Some Drops of the Vial, powered OUT IN A SEASON, WHEN IT IS Neither Night nor
Day: OR, Some Discoveries of Jesus Christ His Glory in several BOOKS; viz.
1. The New Quaere.

2. The Opening of the Vindication.

3. The Smoke in the Temple.

4. The Groans for liberty.

5. The Divine Right of Presbytery discussed.

6. An End of One Controversy.

7. Reasons for Unity, Peace, and Love: And, Shadows flying away.

All which Books are here reprinted in one Book entirely, after the several
Impressions of them, and presented to the Reader.

1 King. 19. 11, 12. But the Lord was not in the Wind, and after the Wind an
Earthquake, but the Lord was not in the Earthquake, and after the Earthquake a
fire, but the Lord was not in the fire, and after the fire, a still small
voice, (and the Lord was in that.) By John Saltmarsh, Preacher of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West end
of PAUL'S, 1646.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, General of all the Forccs raised for
the PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
THe several pieces thus rallied, were never writ in my own power, or
appointment, but I had commonly some juncture of Providence, and something of a
Spirit not my own upon me; for I observed I could not write when I would, my
Springes, were not in me, nor could I end when I would, till I had finished
this Testimony, and for something of God here, I am sure, there is enough of
man, of my self; Thus is Gods appearing while we are in the Body, he was in
Christ's which had no sin, but he is not so in ours which are full of sin.

I have some few things to say, and they ars things of duty from me, and of
truth to you; that God has filled the story of your life with himself, with
his Power, Wisdom, and Love, and all that he may be your fullness, and that
you would glory in the Lord: Let me remind you how you have seen him from
Leedes to Bradfoorth, to Wetherby, to York, to Hull, even from Yorkshire to
Lincolneshire, from thence to Naseby, and so through the Conquest of Cities,
Towns, Castles, through so much almost as a Kingdom comes to. And now after all
this enter into your rest, even the love of God, the Son of God, and there
refresh your self in his light, in his glory, in the bosom of his love, there
are pleasures for evermore; this is a piece of your coursest work, to bear
the Sword for him who is the Power of God upon Earth, for the punishment of
evil doers in the world, the more glorious work is your Spiritual, where
Principalities and Rulers, and Spiritual wickedness in high places, flesh and
blood are all against you, and yet you above them all, in him, through whom you
are more than Conqueror, even him that loved you.

Sir, Let it be not your business only to Conquer as a man, but as a Saint, not
as a Soldier, but as a Christian, not in the spirit of man but of God. Let not
a sin, a lust, a temptation stand more before you in the body, then an enemy in
the field: gird on your spiritual Armor, your Shield of faith, your
brestplate of righteousness, your Sword of the Spirit, your Helmet of
Salvation, and put on your white lining, which is the righteousness of the
Saints, and follow him who rides on the white Horse, in a vesture dipped in the
blood of his sufferings, whose name is the Word of God, and tell me if ever
there was Glory like unto this Glory.

I cannot reckon the mighty men of valor in the world, any thing but a worldly
glory, which if it dyed not with them, or some ages after them, yet can live no
longer than the life of the world, all these things are perishing; but to be a
man of the holy Spirit, a man borne of God, a man that wars not after the
flesh, a man of the Kingdom of God, as well as of England: Thus you shall live
beyond time, and age, and men, and the world; gathered up into the life which
is Eternal, and was with the Father.

Sir, Your dwelling now is much in the shadow of death, and amongst the Graves,
and therefore so live in Christ your life, that you may have one life more then
men can kill; men can only kill the man, not the Christian.

Sir, I will not praise you, but bless God for you, and his Image in you, this
will make great men love God, and not themselves; to speak of them as his, not
as their own.

Now Sir, so war, that you may be still a man of peace in the midst of
battle, and of compassions in the midst of sufferings, never wearing your
Laurel without some Olive, that all may know when you act as a Magistrate, and
as your self, when you act from power, or when from love, from Justice, or
when from mercy.

So love, as you may love God and Christ in men, more then men, and the Spirit
in any more then the Form either of Presbytery or Independency.

Thus Brethren who can now scarcely love one another because of that, shall
love you, and shall learn to love one another from you,

Noble Sir, Your humble servant, JOHN SALTMARSH.

A New Quaere, At this time seasonably to be considered, as we tender the
advancement of TRVTH and PEACE; Viz.

Whether it be fit, according to the Principles of true Religion, and State, to
settle any Church Government over the Kingdom hastily, or not; and with the
Power commonly desired, in the hands of the Ministers.

By JOHN SALTMARSH, Preacher of the Word at Brasteed in Kent.

2 Cor. 10. 8. Our authority (which the Lord has given for Instruction, and
not for destruction.) LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Sign of the
Black Spread-Eagle, at the West End of S. PAUL'S. 1646.

A Quaere:
Whether it be ^it, according to the Principles of true Religion, and State, to
settle any Church Government over the Kingdom hastily, or not; and with the
Power commonly desired, in the hands of the Ministers,

_1. THe Rules laid down in the Word for practical Obedience, are these in
part; Let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind, Romans 14. 5. ver. 23.
and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Now the settling of any Government upon
a people who are yet generally untaught in the nature and grounds of it, is to
put upon the people the practice of that wherein it is impossible they can be
fully persuaded in their minds, and so either on a necessity of sin or misery.

2* There is great danger of bringing people under a Popish implicit
Obedience, by forcing on a practice of that which they scarce know, or know but
in part: And this is against the National Covenant, to side with any
Principles of Popery: And we know it by experience, that the people have been
ever devoted to any thing the State sets up; all the disputes or conscience of
the common people usually ending in this, Whether it be established by Law or
no; and going usually no higher nor further then a Statute or Act of State for
their Religion.

3. Christ Jesus himself could as easily have settled his Gospell-Government by
miracle, as any can now by a Civil power, if there had been such a primary or
moral necessity of establishing it so soon upon a people scarce enlightened for
any part of it: But we see the contrary, first in himself, he taught long, and
John before him, and so the Disciples; and the g^^^s for Government were not
given till he ascended, and the Model for Government not brought forth but by
degrees, and as people fell in and were capable of the Yoke, and would ^ould
more easily to the Commandments of Christ's; and whether then or no, is yet a
Question which some who have sit out the debates too, though not with me, who
am fully assured of a power See in M. Colemans Sermon.
of order which the Apostle rejoiced to behold; though a power with as little
dominion in Government as tradition in Worship.

4. We never read in the new Testament of a Gospell-government settled upon any
that were not brought first under Gospell-obedience by the power of the Word
and Spirit, which thousands of Congregations in this Kingdom are not* For as in
material Buildings Stone and Timber are not to be cl^pt together without
howing and squaring, so nor in the spiritual: And whereas in the Temple there
should neither be Axe nor Hammer heard, because things were fitted before hand,
and so laid together: I question how this could be in our Congregations now: I
believe there would be now more of the Axe and the Hammer heard, then of the
building seen.

5. We have found by experience, that the speedy settling of Government upon the
Nation, has made Reformation take little root, save in the outward man, or
formal Obedience; and the reason was, Because they received not Reformation
first in the power of the Word, but of the State, which went not so deep into
their Consciences, but they could part with it at any time upon a Law: Oh then,
Why do not days speak, and multitude of years teach knowledge?

6. It is against the nature of Christ's description of himself, and against
that sutablenesse which he presses for, amongst all such as should submit to
his Commandments; He shall not strive, nor cry, neither shall any man hear
his voice in the streets, Matthew. 11. 19. My yoke is easy, and my burden light,
Matthew. 11. 29. His Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. Neither do men
put new wine into old bottles. All which cannot be fulfilled in the Parochial
Congregations.

7. The more time for trying the spirits, and proving all things, there is
less danger to that State of errings in things received and authorized, and of
involving it self into the designs of Ecclesiastical power, then which
nothing has sooner broken the Civil power, as may be seen in Popish Kingdoms,
and our late Prelaticall. There can be no great danger in the not sudden
incorporating the two powers: Since Moses is not alive to bring down the just
Pattern of the Tabernacle, there may a new Star arise, which was not seen at
first; which, if we shut up our selves too soon while the smoke is in the
Temple, cannot appear.

8. We have not yet any experiment of our new Clergy, who are many of them
branches of the old stock, and so may weild the Government too much of the
Episcopal Faction, as the Samaritans did with the Jewish Government, because
they were not natural Jews. It is not safe trusting a power too far into those
hands. Our Brethren of Scotland have been more used to the way of Presbytery,
and may better trust one another upon mutual experience, then we can yet.

9. We experience in part some remainders of Prelacy working in many, which
shows a constitution not so clear nor pure as the Disciples of Christ should
have; then whether it be safe committing the power too suddenly: For though I
question not but some may be like the ten, yet there are others like the two
Brethren who strove which should be greatest, till the Lord ended the
difference, It shall not be so amongst you. We find the hottest Controversy is
now moved about Church Government; and there has been most written and spoken
this way, and in most violence: Now when the contention for power is so much,
and the Controversy streams most in Government, we may soon discern
dispositions. Well, is it good parting with the stakes yet while there is such
quarrelling for them, and when one party cannot but take it for an injury, if
wholly given to the other? It is to be feared, there is too much of man,
because the bias runs most in these times toward this one truth of government,
and many other are wholly set by, which might well be looked upon with it; which
if there were not a Principle in man more fitted for a truth of this kind then
any other, would not be: But every truth has its age and season. This only for
caution.

10. There is no Religion established by State, but there is some proportion in
the two Powers, and some compliancy betwixt the Civil and Ecclesiastical; so
as the establishing the one, will draw with it some motions in the other: And
we all see how hazardous it is to disinteresse any in the Civil part, even in
Kingdoms that are more firm, as France, where the Protestants are partly
allowed their Religion in pay for their Civil engagements; and so in other
States. And sure I am, that State is most free, where the conscience is least
straightened, where the Tares and the Wheat grow together till the harvest.

11. Our parties or dissenting Brethren being now together, and clasped by
interest against the common enemy, this foundation of common unity is such as
may draw in both affections and judgments, if not too suddenly determined into
Heretics and Schismatics: It is possible, while a Controversy is long
suspended, and time given for conclusion of things, Opinions may be sooner at
peace: A fire let alone, may dye out under that wood which stirred in would
kindle it. The Contentions of Brethren are like the strong bars of a Castle;
and a Brother that is offended is harder to be won then a strong City, Prove.
18. 19.

OBJECTIONS.
I.
BUt the Temple was builded with all speed in Nehemiahs time; and therefore,
etc. And Haggai calls to the building, Is it time? Hag. 1. 4.

Answ.
Yea, but the matteriall Pattern was more clearly left and known then the
Gospell-patternes: The other were more in the letter, and these more in the
Spirit. Now there must be a proving all things, else there may be more have
then good speed; and the Temple may be built by a false Pattern as well as a
true, and then better no Building, then no right Cedar to build with. And there
were Prophets then, who knew the periods of times, and could Prophecy, as
Haggai and Zechariah; but none so exactly now; and these knew both the fashion
and the time for Building. Yet who ought not to hasten the Temple, if the
Timber be ready, and if the Apostles and Prophets be there for a foundation,
and Jesus Christ for chief Corner-ston? Ephesians. 2.

Object. II.
But Vice, Heresies and Schisms will grow too fast.

Answ.
So they might have done from John's first Sermon to Paul's Epistles, and the
sending of the Spirit; but yet you see there was no Government, till after,
settled upon the people of God. And if Heresies stir up their Patrons against
the State, the Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain? And if moral
transgressions, let the Magistrate be set on in every place to quicken the
Statutes; and Preachers every where sent forth to publish the Gospel. And what
if the Prince of Persia withstand for a while? Truth is otherwise armed from
heaven: Though Satan be in the wisdernesse with Corist, yet Christ shall
conquer. It is the Papists and the Prelates Jealousies, to keep up their
supposed truths, by suspecting every thing that appears for an enemy. The
Gospel dares walk abroad with boldness and simplicity, when Traditions of
men, like melancholy people, fear every thing they meet will kill them: For
the Angel that comes down from heaven has great power, and the earth is
lightened with his glory, Rev 18. 1.

FINIS.
THE OPENING OF MASTER PRYNNES NEW BOOK; CALLED, A Vindication: OR, Light
breaking out from a Cloud of Differences, or late Controversies.
Wherein, Are Inferences upon the Vindication, and Antiquaeres to the Quaeres;
and by that, the way a little cleared to a further Discovery of Truth in a
Church Order, by a Conference or Discourse.

By JOHN SALTMARSH, Preacher at Brasteed in Kent.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Sgne of the Black Spread-Eagle, at
the West End of S. PAUL'S. 1645.

To the Honorable Philip Skippon, Major General of the Army, raised for the
King and Parliament, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax General.
NOBLE SIR,
SVpposing you may take the Book called the Vindication by Master Prynne into
your hand, I desire that this Discourse may be in your other hand, as occasion
serves. If the Lord has revealed any thing in this Discourse, to enlighten the
darkness of this present Controversy, it is only from him who is the Father
of Lights, who carries on his to a more excellent way, till we may with open
face, behold the Glory of Jesus Christ, and be changed from glory to glory.

Sir, The thing I only contend for, is, that which the Gospel and Spirit calls
for; Whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are of good report.

Sir, The engagement of private respects which are upon me toward you; and
being likewise a partaker of some labors of yours in the Lord, which are
abroad, as that of Promises, etc. The best treasure we have in this life, has
drawn this from me.

The Lord who has wounded you, bind you up, and lead you on to the glorious
Truths; for, if I mistake not, our Controversy is but this in these times;
some would walk more close with Christ, some can be content like Peter to
walk at more distance, and follow him afar off, and to stand warming
themselves with the multitude in the Common Hall: And let the Word judge
betwixt us, which is of best report.

Sir, Yours in the things of Jesus Christ, John Saltmarsh.

(...)But I have many Reasons I shall now acquaint you with, if you will have
but patience, and not upon a Notion or Name of Heresy and Schism shut up your
Windows, as against a new light, Meteor, or some Blazing-Star, as too many do:
we are bidden try the spirits, and prove all things. (Friend) be not so
discourteous to any Notion that is a stranger, it is besides the Aposties rule*
be not, says he, forgetful to entertain strangers, for some have entertained
Angels unawares.

And this is one Reason further, till more come; we are but coming out of
Babylon, you, and we were but the other day with the veil of Prelacy upon our
hearts, and we are but in healing, like the blind man; and because yet we see
men like Trees, shall we therefore judge them to be so, and not stay till our
eyes be opened, that we see better?

P. Have you no better reasons to convince me? These I confess are something,
and I will think on them.


C. Yea, look with a single eye upon their principles, and take them in their
own single Positions, not as the world Prints them, or reports them, this is
much a wanting in these times; you know what was said of the Christians to
Paul, As for this sect, every where it is spoken against; And I see no reason,
why other opinions which have been held by some Author of one opinion, should
be all charged upon that one for his sake, which neither in it self, nor any
just consequence from it, can be proved of any right to belong unto it: And if
there be any Tares with the wheat, they are of the enemies sowing, as Christ
said, to make us go by, and not reap there where the Wheat is so scant, and the
Tares so many.


P. But, O methinks, if things were settled about the Church once!


C. Yea, but how will you settle?


F. How? As it is agreed on.


C. Agreed on? What, have you not heard of the new Book of the Vindication of
the four Questions?


P. What of that?


C. Some of the learned, for the Presbiteriall way, are divided about settling,
and know not how to settle the great Ordinance of the Lords Supper upon the
Kingdom or Nation.


P. How? Any of our judgment divided? I will not believe that: Surely, they
are not like your Independent Brethrer, to crumble into divisions, and several
opinions.


C. Look you now, how you are mistaken! I tell you again, The Vindication-Book,
whose Author is as famous and able, as your way affords, has writ a large
Tractate for mixed Communions or Sacraments, against some of that way that are
against them.


P. Believe me, if it be so, I shall be at a stand; I thought all of our side
that had been for Presbytery, had been all of a mind, and none had broken out
into Factions, but they of the other side.


C. I love not this word Faction on any side yet, till we see more; I would not
misinterpret any willingly: You shall hear the reasons on both sides gathered
up very narrowly without the passion; for I would neither have passion to
object nor to confute any thing, but merely Scripture and Reason.


P. I pray you, what are the differences?


C. A reverend Brother of the Presbyteriall way, answers certain Questions of
another of that way, which he it seems had propounded to the State, to be
considered on in the settling of things over the Kingdom: and some others too,
in certain Printed Treatises, have gone about to confute them; so as his
Questions, which as he professes openly, were written only for the advancement
of Reformation, were interpreted by those of the same way with him, as an enemy
of Reformation, as an adversary, and an obstruction Vindication, Fol. 1.
to the work of Reformation, and settlement of Church Discipline, as he says.


P. O strange! one of them thus censured by their own, and by those, whose
advancement he has sought so much in opposing himself against the new ways
of Independency and Separation, as he calls them: But well, how differ they?


C. He holds in his Book of Vindication diverse particulars concerning
Church Discipline, and censures, and the Administration of the Lords Supper,
wherein the other Brethren of the Presbyteriall-way differ from him:

As first, He holds there is no precept nor president in Scripture, for the
Fol. 3.
suspending of any Member of a Congregation from the Lords Supper, who is not
at the same time excommunicated from the Church, and all other Ordinances as
well: some of the other hold the contrary, or mistake, as he says.


2. That Matthew. 18. 16, 17. If thy Brother trespass, etc. is not meant Fol. 3.
of the Church, nor of excommunication, nor suspension from the Sacrament;
which the other hold.

3. That 1 Cor. 5. 5. to deliver such a one to Satan, is not meant of
suspension Fol. 6.
or excommunication from the Sacrament; which the other hold.

4. That 1 Cor. 5. 11. with such a one, no, not to eat, is not meant of Fol 9.
Spiritual eating; which the other hold.

5. That Numb. 9. 1, 10, 11. is not meant of excluding any by way Fol. 14.
of Type from the Sacrament in acts of suspension, but of total putting out
from all Ordinances, for legal uncleannesles, not Spiritual.

6. That Judas received the Supper, or Sacrament, as well as the other Fol. 17.
Apostles, and that the Sop that was given him before he went out, was after
the Bread was distributed; which some of the other deny.

7. That the Minister has fully discharged himself, if he give warning Fol.
28.
to unworthy Communicants of the danger, and then give it; which the other hold
not.

8. That Ministers may as well refuse to Preach the Word to such
unexcommunicated Fol. 35.
gross impenitents, for fear of partaking in their sin, as to administer the
Sacrament to them; and they hear damnation in the one, as well as eat
damnation in the other.

That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is as well a converting Ordinance, Fol
40, 41, etc.
as any other, being reckoned amongst the Means of Grace, and so to be
administered to any unexcommunicated Member of a Congregation; which some of the
other deny.

That they put groundless differences betwixt Preaching of the Word, and
Administration of the Sacraments.

9. That the putting out of the Synagogue in John 9. 21, 34, 35. is no Fol. 48.
good proof of excommunication or suspension from the Sacrament.

10. That the Authors Scriptures quoted in his fourth Question, are not Fol. 49.
rightly applied, as his opposites say.

P. And are these the differences fully?


C. Yea, excepting the Proofs on both sides, for which, I refer you to the
Books themselves, which all together, are large.


P. But how conclude they?


C. The Author of the Vindication does fairly show them, that they Fol. 50.
contend for what he does grant them, with advantage; and yet they quarrel with
him for denying it, as he says.


P. Methinks these are strange mistakes one of another, and amongst these of
our Preshyterial side too.


C. And he hopes the Parliament will consider, and take care, that the Fol. 57.
Ministers, like the Bishops formerly, may not now be taken up with Ruling and
Governing.


P. But how will some of our Ministers take this?


C. I know not that; but I like well in this; but he goes upon one ground more
then all the rest.


P. What is that?


C. That the very ground, upon which diverse of the more modera^e and tender in
the Presbyteriall way, go, is the ground of all the growing, and spreading of
Schism and Separation, Anabaptism, and other Errors tending to them, which yet
they believe, they so much preach against* Fol. 58.
a strange mistake with them, as he observes.


P. If it be so, how pitifully are those Ministers mistaken in their own
grounds? and the best of them too, to be so mistaken, is the more to be
wondered: for I count the tenderest of them the best; but this is yet a secret
to me.


C. Yea, and to them it may seem so too; but I shall unfold the mystery of this
Vindication-Book, if I mistake not the suspending scandalous persons from the
Lords Supper, and some other thoughts of pertaking in their sins, is it seems
deemed by this Book Some principles or positions of Separation, which if
fomented, as the Author insinuates, may in time Fol. 59.
subvert the other principles of Presbytery, as indeed they may, being
something inconsistent, and of a better and more spiritual nature; and I am of
his opinion, for I would have all of a color and constitution, All light, or
all darkness; and believe it, your principles of a purer way, will not long
incorporate with any other; the Ark and Dagon will not stand together, and the
way to overthrow the inventions of men, is by taking in some principles of the
Truth into traditions; what has made the Popish Hierarchy go down? Not its own
principles of Idolatry, Will Worship, and Tyranny: But when there were some
takings in of Reformation-principles, as when they would go from Popery to
Prelacy, Popery fell much in the power of it; and so when from Prelacy they
went off to Presbytery, Prelacy fell, and so on: If you make any remove from
the common principles of this Presbytery, into any of the way or parts of the
Separation, your Presbytery will down too, because it takes in some purer
principles then, as we may gather from the Vindication Book, it will well
bear.


P. But if these be then the common Principles of this Presbyteriall way, as he
would have it to communicate in Ordinances thus mixedly, and to suspect no
uncleanness in any spiritual Communion from persons so communicating, though
of never so unreformed a life, excepting only some pretended form all flashy
apparences of Faith and Repentance put on and off by the Communicants, as
occasion serves; I shall have I think no such good thoughts as I had of that
way.


C. But the grounds are yet further laid down in the Book, that unmixt Vind.
l. Fol. 59.
Communions, and suspending from the Sacrament, are grounds of Schism; and that
the teaching of these formerly, through ignorance or incogitancy, are now to be
taught, and written, and preached against.


P. I perceive then in a word, That the maine thing the Vindication-Book drives
at, is, to place Presbytery upon such a mixed uniformity in the partaking of
Ordinances, that there should be no act of suspension or separation practiced
in their Church, lest the ground of separation get in; and they that make
conscience to separate or suspend in some particulars* it implies, they may go
on to a further separation, till upon more degrees of purity in communicating,
they go off from all kind of mixed communicatings, in the constituting, as well
Churches, as Ordinances and Administrations, and so at length become, either
Congregationall, or of the other way.

But many of us took such of the Presbyteriall way, as writ and taught, for a
pure Reformation in partaking of Ordinances, for the better, according to their
light: And it seems they are but novices, as we may gather from the
Vindication-Book, and are ignorant of his Presbyteriall secret, or mystery of
uniformity, and unmixt communicating, according to the grounds there.

Well, I am yet of the purer side, I like not this mystery, if the way to keep
out Schism be of such a kind, as draws with it an unavoidable necessity of
partaking with all sorts of sinners, except only for some present affected
passions of Faith and Repentance, and a Toleration of all sorts of that kind,
except by excommunication, where in some places whole Parishes, and almost in
all Parishes many must stand, either excommunicated by the Classis, or
Presbytery, or Reformed, which is impossible, or as frequent partakers of
Ordinances, spiritual fellowship, as the best, and purest, which is
intolerable.


C. Indeed, I am glad you come off so well already. I will not meddle with the
present state of some of these first particulars in difference I named to you,
but leave them to the Authors; but come to some of the more questionable.

For that Controversy betwixt the Brethren, which is, Whether Judas Fol. 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
received or not? I know there are diverse Leaves of Paper writ upon it in the
Vindication, and many learned men are quoted, and Scriptures brought in on both
sides, and harmoniously compared; but since the Lord left it so disputable, as
some imagine, we must not do in such doubtful sayings, as those Disciples did,
who because Christ said of John, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to thee? and it was reported amongst the Disciples, that that Disciple
should not die, though Christ said not he should not dye: but only, what if I
will that he tarry. So if the Lord has not clearly said, that Judas was there,
why goes it so amongst the Disciples, as if he were there without all
contradiction? but if he were, and Christ gave it to Judas, as for my part, I
make it not any such ground, though he and all others do, because it will not
be clear then, that he gave it to Judas as a wicked man, or a formal Disciple;
for I know Christ administered then as an outward Dispenser to the Church, or
chief pastor, and in his Body unglorifyed, whereby he kept close to the
analogy of visible Administration of Ordinances, and in President and Precept,
for the future to his Churches for all ages; and so all their puzling may be at
an end.

I will now acquaint you further with some Arguments or Inferences from the
Vindication, which I have to strengthen you.


Vindication, Fol. 36.
THat no Minister, not knowing the present change or inclination of the heart
of any, or whether God by this very duty, may not really convert him, ought to
administer the Sacrament.

Inference.
Whence we may infer, That all sorts of sinners, never so profane and
abominable yet upon any present, affected, counterfeited, formal pretense of
Faith and Repentance, ought to partake in all things of the most spiritual
nature and fellowship; and withal, of the most spiritual and sincere
profession, contrary to these Scriptures, 1 Pet. 2. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16,
17, 18. Isai. 52. 11. Gal. 5. 9.

Vindication, Fol. 37.
The Brethrens Reason, That in the Sacrament, there is a nearer application of
the Word, and Promises in particular, of the right and interest in them, more
then in the Word preached, which the Vindication says, is just like the late
Archbishop of Cante^buries Doctrine for bowing at the Altar, as Gods great
place of presence.

Inference.
Whence we may infer, that the Vindication does very uncharitably compare
Doctrines and Principles, viz. his Brethrens with those of Prelacy, and his
Brethren with the grossest of Prelates; and their Principles, of spiritual
Administration, and Communion with those of a most Idolatrous, and external
nature, which is contrary to these Scriptures, James 4. 12. Matthew. 7. 1, 3,
etc. 1 Pet. 3. 8.

Vindication, Fol. 37.
That the Minister administering the Sacrament to any known impenitent sinners,
yet under the Notion of penitent and repenting sinners, for that time
discharges himself.

Inference.
Whence we may infer, That a Minister ought to comply with the Hypocrisies,
pretenses, co^plianc^s, forms, of any notorious, scandalous, or impenitent
sinner at that time, only in the aparition or resemblance of a Saint and a
Woolf in Sheeps clothing, contrary to these Scriptures, 1 Timothy 5. 21, 22. Math.
15. 26. 2 Timothy 3. 5. 1 These. 5. 22. 1 Cor. 6. 16.

Vindication, Fol. 37, 38.
That the words of Institution in the Sacrament, The Body of Christ which was
broken, and the Blood of Christ shed for you, is not of any Divine Institution,
but humane only, though, warrantably practiced.

Inference.
Whence we may infer, That he, in affirming the Institution to be only humane,
and yet warrantable, is not only an impeaching of their worship of God in the
highest and most spiritual Admirations of Will Worship, and humane invention,
and want of conformity to the Rule or Word; but even a flat contradiction in a
Scripture sense, because he adds, Yet warrantably practiced; as if an
unlawful way of worship, as all will worship is, might be lawfully practiced;
which is contrary to these Scriptures, Matthew. 15. 3, 9. Isai. 29. 13, 14. Gal.
3. 15. John 10. 4, 5. Matthew. 6. 44. Tit. 1. 14. Rev. 14 9, 10.

Vindication, Fol. 38.
That the Sacrament of the Lords Supper belongs of right to all visible knowing
Members of the visible Church, as well as the Sacrament of Baptism.

Inference.
Whence we may infer, That in this his equalizing all Ordinances under this
Notion of knowing Members, that either children are not capable of Baptism,
because not knowing Members, and upon this ground of his wrongfully Baptized;
or if right Members, yet deprived of the other Sacrament of the Supper, to
which, as visible Members, they have right, as well as to the other, there
being no distinction of knowing and unknowing Members in this sense; or else,
that they may partake in that Ordinance of Baptism, and be signed or sealed,
and yet no right Members of a visible Church.

Vindication, Fol. 38.
That that of not casting Pearls before Swine in Matthew. 7. 6, 10, 14. is
expressly determined in 2 Pet. 2, 1, 2, 21, 22. and Heb. 10. 28, 29. to open
Apostates, not to scandalous sinners, who duly repair to publish Ordinances,
and externally profess Reformation and Repentance; and to apply this Text to
these, is a mere perverting of it.

Inference.
Whence we may infer* That this cuts off the Brethren of the more
purely-Presbyteriall way fully from all their foundation-Texts of any more
spiritual distribution of Holy Ordinances, or any dictinction in the
distribution, which they have so long breathed after, and rejoiced in the
expectation of; and their condition upon these Principles are no better now in
their so much desired-for-Reformation, then it was under the Prelates and
Common Prayer Book, which holds the door more close against sinners, then the
Vindication or they ought to do, upon these his principles.

And secondly, The full and final determining a Scripture of this kind, or any
other, to one particular sense, is not agreeable to that Spirit of Wisdom, and
of God, which is an infinitely abounding Spirit; and like the Sun, is full of
beams and continual springings of light; nor do the Interpretations of the
Word, appear all at once: the same Scripture which many ages ago gave out one
beam of light, gave more in the ages after, and more now, as the eyes of our
understanding are enlightened; so as Scriptures are not to be bounded in our
sense, nor the elevations of spirit, taken by the short rule of our spirits;
which is contrary to these Scriptures, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. 2. Cor. 5. 16. Phil.
3. 12, 13, 15, 16. Ephesians. 3. 18, 19. 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15.

Vindication, Fol. 41.
If the Sacrament be only a settling or confirming Ordinance of true Grace, when
and where it is already begun, then it were altogether impertinent, and
ineffectuall unto civil carnal Christians; therefore doubtless it is, and
was intended by Christ for a converting Ordinance to all such as those.

Inference.
Whence we may infer, That the Sacrament being a converting Ordinance, may be
given to all unregenerate persons, in or out of the Church; for if it be a
converting Ordinance, the consequence lies clear, that no sinners, of any
sort, kind, quality, condition, in or out of the Church, ought to be denied it;
nay, to have it administered, as well without the Word, as with it, it being of
equal power with the Word for converting, as the Vindication faith; and that
who holds otherwise, are mistaken. And though there be a distinction premised
of converting to the Faith, or formal profession, and a converting to a
spiritual sincere Faith in Jesus Christ; yet this distinction makes not any
thing against the Sacrament, to be given before the Word, even for conversion
to the first Faith, or faith from Paganism; which neither Scriptures, nor
practice of Christ, or any Disciple of his, from Apostles to the seventy, and
so down through any age, to our own, that ever I could read on, practiced: and
yet the principles laid down in Fol 38. will infer such a consequence,
naturally and truly; for the Vindication says in Fol. 38. That the Word, and
all Ordinances, are alike for conversion; and if so, the Sacraments may be used
as well to convert from Paganism, and administered singly by themselves, as the
Word by it self may be taught.

Secondly, The Vindication says, That it is doubtless to be given to all, for
else it had been an impertinent and ineffectuall thing to administer to close
Hypocrises that are carnal Christians.

Whence we may infer, That because the Counsels of the Lord in all his
Administrations, do not clearly appear, but through the Vindications of his
own suppositions and premises; therefore he concludes fully, That it were
impertinent and ineffectuall, when as there appears no such end at all in the
institution of it, but rather two other ends.

One which himself lays down, as occasional or evidentiall, for the
damnation, and hardening some; though I scarce allow him that, that Ordinances
of mercy and grace, are properly active to condemnation.

The other which he never thinks on in his Book, is this, That God having left
no infallible Rule for discerning, has ordered it by a pure Gospell-rule,
which if wicked men will come up to, they hazard greater condemnation.

Further we may infer, That things may be called impertinent and ineffectuall,
which are instituted of the Lord, when the reasons of the Lords Institution
appears not to us; and that we may put our own suppositions and ends upon any
administration in the Word, when his ends are not clear to us; nay, and
conclude against any other end then that of our own conjecture, or supposed
probable reason; which I am confident is too too gross to be in the learned
Author Intentionally, though not consequentially, in his Vindication.

But the ends which I clearly gather from the Analogy of things in Gods
dispensation, are these; Why the Sacrament; though according to the institution
delivered to Hypocrites, yet is no converting Ordinance?

God having left no infallible Rule of discerning his, but only a* Rule for
outward evidences, the Ordinances must either be administered to all, walking
according to the Rule of outward evidences, or to none; and according to that
Rule, Hypocrites may come in, and do; yet that is no sin to the Administrator
nor Communicants, so long as Administrations be ordered according to that Rule,
and Gods End of his revealed Will showed.

Secondly, The work of sifting, and reaping, of dividing betwixt the Tares and
the Wheat, the Sheep and the Goats, is the work of the great day of the Son of
man; and therefore, though Ordinances be administered here to Hypocrites; yet at
the time of the final discerning, the communicating of Hypocrites shall be
visited in judgment, and greater condemnation upon them. So as there is no
need of framing it into any Notion of a converting Ordinance, lest otherwise it
prove impertinent or ineffectuall; for if the close Hypocrites be finally
impenitent ones, God reckons for a greater sin; if not, yet it is no more
impertinent then the Word is to all the children of God, who yet never partake
truly of it, till converted.

Thirdly, That the distinction of his into the first conversion from Papanism
to Faith; and secondly, from a formal Faith, to a true sincere Faith in Jesus
Christ, which is the corner Stone in his building, is a distinction, and
certain degrees, which we have not in any such Notion in the Word; nor if it
were, does it appear that the Scriptures place administration upon the bottom
of any such distinction, though he does it? But suppose I grant it, yet a
formal profession then, as he contends for, and many other, was not such as is
now, since Kingdoms were Christia^ized; but a profession then was according to
the Rule of evidence, till the contrary appeared, as in all the first gathered
Churches, as in Simon Magus, Ananias, etc. And formal profession then, was as
much as a kind of powerful profession now; for then it was persecution, to
take up an Ordinance or Name of Christ, and now it is faction on the Law of the
Land, as well as the Law of the God, to profess Christ; neither were the whole
Counsels of the Spirit of Christ brought forth then to make up the rule of
evidences, as afterward; but they were brought forth by degrees, till the
whole Scriptures of the New Testament were finished. And we are now to take the
whole Counsels of God concerning Administrations, as laid down in the whole New
Testament, and not by parcels, though so much as they did profess in the first
time of gathering, were rule enough then, to them, when no more was revealed,
yet not to us now, who have a full Gospel for our learning: And this mistake
or want of just consideration of times, and Scriptures, is the ground of all
the mistakes.

Vindication, Fol. 41.
Why should not the Sacrament do the like, since Gods Spirit equally breathes,
and works in all his Ordinances, and may, and does regenerate, and beget grace
in men's souls?

Inference.
Whence we may infer, That it is lawful, according to this Principle to
believe, That if one Ordinance convert, any other may, whether God has
instituted so or no. We know the Lord has appointed and ordered every
Ordinance to its nature, kind, and use; and Gods institution is to be the rule
of our believing, and reasoning, and practicing, not because such a thing works
so, therefore any thing works so as that thing works. The Author himself
reasons against this in another place, and that there is no right inference,
but in things of the like kind, and under the like precept, as thus: The Word
is able to convert, therefore all Preaching and Prophesying is able to convert;
but not therefore the Sacraments can convert.

Vindication, Fol. 41.
The Sacraments are by all Divines whatsoever, and the very Directory, page 52.
ever enumerated among the means of Grace and Salvation; Why then should they
not be the means of converting?

Inference.
Whence we may infer, That it is warrantable to expound Divines, and the
Directory contrary to their intent and meaning, and to infer conclusions from
them, to prove things which are not only very disputable, but unwarrantable, as
far as any Scripture makes appear, either in any plain precept, or president,
and especially to turn the Directory, being a Public form made by the
Assembly, so much against their sense and meaning, as appears by diverse of
their judgments of late, is an attempt, much like that of expounding a Law or
Ordinance of Parliament in a private sense; not in their own; and this
quotation of a Directory, in this kind, is enough to make it all questionable,
and to draw on a necessity of a public interpretation upon it.

Vindication, Fol 41, 42.
That receiving Sacraments is usually accompanied with effectual means, as
serious examinations, solemn searching out of all open and secret sins, with
confession, contrition, humiliation, prayers of pardon, secret purposes and
vows, sundry pious and soul-ravishing meditations of Gods mercy, exhortations,
admonitions, by the Ministers: And why is not the Sacrament a more fit and apt
Ordinance to regenerate, convert ungodly and scandalous sinners, then the bare
Word preached?

Inference.
Whence we may infer, That there are certain preparations and qualifications
in men merely unregenerate, which are here lifted up into something more then
natural or carnal workings, or filthiness of the flesh; as prayers for
pardon of sin, pious and soul-ravishing meditations, with humiliation,
contrition, confession, etc. Now I would feign know, what there is in man
before the glorious light of Jesus Christ has opened his eyes, and brought him
out of prison, out of darkness into light? What kind of prayers can such make?
What pious meditations can such have of Gods mercy in Christ? What contrition
is there in such? What humiliation? Without faith it is impossible to please
God; and the carnal mind is enmity against God; nor is it subject to the Law
of God, nor indeed can be; and they that are in the flesh, cannot please God.
What is all this then of prayers? When as the prayers of the wicked are
abominable; What are all those flourishes and noise of vows and purposes, and
contrition, and meditations of an unregenerate man, when they all are but
glorious sins? Do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Why
should nature be made proud with these expressions? And any ground laid for
boasting?

And whereas it is said, that the Sacrament is a more apt means to convert,
then the bare Word preached, we may infer some derogating and diminution, or
lessening employed here of the Ordinance of the Word or Ministry, because it is
said, Then the bare Word, as if so be, that the Word were a bare Word, when it
comes in the power of salvation to regenerate, when the Spirit quickens it, and
makes it a Word of truth, of grace, the power of God unto salvation; and we see
the Word or Ministry it self is called, The Preaching of faith, The Ministry
of Reconciliation: The Sacrament is not called so any where, though no less
glorious neither: And Christ and his Apostles and Disciples went every where
preaching the Word; but not administering the Sacrament but only there, where
the ministry of the Word had first brought them under the power of the
Gospell-Order, and Rule for Ordinances of a more spiritual institution.

Vindication, Fol. 4^.
That because we behold Christ's death and passion more visibly represented to
our eyes and hearts in the Sacrament, and remission of sins more sensibly
applied to us, then in any other Ordinances; therefore it is certainly the most
powerful Ordinance of all others, to regenerate and covert; with many
Scriptures to prove conversion by representation.

Inference.
We may infer, That because the Lord has instituted his sign of Bread and
Wine in the Supper to his own end; therefore it will serve to any end: That we
can prove of our own imagining, upon certain rational conclusions from
Scripture or reason, without particular Scriptures authorizing or appointing it
to such an end; and therefore all these grounds, consequences, and notions
which are formed upon a likelihood and probability, are nothing to prove any
direct use of the Sacrament to such an end, without, as I have said, a special
Word, Precept, or Practice, or just Consequence from Scriptures, directed to
such a proof; for else there is scarce any thing but we may reason into a
notion of likelihood: but faith must have better grounds, and not of private
interpretation; and the Scriptures that are alleged, must not be to prove
that things of lively representation may most affect the soul, and have done
so; but that these Scriptures are plainly or powerfully directed by the Spirit
of God to prove the very Institution of the Supper to that end; which none of
those Scriptures prove, that are alleged in Fol. 42.

Vindication, Fol. 43.
That God does as effectually teach, convert, and work grace by the eye as
ear; and therefore were the Sacraments, Sacrifices, Types, Miracles, etc. Why
should not then the visible expressions of Christ in the Sacrament now, have
the like effectual converting power.

Inference.
We may infer, as we have done before, That all these are but Why should nots?
no words of Institution or Authority in the Scripture for it. But further, the
Legal Sacraments, etc. were carnal, and more to the sense, and more of
representation, but these are more in the spirit under the Gospel; we worship
now in spirit and in truth, not by representations, as under the Law: And
therefore it is, that the Gospell-Ordinances are so few, so plain, and poor
to the eye, that the soul may not be taken up with the sign, but with things
spiritual: And we may observe, that as little as can be of outward elements
are made use on; as in Baptism, mere water; and in the Supper, Wine and
Bread; and the first Ordinance is called the Baptism of the Spirit, not of
water; and the Bread and Wine, The Communion of the Body, and of the Blood of
Christ, not Bread and Wine: And, faith the Apostle, If we have known Christ
after the flesh, henceforth know we have no more.

And further, What is it that is said of grace coming in by the eye? This is
the way the Papists let in Christ, having made the eye rather the Organ for
conversion then the ear: Now Faith comes by hearing, and therefore all their
Idolatrous Pictures, their Imagery; and theabicall representations are all for
the eye, and bringing in Christ by Obtick or sense, and making conversion to be
by perspective, and working only an historical faith.

And further, What is it that is said of working grace by the eye? As if the
carnal part could advantage conversion by any power there, but such a power as
is merely carnal and natural? What can all these signs of the Lord Jesus do
upon a blind soul, as all unregenerate men are? What are the glorious colors
to him that has no eyes to see? The signs of bread and wine are given for
working symbolically, or by sign, upon a soul or understanding spiritually
enlightened before, and having a discerning; and therefore it is that the
Apostle says, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself, not discerning the Lords Body; which, if the Supper had been a
converting Ordinance, the Apostle would not have charged the unworthy from
receiving, but rather have encouraged them in their receiving, that, of
unworthy, they might have been made worthy: But you see he calls for a right
discerning of the Lords Body first, which cannot be a calling of the
unregenerate or unconverted to a partaking, because they have no right
discerning of the Body of Christ, but by the sense first converted.

Vindication, Fol. 44.
1. That the most humbling, melting, soul-changing, sin-purging, mollifying
meditations, of all others, are from Christ's death and passion, etc. and
therefore, etc.

2. Afflictions and corporal punishments are converting Ordinances; therefore,
etc.

3. That unworthy participating is a means of spiritual hardening; and so by
the rule of contraries, a worthy receiving an instrument of conversion.

4. All the ends of it are, as appears, so spiritual (see his Scriptures)
that how is it possible it should not be Gods intention, and Christ's
Ordination, to be a converting Ordination?

5. Conversion is a turning of the whole man unto love, obedience of God in
Christ, from the love of the world, etc. and what engine more powerful for the
forecited respects or spiritual ends?

6. Experience in every Christians conscience, whose preparations and
approaches to this Sacrament were the first effectual means of their
conversion; yea, they had not been converted, if debarred from it.

Inference.
We may infer upon the first, That there are soul-melting meditations in a
soul unconverted, or unmelted; and that there are soul-changing meditations in
a soul unchanged* which the Scriptures never speak on; such ways of conversion
are no ways in the Word that we read on, but hidden paths for the spirit, of
man's devising.

Secondly, that because afflictions are therefore Sacraments are that is,
because one thing is therefore another thing is: This is but the Old Argument,
But God may sanctify any thing at his own pleasure, to make way for Conversion
and yet that no instituted Ordinance for conversion neither: Because some have
been converted when afflicted, when sick, when poor; therefore will you first
go afflict them, and make them sick, and poor, taking all they have from them,
that you may convert them, and so make them standing Ordinances?

Thirdly, Is a rule of contraries a rule in the Scriptures, or in Logic? But
it is said, Worthy receiving is an instrument of Conversion, that is,
Conversion is a means of Conversion: who can receive worthily, till in Christ,
till converted?

4. But all the ends of it are spiritual, and how is it possible but then it
should convert? This How is it possible? is like that of Why should it not?
both of one strength to prove it; for though the ends be never so spiritual,
yet if there be no warrant for any such institution as conversion, all the
reasons and extrinsecall or strange consequences, as all such are, cannot
institute an Ordinance: none but God and Christ; and therefore the Popish
Arguments built upon such foreign and external (though rational)
consequences are not immediate nor intrinsecall enough to warrant any thing of
their will worship.

5. But ^^ is a powerful engine: Yea, but only for what it is instituted and
o^dained; nor is it less excellent, because it converts not, because every
thing is beautiful in its order and place, and law of creation.

6 But the experiences of Chrictians witness, who had never been converted, if
not at the Sacrament: But what Christians are these? What kind of experiences
are these? I question the truth of all such conversion who have only such
experience, as this, because that such experience, crosses the Word and way of
the Spirit, and those are no right experiences, which are not
Scripture-experiences.

But, some had not been converted, if debarred from it. This is a strange
assertion, against that of the Word, The spirit blows where and when it
liste^^; and some are called at one hour of the day, some at another; and how
is it clear that the Sacrament converted such or not some other act of the
Word at that time, or about it? Show me that Christian, among so many, that can
evidence his act of conversion merely, barely, singly, immediately from the
act of communicating, and then there is something proved to justify an
experience of Conversion at such a time; but still not to justify the
Sacrament an Ordinance-Conversion* and so to be used.

Vindication, Fol. 46.
Is any Master or Parent so unnatural and sottish to deny his children or
servant wholesome meat to feed their bodies? And shall any Minister be so
irrational or inconsiderate, in denying the spiritual food?

Inference.
Whence we may infer, That the Vindication takes all unconverted persons, by
this comparison, to be alive, and spiritually quickened, or else it were, as he
says, unnatural, sottish, irrational to give them food: And if they be
unconverted, as he pleads for, then who is so unnatural, sottish, irrational,
or inconsiderate, as to give them any? Men only hold forth food to the living,
and not to the dead.

Vindication, Fol. 46.
Physicians had an error, to deny drink to men in Fevers, which murdered
Thousands; but now they see this deadly mistake, and corect it: So let not this
error creep into Divinity and Divines, in denying the cup to such Feverish
Christians, burning in the flames of sin and lust.

Inference.
Whence we may infer, That there is in the unconverted a spiritual Feverish
thirst after Christ, as there is in the sick after drink. But oh! Does the
same fountain send forth sweet and bitter waters? Are there any such
spiritually-feaverish desires in souls merely carnal and ^^regenerate? Can
the burning in the flames of sin and lust breath any such heavenly longings?
Can there be any desires but sinful desires after Christ? Can any but a soul
like David's pant after the water-brookes? Are the flames of sin and lust like
that heavenly fire in the bosom which the Prophet speaks on? Do the hearts of
any burn within them, but when Christ is in their company, and when spiritually
inflamed by him? Are the kindlings of sin like the kindlings upon the Altar? Is
the fire in the kitchen like the fire in the Temple? Are the burnings of hell
like the burnings of heaven? If not, Why are we told of men burning in the
flames of sin and lust after Christ? The doctrine is not more unwarrantable
then the expression is uncomely.

Vindication, Fol. 47.
A Peradventure we may receive or do good, by such a particular Ordinance or
action, is a sufficient encouragement for us to adventure on it in other cases;
let it be also warrantable in such cares where they have at least a
probability, a possibility, a peradventure, it may be, and a Who knows but it
may convert?

Inference.
Whence we may infer, That the sum of all the former Arguments now summed
up, you see, will reach no higher then to a Peradventure, or to a may be. And
whether these be such Scripture-grounds or assurances for administrations of
the Ordinances of God, I appeal to all the world of believers, who knows, that
May bees, and Peradventures, are not to be allowed any place in the practicail
obedience of Christians; but clear, demonstrative, solid and certain Maxims or
Principles; for, Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: and, He that doubts is
damned: and, Happy Romans 14.
is he that condemns not himself in what he does. And who knows not, that
what is done upon May bees and Peradventures, cannot be done of faith nor
persuasion?

Vindication, Fol. 51.
That the Presbytery or Classis may order a Suspension from the Sacrament or
any other Ordinances; provided that this power be claimed by no Divine Right,
but by Parliamentary Authority, and Humane Institution.

Inference.
Whereby we may infer, That what is not to be warranted in the Word, yet if
Humane Authority will undertake it, it shall not be excepted against by the
Vindication. But where is there that Authority that will adventure so far, to
make up any thing in spiritual Administrations* that there is no Spiritual
nor Scripture-warrant for? I am sorry to see the Vindication set the
Parliamentary Authority so near to Humane Invention, of whom we are persuaded
better things then to take the Patronage of any such thing, which is not
warrantable by the Word; but rather to suspend all, then to settle any thing so
close to the highest Administrations in the Word, which is of mere Humane
Invention. Nay, I will prove this to be the very Maxim and practice of that
honorable Senate, who have therefore rooted out Episcopacy, professed to the
most high God in a Covenant against all Will Worship, and Traditions of men;
and therefore let us not roll such a golden ball before Authority, to put them
out of their way after Christ, who have followed him so close hitherto, both in
their searchings in the Word, and in their tenderness of persecution, least
they might scourge Christ out of his own Temple, and not know it.

Vindication, Fol. 57.
The practical power of godliness is generally more evidently visible, and
the lives of the generality of the people more strict, pious, less scandalous
and licentious in our English Congregations, where there has been powerful
preaching, without the practice of Excommunication or Suspension from the
Sacrament, then in the Reformed Churches of France, Germany, or Scotland: Our
English Ministers and Protestants generally excel all others, notwithstanding
their strict Discipline.

Inference.
Whence we may infer, That the Vindication, though it pretend in the general
or face of it, to be for Presbytery, yet it is very clear, that, in aspersing
the government of all those Reformed Kingdoms where the practice and power of
it has been, it secretly wounds the glory of it in the opinion of the world;
and though it pull not down the Government quite, yet it weakens the Posts,
or judgments of men, on which it stands. I name not See fol. 3. etc.
here the other Texts that the Vindication has pulled out of the building of
the Presbyteriall Government; for the taking out the Scripture, are like the
pulling out the nails and pins from the house, and a loosning of the frame.
This I observe, because the Vindication professes so for that Government;
though I suppose many such friends, in time, might do as much harm, if not
more, then those of the Separation, whom he calls their enemies. Surely, I do
believe, France, Germany, Scotland, had rather such Books were not writ in
their behalf that opens the evil, corruption, and grievances of their
Government so much,

But I shall argue further: What need such comparing of the mixed Congregations
of several Kingdoms; ours and theirs? Surely they are all corrupt enough, and
mixed enough; and a Law for all sorts of sinners to communicate, as the
Vindication would have, would not much more referme, because it would then be a
kind of Church-priveledge to be a sinner, or a scandalous person; and to be
something notoriously wicked, Would be a way of enrighting them to
Church-Ordinances, according to the Principles of Vindication, however some
fair pretenses and Colors are laid on, that we should believe the contrary.

But what of all this? I believe there is another reason why the Government
has brought forth no more power of Godliness upon the Kingdoms then the
Vinaication observes; because neither the Parishes are constituted, nor yet the
Government, according to Gospell-order: yet I honor them as Believers, and
Brethren in the Lord, according to their light.

Yet I observe another secret, why the preaching of the Word thrives better,
and reformes more then the Government in these Kingdoms, because that the
Preaching of the Word is an Ordinance of the Lord; and when preached or held
forth to ungoldly scandalous, and notorious sinners, is but according to its
right order of Institution so preached; the end of the Lord is but fully and
clearly served; because the Word, in the ministry of it is appointed for a
converting Ordinance; but the Government and Discipline being not instituted as
a converting Ordinance primatily, but for a people already converted and
brought in it cannot be accompanied with such power from heaven, became it is
not managed according to pure Gospell-order, nor upon a people rightly prepared
and fitted: so as the fault is not, because there is a Government, as the
Vindication observes; but, not the pure Government nor the Government rightly
placed.

And for his Charge against the purer Congregations, as I know not any such
doings amongst them; so I will make no Apology for them, because that would
bring them within the compass of something like a crime; and I know nothing
but well by them.

THE NEW QVAERES. Folio 1. Of the Vindication propounded to the Honorable
PARLIAMENT and ASSEMBLY.
Quaere 1.
Whether a bare Excommunication or Suspension from the Sacrament, not backed
with Authority of the Civil Magistrate, be not like to prove an impotent, and
invalid, and ineffectuall means? Whether it be not a far better way, in point
of Conscience and Prudence, to admit scandalous persons to the Sacrament, not
actually excommunicated, though they thereby eat and drink judgment to
themselves, then to deprive any to whom it really belongs?

Antiquaere 1.
Whether is there any excommunication or no? For the Vindication questions it,
in calling it an invalid thing; and if so, How can any such thing be settled at
all as an Ordinance in the Church?

Whether ought Authority to join it self with any thing so questionable as
the Vindication would have it? Since nothing has proved more fatal.

Whether excommunication being granted, be any such bare thing, as the
Vindication speaks on, so impotent, (...)* and ineffectuall, without being
Authorized from a power from men? And whether the Ministers are to strike with
the Magistrates Sword?

Whether all the differences about Excommunication, be not from the want of
true Church-constitution? And whether a National Church be not too wide for
the Ordinances, and the Scabbard too big for the Sword? And whether Solomon's
Temple and Christ's be all of a largeness, so that one golden 1 Kings 6. 4.
Reed will measure both? Whether the old Temple that had Windows of narrow
Lights, be any pattern for the new?

Whether any thing of Prudence, As admitting scandalous persons to eat their
own damnation, as the Vindication says, Rather then to deprive them, to whom
it really belongs, be any Scripture-way of arguing; which forbids us not to do
evil that good may come thereby?

Whether any sin or offense be committed in such cases of deprivation of
scandalous persons, seeing, though it may really belong to them, yet the Church
nor Dispenser not knowing any such thing, nor judging, but only by the Rule of
visible walking to the Word and the Rule of evidences there, for Administration
of Ordinances, can faithfully administer but accordingly; for they that walk
according to this Rule, peace be on them, and on the Israel of God.

Whether the Law of God in this, be not as equitable as the Law of Man, which
judges not of secrets, nor takes cognizance of things unknown?

Whether it be not rather the scandalous persons only sin, who if he have a
real interest, will not live in the evidence of it, nor walk by the Rule of
Administrations, that he may partake?

Quaere. 2. Fol. 51.
Whether the suspending such persons from the Sacrament, being no Ordinance of
Christ without a total suspension, will not be a means rather to harden? And
whether their admission be not rather a more probable way of reclayming, being
accompanied with serious Admonitions, Exhortations, public and serious
Reprehensions.

Reasons.
1. Because that such persons are more hardened by it, total exclusion only
working shame.

2. Because against their receiving like Italians in Lent, they will be holy
for a day or two, and make vows, etc. and may be so converted.

3. Many then will read, etc. which would not do so before, in an Hypocritical
conscience; and the Sacrament is a Covenant which binds all receivers to
reform.

4. The Sacraments are so accompanied with Examinations, Exhortations, etc.
that ten to one would be converted by such admonition rather then by
suspention; therefore Christ when he came to save sinners, permitted Luke 7.
34, etc.
them familiarly to him and his Ordinances.

Antiquaere 2.
Whether Excommunication according to the Vindication grounds, being a
questionable Ordinance, as well as suspention, one of them may not be as well
made use on, as the other; Suspention as well as Excommunication upon his
grounds?

Whether the Admonitions, Exhortations, Reprehensions, Examinations, be such as
Christ appointed to make the Sacrament an Ordinance for all scandalous sinners
to come to, or rather to quicken and spiritualize the worthy receivers, who
receive according to the visible Rule of Administrations, as the whole strain
of Scripture precept, and practice speak?

Whether all the three first Reasons presuppose not such a Church-constitution
for Ordinances and partakers, as the Scriptures never speak on? For where is
there any such constituted Church of scandalous and Italianated persons, who
were constituted according to the Rule; and for Corinth, and the rest, that had
such bad Members, they are not examples in that of gathering, or constituting,
or administering, but reforming, as the Apostles who calls them to the rule of
the Word. This one mistake has deceived many. 1 Cor. 11.


Whether Christ in permitting scandalous sinners to converse with him
familiarly, when he was here in the flest be any rule for admitting all such
sinners now to the mystery of his spiritual Ordinances? And whether there be
not a spiritual difference betwixt Christ not offered, and offered, betwixt
his conversing in the flesh, for making up the mystery of Redemption; and the
mystery of Redemption made up, and finished by the eternal Spirit, in which he
offered himself; betwixt Christ in the flesh, and in the Spirit or Ordinance?

Whether did Christ intend his ordinary or occasional converting, to be any
rule for his Church or Kingdom in its Administrations or Ordinances, which is
a work of another form? And whether this intermingling of carnal and
spiritual notions be a Scripture-way? Whether ought we to force any
consequences or inferences upon the Word for practice in administrations in
things neither clearly, nor intentionally, for ought we see, nor mystically
directed, appointed, or instituted by Christ? And whether such a ground once
granted, will not let in one kind of will worship, as well as another?

And for that ten to one, being converted so as he says; Quere, Whether it is
not ten to one any will be a converted, but rather hardened?

Quere 3. Fol. 53.
Whether did Christ ever intend, that none but true believers, should receive
his Supper, or did he not infallibly know that many unregenerate and impenitent
should and would receive it? And the Antagonists grant, that close Hypocrites
have an external right; then if these, why not others? Christ having ordained
the Sacrament of the Supper, as well as the Word, to be a savor of death to
such; and God has his end in both, the glory of his Justice in the one, as
well as of his Grace and Mercy in the other.

Antiquaere.
Whether did not Christ intend, that all should receive or communicate in
outward administrations by an external right? And if so, then what ground is
there for the visible, imponitent, or known scandalous?

Whether if true saving faith were the one part of the Interest, and the
external right the other part of it, there be any ground left for the other
Communicants? And whether that the Scriptures rule, and purer practice of all
Churches in the Gospel, excepting when fallen, or beside the rule; and the
Scripture Cautions do not wholly exclude such scandalous impenitent persons
pleaded for, against all other foreign, probable, possible, rational, or
Rethoricating consequences and conclusions to the contrary.

Whether the glory of Gods justice in the judgment upon unworthy receivers, be
any ground to take in Communicants for condemnation, since it is full against
other Scriptures, that Christ came not into the world to condemn the world;
and to save men's lives, not to destroy them; and he would not the death of a
sinner? And whether, though finally condemnation be ordered for all such, yet
no such thing being formally, externally, dispensatively ordered, any persons
ought to be called in for condemnation in such a way?

Whether this be not quite against the nature of the Gospel dispensation;
Christ under the Gospel dispensing himself, and giving out himself, as a
Savior, a Redeemer, and in all the Gospel declining judgment; I come not to
judge the world, reserving that work till he appear in his own day to
condemnation of sinners, this being only his day of reconciliation to them.

Whether the Apostle in Romans 3. where he says, But if our righteousness
commend the righteousness of God, is God unrighteous, who takes vengeance?
And not rather as we be slanderously reported; and some affirm that we say;
Let us do evil, that good may come thereof, does not parallel this; For the
Apostle here though Gods righteousness and justice was set forth by his
justice upon sinners, yet he did not say as in the Quaere is said, Let us then
do evil that God may be glorified, or good may come thereof.

Quaere 4. Fol. 53.
Whether all Ordinances proving alike good or bad; saving or damning; and
impenitent persons, as well increasing their damnation by hearing, praying,
fasting, etc. What reason can be rendered by any rational Christian, why such
persons should not be admitted to the Sacrament, as to any other Ordinance, or
not suspended equally from all?

Antiquaere.
Whether any such consequence of admission or suspention from Ordinances, ought
to be grounded upon damnation or judgment, but rather upon words of command
and institution, and Scripture-practice? And if any such appeared, all these
Consequences which the Vindication draws forth, wringing blood, and not milk
from the Word, might be saved; and he need not go so far about, which when all
is done, brings a soul, but at best, upon a probable, specious, or real
colored Argument.

Whether, since the Vindication pulls down clear Scripture-Texts and grounds
in this Controversy, to weaken the building of his Adversary, he ought not in
conscience first to have had a clear Word or Institution for Fol. 3, ^, 6, 9.
the contrary practice, and not only probable, and literally conclusive
grounds, that souls can stand at surest upon; but like men upon Ice, who are
in as fair a probability to fall, as stand? And whether having taken away In
Fol. 3, 4, 6, 9.
the Scripture-Texts for Presbytery it self, he can well hold up any upon his
grounds? And whether is not this sceptiall or doubtful way of reasoning upon
Scripture; neither pulling quite down, nor building up, a way rather to fill
all the rooms with rubbish; and at length, neither to have new building nor
old. What man going to build a Tower, sits not down first, and sees what it
will cost him, lest having begun, and not able to finish all, men begin to
laugh at him, saying, etc. But whether is not all this ado about Ordinances,
rather for want of a right and purer constitution of Churches, which would save
all this controversy about scandalous and impenitent sinners, when the Church
were not troubled with such, where the Ordinances are.

P. Well, I am by this time well persuaded; and having heard all this, for my
part, I cannot but see that in settling things suddenly upon the Kingdom, and
things thus questionable, and unwarrantable in the way of Administration, and a
Kingdom so full of impenitent and scandalous sinners, as Parochial
Congregations generally are, there is danger of great sin, and great trouble.

C. I will therefore add two or three Arguments more, and so conclude.

An Experimentall-Argument for pure Churches and Ordinances.
THere is a spiritual Antipathie betwixt Grace and Nature, Flesh and Spirit;
the Flesh lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh: and the
more spiritual, or more carnal, the more these two contrary Natures work,
and the more powerfully against each other, as in Sarah and Hagar, Isaac and
Ishmael, and the less or more they can bear with each other: As for example:
While Judas carnal nature or disposition, uninflamed by Satan, boiled and
heightened not into any such gross act as selling and betraying of Christ, the
Disciples bore with him more, and Christ himself, as he was man and in a state
of Infirmity, could more endure him, then upon the breaking out of his sin: and
so in Simon Magus, in Ananius and Saphira, and others, whom the Apostles could
no longer suffer, not by way of Discipline, or inflicting Censure, but by way
of a spiritual contrarinesse to such gross hypocrisy and sin discovered: And
so the experiences of all that are of a pure Gospell-temper, will witness to
this very Age, in acts of spiritual fellowship and Community, in all acts of
Worship, etc.

This is founded not only on spiritual antipathies and sympathies, but in
natural and civil; natural things of a contrary nature, bearing one another
no less; and things of a civil nature, yet contrary doing the like.

Hence arise separations merely natural, and sensitive, and rational: Hence
arises a particular Schism and separation in all the things of the world, and a
secret gathering and contracting of things from the contrary into the same
kind: the common purity being lost, as the Apostle implies, Romans 8.
by which Nature did at first more universally agree, as if one common spirit
had been in it. And thus it was in the Churches of God at first, when three,
four, or five thousand did agree in one way of spiritual fellowship,
Doctrine, breaking of bread, and Prayers; but we see there is not now such
pourings out of spirit upon multitudes and Nations, that a Nationall-Church
should be together in such a unity of spirit. And under the Law there was even
a weaker example in the people of the Jews, being taken out from the people of
the world and naturally hating all that were common and unclean, as the
Gentiles: And before the Law, the people of God did gather into Families and
particular societies; as in A^^^^am, etc. And those Families, the children of
the Bondwoman and of the free never bearing but persecuting each other. So as
all of pure spiritual constitution, cannot but experimentally find a
spiritual nature in themselves, working them into a more glorious fellowship
then that of the world.

The sum of the Argument.

If then there be two contrary natures of Spirit and Flesh; if these cannot,
nor never could, in experience of all Age^, and according to the truth in
Scriptures, and example of all there, bear each other into the same spiritual
society or fellowship; if nature it self in the creatures run out into
antipathies and sympathies, that is into particular gatherings and separations,
mutual opposings and resistings of each other when together: Then spiritual
and unmixt Communion and Fellowship from the world, and men of the world, is
warrantable. But all this is undeniably true, to the experience of all:
Therefore spiritual unmixt Communion and Fellowship from the world, and men of
the world, is warrantable.

II. Argument from the Power of Spiritual Ordinances and Dispensations.
THe Gospel Ordinances brought into the World a power, and spiritual Law in
them, though in degrees and measures, and several givings out, as in John's
time, and his Disciples, in Christ's own time, and his Disciples, and in the
Spirits time, and according to these times of manifestation, believers were
wrought upon: in John's time they came out to the Baptism of Water; in Christ's
and his Disciples, to the preaching of the Word; in the Spirits time, to the
B^p^^sme of the Spirit, to a more mighty and glorious working; and all these
times of Gospel-manifestation, had a prevailing loss, and more upon the
believers of these several times, in drawing them out from the World in part,
though weakly: in John's time, it is said, Then came out unto him all Judea; yet
though they were Baptized of him, they gathered not off into such particular
societies, as after, The Kingdom of God then was but at hand in Christ's time,
though his preaching was powerful, yet he let out the glory of his spirit, but
sometimes with the Word, reserving his more glorious manifestations for other
times; and even here, though Christ's preaching gathered in his Apostles and
Disciples into some particular, and nearer way to himself, yet not many more;
nay, he rather left many, partly in that mixed condition of society he found
them; and so the Disciples Commission which was given, was to preach but little
yet of Church- gathering, but by way of Prophecy, as in Matt. 16. and 18. The
Kingdom of God was but yet at hand, not come: In the Spirits time, then the
Kingdom of God was come, and then a mighty operation and measure of the Spirit
was powered out, and then the believers through the powerful working, were
brought more off from the World, and began to gather in closer to Christ, and
one another. And now all power was given to Christ, which was not before his
Matt. 8. Ephesians. 4. 8, 11.
Resurrection, and now he sets up a Kingdom; All power is given into my hands
and now the Kingdom begins to be set up in the hearts and practice of
believers, and the Spirit to mold and cast the believers into Brotherhoods and
societies, and the form of a Kingdom; and now the Laws and spiritual policy
are given out for ordering this Kingdom: And we see how the people of God in
Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia, drew off from the world, in the things of the
Lord.

We see then how the Word did begin to work Believers into a fellowship from
the world; and the more the spirit was given, the more and more off from the
world, in all these several times: And it is a rational truth, and a clear
conclusion, even to mere reason, that the more Christ, and his Spirit is in
any, the more near and close they will gather up to heaven and walkings with
God; and the more Christward any one is, the more off still from the multitude
of the world: And thus the Ordinances of Jesus Christ, in which the Spirit
breathes so powerfully, work men off from the mixed world, into fellowship
with the Lord, and that spiritual fellowship makes them rejoice more in one
another, then in any other that are more carnal: The more men live to Christ,
the more they dye to the world, and are formed into the fellowship of his death
and Resurrection.

The sum of the Argument.

If then the Ordinances and Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ had ever a power in
some degree of prevailing upon the souls of Believers, according to the
manifestation of the Spirit: and if this Spirit, flowing from God and Christ,
carry up the soul to God and Christ, according to the measure given to those
Believers; and if the more they are carried toward Christ, the more they must
come off from the world:

Then Congregationall or Church Order wherein Believers are gathered into
fellowship with God in Christ and one another from the world, in the things of
the Gospel, and unmixt communion, is warrantable. But all this is undeniably
true from the Word. Therefore Church Fellowship and unmixt Communion is
warrantable.

Argument III.
IF mixed communion and society came in upon the Apostasy and falling Rev. cha.
2, 3*
away, and Parochial Congregations were formed up afterward from such mixed
Communion: If as Antichrist prevailed, so darkness and corruption prevailed
upon Believers: If Churches were called Golden Candlesticks Rev. ^* ^* 1 Cor.
1. 9. Ephesians. ^ 19. etc.
before and a Fellowship of Saints, and the Body of Christ, and Kingdom of God,
till they grew mixed: If the mixed Congregations by Parishes came in first by
Dyonisius Bishop of Rome, in the year 267. and in England by 2 Cor. 6. 5, 16,
7.
Honorius Bishop of Canterbury; and people were only made Congregations See the
learned Mr. S^^den. in his Book ^^ decimi^.
by convenience of situation, and the Law of Civil Policy: If Parishes were
first the seats of Popery, and after the seats of Prelacy and now fall under
the Presbytery in the same kind and Notion of a mixed multitude:

Then mixed and Parochial Congregations are not that way and order of Christ
for Ordinances which was the Primitive way revealed and practiced in the
Gospel But all this is undeniably true from the best Historians: Therefore not
mixed Communion and fellowship, but pure and unmixt, is the only Ordinance of
Christ.

Now I shall leave you for the present, and commend particulars unto you and
the Kingdom: the one, A Rule of Evidences for Spiritual Communion, drawn from
the Scriptures; the other, A remarkable passage in the Book of Vindication.

The Rule of Evidences for Spirituall-Communion.
Matthew. 15. 26. Chap. 18. 19, 20. Joh. 10. 16. Acts 2. 44, 46. Chap. 19. 9.
Romans 1. 7. Chap. 16. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 1. 1, 10. Chap. 5. 4, 5, 11, 13. and 12.
12, 13, 14, 20, 25, 27* 2 Cor. 5. 6, 7. Chap. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17. Gal. 5. 9, 10,
12, 13. Chap. 6. 16. Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 25* Chap. 5. 1, 2, 11, 12, 21, 30. P^il.
3. 15, 16, 17. 1 These. 3. 6. 2 These. 3. 14. 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5. 2 Timothy 3. 5.
Tit. 3. 10. Heb. 10 ^^. 1 Pet. 2. 9. 1 John 1. 7. 2 John v. 10, 11. Revel. 2.
14, 15, 20. Chap, 18. 4. and 19. 20.

A remarkable Passage in the Vindication-Booke.
ANd if our Assembly and Ministers will but diligently preach against that
Catalogue of scandalous sins and sinners they have presented to the Parliament,
and the Parliament prescribe severe Temporal Laws and Punishments against
them, and appoint good Civil Magistrates to see them duly executed, inflicted;
I am confident, that this would work a greater Reformation in our Church and
State in one half year, then all the Church Discipline and Censures now so
eagerly contested for, will do in an Age, and will be the only true way and
speediest course to reform both Church and State at once; which I hope the
Parliament will consider of, and take care, that our Ministers (like the
Bishops formerly) may not now be taken up with Ruling and Governing, but
Preaching and Instructing, which is work enough, wholly to engrosse their time
and thoughts.

FINIS.
LEt this Way of Peace and Reconciler among Brethren, entitled, The Smoke in
the Temple (more then ordinarily useful in these times be printed.

Imprimatur, JOHN BACHILER.

The Smoke in the Temple. WHEREIN IS A DESIGN FOR PEACE and RECONCILIATION of
Believers of the several OPINIONS of these Times about ORDINANCES, to a
Forbearance of each other in Love, and Meekness, and Humility.
With the opening of each Opinion, and upon what SCRIPTURES each is grounded.

With the several EXCEPTIONS which may be made against each Opinion from the
SCRIPTURES.

With one Argument for Liberty of Conscience, from the NATIONAL CONVENANT.

With another Argument to prove the Gospel, or New Testament of Jesus Christ
the very Word of God; Tendered to all the Believers, to show them how little we
have attained, and there is a more glorious Fullness to be revealed.

With a Discovery of the Antichristian way of Peace, etc. for Opinions.

With a full Answer to Master LEY, One of the Assembly of Divines, against my
late New Quaere.

With some spiritual Principles drawn forth of the Controversy.

Rev. 15. 8. And the Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and
from his power: and and no man was able to enter into the Temple, till the
seven plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled. By John Saltmarsh, Preacher
of the Gospel at Brasteed in KENT. THE THIRD EDITION.

Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Sign of the Black Spread-Eagle, at the
West End of S. PAUL'S. 1646.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Vicount SAY and SEAL, and Lieutenant
General CROMWELL.
Noble Patriots,
IF I mistake not, you may here single out something of the Lords from what is
mine, and discern some beams of God amongst many things of man. I know the
candle of the Lord cannot shine any where with more snuff then in me; however
since the Lord has lighted it, I dare not but let it shine ( or rather
glimmer) before men. I have writ your Names to my Book that I may be one of
your Remembrancers amongst the rest to the advancement of Truth; not but they
who know ye, know ye to be acted by a Spirit of Truth in your selves. The Lord
remember ye according to all the good ye have done (in your several
Ministrations) to this people; and do that for ye which gives you most, and yet
takes most from ye, even filling ye with himself; till he has emptied ye of
all but his own glory, and gathered ye up into the fullness and righteousness
of himself in Christ, where we are only nothing in our selves, and every thing
in him; and surely the most, and best and greatest thing he can do for the sons
of men, is, thus to make them nothing in their own account, that he that
glories may glory in the Lord. I may seem strange to wish ye thus; but I know
it is not strange to ye, who know the Mystery of the Spirit, and of Christ.

My Lord, and Sir, Go on still, yet still laying your designs in a glory above
that of States and Kingdoms, and involving all your Counsels there, where
there is most of Heaven, and least of the world.

So prays, Your Servant in the Lord, JOHN SALTMARSH.

To the Believers of several Opinions for outward Ordinances or dispensations,
scandalously called Independents, Presbyterians, Anabaptists, Seekers.
Brethren,
I Have fairly set down how far each of you have attained in the Mystery of
Truth; and surely we are all short of the glory which shall be revealed in the
Temple or Church of God; and there are such clouds rolling about each opinion,
that may darken it, or something of it, So as things are not so clear as they
are commonly taken by each of us; If any man think he knows anything, he
knows nothing yet as he 1 Cor. 8. 2.
ought to know: So as the common ignorance and infirmity amongst us, may be a
rise for a common Unity amongst us: and seeing we all come out of Babylon
(though in several ways) to the glorious Temple or Tabernacle which God has
sent down to be with men, and walk thus diversely thither; yet our several and
distinct goings are but like so many Travelers to the City of London; some
travel from the North, some from the South, and from the West, some from the
East, yet all thither; though too, there may be some mistaking of the way in
each, because of the little light that is abroad. The gathering of the Saints
into the Heaven, or Kingdom below, in this day of Revelation, is like the
gathering at the last day, which shall be all into one glorious Body, though
the gathering shall be from the four winds or ends of the Earth, by the
several Trumpets or Angels.

One thing I have more. Let us seek for the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, to
open to us the Mystery of the Scriptures called The Revelation; for in that
Book is the Prophecy of the Churches laid up, and the seasons and times for
Truth revealed. Let us search and seek out by the Spirit of Jesus, even that
Jesus which was in the Vision, and gave it out to John; for there is none found
worthy to open the Book with Seals but the Lamb. Surely in the Mystery of
Angels, Vials, Sea of glass with fire, Temple with Smoke, the Angel with the
everlasting Gospel, the Angel enlightening the Earth, the Whore in skarlet and
precious pearls, the Cup of abomination, the Beast like a Lamb, the Image of
the Beast, the Horus and Kings of the Earth, the mark in the forehead and in
the right hand, the buying and selling, the Tabernacle of God with men, the
first and second Resurrection, the Ihron^ of God, the pure Crystal River of
water, the Holy Jerusalem descending from God, etc. In these is much of the
glory wrapped up, and from these shall the Truth we contend for, appear to our
further enlightening.

Yet one thing more. We that are thus contenders for Ordinances, for the Temple
and the Vessels in it, let us take heed we forget not him who is greater then
the Temple; for one greater then the Temple is here It would be spiritually
considered, that while we strive for the Vessels and Cups, we spill not the
Wine.

And it ought to be so carried by all of us, that* because we are so much in
opinion, we may not be thought to place Religion there, as I fear too many do,
making a Christ of the very Ordinance of Christ, and pressing some outward
Ordinances of the Gospel so legally; as some hearing such a power of Salvation
put into them, and finding an outward dispensation more easily got then the
spiritual, make haste thither only, and then sit down as saved under a mere
outward Ordinance. The Lord grant that we may neither undervalue an Ordinance
nor the least Institution of Jesus Christ, nor raise it up into a Jesus Christ,
and set up the Law above or beside the Lawgiver. We must now learn to know
Jesus Christ less after the flesh, and not to embody salvation in a mere
outward dispensation, and so incarnate Jesus Christ over again from the glory
and spirituality he is in.

Brethren, farewell; For my part, I am fully assured from Scriptures of the
Church of Christ here, or Gospell-fellowship of the Saints; and unto this If
any man wi^^ do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, Ioh. 7. 17.
fellowship with the Father and the Son, I endeavor; and I have one way to
reveal Truth to me which I cannot conceal, nor yet cannot practice as I
would, and that is this;

To see Truth by living in the power of Truth, and by first obtaning Jesus
Christ to live in us in the power of his suffering, death, and Resurrection;
for surely Jesus Christ must do all (though more gloriously and spiritually)
over again in his, which he did in himself.

If Jesus Christ the Light be in us, the light by which every outward
dispensation is seen, will flow in; for where the Sun is, there will be every
beam with it.

THE CONTENTS.
A way of Peace, or a Design for Reconciliation.
1 GOds Love the first and last glorious V^ion to be considered, to draw us to
Unity. Page 1 2 Names of Sect and Division to be laid down. p. 2 3 Passions and
Railings forborne. Ibid. 4 Reviling each other for infirmities forborne. Ib. 5
The sins of any not to be laid on the Cause. Ib. 6 Liberty for Printing and
Speaking. Ibid. 7 Let all subscribe their names to what they Print. Ibid. 8 Let
all be severally accountable. page 3 9 Free Debates, and open conferences.
Ibid. 10 Let us call Believers, though of several Opinions, if the name of
Brethren cannot be justly allowed. Ib. 11 No Believers to esteem too highly of
themselves for what they attain to. Ibid. 12 No assuming infallibility over
each other. p. 4 13 No civil power drawn into advantages. Ib. 14 Tenderness
in offending each other in things of an outward nature. Ibid. 15 Several
Opinions from the Gospels first discovery, yet all believers. p. 5 16 No
despising for too much Learning, or too little. Ibid. 17 We be one in Christ,
though diverse, Ibid. 18 The Spiritual Persecution to be forborne. Ib.
The Unwarrantable Way of Peace, or the Antichristian Design for Reconciliation.
TO believe as the Church or Councils. p. 6 ^o set up o^e as the Pope, for
Infallibility. Ib. To allow that all may be saved in their several ways. p. 7
To forbid Interpretings and Disputes. Ibid. By a compu^sive power. Ibid.
The Opinions of these times.
^ Resbytery so called, what it is, and what they hold. p. 8 ^ceptions against
Presbytery. p. 9. ^ dependency so called, what it is, and what they hold. Ibid.
^ceptions against Independency. p. 10 ^abap^isme so called, what it is, and
what they hold. p. 12 Exceptions against the grounds of the new Baptism. Ibid.
Seeking, or Seekers so called; what their Way is, and what they hold. p. 16
Exceptions against them, Ibid. Conclusion. p. 19 The Gospel, or New Testament,
proved undeniably to be the very Word of God. p. 20 One Argument from the
National Covenant ( Art. 1 and 2.) for Liberty of Conscience. p. 23 Objections
against it, answered. p. 25, 26
Spiritual Principles drawn forth of the Controversy.
GOspell-truth one and the same. p. 60 Prudence and Consequences, are the great
Engines of Will Worship. Ibid. The People are Brethren and Saints in Christ's
Church; but in Antichrists, Parishioners and servants. p. 61 Presbytery it self
is founded on Principles of Separation, which yet they condemn for Schism in
other Churches^ay, is the greatest Separation. p. 62 None to be forced under
Christ's Kingdom, as in the Kingdoms of the world. Ibid. The power of a formal
Reformation, in a Government, makes it not Christ's Government. p. 63 The
visible Church or Communion, is the Image of the invisible or mystical. p. 64
How Christ is a King of the Nations and of the Church* and how an Head. Ibid.
The Presbyteriall Government and the Worlds, of the same equal Dominion. p. 65
The National, and Congregationall Church Covenant, both lawful, or both
unlawful. Ibid. We receive and give out Truth by parts. p. 66 All Cove^an^ers
are bound to contribute to Religion as well as State. p. 67 We are to try
Truth, and so receive it in its degrees. p. 67 No Church Way Independency. p.
68 A spirit of Love and Meeknes becomes Believers. Ib. When a State-conscience
is fully p^rswaded; doubtful, and so sinning. Ibid. A Postscript. with
Salmasius his Testimony against the present Presbyteriall way. p. 69
A WAY OF PEACE: OR, A Design of Reconciliation. How the Believers of several
Opinions, scandalously called Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists,
Seekers, may be reconciled to forbear one another.
(1) Gods love the first and last glorious Union to be considered, to draw us
to Unity.
ONe way, is, to consider love as it is in God, and flowing from him upon the
creature: God is love, and he 1 John 4. 8. 1 John 4. 16.
that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. Now the more love
there is in any, the more of God there is in any. Satan, the first fountain of
sin, made the first Schism in the glorious Communion: All was one, and in one
glory, till the first division, Luke 10. 18* Matthew. 24. 12.
and till Satan fell like lightening; and he envying the whole Creation, which
was in love with it self, and him that made it, drew it into sin, and
antipathies, and mutual persecutions; and when it began to leave loving him
that was pure and infinite love, it began to hate it self, and divide from it
self: So as the less love, the more of Satan, and sin. The consideration of
Gods love to himself, which 1 John 4. 8. 1 John 3. 6. John 13. 1.
is infinite, of his love to his, which is no less infinite, because to
sinners; and of his Sons love, spiritually uniting himself here, and gloriously
hereafter, into one Body and Communion, cannot but make us love one another.

(2) Names of Sects and Division to be laid down.
Let all names and notes of distinction taken up by way of scandal and
reproach, be laid down and forborne; names and notions are like Standards and
several Colors in wars, whereby men are gathered into several Orders,
Armies, and bodies of division, one against another; one says I am of Paul,
and 1 Cor. 1. 12, 3
I of Apollo, and I of Cephas; Is Christ divided?

(3) Passions and railings forborne.
Let a spirit of meekness run in the artery of Preaching and Printing: Let
not passions, evil speaking, railings, which inflame and do not edefie, be
heard Prove. 6. ^8.
amongst us: the angry stir up strife; wherefore let all bitterness, wrath,
malice, with evil speaking, be put away from you.

(4) Reviling each other for infirmities forborne.
Let there be no rifling into each others infirmities, to the advantaging or
disadvantaging the cause: What is any thing of the man to the thing it self?
Phil. 1. 15, 16, 17, 18.
What is ones darkness to the light he professes? Any ones errors to a single
truth? There is rubbish enough every where if swept from every corner.

(5) The sins of any not to be laid on the Cause.
Let not the miscarriages, the failings, the sins, the hypocrisy, etc. of any
that profess a Truth, with others, be charged upon the Truth he or they Luk
2^, 58, 60 Gal. 2. 12, 13, 14.
profess, making such sins to be the sins of opinion, not of the Person, as
one of late, who has charged the unfortunate end of one, as a fruit of
separation, See M. Bailey his Dissuasive. Acts 1. 25.
whereas he might so argue against the very Doctrine of Christ, because of one
Judas, who did the like to himself.

(6) Liberty for Printing and speaking.
Let there be liberty of the Press for Printing, to those that are not allowed
Pulpits for Preaching: let that light come in at the window which 1 These. 5 19.
cannot come in at the door, that all may speak and write one way that cannot
another: let the Waters of the Sanctuary have issue, and spring up Valleys as
well as Mountains.

(7) Let all subscribe their names to what they Print.
Let all that Preach or Print, affixe their names, that we may know from whom:
the contrary is a kind of unwarrantable modesty at the best: if it be truth
they write, why do they not own it? if untruth, why do they write? Some such
must either suppress themselves for shame or fear; and they that Prove. 28 1.
dare not own what they do, they suspect the Magistrate, or themselves.

(8) Let all be severally accountable.
Let all that Teach or Print be accountable, yet in a several way; if it be
matter of immediate disturbance and trouble to the State, let them account for
it to the Magistrate, under whom we are to live a peaceable and quiet life; 1 Timothy 2. 2.
if matter of Doctrine, etc. let them be accountable to the Believers and
Brethren who are offended by conference, where there may be mutual Gal. ^. 1 ^.
conviction and satisfaction.

(9) Free Debates and open Conferences.
Let there be free debates, and open conferences, and communication for all,
and of all sorts that will, concerning difference in spirituals: where doors
are not shut, there will be no breaking them open* so where debates are free,
there is a way of vent and evacuation, the stopping of which has caused more
troubles in the States then any thing: for where there is much new wine in old
bottles, the working will be such as the Parable speaks on; still allowing the
State to secure all tumults or disturbances.

(10) Let us call Believers, though of several opinions, if the Name Brethren
cannot be justly allowed.
Let all who pretend to come out of the Antichristian State, be acknowledged as
those several Jews and Christians, who came out of Judaism and Acts 21. 20 1
Cor. 8. 7, 8, 10
Gentilism in the Apostles times; some were more and some less zealous of the
Law, yet all Believers; some made conscience of the Idol, and sacrifice, some
not.

(11) No Believers to esteem too highly of themselves for what they attain to.
Because we are but yet commings out of Babylon, and the fall of Babylon not
yet, the Smoke yet in the Temple, the Angels but pouring out the Vials, the
Rev. 5. 6. Rev. 18. 1.
Angel that enlightens the earth with glory not yet flying through the
heavens; let not any account of themselves to have attained any thing yet as
they ought, or to know there is not any Church or Believers; but if one see
more of one truth, another may see more of another; if one see one thing for a
truth, another sees another thing for a truth, and yet all see short of the
fullness of truth; there is so much want, darkness, and so little light or
glory in each, as is rather matter of humiliation and praise, then glorying and
exception one against another: If any man think he knows any thing, he
knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8. 2.

(12) No assuming infallibility over each other.
Let us not, being under no further degree of the revelation of Truth, and
coming out of Babylon, assume any power of infallibility to each other; so as
to force up all to our light or degree of knowing or practicing; for there lies
as much on one side for compulsion, as on another, respectively to one another;
for another evidence is as dark to me as mine to his, and mine to his as his
to me, till the Lord enlighten us both for discerning alike; So as when there
is no power in us to make that appear to another which appears to Matthew. 7 1,
2.
us, there can be no reasonable equity for any enforcing or compelling in
spirituals. The first great rent betwixt the Eastern and Western Kingdoms,
began when the Bishop of Rome would needs excommunicate the East, for not
believing as they believed.

(13) No Civil Power drawn into advantages.
Let not those Believers who have the advantage of the Magistrate, strive to
make any unwarrantable use of it one against another, because Scripture
principles are not so clear for it, and because they know not the revolution
of Providence, and we are to do as we would be done to: That very day which
should have been a bloody day to the Jews, was turned into the contrary;
Esther and the Jews had power over them.

(14) Tenderness in offending each other, in things of an outward nature.
Let there be much tenderness in not offending each other, but pleasing one
another to edification: Paul would not offend the Idolatrous weak: The 1 Cor.
9. ^0. Romans 15. 2.
weakest and most superstitious makes most conscience of outward things; and
the strong should know, that Idol or Idoll-Temple is nothing: Many a one are
more offended at Truth by the carriage of another, who sometimes reformes with
as much superstition, as the other offends. It is as much below 1 Cor. 8. 9.
Romans 14. 17.
the glory of the Gospel to think one place unholy, as holy: No place can
defile now Salomons Temple is not standing; yet let all Truth be brought forth
peaceably: Truth and Peace can offend nothing but that which may be justly
offended, which is the corruption, not the person.

(15) Several Opinions from the Gospels first discovery, yet all Believers.
Consider the differences and several Opinions from the first discovery of the
Gospel: Some believed not Christ's sufferings and Resurrection; as the John 20
9.
Disciples whom yet Christ took to him, and walked with, and counted as his:
Some believed not the Holy Ghost, nor Christ's Baptism, and were zealous Luke
24. 26. John 3. 25. Acts 21. 20. Mat. 11. 1, 2, 5^
of the Law, and yet the Disciples counted them as Believers. John's Disciples
would have followed John only; but John sent two of them to Christ at one time
and told them again he must increase, but himself must decrease. Christ in
his time would not forbid any that went about in his Muke 9. 38. Luke 9. 49.
Name; There is none that does any thing in my Name, can lightly speak evil of
me. When the Spirit was given, the Disciples bore one another out of the
Church, as the Believers of John's Baptism, and the zealots of the Law, and
A^^s 19* 2, 3.
one another in the Church; they that did eat, them that did not eat; and they
that regarded a day, them that regarded not a day; walking together as far as
they attained by the same rule.

(16) No despising for too much learning, or too little.
Let not one despise another for gifts, parts, learning: let the Spirit be
heard speak in the meanest: let not the Scribe or Disputer of the Law despise
the Fishermen, nor they despise them because Scribes and Disputers: The Spirit
is 1 Th^ss 5. 20.
in Paul as well as Peter; in both as well as one.

(17) We may be in one Christ, though diverse.
Consider that we may be one in one Christ, though we think diversely; and we
may be Friends, though not Brethren: and let us attain to Union, though not to
Unity.

(18) The spiritual Persecution to be forborne.
Consider there is a twofold Persecution: There is a spiritual or that of
Believers, and a mixed Persecution, or civilly Ecclesiastical: The spiritual
Persecution is that of the Spirit merely, and this kind of Persecution little
thought on and studied; this is when we cannot be are one another several
Opinions or soul-belief, in the same spiritual Society, or fellowship, but
they must either be of us, or out of us; and surely, this kind of Persecution
is as unreasonable as any other; for what is this but soul-compulsion, when
another Phi. 3. 2, 5, 16.
must only believe as we believe, and not wait till the Lord reveal even this?
This kind of spiritual compulsion will in time break and dissolve the visible
Communion of Saints, and Body of Christ exceedingly, if taken up or continued;
and it will be amongst Christians, as amongst the Antichristians where they
divide and subdivide, and some cast themselves into a Monkery from all the
rest: Jerusalem and Antioch were not of this way, to cast out one another Acts
15 3, 4.
upon such grounds, but to meet, reason, and counsel, and hear: And surely
the Churches can ill complain of a mixed persecution from without, if they
persecute one another from within; the Magistrate may as justly whip them both,
as they whip one another: Such grudgings, complainings, dissolvings, spiritual
inforcings, gives hint to the Civil power to compel, while it beholds them
but a little more spiritually co^p^lling one another: Let all Churchrights, 1
Cor. 13. 12. Col* 3. 13. 1 Cor. 8. 2.
privileges, boundaries be preserved; all Heresy and Schism by the rule
rebuked, but in all spiritual meekness and wisdom, and not call Heretic and
Schismatic too suddenly, since we see but in part.

THE UNWARRANTABLE WAY OF PEACE: Or, The Antichristian Design of
Reconciliation.
(1) To believe as the Church or Councels.
THat all should believe as the Church believes; and this Church is the great
Councels of Bishops, Cardinals, etc* as if the souls of all were to be saved
only in the bundle of theirs, as if they could believe both enough for
themselves and all others.

(2) To set up one as the Pope, for infallibility.
Because there may be difference amongst many, and all may not agree, therefore
there shall be one (say they) with the Vrim and Thummim, one infallibly
decreeing, and interpreting, and unerring, to whom the Spirit of Truth is
successively derived; and his determinations, interpretations, shall be final,
conclusive; and this that Vicar of Christ, the Pope this one way in the
Antichristian State, and all Reformed Kingdoms were once under this Peace.

(3) To allow that all may be saved in their several ways.
Because there be several Believers, and several interpretations and
opinions, one saying, This is the way, and another That, therefore say some,
All in all ways may be saved, every one believing every thing. Now this is one
way to make peace, but not the way; there is but one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism.

(4) To forbid Interpretings and Disputes.
Because several opinions arise by interpretings and disputings about
Scripture, therefore all openings of the Word, all disputings must be forborne:
Because the Sunshine offends some weak sight in the house, shut up doors and
windows, and make all dark. Thus the Papists and Prelates in forbidding
Scriptures and Marginall Notes; and thus fearing there may be something false,
they will hear nothing that is true.

(5) By a compulsive power.
Some take the Civil power in to make peace, reckoning a compulsive
Uniformity for Unity, Peace, and Truth. This is one way to deal with the body
indeed, but not with the soul; to mind the outward man, but not the inward.
This way of Civilly Ecclesiastical peace is the Antichristian design, who
having got the Kings of the Nations to give their strength, and power, and Rev.
17. 17.
Kingdom unto them, supplies that from the world which they want from the
Word, making the spiritual power of Jesus Christ to receive its honor, life,
efficacy, power, from the power of men. This way of peace is such as has by
experience troubled Nations, and troubled it self at length too; and broken it
self against that way which it aimed to break: For whosoever falls upon this
stone shall be broken, and on whomsoever it shall fall, it shall break Luke
^8. 18.
them to powder.

THE OPINIONS OF THESE TIMES:
With the Exceptions each Opinion may be charged withal; being the great
Argument for Love, Meekness, and Forbearance one to another, or of Peace and
Reconciliation till the Lord reveal more.

Presbytery, So called; What it is, and what they hold.
THe Presbytery is set up by an Mat. 18. 15. Acts 15. 19, 28, 31. and 16 4. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Titus 1. 5. 1 Timothy 1. 2. Titus 1 6. Acts 13. 1. 1 Cor. 12. 17.
alleged Pattern of the Eldership and Presbytery of the Apostles and Elders
in the first Churches of the Gospel, strengthened by such Scriptures as are in
the margin, and by allusion to the Jewish Government, and to appeals in Nature.
Their Churches are Parochial, or Parishes, as they are divided at first by the
Romish Prelates and the Statute-Laws of the State. Which Parishes and
Congregations are made up of such Believers as were made Christians first by
Baptism in Infancy, and Acts 6 6. 2 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
Heb. 13. 17. Act. 20. 28, 29. Rev. 2. 14, 20.
not by the Word: And all the Parishes or Congregations are under them, as they
are a Classical, Provincial, and National Presbytery; And over those
Parishes they do exercise all Church Power and Government; which may be
called, The power of the Keys.

Exceptions.
1. THe Apostolical and Primitive Eldership were not so Acts 15. 22, 25, 29. 2
Cor. 1. 24. 1 Pet. 5. 3. 1 Timothy 5. 1. Mat. 20 15. Acts 15. 29. John 16 13. Gal.
1. 12. Acts 2. 43.
authoritative over their Congregations as these pretend, nor so compulsive or
forcing their respective Congregations.

2. The Apostolical Eldership and Presbytery were more infallible; they were
more in the light, and the immediate way of the revelation of Truth.

3. They took not in the power of the Mark 10. 42 Luke 2^. 25. John 18. 36.
Acts 1. 15. and 15. 23. and 14. 23.
Magistrate to help them, nor did they clasp it as one with their own.

4. They consisted of Brethren as well as of the Presbytery, and both together
had a joint interest and concurrencie in all power.

5. The Presbyteries were not as now, Classical, Provincial, National: these
are no Scripture-forms, but devises of men. 1. Tim. 6. 3. Mat. 15. 9. (...).


6. The Acts 20. 17. and 15 4. Mat. 16. 11. and 13. 3. John 6. 12.
Presbytery is of no more in the Greek, then of a metaphorical or figurative
signification, signifying Seniority or Eldership: and the setting it up in a
notion of power and office, is more then the Scriptures will clearly bear:
such Notions in the Word, are but Notions of form and order, not of Office.

7. The Presbyteries now are not rightly constituted, because they consisted of
a Ministry from Rev. 13. 16. Mat. 7. 14, 15, 16, 17.
Antichrist, and the Bishops of Rome, ordaining John 10. 1, 5. Acts 19. 15. ^
Cor. 14. 23. Acts 6. 3. 1 Cor. 1. 12.
one another by the same power they received from them.

8. Their Congregations are not such as before, so constituted; because
Parishes are of a Popish and politic constitution.

9. Baptism is not to be received by Generation now, as Circumcision was, but
by John 3. 5. Acts ^. 31. Gal. 3. 7. Ephesians. 1. 15. Acts 3 22.
Regeneration or visible Profession, as at first: Nor are the carnal seed now
any more children of Abraham, but the Faithful: And no Ordinance is now to be
administered upon legal consequence, but upon Gospell-precept.

Independancy, So called; What it is, and what they hold.
THe people of God are only a 1 Pet 2. 5. 1 Cor. 1. 2, 9. Col. 1. 2. ^ Cor. 6.
16, 17. Acts 2. 41, 42. Revel. 3. 1. 17. Acts 9. 26
Church, when called by the Word and Spirit into Consent or Covenant, and Saints
by profession; and all Matt. 18 15, 16, 17, 18, 20. Mat. 16. 18, 19
Church Power is laid in here, and given out from hence into ^ Cor 12. 28
Ephesians. 4. 11.
Pastorship and Elders, etc. and a just Acts 6. 3, 5. and 15. 22. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
distribution of Interest betwixt Elders and People. All spiritual Government
is here, and not in any power foreign or extrinsecal to the Congregation or
authoritative: Their children are made Christians first by Infant Baptism, and
after by the Word: and they are baptized by a 1 Cor. 7. 14. Acts 2. 39. Romans
11. 16.
foederal or Covenant-holinesse, or Birth-priveledges, as under the Law, They
may enjoy all Acts 2. 42. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Ordinances in this estate, and some may 1 Cor. 14. 22, 6, 11, 4.
Prophecy.

Exceptions.
1. THat there is not such a power radically or fundamentally placed in the
Church to make Pastors and Elders, etc. because there is, first, no such
practice in the Word, but rather of an Apostolical or Matt. 28. 18. and 18.
18, 19. Acts 14. 21, 22 23.
Ministerial power, which made or gathered Churches first, not Churches them.

2. The Eldership and Presbitery of Apostles and Elders did Acts 15 6. and 14.
23. ^ Tim. 4 14. Acts 6. 2* 6.
principally act, and authoritatively act, and not the whole Church or people;
they in a lower and less Interest, in a way of choice or vote and consent.

3. That which is called Ordination, etc. was by the Apostles, and a power
established in the Acts 14. 23. 1 Timothy 4 14.
Presbitery not in the Church, as mere Believers.

4. They that were Baptized by an Reve 13. 16. John 10. 1, 5. Mat. 7 14 etc.
Antichristian power, are no right Baptized Members of Churches; and yet so are
all of their Churches as were Baptized under Prelacie; the power of the
dispenser being Antichristian and the subject or Matt. ^8 18, 19. and 3. 6. 9
Acts 8. 37
Infant no visible Believer for that Ordinance.

5. Their Church consists not all of visible Saints or Believers, according to
their own 1 Cor. 1. 2. 1 et, 2: 5 etc. John 3. ^.
Principle: for their children being baptized, and in that condition, are no
actual visible Saints; all their Church are not living stones, nor visibly
holy. And it may be more clearly proved that mere civil and moral men are
rather to be admitted of their Church-society then such as children are, who
are but merely naturally visible; neither spiritually, civilly, nor morally
visible.

6. That of foederal holiness in 1 Co. 7. 14.
1 Cor. 7. 14. is only to satisfy a scruple; that if Unbelieving made wife or
husband unholy, it made children unholy too, and so both or none, must be put
away.

7. There is no carnal seed now to be sealed, Christ being come in the flesh;
which Gal. 3. 16. Romans 4. 16. John 3. 6.
flesh before, had a Seal of Circumcision; but there is no such Matthew. 3. 9.
external privilege now, by any such right.

8. All Consequences drawn from Circumcision, are of no more force then from
the 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.
cloud and the 1 Cor. 10. ^, 2, 3, 4. 1 Pet. 3. 21.
Sea, and the rock, and Noah's Ark, and other typical and figurative places
in the Word, nor can any legal or probable Scriptures make any Law or Rule for
any such Gospell-administration, which is not directly and in John 15. 14. Acts
3. 2^.
Scripture-words to be found.

9. Childrens Baptism in the Church is a way never to have a Church of such
Mat. 3. 5, 6. Acts 2. 41. and 8. 12. and 10. 48. Ephesians. 5. 26.
Baptized Believers as in the Apostles times.

10. Baptism being a Rom 4. 11. 1 Cor. 14. 22.
visible sign, cannot rationally be administered upon one that cannot see nor
discern what is done, to whom the water can be no Acts 22. 16.
sign, but they are only told of it when they come to age: and how can it hold
proportion with Circumcision, when as that was a Romans 4. 11. Genesis 17 11.
mark remaining in the flesh when they came to age to signify to them? But
water is like a flash of Mat 24. 27.
lightning which must be taken by the Believer in that quick and James 1. 23.
vanishing act, or else it has no Rom 6. 3, 4. Acts 22. 16.
sensible efficacy to which it was instituted; nor does the Believer thus any
other way enjoy it but by way of History, or a thing past and done, which he
never saw. Baptism is as a flash of lightning, (as it is well observed by
one;) Circumcision was as a fixed Star; so much difference in these two Rites.

11. Institution of Baptism is to Acts 2 38 Rom 6. 3. 4. Gal. 3. 27 Col. 2.
12. Mat. 28. 18, 19. Heb 6 ^. Mark 16. 15, 16.
duty as well as grace, which children cannot perform, and so answer the sign.

12. Institution of Baptism is doctrinall in the very act of it, as is
acknowledged by all the present Baptism, Matthew. 28. Baptizing them in the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost etc. Now this implies a capable and
teachable subject.

13. Their Churches are not distinct from other Societies Antichristian,
because there is no visible gifts by which their Churches are Ephesians. 4. 11, 12.
visibly qualified from any other Societies, and according to the promises of
gifts in Ephesians. 4. 11. nor no such Church-gifts as in 1 Cor. 12. etc. where
there was the 1 Cor. 12* 8, 9, 10 Acts 2. 38. and 2. 34
gifts of the Spirit powerfully and visibly spiritualizing that body, and
making it to excel all other bodies civil or Antichristian.

And that Prophecy was a more 1 Cor. 12. 10, 29. and 14 29.
extraordinary gift, then is now any where in the Churches.

Anabatisme, So called; What it is, and what they hold.
THe Church of Christ are a Company of Heb. 12 22. Acts 10. 48 and 2. 4^. and
16. 32, 33.
baptized Believers; and whatsoever Matthew. 10. 1. compard with Matthew. 8. 18.
John 4. 1. John 8. 31. Isai. 1. 16 Act 9 10. and 1. 15.
Disciple can teach the Word, or make out Christ, may baptize or administer
other Ordinances.

That the Church or Body, though but of two or three, yet may enjoy the Word
and Ordinances, by way of an 1 Cor. 12. 5.
Administrator, or one deputed to administer, though no Pastor.

That none are to be baptized but Acts 2. 38. and 10. 4^. Math. 28. 18. Mark
1^. 16. Acts 8 37.
Believers.

That those commonly called Church Officers, as Pastors, etc. are such as the
Church or Body may be Acts 1. ^5 and 2 42.
without.

That none are to be called Brethren but baptized Believers.

All administrations of Ordinances were given to the Apostles as Matthew. 1^. 1.
compared with 28 18. Isai. 8. 16. Acts 9 10.
Disciples; not so under the notion of Church Power as is pretended.

That none ought to communicate in the Ordinances of Christ till first Acts 2.
41, 42. and 16. 31.
baptized.

Exceptions against the grounds of the new Baptism.
1. THat those places commonly taken for the Commission for Christ's Baptisin,
as Mat. 28. 18. Mar. 16. and where they that now baptize ground their
Commission and practice, has no such thing in it; For the Baptism there is a
Baptism in the Name of the three Persons, of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and
not the Baptism of Jesus Christ alone, which the Apostles only baptized in by
water, as in Acts 2. 38. and 10. 48 and 19. 5. and 8. 1^. Romans 6. 3.
Act. 2. 28. Act. 10. 48. Act. 19. 5. Act. 8. 16. Romans 6. 3. where it is still
said, Baptize in the Name of the Lord Jesus, or of Jesus Christ; and a Name of
any more Persons is not the least mentioned: So as to baptize as they commonly
baptize in the Name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; for Jesus Christ's baptism,
is contrary to the full Acts 2. 38. and 10. 48. and 19. 5. and 8. 16.
practice of all that baptized by water, as they do, as in Act. 2. 38. Act. 10.
48. Act. 19. 5. Act. 8. 16. etc. and a confounding Scriptures together, viz.
several institutions and practices.

2. That baptizing, in Matthew. 28. 18. cannot properly, nor in the word, and
letter, be understood of baptizing by water, because there is no more mentioned
in the letter, or Scripture, then merely the word baptizing; and to expound it
as they do, by a baptizing by water, is to put in a Acts 3. 22. John ^5. 14.
Matthew. 15. 9. Revel. 22. ^9.
consequence and interpretation of their own for Scripture; which way of
consequences they condemn in all others, Presbyterials, etc. as Will Worship
and traditions of men, and justly too: Now there being no water, nor any
circumstance in the Text to make out any sense of water, as in other places, it
is an usurpation upon the Spirit and the Word, to put such a sense so
infallibly and peremptorily upon the Word, which Jesus Christ himself uses in
other Matt. 20. 22, 23. and 3. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 13. and 10. 2.
significations then that of water, as in Matthew. 20. 22, 23. Matthew. 3. 11. 1.
Cor. 12. 13. 1 Cor. 10. 2. all these places are of Baptism and baptizing; yet
not one of them of baptizing by water, but of Metaphorical and figurative
Baptism by his sufferings, by the Holy Ghost, by the Spirit, by the cloud and
Sea.

3. That Matthew. 28. 18. Mar. 16 etc. are rather and far more probably to be
expounded of the Spirits Baptism, or the Joel 2. ^8. Isa. 44. ^. with Matthew.
^. 11. Act. 1. 5. John 1. 33.
Baptism of the Holy Ghost, because it seems to be prophesied on by Joel 2. 28.
Isai. 44. 3. where the Holy Ghosts Baptism is promised to come by Christ; and
in Matthew. 3. 11. Act. 1. 5. Joh. 1. 33. prophesied on to come by John, and
Christ himself to his Disciples, and was fulfilled in Christ's Institution, and
power which he gave, in Matthew. 28. 18. by baptizing with the Holy Ghost, which
the Apostles did accordingly practice, and by their Ministry was given, as in
Acts 8. 17, 18 and 10. 44. and 11. 15.
Act. 8. 17, and Mark. 16. 16, 17. compared with Matthew. 28. 18. does show that
the Baptism in Matthew. 28. 18. is a Baptism of gifts, as Mark. 16. 15, 16, 17.

4. That the Baptism of Jesus Christ by water, was only in the Name of Jesus
Christ, as appears in all the places where such a Acts 2. 38. and 10. 48. and
19. 5. and 8 16. Romans 6 3.
Baptism was practiced, as in Act. 2. 38. Act. 10. 48. Act. 19 5. Act. 8. 16.
Romans 6. 3. all which is a Baptism only in the Name of Jesus Christ, of the
Person of the Son, not of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as they now
practice, and which was never practiced as appears in all the Apostles and
Disciples practice.

5. That the form by which they baptize, viz. I baptize thee in the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is a Matthew. 9. 15. Revel 22* 19. John 15. 14.
form of man's devising a tradition of man, a mere consequence drawn from
supposition and probability, and not a form left by Acts 3. 2^* ^^
Christ, to say over them at the dipping them in the water: If Christ had said,
When you baptize them, say this over them, I baptize in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; and unless Jesus Christ had left this form thus made up
to their hands, they practice a thing made up by themselves, and drawn or
forced out of Jesus Christ's words in Matthew. 28. 18.

6. That to preach in the Name of Jesus Christ, or to do things in the Name of
Jesus Christ, is not always in that gross manner as it is taken, viz. naming
Jesus Christ, or the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost over them.

But in the Mat. 18 20. Mark 13 6. John 14. 13. Acts 9. 15, 16. John 17. 6, 11
Acts 9. 14.
power, virtue, efficacy, Ministry of Jesus Christ, or the Persons of the
Godhead of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, as in these Scriptures Matthew. 28. 20.
Mark. 13. 6. Joh. 14. 3. Act. 19. 15, 16. Joh. 17. 6, 11. Act. 9. 14. Revel.
11. 18, So here they are at some more loss.

7. That though I deny not but water is a sign and one of the John 7 7;
witnesses that bear record; and in the Word though not yet clear, yet
neither can Christ's Institution of water; and his own Baptism, in his own
Person, be made appear out of all the New Testamont; nor can the Apostles
practice by water yet be fetched from such a particular Institution, unless
from John's: And if so, I am sure they are then at as great a Controversy one
with another concerning John 1: 26. Mark 1: 4: Matthew ^^: 30. Acts 10: ^, 4:
John's* Baptism and Jesus Christ's, making them to be two several Baptisms.

8. That every common Disciple cannot so baptize as the first Disciples did,
because not gifted, or Mark 16 17. Acts 2: 3, 4: and 16. 17:
qualified as they were. And there is as much necessity to make out the Truth
in the same power and way of evidence to an Antichristian estate, as to a
Jewish and Heathenish, and with a Word written as well as preached; speaking
and writing lying both equally open to question and exceptions, without a power
John 1 25. Matthew. 2^. 25. Heb. ^. ^.
glorious working in the behalf and to the reputation of it. Nor is there any
one Disciple in all the New Testament preaching and baptizing by way of
authority, but he was able to make out the truth of his calling and
dispensation, either by miracle or gifts. There are but three Exceptions, and
they have no weight in them.

1. Acts 8. 6.
Ananias was a Disciple.

I answer: Yea, but he restored sight to Saul, and had vision.

2. Acts ^. 17.
Philip did no miracle to the Eunuch.

I answer: We can neither conclude he did, nor he did not, from the Word; for
it is silent: but he did miracles in Samaria.

3. They that were scattered, went every where preaching.

I answer: Who they were, or how they preached, or what power they manifested,
is not laid down in the Word neither for nor against: The Word is silent.

9. That there is not such an Officer as Administrator in the whole Word; but
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Rulers, 1 Cor. 12.
29, 30. Ephesians. ^. 11
Deacons, etc. and therefore Administrator is an unholsome Word.

10. None ought to give Baptism now, because there is none can give the gift of
the Holy Ghost with it, to make up that glorious supplement of gifts which it
always had; and they are joined both in the Word and practice, as in Heb. 6.
1. Doctrine of Baptisms and Laying on of hands: and in their practice they were
joined as in act, Act. 8. 14. 15, 16. And it will appear in the Word, that the
Apostles did not so reckon of them single, but together, as in Act. 8. 14, 15,
16. where it is said they were only Baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus; but
they prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost. So as Baptism by
water, and by the Holy Ghost, being joined together both in Institution,
Doctrine, and Practice, are not to be separated, nor given in such a time
wherein that of the Holy Ghost is not given: For, what God has joined
together, let no man put Matthew. 19. 6.
asunder.

11. That it is as unreasonable to take any such Ordinance of Jesus Christ from
any that is not distinctly, specially, spiritually, powerfully enabled as the
first dispensers, as it is to take the word of any John ^. ^5. (...) 5 4. Mat.
^^ 1. ^. 8. Mark 16. 16.
common man charging us in the name of the Parliament, and cannot visibly make
out a visible Excellency and Supremacy of power by Ordinance or Commission.

12. That these Churches who enjoy Christ's mind, as they think, most fully in
the practice o^ Ordinances, yet have no greater gifts in their (...). ^^. 8. 1
Cor. ^ 1.
Churches then there are in those called Independent, or Separatist; Prayer,
Teaching, Prophesying being as fully and powerfully performed in the one as the
other. And being so, Whether must not the Churches of Christ be distinguished
by some more visible glorious power and gifts as at first, by which they may be
discerned to excel all other Societies? 1 Cor. 1^*


13. That the fullness of time is not yet come for Ordinances: For as there
were several Acts 1. 4 and 7. ^7. G^^ ^ 4. Mark ^. ^5. Revel. ^5. 8. and 16
and 18 ^. Acts 1 6, 7.
seasons for the givings out of Truth before, so now.

Seeking, or, Seekers, So called; What their Way is, and what they hold.
THat there is no Church nor Ordinances yet. That if they did not end with the
Primitive or Apostles times, yet they are to begin as in the Primitive times,
with Matthew. 10. 1 Mark 16. 16. 1 Cor. 12.
gifts and miracles; and that there is as much reason for the like gifts to make
out the Truth of any of the Gospel now to an Antichristian estate, as formerly
to a Jewish or Heathenish. That such a Belever as can dispense Ordinances, must
be qualified as the Believers in Mark. 16. and as the former Acts 8* 6. and 9.
17.
Disciples were. That there is a time and Revel. 15. 8. and 18. 1.
fullness for the Spirit, and for the latter pure spiritual dispensations, as
there was formerly for the first dispensations: And whether this shall be while
the Angels are but pouring out their Vials or not, or when Babylon is fallen.
And whether there is not as much need for Acts 2 4. Mark 16. 17. Acts 19. 6. 1
Cor. 14. 22, 39.
new Tongues to reveal the pure Origionall to us, it being conveyed with
corruptions and additionals in Translations; by which, Truth may be more purely
discovered, and the waters of Life that now run muddily, may flow more clear
and Crystallike from the Throne Revel. 22. 1.
of God.

The Exceptions.
1. THat Jesus Christ did promise to be ever with his Mat. 28. 2^ and 16. 18.
Church, and therefore cannot be reasonably presumed to leave them without John
14. 16
Church and Ordinances.

2. That if Rev 2^. 18, 19.
Scriptures were not so pure and clear to us, as the Word of Life were not
sufficiently there; God were less Heb 7* 22.
gracious to us now under Grace, and Christ come in the flesh, then before to
the Jews, who gave them a Book of the Law, which remained with them to the
coming of the Messiah.

3. That such gifts and miracles were rather for bringing the Word into the
world, and for glorifying Christ's first coming in the flesh, then for John 20
29* 30, 31.
after.

4. That if we must have miracles to make us believe, and not believe any truth
till then; we must have for every Truth, as well as for one or two, a miracle
to give it evidence: and so there must be a continual and new miracle working
for every new believing.

5. If there must be miracles for believing, Truth is not of that excellent
nature that it seems: for if it be not able to make it self evident, and cast
a native and spiritual f Ephesians. 5: 13:
shine or brightness upon that soul it comes into, it is but weak, dark, and
insufficient.

6. If Truth be not discernable in it self by its own glorious lightsome
nature, by beams from it self; it is of a worse condition then many things
below, as the Sun, and Stars, and Candles etc. which bring that light in their
own nature and dispensation, by which they are discerned.

7. If every Truth be a became of John 8: 12: and 9: 5:
Christ the truth, then every beam has Revel. 22: 5:
light in it self, because it streams from the fountain of light, and so is
discernable.

8. That it is more glorious to take evidences from the Spirit, then from any
thing without; which can at the farthest of it self but convince the outward
man.

9. That all shall now in the last times be in a secret, invisible, inward,
spiritual glory, no more in gross, carnal, visible evidences and material
beams, as gifts and miracles. And this is to know Christ no more after the
flesh.

10. No miracles can in their own nature make one believe, without a spiritual
conviction from the Spirit of Christ going along with it; so as we see when
miracles were wrought, some believed, and some believed not: So as then there
is no such reason for miracles as pretended, because that conviction which
comes from the Spirit through the work of a miracle, may come by any other
isntrumental or original way. Or, it is a more glorious operation, by how
much more single, or by way of immediate revelation it works.

11. To believe merely by the John 20: 19, 30, 31:
Spirit, is far more glorious then by any other outward means, though never so
outwardly glorious: by how much the Spirit is more excellent then any thing
else, by so much more divine and spiritual are the impressions of it.

12. That when miracles are wrought, yet a pretender may work a miracle for the
contrary; like the Sorcerers of Egypt against Moses: and Antichrist is spoken
on rather to come Matt. 2: 24:
with signs and wonders of the two, then Christ. So as here shall be a loss to
any that think to believe merely by miracle. So as the Spirit is that which
must make us believe beyond all the power of miracle, which can give out its
power but upon the sense at farthest, being merely outward and visible.

13. That there is no such power for Ordinances as is pretended; but Believers,
as Matthew. 10: 1, compard with Matthew 28: 18: John 8: 31: Isai. 8: 6: Acts 9* 10:
Disciples, may administer; and so did the Apostles and Believers formerly, as
they were Disciples.

14. That the Scriptures of the Gospel, or New Testament, are of such a 2 Cor
^ 6, 8, 9: Rom: 1: 16: 2* Tim: 3: 6, 17: Heb: 4: 12: ^ Pet. 1: 19:
divine and even Spiritual glory in the Letter, as no other word: There is a
power to discover the reason and secrets of the heart, which the reason and
heart of man witnesses unto: There is a power to convince, and accase, and
terrify, and comfort, clearly, and undeniably, and experementally known.

15. These Scriptures we have, as they are, do make a Discovery of such a way
of Religion as reason never yet in any age attained to: The men of purest
reason, as your old Philosophers, never attained further then the knowledge of
something infinite which they did not know, and a Religion of humane or moral
righteousness and purity, and some sacrifices of atonement, etc. And there is
not any Religion in the world, Jewish or Turkish, but they are made up of
carnal principles, and are founded upon reason and nature; but this Gospel
Religion has opened a new way of righteousness in one that is both God and
Man in a most rational though infinite way of salvation, and a way of Worship
cross to all methods and wates of reason, and the world, opening new ways by
a new Spirit, purifying natural reason into more divine and glorious notions
then ever it yet attained, bringing in a way of believing, and placing a
Religion upon a spiritual persuasion called Faith, which is more
proportionable to an infinite God, and an infinite way and depth of salvation,
then reason ever invented, viz. for the soul to believe upon one, even Jesus
Christ, in whom God has laid up all love and fullness; and so for man to
become one with him who is God and Man: and there cannot be a more rational
way for man to become one with God, then by one who is both God and Man.

16. That though there be not such glorious powrings out of Spirit, and such
gifts as Believers both may and shall have; yet all Believers ought to practice
so far of the outward Ordinance as is clearly revealed they may. Phil: 13: 16:


17. That the Scriptures or Gospel of the New Testament being as many hundred
years old as from the Apostles, even in that Original we have them, no very
material differences in Copies, as it seems; and though they have passed
through the great Apostasy, yet they have not had the power to corrupt them
materially in their Original, to advantage their heresies and corruptions;
which very constant preservation of Truth in the midst of the very Enemies of
Truth, is both a constant and standing miracle of it self; and so we need not
stay for a Ministry with miracle, being we have a Word with miracle, which in
its matter, subject, power, speaking of God, of his Son, God and Man, of his
Spirit the Actor in man from both, by ways of outward Ordinances, of the
depths, windings, and workings of reason, etc. is of as much efficacy to
persuade as any thing else we can have; and the way of the pure Spirit is a
more glorious way of operation then any other of a visible sensual nature: And
God may be more glorified by quickening and spiritualizing a word, and using the
spiritually glorious Ministry of that, then of man: and they are far too low
who look for their original teaching from man, and not from the Word and
Spirit.

CONCLUSION.
I Have drawn out this map of each opinion, that your eye may travel over
that in an hour, which otherwise you might be a year in going over. Thus each
are discovered in a narrow yet full Discovery; and I think all that are
divinely rational, will see no such cause to think that each has attained so
^ Cor. 8. 2.
far, that either they should presume in their degree, or look down from the
pinnacle of an infallibility upon each other. I have set the strength and
weakness of each opinion before it self, that on the one side as it may glory,
so on the other side it may fear and be humble. All I wish now, is, that we be
all so far one, at least in infirmity, and this Common weakness, as may be a
ground of Common embodying and associating against the Common Enemy, or Grand
Antichrist; as in States, when they are at lowest, have least factions; and
when weakest, are most peaceable with one another.

The Gospel, or New Testament of JESUS CHRIST, proved undeniably to be the
very Word of God, without Miracles, to assure us of the particular duties in it.
Because there are some men now of more reason then sound belief, I cannot but
in a spiritual rationally way bear witness to our salvation in the written
Word.

1. IF there were not a Word or Will of God revealed in Laws and Ordinances
written, God were worse provided then the Lawgivers of Nations and Kingdoms,
and the World were left to their own wills; which is esteemed ridiculous in the
eyes of all the Nations of the world in their very politic condition.

2. The Laws and Ordinances contained in the Word, or New Testament, bear only
the Image of a God, in their holiness, purity, righteousness, glory,
infiniteness, eternity, immortality, which are all, with many more things of
like excellency, there, which are as the beams of light to the Sun, or so many
things of God, revealing God.

3. The Word is so tempered into a middle nature betwixt God and man, as no
Word can be more revealing the most glorious, spiritual, infinite things from
a God, in a mean, literal, figurative, comparative, significative way to man.

4. To have a standing Word as the Gospel is, is more for the glory and
authority of a God then any ministry of man, though with miracles and signs;
because such a Word, where none can join themselves as Authors or Parties, as
in other ways of dispensation by men, men may join themselves, does
undoubtedly hold forth most of God and of divine Authority; and thus to
maintain or preserve a Law or Word in the world, is not so much with God as
for King and Princes to maintain Statutes and Laws in their Kingdoms.

5. A Word as the New Testament is, may be as well a way and dispensation to an
infinite God to make out himself by, as any other, either of dream or vision,
or Revelation, or Oracle, all being but ways of a natural strain and
condition, no more then the Word.

6. The very manner of dispensation or writing, is such as has the authority,
power, wisdom, counsels of a God, the whole business of it being a work
discovered to be begun by God, and amongst men, to let forth the glory of God,
the mercy, love, and wisdom, of God, and the way by the Son of God, and Spirit
of God, and all to be glorified with God; and thus treating only of things
divine, and a work divine, in a way divine.

7. We must either give up our selves to this Word wholly, or not at all; and
then let the world and experience judge what kind of Religion reason at large
unbounded, or unenlightened, will bring forth, by the former paterns of
Heathenish and Gentilish Religion.

8. Why should it not be thought the most clean and direct way for God, to
manifest himself to man by Word, Gospel, and Epistle; and so by an infinite
and invisible power and hand commend and conveigh it from age to age, from
generation to generation, as well as for men to make out their art, reason,
knowledge, experience into books and words written, to their own and other
generations?

9. This Gospel of Jesus Christ places Religion upon a more glorious
transcendent way, to suit with an infinite God, then ever any device of man, or
reason could invent, viz. upon faith, upon a believing or spiritual persuasion
wrought by the same God, by which men are carried out into depths of
infiniteness and glory, no way measurable nor discernable but by this way of
believing; and there could never have been an engine contrived which could have
gone from man into God but this of faith by God himself; nor more for the
advantage of the glory of a God, taking all from the creature, employing it
wholly upon a God.

10. There is more reason in this Gospel, or New Testament, in the way of
Religion which it holds forth by Jesus Christ, then ever could be thought on by
the reason of man; as for instance, Each man's internal conscience has a light
or law in it, which condemns or accuses for murder, etc. Now if there be
accusations, against whom is the offense committed but against something
infinite? and what way is there more divinely rational to apply to the justice
of such an infinite, being on God offended, but by one who is both man and God,
even Jesus Christ? So as the mystery of salvation is such as even reason it
self cannot contradict or gainsay, though it cannot comprehend to leave the
world inexcusable in their unbelief, because it commands them to believe in
one whom in reason they cannot deny to be a way proportionable betwixt God and
themselve* for salvation.

11. It carries things in such a rare way of mercy, of justice, of love, of
piety; and as it is a salvation from God to man, so it is a salvation managed
by one who is God and Man; and every thing belonging to it, is accordingly
mixed or tempered, of Word and Spirit, of power divine, and outward
dispensation, or ordinance; and all this for man who is of a mixed nature of
flesh and spirit: Thus things are carried in a way of proportion and
sutablenesse, so full, so suitable, and complete, and serviceable, as the
invention of men could never devise.

12. It discovers reason to it self in all its workings and ways, in its
purity and corruption, in its virtues and vices, conscience bearing witness to
the Laws and Commandments of it; it purifies and spiritualizeth reason, and
brings it into such a way of communion with God, as the souls that read it,
and are exercised in it, seem to be newborn, to receive in another nature, an
immortal and incorruptible seed.

13. It manages all the design of salvation, contrary to nature and the world,
upon contrary principles, dispensations and hands, by a Person poor, humble,
and crucified for the good, by Ministers and Dispensers, mean and contemptible
Fishermen, Tradesmen, etc. yet inspired by graces contrary; as self-denial,
humility, love to enemies; by conditions contrary; as weakness, affliction,
poverty, suffering, dying, carrying a treasure, a comfort, a riches, a life, a
glory, under all these.

14. It is accompanied by continued or standing miracles, though miracles of a
more spiritual nature, as discovery of the counsels and hearts of men, as
conversion from sin, mortification of sin, changing natures from evil to good,
planting in new dispositions, inclinations, affections into the soul. Now, if
such charges and conversions were in material or sensible things, as from
water to blood, from water to wine, how would it astonish? Which in spirituals
in more wonderful, though only less discernable, and not to be so sensibly
perceived, preserved by its very enemies, the Roman cruelty of Emperors, and
Antichristian Traditions.

15. It refers the discovery of all Truth in it self to the Spirit of God,
which no word but the Word of God would do, and will not take in men into glory
with it self which miracles do, which are done by the hand and ministry of man;
and the Spirit in this way must needs be a more glorious Interpreter of the
Will of God, then the mere ministry by man and miracles can be* by how much it
is of a more spiritual nature; and it is more excellent to seek things in the
Spirit, then in any outward dispensation, which as it comes more immediately
from God, so it comes in more immediately upon men; and to take in Truth by
sense and sight, or miracle, is rather to know Christ after the flesh.

16. Yet after all, the Word it self is the best way to bring in evidence and
discovery in its (...) half to the souls of those that will come under the
power, ^pe^at^on, and experiments of it, under the enlightening, convictions,
impressions of it, in the reading, hearing, and meditating of it. These things
are John 20.
written that ye may believe: And they that are thus exercised, are above all
miracle, and are persuaded enough by it self without the help of an outward
work.

17. To these I add the testimonies of the most ancient in witness of it. De
divinis nomin. c. 2.


Dionysius Areopagita, thought to live in the times of the Apostles, and Iren
l. 3. c. 1.
not daring to take his Divinity any where, but from these Scriptures.

Irenaeus, who was in the year 180, affirming the fullness of these
Gospell-Scriptures, Tertul. lib. contra Hermogen.
and accounted them the Pillar of Truth.

So Tertullian, who lived 1400 years since* does accordingly witness to their
perfection.

Origin, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Constantine the Great, in the first
Nicene-Councell, with thousands others all along to our own age.

18. The Jews, whose very Testament and condition answers to every Prophecy
and Gospel-Scripture.

19. The many of those most eminently ancient, learned, and godly, who have
shed their blood in testimony of it.

20. The power of God going along with it.

21. The Confessions of the most learned in that, confess, that the Original
Copies are not corrupted, but continued pure.

One Argument from the National Covenant, for Liberty of Conscience, yet with
all subordinate and just obedience to the State.
ART. I.
THe first Branch of the Covenant is,

That we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, etc. endeavor, etc. the
Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of England, etc. in Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government, according to the Word of God, etc.

ART. II.
The second Branch of the Covenant,

That we shall in like manner without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, etc. Superstition, Heresy, Schism, etc. and whatsoever
shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, etc.

Now from these I argue:

1. Each one is personally and individually bound by the Covenant, and in his
own proper conscience is obliged to endeavor a Reformation according to the
Word of God, and so far to the example of the best Reformed Churches as they
are agreeable to that Word; I hope no further: Now who shall be the Judge and
Interpreter of this Word of God, to each man's conscience in the things of God,
but he who is Lord of the conscience, in things immediately divine and
spiritual? The consciences of men are under a spiritual and immediate
Interpreter of the Word, even the Spirit of the Lord, in all things of
spiritual cognizance, as every Scripture-truth, or Truth in the Word is: and
this is not only strengthened and clear from the Word, but from a testimony
which some when they read, may know better then many others.

By the Clause, According to the Word of God, we understand, so far as we do
or shall in our consciences conceive the same to be according to the Word of
God.

Now each man standing thus engaged in his own particular, and in his own
proper conscience by a Covenant recommended and imposed, each is bound to bring
forth the evidence of their consciences in particular, concerning this to which
they are covenanted: So as I, or you, being covenanted against Popery, Heresy,
and according to the Word of God, you and I stand bound by our own private
consciences to reveal to the State, who has recommended such a Covenant unto
us, what our consciences interpret according to this Word, against Popery or
Heresy, unless there could be one universal, or public infallible
Interpreter of the Word of God and Truth, who might determine concerning
Heresy, and the Word of God, and whose determinations is as in the formerly
inspired Apostolical teachers, we may rest.

So being thus engaged by Covenant, we are at the same time, by one and the
same Act, bound to liberty of conscience, in these particulars of the things of
God: And if there should be any persecution for the pious, modest, and
peaceable liberty, so taken and practiced, whether would it not clearly and
undeniably follow, that our consciences are not under the Lord Jesus, and his
Spirit immediately in the things of God, but under the interpretations of men.

And surely that one Clause* according to the Word of God, is most
providentially inserted; for if we be so closely covenanted to the Word of God,
how tender ought we to be? lest in this dark season of our discerning, we
oppose something of the Word, and so in ignorance, persecute what we covenant to
maintain. I wish our Assembly would press this equally with the Covenant in
their Sermons.

Object. But must every one be the Interpreter of the Covenant?

Answ. Nay, not every one, in every thing: The Magistracy in all things of a
civil cognizance, and in all spiritual things which go out from their mere
spiritual condition into a moral offense; as injustice or evil transgression
into tumult or disturbance of public or private peace, actually and
expressly, not interpretatively; for so the Nations interpreted the Jews as
troublers of the State; and the Jews, Christ and his Disciples, as movers of
sedition: The Papists and Prelates interpreted the Nonconformists or repro^ched
Puritans, as factious and tumultuous: So as in all things of Moral, Civil, or
Secular cognizance, which the Magistrate has clear rule for to walk by, He
ought to interpret and proceed by; partly, because he is the Legislator, and so
is the best Interpreter, and can best resolve us in things of Law and public
liberty; and in morals, his duty lies out more clearly; but in merely divine
and spiritual interpretations of Truth and Gospell-mystery, the Lord Jesus and
the Spirit of Jesus Christ are both the Legislators, or Law givers, and
Interpreters to the conscience.

Obj. But shall there be no power to compel consciences into Uniformity?

Answ. I shall give light to this by propounding a Case. Suppose the several
godly parties, or believers, were equally principled for persecution or
non-toleration, and were equally numbered, and were equally strengthened by
parties of Magistracy on their side, what would come forth according to such
principles? I sigh to consider: There would be edge against edge, authority
against authority, power against power, and all the State or Kingdom involved
into blood and confusion: So as we must consider things according to their
principles, not according to their temporary or occasional advantages.

Object. But you give not enough to the Magistrate?

Answ. Yea, more then any. He that gives him that which God has given him,
gives more then any that pretend to give him the most.

The pretenders that bid for the Magistrate at this time, are,

1. They that put him as an help and government in the Church, as some, 1 Cor.
2. 28.
viz. they of the Erastian way.

2. They that make use on him but as an help to the Church extrinsecally, and
by way of foreign assistance, as others, viz. they of the Presbyteriall way.

3. They that give him power over body, goods, over all moral and civil
behaviors of men, Professors and Believers, of what sort soever, of what
opinion soever, as I and the rest of our Brethren do, praying with all manner
of supplication, that under them we may lead a peaceable, godly, and quiet life.

Obj. But why dare you not engage civil Magistracy in Religion over
consciences, as some others do?

Answ. Yea, in all things morally good and evil, God has engaged them* and
has set the Law and Light of nature and conscience in all people to side with
them, condemning and excusing what they and their Law does condemn and excuse,
and thus to bear witness with their dominion and power.

But in things of pure Gospel-mystery and Evangelically good or evil, I dare
not engage them (whatever others do) over consciences, because I give more to
their just power, and because I dare not draw them into such principles, which
has broken more Magistracy, then all the other plots and devices of men.

For things of Worship which are laid up in the pure simple mystery in the
Light of the Spirit, not of nature, as all mere Gospell-mystery is, to engage
the Magistrates Sword into these, is rather a way to dash them against every
man's conscience, and so in time to lay in a fatal power, or a fatal suffering.

We know that power which makes Kingdoms soundest in their* Dominion, and most
lasting, is the truest and wholsomest; and surely that which ingages them lest
into that part of the soul, the conscience which can lest endure to be
oppressed, is the safest and most peaceable.

To my Reverend learned Friend M. LEY, One of the Assembly of Divines, at
Westminster, Author of a Book called The Resolution of the New Quere, published
by Master Saltmarsh.
SIR,
I Shall give you a public account according to your public charge in your
leaf concerning me, That I intended to make you my Censor for some Papers
which I did not publish. Page 1.

Sir, those Papers were an Answer to Master Fullers last Book; and the Question
about Reformation betwixt him and me, being so out of all Question, as Master
Herle serves, and ^e as I heard, being dead, made me rather put up my Arrows
into their Quiver, then shoot them at such a mark.

For my contending with you in this, I hope it is but as that of Paul and
Barnabas, and Paul and Peter, a contention of Brethren, not of Enemies; for I
think you would oppose Truth no more then my self; but we both may be said to
contend rather for the Truth then against it, and rather with one another
reason, then with Truth.

In this Controversy you have much advantage of learning, and experience; but
there is a Spirit and the inspiration of the Almighty, which enlightens the
young man and the old; Elihu as well as Job or his Friends.

Your other advantages are, the Magistrate whom you have more on your side; we
only are more on the Magistrates side, then they are on ours; yet we cannot but
say, and bless the Lord for them, they are so far on ours, as we lead a
peaceable and quiet life under them.

Your other advantage, is an Assembly of learned Divines, yet not so wholly
yours; the way of Truth we stand for, has a Party there; and I hope when the
veil of prejudice is taken away, and Truth is brought home to their souls in
its nakedness, power, and evidence, by a power more spiritual then is yet
given out from Heaven, out Party there will be greater: I willingly presume so
much of them.

I have labored that a Spirit of love and meekness might run through all my
Reply unto you, though in my traveling over your Paper, I have met with some
things in the way too sharp, and your way has more Briars and Thorns in it
then you promised in your first leaf: I had much ado not to be provoked, by
how much your promise had removed all offense on your part from my expectation:
If you find any passions in my Book, charge them on my unregenerate part; for I
find that when I would do good, evil is present with me.

You see my labors, deducting the time of their Printing, are of about two
weeks growth, younger by some six weeks (if I mistake not) then yours. I hope
where you could not expect much, you will not look for more then I here return
you in this time.

Sir, I salute you in the Lord, and with all due respects to your self, your
age, your learning, I begin my Discourse with you; and the Lord let me see the
failings on my part, while I seek to discover those on yours, that I may take
out the beam from my own eye, as well as the more from yours.

You desired me in your Book to enter upon away of Peace; and I have
accordingly presented my Model, to be perfected and refined by any that will
set upon the work: I do not love in any thing I write, to fume out merely in
Controversy; but in something if it may be to edification. I rest,

Your Friend in the Lord, JOHN SALTMARSH.

THE SMOKE IN THE TEMPLE: Wherein, is the Vindication of the new QUERE, From
Master Ley's RESOLUTION.
Master Ley's Resolution, Page 2, and 3.
I Put a Question, Whether he were an Independent or no? He told me, He was
not; but that he had a latitude of charity for them of that way. Since that, I
had a glimpse more of his inclination by his Dawning of Light: but a full
discovery of his mind in his Book, The Opening of M. Pry^^s Vindication. I will
not entertain him as an enemy. To give him his due, in all that I have seen
set forth in his name, I find him rather opinionative then passionate.

Reply.
Your Question was accordingly put by you, and accordingly answered by me. And
for my appearing for Truth not all at once in my Treatises, you may see I was
not hasty to believe, nor to write in the behalf of a Truth before I saw it,
nor to plunge my self into any Way till I had examined it. The Apostles waited
for the full revelation of all Truth by the Spirits coming. The Bereans
searched daily to see whether the things were Acts 1 and 17. 1 John 4. 1. 1
These 5. 21.
so, or no. Apollos preached not Christ clearly till he was instructed in the
way of God more perfectly. We are bidden to try the spirits, and prove all
things: So as I appeared in those degrees but by Scripture warrant. And I could
name to you examples of another sort; Augustine, Luther, both finding truth but
in degrees; and the latter sweetly acknowledging how he was enlightened by beam
after beam. Angels, who lie more naked toward God, and take in the things they
know, by way of Vision; yet see not any of that will of God which gives Laws to
them, but as he reveals: Much less such as we who dwell in houses of clay,
and whose foundations are in the dust, and who come by the sight of things
discoursively, and by spiritual reasoning; God giving in the revelation of his
Truths, in a natural, yet supernatural way.

But for that Notion of Independency you speak on, I dare not own it, because
I account my self both under a spiritual and civil Supremacy; under Jesus
Christ and the Magistrate severally, and exempt from neither. We are not of
those that despise Governments, and speak evil of Dignities; nor are we under
any such singular Notion that I know on, to be called Independents, etc. We all
hold of the Body of Christ, and of the Communion of Saints below; and we hold
one upon another, but not one over another. We dare not be Classical,
Provincial, National; these are no forms of wholesome words to which we are
commanded, nor know we any such power; but that of Brethren, and Ministry, and
fellowship. We dare not take out a Copy either from the States of the world, or
the State of Israel, to obey or rule by under the Gospel. And if you can the
Churches or Christ Independent for this, we must suffer till the Lord bring
forth our righteousness as the noonday. Yet this you and we both know, that
when Truth would not embody or mingle at any time with corruptions, it had
presently the name of Sect, Schism, Faction (all which are employed in the name
Independency) put upon it. Thus were the Reformed Nations of England, Germany,
France, etc. scandalized by Popish Writers, and the old Nonconformists by the
Prelaticall; the Jews formerly by the Nations, and the Christians by the Jews.
We have heard enough of Independency and Presbytery, such notes of distinction
are now become names of reproach: and so I lay them down.

And whereas you say, you will not entertain me as an enemy; It is more likely
then in the end, both you and I may prove a better friend to the Truth. It is
possible many in this Age might have seen more, had they not east so much dust
in one another eyes by their strivings: It were well such a Gospel spirit
would walk more abroad, and that spirit which casts men sometimes into the
fire, and sometimes into the water, were not so stirring. Well, since you will
be no enemy to me, I shall not, I hope, contend with you, though I dare not but
contend earnestly for the Truth. And the Truth it self which I write for, may
(I hope) at length find you no more an enemy to it then you are to me. I cannot
^ut wish, one of your experience and abilities, like Pant, to preach for that
Truth which before he destrayed. Our hearts desire and prayer should be for any
of Israel.

And for that you say of me in your Observation, that I am rather opini^native
then passionate, I cannot take it so ill from you that will needs be no enemy
to me: I interpret any thing from such a one on the better side of it. But I
shall allow you your liberty as my self: And if the truth of God may (...)
more abound through my opinion (as you take it) unto his glory, I have enough.
(...)


Master Ley's Resolution, Page 4, and 5.
I wonder he, who has writ a whole Book of Policy, should be so unpolitick
as to think it seasonable, since it tends to retard the establishment of
Government, whereto the Parliament is so much engaged by Declaration* etc. by
Solemn League and Covenant, Art. 1. already setting it up in Ordinance for
Ordination, etc. Though the liberty of speaking lengthens the Debates, and
delays the Votes, etc. and so much the more, because they are more in number
then we, and because their determinations are final, as ours are not.

Answer.
For some things in my Book of Policy, I praise the Lord I can look on them as
on part of the darkness I was in: And I can freely join with any in censuring
any unregenerate part in me, as I esteem much of my carnal reason to be. When
I was a child, I spoke as a child; neither have I any fruit now (as the
Apostle says) of some of those things. Nor would I have any go thither for
direction, but so far as they find Scripture or sound Reason. I cannot but give
a Caution concerning this Book, because I would have Readers to look on any
thing from me, as Luther speaks of himself, as I receive in light. And me
thinks I scarce do any thing which I could not, with Augustine, when it is
done, find something to retract in it: either something is too dead, or too
dark, or too carnal. Thus you see I willingly help you against my self; and
I account it a part of my condition here, not to see all at once.

For the unseasonablenesse of my Quere, you allege the Declaration of
Parliament, and the Covenant in Art. 1. wherein they are engaged to endeavor
Reformation; and the Ordinances, etc.

Now, where is my unseasonablenesse? The Parliament is endeavoring, etc. May I
contribute my moneys, my vote, my pains my informations to the Civil
engagements, and not my notions to the Spiritual? Are we not to bring in all
our disbursements, either Natural, Civil, or Spiritual, into that public
Treasury? Though you of the Assembly* cast in of your abundance, may not the
poor ones cast in their mite? Are we not by the same Covenant bound to
discover any thing against God and the State, and the glory and peace of both?
And if I find my conscience persuading me such or such a thing is not
accordingly, ought I not by all the Obligatious that are upon me, of Gospel,
Parliament and Country, peaceably and meekly to speak a word? May we discover
any thing to the State we conceive of malignity or danger in Civil things, and
not in Spirituals* Is not the Spiritual or soul-liberty* the more glorious
liberty of the Subject? We cannot but speak the things which we have seen and
heard, says the Apostle: And* What Acts 4. 20.
you hear in the ear, that speak you on the house top, says Christ. We know
who it was that said, Prophecy not here; for it is the Kings Chapel. And
Amos 2. 13.
for things of a Spiritual nature, we are allowed almost the fullness of time
for season: Be instant in season and out of season, says Paul.

But, What better season could I come in, then such a one, wherein things were
but ripening and moving toward establishment? Where nothing is settled* there
can be nothing disturbed. Where nothing is concluded, there can be nothing
repelled. Where nothing is established, there can be nothing disordered. But
since you put me to a further account, I shall give it. My Spirit was not my
own so wholly then, but his (I hope) whose motion I obeyed, the Lords. Such
breathings of Heaven who dare safely quench? It is as fire in the bones, says
the Prophet: and like that of Mordecai, If thou altogether hold thy peace at
this time, etc.

And whereas you say, that the Parliaments determinations are final, That
holds better for me, who might have spoken to much less purpose, had I stayed
till all had been done, and the determinations ended, and become final; sure
it was time then to speak before determinations were final, or never, and by
your own account too; for you are pleased to reckon up the proceedings of State
in the business of Religion; which are such, as had I stayed, I had had a
worse season; however, as the Prophet says, I have delivered my soul: they
were, you know, the foolish virgins that came not with their oil till the
door was shut. Whatever my Oil or my Lamp was, yet I think it not agreeable
to the wisdom of that Parable, to come and knock only when the door is not
open.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 6, 7, and 8.
The title of the Quere is baited with Truth and Peace. He a private Divine to
put such a Quere both of State and Religion, and to suggest such a suspicion of
have, and to tax the Ministers for putting in for a power not consonant to
Scriptures and Prudence, etc. His rendering the original word metaphorically:
His artificial colors, Rhetorical, etc. And my marshalling his reasons in a
right method.

Reply.
I have gathered up into one bundle your pieces of a lighter concernment: I
would not stay tything Annise and Cummin, but I hasten to the weightier matters
of the Law. A word only to each.

For baiting my Quere with Truth and Peace, you allude to Christ's allegory,
that we are fishers of men: and if I have no worse things to bait with then
these two, Truth and Peace, none need, I hope, be afraid of the hook. And for
the proof of them both, argument and time will evidence.

For me, a private Divine, to put a Quere of State and Religion. What were John
Hus, Wickliff, Luther, Paphnutius, who in their several ages gave out their
testimonies? They were but single men, compared with Councels and Synods. Not
that I would compare with them, who am less then the least of all the mercies
of God; yet they were but single, though singular men. And what if a private
Divine? Jesus Christ may bid a private man stand and speak to the people.
There is a Law of the Spirit commands to speak as well as the Law of a State;
and though you speak by the later Law, another may speak by the former. And
what though a Quere both of Religion and State? Is not our Covenant mixed
accordingly of Religion and State? Does not the State it self mix with Religion
where Churches are National? And how can I speak properly but to both, where
both are in interest?

For my suggestion of a suspicion of haste; you know; words and phrases are not
the same to all: one may interpret thus, another thus. I had no thought of
Jehu's driving, as you imply, when I wrote. I must lay the supposed crime at
your own doors, for it is none of mine; nor have I (nor any) reason to tax
that Honorable Senate, whose Counsels are grave, and serious, and deliberate.
Had I looked for Jehu, I should have looked to another coast and quarter, where
they drive more furiously. Why deal you not more heartily? Why are you not
more faithful in your interpretation to the Original?

For that of my taxing the Ministers for desiring power; none have reason to
speak but the guilty, it concerns not the innocent. It is not strange for some
Ministers to affect Government, or rather ruling: we have so much of Prelacie
yet left, and working in the Country with us; and if not in the City too I
refer you to Master Coleman.

For the word rendered from the Original metaphorically, I quoted only the
Text, to my remembrance, to the Printers hand; and how he came by the metaphor,
I know not; but I find fault as well as you: However, to make the best of it
now; translations of Scripture are not all Grammatical, as you know; nor to
the letter, as I could wish them with you.

For Artificial Colors, or Rhetorioall; etc. You make me guilty of such
vernish as I have not laid on, to my knowledge; nor have much to lay on, if I
would: Truth and Peace, which were my subjects, are fair enough of themselves,
without any color of mine: And I desire not to bring forth either, but in the
evidence and demonstration of the spirit; and if there be any thing of their
own beauty there, call it not artificial, put not suspicions* and jealousies
into any, that such things as they see are not so, to make men Scept^call. It
is as much injury to Truth and Peace to misreport them, as to counterfeit them.

And for your logical marshalling my reasons, I thank you, you took more pains
with them then I would do. Notionall order I received them in. Nor dare I be
too logical and notionall in things divine. Systems and forms* of art, have
done our Divinity some harm: Such Classes and methods of reason have been found
too strait for the more spiritual enlargements of truth. Yet I honor your
Learning, though I* thus speak.

Master Ley's Resolution Page 9, and 10.
His first reason taken from Rules of Faith, Rom., 4. 3, 13, etc. Now he should
have planted his reason directly against the imposing a Government, rather then
obedience to it; as thus, etc. Those that set up a Government which they are
not fully persuaded on, sin: But, they that now set up Church Government with
power, etc. do set up a Government whereof they are not fully persuaded on:
Therefore in so doing, they sin. The major is true, but the minor not, because
of their faithful learned Counselors, and Scripture-discussings.

Reply.
Since you will help me to prove you are welcome: You have furnished me with
one Argument more: You are a fair enemy, to lend out your own weapon. And now
you have made your Argument half for me, I shall make the other half my self.
You say,

What the imposers of Government cannot do in Faith, is sin: This is your half
Argument. But you take it for granted, Our imposers of Government are not such,
but such as are fully persuaded, and can set up the Government in faith; and
you prove it thus, from those of their Counselors so near them, and from their
Scripture-discussions.

First, I know not what Counselors you mean; but they are too wise a Senate to
be carried by any interest but their own; and I wish them no other Counselors
then Truth and Peace: nor do I know that they are so fully persuaded of any
such Government. I believe some of them are not so fully principled for your
way, and then they all are not persuaded so of the Government: nor have you yet
been able to make out the evidence of every truth you presented them from
clear Scriptures, saving your Art of deductions, and consequences, and
prudence: and if all cannot be persuaded that State-conscience, or Public
conscience, is not so wholly nor fully persuaded: then, as you imply, a State
or Public conscience is like a Particular conscience; which if it does not
wholly consent, is doubtful, or weak; for it is not in Spiritual things as
in Civil: Votes of major parts make laws, and they stand good from any such
forms of Policy: but I never yet saw that rule in the Gospel for any such
proceedings in spiritual things: but that is a Law in Christ's Kingdom, not
that which is voted so, but that which is so in the truth of it: For else
Popery were the best, for it has most voices and counsels. So as unless you
can prove the Parliament to be of one mind in it, how can you prove a
Parliament so fully persuaded in mind as you imply? Let them prove a Truth by
most voices that please or can; but I wish the business of a State-conscience,
in a thing of this nature, were more enquired into then yet it has been.

But if the Parliament were fully persuaded of the truth of the Government, yet
there would be a new question, yea* and is very learnedly discussed by our
worthy Brethren, Master Coleman and the Commissioner, how they could be
persuaded of the imposing, and power of settling. For my part, if there must be
an imposing of Government (for I would have the Stateconsciences left to their
liberty as well as Particular, and yet Truth to have the liberty of access
unto them) I would have the power of the Parliament laid up there: we have had
too sad experience when it has been given out from thence, and trusted too
far. Paul referred himself thither, ( I stand, says he, at Cesar's
Judgment Seat) rather then to the Council of the Priests and Elders. Christ
had more favor from Pilate a Roman Governor, then from Caiaphas the Priest.

One word more. How can the Parliament properly be said to be fully persuaded,
etc. unless they could freely sign it with a Jus divinum, or divine Right?
Nothing but Scripture and the Word, can properly fully persuade. Now if they
cannot find so much Scripture as to warrant it for Christ's Government, how can
there be a purely Gospell-warrantable, a full persuasion, or faith, where there
wants a word of faith to secure it?

And now I shall form your Argument, you half made to my hand thus, and
return another with usury.

Your Argument is this:

Those that set up a Government which they cannot be fully persuaded on, cannot
but sin.

But, the Parliament cannot be fully persuaded of this Government:

Therefore, if they set it up they cannot but sin.

My proof is this in behalf of your Argument.

That conscience which is not wholly consenting, is not fully persuaded.

But, such is the State or Public conscience, viz. not fully consenting at
this time:

Therefore, the State-conscience is not fully persuaded.

Note.
Because some are more for it, some are less for it.

I prove the State-conscience not fully consenting.

That conscience which has not Scripture to secure it, cannot be fully
consenting or persuaded.

But* such is the Public conscience at this time concerning this present
Government:

Therefore, the Public or State-conscience cannot be so fully consenting or
persuaded.

Note.
Because they which cannot call it a Government by Divine Right, are not
secured concerning it by the Word; and then, by conscience, are not fully
consenting nor persuaded.

Master Ley's Resolution page, 9, and 10.
If we take his reason to stand immediately against obedience, and so
consequently against commands, etc. It is more formal, but still as feeble;
Repugnant to Religion and reason, against former Protestations, and the
Covenant; for some will always scruple, etc.

Reply.
Some of this might have been spared. Let us have as much reason, and as little
reviling as may be. Your reason is, because then neither Protestations nor
Covenant of State can be administered; for some will always scruple. So as here
is the force of your reason; Because Protestations and Covenants in the State
are put upon a people unwilling and malignant, therefore Government should.

First, a truth of Government, and the establishment of it, is but indirectly,
unsutably, and disproportionably proved from Oaths and Covenants. Indeed, under
the Old Testament, and in the State of Israel, Covenants were more agreeable to
the way of that Church; they were part of the Worship then; and it was a way of
obligation and engagement, fitted more to the Policy of that Nation: They were
a People or Nation of themselves, singled out from the world, and marked by a
carnal Ordinance: And their Discipline was fitted to the whole Nation by God
himself; and so Covenants, etc. gathered them up from the world into their
National way of Worship, etc. But now, the way of Church and Worship changing,
and the Laws of such kind of external Pedagogie ceasing, and a more inward and
spiritual Law coming in, you might have done well, ^re you took things thus
for granted, to clear the way of Covenants under the Gospel, and not to prove
one probable thing by another. Those of your way are against a little Church
Covenant, and why not a great one?

For the imposing of Protestations now, etc. It is not my work here to
discuss; nor am I against any way of State-security, that may consist with
^ound Prudence: and for the spiritual part of them, wherein men covenant in
the things of God* let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind: That is
the Apostle's rule, I am sure, what ever any say to the contrary, and will
stand. In civil things, I would have any way or design of assurance that is
fairly and justly Politic: in spirituell things, only such ways of assurance
as are Gospell-waies, and may sure with the New Testament-beleevers.

And now you are to prove more then perhaps you thought on; that is, to clear
a Church Covenant, which many of your Way are against: for though you condemn
it in some Churches, not of your Way; yet a National Church Covenant you plead
for. And how can this be both true and false, that a great Church Covenant is
lawful, and a little one unlawful? A National Church Covenant lawful, and a
Particular or Congregationall Church Covenant unlawful? This only by the way:
To show you how one may mistake his way in a mist: you were proving a
Government, and now you are engaged to prove Church covenants, which you are
both for and against.

And yet, after all this of Protestations and Covenants, there is no fair
proof of establishing a Government, or imposing it in your way and design
from these. It is not safe going to the State for a Pattern for the Church. If
the State in certain seasons of unfaithfulness and unsettlement, contrive any
way of security and assurance (necessity is often a law maker in States, yet
not so in the Church) will you from hence argue for a liberty in the Church?
Will you make necessity your Gospel, your Lawgiver there? Necessity is
sometimes a suspender of laws in the Gospel, but no lawmakers.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 10.
But I answer: I wonder an ingenuous man, as M. Saltmarsh is, should make such
an Objection.

Reply.
These are good words; and I hope you shall have no worse then you bring: Yet
we must speak truth.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 10.
I answer: The Church government is such as in the chief parts of it is from
the Word.

Reply.
You grant then that the Government is but in some parts warrantable by the
Word; So was Episcopacie and Prelacy in some parts of it. There is not any
false Worship or Way, but it has some parts of truth in it. The great Image
had a head of gold. etc. The Mystery of iniquity sits in the Temple of God,
etc. The Whore of Babylon sits in Skarlet decked with gold, and precious
stones, and Pearls. Truth must be all one and the same, and homogeneal, not in
parts. The Jews had not the Law, but then their own traditions mingled. There
is one Lord, one Faith; not two.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 10.
Things of lesser moment in it, though they are not directly from Scripture,
yet not repugnant; they are of Prudence, and agreeable to the best Reformed
Churches.

Reply.
But, Why of lesser moment? All things are of moment of spirituals. Indeed, if
they be such as be not the Gospel*s, they are then, as you say, of lesser
moment: and yet of moment too, in another sense; for, Traditions of men make
void the Commandments of God.

Nor are the grounds of Prudence any Scripture-grounds to rule by. Prudence
has let in more Will Worship then any thing. Prelacy had its Prudence for
every New additionall in Worship and Government: And if Presbytery take
Prudence too, let the Reader judge what may follow.

And what is that, Not directly from Scripture, yet not repugnant? Surely
Christ's rule is not such; he opposes any Tradition to the Commandments of
God. Not directly from Scripture, is repugnant to Scripture: Such is the
oneness, entirenesse, indivisibility, and essentiality of the Truth. He that
is not with me, is against me.

And for the Reformed Churches as a rule; that is to set the Sun by the Dyall,
and not the Dyall by the Sun. We must set the Churches by the Word, and not
Church by Church, and the Word by the Church.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 10. and 11.
Because the practice of the Government belongs not to the peoples part, but to
the Ministers and Elders.

Because, so far as concerns the peoples compliance, they are to be instructed
before they yield submission.

Because if any remain unsatisfied, they are not to be put upon his Dilemma of
sin or misery, or to be ruled with the rod, but meekness, 2 Cor. 4. 21. 2 Timothy
2. 25.

Because the ignorance of the people generally, which he would have for a
reason to suspend it, ought to be rather a reason for expedition, that they may
practically know it: for while it is unknown* it is slandered, which might have
been more amiable.

Because his two Texts make not only against the suspending for a time, but for
ever: I wish he would preach such Texts as these to his people; ^* These. 5. 12*
13. 1* Tim. 5. 17. Heb. 13. 7* 17.

Reply.
To your first, It belongs not to the people, etc. It seems then the people
must be kept out from all intermedling. But I would have the people mark well
what kind of Government that is that sits upon the waters or people: I am sure
Christ's Government takes in the people: and being once in a Church Way, they
lose their old capacity for a new, and are raised up from People to Brethren,
Act. 15. It is a worthy saying of Master Goodwyn and Master Nigh, That the
Clergy got the golden ball of Government amongst them; and I censure it is not
much mended in the Presbytery.

But you say, The people must be instructed, that is, they must only know that
they must obey. But they are called, and consulted with, and owned, as the
Scripture holds forth, where ever there is any Church spoken of? But what
though instructed? They are only to be instructed and taught that this is the
Government to which they must submit. So the people under Popery, Prelacy, etc.
were instructed, with that limitation and restriction. But shall they be thus
instructed and taught in it? People, here is a Government which to some of us
seems to be a Government according to the Word; take it and examine it: if
you be so persuaded, and that the Word holds it forth clearly, embrace it; if
not, do not obey anything in blind and implicit obedience. This were fair
dealing with Conscience; thus the Churches of Christ had their Government among
them.

To that of the peoples compliancy you speak on, it is not my work here to
dispute the Interests of Elders and People distinctly*; but to make answer,
that the complyancy and submission which are the duties you set out for the
people, are such as they may easily see the Interest you allow them: viz. an
Interest of compliance only, and submission or obedience to what is done
already not any liberty to examine and refuse.

And when people are instructed, still your work remains to prove your
Presbytery over Congregations, or a Church gathered out of a Church to be over
a Church; which may upon the Presbytery more justly be recriminated then where
you do so often recriminate, upon gathered Churches. And me thinks to me it is
unreasonable to tax any for church-gathering, when your very Presbytery is
maintained by such a kind of principle. What is your Classical, your
Provincial, your National Presbytery, but a Church gathered out of the rest,
call it a virtuall, or representative, or what you please?

For that of Meekness; how meek it will prove, and how meekly they shall be
dealt with under it, we are not to judge by any promises of Meekness, but by
Principles. Are the Principles such as naturally bring forth Meekness, or
rather such as invest the Ministers and Elders with a power supreme and of
dominion? But what if such as your self, and some other godly meek of your Way,
may propound nothing but ways of meekness to your selves? Can you undertake
to secure the people for hereafter, and for all of the Way, and for the Way in
its own nature?

There are things of meek appearances, as the Presbytery may be, yet prove not
so. The Lamb in the Revelation had two horns, though a Lamb. Hazael could say*
Am I a dog, that thou should think so harshly of me, that I should kill the
children in the womb, 2 King. 8? He as little suspected his own cruelty, which
the Prophet foresaw in his nature would come to pass as you do in your
Presbytery, which some, seeing into the nature of it, cannot but prophecy
accordingly. You know Episcopacy began in meekness, and Bishops were brought
in first for good and for Peace: But how proved they? Tyranny had ever a
countenance of Meekness and Love, till it got seated in the Throne. So Absolon
was very fair spoken in the Gate; but how was he in the Throne?

For that of my Dilemma of sin and misery, which you say people shall not be
put upon; it may be some in your or another Classis may find more meekness, a
spirit of more love and ingenuity: But what is this to the nature of the
Government, that some in it are well natured?

And for that of sin and misery; surely if the Presbytery be set on with power,
many a one will be in that snare, partly in fear, and partly in an easy
complyancy: For there are whole Parishes and Counties of this constitution: And
you your self say, The wilfully weak must have the rod. And who will this be?
Such as are so in the judgment and interpretation of the Classis? or how? I
would this were well cleared.

And for your Scriptures of 1 Cor. 4. 21. 2 Timothy 2. 25. Shall I come to you
with a rod, etc. and in meekness instructing, etc. These are full Scriptures
for ordering any Church government: These are good Laws; but then men must be
rightly in Commission for ruling by them, and people rightly ordered and
disposed for such rules, as in all other Laws and Kingdoms. But what is this to
your purpose, till your Government appear to be all Christ's?

To that of the ignorance of the people, which you would have for a reason of
expedition rather then susponsion, that they may practically know it; I answer:

In practical godliness, the Scripture-way is not so: Things must first be
known, before practically known, or else the obedience can be but mixed, blind,
and Popish. Who can practically obey, taking practically in a Scripture-sense,
that is, with knowledge, till they know and be persuaded? Indeed in things
civil, etc, or moral, practice may bring in knowledge; habits may be acqui^ed
and gotten by Acts; a man may grow temperate by practicing temperance, and
civilly obedient practicing civil obedience: But it is not so in Spirituals,
there, habits go before acts, spiritual infusions before practices.

And for the amiablenesse of it, look into other Reformed Kingdoms, and see
what power of godliness is there by reason of it. Do we not see the huge
bodies of Nations very sinful, corrupt, formal? For Scotland, our Brethrens
preaching and watchfulness, it may be more powerful in a Reformation upon
them, then their Government. And further, I deny not but a Government of that
nature may much reform the outward man: So may a mere prudentiall Government,
a mere civil Government, if sincerely executed. The Romans had a very moral
people under their Yoke, when their laws were well executed. Prelacy and
Bishops had a Government which was Antichristian, yet by an exact execution,
could chastise the outward man in some measure.

For your other reason: That my Texts make against not only the suspending for
a time, but for ever; I answer.

It is true, Principles and circumstances considered: For if neither the
Government be Christ's, nor the people Nationally a Church, when can you settle
it? And if there be no Gospell-promises, that people shall fall in so
nationally as the Jews did, excepting some that concern the world in general,
as Isai. 49. 22. then how or when will you settle, or what will you settle, or
upon whom?

And for the Texts you commend to me for preaching, 1 These. 5. 12. etc. they
all concern peoples obedience to their Elders and Rulers; they are very
material and pertinent to that: And I shall in requital commend some other
back to you; as those of not lording it over the Heritage: Against
preeminence; as helpers of your faith; of service, and ministry: We are your
servants; we entreat you, and beseech you, not seeking our own things, not for
filthy lusre, but of a ready mind, etc.

We must consider, Scripture must be taken in the wholenesse and entirenesse of
it; and we must not only mind people of their obedience, but Elders and
Ministers of their service, duty, Ministry, humility, self-denial, etc. And
thus in a just distribution, deal out both to Ministers and people their
measure.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 12.
Strange that he should plead for a delay in establishing of Reformation from
the Covenant, wherein we are bound to endeavor it sincerely, really, etc. and
more strange, under the title of Popery too, which in the next Article of
Popery is disavowed,

Reply.
Not so strange as you make it; for we are covenanted to endeavor a setting up
the Government, not a Government; that is, as it is expounded in the Article,
the Government, or Reformation according to the Word of God, etc. not a
Government or Reformation of any other sort. So as I plead for a delay only in
setting up a Discipline, not the Discipline: or more plainly, that the
Discipline be such, that the covenanters may not violate that Article, wherein
they are bound to do every thing according to the Word, and so prove
unfaithful in their covenant, while they are most zealous for it. There was
such a kind of mistake in the Jews, who would have stoned the Lord of the
Sabbath in zeal to the Sabbath, and following after righteousness, yet did
not attain to the righteousness of God.

And for the title of Popery which I put upon such obedience; which you say
cannot be, because discovered in the next Article of the Covenant: I answer,
The Popery is not in the covenant, but in the Interpretations upon it, and the
mistaken practice of it, which is the thing I only aver. O! How soon may we be
Popish under a Covenant against it! What are the maintenance of Ministers by
Tithes? Jewish and Popish undeniably, and yet no notice of this at all. I had
as great a Tithe once as another, but I could not hold it so, neither by
Covenant nor Gospel. Nor do I tax the Parliament, but those who are betrusted
to commend Spiritual grievances to their Senate, etc. Brethren, let us lay
down these grievances: Countries and Famalies are burdened: Let not the
Ministers have their hooks abroad in every thing of the peoples, like Elies
sons. We know the Kingdoms of Scotland and the Netherlands take their Tithes to
maintain their wars, and will not let their preachers live by decimation, bur
by pension. And methinks you that profess ingenuity, should be so candid to
distinguish where you see I distinguish, and not to force on constructions of
this nature, which neither any thing of mine nor the Covenant will bear.

And for what you say concerning the composers and penners of the Covenant, I
am willingly silent: I would not aggravate any thing against a Brother, as you
are, which might be only a failing in your Pen.

Master Ley's Resolution page 12, and 13.
For that he says of peoples implicit obedience, etc. of their being devoted
to any thing the State sets up by Statutes, cannot be for these reasons:

Because, as in the former Reason, Instruction must go before.

Because, for that of their being devoted, it makes against setting up Doctrine
as well as Discipline, and Authority of Parliament as well as Authority of
Ministry: They not Ministers, make Statutes.

Reply.
To your first, That instructions must go before, I have answered to this
before, as you expounded it before: One word more will suffice. What kind of
instruction is it you mean, but authoritative compulsive instruction, such as
the Schoolmasters, even your own instance, and here most pertinent, who teaches
and whips every one of those that will not understand as well as he? Something
an unreasonable way of correction in matters of pure belief and conscience,
and best amongst boys, as your instance implies: Men of Scripture-consciences
cannot bear it.

And for that you say it makes against Doctrine as well as Discipline: Yea, in
some sort it is granted; for neither Doctrine nor Discipline ought to be forced
but in a Gospell-way.

And for that you say it makes against the Parliament, because they make
Statutes: I answer, Nothing makes against a Legislative power, which reduces it
to ruder, and clearer, and free* Principles. And thus the Parliament very
justly argues in all their Remonstrances touching the King, while they go about
to reduce him to his just Rights, from those exorbitances he suffers himself
to be brought into. For instance: He that wishes the Parliament might only
proceed in a way, not grieving the Spirit nor hazzarding the persecution or
Truth, nor oppressing any Gospell-principle, to which they are covenanted, not
keeping on in any sin of former Parliaments, of severe imposing in matters of
Religion so controvertible: Is not he, I say, that so wishes, a better friend
to Parliaments, Laws and Statutes, then those of contrary Principles? Nay, I
must profess that to me that very one Article of Reforming to the Word of God,
most providentially inserted, is an Article of Caution, both against imposing
and punishing, lest through want of a clear discerning, we be found* violaters
of that we covenant to maintain, and ought to be sadly considered by all.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 12, and 13.
His second reason of experience, That the speedy settling, etc. takes little
root but in the outward man, etc. concluding pathetically, Why, do not days
speak, and multitude of years teach knowledge? In answer,

1. That the fault was not in over-speedy settling, but in the choice of a wrong
Government.

2. Because the Doctrine goes on with Discipline, and so the power of the Word
may go deep into the conscience, as a Schoolmaster who teaches and corrects.

3. Because the Discipline is an hedge or wall about the Doctrine, a goad to
the Means of Grace, a curb to licentious courses; though with many it go but to
the outward man, that is not to be imputed to the Discipline, but their
corruptions, etc.

4. Because where the Discipline has been rightly chosen and settled, God has
blessed it with better fruits; as in Scotland, where there is no Heresy nor
Schism, etc.

5. For that of Elihu in Job, Why, do not days speak, etc. it makes not for
his purpose; but that Wisdom is with the ancient, and gray headed to be heard
before young or green-headed Counselors, etc.

Reply.
To your first, That the fault was in the choice of a wrong Government, etc. I
answer: That is the fear now, least there should be a choice of a wrong
Government, and so the same fault should be committed again: And this very
Government has no Image of Divine Right upon it, nor has it warrant in all
things from the Word, as your self acknowledge.

To your second: That Doctrine and Discipline go together, etc. Yea, pure
Doctrine and pure Discipline go rightly together; and if either be impure or
unsound, there is so much the more danger: So as this is an Argument rather
against you, because where Doctrine opens the conscience, and lets in any thing
of Discipline but that of the pure Word, there is one evil only mended with
another.

And for your instance of a Schoolmaster, who both teaches and corrects: You
know we are not to prove but to illustrate by similitudes: And that of a
Schoolmaster is a fitter illustration for the Pedagogie of the Law, and that
Discipline then the Gospels: You know the Apostle uses it only to that; The Law
was our Schoolmaster, etc. Gal. 3.

To that of your description of the Government, that it is a curb, a goad, etc.
I answer; There is nothing you say of Government in these words, but may be
said of any civil Government, nay, of Prelacy, when it was in its primitive
form. But that only which you ought to say, and that which only differences it
from all devised forms of men, as your Covenant binds you, and ought to be your
only reason for erecting and setting it up, is this: Is it the Scriptures form
or model? Is the people so in the exercise and capacity of it as in the Gospel
times? If so, then you prove something. And further: All this you say is true
in a kind too of Christ's Government; but yet, in some sort communicable with
devised Governments. The only distinguishing and essential marks are not to be
a curb and goad, but the Scriptures only mark and image, and some spiritual
operations, etc. which no other devised form of man has.

To your other, of the blessings and blessed fruits in Scotland that there is
no Heresy nor Schism there, Let Master Coleman (our learned and pious Brother)
speak for us both, from his experiences. And for that Kingdom, time will show
whether it will prove to be a blessing or no, to want that which you call
Heresy or Schism. Surely to be free from Heresy and Schism, in a Scripture
sense, it is such a blessing as the whole Gospel cannot pattern. What? No
Heresy in a whole Kingdom? No Schism in a whole Kingdom? Never such a pure
Church heard on? Corinth, Ephesus, Colosse, Jerusalem, Antioch, all not
comparable? The worst I wish our Brethren there, is, that all were so pure as
we hear on. Indeed Scotland had the honor to awaken us first in the work of
Reformation and Liberty; but lest Scotland should be puffed up, England shall
have the glory (I hope) to improve that liberty to a fuller light, which some
would close up too soon, in the narrowness of a Presbytery.

Methinks there is something of this nature considerable in the Lutherans, who
though they follow the first Light in Germany, yet the Lord has suffered them
to stick there without a fuller Reformation, that the first may be last, and
the last be first; For if a State be covenanted so close to the Word, they had
need be favorable and free to all that are accordingly covenanted; for each
man's conscience is the Interpreter in himself of what makes for or against the
Covenant he takes; and by this very Covenant, you are all to be tender to
consciences, because the Spirit of God (not power of men) can intterpret the
Will of God; but in their civil and prudentiall things only, they may
interpret themselves.

To that of Job, That with the ancient, is wisdom and with the gray headed;
which you apply in way of reproach to the younger, whom you call as it were
green-heads: I answer, That the elder I esteem as fathers, and the younger we
know are such in whom the Lord speaks more gloriously, as he himself says;
Your young men shall see visions, and upon your sons and daughters I will power
out my Spirit, your old men shall dream dreams. Now whether is it more
excellent to dream dreams, or to see visions? The Lord delivered Israel by the
young men of the Provinces. Surely we may more safely hearken to the younger
that see visions of Reformation, then to the elder that dream dreams of it only.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 15, and 16.
There is great disproportion of times. Men were then converted from Paganism,
and while they were so, they were incapable. Our Congregations in England are
professed Christians; and though there be many not so wrought on by the Word,
etc. That is rather a reason for the establishment of it, Ezekiel. 22. 26, 1 Cor.
4. 21. Prove. 23. 13, 14. Nor can Sabbath nor Sacraments be administered without
it.

Reply.
To that of the disproportion (you speak on) of times, and conversion, etc. I
answer:

The Apostle's and Primitive times are the times we are to look at for a
pattern and model. It Is true, there is great disproportion; for they were
Apostles who gave the government then; yet are but private Divines, as you say
by me, if you be compared with them.

For that of the conversion from Paganism to Christianity:

There is no such disproportion there neither, but that very proportion which
our Savior has himself foretold, and set forth: For how does a Jewish and
Antichristian State differ? Nay, how does a Heathenish or Paganish State,
differ from an Antichristian or Parochial State, as Parochial or Parish is in
that notion? Christ has put them that are out of the Church under that very
notion, Matthew. 19. 17. and the spirit in the Revelation makes the Antichristian
State to be as unlawful as a Paganish, and calls out equally from that as from
the other, as by comparing, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Rev. 18. 4. together will appear.

So, as speaking of things and notions, I cannot but speak in a Scripture way
nor am I uncharitable in this neither, though I thus speak; I look on
thousands in this State as godly believers: It is not the Pastors I write
against, but the way. There may be a Moses in Pharaohs Court; a Joseph in
Po^phar's house; a Cornelius, or devout man, though out of the Church; a Luther
even in Rome, till the Lord enlighten.

So as government and discipline is a Churches right, and privilege, not the
worlds and Nations privileges, as so and then. Where are all your quoted Texts
which are applied? Surely that of Corinth, is the Churches; and that of
Ezekiel, and Proverbs, makes not for the discipline of a Church at all.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 16, and 17.
He makes a comparison betwixt material and spiritual buildings, as stone and
timber should not be clapped together in the one, soon in the other.

1. Similitudes may illustrate but not prove any thing.

2. Conformity betwixt material and spiritual things is not to be carried too
far.

3. In material buildings, or the Temple, there is not only squared stones,
but pieces and rubbish which have their use; not so in the spiritual; all
things there are homogeneall, and square, and living stones, etc.

4. Those that he accounts rough and unsquared, are in some conformity, though
not so polished as others.

5. The best stones are not to be taken from the rest, to make up a building by
themselves, as in separated Congregations.

6. Let him show any such example in the New Testament where when there was a
mixture of holy and profane, as in Corinth, i Cor. 11. 21. the Apostles
gathered out the holy part.

7. That of Axes and Hammers has a mysterious truth in it, but not to his
purpose, viz. That the spiritual building is built of the soft and secret
whispers and motions of the spirit.

Reply.
To that of the similitudes:

I fully agree with you, they illustrate better then they prove.

To that of not carrying a conformity betwixt materials and spirituals too high:

I agree with you in that too, yet not so fully; for Jesus Christ the great
Prophet of the Gospel preached the glory of the Kingdom in material
comparisons, in salt, water, leven, mustard seed, sowers, husbandmen, vines,
vineyards, etc.

To that of spiritual buildings, which you say are to be made up only of
squared living stones:

I agree with you, and here the controversy might be ended: If your Temples
shall be of living stones, the controversy is granted: But because I will not
seem to mistake you, I believe the spiritual building you mean, and I, are not
the same here: You mean as it appears, the invisible spiritual, or Church
mystical; and yet there, all is not so Homogeneall, and of the same kind
neither: The head of the body is both God and man, and one member like one star
differs from another in glory.

But, we are speaking of the spiritual building or Church here, which is the
Image of the Church above; and as that is of true, real, essentially
spiritual living stones: so the Church below is to consist at least of such as
visibly and formally appear so; and therefore the Apostle calls them in his
Epistles Saints, and called to be Saints.

And to that of your pieces of Rubbish in the material building:

It is true; But what is that to Salomons Temple, which my comparison drives up
to? How much Rubbish can you prove in that type, nay, square stones, pure
Cedar, gold, etc. to figure out the Gospell-building or Temple, as in Heb. 9.
So as your rubbish is only in your own allusion, not in mine.

To that of your unpolished stones in your Parishes which may fit the Temple
now; I answer:

It must be then only such a building as the material one you speak on, which
is made up of rubbish and broken pieces: and if that be according to 1 Cor. 19.
Ephesians 2. 19, 20, 21, 22.
Christ's pattern, let these Scriptures in the margin, with many more, determine.

And for their submitting indeed, there is a national, blind, traditionall
obedience in them, I cannot call it Gospel submission.

To that of the best stones not to be taken out to make up a building, I answer:

I am sure we are to take in no ill, unhewne, unpolished; and the Scripture
cautions and practice are clear, etc. then judge you what the stones must be.

Nor do we so pick and choose as if all stones were to be square alike, or
equally polished; that is, not in any material building: Though we would take
in no rubbish, yet we take in stores differently squared. As in the body one
member differs from another; the eye, and hand, and foot, etc. and members
less honorable, 1 Cor. 12. so in the body of the Church, every one according
to his measure, and as every one has received.

Nor do we stand so for the first polishing as you pretend. You make as if we
set up such degrees of perfection as were only the degrees of the invisible or
mystical body, when it is merely in the degrees of visible Gospellperfection.
By this you would make the carnal to abhor, and the weaker to stumble and be
offended; as if the door of our Churches were not open for any such whom you
imply, were of a temper merely Spiritual, and of a size of our own, not the
Scriptures. Let the doors of our Churches be as strait as you imply, I am sure
your doors are set open, or rather cast off the hinges: but a pure
Gospel-entrance is neither too wide nor too narrow. We know there is smoking
flax, and bruised reeds, measures of grace: If they can willingly submit to
Jesus Christ their Lawgiver, and walk as members of the body; here they may
receive polishing, and have honor, and building up, and many other degrees of
perfection which the Saints of God obtain when they are in fellowship with the
Father and the Son.

To that of your challenge, that I should show any such example in the New
^^stament of taking out the best, when there was a mixture of holy and
profane; I answer: Those were Gospel-Churches gathered by the Word and Spirit
into Gospel-fellowship: and when you make your Parishes to appear such
Churches, then I shall tell you more: till then, I suspend your challenge. The
world, and an Antichristian Nation, are both under Christ's fan for gathering
them out.

To that of a mysterious truth you speak on in the Axes and Hammers, I agree
with you in that; and because of the mystery, I therefore quoted it. And
whereas you sum up all the mystery into the soft whisperings and motions of
the Spirit, you can hardly warrant us, or secure us that your interpretation is
the whole mind of the Spirit, and that very interpretation of yours is part of
it the very same I aim at, viz. to show how the Gospel-building is softly
gathered and made up by the Ministry of the Word and Spirit, and not with Axes
and Hammers, tools of a compulsive, forcing, sharp, and authoritative nature,
as etc.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 17, 18 19.
For that of his, etc. whore he makes Christ's description of himself, etc. to
be against the establishment, and the sutablenesse Christ presses for; I answer:

1. If his reason be of force against a speedy Government, it is as well
against a Government at any time.

2. That Christ in his own nature, and his Government, differ exceedingly.
Christ came to suffer, Paul. 2. 7.

3. Neither is Christ so remiss as not to take upon him a Government. The Head
must govern the Body. Nor so meek: He has anyron Rod as well as a golden
Scepter, Psalm. 2. 9. Esth. 5. 2. and though he was sometimes a servant, etc.
yet sometimes a Lord too, John 2. 14. and though he be a Lamb, yet he has a
formidable mouth too, etc. Rev. 8. 15.

4. For his Scriptures produced, Mat. 12. 19. 1 John 5. 3. they make nothing
against a speedy, but against a grievous Government. And though his yoke be
easy, yet not easy to flesh and blood, Matthew. 5. 29. and 16. 2, etc. as in
self-denial.

5. Nor has his other place any sober sense in it, Matthew 9. 7. nor makes it
against Government at this time, but any time. The wine will be always new at
the first; and the longer delayed the older will the bottles be.

Reply.
To that, If against a speedy Government, then against a Government at any
time; I answer:

How do you infer that? Nothing of those makes against the Government of
Christ rightly constituted, and ordered and settled upon those called to be
Saints. Indeed they make against any other Government at all times as well as
now. Nor will there be always such a people under Christ's yoke as you think
on. But you look further abroad then I, and in that we mistake one another. You
look that whole Kingdoms and Nations should submit, and I look only for one
of a Tribe, two of a City, etc. Your Horiz^n and the Scripture's, for
Government, are not equal.

To that of Christ's nature and Government differing so much, and therefore my
Text proves nothing; I answer:

Every thing of Christ's bears the Image of Christ. Every Truth of His has
something of Himself in it, who is Truth it self by way of excellency: I am the
Truth, says he. Every beam of light is light: Then how can Christ and his
Government differ so as you pretend?

Surely, if we observe well, there is not any Truth but it partakes of Him who
is The truth, and is a beam or sparkle of him. Truth is Homogeneal, and not so
unlike and contrary dispositioned and natured as you pretend.

And for your expounding the Text, He shall not strive, etc. as a Prophecye,
you do well in part; but you know Prophecyes have a latitude, and Scriptures
have not only one main and principal, but many subordinate aims: so as though
this Scripture concern his sufferings principally, yet it does in a latitude
set forth the nature of Him who is Truth; and in Him we may see how those
things which are pretended for Truth hold proportion.

To that of Christ the Head, and taking the Government of his Body, etc. I
answer:

It is true, Christ is a Head, but he is not a Head to every Body. He will have
a Body proportionable to his Head. Is a Nation of all sorts a fit Body for such
a Head? Is he not a pure, holy glorious Head in his Gospell-dispensation? and
is a Body so leprous, so wicked, so formal, so traditionally and
Antichristianly corrupted, a fit Body? Shall I take the members of my body,
says Paul, and join them to an harlot, to make one flesh? God forbid. What
then shall the Head do with such Members?

To that of His Ruling with a Rod of Iron as well as a golden Scepter, Psa. 2.
Esth 5. I answer.

And does He rule any in his Church with his Rod of Iron, who were not called
in first by his Golden Scepter?

And for that of his Iron Rod in Psalm. 2. that is spoken of Christ, not as King
of his Church, but of Nations.

And that of Esth. 5. what is that Golden Scepter to Christ's? unless you bring
a Text only to prove that there is such a thing as a Golden Scepter in the
Scriptures.

For your other Texts of Christ's, being a servant and a Lord, a Lamb and
terrible; you only prove what I grant, that he is more a King, and a Lord in
his Government, then in any other of his Gospel-dispensations: But all this
will not prove the Lordship of such a Presbytery or Government. Certainly you
intend it a terrible Government, because you bring in those Texts that have all
the judgment and severity in them which Christ threatens to the Nations and
Kings of the earth, not to his Churches. Will you make Christ rule in his
Church as he does in the world? well, let your Presbytery enjoy the Iron
Scepter, while the Churches of Christ enjoy the Golden; and try if you ruin
not more then you rule, and break not more then you bow.

To that of Mat. 12. 19. 1 John 5. 3. The yoke easy, etc they make not against
a speedy, but a grievous Government; I answer:

I cannot express my self better then in your own words; They make against a
grievous Government, which is all I aim at in the Quotation. And whereas you
say the yoke is not easy to flesh and blood; so say I too, it is very
burdensome, and the Commandments grievous to the unregenerate; and therefore I
prove from hence, that it is only a fit and suitable yoke for the Saints, and a
Commandment for them. And there is the same proportion of the outward
government to the outward man, that there is of the other spiritual Laws in
the Gospel to the inward man, and none but the Saints can delight in either.
Men are to be spiritually molded and framed to the Law of Gospel-discipline:
that kind of Discipline is not like your civil Discipline: this way of
Discipline you would have, is too Politic and National; it takes in a people
to subdue as the Laws of Civil Policy, which finding a people unsubdued*
subdues them: So does not Christ as we read of; the dispensation of the Word
(not the government) subdues.

And thus with much ado, you only prove them to be as I intended them, no
Commandments for the mixed and unregenerate, or in a word, Christ's government
no National government.

To that where you say, Nor has his place any sober sense in it, Mat. 9. 17.
The new wine will be always new, and the longer delayed, the older the bottles
will be; I answer:

I wonder that one of your experience in the Majesty of the Word, should be so
pleasant with a Scripture allegory, because the Scripture is of wine. You jest
on it, as if it had made the sense less sober: I am sorry my younger pen
should reprove the aged for jesting, which the Apostle says is not convenient.
And truly it is not comely for the servants to play upon the Master of the
Feast, or any thing in his house, especially upon his wine, which alludes so to
his blood, and which he has promised to drink with us new in his Fathers
Kingdom.

Nor will the wine be always new to those that are renewed as they ought to be
indeed; for your Parishes which you call old Bottles, I am sure the wine, or
pure government, is too new for them.

Nor will the Bottles be older, as you say, the longer the government is
delayed, if the power of the Word be there for renewing them.

But you say, What sense is this? What logical connection?

I answer, that shall appear there is sense enough, and connection enough; and
Logike enough, though I had rather have more Scripture and less Logike; for
all I aim at, is what the Scripture aims at, that the bottles should be fit for
the wine, the necks for the yoke, and the subjects for the commands.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 23, and 24.
To that of his, That Jesus Christ could as easily have set up his government
by miracle, had there been such a primary, etc. necessity, etc.

1. The acts and times for divine Providence toward his Church are various.
God had his Church at first and no written Word for it till the Law was writ,
and Moses wrote, etc. And God added to the moral Laws, ceremonial and
judicial, diverse of which were not executed till forty years after, at their
coming into Canaan; so far ws God beforehand.

2. Whereas he says, Christ could as easily have settled the government by
miracle; we grant it, yea, and more, without a miracle; and yet more that he
did so, in Mat. 16. 19. John 10. 23. Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17.

3. If Christ's delay of Government must be our example, then as well for the
Anabaptisticall delay of Baptism till his age, Luke 3. 23. nor was it John's
office to set up a Government, but to prepare the way, etc. And Christ's public
Ministry lasted but four years, or three years and a half, and he began
then to set up Government.

Reply.
All your proof reaches but to this:

1. That God dealt variously with his Church. They had first no written Word,
and after, a written Word.

2. That Christ could have settled his Government by miracle, but did not.

3. That Christ's delay of Government must be no more our example then his
Baptism.

My proof was to show there was no such moral necessity of the settling,
because it was not settled. Now, what have you overthrown here? Not that Christ
suspended his Government, and the se^ling of it; for, that you grant with me,
and prove it more at large then I did: so as all your rest will be answered in
two particulars.

1. To that of Gods Church and Government before his Word, etc. which you would
insinuate as some advantage to your serling, etc.

What is that to Gods dispensation now, if there wanted a Word, there was a
supplement of vision and dreams, etc. And I hope you will not go before the
Law, so much as you do for a Pattern: You go too far when you go to the times
of the Law: You have a Prophet now to hear in all things, Act. 3. 22

2. To that of Baptism to be delayed as well as Government from Christ's example:

I cannot dispute that here. Master Tomes will satisfy you at large in his
learned Examen, where he has made work for a whole Assembly; That he knows
not but it may be delayed till they be of years.

But, to answer you in your scope:

You bring this to prove, That Christ is not to be imitated in all things. I
grant it. But what is that to prove that Christ settled not his Government when
he began his Ministry, or John's? For the business on your part is to find
out, either that the Government was settled before, or with the Ministry, or
there was as much necessity of it as of the Word; but for some reason, and not
from any thing in the nature of the Government, but some other extrinsicall
reason it was delayed: Which ought not to take place now.

And this is yet to prove; all your proof summed up, reaches not to this.

But you imply, The will of God in his dispensations was the cause: But the
will of God in his dispensations carries a rule of righteousness along with
it, and of spiritual reason. And in Gospel dispensations and extrinsicall
proceedings of Gods will, you will find a rule and golden reed of
righteousness measuring the Temple; and every dispensation, and even this of
suspending Government has its rule in the Gospel, that a word of obedience
must precede and go before a form of obedience, and a word of faith before the
obedience of faith, and living stones before a living Temple.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 24, and 25.
Whereas he says the gifts for Government were not given till Christ ascended,
it is answered:

1. That he ascended 43 days after his ministration; and that added to the
year forementioned, makes but small difference, etc.

2. He put his Apostles upon neither of these offices, preaching or governing,
without competent gifts an ^^ualifications.

3. For the model of it, which he says people fell under as they were
capable: If he mean the written model in the Word, though it were young in
Christ's time or his Apostles, yet not now; we have had 1500 years si^c^. Why
should that which is so old in constitution, be thought too soon for
execution? And bisides Scripture directions, we have many years the paterns of
^^ in many Reformed Churches.

4. It has by soft and slow degrees been brought in, a^ both in debates of
Assembly, Parliament, etc. And so sor execution ^^^; First, an Ordinance for
Ordination, and then a Directory, etc.

Reply.
You prove here:

1. That Christ gave gifts when he ascended, and*not any longtime in all his
ministration and sending gifts.

2. That he qualified ^^s. Apostles for government and preaching.

3. That the government of Christ now so old, should be seen set up as in other
Kingdoms.

4. That it proceeded by degrees in its setting up here.

Now all this thus gathered up, proves not any thing against my assertion, that
Christ proceeded by degrees in his Ministry, and giving out his government;
but rather strengthens my assertion.

And for your Arguments for settling, employed in these particulars:

1. That Christ's government was but a while in bringing forth, the years
considered.

2. That the government in the Gospel being now so old, might to be soon
executed.

3. That the Paterns of it are in other Reformed Churches.

I answer to all these in as few words:

1. Prove your Argument first to be Christ^, the particulars, and entirenesse
accordingly, and then I shall allow you your Argument; but you grant it to be
but partly Christ's, and partly the Assemblies, or of Prudence.

2. You must prove but the same again, that the government you have, is the
government, there withal Gospel-necessaries take in; else, though the
Gospel-government be never so old, yours is but new; and this Argument is no
better then the first.

3. Prove the other Reformed Kingdoms to be Reformed Churches, as Churches are
taken in the Gospel, and their Paterns pure Gospel-paterns, which by your own
you acknowledge to be in part prudential or humane as well as Evangelical and
Divine; and then your reason may have some force in it. Till then, you see with
all you can do, you cannot prove but Christ's government was diverse years in
bringing forth by himself and his Apostles; and so by your own account, you
ought not to be before them, unless you assume fuller Revelations of truth
then they did.

Let the Reader judge whether any of these makes for the setting up your
government, or the taking down my reasons.

To your last; That this Reformation has proceeded by slow pa^es and degrees.

What? Would you prove it by its slow proceedings to be Christ's Government, and
therefore to be settled? That were a strange kind of reasoning: Because Christ
proceeded by degrees in giving out the glory of his Kingdom here, therefore
every thing that proceeds by degrees, is Christ's Government. Here is some kind
of Logic indeed, as you say, but no Scripture: as for instance; He that says
such a one is a living creature, says truly; He that says such a one is a
beast, says he is a living creature: Therefore will it follow, He that says
such a one is a beast, says truly; So, He that says Christ's Government
proceeded slowly, says truly; He that says your government proceeded slowly,
says truly; Therefore, He that says your government is Christ's government,
says truly. What have you got now by your Logic?

Whereas you say in your second, Christ gave gifts and qualifications for
government: I answer; If you and your Parishes have such gifts and
qualifications as in Ephesians. 4. 1 Cor. 12. set it up when you please; if not
what haste?

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 26, and 27.
Now to his Rules and Considerations of Prudence; The more time ( says he) for
trying spirits, the less danger to that State, etc. I answer:

1. It is the duty of a State not only to try spirits, but to rule them.

And rather to rule them, then to try them, Prove. 29. 15. and the longer they
live without the yoke of Discipline, the more enormous.

And for trying all things, there is a due proportion of time to be observed.

Though it has been the ill hap of our Chureh, etc. to have the government
fluttering on the lime twig at Westminster, when it should be on the wing of
actual execution all over the Kingdom.

2. He makes it a dangerous matter for the State to involve it self into the
designs of Ecclesiastical power.

But unseasonably applied to Presbyteriall-government, because both Popish and
prelaticall power is abjured by it by covenant.

3. Whereas he says, There can be no danger in the not too sudden
incorporating, etc. since Moses is not alive etc. a new star may arise.

It is a groundless conceit refuted already; and for that of Moses, etc. he
b^wrayeth his design to debar the government for ever; and for that of a new
star arising, it prepares the way for some Barchochebas who pretending to be
Jacobs Star mislead the Jews, and was called Benchozba, the son of a lie.

Reply.
You prove against me:

1. That people ought to be ruled rather then tried, etc.

2. That sometime is to be allowed for trial.

3. That the government has been fluttering too long at Westminster.

4. That there is no danger to fear the Presbyteriall government, which has
abjured Popery etc. Dominion by Covenant.

5. That some of this is refuted already.

6. That my design is to debar it for ev^^.

7. That a new Star is a misleading star*

To your first I reply;

It is true in civil government, rule there rather then try: But what is that
to Church Government, or Discipline? The rule there, is the will of God, which
is the only rule in government, and legislative power in the Church; and that
is, Try all things before either you rule or be ruled.

To your second;

Some time you will allow (I see) for trial; but you ought not to measure and
deal out time but by the Standard of the Word; and before you call for such
quick obedience as you do, and as the Apostles did, prove your power, and
truth, and conclusions, and by such Apostolical and infallible evidence, and
then it is our sin if we submit not. And let the time you deal out not be like
that of States and Armies in their Treaties, who are final and peremptory in
the seasons they set: You cannot set such time; the Spirit breaths when and
were it lists.

To your third;

What is that to the present Discipline what the Covenant abjures? Covenant and
Discipline are two distinct things; a Covenant may abjure in word, what yet a
government may practice indeed.

Nor is it enough to abjure Popery in gross, but in every part and parcel.
And now having abjured, it is not enough to sit down in that satisfaction that
we have sworn against Popery; but to search out, lest we be forsworn in the
practice of it. Such a duty begins from the time of abjuring; and it lies not
only upon the State to find out Popery; but every one in his own particular is
engaged, you and I, and every Covenanter: and therefore seeing you have engaged
thousands by conscience against Popery, and to endeavor etc. you are bound to
give the same conscience liberty to bring in its result and enquiry; else you
make it a snare and trouble to Israel, and not a Covenant. And now I profess
here a just and undeniable liberty by Covenant to bring forth all of Popery,
Prelacy, or truth they know.

To your other;

Why should ye speak of governments fluttering on a lime-twig at Westminster?

Sure the State or Parliament may deserve better of any of the Assembly* then
to be thought their retarders or l^me twigs: How have they honored them above
their Brethren, printing their engagements to the world before every Sermon,
calling them into so near a capacity with themselves? though Divines have been
unfortunate before, and their Predecessors raised in the courtesy and piety of
former States and Parliaments into a Law and power above their Brethren; which
I hope our Brethren will remember and beware of.

But because I would not wholly interpret you into so dangerous a sense against
the State, it may be you may call your dissenting Brethren the limetwig; which
if you do, you are contrary to your own Argument, for you argued but lately the
slow proceeding into a very warrantable and Scripture-way: and will you now
mar^all, and defile your Argument with a limetwig, and bewray rather your slow
proceeding to have been of constraint then conscience?

To your other; That this is already refuted:

I say no more; but as you have formerly refuted, so I have formerly answered,

To your other;

That my design by that of Moses is to debar it for over; I answer:

Yea, forever would I debar a government not clear from the Word, and not one
hair would I debar a government that had the name of Christ in
Scripture-letters engraven upon it, pure Gospell-principles and proceedings.

To your other; That a new-star is to prepare for a misguider, and your story
of Barchochebas upon it, it has more light somnesse then light in it. But why
should you be so pleasant with my expression of truth by a Star? It is the very
allegory of the Spirit. Christ calls himself the morning star, the light which
springs from above. The Spirit is called the day star arising in our hearts;
and the Spouse is attired in a crown of twelve stars.

Nor do I call to any to look for a new created star of truth, but an old, yet
new appearing star to us, one of those stars in the Gospell-firmament, which
the Clouds of Tradition and Ignorance hinder us from seeing; And now, what of
your story?

But what way is most likely to mislead? That which b(...) you prove and try
all things and accordingly follow? or that which says, This is the way,
compel them to come in, not only as the Gospel compels in the Parable by a
Spirit of power but by a civil power; not a power of word only, but of State
too: and so tw-sting the Gospel with the Law, and humane authority with divine?

Master Ley's Resolution, page 27, 28, 29.
To his other prudent all rule, which is, That he makes the Civil and
Ecclesiastical power so linked, that if there be motions in the one, there
will be no quietness in the other; I answer:

1. He aims at the perpetual prohibition, not at a temporal forbearance
only. He carries it on so, as if we must allow him the authority of a Politic
Dictator.

2. What if they reciprocate interests? must the Civil State leave every man
or Congregation to be governed? Judge. 17.6.

3. Because disturbances are communicated, therefore the Civil State ought to
settle the Ecclesiastical, that it may enjoy its own peace.

And for that he says of the ^olleration of the Protestants of France; Henry
the fourth being a Protestant, though a revolter, and recovering his rights by
the arms of Protestants, he could do no less in humanity then allow them their
Religion; though now tolerated, because the trust: est friends to the Crown of
France.

For that of the State being most free where the conscience is least straightened:
If free in indulgence to all Religions, he complies with the Author of The
Bloody Tenet: If free from commotions, experience in several Ages and
Countries prove the contrary.

For that of his Parable of the Tears and the Wheat: If there must be such
mixtures tolerated, what warrant have they to pluck the Wheat from the Tares,
nay, Wheat from Wheat, in their now gathering Churches?

Reply.
You prove against my reason the compliance and nearness of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical power, occasioning motions in each other.

1. By the authority I assume of a Politic Dictator. But what does my assuming
prove against the complyaney and motions of the two Powers? This is no proof
against the two Powers of Church and State, but against use. I hope you
conceive not they are concentred in me a private Divine, as you call me; nor
would I give any thing out in way or Magistrality, but evidence: you and I, and
Assemblies of men, are not infallible.

2. By my aiming at the perpetual prohibition. But what does this prove
against the compliancy and motions in the two powers? This is still against me,
not against my reason. And further, because I suggest a reason of not embodying
the Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers too suddenly, therefore, says he, I aim
a(...) perpetual prohibition. How does this follow? I aim to prohibit it,
rebus sic stantibus, therefore for ever? I aim to prohibit it, because as yet,
neither the Discipline appears to be all Christ's, nor the Parishes fit matter
for Churches; therefore I prohibit it for ever. Is this good reasoning? They
that do over-desire the enjoying any thing, do measure time by eternity, and
weeks by Ages, and take a little deferring for everlasting. Why is his Charets,
says Siferah's mother, so long in coming?

3. Because they reciprocate Interests, therefore is every Congregation to be
left at liberty? Yea, at liberty in Spiritualls? and not as they will, but as
the Gospel persuades the will. Yea, and because they reciprocate Interests,
therefore to be left at liberty, say you. Rather, because they reciprocate
Interests, to be cautious how they mingle and incorporate Interests too soon.
And if any just liberty may arise to the people of God from such Statepauses,
why not such a liberty? Should the Churches be ever persecuted, and have no
rest? It was not so under the first Persecution, Then had the Churches rest.

Because, say you disturbances are communicated, therefore settle the
Ecclesiastical, that the civil may enjoy peace.

But can you secure the Civil from the Ecclesiastical in peace? ought you to
have a State-being, or a Church-being first? Is this good reasoning? Because
disturbances are communicated, therefore order it so that the Civil may be
within the Line of communication, or of Ecclesiastical disturbances, by
clasping and incorporating them together. So as it follows better thus: Because
they reciprocate Interests, therefore take heed how you establish, because the
State cannot but establish a way something of its own, in the Ecclesiastical.

To that of Henry the fourth's humanity which you press, because the
Protestants helped him by arms; I answer:

Let but the same humanity be copied out by the State here, and press for it
here as you do there, and we are agreed. Surely you have the same and greater
engagements. Your Brethren whom you call Schismeticks and Heretics, have not
been sparing of Arms and Blood in the high places of the field, and in a Cause
more glorious, with success more admirable, with courage as gallant: And sure
they have been found as trusty friends to this State, as the Protestants to the
State of France.

You say, That State is rather free in indulgence, as the Bloody Tenet, then
free from commotions, etc.

For the freedom contended for by The bloody Tenet, when I undertake to prove
his freedom at large, then put us together; till when, deal fairly. I could as
easily draw something of yours under the Line of Prelacie; but I would not
force any man's notions, much less yours.

You see of what stamp the Liberty is I contend for. And for Commotions, let
the world judge if all the broils and combustions kindled not from the Coals
on the Alia, and from the flame of an Ecclesiastical. Interest, such as you
contend for.

For that of the Tares and Wheat, etc. where you charge us with mixture
tolerated, or rather with plucking up Wheat from the Tares etc. in
Churchgathering: I answer:

We tolerate no mixture, but in the world where Christ himself tollerates, as
in the same Pa^able; not in the Church.

And for our plucking, it is not plucking, but gathering and calling out: Your
words are of more violence then the Word will bear; that is, more properly
plucking, which is a destructive pulling out a bloody Separation, a plucking of
Persecution; such a plucking as some contend for, and would requite our
gathering with plucking, and take us all not for a mixture of Tares and Wheat,
but all for Tares.

You say we gather out the Wheat; it is well you observe that we have Wheat
amongst us, which some of your Brethren will searce allow us; and you very
hardly.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 29, 30* 31.
His other politic consideration is this. Our Parties, or dissenting Brethren
now together, and clasped by Interest, etc. I answer:

1. No clasping in the Camp must loose us to division in the City.

2. Mr. Saltmarsh in his Politic advises to repress factions, etc.

3. The delay has occasioned a multiplication of Heresies and Schisms.

4. Many disposed to division, heighten their spirits to contumacie and
contempt.

To that other of his, it is possible while time is given, opinions may be
sooner at peace; I answer:

1. Possibility is no pleae against probability, nay, clear experience, that
by the Brethrens amiable carriage, they have driven on their design with a
politic activitie, and gained more by their adversaries slownesse, than the
goodness of their cause.

To that of his Fire let alone under wood, and so to dye out, etc. I answer:

1. Will fire under dry wood quench it self, or the settling of a Government
be as the Bellows?

2. The contrary is plain by examples of Anabaptists and other Sectaries in
Germany, whom Luther at first mediated for with Frederick Duke of Saxony; but
after he was glad to stir up the Princes and people of Germany for
extinguishing a common combustion.

To that of his, etc. The contentions of Brethren are like the Bars of a
Caestle, Prove. 18. 19. I answer:

1. This is his seal to his politic Aphorisa^: But will the bars of a Caestle
be taken by letting alone? We have not found it so in our wars, etc.

Reply.
To your first, That we must not claspe in the Camp, and divide in the city.

You say well; we are to agree, or clasp both in Camp and City, and to divide
in neither.

To your second, Mr. Saltmarsh in his Politikes, I told you before, I dare not
allow my self the privilege of an Aphorism of light then, when it was rather
night than day with me as I told you. You know Paul's regenerate part or law of
his mind, quarrelled with the law of his Members; so does mine; so Luther,
Augustine, etc.

To that of delaying occasioning Heresies, Whether may not your settling things
thus, be as great an Heresy as you complain against? Be sparing. You may call
these Truths, which you now call Heresies; Paul preached that Doctrine after,
which before he destroyed.

To that of many heightning their spirits into contempt.

Do not aggravate against your Brethren; remember your own professed ingenuity,
in these words, I would not excite Authority to needless severitie.

To that of the Brethrens politic advantage on your slow pace, and amicable
carriage, as you say.

Give not over your amicablenesse for that, their policy is no warrant against
your duty; and if they be politic, blame them in print: For my part, I hate
to see in any too much of man in the business of God; but if some of the
Brethren be politic, what is that to the rest, who wait for the Spirit in the
simplicity of their own?

But it may be you mistake the advantages, and put their increasing upon
Brethrens policy, which is the power of the Gospel. You know in Christ's time
many believed on him, and the people went after him; and yet not policy, but
his power gathered them.

To that of your fire and dry wood, and that your settling a Government would
be no bellows.

Who are the dry wood you mean? and what fire? and what by the bellows? I fit
be this, that the settling a Government will quench our contentions; yea, and it
may quench more then it ought, even something of the Spirit may be quenched by
it: Persecution may put out many a Candle of the Lords lighting, and many a
coal kindled from his Altar: But take heed there be not more fire in the
bellows then in the wood.

To that of the Anabaptists and Sectaries, quenched by Luthers mediation:

I dare not believe your Historian, nor take all against them from the Pen of
an enemy. He that takes the Parliaments battles from an Oxford Pen shall read
nothing but Rebellion, rather than Religion, And me thinks I observe much here
in your observation to the contrary: We may rather think that Germany is a
field of blood to this day for shedding the blood of so many consciences for
some points of difference. And for Luthers mediation against them; Look well,
and tell me how much the Lutheran there have advanced in the Reformation: Have
they not rather stood like Joshua's Sun, where he left them? Let England take
warning by Germany.

To that of the Brethrens contentions, which are like bars of a Castle; and
must not then be let alone (you say) as in our Wars:

Yea go on, take these offended Brethren, these Castles, in your military way;
but then, let your Warfare be spiritual, your weapons not carnal put on the
armor of light, etc. and take them by a Gospel-siege, and we are satisfied.

But it you take them with the power of the Magistrate, with swords and staves,
as they took Christ; if you come in this Gospel-Controversie to to take them as
the Parliament takes in their Towns and Cities, by force of Arms and compulsive
Artillery, as your instance seems to imply; take heed lest you shed more
spiritual blood to that under the Altar, that never ceases to cry, How long,
Lord, how long?

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 32.
To that he says, We have not yet any experience of our new Clergy Answ.

How can there be experience of them, if there be no government to try them
withal?

Reply.
So as you will have an hazard run both in State and Church for a new
experiment upon the Ministers: but sure your Statists will tell you, it is not
safe trying experiments with State; they are too vast bodies for that. What
think you of that Physician that will cast his Patent into a disease, to try a
cure on him? You know the old moral adagie, Turpius ejicitur quam non
admittitur hospes: One is sooner kept out, then cast out.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 32.
To that, It is not safe trusting a power too far into those hands. Answer.

He need not much fear, the government will be so qualified, so disposed for
the persons that manage it, etc.

Reply.
These are fair promises. It is pity that government should ever be set up,
that cannot tell before hand how well it will carry it self. Oh I says
Absolon, If I were a King, it should not be thus.

But, what is a qualified Government that is not Christ's? I can never hope to
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles. Sure it can never be well for
for the Trees of the Forest when the Bramble will reign.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 33.
There are many of note who affirm the best way to suppress the multiplicity
of Sects is to let them have scope, and they will run themselves out of breath;
but I cannot give my Vote, false teachers are not to be tolerated, no, not for
an hour, Gal. 2. 5.

Reply.
I would there were more such of that mind; I am sure it is safest and
soundest. It is safest, there is no such danger in that of crucifying Christ in
ignorance of fighting against God. And soundest, for so they die out most
naturally by their own unsoundnesse, without noise and commotion. Sometimes
the cure makes the greater disease, when the cure is not natural but violent.
For that of Paul's withstanding Peter to the face, I allow you all such
Gospel-wayes of contention, so you only withstand them to the face, and do not
as the High Priest did command them to be smitten on the face. Oppose with
words as Paul did, but not with swords, taking and turning the Edge of
Authority against us.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 33.
We experience, says be. But where roads this Writer this phrase?

Reply.
You criticize on words; I cannot take time to do so; I wonder you (an
Assembly-man) have leisure for that; this is logomac ice, or word-fighting: and
why not We experience? You know our times have found out such ways of elegancy
in the English, though I thought not any such thing when I wrote. But why do I
triffle too? To your matter.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 33.
But it appears by his, etc. Whether it be safe to commit the power, etc.
That to commit any power, or establish any government, especially the
Presbyteriall, is too soon or suddenly done, if done at all.

Reply.
Yea, and it is not too suddenly if done at all, and not done as it ought, or
in Christ's way: I am for any thing of Christ's, when, and where, and how soon
you will.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 34.
We may say as he; Some may be like the ten, yet others like the two Brethren.
For two ambitious Presbyterians, there may be ten more modest.

Reply.
But how come you by such plenty of the better sort? It is not thought by most
of your way; I am sure some of your way were taking care how to furnish their
Presbytery. their 10000 Parishes. And this I know, that if there were such
plenty, Why do you make shift with so many of the Episcopal stamp, who keep
their Parishes, and resolve while they live, to try out all turns of
government, rather then turn off a tithe of two hundred per annum? But I
believe the English Presbytery and Prelacy are well agreed in that.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 34.
Besides, the Presbyteriall government is framed directly according to the
Resolution of our Savior.

Reply.
Not so directly neither: It is rather directly according to the prudentiall
design of your Assembly, as you say: so as all yet is but So you say, and we
say the contrary; there is You say, and We say, Authority not Scripture and
evidence, carries it on your side; And let the Reader judge bet wixt us. Indeed
you are able to prove by the Magistrate, that your Presbytery is some of it
Christ's way: That is an Argument of power, not of Scripture.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 34, 35, 36.
To that he says, The Controversy is hottest about government, etc. It may be
so without fault in those that are for it, but not without crime in those that
oppose it.

To that of his, Is it good parting with the stakes?

The Question presupposes evennesse betwixt parties, whereas the difference is
betwixt government and no government. The high Court of Parliament, and all the
Orthodox Churches, etc. on the one side, and a small inconsiderable party on
the other.

Nor is it so much injury to resolve for government against them, as the
Bishops, who had possession of Prelacy by a prescription legally etc.

To that of his, It is to be feared there is too much of man:

It is likewise to be in those who despise government etc.

And if the Bias run most to this truth of government (as he says) it is but
as it should be.

The Bishops government being put down, it is necessary some other should be
set up, and before all, the Presbyteriall.

And if (as he says) some other truths are wholly set by, it may be the fault
of those who set themselves too much against government, I am sure not in such
as are for the Presbytery.

And for his caution as he concludes with, I wish he had had more caution in
his mind, and his paper; he had had few faults, and a shorter refutation would
have served.

Reply.
You say, The Controversy may be hottest, yet no fault in those that are for
it, but against it.

But, is all the heat in those that oppose it? Nay sure: Witness the
importunity, the petitioning of your party, etc. we silent all the time.

You say, The difference is not so equal, but betwixt government and no
government; Parliament and all Orthodox Divines against an inconsiderable party.

Indeed it is unequal: It is betwixt a government of man of Prudence, as you
confess, and a Scripture government; betwixt an huge National Government, and
Christ's little flock, or Church. Nor is it a Controversy with the High Court
of Parliament; we contend not with them, but humbly petition and represent the
truth unto them: but this is the old way to wind in under the wing of
Authority, and to engage them. But they are wise to discern, and not to be
engaged as their Predecessors were by the Churchmen as they called them; there
are too many sad stories.

But what of our inconsiderable party? We had rather be a few with truth, then
a multitude against it. And how inconsiderable soever we are in number, the
stone cut out without hands may fill the earth: the Kingdom of Christ, and the
worlds, are not so one as you would make them* Unus homo totius orbis impetum
fustinuit; It was said of Euther; He was but one against a world. Your
non-conformists were but inconsiderable to the Kingdom of Prelacy almost. A
pebble in the band of David may do more then a mighty spear in the hand of
Goliath.

You say, The Bishops had a better prescription even by Law for their
government then we.

But how is this? Is a legal prescription better hold then a Gospel
prescription? Is it more privilege to be founded upon a Statute, or Act of
Parliament then Scripture?

You say, If too much of man be in this Controversy, it is in those that
oppose and despise Government.

But what is that to our Controversy? We are not of those that speak evil of
d^g^i^ies, or desp^se government, unless you count your Presbytery to be that
government and dignity spoken on by the Spirit; and that remains to be
proved: That which cannot be proved to be a Scripture-government, cannot
challenge a Scripture-law to defend or secure it.

You say, If the Byas run most toward government, it is but as it should be:
Yea, if toward a Scripture-government; else it is as it should not be* and not
as it should be.

You say, The Bishops government's put down, some must be set up; and that is
Presbytery.

But there is one set up already, a civil Parliament arie government; and will
you set up another above that? or cordinate with that? Will you set up one
government to rule another? or tutour another? And must you needs set up as
large a Dominion as the eiv^ll Power has? Must our Presbytery be full as
ample, as high, and supreme, as our Parliament? Will no less territory or
Kingdom serve it but all England? Whole Nations? Must Christ's government be
just as broad and long as the worlds? You find not the golden Read for the
Temple of that length. Now Reader, judge, which government affects Dominion?
Which brings in whole Nations under the Scepter of it? Poor
Scripture-government can be content to sit down in a Village; To the Church in
thy house, says the Spirit; In a City as Corinth, and over but a few there,
the Saints only in fellowship; to the Church in Corinth: In a Country not over
a Country: so the seven Churches in Asia, not to the Church of Asia, or the
Church Asia, a Church taking in half part of the world. Sure if Christ would
have had such a National compreliensive Church, he could have converted King*
and Princes first, and they should have given up their Scepter^ and Kingdoms to
Jesus Christ, in the way of a Presbyterian: Nay* it ought to have been so;
Jesus Christ was bound in the way of righteousness, to have be un the practice
and modell^ to us over whole Kingdoms, having not left it in precept in the
whole Gospel; and we ought either to have had practice or precept to order and
command us in what we obey.

You say* If other Truths be set by, it is by those that so oppose Government,
and not by the Presbyteriall.

I see the Presbytery must be in no fault: Happy men! that have nothing but
Truth on their side.

You wish I had more caution in my mind and paper, and ^ shorter Refutation had
served.

Cautions are not amiss both for you and me; and I think you had need of more
caution of the two, by how much more vast and national the Government is, you
manage. You that put yokes upon whole Nations in a day, had need to have the
cautions of a years provision laid in before hand.

And for your Refutation of my paper; do not bear witness of your^selfe; let
Truth judge bet wixt us, and let the Reader pray for a spirit of discerning to
judge both what is Truth and which is Truth; that which you, or I, affirm. Nor
will I say I have made here a Refutation of yours. If I have done well, What
have I that I have not received? And if I have not, the Lord enlighten and
enable me to refute my self.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 36, 37, 38.
To that of his, that the matteriall Temple was more clearly left and known
then the Gospel pattern, etc. Answer:

1. He would not be thought to side with Sanballat and Tobijah, and so
endeavors to show some considerable difference.

2. If it be^to^ soon now for the Government, will he set a time for it when it
will be seasonable? or will he have it stay till it be a matter all building,
or till we have inspired Prophets?

3. It cannot be of too quick dispatch, if we set it up by the dictates of the
Holy Ghost in the New Testament; nor the determination sudden, if after
consideration with Scriptures, with the best Divines, and collation of the
exactest paterns, after long debates in the Assembly of Divines, where the
dissenting and liberty to object; and lastly received by Parliament.

4. By the builders, special regard has been had to Jesus Christ for
Foundation etc. And now by Master Saltmarsh his consent the work may go on, etc.

Reply.
You say, I would not seem to side with Sanballat and Tobljah.

You say true, I would not. But every building is not Temple-work. And though I
would not with knowledge hinder the Temple of the living God, yet if another
kind of frame were in building, I would do my best to hinder and be no
Sanballat neither. But they are Sanballats, not whom man, but whom the Lord
counts so. But surely they hinder more, that set up another kind of Temple then
Christ's, then he that advises to look well that all be right and Temple-worke
that is set up.

To the difference I made of the material and Gospell-paterns, you say
nothing; and that is the only considerable. It may be as you said by me, you
are best able to deal with the other.

You say, I should set a time then for the setting it up.

Yea, I shall set you a time, yet not in mine own authority but Christ's: When
your Pattern is all Gospel, and your people all qualified in that
Gospellpatern, then is my time for setting up, and then is Christ's time too.

Nor would I stay you for a material building, as you say. You know I call you
on to the Gospel* I am very far from turning you back to the Law; I call you
on to Christ; I would not turn you back to Solomon.

And for the inspired Prophets you tell me I stay for, and would have you stay
too:

Is not that a very Gospell-way to stay for the Spirit's coming into the
servants of the Lord? Take heed of denying inspired Disciples. You know it is
part of the f^l^illing of the great Prophecy, Acts 2. Indeed some of the
Prelates, many of them being uninspired themselves, and having little of the
Spirit, or none, would needs say therefore, All inspirations and Spiritual
enlightnings, etc. were ended in the Church, because ended in them: and because
they were so carnal themselves, they thought none was Spiritual. And you
remember how they made Laws even against the Spirit in Prayer.

I speak thus, only to remember you who spoke most against inspiration and the
Spirit, lest you may let fall some words which may be taken up by some of that
way, to countenance them in their Invectives. Not but that I esteem of you as
one inspired your self in a measure, and having the Spirit of God in you;
therefore I know the Spirit will be very tender in opposing the Spirit.

You say, you ought to dispatch the Government, because you have followed the
dictates of the Holy Ghost, of the Assembly, and Parliament.

Then let me put one Question; Why is it not called Christ's Government? Why
has it not a Jus divinum, a Divine Right put upon it, if all be of the Holy
Ghost in it? But I would not mistake you; you say only that all is by the
dictate of the Holy Ghost, of the Assembly and Parliament. So it is but part
then, by your own confession, of the Holy Ghost; the rest is of the Assembly
and Parliament.

You say, The builders have had special regard to Jesus Christ the Foundation.

I will not suspect the Counsels and Debates of any of the builders. I know the
Disciples of Christ were true Disciples, though they had not all of the Spirit
at one time which they had at another; I hope and I pray, that the Lord will
make up to the builders what of the Spirit he has not given them* that they
may both see to build right, and see where they have builded wrong; and so pull
down again, as well as set up.

And whereas you say, The building may go on* by Master Saltmarsh his own
consent:

I say, your building will go on it seems, whether Master Saltmarsh consent or
no. Master Ley, in his capacity, is better able to put it on at this time then
Master Saltmarsh is to put it off to another time, unless the Lord who is
above all, and has the mighty, even the Princes of the earth to command, work
for his own glory above all that we can or think.

Master Ley's Resolution, page 38, 39, 40.
To the second Objection and Answer of Heresies and Schisms, and so they might
have done from John's first Sermon, he says,

1. Why does he begin with John's first Sermon.* Were not the Esseans, etc.
Heretics and Schisma icks? See Epiphanius, etc.

2. He makes Paul's Epistles the terminus ad quem which from John's first Sermon
to the last, make up Twenty nine years. After the Epistles, he brings in the
sending the Spirit, etc. which was but five years after the first Sermon of
John Baptist.

3. Before the end of the Epistles, that Government was not which we find in
Scripture; and if so, the Church Government was not long suspended.

4. Nor would it prejudice our expedition: People of that Age could not be so
easily gathered as with us they may be.

5. What was long in establishing in Primitive times, cannot be said to be
hastily done now, after so many discussions and deliberate resolutions.

Reply.
You say first, Why begin I for Heretics and Schismatics from John's first
Sermon?

I begin there, because there began the mystery of the Gospel. And yet I show
you that no Government began with that Gospel manifestation* by which I made
appear, that if Government had been of such moral necessity, why was it not
given out with the Gospels first giving out.

Now you prove in a chronologicall discourse the space of time from John's
Sermon to Paul's Epistle, to make the time appear for Government. And, after
you have summed up all the time and periods, and find it no two or three years
work, you conclude People of that age could not be so easily gathered as now:
Nor the long establishing then to be an hasty establishing now.

And now, after all this discourse and ravellings out of time from John's
Sermon, etc. What have you gained? Not that the Government was soon settled.
Then you have proved (much to my advantage, and in a clearer and fuller
computation then I did) the contrary. So as you have only been taking some
learned pains, if you well observe, and the Reader well observe you, to prove
that the Government at first was not suddenly cast into model, nor brought
forth in practice, which is the very thing I aimed at; and truly your pains in
it have been more exact then mine; and I thank you for it.

But you say, It ought not to be so now; nor can it be said to be hastily done
now, that was done so long ago.

You say true in that: But you know the same Spirit must reveal it that formed
it; and it formed it at first by degrees: and the way of Revelation has been
more year's then the first farming; reckon but your Antichristian years as
exactly as you have done your first Christian and Primitive years, and you may
be more satisfied* So as all, both the first Revelation of it from Prophesies,
and the latter from Antichristianism, makes all for the not hastening, which I
aimed at.

Indeed, if you can as infallibly assure us this form and model is the very
form then given out, it were very true that you say, That it cannot be said to
be hastily done now, what was done so long ago: viz. If it be that very one
which was done so long ago.

For your exception against me concerning my placing the giving of the Spirit
so late, if you interpret sense by the strict order of words, you will lose
many a Scripture truth in the words, as you well know.

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 40, and 41.
To that of Heresies, etc. he says;

What if they do not ster up their Patrons against the State, etc. but they
busily poison the souls of the people; and shall they (if as Paul Best) be
suffered to blaspheme and reproach, and perturb the public Peace? An
Indulgence much like old Elies, etc.

If Truth be not more precious then Peace, why does our Savior say, He came
not to send pe^ce? And why do the Fathers contend so against the Arrians about
a letter? And why we so with the Romish Religion rather then be at peace with
them?

For that of moral transgressions, he would have the Magistrates set on.

Set on? By whom? We have not such mean thoughts of the Magistrate as to make
mention of him in such terms of disparagement.

And for all his Disciplines regulating men for religious walking, there will
be work enough for the Magistrate to bring them under civil trial for
c^ntuma^ie, etc.

Reply.
You say, What? If here^ies stir not up, they poison souls.

If they poison, let the Gospel-antidote be applied then and no other way which
the Gospel will not bear no^ allow; there is the sword of the Spirit, and
weapons not carnal, but mighty and spiritual.

For that of old Elies indulgences which you speak on you are still looking
upon Moses, though you tell us of Christ. Make the Kingdom of Israel and of
England the same; a Jewish and Christian State the same; and then we shall
allow you both Elies sin, and his sons maintenance by tithes and offerings.

You say, Truth is more precious then peace; yet there is a peace precious as
well as Truth, even the Peace of Christ, as well as the Truth of Christ.

But to the business; You would prove Truth to be precious, to the
disadvantage of Peace; and therefore you bring in the Fathers against the
Arrians, and us against the Papists, and Christ against Peace: But what would
you prove? Would you prove that truth ought to be established against peace,
and peace to be no way to truth? Surely truth and peace do meet together; nay,
they are so much one, as there is even a truth in peace. He that was Truth it
self could say, My Peace I leave with you.

But, What of the contention spoken on of the Fathers and ^^, etc. If there be
any quarrelling for Truth either by the Fathers or us; but in a Gospel-way, we
are not excusable* neither does Christ speak of truths drawing swords, but of
swords drawn against truth; which is no Argument for you. When Peter would draw
a sword in the defense of truth, Christ bid him put it up. So far is he against
your way of defending truth.

You say, By whom should Magistrates be set on, and that you cannot speak in
such disparaging words?

By whom be set on? By the legislative power, by the Parliament* The Parliament
can set on their respective Committees, Justices* etc. and is this any
disparagement? I speak of subordinate Magistrates, not of the supreme.

You say, There will be work for the Magistrate enough, to punish the
contumacious* etc.

That is in English, the Presbytery will keep the Magistracy doing: and now who
disparages the Magistrate? Who set them on work? Who makes them their
Deputy-punishers? Nay, Who is the Satan to whom the excommunicate are
delivered? It is an expression not much besides your principles: and who
disparages the Magistrate in that?

Master Ley's Resolution, Page 41, and 42.
To that of Truth, being otherwise armed from Heaven; I answer:

We think it not meet to divide the subservient means from the supreme power,
nor the exercise of Discipline from his assistance who can make it effectual,
the sword of God and Gideon.

To that of the imputation of jealousy, etc.

There is a godly jealousy, which would set up as many securities as may be
against Heresy and impiety.

The faulty jealousy is theirs that would stiffle the Government: but there is
a fear which we profess of Gods anger for connivance and communion with
heretical men, etc. There is in some an averseness to Heresy in a trne zeal
and love of God.

There be many other causes of jealousy, but I will take but that one of the
Lords and Commons, p. 43.

If Master Saltmarsh ^ad well considered who were engaged, etc. he would not
have undervalued their piety and prudence, to compare them with Papists and
Prelates.

I will conclude with a piece of his own politic advice, etc. Upon such
principles is Church Government ordained; for his Text out of the Revelation,
Rev. 18. 1. As he began, so he ends with mis-application of Scripture.

Reply.
You say you cannot divide Discipline from his assistance, who can make it
effectual.

That is, from the Magistrates. This is a sign without further Argument, that
you do not hold your government for Christ's, because it cannot be effectual of
it self, without help from below, and the world, and to another power then its
own; nor is the sword of God, and Gideon any fair and just proof for joining
Presbytery and Magistracy; it joins only God and the Magistrates.

You say, Your godly jealousy will set up as many securities as may be.

But then they are warrantable and Gospel-wayes of security. That is no godly
jealousy which sets up other ways; as Herod killing all the children to
secure his Kingdom; David dissembling to escape; Jacob to get a blessing:
there is jealousy, but no godly jealousy nor warrantable security: So to
secure any way, though of truth, by a power not allowed on in the Gospel, as
no such compulsive power is in your way, is not to be jealous with a godly
jealousy; though I deny not but some of those may be godly who are so jealous,
but not in that.

You say, that some fear* Gods anger for their communion with Heretics, etc.

You know all such fear is only warrantable in the Church not in the world: It
is not so with the Nations now as with the Jews. Now if we have not communion
with them in the Nation, we must go out of the world. But, What communion is
this you mean that will bring Gods anger? You have your liberty to withdraw,
to separate as they from you: If it be national or civil communion, then you
pluck up the tares before the time of harvest.

But whom you esteem Heretics, they it may be think they have as good
Scriptures to esteem you so; and this is Heretic for Heretics, interpretation
against interpretation. And since there is only a sufficiency, but no
infallibility now as before; since there is no Apostles for interpretation as
at first, for Revelation, why do we thus cry out, Heretics, Heretics; the
Sword, the Sword? Let me put one Question here.

Suppose those you call Heretics were of equal number to you, and both of you
equally numbered with Magistrates, and both of you equally principled for
persecution and both equally calling out for the Magistrates Sword; What
clashing of swords would there be! What edge against edge! What authority
against authority! What power against power! What bloody doings! What sad
workings! What confusion would there be! This is an Image of your Incorporation
of your two powers that you so plead for in this kind. If we were equally
principled and armed for persecution as you are, and acted by your spirit; Ah,
what a Kingdom would here be!

You say, Some have averseness to Heresy in a true zeal to God.

These are but general notions of Heresy. Every thing is not Heresy that is
called so. And for true zeal to God in that averseness all this is granted, if
that be Heresy indeed. But how if it be such a zeal as Paul says the ^ewes
had, a zeal, but not according to knowledge? how if it be such a zeal to God as
crucified the Son of God? and such a zeal there has been, we know. The Jews
did much in zeal to Truth, even against Truth.

But you close up with that of the Lords and Commons in an Ordinance, etc.

I am afraid these are such proofs as you intend most in your Presbytery, to
make your supplement to Scripture from Authority, and so to make us believe
what you cannot persuade us to believe, and to make it out by an Ordinance what
you want by Scripture.

But I hope that honorable Senate will rather let you argue from the Scripture
against us then from their Authority.

But I have not to do here with answering Ordinances of Parliament.

I contend not, but submit to them in every Ordinance for the Lords sake; nor
does my Argument lie against any thing of theirs, but yours. I dare not
undervalue them to count them as Parties, but Judges in out difference. I
appeal to the Parliament, as to Caesar: nor in it a fair proof of Truth, to
draw the Magistrates Sword out of the Scabbard.

You say, You wonder, considering who was engaged, I would so undervalue them
to compare them with Papists and Prelates.

I did consider who was engaged, a Parliament, etc. and had I not highly valued
them, I had not ventured so far in my Quaere. I considered the sad and farall
troubles which attended the Magistrates engagements with the Ministers; the
blood which has been powered out by National compulsion of tender consc^e^ces;
and like a spiritual Watchman, I could not but blow my Trumpet, and give
warning. And for my comparison or Papists and Prelates, I appeal to the world
if there be any reproach; whether it be not in the Interpreter, rather then in
the Author. But I know no such thing by my Paper: And if it be lawful to draw
in consequent conclusions* and then father them, I could prove you to speak
Treason, Blasphemy, Idolatry, Atheism, Heresy, nay, Independencie, which some
of your Way think worse* A^abaptisme, Separation, which would seem to be as
hateful to you: But I judge you not in any such sort; nor had I spoken so far
now, but in a just Vindication.

You say, You will conclude with my Politics; and upon such Principles as
mine, Church Government is ordained.

I have told you my Politics were written by my dimmer light. And if your
Government be built upon no better Principles then mine, I cannot but be out of
conceit with that Government, being so far out of conceit with mine own
Principles; and it makes me think the worse of it, because my former Principles
fit it so well. Those Principles you speak on are partly of C^vill power and
the Sword; and the Dominion or Scepter in the Gospel, is more Spiritual.

You say of my Text in the Revelation, Revel. 18* 1. that as I began, so I end,
with misapplication of Scripture.

Misapplication is a word sooner writ then proved; and my reasons were rather
crowded then ordered in my Paper.

The Scripture was this: For the Angel that came down from Heaven has great
power, and the earth is lightened with his glory.

Which Scripture there applied, does hint to any that will not rather cavil
then interpret, that my only reason for delay of Government was in this: An
Angel was yet to come with power and glory; or, the Gospel would fill the
earth with more light; ^o as we should not shut up our selves too soon in the
dark.

And now Reader, judge whether it be my mis-application, or his
misinterpretation.

Spiritual Principles drawn forth.
Gospell-Truth is one and the same.
THat which is only in some parts of it warrantable by the Word, is not purely,
nor in a Scripture-way warrantable: For there is not any Willworship, but it
has something from the Pattern of the true. The Samaritanworship was coppied
after the Jewish; and the Jewish, when Christ came, had Priests, and Temple,
and Sacrifices, and was copied by the Law: But then there was Traditions and
Commandments of men. That is pure Gentilism, which has no Image of Gospel
nor l^gall Truth. Antichrist sits in the very Temple of God, though rather upon
it. False Christ's call themselves Christ's as well as the true. The great Image
had a head of Gold, though feet of Iron and Clay. Every Heresy has a
Scripture Word in it. But Truth must be all one and the same and Homogeneall;
not in parts so, but all so. There is but one Lord, one Faith, etc.

Prudence and Consequences, are the great Engines of Will Worship.
THings of Prudence merely, are not to be admitted into the Spirituallway and
Gospell-designe. Prelacy had its Prudence for every new additionall in Worship
and Government. And once let Prudence open a door, and then will more of man
crowd in, then the (...) of God can keep out. Nor is that to be admitted, which
is so received a Maxim, Though not directly, yet not repugnant to the Word.
Christ's rule is not such* he opposes any Tradition to the Commandments of God.
Not direct from Scripture* is indirect and repugnant, though not to the very
letter of such words, yet to the form and Analogy of truth to the general
Scripture-Law, viz. the will of God, that nothing shall be added or diminished;
and ye are only my friends, says Christ, if ye do what I command you; and the
Lord will raise you up a Prophet, him shall ye hear. For if any thing of
Prudence is to be let in, then something of Tradition; for Prudence can make
nothing higher, no^ purer, nor better; m^n can but give his own Image to the
things ^e makes himself: though he make them up of divine materials from
Scriptures* yet the form none but the Lord himself can give; and the form is
that which stamps Christ's Image upon every Truth. Every thing in the Word has
a form; that is, it is ^uch a thing of truth, and not another. Nothing but Gods
power and will can make a thing Truth: his power creates it, and his will
creates it such a Truth. Nothing is agreeable to the Will of Christ* but the
very Will of Christ. The Will of Christ is the only Legislative power in the
Gospel. Nothing is agreeable to his Will but what he wills; and every thing is
repugnant to his will but what he wills: so as this will is the supreme general
law, and indeed the very form or essence of Scripture and the Word of God. And
whatsoever is devised by Prudence, though upon Scripture-materials, yet being
not the work of this will, nor having the Stamp or Image upon it, is none of
Christ's, but as repugnant as any other Tradition or invention of men.

And here let us look to that new, though old design against Truth, the most
subtle, undiscernable, and divinest kind of Will Worship in the world, that
which some call Scripture-consequence, an unwholesome word as it has been used:
for under color of consequence what Conclusions may be promoted! What may not
Reason draw from Scripture, and what may it not fashion like a Truth? But
consider, in Parliament Laws, or Ordinances, or Commissions, is it lawful to
take them and from every part of them to draw out results of our own? and when
there is but one Law, make many subordinate Laws of our own; and frame Laws out
of Laws, and Ordinances out of Ordinances, and Commissions out of Commissions?
No sure: But we must keep to that one, general, entire, litterall Law and Will
of the Parliament. Is it thus in Laws humane, and not much more in Ordinances
divine? Yea, there is the same oneness, entirenesse, indivisibility, and
essentiality of the Truth.

Nor do I here disapprove any Scripture-consequence, if merely consequent and
not formed up into a Law by mere reason; for then m^n makes Laws from the Laws
of God; and this is not the least engine that Antichrist has wrought with.

The people are Brethren and Saints in Christ's Church; but in Antichrists,
Parishioners and Servants.
What kind of Government is marked out in Scriptures for sitting on the
waters, or people? Christ governs by the people ministerially, not over the
people authoritatively only; and the people being once in his Church Way, lose
their old capacity for a new, and are raised up from people to Brethren, to
Churches. It is a saying of Master Goodwyns, and Master Nigh, not so pleasant as
true. The Clergy had at first the golden ball of government amongst
themselves* and it is not much mended any where, but in that Church where the
people have their Interests as well as others; they are the Clergy properly, a
notion which the Ministers got only to themselves till of late: The interest of
the people in Christ's Kingdom is not only an interest of complyancy* and
obedience, and submission; but of consultation of debating* counselling,
prophesying voting, etc. and let us stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free.

Presbytery it self is founded on Principles of separation, which yet they
condemn for Schism in other Churches; nay, is the greatest separation.
What is a Presbytery over Congregations or a Congregation, but a Church
gathered out of a Church? Nay, is not that the only Church; and the remainder
of people made but an accessory, or something of another kind* or rather the
Nation or Kingdom which is only subject to this power supreme? And though
Presbytery be but a Church-gathering, and founded on a Principle of separation,
yet do they not disapprove, and condemn separation, and semi or
halfe-seperation and Church-gathering for Schism, etc? When their own power is
a Schism respectively to the Parishes that are distinct; and whatever
distinction is formed to make them appear as part of their Congregations, yet
is it indeed so. Is not their whole power defended to be entirely, essentially,
dispensatively in the Presbytery called by themselves the Church, and by the
very authority of one whom I name with reverence to his learning and
moderation, Master Herle?

So as I wonder why there should be such envyings, raylings, accusings*
dissentings betwixt us that are believers, though of several ways, when as
each is principled, founded, administered upon the same ground and way of
Schism, separation, and Church-gathering; nay, the Presbytery has more Schism
and separation in it then the rest, by how much it is constituted from the
people and Brethren, and Acts in its ministration apart too, viz. over the
people, rather then with them.

None to be forced under Christ's Kingdom, as in the Kingdoms of the world.
IN a Spiritual Government the ignorance of people which some would have for
expedition, that they may practically know it, is no Scripture way of knowing:
in practical godliness, things must be known before practically known; and
practice is to begin from faith, and faith from knowledge; else the obedience
can be but blind, mixed, and Popish. Indeed in things civil or moral, practice
may bring in knowledge, habits may be acquired and gotten by Acts; a man may
grow temperate by practicing temperance, and civilly obedient by practicing
civil obedience; but it is not so in spirituals there, habits go before acts,
spiritual infusions before practices.

Indeed the Laws of States and Kingdoms and Civil Policy, teach men best by
ruling them practically; but it is not so in the Church, men are not to be
forced into Christ's Kingdom as into the Kingdoms of the world; the Kings of the
Nations exercise their Dominion; it shall not be so among you.

The power of a formal R^formation in a Government makes it not Christ's
Government,
A Government; though not purely Christ's, may be made up of such Scripture and
prudentiall materials as may much reform the outward man, even as a mere
prudentiall Civill-Government may do, if severely executed. The Romans by how
much they excelled other Nations in Laws, so much the more they excelled them
in a people reformed, moralized, and civilized* in many Civil States, merely
from their wholesome Policy and administration, excellent and precious flowers
spring up, many moral virtues, as prudence, temperance, obedience, meekness,
love, justice, fortitude: Yet all this makes not a Government to be Christ's;
but only that which is merely the Discipline of Christ, and Policy of Christ.
Prelacie in its Primitive time did reform; the beast like a lamb, which
compelled the Nations to Worship, and made even fire to come down from Heaven,
or was religious in the eyes of men, and did miracles; yet was no true nor
heavenly Power neither.

There are certain parts and degrees of Reformation common and communicable
with the Government of Christ and other Governments; but then, there is a form
and Image of Christ in it which no others have, and some certain spiritual
operations and workings which exceed the power of all other Governments; and
this makes the difference and puts on the essential, true, and individual
form upon it; so as in choice of Governments they are not to be chosen by some
Summer- fruit in the outward man, but by the Word and Spirit.

The visible Church or Communion, is the Image of the invisible or mystical.
THe invisible or mystical Church is made up of pure living stones; all is
spiritual and yet all not spiritual in the like kind, nor degree; Jesus
Christ the corner stone is both God and man; and some of his differ in glory as
one Star differs from another* and as it is here, in this spiritual,
invisible, glorious building* so it is in the outward, visible Communion below,
or building here, which is the Image of that above: The Temple here is acording
to the Pattern there; and as that is of true, real, essentially spiritual
living stones; so the Church here is to consist of such as visibly formally,
and outwardly appear so; and therefore called Saints, and golden Candlesticks,
and holy Natio, etc. And though all the materials in this building are to be
proportionable, and pure, to make up a representative of the Church above; yet
all is not of one square, and measure, and polishing: some are greater and some
less; some Babes and children in Christ; some smoking Flax, and bruised
Reeds: And as this Church bears the Image of the heavenly* so the mate^^^ll one
bore the Image of this: there was p^ne stones, gold, and Cedar; so as there is
room in the Church now for any small stone or the least piece of timber, if it
be but lively or squared, if Cedar or Firr^.

How Christ is a King of the Nations, and of the Church, and how an Head.
CHrist is a King to the Nations and to the Church; nor does he rule the
Nations as the Church, nor the Church as the Nations; he rules ministerially in
his Church and Monarchically in the Nations; he rules with a gold^n Scepter in
his Church with an iron Rod in the Nations: Nor does Christ rule as the Kings
of the Nations, who finding people rude, barbarous, uncivil, subdue them into
obedience and civility; but so does not Christ in his Church, that we know on;
the dispen^ation of his Word (not of the Government) first ^ubdues.

And it is true* Christ is an Head, but not an Head to every body; he will have
a body proportionable to his Head both here and hereafter, in earth as well as
in heaven; he is a pure, holy, glorious Head in his Gospel Dispensation, and
will have a body suitable pure.

Not only is the visible body of Christ thus pure, but every truth of Christ
bears the Image of Christ; every truth of his has something of himself in it
who is Truth it self; I am the Truth says Christ; every beam of light is
light; every truth is a sparkle of truth it self. Thus we may judge of truth by
what of Christ we see in it. They who break a Crystal, may see their face in
every pe^^e and parcel: so in every thing of Christ there is an Image of
Christ, either of his purity, or holiness, or love, or humility* or meekness*
etc.

The Presbyteriall Government, and the Worlds, of the same equal Dominion.
What kind of Church Government is that, which will set up it self with the
Civil and State-government, even coordinate with it, if not to the ruling and
tutoring of it? which has as large a Dominion as the other? which is as full,
as ample, as high, and as supreme? which no less territory then a Kingdom
will serve, then a whole Nation? Mu^^ Christ's Government be just as large as
the worlds, which Government affects Dominion? which brings in whole Nations
under the Scepter of it? This, or that little one in the Scripture, which sits
down sometimes in a house, to the Church in thy house; sometimes in a City as
Corinth, and over a few there, to the Church in Corinth, in a Country, not
over a Country; to the seven Churches in Asia, not to the Church of Asia, or
the Church Asia, a Church a fourth part of the world. Sure if this National
and comprehensive Church were the pattern we should walk by, Why did not Christ
begin first at Kings and Princes, and so bring Nations and Kingdoms, and make
Churches of them? But we see no such thing, he begins lower, at the base and
weak, and foolish, and few; and raises up his Kingdom from the bottom of the
world, and not from the top or pinnacle of Princes, Kingdoms, and Nations.

The National, and Congregationall Church Covenant, both lawful, or both
unlawful.
HOw can a Church Covenant be unlawful, if the Nationall-covenant be
warrantable? and why do any plead against that, who are for this? A Covenant
is condemned in the Congregationall Church, and yet commended in the National.
Now, How can a Church Covenant be both true and false? Is a great
Church Covenant lawful, and a little one unlawful? a National
Church Covenant warrantable* and a Congregationall unwarrantable? But Covenant^
in their nature were a dispensation more of the Ol^ Testamen^* strain; a
National Church had a Covenant to gather them up into their National way of
worship, and were under the Laws of an external Pedagog^^; and now the
spiritual dispensation being come, even the Gospel of Jesus Christ, there is
a fullness of spirit let out upon the Saints and people of God, which gather
them up more closely, spiritually, and cordally, then the power of any former
dispe^sation could: the very Covenant of God himself, of which the former were
typical and Prophetical, comes in nakedly upon the spirits of his, and draws
them in, and is a law upon their inward parts, sweetly compelling in the
consciences with power, and yet not with force; with compulsion, and yet with
consent; and surely where this Covenant of God has its kindly and spiritual
operation, there would need no such external supplement as before; but because
of the hardness of our hearts, it is thus, from the beginning it was not so;
the spirit tied up thousands together then.

Let States then have any prudentiall security, any design of sound wisdom,
to consora^e people together; but let the Church only be gathered up by a Law
of a more glorious and transcendent nature, by the pure Covenant of God
himself, with the souls of his.

We receive and give out Truth by parts.
MEn are to be judged and followed according to the degrees of light they
receive; and if any have some light, that light is not to be used as an
advantage to all their other darkness, as if all their darkness might pass
under that one beam of light. The light rises upon the Prophets, as the Sun
upon the Earth; it is dawning and morning, and noon with them. Thus came the
Gospel; John preached Repentance, Jesus Christ Faith and Repentance; John came
with Water, Christ with the Spirit, and first in Parables, and after in power:
the Apostles they knew first Christ for Messiah; then, that he should suffer
and die, and rise again, and then the Kingdom of God. Luther knew first that
Indulgences were unwarrantable; and after, that Popery was Antichristianism,
and Rome was Babylon, and works could not justify; and after, conscience was
not to be compelled in spirituals. Thus we grow from Faith to Faith, to the
fullness of stature in Christ, to a perfect man in him, growing with the
increasings of God: The Kingdom of God is like a little leven, like a grain of
mustard seed. So as while we see but things in degrees, we are neither to be
too sudenly admired by others, nor our selves.

All Covenanters are bound to contribute to Religion as well as State.
Whosoever has Covenanted, is bound to assist the Public to his utmost in
every Condition, and Calling and Place, and Way accordingly, from natural
abilities to his relations, from one relation to another, even to all* to that
of Christian and Spiritual; his Prayers, Counsel, Notions, with
Countributions of all sorts* Civil, Natural, Temporal, Spiritual* He is
bound by Covenant to discover malignity in State, in Church; enemies to God as
well as man; endeavors to any thing of Popery and Prelacy, under what visage,
habit, form of Words, of Doctrine, Discipline, be it Presbytery, or whatever,
if repugnant to the Word of God, as we are persuaded in conscience who have
personally Covenanted. The breathings and speakings of the Spirit, are not to
be quenched: Every season is for the Lords service; in season and out of
season: Watchman, watchman, what of the night? The Spirit is powered upon sons
and daughters. Synods of men are not infallible: Not because more men, more of
the Spirit. The liberty of the subject is that of soul as well as body; and
that of soul more dear* precious, glorious, The liberty wherein Christ has
made us free. Be not ye then the servants of men in the things of God.

We are to try Truth, and so receive it in its Degrees.
ENquiries for Truth ought to be according to Scripture-rule; and that rule
lights us on to the trial of all things, and proving spirits, and judging
between the precious and the vile. The water that is mingled with the wien, the
Tares with the Wheat, will require sound trial, lest we make but an exchange
of one Error for another. The Apostles waited for the Spirit, the Bereans
searched the Word: we are bidden to try and prove. The Prophecies of seducers,
false Christ's, Antichrist, with lying wonders, are as real cautions given out
by the Spirit. The examples of former Ages, Luther, etc. were enlightened by
degrees. Angels, who see by vision, see but as God reveals; much less men who
take in Truths by spiritual reasoning, as well as revelation. Arise, why
tariest thou, is a Text only for him who had such a Vision as Paul to obey by;
and such a Vision as Ananias had to Preach by.

No Church Way INDEPENDENCIE.
THe Believers for the Church Way falsely called Independents, they hold on
Christ for a spiritual Head, on the Magistrate for their civil Head, on the
Body of Christ above and below in the communion of Saints here: their
Dependency is spiritual, Ministerial, communicative; not Classical,
Provincial, National: Their power is for one another, not over one another.
They cannot mingle or embody with those in a Way not of Truth. Their separation
is not from men but manners; not from believers themselves, but their practices
and corruptions. Nor go they out but they are called out: Come out of her, my
people* etc. And thus the Jews were Independent to the Nations, the Christians
to the Jews, the Reformed to the Papists, the Non-conformists to the
Prelaticall, and these to the Non-conformists.

A spirit of Love and Meekness becomes Believers.
THey that write not as enemies, are likely to prove better friends to the
Truth, because they raise not so much dust with their striving as others, to
blind one another sight. Those spirits which cast men sometimes into the fire,
sometimes into the water, are not from Christ; it were happy the Lord would
cast out those, and let a more Gospell-spirit walk amongst us; we might then
sooner attain to that of the Apostle, To walk by the same rule so far as we
have attained together, till the Lord reveal and the stronger to bear with
the weak; and to please one another to edification, rather then our selves, in
all things wherein the Lord may not be displeased in the way of his
dispensation. I know no advantages we have got, but the reviling our selves
before our enemies as well as one another. And oh! why do we tell it Gath, and
publish it in the streets of Askalon, to make the uncircumcised triumph? Was
the Lord in the wind, or in the fire, or in the still small voice, when he
spoke to the Prophet? only in the still voice. How was the Lord heard in the
time of his Indignation? Man heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the
garden in the cool of the day. Oh! could we find out the coolest times to
speak and write one to another in, and not in the heat of the day, as we do.

When a State-conscience is fully persuaded; doubtful, and so sinning.
IT is with a Public or State-conscience, as it is a personal or particular
conscience: What is done, must be done in Faith, or else there is weakness,
doubting, and sin. Now where there is not a full consent and persuasion from
the Word of faith, there cannot be faith properly, and where there is not a
Word of faith for that Conscience to be grounded upon, there cannot be a purely
and spiritually full persuasion. And one may question whether in spirituals, as
in Civils, Votes and Voices are to make Laws; for in the Gospel we find that
Divine Laws have their subsistence there, without the Vote of any: and that is
only to be a Law or Truth in the Church and Kingdom of Saints, not what is so
in the common consent or voice, but what is a Law in the very Gospell-truth of
it. If the Laws of truth were founded as the Laws of Civill-States* in a mere
Leg^slative power; then Popery has had as good assurance as any; they have had
most v^ces, most Counsels: and so Arrian^sm, when the world went after it.

Postscript. The Testimony of Salmasius, the approved German writer of the
Presbyteriall way and employed by the States of Holland to write.
THat the Baptism in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is not that
way of Baptism practiced by the Apostles.

The Baptism of Apostolical use and institution* is in the Rivers not with
invocation of the three Persons, seeing the Apostles Baptized only in the name
of the Lord Jesus Christ.

In his own Latin thus.

Baptisma in aquis perennibus Apostolici instituti and moris sed non invocatio
Trinitatis super Baptizatum, cum Apostli in solo nomine Jesus Baptizarent.

Salmasius in apparatu ad libros de primatu papae, fol. 193. Salmasius his
Testimony against the present Presbyteriall-way.

DUobus modis ha^ Independentia ecclesiarum accipi potest, si vel respectum non
habeant ad vicinas ullas ecclesias, aut si non pendeant ab authoritate aliquot
Ecclesiarum simul in unam Classem vel Synodum conjunctarum cujus conventus
partem and ipsae faciant. Prior modus similior reperitur primitivae ecclesiae
praxi, consue^udini ac usui, quo voluntaria haec (...) et communio inter
ecclesias fuit: Posterior magis convenit eum instituto quod postea juris humani
dispositione introductum est.

Hoc posteriore modo l^ber^as particularium ecclesiarium magis immmuta videtur
quam priore.

Sed quod ab initio fuerit voluntatis, postea factum est juris.

Et hoc jus sane* positivum, atque ecclesiasticum humanumque* non divinum The
begin^^ of his Post-^^^ p^ witnesses to page ^3. Exception 4.
juris est quidem divini, ut una si^ ecclesia christi, unitas autem ejus non
gregalium aut concorporal^um plurium adunata collectione consistat, sed in
fidei ac doctrine unanimi consensione.

Page 265, 266* in apparatu. In English thus:

THis Independency of Churches may be taken two ways; Either as not having
respect to any neighbor Churches, or as not depending on the authority of ^ome
Churches that are joined in some Classis or Synod, of which the Churches
themselves may make a part* The former way is found to be more like the
practice, custom, and use of the Primitive Church, whereby this voluntary
communion was among the Churches. The latter way does more agree with the
institution which afterward was introduced by a humane authority.

By this latter way the liberty of particular Churches seem to be l^sse
diminished then by the former.

But that which from the beginning was arbitrary afterward is made necessary
[as a Law.] This Law truly is positive and ecclesiastical and humane, not
divine. It Is ^y a divine Law that the Church of Christ should be one, but the
unity of it does not consist in the union [o^ collection] of many that are of
the ^ame flock or body, but in the unanimous consent agreement in faith and
doctrine.

Page 65 66. in apparatu. FINIS.
THese Groans for Liberty, out of Smectymnuus his own mouth, I approve to be
printed.

Feb. 27. 1645. JOHN BACHILER.
If any are ignorant who this Smectymnuus is,

Stephen Marshall

Edmund Calamy

Thomas Young can tell you.

Matthew Newcomen

William Spurstow

GROANS FOR LIBERTY. PSESENTED From the Presbyterian (formerly Nonconforming)
Brethren; reputed the ablest and most learned among them, in some Treatises
called Smectymnuus, to the high and Honorable Court of Parliament, in the year
1641, by reason of the Prelates Tyranny.
Now awakened and presented to themselves in the behalf of their
Nonconforming Brethren. WITH A BEAM of LIGHT, discovering a way to Peace.
ALSO, SOME QUAERES For the better understanding of Mr. Edwards last Book called
GANGRENA. With a PARALLEL between the PRELACY and PRESBYTERY.

By JOHN SALTMARSH Preacher of the Gospel.

Mat. 18. 32, 33. I forgave thee all that debt because thou desiredst me;
Should no thou also have had compassion on thy fellow servant, even as I had
pity on thee? LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black spread-Eagle at
the West end of Paul's, 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE, THE Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
COMMONS In PARLIAMENT.
Honorable,
I Here present you with some Notions of the Brethren of the Presbyterian Way,
which were presented to your HOUSE some four or five years since; wherein
they do in much strength and piety, as it seems to me, open the way and
secrets of Spiritual Tyranny, and Conscience-yoaks; there is some occasion now
of reminding the Brethren of these, because the strain of their preaching and
printing seems to have forgotten these principles: Spiritual* Yo^ks and
Burdens being taken off from us (through the hand of God upon ye) the memory of
them seems to be gone off too from some; some have forgotten that they were
strangers in the Land of Egypt; the Lord has seemed to forgive the formerly
Nonconforming Brethren all their debt, because they desired him: And now the
Question is, Whether they should have compassion on their fellow servants as he
had pity on them?

The Controversy now before ye, is of all your Faithful ones, and therefore
it calls for the tenderst judgment: Fathers may better beat servants then
children out of doors; the one sort ^^ I mistake not) contend that they may
rule with ye* the oth^^ ^^^t they may be ruled by ye in the things of your own
Kingdom and in that of the Kingdom of God, that Jesus Christ may rule both ye
and them: how just, how spiritual, this latter plea is, will appear from the
choycest Reasonings of some in reputation with ye, which I have awakened.

The things I present ye, I would not presume to make too positive, because I
would not conclude a wisdom of your latitude under any notion of mine, (though
I see private men take too much liberty in that way toward ye) though it is
your indulgence not to know it.

I here present ye things only to be considered, to be quaered, in the behalf
of truth, and the advancement of your State, to which I am covenanted; and I am
the bolder and freer, having sold something that I had for that pearl, for
which we are bidden to sell all: I shall add some Considerations here to the
rest:

1. Consider whether under Popery the mystery of the National Priesthood was
not rather held up by the power of Princes and States, then States themselves
by such a way of power; and whether the mystery of the National Ministry be
not rather held up by the power of States now, then the States themselves in
such a way of power; and then, whether all the Pretenses and Consequences to
draw^ in States and Kingdoms for the Churches interest (if clearly discussed)
be not rather a way of Antichristian mystery* then of zeal to Religion, or the
power of Magistracy?

2. Consider whether in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ any other Scepter should
be lifted up then that golden one of his own, and whether if there be a Kingdom
of God, if Jesus Christ be the Lawgiver, and the Spirit of of Christ the
interpreter of those Laws, and this Kingdom of God within the throne of that
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords the Lord Jesus, any other power should rule,
any other Scepter* any other Laws, or any other sit down in that Throne, which
is only the Throne of the Son of David* whose Throne is for ever, the Scepter
of whose Kingdom is an everlasting Scepter?

3. Consider whether there be not an Heathenish or Gentilish world, and an
Antichristian world, or a world of many called Christians and believers in
Christ, and yet a Church of Christ which is neither of these; and if so,
whether is all this Kingdom of England that Church of Christ, or not rather
much of it that part of the Antichristian world, over which one part of the
mystery of iniquity has sat long, and is yet upon it? And if so, then is there
not room in England both for Presbyteriall Churches, and Believers of other
ways to live in that part of this Kingdom which is the world, and not that
Church? And if so, ye may be rich in people, rich in peace, rich in the praises
of the people of God. Honorable, go on to do worthy things* for our Nation, as
worthy things have been done by you* and may ye be as the wings of a Dove
covered with Silver, and her feathers with yellow Gold.

So prays, Your humble faithful Servant, JOHN SALTMARSH.

To the Reverend Divines of the Presbyteriall way.
Brethren,
THese are the sig hings of some of your own spirits under Episcopacy, under
the Tyranny of that government. O how acute and sensible were your Judgments
and Consciences then of the usurpation, dominion, imposed Forms, when you were
the sufferers! but now that your Brethren are become the Non-conformists to
you, as you were Non conformists to the Prelates; and you the imposers, and
your Brethren the sufferers; I find times and conditions are forgotten, and
yoakes are called for which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear. I
see by your printings and preachings the working of new dispositions in you,
and Symptoms of something like Dominion and Persecution; surely Brethren your
crying out thus for the civil power to help you or all is undon, is a sign you
trust not to the Gospel strength, nor truth of you^ way, but to the arm of
flesh. Methinks of late your Sun is turning into darkness and blackness over
us, and your Moon into blood: is it possible that yoakes, burdens, whips,
prisons, banishments, can be soon forgotten? Can Saints like natural men see
their faces in a glass, and so soon forget what manner of men they were?

I have reasoned with you in your own arguments; I hope your own arguments may
find access to your spirits when ours cannot; men are sooner persuaded by
their own reason then another. O that the same sounding of bowels may be heard
in you to your Brethren, that ye wished to hear in others who were once your
taskmasters! What Joseph said in his affliction, we shall say to you, Think on
us I pray you when it shall be well with you, and show kindness; for it may be
as Mordecai said, ye are come to the Kingdom for such a time as this; if not,
enlargement and deliverance shall arise from another place.

JOHN SALTMARSH.

GROANS FOR LIBERTY.
1. Divisions ought to be no prejudice to the Truth.
But he upbraids us with our Divisions and Subdivisions, and so do the Sea the
ministers Book called Smeetymnuus presented to the Parliament, sect 18. printed
1641.
Papists upbraid the Protestants with their Lutheranisme, Calvinisme, and
Zuinglianisme; and this is that the Heathens objected to the Christians, their
fractures were so many they knew not which Religion to choose if they should
turn Christians. And can it be expected, that the Church in any age should be
free from Divisions, when the times of the Apostles were not free, and the
Apostle tells us it must needs be that there be Divisions? In Greg. Nazian. his
days there were six hundred errors in the Church; do these any ways
^erogate from the truth and worth of Christian Religion.
Quaere.
1. Whether are not Divisions and Subdivisions objected now to all that are
dissenting Brethren from the present wa^ of Church Government? and whether are
Divisions any more scandal to Religion now then before?

2. Whether is Independancy, Anabaptism, Brownism, Seekers, of more evil
report now* then Lutheranism, Calvinism, Zuinglianism formerly?

3. Whether is an hundred and eighty opinions, as some would reckon Mr. Edwards.
them, more to be cast in the face of Religion now, then six hundred in the
days of Nazianzen?

4. Whether is this fair dealing for Brethren to make Apologies for divisions
and several opinions when they are oppressed, and to turn back in accusations
upon their Brethren when the oppression is off from themselves?

2 Stinted Forms not to be imposed.
The validity of which plea your Honors are best able to judge; and therefore
See the same Smect. sect. 2.
we leave it at your Bar: Yet these two things w^ know, first that this form
viz. of Liturgy, was never established to be so punctually observed, so
rigorously pressed to the casting out of all that scruple it, or any thing in
it.
Quaere.
1. If former Liturgies were never established to be so punctually observed,
why is there such pressing now for establishment of Forms, now to be observed
in Worship and Discipline? seeing the former Divines walked as they thought by
as true a light then, as the Divines of this age do now?

2. If Synods did not formerly establish things for such punctual
observations, why are there any penalties, fines, imprisonments called for now,
upon nonconformity to things established by them?

3. Why are the forms composed now so rigorously pressed, Uniformity so urged,
when such practices and designs were condemned but a few years since? and they
who urge it now, would scarce then seem to believe it to be the mind of former
Synods and Parliaments?

4. If things were not to be rigorously pressed then to the casting out of any
that scruple, why now?

3. No Forms of Particular men to be imposed on all the rest.
But if by Lyturgy he understand prescribed and stinted forms of
administration, See Smect. sect.
composed by some particular men in the Church, and imposed upon all the rest
(as this we must understand, or else all he says is nothing;) we desire and
expect th^^ those Forms which he says are yet extant, and ready to be
produced, might once appear.
Quaere.
1. If Forms composed by particular men be not to be imposed on all the rest,
why do the Brethren now urge upon us all and upon all the Kingdom, their own
Uniformity and Forms, since theirs is no more a Truth to others then others
Forms were formerly a Truth to them?

2 Whether one Synod of Divines is not as well a few (^) compared 2 A some.
with all the rest of the Kingdom as another Synod? and the same that were but
a few (2) six years since, or sixty years since* but a few (3) still, unless
2 Or some. 3 Or some.
the same numbers and accounts alter by years and seasons? and if so what
reason is there ^on ones imposing more then another, since Truth is no more to
be reckoned by multitudes and Synods in one age, then in another?

4. No binding to the use of composed Forms.
All other Reformed Churches, though they use Liturgies, yet do not bind See
Smect. Quaere.
Ministers to the use of them.
Quaere.
1. Why do any Reformed Churches now undertake to bind any to the use of their
Forms, seeing the Churches formerly durst not usurp it? and why under
penalties now more then before?

2. Whether is that lawful now which was not four years since, and for these
Brethren to do, which was unlawful for their Predecessors?

5. Severe imposing* a sin and a snare.
That which makes many refuse to be present at our Church service, is not only
See the same Quaere.
the Liturgy it self, but the imposing it upon Ministers.
Quaere.
1. If imposing of Forms was a snare before, how comes it to be none now?

2. If Ministers were not to be compelled then, why are they to be compelled
now?

6. Liberty in use of Forms breeds no disturbance.
Object. If it be objected that this will breed divisions and disturbances in
the Se^ the same Quaere. 2.
Churches unless there be a uniformity.

Ans. It has not bred any disturbance in other Reformed Churches.

Why should the free liberty of using or not using breed mo^e confusion then
the liberty of reading or not reading Homilies, especially when Minsters shall
teach people not to condemn one another in things indifferent.


Quaere.
1. How comes it to pass that liberty in the use of Forms bred no
disturbances before, and yet now all is pretended to be undone if uniformity be
not preserved

2. Why are Divines more jealous of conscientious and in offensive liberty now,
that the Government is coming into their own hands, then when it was in their
Predecessors?

3. If Brethren are not to condemn one another in things indifferent, why do
they teach now a Persecution to all that conform not to things indifferent
only, but unlawful, as all parts in Worship and Government are, which are
Devices of men?

7. No set Forms for the first 300. years.
For Christian Liturgies which the Remonstrant had affirmed to have been See
Smect. ^ sect. 2.
the best improvement of the peace and happiness of the Evangelical Church
ever since the Apostles times, we challenge the Remonstrance, setting aside
those that are confessedly spurious, to produce any Liturgy that was the issue
of the first 300. Years.
Quaere.
1. If solemn and set-formes and Directores were excepted against, and accused
then as no friends to the peace and happiness of Churches, why are they made
now the choycest means of peace and unity, and all those Churches condemned as
erroneous that are without them?

2. If no set-formes can be produced as the issue of the first 300. years, why
are they continued still, Viz. in the worship no^ Sect. ^^.
which has neither precept from Scriptures, nor president from Apostles or
Primitive practice to warrant them? why are the crimes and will worship of
forefathers condemned by their children, yet afterward taken up? the fathers
eat sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge.

8. Things that even offend Anabaptists are to be removed.
It is under careful hands, and hearts more merciful, viz. the Parliament,
See Smect. sect. ^.
then this Remonstrant is (to remit troubled consciences to no better cure then
Mr, Fishers Book) who we hope will do by those as the Helvetians did by
somethings that were stumbled at amongst them, though there were none but
Anabaptists that stumbled at them, yet the State did by Authority remove them,
and Zuinglius their pofessed adversary gives them thanks for occasioning the
removal.
Quaere.
1. Why may not the Brethren look for better cure to their troubled consciences
from the State now, then from some of their Brethren, because the hands and
hearts of the State have appeared more careful, more merciful then some of
them? the Priests and Levits walk by, while the good Samaritans comfort the
wounded.

2. If the State of the Helvetians would not offend the very Anabaptists, but
remove the scandal: why should any State now be set on and inslamed not only
to offend, but persecute them; not only Anabaptists as they are called, but all
other their Brethren that dissent? If States are commended then for being so
tender, why are they preached now into severity, wrath, revenge and tender
troubled consciences made the only trouble?

9. Rigor makes Separatists.
But we think, nay we know that some few Prelates by their over-rigorous See
Smect. sect. 2.
pressing have made more Separatists then all the Preachers disaffected to
Ceremonies in England.
Quaere.
1. If it has appeared formerly that rigorous imposings have occasioned
Separation, why do they now cry out of so many Separatists, and not look up to
themselves? Why do they beat their fellow servants out of doors, and then cry
out of their running away?

2. Why is not persecution and imposing more forborne by the Brethren now, when
they have found it the cause of their own Separation formerly?

3. Why do they cry out of Separatists, when they see Separatists have not so
much made themselves so as they have been made so by others, and they have been
rather driven away, then they have drawn away themselves? Why do they cry out
of Separation, when they force them into corners first, if they would have the
communion of their Brethren more, why make they not their persecution less,
and their offenses in Worship and Government less?

10. Burdens to Churches to be removed.
In the mean we bless God who has put into the hearts of others into See
Smect. sect. 2.
whose hands he has concredited the work to judge more wisely, and consider
more mercifully, and to profess in the hearing of some of us, they would
willingly part with that which was indifferent to themselves, if they were but
truly informed it was offensive to others, according to that of Gregory, those
customs which are known to bring any burdens upon the Churches, it becomes us
to consider of the removing of them.
Quaere.
1. Why may not the State too be petitioned by their people now of tender
Consciences, to the same temper of tenderness and mercy to them, that the
Brethren then desired for themselves? Whether are those good neighbors that
would have it rain only in their own Gardens, and the Sun to shine only on
their own blossoms and have peace only in their own dwellings, and their
neighbor Towns running with blood?

2. Were the times of Non-conformists then times only for removing burdens from
Churches, and the times of Non-conformists now times of burdening Churches?

11. Men's devices ought not to hinder preaching.
This is just as our Bishops were wont to do, who give a full power to a See
Smect. sect. 87.
Presbyter at his Ordination to preach the Gospel with a charge to do it, yet
will not suffer him to preach no not in his own cure without a License.
Quaere.
1. When any then was gifted and called to preach the Gospel and Licenses were
complained on to hinder, why are there any other ways devised against the
liberty of the Gospel now? as uniformity, etc.

2. Were Licenses chains and fe^ters to the glorious and free spirit? And are
internogatories and ^uestions at times of Ordination and admission about
Anti-Paedo-Baptisme, Antinomianism now no restraints nor devices to the same
purpose, is this to rejoice that Christ is preached, howsoever, nay is not this
to forbid him because he follows not with us?

12. Men's inventions to set up jus Divinum to advance Government.
They that have studied to advance the Babel of Episcopacy, have endeavored
See Smect. sect 87.
to underpin it with some Texts of Scripture, that they might plead a jus
divinum for it.
Quaere.
1. Was it unlawful, and politic in some to underpin Episcopacy with some
Texts of Scriptures, and so to get up a ^us divinum for it? and is it not as
unlawful to set up another Form that is not purely of God, underpinned with
Texts of Scripture for a jus divinum, or divine right as some would have had it?

13. Oath ex officio an unlawful engine.
We desire to see further how abominable this Oath is, how cried down by The
same Sm^ sect. ^6.
learned men, how contrary to the Word of God, the Law of nature, to the Civil
and Cannon Laws, and to the Statutes of our Kingdom, he may find in Mr. Parker.
Quaere.
1. Was it so contrary to the Word of God, to all Civil and Common Laws, and
the Law of our own Kingdom to extort from men Consciencesecrets; then of what
kind are all Forms of posing, examining, interogating to find out the opinions
of those who are to preach in any Congregation?

14. When Presbyters grow as tyrannous as Bishops they are to suffer.
But if the Presbyters should be as generally corrupted as Bishops now are,
have as much strength to suppress the Gospel and promote Popery, as the
Bishops by their supreme power have, and if they can bring no more evidence of
divine institution then Bishops can, and are of no more necessity to the Church
then Bishops are let the function suffer.
Quaere.
May not the very thing be more feared and presumed by us now, from some late
experiments of them viz. that the Presbyters may grow strong to suppress the
Gospel, and tyronnous etc. and may be corrupted, as Bishops formerly, as well
as they might prophecy this of themselves? Caiaphas thought as little of
Christ when he said, one should dye for the people, as some Presbyters thought
of suppressing the Gospel themselves, and suffering for it, when they wrote
thus against Bishops and Presbyters.

15. Change of words in Religion an ill sign*
We find that the late Innovators which have so much disturbed the peace and
purity of our Church, did first be^in with alterations of words; and the
Apostle exhorts us to hold fast the form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1. 13. and
avoid profane novelties of words.
Quaere.
1. If the change of words be so dangerous, and unwholesome Forms, and so
condemned before* why are unwarrantable words taken up again, as Classical
Provincial, National, Triers, Directories, which are no more Forms of
wholesome, nor Scripture words?

16. Repro^ches ^o Arguments.
If confident slightings and scornful den^als be sufficient answers to us and
our arguments, never any man has better defended Episcopacy, or more strongly
confuted those that oppose it.
Quaere.
If confident sleightings* etc. were counted no sufficient answers from the
Prelates to the Presbyters, why are Presbyters sleightings counted so
sufficient arguments for their Dissenting Brethren now? and if to rail be to
reason, and to revile be to refute; Mr. Edwards and some of his brethren have
as strongly confuted us, as the Prelates did formerly them.

17. Prelates impropriate Orthodox.
In impropriating to the same party the praise of Orthodox, as if to speak See
Smect. Epist.
a word or think a thought against them were no less Heresy, then it was in
former times to speak against the Popes Supremacy, or the Monks fat belly.
Quaere.
1. It it were so ill taken by the Presbyters then, that the Prelates
impropriated the name Orthodox: how may it be taken now by all the rest who are
cast out as Heretics and Schismatics, while they walk abroad clothed only
in the name of Orthodox Divines?

2. If the Popes Supremacy and the Monks fat belly, and the Prelates could not
bear a word nor a thought against them; are not some Divines working for a
supremacy and a revenue, against which it may prove as great a crime to speak.

18. All not of their opinion are factious.
Sure the man thinks he has obtained a Monopoly of Learning, and Smect. sect.
3.
all knowledge is loct up in his bosom, and not only Knowledge but Piety and
peaceablenesse too; for all that are not of his opinion must suffer, either as
weak or factious if he may be their judge.
Quaere.
1. Whether do not they who hold all other in Schism and Heresy, and a
company of Mechanics who conform not to them, conceive they have the Monopoly
of Learning as once the Prelates did: and who are these now?

2. Whether do not they who look on their Brethren that dissent as Troub^ers,
Factious, Schismatic; cenceive all Piety and peaceablenesse to be locked up
in their own bosoms: and who are they? and who are the weak and factious if
they may be judges?

19. Prelates paths causes of Divisions.
It is no wonder, concerning the paths our Prelates have trod, that there See
Sect. 18.
are divisions in the Nation; the wonder is the Divisions are no more, no
greater.
Quaere.
If the usurpation, Tyranny, Persecution of the Prelates, were reckoned for the
supreme division makers in the Kingdom, when the Non-conformists were the only
Separatists; Why do they not find out some other or such like cause now, in
some other place, rather then amongst their dissenting Brethren themselves,
whom they now only accuse of division and faction? but this is the difference
of being Parties and Judges, we naturally spy out faults furthest from our
selves.

20. Where is the Church of England?
We desire him to tell us what the Church of England is, for it does not please
Sect. the same
him that we should call the Convocation the Church of England, much less the
Bishops or Archbishops.
Quaere.
It was so hard to find out the Church of England in the Prelates days, surely
it is hard to find it out now; then it seems neither Synod, Bishops, nor
Archbishops were the Church. Then Quaere, where is the Church now? not in the
Assembly, they are but consulting how to build the Church; not in the
Presbytery, for that is a Church unbuilt yet; not among the Paris^es, they are
not Scripture-Churches or Congregations as the same Smectymnuus says; then
where is the Church of England?

21. The name of Church is the Gorgons-Head.
But these Episcopal men deal as the Papists that dazzle the eyes, and
astonish Smect. sect. 17.
the senses of poor people with the glorious name of the Church, the Church,
the holy mother the Church; this is the Gorgons-Head that has enchanted them
and held them in bondage to their errors; all their speech is of the Church,
the Church; no mention of the Scriptures of God the Father, but all of the
mother the Church.
Quaere.
1. If the name of Church then, the Mother Church, the Church was such a
Gorgons-Head by which Prelates as well as Papists enchanted thousands of people
to believe: why is that very thing or device taken up in another form to
inchant with still, viz. The Church of England, the Orthodox Churches, the
Reformed Churches?

2. If the Church Mother was so much spoken on before, and the Scriptures so
little? why is not the Church of England the Reformed Churches, the Orthodox
Churches and Divines less spoken on, and the Scriptures more?

22. An ill Custom to say Church of England and Conformity.
It has been the custom of late times to cry up the holy mother the Church
Sect. the same
of England, to call for absolute obedience to holy Church, full conformity to
the orders of holy Church, neglecting in mean time God the Father and the holy
Scriptures.
Quaere.
If it has been the unwarrantable custom of late times to cry up the Church
of England, and absolute obedience to the Church, and confor^^^^, why is this
custom still kept up? conformity, obedience, and uniformity as much called for
still, as before? why is not the word more spoken on, and the Reforme^ Church
less? why is not free Christian liberty, peaceable forb^arance of each others
differing opinions, and practices in unity, more heard among us, and obedience,
conformity, and uniformity less?

23. To call Schismatics and Heretics the Bishops practice.
Only there is one practice of our Bishops, that is their casting out
unconforming Sect. the same.
Brethren commonly known in their Court language by the name of Schismatics
and Heretics.
Quaere.
1. If the Bishops did practice the casting out the Nonconforming Brethren,
w^itner ought any such practice to be taken up by the Nonconforming Brethren
against Brethren now not Conforming to them?

2. If all the Nonconforming Brethren were in their Court-language Heretics
and Schismatic, whether ought not such names to be sent packing to Court
again, rather then taken up by the same Brethren, who were so much called so
themselves, Heretics and Schismatics, that they have taken it up against
others?

24. Heresies and Schism harsh words.
But we had hoped the refusal of the use of a Ceremony, should never have See
Sect. the same.
been equalized in the punishment either to Heresy or Schism.
Quaere.
If you hoped that the refusal of a Ceremony would not have been punished with
Heresy and Sc^ism from Bishops, may not your Brethren hope much more from you,
that their dissenting from you in things of outward Cognizance and Form, as
Church Order and Baptism, would not be so branded for Heresy and Schism by
you (who glory in a more Gospell-way) as as you were branded yourselves of late?

25. Heavy censures for Nonconformity.
I am sure above the crime of the Remonstrant, Nonconforming Brethren, See
Smect. sect. 13.
who are unsettled in points of a mean difference (which their usual language
knowns by no better^ term then Schismatics and factions) yet even such as
have fallen under the heaviest censures of Excommunication, deprivation,
suspentio^, etc.
Quaere.
1. Why was it such a crime to count any Schismatics and factious, under
Prelacy? and why is it now under Presbytery matter of just report against
others?

2. If Excommunications, Deprivations* Suspensions, etc. were esteemed so
burdensome and cruel? then why are Fines, Penalties, and imprisonments, so
much preached for now? why do not the Brethren of the Presbyteriall way, think
it as hard for the Magistrates to aflict their Brethren, as they thought it
hard in the Prelates to afflict themselves?

26. No Presbyters to be Ambitious.
Neither in any of his writings the least intimation of superiority of one
Sect. the same
Presbyter over another save only where he names Diotrephes as one ambitiously
affecting such Supremacy.
Quaere.
If none but such as Diotrephes is observed in Scripture for affecting
Supremacy, and Superiority, and if one Presbyter cannot be found affecting
place above other Presbyters in opposition to Bishops; then how is it cleared,
that a Presbyter may be supreme to a whole Church or Congregation: and that it
is not as much Superiority for some few Presbyters to affect being above many
Saints together in one Church, as for one in name or office as a Bishop, to
affect place above another in name or office as a Presbyter, and so Episcopacy
be as warrantable as Presbytery, and both alike unwarrantable?

A Beam of Light to discover a way to the peace both of CHURCH and STATE. By
way of Considerations.
Consid. 1.
LEt it first be considered where the great obstructions lie against Liberty or
Tolleration of Brethren of several ways, and if it may not be found to be in
these things;

1. A taking the whole Kingdom of England for the Church of England, and so
setting up the National Magistracy of Israel in the Nation now as it was then,
which how it may be warranted, would be well considered.

2. A jealousy how to preserve the present Ecclesiastical Interest without
the choycest power of the Magistrate to help it, which if well observed, makes
it appear to be less of God and more of Man.

3. An interpretation of these Gospel Scriptures which concern Magistracy,
Romans 13. 4. 1 Timothy 2. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 12, 14. (which I humbly conceive to be so
far as concerns any good or evil either of the Law of Nature or Nations) into
a good or evil purely spiritual, and of mere revelation in the Gospel, as
things of Gospell-light, and mystery, and notions of Heresy and Schism are:
this latitude of interpretation of the general Rules in the Gospel concerning
Magistracy, into all particulars of Truth and Heresy, is of high consideration.

Consid. 2.
Let it be considered, how the Kingdom of England may be called the Church,
taking in all the Northen parts, the Western parts, the whole Nation generally
to the very walls of London, with Mr. Marshals Testimony, M. Marshals sermon Nov.
17. 1640.
that many thousands, nay, thousands of thousands* (which accordingly reckoned
takes up almost the greatest part of the Kingdom) not knowing their right hand
from their left in the very principles of the Doctrine of Christ; and says Mr
Marshall; no land can be esteemed Christ's Kingdom where the preaching of the
w^ra is not established: is any country esteemed a part of a Princes Dominion
that is not ruled by his Laws?

Consid. 3.
Let it be considered then, seeing the Kingdom of England is not a Church, but
in the general a Nation baptized into they know not what at first, and
believing generally they knew not in whom ever since, as Mr. Marshall, whether
there may not be a free peaceable cohabitation of the people together, viz. of
those called Presbyteriall, Independent, Anabaptists, enjoying there several
ways of practice in things of outward cognizance and order, as Baptism,
Church Order, etc. in all peaceable demeanure and godliness, as well in this
spiritual variety, as so many Corporations, Counties, Divisions, Armies, and
several Companies, in that their civil variety; and yet in all, a civil
comeliness, peace* and unity.

Consid. 4
Let it be considered, whether the Civil power in such a Gospell-mystery, as
Presbytery is, and the way of Baptism is, and the way of Independency is, may
not with more lawfulness, less hazard of sin, and safety, keep off, or
suspend his engagements from all sides, seeing there lies Gospell-strength and
Arguments on all sides, and walk only according to those general Rules the
Gospel has laid him down in Romans 1. 3, 4. 1 Timothy 2. 2* 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. not
daring to draw himself to revenge any misbeleefe of particular Scripture
mysteries; forcing either side either for Presbytery, Independency, or Baptism,
which the Gospel has no where warranted him in special or in any clear
consequence to do, but such as the present prevailing Brethren draw out from
the judicial law of Moses to help: and from these general Gospel rules, which
can bring forth but an opinionative justice, as their Arguments an opinionative
truth, or Presbytery and whether the Magistrate ought not to demand a more
clear and equitable rule in things of spiritual cognizane, I humbly present to
be considered. Whether there ought not to be a certain Rule for a certain
justice: so if there should ever be a proceeding to Fines, Imprisonment,
Banishment, the Divines can administer no more certain grounds for the
Magistrates conscience, then such as they have for their own, which are but
probable, controvertible, doubtful, as the Arguments on all sides will make
appear.

Consid. 5.
Let it be considered, whether it has not been one of the National sins, viz.
Making Laws, against all other I ormes, but what it did establish it self
Nationally; by which experience has told us, how Gospel Truths have been kept
out whole Generations; ^opish States kept out Protestantism, and Prelacy kept
out Peesbytery, and whether Presbytery proceeding on the same ground, is not in
the same danger of sin, and of keeping out other Truths; and whether upon this
ground, any Gospel Revelation or Light Mr. Case Sermon. Gods waiting, page 62.
(of which there shall be an Increasing every day, as Mr. Case himself
preached) ever shall come into this Nation, but of the National size and
temper; and we know that is not often the Gospel way; the Lord has chosen the
weak things, and base things.

Consid. 6.
Let it be considered whether part of the great Mystery of iniquity be not that
of drawing in the strength of the Nations, the Princes of the Rev. 17. 12, 13.
earth, to support the Ecclesiastical or Church glory, and let this be sadly
considered; did not Popery get in the Kingdoms of the world to support itself?
Did not Prelacy stand by the same power? Does not Presbytery hold it self by
the same strength of Magistrates? Are not the same Iron rods and scourges of
steel conveyed over from one of them to the other? Did not the Pope whip the
Protestant with fine, imprisonments* and the Prelate take the rod out of his
hand and whip the Nonconformist, and the Nonconformist or Presbyter take the
same ^od out of the Prelates hand and scourge those that are Non-conformists to
him?

Consid* 7.
Let it be well considered, whether the design of the National Ministry,
eversince the first working of it upon the Magistrates has no^ a design for
strengthening their own interest by the Magistracy of the Kingdoms, and how
have* Kingdoms been embroyled for the serving of this design, and whether is
not this gilded with the glorious name of Reformation.

Consid. 8.
Let it be considered from the several ways and Forms of proceeding in which
the believers of several opinions have gone in these times to support
themselves, which stands most on a pure Gospel spiritual bottom, supported by
its own innate ^ongeniall and proper strength, clasping about no stones* no
pillars of the world* or humane strength.

Consid. 9.
Let it be considered, whether the whole cry of the Divines of the other Mr.
Edw. his Gangraena.
party (as in the late Book) is not all to the Magistrate: Help us Parliament,
help us City or we are undon, the Heresies and Sects will undo us; What said
Ezra, I was ashamed (says he) to require of the King an army and Ezra 8. 22.
horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way, because we had said the hand
of our God is upon all them that seek him.

Consid. 10.
Let it be considered whether they whom he calls Heretics and Schismatics,
make it one of their choycest Principles to desire the Magistrate to help their
opinions with their prisons, fines, pillories; but rather that they would let
them alone to stand and fall by the power or weakness of their Gospel
principles, and that they may have liberty to pray for them, pay to them and
possess the Gospel.

Each opinionst ted briefly, respectively to Toleration. Let it be considered
to what each pretended Heresy will amount to.
Independency.
INdependents believe that since the Parishes are so generally corrupted, the
Churches ought to consist of those of them only that profess more purely, as
they find Scripture Rule and Practice; and as the Presbyterians themselves many
of them practice in some Ordinances* as that of Baptism and Supper* giving them
only to the purest Believers.

They also believe that they ought not be a few Ministers and Elders of the
Churches to bring all the Churches and Congregations under their Power and
Dominion, but rather under under their advice and consultation.

Quaere.
Because then they practice to meet more purely, and to rule less one over
another; whether is this enough that they should be fined, imprisoned, banished?

The Anabaptists.
THe Anabaptists so called, they hold that Believers ought only to be baptized,
and that Baptism ought to be so for the manner, as may set forth Christ's
Death, Burial and Resurre^^ion by water, as the Greek word and Apostles
practice seems to imply, and some of the ablest Divines both of England and the
great Adversaries the Papists themselves deny not; and for children, they read
of none the Apostles Baptized, and they see not any Scripture clear enough to
warrant, and they therefore forbear.

Quaere.
Because they will not practice then what is not clear in command, and
confessed by all to be but in hidden consequence; because they baptize as they
find the clearest rule and practice, and as none can deny but it was the
Apostles general practice to baptez* Believers: therefore, whither is this
enough that they should be Fined, Imprisoned, Banished?

The Seekers.
SEekers, some of them Question only the way of Church and Ordinances, as of
Baptism, etc. because they find that the power was at first given to the
Apostles with gifts, and from them to others, and they dare not take it from
Antichrist and the Bishops, as the Reformed Kingdoms generally take it, nor
from the Churches, because they find no such power begun from the Churches, but
only of ch^y^e of consent, not of power not Churches begun before Apostles or
Disciples with gifts.

Quaere.
Whether then is this enough, because they conceive they dare not take
Ordinances, but from such, and in such a manner as was given at first, to Fine,
Imprison, or Banish them?

A Model or Short Draught of the whole difference betwixt the Divines for the
Presbytery and them of the other way respectively* to the Magistrate or State
drawn from the late Books and practice of both parties, in a Pet^^nary way.
They of the Presbytery to the Magistrates or State.
WE humbly Petition ye, that Herericks and Schismatics (we believing all that
differ from us to be so) may have your power inflicted upon them, whether to
Fines, Imprisonm^n, or Banishment, and upon this condition, ye shall have what
we can do, or preach, etc.

The Independents to the Magistrates or State.
WE humbly Petition, that ye will not hazard nor endanger your civil power
of the State to help our opinions against our Brethren, for we are not
Infallable nor Apostolical, we see but in part, and that ye will not punish
any of our Brethren Presbyterials or others, for what they believe or differ
from us in things of outward order in the Gospel, and that we may have leave
to pray for ye, to pay tribute to ye, to fight for ye, and to worship the Lord
among our selves peaceably as we believe, and to punish us when we disturb ye
by tumults, or trouble your peace in our way of worshipping.

Some Quaeres for the better understanding of M. Edwards last Book, called in
Latin Gangrena, But in English, a Book of Scandals, against the Honorable
Houses of Parliament, the Army, the Saints and Churches of Christ, that differ
from him.
Quaere. 1.
Whether this be not a new way, and work of Providence to bring forth some
Gospel Light to the world by presenting some truth under the name and notion of
errors and heresies, which can scar^e obtain from the Press and Pulpit any
other way of appearing abroad: and if this ^e not to take the wise in their
own craftiness, and to make M. Cranford the Licenser, and M. Edwards the
Publisher of some such Truths, which the world had else never known so
publicly, but under the form of heresy, and from their two pens, but under
this disguise?

2.
Whether that Story which M. Edwards tells of Brasteed in Kent, where he says a
woman preaches which is known to my self, and all in that place to be a mere
untruth, be not a way to judge of most of his Stories, Letters, Relations?

3.
Whether this late Book called Gangrena, where there are so many letters writ
to the Reverend M. Edwards, to the Worthy M. Edwards, to the Good M. Edwards,
to the Father M. Edwards, to the Worthy, Reverend, good M. Edwards, with diverse
other insinuations of his own worth, be not a way of seeking glory* and praise
from men?

4.
Whether so many Letters as are in the Book called Gangrena, where there is not
one name subscribed, may not be as well written from M. Edwards as to him: and
whether the Authors of those Letters whose names are suppressed, are not
afraid to be questioned for their Relations, and therefore have either
conceived their names themselves, or M. Edwaras for them?

5.
Whether the great reasonings and conflicts, which M. Edwards says he had in
his spirit in the writing of this book, and says were only carnal conflicts,
were not rather conflicts with that spirit of God, which breathed on him more
love and charity to his Brethren, then it seems he would receive at that time.

6.
Whether his accusing the Parliament and Army, the one for tolerating as never
Christian State or Magistrate were known to do; the other for Antinomianism,
Independency, Familisme, Seraphanisme, etc. be not of high and dangerous
insinuation to the people at such a juncture of time, and of desperate
^ritation to our Brethren of Scotland, and is against the solemn League and
Covenant, one great Article of it?

7.
Whether this be a sufficient confutation of my Book called the Smoke in the
Temple, to call it a Book of errors, as he does in Page 3. Epist. and in Page
180. where he says only, this is an error, and that is an error, without the
least particle of Reason or Scripture to prove it; where if mere accusations
may pass for crimes, I wonder he made his Book so large, and rather summed not
all up into one grand affirmative, viz. This is all heresy, and so have spared
the Reader much pains, and himself much paper?

8.
Whether has M. Edwards dealt faithfully and ingenuously as became a Brother,
pretending to so much clearness and integrity of spirit (and which makes me
suspect him in the rest) viz. to charge me with positive errors (which my
Book can witness to the world) I writ as exceptions to serve a design of
Peace and Reconciliation, and not as my opinions?

9.
Whether the design which M. Edwards pretends in setting forth his Book, viz.
to make the blasphemies and errors of the times (as he calls them) to be
detested, is not rather a far contrary design, viz. to spread poison, infect
many souls who by this shall come to the knowledge of such things as they never
heard before, having provided no Antidote, nor any Answer of Scripture or
reason against them, but merely contradictions, and ill words; it was observed
that some books set forth for the discovery of w^^ch^raft, made many W^ches;
and so who knows how many heretics he may make by this his pretended design
against them; sure either some of the heresies or diseases were so above his
care or remedy, or he had a counter design to make Heretics, or the wisdom of
his design was turned into folly, making Heretics by writing against them.

M. Edwards Designs against His Brethren that differ from him.
Gangrena, p. 164. Let us fill all Presses, and make all Pulpits ring, and so
possess Parliament, City and whole Kingdom against Sects.
Quaere.
Whether this be not according as the Priests and Elders did about Christ's
Resurrection saying to the Soldiers, say you they stole him away, and if any
thing come to the Governors ear, we will persuade him, that is, let us cry
out they are all Heretics and Schismatics, and we will persuade the
Governors that it is so.

M. Edwards Book, p. 172. Let the Magistrate put out some Declarations
declaring they shall be proceeded against as Vagrants and Rogues.
Quaere.
Whether is this wisdom like that from above, which is first pure, then
peaceable: whether these be such words as the Angel gave, who would not give
the very Devil himself ill language, but The Lord rebuke thee O Satan.

M. Edwards Book, Epist. Page 4. When I think of, etc. how many powerful
Sermons you have had preached before you about the Covenant against the Sects,
the many Petitions, and yet how little is done, etc. God accounts all those
Errors, Heresies, let alone and suffered, to be the sins of those who have
power.
Quaere.
Whether is not this a representing to the world, and a public insinuation
that the Parliament are Sermon-sleighters, Covenant-breakers, heretical,
unjust, Petition-sleighters; and whether this ought not to have been rather
represented by him in private papers, then thus to arraigne them before the
people, and to make them vile in the eyes of the world, who have exceeded all
their Predecessors in being tender of the blood and sufferings of Gods people,
and giving the Churches rest, for which they have prospered more in the field
in victories for this their peace at home, then ever before.

M. Edwards, p. 2. Epist, to Gangrena. You have done worthily against Papists
and Prelaies, etc. but what have you done against other kind of growing evils,
Heresies, Libertines, etc.
Quaere.
Whether is not this to charge upon the Parliament all those things which he so
grossly aggravates to the world as Blasphemies, etc. and to bury all the Honor
of the Good they have done, in the Sepulcher of the Evil which he says they
are now in doing.

M. Edwards Epist. Noble Senators, be pleased to pardon the boldness I shall
take, etc. not to impute it to my malignity, etc. I am one who out of choice,
and of judgment, have embarked my self with you.
Quaere.
Whether does it not clearly appear by this Apology, and insinuation of his
own worth and good affections that he knew well to what a Crime and
Transgression both against Parliament and Piety the Book he had writ would
amount to, and therefore bespake their just indignation and Censure beforehand
with this story of his good affections, and imbarquing himself for them.

Whether did M. Edwards consider the Parliaments Honor, Quality, Capacity,
that durst entitle them to the Patronage of such immodest, ridiculous Stories
and Tales, as he brings in his Gangrena.

An Expostulation with M. Edwards, upon his Book called GANGRAENA.
SIR,
THe uncharitable expressions of your Book against those who see not by your
Light, and write not by your Candle; your binding up the Tares with the Wheat
together, and the precious with the vile; your trampling upon your Brethren as
the mire in the streets, have forced my Spirit into these few Quaeries; for
Stons sake I cannot hold my peace.

The Designs of your Book seem to be these:

1. A Design of Provocation to the Magistrate against your Brethren.

2. Of Accusation, under the old project of Heretics and Schismatics.

3. Of Historical Recreation to the people, that they may make themselves
sport with the Believers that differ from ye, as the Philistines with Sampson
upon the Stage.

Can your wounded Brethren make ye good music? Can their failings make ye more
innocent? Or their sins make ye more spiritual?

You would have all the Believers that are not of your mind, banished, etc.
will you who pretend your self to be a friend, be such an enemy to the State
as to cut off (like Ner^ the Tyrants wish) so many thousand of their faithful
servants at a blow, in such a juncture of time when they need so many? Ought ye
to work off so many choice ones from this Cause, till you have as many more of
your way for their places; and till as many Battles, years, experiments, prove
them as gloriously faithful, as these are; is this fair dealing with the
State?

You have brought forth before Israel and the Sun, many pretended sins and
crimes of your Brethren: Suppose they should write by your Copy, and bring
forth the Aslembly-sinnes, the crimes of all those of your way, of all the
Divines and others that you take in, and rake back into the ashes of their
unregenerate condition, keep Almanackes for the years and days of their
faylings, watch their haltings in all things they say or do, tell all the
Stories of them they hear, what would the next generation think of their Book
and yours? At this rate of writing they would not read one honest man of all
their forefathers yet this is your course and method.

I have done for this time, and I hope all that are not enchanted with the
Gorgons-head of Heretics and Schismatics and Church of England, (as your own
Smectymnians say) will read and judge. I had said more to ye, had you printed
us more Reason, and less Reviling, and something more then Stories and
Winter-tales.

And for our Licenser, whom you so rail at, he is so much a friend to all the
world of believers, as to give them the Scripture-liberty of proving and trying
all things; and not to silence the Press, as some would, and as the Prelates
did silence the Pulpit.

And now let any age, weighing all the differences (excepting the Blasphemies,
etc.) and the nature of them nakedly, without aggravations, and fallacy of
words, bring forth a Book printed in such Letters of blood, as this Gangraena,
bind up all the Oxford Aulicusses, the Mountagues, the Pocklingtons, and see if
this Gangraena do not exceed them all; this is Persecution and Prelacy
sublimate.

And for all this, I would not have the Civil power drawn against you, (if we
had all the Magistrates on our side) but rather that you may in the flowings of
a more heavenly spirit, with your head of waters, and your eyes a fountain of
tears, write against your own Book, and let the world see that Men in these
times are not infallible, as you all conclude, but may mistake their Brethren
for Enemies, some Truths for Errors, and Zeal for Persecution, as the very
Jews did when they crucified Christ, as they thought, for Blasphemy; And some
shall kill ye, says Christ, and think they do God good service.

A Parallel between the Prelacy and the Presbytery.
Quaere. Whether if we should reply to M. Edwards in his own words, and as
Solomon says, answer him according to his, etc. we not compare things as
follows, and trace up their proceedings into the very mystery of Prelacy?

1. The Prelates were ordained Ministers by the Bishops.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines that sit now, are Ordained by
the same power of Bishops to be Ministers, and so by that power ordain others?

2. The Prelates when they had made Canons, procured the power of the State to
impose them upon all the Kingdom.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now get the same power to what
they decree, and accordingly impose them upon the Kingdom?

3. The Prelates composed one great Service-booke for direction to Uniformity
of worship, according as they had ordered under penalties, yet without the
least word of Scripture to prove the truth of any thing in it.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, Divines have composed one great Book
accordingly now for the like Uniformity, viz. the Directory to be observed
under fines and penalties; and yet without the least word or tittle of
Scripture to prove the truth of any thing in it?

4. The Prelates ordered, that from that Book Prayers should be read to the
people.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now have not cast the Prayers
of the Spirit into such Forms and Methods, that a little invention will make
them as stinted current and legible Forms as before, and accordingly read in
diverse places?

5. The Prelates counted all that would not conform to them, Schismatic and
Heretical.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now count not all so that will
not be uniforme with them?

6. The Prelates forbad all to Preach and Print, that did not Preach and Print
for their way of worship and Government.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now would not have all hindered
from Pulpit and Press that will not be of way of Worship and Government with
them?

7. The Prelates possessed themselves of the States power and favor.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now wholly labor after the
same interest, both in Parliament and other Councles?

8. The Prelates had their Licensers to stop all that write against their power
and pomp.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now labor to ingrosse the
power of licensing only to themselves?

9. The Prelates had for part of their Government, Fines, Pillories, Whips,
Imprisonment.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now have those very things for
part of theirs?

10. The Prelates had Parishes for their Churches, and Tithes for their
maintenance.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said the Divines now have the same Parishes now
for Churches, the same Tithes for maintenance?

11. The Prelates called all other meetings but their Parish-meetings,
Conventicles.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now call the Churches and
people that meet now together apart from them, Conventicles as formerly.

12. The Prelates called the Non-conformists factious troublers of the State.
Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now do accordingly call any
that write or oppose their Presbytery, factious and State-troublers?

13. The Prelates ever accused their Nonconforming Brethren to the King and
Council.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now accordingly accuse their
Nonconforming Brethren to the Parliament and other Councels?

14. The Prelates had a design to send all their Non-conformed Brethren to
strange Kingdoms, as New England.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now endeavor to send their
Nonconforming Brethren to other places out of the Kingdom?

15. The Prelates engrossed all the Preaching, and preferring Divines to all
places of honor and popularity in the Kingdom to themselves.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now do accordingly prefer
to all places of public trust, honor, and imploiment* as Universities, Navy,
Armies, Garrison-Towns, Counties, Cities, etc?

16. The Prelates would not suffer men whom they called Laymen, to speak of
the Scriptures.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now do forbid and contemn
all Laymens gifts in the same manner?

17. The Prelates would not suffer any to go from the Parish-Minister.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now accordingly labor to have
all keep to their Parishes.

18. The Prelates called Truths which they received not; New Lights, Errors.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now accordingly call all
things they receive not, New Lights, Whimsies, Errors.

19. The Prelates labored to scandalize their Nonconforming Brethren with
Nicknames, etc.

Quaere. Whether may it not be said, the Divines now accordingly labor to make
their Nonconforming Brethren vile and scandalous to the Kingdom?

Ezekiel. 18 2. Thus the Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth
are set on edge.

Thus if we would compare crimes and times, we might write and speak.

Quaere. Whether M. Edwards in reekoning up diverse* things for Errors, has not
much aspersed his own Brethren* Doctor Twisse, M. Gattaker, and many others in
many Doctrinall points they hold?

The Testimony of M. Samuel Rutherford, one of the Scotch Comm^ssioners, in the
last Page of his Epistle to the Reader, in his Book Entitled, The Divine
Right of Church Government, and Excommunication. No incroaching on Christ's
Prerogative.
BUt it is a Controversy (say some) whether the Government of the Church of
the New Testament, belong to the Magistrate or to the Church? To which I say 1.
It was a controversy created by men willing to please Princes, with more power
in the Courts of Christ then ever the Lawgiver and Apostles gave them, and that
against the mind of glorious Lights, the first Reformers, and the whole Troop
of Protestant Divines, who studied the Controversy against the usurped
Monarchy of the man of sin, more exactly then one Physician, who in a cursory
way diverted off his Road of Medicine, of which he wrote learnedly, and broke
in on the by upon the deepest Polemicks of diyinity, and reached a riders blow
unawares to his Friends. 2. In things doubtful, conscience has refuge to the
surest side: Now its granted by all, and not controverted by any, that in the
Apostolic Church, the government of the Church of the New Testament was in the
hands of Apostles, Pastors, Teachers; and therefore Conscience would sway to
that in which there can be no Error, except on supposall of abuse; and
Christian Rulers would not do well to venture upon Eternity, wrath, the
judgment to come; confiding on the poor plea of an Erastian distinction, to
incroach upon the Prerogative Royal of Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
THese Reasons, tending not only to the sweetning of the TWO KINGDOMS, England
and Scotland, the Parliament, and Dissenting Brethren on both sides, in the
Assembly, each to other; but also to the preserving a Just Liberty for them all
respectively, I commend to the Press.

March 30. 1646. JOHN BACHILER.
THE DIVINE RIGHT OF PRESBYTERY; Asserted by the present Assembly, and
Petitioned for accordingly to the Honorable House of Commons in PARLIAMENT.
With REASONS Discussing this pretended Divine-Right; and yet with tenderness
to the Brethren of the Presbyteriall way. Pleading for a Liberty of Conscience
for them in this their Opinion, as for others of their Dissenting Brethren, and
equally for both. With Inferences upon their late PETITION.

By John Saltmarsh, Preacher of the Gospel.

Rev 2. 2. Thou have tried those that say they are Apostles, but are not.
LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West end of
PAUL'S. 1646.

To those Brethren of the Assembly of Divines, Petitioners who are for the
pretended Divine Right of the present PRESBYTERY.
BRETHREN, Meeting ye but of the Assembly, or that bounder appointed ye by
Part. I cannot justly be denied this reasoning with ye; for the Ordinance by
which ye sit, does enable ye only to advise of See Ordin. Iu^. 12 1643. P. 4.
things propounded, but not to propound or demand any as ye have done of late;
so as in this ye have brought your selves down to the same magnitude with us
that are private men: Here is the difference now; Ye are many of better parts
and abilities; I am as one borne out of duetime; yet the same Covenant is upon
me with your selves; nor ought I because I am but one, presume to see Truth
more then one, because ye are many; Nay, it is that voice from the excellent 2
Pet. 1. 17.
glory which both you and I must hear, and which can only teach us Truth; It
is not the voice of any other. And surely, since Truth has had its lot in the
world to l^ve upon voices in Assemblies and Synods, where that is only Truth
which is voted so, and not in its own glory and evidence, where that is only
Truth which is so: The Mystery of iniquity has been more advanced then the
Mystery of godliness.

THE DIVINE RIGHT Of Presbytery, etc. With Reasons discussing this pretended
DIVINE - RIGHT.
FIrst, They who are the Presbyters in this present Presbytery, pretend to be
Presbyters by a power of Ordination from Bishops, as the Bishops were
Presbyters: and if so, they are to make it appear, that there is a true
personal succession of Ministry from the Apostles, and that they do lineally
succeed without interruption; for in succession, unless there be a certain,
perpetual, and personal derivation of power, there can be no certainty, nor
infallibility of the truth of such a power; and whether the proof of this
draws not with it a necessary and perpetual visibility of a Church, (contrary
to the opinion of all the Reformed Divines;) and further, a truth of
Church-Ministery, and Ordinances of Jesus Christ. in the Antichristian State,
from whence this Ministry of theirs comes, by which they stand present
Presbyters, and how any true Ministry can be found in that very Antichristian
State, which is called the man of sin, the mystery of iniquity, the Whore of
Babylon, the falling away; and how the same State can be both merely
Antichristian and Christian, a Whore of Babylon, and a Spouse of Jesus Christ,
a Ministry of God, and a mystery of iniquity, a Temple of God and of Idols; I
leave it to be judged.

2. That these present pretended-Presbyters cannot be found true Presbyters but
by such a personal and successively derived power, will appear, from their
present Model of Ordination; they allowing and accounting none for Presbyters
or Ministers, but such as are sent out by their personal Ordination, or were
formerly ordained by Bishops; so as they make these, and these must make
others; and thus their power is derived from a personal and lineall
succession, and demonstratively proved from their own practice: nor will it
help them that Jesus Christ always had a Church, or some invisible Saints
under Antichrist because they must both prove themselves and the Episcopal
Ministry to succeed that very Church, or those very invisible Saints; and
that, that Church or those very Saints, were Presbyters or Ministers; for we
know men may be Saints, but not sent, or ministerially Saints sent; good men,
but not good Presbyters, as in their own way of practice will more appear:
for if any should now call himself a true Presbyter or Minister, he must prove
his sending to them by a personal Ordination; which proof of their Ordination
we demand from them, as they would do now from any others.

3. How these things can stand together. That the Divine Right is in See their
humble Advice.
the Congregationall Presbytery, as they acknowledge; and yet that there is a
Classical, Provincial, and National Presbytery, which are but Prudentiall
and humane, or mixed Judicatures, according to such a distinction; and yet are
allowed by them a Power Supreme and coercive to the Divine Right of the
Congregationall Presbytery, which is the first and immediate subject of the
Divine Right of Presbytery, as they themselves acknowledge. And now whether do
not their own principles control See in their Humble advice, etc. to the
Parl. Manus. page 4.
that pretended Divine Right they plead for and set up, a Presbytery of Charity
and Prudence, over the Presbytery in the particular Congregation, which they
say is only of Divine Right?

4. How can that Presbytery whose constitution is so questionable, challenge
such a Divine Right? As first, their Presbyters, or first constituting
Principles, are ordained by a questionable power, viz. that of Bishops.

Their Ruling-Elders by a power as questionable, viz. by a Rule or Ordinance of
Parliament; prudentiall for trial* for election, because of the general
corruption in this Kingdom, both in Ministers and people; not by that very
Apostolical Scripture-Rule or Institution of Jesus Christ.

Their Congregations Parishionall, and of politic constitution; not
Congregationall, according to Scripture.

Their way of constituting this present Presbytery extraordinary, by such an
Assembly, without precept or example for such a Way in the whole New Testament,
from whence the whole Order of that dispensation ought to be framed, and not
from the Law, or Old Testament, or See the humble Advice, etc. of the Assembly
in manus.
some cases of necessity in the State or Church of Israel by way of Analogy, as
they say in their Model to the Parliament.

The Primitive Elders and Apostles were qualified immediately from the Spirit
with gifts proper to such a Ministration; which these Presbyters and Elders
being not, but most by gifts, and habits of Art and Science acquired by
industry; therefore these present Presbyters cannot challenge the same power
for Church Censures, without the same Spirit gifting them, and anointing them
to such a power and administration in the Church; but ought to be content
merely with a mixed and partly prudentiall power, because of the mixture of
their anointing and gifts, if they will needs have such a Government set up for
Christ's, which is not all Christ's, and most of that all very questionable
whether of Christ or no.

For all their proofs alleged from Scripture for the Presbytery by Divine
Right* or of such Presbyters as were ordained either by Christ himself, as the
Apostles; or by a power from the Apostles, or from such who in that power
received from the Apostles, did ordain, or by a power in the Church or
Congregation preceding such a power, and accompanying such a power: Now this
present Presbytery can neither make it self appear to be so purely ordained,
nor have they the Church or Congregationall power so preceding or accompanying
such an Ordination; nor is that act of Imposition of hands by which their
present Presbyters stand Ministers, a mere sign of setting apart, or merely
significative, but an Institution for gifts to be conferred: under the Law, it
was an empty and bare Rite; but under the Gospel, it cannot be proved to be
such an empty Rite; Gospell-signes being but few full, and ministerial to the
spirit; not merely significatively-visible, as the Institutions and Rites under
the Law were. So as all being thus questionable still in this present
Presbytery; how can they so Apostolically challenge such a Divine Right, their
present constitutions being mixed, questionable, fallible, not one and the same
with that primitive, pure, certain constitutions and practices?

Whereas it appears in their Scripture-proofs, that both in Jerusalem, Ephesus,
Crete, etc. the Presbyters and Elders did constitute, etc. and were most
consulted with, and advised; and therefore they assume the same power, and so
force out rather then prove out their frame of their present Presbytery from
such practices: I desire the Brethren to tell us whether the Word of the
Gospel was then wholly in Scripture or writing, but partly in the Spirit and
gifts or teaching: and therefore the Eldership of the Churches then were so
gifted, as to direct, constitute, advise; and from the ministration of gifts in
the Eldership, etc. the Institutions, forms and Rules were given out into
Scripture or writing; which Scripture or written Word is now in the place of
that infallible Primitive Eldership: and therefore for any Presbytery or
Eldership to assume now such a power as the first did, they do not only
without warrant substitute themselves to such a Presbytery or Eldership, which
stood by another anointing or spirit of gifts then themselves do; but they sit
down in the throne with the very Scripture or written Word of God, casting a
shadow upon the glory and infallibility of that Word, by that present authority
and power which they now challenge in the interpretation of that Word in their
Presbytery, because by such a sure and certain power as Divine Right allows
them, they having not a sure and infallible Spirit for Church Censures, or the
execution of such a power, may put forth a certain, sure, executive power, by
an uncertain, unsure, and fallible spirit. And so how proportionable a power
of Divine Right, is with a Spirit not purely Divine; and how proportionable a
power of Church Censures acted by a gift not purely the Spirit's, but rather
the Universities and Schools; and to join such an Eldership so with the
infallible Word or Scripture, which for want of that primitive or pure
anointing by gifts, shall control the pure Word of Truth, by an
Interpretation less then Truth, I leave to all the world of believers to judge.

How such a visible power and Judge as a National Assembly of such a
Presbytery, can be set up, which must judge all the Churches and Congregations
of Christ, all the Magistracy and State-power in the Kingdom, they assuming to
themselves a spirit of judging and discerning of sins: And whether by this
power the Parliament of England shall not fall under the Sea in their last
Petition.
cognizance, interpretation, and censure of such an Assembly, for some sins
which they as a Civil power may commit, especially dealing in Ecclesiastical
causes: And then how far such a National Assembly may manage such crimes to
the heightning of their own interest, and to the troubling the interest of the
State amongst the people, I let all judge, who know how the same visible
Ecclesiastical Judge is condemned by all the Reformed Kingdoms under another
notion, viz. of the Antichrist, and Pope, and Councels: And how that
Antichristian power and Judge in Ecclesiasticals has troubled this and other
Kingdoms to the imbroiling them by excommunications into Wars and commotions
(as in our Histories, etc.) and has at length taken up other weapons then the
Word to make good their Ecclesiastical censures and interests.

And whether this visible form of Classical, Provincial, National,
Oecumenicall, be any other then the like Papal, Episcopal power, differing
only in form, in Consistoriall, Provincial, National, Oecumenicall Counsels
and Synods, the like spirit of Dominion, ruling, conventing, excommunicating in
each.

Objection. But how will you do to satisfy Parliament, Presbyterials, and
other dissenting Brethren?
Answ.
Not that I will determine, but propound for the Parliament: It appears that
the State-conscience according to the present corrupt constitution both of
Ministers, and Elders, and People of this Kingdom, cannot yield a Divine Right
to a Presbytery so constituted; and therefore they are not to be forced to the
judgment of the present Assembly, no more then the Assembly do desire to be
forced themselves to their judgment; and therefore each is to enjoy their
liberty in the Lord as they are persuaded.

The State is to enjoy their liberty in their judgment of no Divine Right in
this present Presbytery.

The Assembly may enjoy theirs, in their judgment of a pretended Divine Right
or Presbytery in all Congregations, which will conscienciously practice with
them, not seeking to make the State subservient to them by their Civil power,
which no Scripture practice will warrant from any Eldership or Presbytery
there: and thus the French Churches enjoy the Presbytery at this day, having no
Civil power to help them.

And the other dissenting Brethren may enjoy their Divine Right too, being as
fully persuaded from Scripture of theirs as the other are of theirs, and
equally live under the same liberty, and not trouble the State with any thing
but their prayers and obedience.

Objection. But the Brethren of the Assembly expect the Parliament should join
with their results.
Answ.
I know not why they should expect that, for they are no more infallibly gifted
then their Brethren, that they should expect more from the State then they.

Their Ministry is as questionable.

Their Interests are more in the world then the Interests of the first
Presbyters were, as in their maintenance by Tithes, and in their power of
Classical, Provincial, National, the Kingdom being thus corrupted, and in
that subserviency and power of compulsion, they demand of the Magistrate, and
Princes of the world.

And why our dissenting Brethren may not with as much justice, honor,
conscience, desire the State to settle such a Gospell-order as they believe to
be true; the other being no more enabled to demand of the State any power for
imposing their conclusions true by a power of the States own giving by
Ordinance: And whether the State seeing no infallibility of spirit in any of
all sides, since what the Truth which they hold bring in its own evidence and
demonstration before them, ought to be pressed* as bound to one by any Interest
more then to another* save that of Truth, I leave to be considered; and then,
what reason the Brethren have thus to press their supposed Divine Right, I
desire to know.

Objection. Whether is this to settle things according to Covenant?
Answ.
Yea, The Covenant binds us to Uniformity; but then, that clause According to
the Word of God does restrain the Uniformity to the light which each Kingdom
sees by according to that Word; and therefore our Brethren of Scotland see
Presbytery in one degree, the Hollanders in another, and the French in another,
and at this time England in another; and yet all should be one in that clause
of the Covenant, viz. to defend each other in their degrees of Reformation
against the common enemy; We Scotland, and Scotland us; and what a comely thing
it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity, though they cannot in Uniformity!

The Last Petition of the Assembly, for Divine Right in their present
Presbytery, with Inferences upon it.
Petition. THat the Provisions of Commissioners to judge the scandals not
numerated, appears to our consciences to be so contrary to that way of
Government which Christ has appointed in his Church.
Inference.
Whence we may infer, that the Assembly do suppose the Parliament and
Commissioners to be far below the Ministers and Eldership in spiritual gifts
and discerning, which I suppose cannot be well presumed, considering the
Assembly and Eldership now is not anointed with that pure spirit and gifts as
the first were; but with habits of Arts and Sciences, and with some measure of
the Spirit, which many both of the Parliament and Commissioners both may be,
and are enabled with as well as they; and whether is not this to set up the old
distinstion of Layty and Clergy, and to set the present Eldership and
Presbytery upon a higher Form then the Magistrate? seeing the gifts are not so
distinct as at first, why should the Offices be so distinct?

Petition. In that it gives a power to judge of the fitness of Persons.
Inference.
Whence we may infer, that they presume themselves to be that very Ministry
and Eldership of Jesus Christ, though both their Ministry is by Bishops, and
their Elders by a prudentiall constitution and election at this present; and
may not the Magistrate, who is unquestionably the power of God, Romans 13.
appointed to be Judge of good and evil; more lawfully judge o^ sins and
Gospell-Rules, then they who are a questionable Ministry and Eldership in this
present Presbytery?

Petition. And to be so differing from all examples of the best Reformed
Churches, and such a real kinderance to the bringing the Churches of God in
the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity, and in all those
respects so disagreeable to our Covenant.
Inference.
Whence we may infer, that if all do not believe as one believe, it is
pretended that all are in breach of Covenant; and thus the Covenant is made a
snare by interpretation, and principles of spiritual compulsion employed in the
Covenant, contrary to the Spirits wisdom who both allows and advises the
several statures and measures of light, the weak and strong: and whether the
Communion by unity is not a glorious supplement to the Rent of Uniformity, that
of Unity being in the Spirit, that of Uniformity in the Letter; and why should
our Brethren thus bring down the State and Kingdom more to other Reformed
Kingdoms, or not rather raise up the other Reformed Kingdoms to this? and if
any thing be revealed more to this Kingdom, that has sit by this long time,
why should not the other hold their peace, and believing Kingdoms as Believers
walk one with another so far as they have attained? and wherein they have not,
the Lord shall reveal even this unto them; not but that this Kingdom ought to
form it self into any Communion with the rest, so far as their Communion
excels, and so the other into Communion with this so far as this excels, and
both so far to one another, as they are persuaded, not compelled, which are
no Arguments for Faith but Formality.

Petition. Do humbly pray that the several Elderships may be sufficiently
enabled.
Inference.
Whence we may infer, that their whole endeavor is to raise up the Interest
of the Eldership and Presbytery into a distinct, sole, and Independent body and
power, which how conformable, and obedient, and consistent it may prove to and
with the power of the State in one and the same Kingdom, would be considered,
when such an Interest grow^s up from its infancy and first Reformation, into a
fuller and more perfect man: And whether their petitioning of a power from the
State to complete and make them an Eldership and Presbytery, does not imply a
power in the State more or rather as fully Ecclesiastical as their Presbytery;
for can the State give them any Ecclesiastical power, and have none it self;
so as according to these Principles the State is Ecclesiastical as well as
they, and so not to be denied the power of Commissioning with them: or else it is
a mere contradiction to pray for power from those to their Eldership and
Presbytery, which they say is a Government and Power entirely Ecclesiastical
and complete in it self; and so, as they either pray for that which they have
of their own already, or else pray for that from the State which they cannot
give them.

Petition. It belongs unto them by Divine Right, and by the Will and
appointment of Jesus Christ; which with the help of superior Assemblies in
cases of appeal, or in all administrations therein, will prevent (through the
blessing of God all the feared inconveniences.
Inference.
Whence we may infer, that the Presbytery and Eldership of a Congregation is of
Divine Right, etc. yet that Divine Right is perfected and completed by that
which is not of as pure Divine Right as it self, viz. Superior Assemblies;
and so becomes neither purely Prudentiall, nor Divine, but Mixed* and so is
neither good Divine, nor good Humane Right.

Petition. And the Magistrate to whom we profess the Church to be accountable
for their proceedings in all their Elderships and Church Assemblies, and
punishable by him with Civil censures for their miscarriages.
Inference.
Whence we may infer, that the Civil Magistrate is neither over nor under
the Presbytery, and where they place it, who can tell by this Petition of
theirs? for over it the Magistrate is not; for they say Commissioners over them
are not sufferable; and under it they say the Magistrate is not, for their
Eldership and Presbytery are to be accountable to the Civil power for their
miscarriages; and how at the same time they should subject their Churches in
their mal Administrations to the Magistrates power of judging and yet challenge
such an entire, sole, supreme and Ecclesiastical Judicature, is a mystery
becoming the learning of that same Assembly to reveal which first begun it.

Principles against the Divine Right o^ (...) present Presbytery extracted from
the Reasons.

1. THey are no such Presbyters of Jesus Christ as the first were, because
ordained by an Antichristian power of Bishops; nor were Bishops true
Presbyteres, nor those who joined with them in their Ordination who were made
by them, nor is there any succession of Ordination, but it implies both a
Perpetual Visible Church, and a true Church Ministry and Ordinances under
Antichrist, which all are to be proved by them.

2. If there were any such true Church invisible under Antichrist, to which
they succeed in their Ministry, then it must appear that they succeed that
very invisible Church, and that that very invisible Church had a true Ministry
or Presbytery in it; for men may be Saints, or good men, yet not good
Presbyters, or Ministerially sent.

3. As they now in their practice will not account any for true Presbyters but
such who can prove to them their personal Ordination from them, so we demand
of these Presbyters an account of their personal succession accordingly, which
personal succession if it be false and interrupted any where in the Line, must
needs be all false, from such a point where the first interruption was made.

4. Though Christ's promise is enough to ground a perpetuity of Church and
Christ's presence, yet not of his promise made good to such particular men, or
to their pretended succession.

5. They that challenge a Divine Right to the power they act by, must act by a
gift as Divine and infallible as their right and power, and thus did the
primitive Presbyters and Elders; therefore the gift being but mixed, their right
or power is but mixed accordingly, and not Divine.

6. They who were Elders or Presbyters in the first Churches, as Jerusalem,
etc. were gifted by a spirit which taught the very infallible Word which is now
written or Scripture, and so they then did constitute, advise, counsel in the
place of this written Word; and all Scripture Forms and Institutions were then
in the gift, and persons; but no such thing can be said of any Eldership or
Presbytery of men now.

7. They who set up an Eldership or Presbytery now of Divine Right, to
constitute, ordain, counsel, etc. do join to the Word written, or infallible
Scripture, a Power less infallibly gifted, who by such a Divine Right and
Power pretended, shall control the Word of Truth, by Interpretations of that
Word less then Truth, which is not consistent with the glory of the Word.

8. There is no Eldership or Presbytery in Scripture, but either the Churches
Act did precede it, act it, or accompany it, by precept or practice, which
makes the Divine Right of the Presbytery questionable, uncertain, unsafe,
because of a contrary Scripture, and Precept.

9. The Eldership and Presbytery which are brought for instances, are
questionable; first for the Persons, who were not such very Presbyters as they
would imply, but Apostles, Evangelists, etc. or otherwise ordained, either by
Apostles or Church, or otherwise gifted by special unction, or else an
Eldership of eminency, not of Office.

10. They hold this Divine Right is in the first subject in the Congregationall
Presbytery, and yet they set up a Classical, Provincial, National Presbytery
to complete and control this of the Congregationall, and how this their Divine
Right can be subjected thus to a Right less Divine, is unreasonable, and
unscripturall to imagine.

11. Suppose such a power as a National Presbytery collected from all parts of
the Kingdom, every Congregation having an Interest, or part there, and this
Presbytery so National and Collective informed by a Divine Right, for judging
sins, etc. shall not this National Presbytery take cognizance of States, if
sinning, Ecclesiastically as well as others? and if so, what proceeding, what
cen^ures will follow from such a body as universal as the body of that State,
and of as much Interest in the Kingdom as they, and of more interest, by how
much more Divine a Right they act by, and by how much nearer they are seated to
the conscience, and how Kingdoms have been embroyled by such an Ecclesiastical
Interest, Histories will tell ye?

12. So as in this strait when Parliament is persuaded of no Divine Right,
Assembly of a Divine Right, and the Dissenting brethren of another Divine
Right; is not the way this, to let the Parliament have their Liberty of
Conscience, to settle no Divine Right, by a power, and the Assembly to use
their Liberty in a Divine Right, with all that will peaceably join with them
in the Kingdom under that Power, and not to trouble the Magistrate further; and
the other Brethren as peaceably to enjoy their other Divine Right, as the
Brethren of the Presbyteriall way theirs, and all alike under the same Civil
Power, and neither of them with it, and all other Reformed Kingdoms, in unity
of the Spirit, and love, to one another?

Principles destructive to their present Petition extracted from the Inferences.
1. The Presbytery now not so distinct in gifts and office, but the Magistrate
may rule with them.

THe Eldership, and Presbytery in the primitive Churches had a spirit anointing
them to such Administrations; but now as the anointing is not so, nor is the
Office pure, peculiar, and distinct; the Magistrates and Parliament have gifts
as spiritual as there are any now in the pretended Presbytery, and may
therefore as well put forth a Power in their Churches or Congregations, as they,
unless their Churches, Officers, and Gifts, were more Christ's then they are.

2. The Magistrate may better rule then the Eldership or present Presbytery.

The Magistrate is unquestionably a power of God, and the present Presbytery
are Officers questionable in their Offices, Gifts etc. Therefore the Magistrate
may more lawfully put forth a Power coercive to sin then they.

3. Uniformity in the Word of God is the Uniformity of Church^^.

They that press the Covenant for Uniformity so penally as they do, make it a
snare of compulsion, not in the Word of it, but in their Interpretation of that
Word; unity in the Spirit, makes up the want of Uniformity in the Letter;
Kingdoms are to be no more compelled to Uniformity in Laws Ecclesiastical then
in Civil, but may walk together as Believers so far as they have attained;
that clause according to the Word of God, makes room for the several statures
of Christ, and measures of light in the Covenant, and they that agree in that
are truly Uniform, for it is the Uniformity with the Word, not with one
another, but so far as we are all alike in that Word, which is the very
Uniformity of the Kingdom of Christ.

4. The Magistrate as they now make him, is Ecclesiastical as well as they.

They that ascribe a Power to any to complete and actuate them in their
Ministration, do acknowledge that very Power by which they are informed to be
in those that so inform and complete them; so as the very Petitioning a State
for Power and qualification for Eldership and Presbytery, does imply a
Presbyteriall and Ecclesiastical Power in that State; and if so, the
Magistrate may as well govern in that Church, as any ruling Officer they have.

5. The present Presbytery in mystery, both over and under the Magistrate.

They that are a Magistracy neither over nor under the Presbytery, tell me in
what sphere or where rule they? for over it, they are not* Commissioners See
Petition.
they say are contrary to the Word; and under it, they are not, for their
Presbytery is accountable as they say unto ^^* so as they who are so much in
the dark* with their Government, do with Magistracy they know not what, and
would place it they know not where.

The Position being a safer way for the Magistrate then the Erastian, and how
the Presbyteriall Brethren cannot justly exclude him from ruling with them,
according to the present constitution both of the pretended Church and
Presbytery.
THat the Magistrate or Parliament cannot be excluded from Government in this
present Presbytery as the present Assembly would exclude them, because this
Kingdom of England is not a Church in Gospellorder, but a Kingdom of Believers
in general, and because their present Presbyters and Elders are no true
Presbyters of Jesus Christ according to Gospell-order; and till both this
National Church and Officers be that very Kingdom of Christ, and those very
Officers of Christ, the Magistrate may as lawfully, yea more lawfully rule then
any other pretended Officer, Minister, or Elder amongst them; for Magistrates
have the whole Kingdom of the world allowed them from God for their place of
Government: And this Kingdom of England being but a Kingdom or world of
Believers, not a Church, they may as they are powers of God rule amongst them;
Jesus Christ being only King and head in that Church or Kingdom which is more
his own, and the Magistrates Kings for him in that Kingdom which is the worlds,
or less his own: so as the Presbyteriall Brethren cannot exclude the Civil
power from governing with them according to the unsound constitution of their
Church, Ministers and Elders, nor till they have proved the truth both of their
very Church, Ministry, and Eldership; for all Scripture proofs of Eldership
and Presbytery is respective to the true Presbytery and Eldership; according to
Truth, not to every pretended Presbytery and Eldership of the Nations; so as
till the very Constituting Principles of Presbytery be proved ^^ue, no
Scripture either alleged for Presbytery belongs to them, nor any other by
which they would exclude the Magistrate, as from the Church of Christ.

Conclusion.
These few things I have writ to draw forth the strength of others in a thing
of this Nature, which is of high concernment in the things of Gospell-order, as
any point now abroad; for surely it is not a University, a Cambridge or Oxford,
a Pulpii and Black gown or Cloak, makes one a true Minister of Jesus Christ,
though these are the best things in the composition of some the Mystery of
Iniquity has deceived the world with a False and Artificial unction for that
true one of the Spirit; and the Ministry has been so clothed with Art and
Habit, that if the Apostles should live again, and preach in that plainness
they came, they would be as despised; for we wonder after the Wise, the Scribe,
and the Disputer of this World.

FINIS.
An End of ONE CONTROVERSY BEING An Answer or Letter to Master Ley's large
last BOOK; called, LIGHT FOR SMOKE. One of the Assembly at WESTMINSTER: Which
he writ lately against me.

In which the Sum of his last Book, which relates to the most material
Passages in it, is gathered up and replied to.

By John Saltmarsh, not revolted (as Master Ley says) from a Pastoral
Calling; but departed from the Antichristian Ministry by Bishops, and now a
Preacher of the Gospel.

Isa. 5. 20. Woe be to them that put darkness for light. Acts 19. 32. Some
therefore cried one thing, and some another: for the Assembly was confused, and
the most part knew not wherefore they were come together. Ver. 41. And when he
had spoken this, he dismissed the Assembly. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert,
at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West end of PAUL'S. 1646.

THE Law of Nature giving a man leave to speak fairly in his own just
defense, and the Law of Grace requiring him to speak zealously in the defense
of Truth, I think it equal that this answer to Mr Ley should be printed.

April 15. 1646. John Bachiler.
The LETTER.
SIR,
FOr the Controversy in substance betwixt us, I cannot think the Truth I
defended, so weak as to need a new Treatise to bear it up. I see it is
otherwise with you, who dare not let your former Books stand by themselves,
without another to support them. It is indeed the way of the Popish Schools to
fill the world with Volumes and Tomes, and rather to astonish then convince:
and this is one thing which has made the world wonder after the Beast. There
is no end in making many Books. How has Eccles* 12. 12.
Truth been carried out of sight from the Reader in the Labyrinth of Replies
and Rejoynders. Your self gives us an Experement in this Book: for, how are
you puzzled to let the Reader know what was yours, and what was mine at first,
and what is yours again, and what was mine afterward, and what is yours again
in answer to mine, and what Truth is after all this.

I find it to be the wisdom of the Spirit of God, to leave the world a
sufficiency of Scripture and Truth; but not to write all, list the world should
not contain it. And Pilate was not amiss in that: John 21* 25.
What I have written, (sates he) I have written, when they desired him to write
more.

So as things being thus, I hope I shall write you as much, if not more, in One
Sheet and an half, as you have writ me in Seve^teen: for he that writes
anything of Truth, more properly writes much, then he that writes against it,
though in more Paper.

The Sum of your Book is this:
1. YOur Epistles, which are a competent Treatise of themselves, and the very
Cisterne of your reasoning, from whence you fill all the other Pages of your
Book.

2. The parrs of my Treatise, with your Answer, or rather much of your former
reply, which in things of most weight is no refutation, but a reference to
other Divines, who have writ of the like subject, etc. it seems you have a
common stock of learning amongst you, or a Argumentative Treasury, to which
you refer us with much ease; but I cannot take this for good payment, to be
put over to another man, when you are bound to pay me your self: I could turn
you over thus to as able Divines, as you do me, to Mr Tho. Goodwyn, Mr Burton,
Mr John Goodwyn, Mr Nigh, Mr Tombs, Mr Pr^^^, Mr Borough, Mr White, Mr Eator,
Mr Den, Mr Knolls, etc.

3. The Appendix to your Book writ by a Master of Arts, whether your friend, or
your self, for I know not whom you make the two letters C. D. to stand for;
who brings in testimonials of your abilities, learning, piety, good carriage,
worth, etc. who methinks speaking so much to your praise as he does, stands a
little too near you; we should not seek glory one of another, our praise
should be of God, not of men.

Thus I have contracted you, to save you some evil in the multitude of your
words, now to your matter.

(1) THat they should counsel me, not to cry down the Government. (2) That In
Epistles to Sir William S^rickland and M. Gr^^^sto^, and in Epist, to myself.
no Presbytery Parochial* etc. assumes such power as the Prelaticall. (3) That
if the question were rightly stated, men would be convinced, Magistracy and
Christian Liberty would be preserved. (4) That I should restore such Tithes, if
unlawful, as I formerly received, because the sin till then is not remitted.
(5) That I would have men believe as they list. (6) That he was wished rather
to a neglect of me, then alloud conquest over me. (7) That he had rather
consute Bellarmine, then my new-sprung Notions. (8) Because I am against Logic
and Forms of Art, I am no right Disputant. (9) That I am an Ubiquitary in my
Belief, because of the Opinions set down in The Smoke, etc. (10) That I am an
Antinomian, and deals with some late Divines, as some with Luther. (11) That I
am unstable. (12) That I glory in the quick dispatch of my work: To which
Tertullian, and some old Poetry, and other Authors, with a Story of a Nobleman
and a Brewer, is brought. (13) That my Interposition is like to be no delay to
the Government. (14) That he may be better employed then in writing: and others
shall undertake me.

To the first.

1. ARe you in such fears of your Government, that you make friends to me to
be silent? Is it so weak, that it may be cried down?

To the 2. Is Presbytery, because Parochial, Classical, Provincial. less
Tyrannical then Episcopal, because many rule in that, and in this but one? or
rather not more Tyrannical, because one Tyrant is not so much as many
together? Evil in a Community, is stronger and more diffusive then in Unity.

To the 3. Is not the Question of the Presbytery yet stated? Yea surely? What
else has your Assembly and others been doing? Is it not a power in your
Eldership and Presbytery, how little or large soever, over the Churches and
Congregations? Independent upon the Magistrate, coercive to all that believe
not as they believe, as to Heretics and Schismatics? And yet men are not
convinced, nor is Magistracy or Christian liberty so preserved as you say: let
both the Magistrates and Christians judge, who in the mean time you would be
Judges over.

To the 4. For my restoring of Tithes, now unlawful to me; I have done it; I
have returned to the State my property of a full years Arrearage: nor did I
take Tithes since I was in Kent, but the peoples free composition from the
first, and being even convinced against that too, a year since, I forbore it.
But take heed how you put forgiveness of sin upon restitution; for that is not
only Popery, but like the Pope you would sell Pardons only to the rich, and
none to the poor; and you would put more upon Sacrifice then upon Mercy.

To the 5. Nor would I have men believe as they list, as you say of me: I would
only not have men forced to believe as others list, as you or your Brethren
list: I would have Faith wrought by the Spirit of God, not by the spirits of
men, who have no Dominion over Faith.

To the 6. And why do you speak so of a loud Conquest over me? Truth is not
conquered, when the man is trampled on. It is not your being great, can make
you a Conqueror, no more then your calling by the Bishops a true Presbyter.

To the 7. And for your desire rather to deal with Bellarmine then me: I did
not think I had been so formidable an enemy; but I will not presume. Indeed,
Bellarmine is a more easy adversary, because he opposes the Truth; and I,
though a weak one, may be more considerable, because Truth defends me, rather
then I the Truth: for I will rather make it my Champion, then my self a
Champion for it. And for my new-sprung Notions (as you say) call Truth Notion,
or new, or what you will; you can never call it out of its own nature or
essence: And Truth is Gods own Notion; neither mine nor yours: and new only to
the old man, not to him who after God is created in Epli. 4. 4.
righteousness and true holiness.

To the 8. Nor am Ilesse a Disputant in Divinity, because against Forms of Art
and Logic (as you say) I may dispute in Christ's School, though refused in the
School of Tyrannus. And if you will challenge me in any point of Philosophy, I
shall not refuse you there in Logic or Forms of Art. They are Forms only for
the wisdom of men, not the wisdom of God. Nor dare I take my discoveries of
Christ from Reason, nor seek the glory of him in Forms so much below him, and
fashion the Creator like to the Creature, who is God blessed for ever. You and
I must die more to vain Philosophy, to the wisdom of the Greek, to the
rudiments of the world. I allow Learning its place any where in the kingdoms of
the world, but not in the Kingdom of God.

To the 9. For my being a Vbiquitary (as you say) in belief, and your proof
of this from the several Opinions stated in my Book: Can you be so unfaithful
to that Book? Can you, who would be counted an Orthodox, and a Divine, thus
force and compel those Opinions upon me, or not rather upon the Paper only
where they were printed? Because I stated the Opinions of man, am I therefore a
man of all those Opinions? The best is, the world may convince you of this, and
of my purpose in that: And now you are thus unfaithful in a little, I may
suspect you for more. Are you one of those who pretend to be in the Mount with
God, and to give Laws for Religion? Can we trust you in the more excellent
mysteries of the Father, while you trifie thus, and deceive the Brethren?

To the 10. For my being an Antinomian, If to say we serve not in the oldnesse
of the Letter, but in the newness of the Spirit: If to say, The Law was given
by Moses, but grace and truth by Jesus Christ: If to say. We are not under the
Law, but under Grace: If to say, We are delivered from our enemies, that we
might serve him without fear^, in holiness, and righteousness: If to say, The
Commandment is holy qust, and good: If to say, Shall we sin that Grace may
abound? God forbid: If this be Antinomianism, I am one of that sort of
Antinomians, I know no other for my part, though you have filled the world with
a noise, if this be Heresy, so worship we the God of our Fathers; nor have I
mis-quoted any, but only singled out that truth from many, in one leaf, before
they spoiled it in the next, and like Pilate, who asking only what truth was,
would not tarry by it, but departed.

To the 11. And for my unstablenesse: If to be sometimes darkness, and now
light in the Lord: If to put off the old man with the former lusts, and to put
on the new: If to come out of Babylon when the Spirit calls: If to add to
faith, virtue; to virtue, patience; to patience, godliness, etc. If to grow in
the encreasings of God, to a fullness of stature in Christ: If leaving things
that are behind, and pressing to things that are before, be unstablenesse, let
me be always thus changing, till he who can only change our vile bodies,
fashion me like unto his glorious body.

To the 12. Nor do I glory I hope in the quick dispatch of what I do: but do
not you as well over deliberate, as I over dispatch and glory in that? But are
you no better acquainted with the Spirit, in the things of God? Are we to be
ever consulting with flish and blood? did the Disciples and Brethren when they
spoke the Word of God, tugge first amongst so many Schoolmen? so many
Fathers? so many modern Divines? so many Commentators? so many old Poets as
you do? Or rather, only with the Word and Spirit, and power of Christ: and for
that of your Poetry, and your Brewer, I desire not to show so much of the
old man, or former corruption, as to sparkle so lightly with you.

To the 13. For my Interposing, being no delay to the Government (as you ^ist.
p. 1.
say) Why do you say then in other places, I presented you with a former Book,
against M. Saltmarsh his Remora: And again, Mr Saltmarshs Quaere, to retard the
establishment? I pray now, be friends first with your self, before you be too
much an enemy to the truth, or to me; and though I cannot stand in the way of
the establishment; I am the least in my Fathers house; I am but as the fli^
upon the wheel; yet truth is mighty, and of that power, as it can weigh heavy
upon your Chariot-wheels, when you would be driving into the red Sea of
persecution, and pursuing Israel.

To the 14. Whereas you say you are wished to be better employed then in
writing, they are your friends indeed that wish so, you cannot be worse
employed I am sure, then in speaking ill of your brethren, in advancing your
selves, in Lordino it over the heritage, in tryumphing upon the vantage ground
of your place, and power; in supplicating, and at the same time judging the
Magistrate; or in a word, entreating them that they may rule, not you, or your
Presbytery, but whom you allow them from your Presbytery.

And for others undertaking me, as many as please, for I fear not an host, nor
a multitude of penmen; I see more for us then against us, I know this present
Presbytery may have many pensioners; there are such great livings of hundreds a
years to spice the Government; the silver shrines had many that cried great was
Diana in the Ephesians.

Master Leys Treatise.
1. THe subordination of Assemblies is made good by the learned Book of Mr
Rutherford against the Congregationall Independency.

2. The subordinate Presbyteries are not Churches out of Churches, as yours
Page 12.
are, not in such singularity, with free choice, more conveniences in
Parishes, more for preservation of Peace, more agreeable to the Apostles, Acts
15. more authorized Page 13.
by Parliament.

That tithes are spoken against by those that scruple not at slander or
sacriledeg, Page 19. 20.
that they usurp upon God and his Ministers that alienate them from his Worship
and Service.

That Old men are more honorable then the Young, therefore called Senators,
Page, 25, 26.
Elders, Sages; that Dreams are more glorious then Visions, because of more
Communion with God in the sleep, then waking, and because of many Divine things
revealed in dreams, and that John was old when he had his vision.

That it is lawful to jest at mis-application of Scripture by Gods example in
Page 40.
Genesis by Eliahs by others, etc.

That the other Church Government comes not under such trials of the Page 54.
Parliament, as Presbytery, but is set up without their authority.

That Gospell-patternes are as much in the Letter, as the Legal, because Page
62.
written.

That Mr. Prinn, Dr. Bastwick, Mr Burton, Mr Lilburne were cruelly Page 82.
used by the Bishops. Mr Lilburne whipped from Fleet-Bridge to Westminster, so
cruelly, that the cords bruised his shoulders, and made them swell as bigg as a
penny ^oase; and the Warden made him be gagged, as if he would tear his jaws.

Answer.
THat the graduall subordination is made good by Mr Rutherford, etc. Is this
reasoning or reference? And this you have done all along, referred to 9.
us either to your self, or some other to answer for you.

That your Presbyteries are not so singular, more free, convenient, more to 21.
peaceable, more Apostolical, more Authorized then other Churches: These are
good commendations; but had half so much been proved by the Word, your
Government had passed before this.

For that of Sacrilege, and usurpation upon God in alienating Tithes; never
did Prelate, no nor Bishop Mountague plead an higher title for 3.
tithes. What sacrilege and usurpation to deny Tithes? Where are you? in the
Covenant, or no? is it not a Parliament Ordinance you take them by? and will
you set up a Divine Right over that now? surely they may justly now withdraw
their Ordinance for Tithes, and leave you to your Divine Right, and see what
the people will pay you.

To that of your commending old men and age; I reverence age, and old 4.
men, but not the old man in them. And for dreams being more excellent then
visions; It is a curious speculation, and enough may be said for both; yet if
you take Visions more spiritually, they are a more glorious way of Revelation
Acts 2.
then that of dreams: but what are these dreams to yours? Surely Reformation
in blood, or by persecution, is but a dream of such as have slept long in
Prelacie.

Why are you so much in the defense of jeasting and so serious in your 5.
Scripture proofs for it? take heed of strengthening corrupt nature by
Scripture; God and Eliah saw errors more clearly then you or I, who may as soon
laugh at the Scripture it self, as something beside it.

And for other Church-Governments not coming under the trial of 6.
Parliament, nor coming out by their authority, I know not any that would not
humbly lay down their Scripture-order to that honorable Senate, and rejoice
that they would take it up to discuss, and for not coming out under their
authority; I know none of the rest so ambitious or troublesome to the
Magistrate, as to solicit them to compel their order upon all their Brethren,
and all must be Heretics and Schismatics that will not though they cannot
believe so

For Gospell-patterns being as much in the letter as the Legal, because
written, are you such a stranger to the Spirits notion of Letter and Spirit in
the New Testament? Know you not that the Temple or Legal Worship before was
said to be in the Oldnesse of the Letter? Know you not that Gospellpatternes
are more seen by the Spirit now, then before? and though both be written, and
in Letter, yet not both equally litterall, but the one more glorious in the
ministration, the other less.

For that of the sufferer^, Mr Prynn, Mr Burton, Mr Lilburne, and Mr Bestwick;
And Mr Lilbourne written in such capital Letters of bl^^^d, as you justly say;
and can you name these, and call for the power in your hands as you do? Can you
thus remember Prelates, and yet petition to be such Presbyters? Can you see
these yet bleeding, and desire to persecute by such a President of Blood?

FOr Salmasius his testimony, with the Baptism in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ: and his testimony that the Presbyter^ is but of humane and positive
right, not of Divine; He is mine, and not yours, and all you^ pains and
quarrelling, and after quotations cannot make him more yours, or less mine.
and it is no little disadvantage to you, that one so great a Scholar, as your
whole Assembly affords any, has thus witnessed with the truth, which so many
Scholars oppose.

C. D. his Treatise printed with Master Ley's Book, in Master Ley's
Commendation: whether made by himself, or some other, he best knows.
HIs Title is, One of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster. Page 4.
And there you might have known of what account he was among his Reverend
Brethren.

He was chosen Chair man of the Committee of examination of Ministers, and of
the Committee of Printing; and one of the Tryers, and one of the Ordainers of
Ministers; next after the two Doctors, Chaireman. [I remember not any of the
Apostles in such Offices and Titles.

You might have known him by his Pattern of Piety, his Book on the Sabbath; by
diverse Sermons of his ^^ Print, his Annotations on the Pentateuch: and he has
much more prepared for the Press then is already printed: All which are
approved by those most able to judge of judicious and learned Labor. [Give
them leave to speak themselves in this point.

The Greek Anagram made on his name when President of Sion College; THE SUN IN
SION; with Verses. [If the Sun be there, why no more Light there then?

For his Name, you would think it too venerable, etc. John in the Hebrew
signifies Grace; and Ley in Spanish, the Law.

With some Letters in his Commendation, in page 19, 20. etc.

THus I have gathered up all in your Book that concerns you materially, and
your friend printed on the backside of yours: And for other particulars more
substantial, your Books and mine are both abroad; let them speak for
themselves: the Readers must now judge in the Spirit, what we both write in the
Letter; for I intend not to puzzle the world with any more of this
Controversy. Some Truth may be seen: and what is more, is but you and I.

SIR, I was unwilling to set your failings before you and the world: but since
you printed them once over in mistake, I thought I might print them over in a
cleerer letter, that you may see things for Errors, which before you took for
Truths.

Conclusion.
THus I have replied to your Positions, not to your passions nor reproaches; in
which you are something larger then I had thought becomes an Orthodex Divine.

And for the dirt you cast in my face, I have only wiped it off, without
casting it back on yours: I had rather let it fall in the Channel, which best
becomes it.

For your Revilings, sleightings and railings, if they trouble not your self
to write, the Press to print, and the Reader to read, I promise you they
trouble not me. And though I am much below many, yet I am in this above you,
that I can forgive you, by how much he that can pardon, is greater then he that
offends.

I thank you for your ill usage: you cannot do that against me which works not
for my good; for I am learning to bless them that curse me, to pray for them
that despightfully use me.

And truly this advantage I shall make of your taxing me for faults which I
have not, To tax my self of the many other faults which I have indeed, which
you and the world see not.

FINIS.
REASONS FOR Unity, Peace, and Love, WITH AN ANSWER (Called Shadows flying
away) to a Book of Mr Gataker one of the Assembly, entitled, A Mistake, etc.
and the Book of the namelesse Author, called, The Plea: both writ against me.

And a very short ANSWER, in a word, to a Book by another namelesse Author,
called An After-reckoning with Master Saltmarsh; and to Master Edwards his
Second Part, called Gangrena, directed to me.

Wherein many things of the Spirit are discovered, Of Faith and Repentance,
etc. Of the Presbytery: And some things are hinted, to the undeceiving of
people in their present Ministers.

By John Saltmarsh, Preacher of the Gospel.

Acts 7. 26. Sirs, ye are brethren; why do ye wrong one to another? LONDON,
Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West end of PAUL'S.
1646.

Reader,
IN this Answer to Master Gataker, I conceive thou have a taste of the true
Notion both of the sweetness and glory of the Gospel.

Imprimatur,

May 26. 1646. JOHN BACHILER.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and the Common Council of
the City of LONDON.
Right Honorable,
MAny who call themselves Ministers and Prophets of God, accuse us of Heresy
and Schism before ye. But I hope ye will take notice they are but men as we
are, and of like passions with us; neither Apostles, nor Prophets of the first
Baptism, or gifts of the Spirit. Yet if the Priests and Elders, or any Orator,
as Tertullus, accuse Paul to Festus or Agrippa, be cannot but answer for
himself.

I have but few words to speak to ye (Noble Citizens) That ye would in that
Spirit which is of God, judge the Doctrines of Men, and single them from
Traditions, Customs, Councels, Synods, Interests. Ye are bid to try the
spirits whether they be of God, or no.

Try whether it be according to God, for some Ministers, and those not
Apostles, to call others Heretics who believe not as they believe: What will
become then of the strong and weak Christian, of the Rom, 15. 1. 1 John 2: 13,
14.
children, fathers, and young men?

Try whether they ought to preach to ye to suppress all but themselves; since
they are not infallible, but may err; and where is the Remedy then, if they
err? Who shall judge the Judges?

Try whether this make for unity of spirit, to allow no more fellowship nor
brotherhood then in Horme and practice. And what will they have ye do if Forms
should alter? For States may change: England has done so.

Try whether this make for the glory of Christians, to persecute or banish (as
they would have ye) all but themselves. May they not as well tell ye that God
has made England only for men of the Presbytery or one opinion to live in, and
worship in: And where find they that?

Try whether some by their daily Invectives from Press and Pulpit against
Independent's and others, bring not in the Popish Design in another Form, to
divide the godly party, both Presbyterian and Independent, and so to ruin all.

Try if all such Doctrine as they commonly preach and write to ye, resolve not
it self most into their own interests, profits, place, power: And what does
the Scripture and Histories tell ye of that?

And now I have done; praying for ye,

That ye may be still a free City, and not disputed by the miscelany of Logic
and Divinity of some, into bondage.

That ye may be still populous, and not your streets growing with grass
through any un neighbourly Principle of Persecution, which must needs lose ye
many, and much resort from this famous City, under the name of Heretics, not
letting such live beside them.

That ye may be a peaceable City, and not raised up and dashed by any breath of
men against the other and greater part of your selves, the Parliament. England
has long enough broken it self against its own walls: let it now be our
strength to sit still, and to stand still and see salvation.

And since the Lord has let the most of the success of the Presbytery, which
is so much desired, come through the hands of those and that Army whom they have
told ye over often were Heretics; let this be but taken notice on by ye, what
God has told ye in the success of that Army; and I trust ye will never regard
the Messengers by whose hands the Presbytery in a kind came, by beating them
out of doors. Thus rests he,

Who would rejoice in your Peace, Prosperity, and GOSPELL-unity, JOHN SALTMARSH.

REASONS FOR Unity, Peace, and Love.
THe Nations and Kingdoms of the world shall bring their Christ, and be at
peace with all his, according to the Prophesies, isai. 11 6, 7, 8. Revel. 21.
26. Isai. 49. 23. And how happy is that Nation or Kingdom which shall be first
in this truth, and have rather a peace of Prophecy, than Policy, a peace of
God, than man. How happy shall this Kingdom be to fulfill any of this
Prophecy, of peace to one another, and to the Saints.

That all Kingdoms, and Nations, and Princes, and People, prospered according
Christ, and his: Pharaoh for Joseph, Ahasuerus for Mordecai, Artaxerxes for
Nehemiah and the people of the Jews; and those Nations have been ever nations
of bondage and tyranny to themselves, which became so first to the Saints.

That Jerusalem has been ever a burdensome stone, and a cup of trembling stone
cut out of the Mountain without hands, too mighty for all the Mountains of
the world: And the blood of the Saints, wherever spilled, and where ever
found in literal or mystical Babylon, never left crying, till that very place
had blood given them to drink for in her was found the blood of the Prophets.

That the true Peace indeed, is more spiritual and comprehensive then natures,
nations, people, languages, of every tongue and kindred; so, several spirits,
consciences, judgments, opinions; not a Peace only of such or such an Opinion;
not a Peace only of such or such a Society; of such or such a Body; not a Peace
of Presbytery only, nor Independency only, nor Anabaptisme only, but a Peace of
All, so far as that all, or many may be one, which is that unity of spirit in
the bond of peace.

That true Peace is an enemy to all selfish interest, and selfish preservation,
selfish unity, or selfish peace; because that when Uinity, Peace, Preservation,
gathers up from that common interest Peace and Unity, to which they are
appointed by the law of Creation, and Institution, and becomes only their own,
and not another, their own peace, their own unity, their own preservation,
they breaking that law of the Spirit, and Communion of their first Creation,
each perishes in their single, private and unwarrantable way of saving
themselves; And the eye says unto the hand, I have no need of thee, and the
head to the foot, I have no need of you.

That there is no such impossibility of being one under diverse Opinions, eat
flesh, and those that eat herbs; for those that regarded a day, and those that
regarded it not; for those that used milk, and those that eat stronger meat;
for those that were zealous of the Law, and those that were more in the
Gospel, to be one, or together, or to please one another to edefication. Did
Paul bid the eaters of flesh call the eaters of herbs, heretics? or them that
regarded a day, the others that regarded it not, heretics? or them that were
zealous of the Law, them that were of the Gospel, Heretics? or thus;
Flesheaters, and Day-regarders, and Legalists? as we do, Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists.

That there is so much in every one of these, wherein they appear to
Presbyterian cannot say, I have no need of the Independent; nor the
Independent, I have no need of the Presbyterian; nor either of them say, we
have no need of you Anabaptist: For, the Presbyterian may need the Independent,
because he is for a purer Communion of Saints then he; They both the
Anabaptist, because he baptizeth Believers, as the Apostles always did: They
both the Seekers, because none of them have these Ordinances by the first
pattern in the Word, as by Apostleship and Baptism of Spirit: Nor these the
Presbyterians, because there may be some gift, some power of the Spirit, some
principle of Administration in them, which may help the Body, and the
Commonwealth, or Parliament. All these, because they are all members of the
same State.

That Love is the more excellent way revealed, then either the way of Gifts, or
Ordinances, and therefore no gift or ordinance is to be preferred 1 Genesis 12.
31. 31. 2.
before love: Love neither envies, nor vaunts, nor behaves it self unseemly,
but bears all things, and hops all things: and this is that love which is
of God, and extends it self as God, and comprehends and embraces men; not as
this man, or that man, merely; not as a man of this, or that opinion: but
because it is love from the fountain of infinite love* it flows upon all, and
has a kind of peace with all, and loves all: God is love; and therefore just
and unjust good and bad, are taken into something of him, seeing he gives to
all things life and breath, and all things: and the more this love is amongst
men, the more they love as God, and the more large in love, and universal in
love. That love which is only to one kind, is but low, narrow, and natural,
the mere love of creatures as creatures* but that love which can love those of
other kinds; as Presbyterian, Anabaptist, Independent, is not that love of a
creature only: so as the more we love any that are not as we are, the less we
love as men, and the more as God.

That the first and most glorious and spiritual unity is that of spirit; and
One, nor in any communion of spirit, till they be like one another in the body
first, and in the Ordinance first, which it may be they never shall be, for we
see God has hid outward Ordinances deepest from discovery; so as they that
find most, find but pieces and parcels, and one one part, and another another
part, and another another part, all find not all, because all should not want
one another, and we find these things last, because there was less need: how
many hundred years from Christ, and nothing of these? yet Christ was known,
and some of the more spiritual glory of Christ: and if Christians should not
be one, till they be like one another, how little would the peace be? even as
little as that unity they contend for: and what peace would it be, but that of
flesh and form, the peace of Ordinances, not of Spirit. I desire this may be
considered, that according to the first pattern, the Baptism of the Spirit,
or Gifts and Ordinances, were together, never asunder, from the Apostles times
to the falling away: and let there be a Word held out for Ordinances by
themselves without the like Gifts, or else let us be in more unity of Spirit
then we are.

Christians are truly so alike, and so one and the same, as they are one in
Christ in union and spirit, one in God, as they partake of the Divine nature of
the Image of Christ, as they are branches in the same Vine, members in the same
body: so God loves all his, as they are of him, born of the incorruptible seed,
being the glory of the second Adam, quickened by that life, that eternal life:
God looks not* nor loves not, as men are Presbyterians, or Independents, or
Anabaptists, we commonly love so, who begin to love at the outward man before
the inward: God loves us first as in Christ, and loves us because in Christ;
God loves according to the figure of himself in us, and so we should love one
another, if we will love according to God: let Papists love Papists only, and
Prelates love Prelates only, because they are so; let us love according to that
of spirit, we discern by the same spirit in each, according to that of love,
faith, meekness, patience, purity, faithfulness, glory, which are the fruits
of the Spirit: let us love, as we judge, and that is in spirit, as spiritually
discerning according to fruits of righteousness and holiness, not according
to this and that form which is carnal: for as he is not a Jew, which is one
outwardly, no more is he a Christian, which is one outwardly, circumcision and
Christianity is not of the letter, but of the spirit; so as loving thus, we
should not think nor speak against these, and these, because they are not
Presbyterians as we are, because they believe not as we believe, and think not
as we think.

Were it not madness to fight, because we are not like one another in face, in
feature, in complexion, in disposition, in a word, because we are not alike in
body? and what were it less to sight with one another, because we are not
alike in the Spirit, in soul, in judgment, in conscience, in opinion? If the
whole body were the eye, where were the hearing? If the whole were hearing,
where were the smelling?

The less we endeavor this bond of peace, the more we shall take in new fuel
to our old fire, the more advantage and opportunity will be opened to let in
the old remainders of the war amongst us, which shall be as a train of powder
to kindle us into new contentions; and thus new divisions will spring out from
the ashes of the old, and those whom we conquer one day, will be conquerors
amongst us another day, and we shall not know them from some of our selves, and
all our victories and conquests will be but the enemies design of recruiting
our misery; they whom we subdue, finding the vein of enmity running through
Presbytery and Independency, will soon gird themselves to battle in those
Notions, and we shall never want enough of Presbytery and Independency, till
they undo us after our own fashion: and if they cannot kill us as Cavaliers and
Malignants; in this new way, they may kill us as Presbyters and Independents.
And surely they will have so much Iesuitisme, as never to let us starve for
Heretics and Schismatics: the Jesuits run commonly over to the Lutherans, and
rail there against Calvinists and so they never want matter for division in
Germany; it is the great design of Conclaves and Popish Councels, to practice
upon States in their own religions and customs, and to turn us back into
Popery, by being Protestants amongst us, and to raise up new troubles by
changing the old, and by transfiguring their enmity; Satan himself can be an
Angel of light, when he cannot pass as a power of darkness, and where works
he thus but in the children of disobedience? And Brethren, let us not let our
enemies in at back-do^res, of Presbytery and Independency: let us not undo our
selves when God would save us: let us see that these workings are but the old
design in a new Form.

The last reason is: People are not wholly undeceived in their present
Ministers. And to that end consider,

1. That these Ministers who tell them thus, and preach thus, are neither as
Aaron was nor as the Prophets were, nor as the Apostles were, nor have such an
infallible gift, nor spirit of discerning, so as their words and Sermons are no
more to be believed then the words of the Scripture proves, and people are to
try all and to try spirits, and so trust, and now (friends) not believe
Sermons too suddenly, because their Sermons are not very Scripture, but
interpretation to their light, and light may be darkened with carnal reason and
interest.

2. That these Ministers who preach so for Presbytery through blood and
persecution now, did but a few years since preach as confidently for the
Service Book, for Bishops, or against the Presbytery, and our Brethren of
Scotland.

3. That these Ministers that preach nothing but Presbitery, Government, and
Divine Right, yet never tried it in their lives, nor lived in the experience of
it, but have it by report, and by Idaea, or model, or Landship from other
Countries, and some specious Scriptures.

4. That these Ministers who would press the Covenant against Popery and
Episcopacy root and branch, yet will be content, though Bishops be unlawful,
to say the Bishops hands which ordained them are not; and that Bishops could
make them Ministers of Christ, though they were Antichrist themselves, and that
Episcopacy could make a lawful Ministry.

5. That these Ministers who preached against Deanes, and Archdeacons, and
Prelates, as unlawful, can be content very well with their maintenance; their
tithes are not popish, nor the profits nor revenues are not against Covenant:
(people) look a little into these men, that hold there is no popery in any
thing that makes them rich, or maintains them: is this the doctrine of the
cross, and self-denial?

6. That these Ministers who preached against Pluralities, yet now a Mr Seaman,
Mr. Vines, Mr. Hill, Mr. Segwick, etc.
mastership of a College, and a great Living or two of some hundreds a year,
with Chaplainships, as they commonly have, and two or three great Lectures in
conjunction with a great Living, is not Plurality, nor must be accounted so:
Nay, for a Presbyter to have two livings is no plurality now, but for a Prelate
to have them is undoubtedly so. By the same tenure the Prelates formerly lived
at Court, and in Lords houses, and held Livings, as they in the Assembly, now,
by their attendance there.

7. That these Ministers who pretend to so much light and certainty of truth;
yet after two years reasoning and proof, have not been able to prove their way
of Government from Scripture; so as there are so many excellent Quaeries
propounded from the Honorable Parliament, which lie unanswered, unless the
Ministers intend to resolve the Parliament some other way, by making the
tumults more, and their answers less; for their books and Sermons speak no
less. Was ever Reformation, but where the Red Dragon is in the Pulpit,
preached for in so much blood? and I pray (friends) are all things so true as
they tell you? our greatest and wisest Counsel can see no such thing in it
yet: and since you expect your Government from the Parliament, I pray go not
before them in your judgments, but stay and examine as they do.

8. That the mystery of the Popish Ministry has ever been to lead the people,
and stir up the people, either by merit, or martyrdom, or ministry: and
therefore the poor souls of England had given away all their Lands once to
Monks and Friars, and would all fight for the Holy Land, and the Kings and
Princes their power to do with as they pleased: and all was, as the Priest
said, for Religion too, all as the Holy Church said: and now merit, martyrdom,
and ministry carry all before them yet, in some measure, though not in so
much: England has seen so much, as to take much of their lands again, and
Tithes again from the Ministry; and the Parliaments have seen so much as a
little to debate Religion with the Synods: and this Parliament has seen more,
by how much they have reasoned, disputed, quaeried with their Ministers: When
did ever England see so much liberty before? when durst Parliaments talk with
their Ministers till now? And (friends) let not the old Popish things of merit,
martyrdom, and ministry, carry us away as they did. I remember an excellent
saying reported of General Lesley to our Nobles and G^ntry, when they were
ready to fight for Bishops, to this purpose, Shall we lose our blood for so
many fat Swingers? And I pray, are not these the Sons of the Swingers according
to ordination, ordained and called by Bishops? Is our blood too good for
Bishops, and not for Presbyters, as some think?

9. That these Ministers who seem to close with those whom they so lately
called, and preached against as Malignants and Cavaliers, yet cannot love them,
or use them otherwise then in design to help up with the Government, and then
leave them, und persecute them under the same Notion with us as Heretics,
using them now, as the Israelites did the Gibeonites, as hewers of wood, and
drawers of water; and then what will become of these poor souls, who having
helped up the Presbyters into the room of the Bishops, to be sure they shall
neither have Common Prayer Book, nor Surplice, nor Bishops, nor Sacraments; for
the Directory shall keep out the Common Prayer Book, and Presbyters shall keep
out Bishops, and Elders shall keep out all Communicants of such and such sins,
and Uniformity will keep out Conformity: And if ye hope for better, by the
bustle and differences, and sideings; Issues and success are in Gods hand, not
in ours: Ye may know when ye begin, but not when ye end; and they will be first
in the Presbytery, before ye in the Prelacy. Therefore consider things.

10. That these Ministers, though some of them were old Non-conformists, and
have a power of God in them, (which I desire to love under any Form) yet
according to their Interests they are not so, nor to the flesh they are not so,
and it is their old man I write against, not their new; so far as they are men,
and so far as they are persecuters, so far as they are lovers of gain, not of
godliness, so far as they are accusers of their Brethren, so far as they are
in the Form of Godliness, not in the power: Therefore consider, these men are
not all spirit and truth, we are not to call one of them Iubiter, nor the other
Mercurius; They are men of like passions with us, and ye; and the worst I wish
(saving their humor of Persecution) is that the Lord would make them love us
in the Spirit, and we shall in all love allow them their Forms.

To Mr. GATAKER.
SIR,
I Hope I shall answer all things material in your Book; but your Margin I
shall not meddle with: I observe, you commonly in all your books fill that with
things, and Authors, of little value to Christ crucified; As in your last
leaf, where you quote Sophecles the Poet, comparing your self to an old
prancing horse. I should not rebuke your years, but that I find you Comicall
and Poetical; and for my part, I am now ashamed to own those Raptures, though
I am young, having tasted strains of a more glorious Spirit; how much more you
that are old, and call your self a Divine, ought not to have any fruit in
those things?

I hope I shall be in no more passion with you, than with your Brother of the
Assembly, Mr Ley. I write to edify, not to conquer; nor to teach others, but
that we may be all taught of God.

JOHN SALTMARSH.


To the Author of the PLEA for the Congregationall, or (as he should have said)
Parishionall Government.
SIR,
A word to you the Author of the Plea. You have so entangled and wrapped your
self in the Congregationall and Church-principles, as if you meant to engage
me at once against your Presbytery, and the dissenting Brethren. But that
Spirit which makes me oppose you, makes me discern your design, and so I hope
I shall single you from them; though you have clothed your self in their
Apologeticall Narration, yet I must deal with you as your self, and your
Brethren, not as theirs; and it is but a little I have to say to you. But why
no Name? Is your Divine Right so questionable, that you will not own it? or are
you one of them that sit too near it to commend it with open face, and think
you may better, and more modestly do it in disguise, and without a name? Had I
not some reason to suspect it came from some of that sort, I had passed it by
with as little noise as it came abroad: And I have but little to say to you
now; I cannot stand long wrangling in things that grow clearer and clearer
every day, for the day breaks, and the shadows fly away.


SHADOWS FLYING AWAY: Or, A Reply to Master Gataker's Answer to some passages
in Master Saltmarsh his Book of FREE GRACE.
Master Gataker. (1) THat he was traduced by one Master John Saltmarsh, a man
unknown to him, save by one or two Pamphlets, as witnessing to the Antinomian
party. (2) That he must unbowell and lay open some of the unsound stuff. (3)
That some think they have found out a shorter cut to Heaven. (4) That my
inferences upon his words are not true, nor as he intended: As if a Protestant
with a Papist disputing about the Mass, should say the Controversy is not
concerning the nature of Sacraments, etc.
Answ.
To the first, that you were traduced by me: Let not you and I be judge of
that: both our Books are abroad; and I have quoted your words to the very leaf
where they are. Your meaning I could not come at: the deep things of the heart
are out of the power of another quotation.

For my self unknown to you but by two Pamphlets: I take your sleighting: I
could call your Treatises by a worse name then Treatises; for I knew one of
them some years since, that of L^ts, wherein you defended Cards and
Dice-playing: And it had been happy for others as well as my self, in my times
of vanity, had you printed a Retractation. I believe you strengthened the hands
of many to sin. I know you love ancient Writers well, by your Margin and
quotations. And I pray remember how Augustine honored Truth as much by
confessing Errors as professing Truths. What fruit should you and I have of
these things whereof we are now ashamed?

For your witnessing to the Antinomian party against your will: Is that your
fault, or mine? Nor am I to judge of your reserves, and secret senses, but of
words and writings. Nor is it an Antinomian party I allege you to
countenance: but a Party falsely traduced and supposed so: a Party called

Antinomian by you, and others, and then writ against: A setting up Heretics
to deceive the world, and then telling the world such and such are the men. You
may make more by this trick, then you find so.

To the Second, that you will lay open the unsound stuff: I shall not be
unwilling, I hope, to be told my failings: but I must look to the stuff you
bring in the room of mine, and entreat others to try the soundness of yours
It is not my saying, that mine is sound, will make it better; nor your saying
it is unsound, can make it worse. Let every ones work be proved, and then he
shall have whereof to boast.

To your Third, of some finding out a shorter cut to Heaven then some former
Divines: I know not what you mean by shorter cuts. The Papists find a way,
they say, to Heaven by works, some Protestants by Jesus Christ and works, and
others by Jesus Christ alone, and make works the praise of that Free grace in
Jesus Christ: And is that a shorter cut then theirs, as you call it? or rather,
a clearer revelation of Truth? Methinks you expressions have too much of that
which Solomon calls frowardness in old men. Argue, and prove, and bring
Scripture as long as you please, but be not too quarrelsome. But I shall excuse
you in part, because you tell us you are not yet recovered from sickness: so
as I take this, with other of your Books, as part or remainders of your
disease, rather then your judgment; and the infirmity of your body, not the
strength of your spirit. But why chose you not a better time to try Truth in,
when you were not so much in the body?

To the Fourth, That nothing less was intended by you: I undertook not to
discover your intents to the world. You might have don well to have revealed
your self more at first, that I might not have taken you to be more a friend
to Truth then I see you are: forgive me this injury, as the Apostle says* if I
accounted you better then you desire to be. Love hops all things* and
believes all things. And Paul it seems was better persuaded of Agrippa then
there was cause, and quoted some of the Heathen Poets better then they intended
them, as it seems I have done with you; that being the greatest thing you lay
to my charge.

Master Gataker. (1) That our Antinomian Free grace is not the same with that
of the Prophets in the Old Testament, and the Apostles in the New. (2) That in
saying the Old Testament was rather a draught of a Legal dispensation, then an
Evangelicall or Gospell-one, was to tax the Ministry of the Prophets for no
Free Grace. (3) That in saying the Ministers now by the qualifications they
preach, do over-heat Free Grace as your poor souls cannot take it, does make
the Prophets, Iuglers and deluders of the people.
Answer.
To your first, That our Antinomian Free Grace, is not the same with the
Prophets and Apostles: Why do you tell us of Antinomians, of Prophets and
Apostles Free Grace? It is not the Free Grace of any of these: Freegrace is of
God in Jesus Christ; Prophets and Apostles are but dispencers of it, and
Ambassadors of it, and Ministers of it; and yet Ambassadors not in the same
habit: The Prophets preached Grace in a rough and hairy garment, or, more
Legally; the Apostles in a more clear and bright habit, in the revelation of
the mystery of Christ: The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth by Jesus
Christ. I could as easily say, Master Gatakers Free Grace, and the Legalists
Free Grace, as he says Our Antinomian Freegrace; but such words and reproaches
make neither you nor I speak better truth.

To your Second, That in saying the Old. Testament strain was rather Legal
then Gospel, taxes the Ministry of the Prophets for no Free Grace: That is
according to your Inference only. Because the Spirit says, the Law was given
by Moses, therefore will you put upon the Spirit, that Moses taught or gave out
nothing but Law? Because I say, The Old Testament was a Legal ministration,
therefore do I say there was no Free Grace in it? or do I not rather say,
Therefore it was Free Grace legally dispensed, or preached, or ministered? Would
not such Inferences be bad dealing with the Spirit, and will it be fair
dealing with me? I wonder you who pretend to write against me, as having not
dealt justly with your sense, will deal so unjustly with mine, and commit the
same sin your self, in the very time of your reproving mine. You may see what
this Logic has brought you to, To deceive your self, as well as your
neighbor. Can you cast out my mote, and behold, a beam in your own eye?

I have printed all you quoted: let the Reader judge from this and compare it
with the rest of my Book.

The whole frame of the Old Testament was a draught of Gods anger at sin. --
And God in this time of the Law appeared only as it were upon terms and
conditions of reconciltation: and all the Worship then, and acts of Worship
then, as of Prayer, Fasting, Repentance, etc. went all this way, according to
God under that appearance. And in this strain (says he) runs all the
Ministry of the Prophets too, in their exhortations to Duty and Worship, as if
God were to be appeased and entreated, and reconciled, and his love to be had
in way of purchase by Duty, and Doing, and Worshipping: So as under the Law,
the efficacy and power was put as it were wholly upon the Duty and Obedience
performed, as if God upon the doing of such things, was to be brought into
terms of peace, mercy and forgiveness; so as their course and service then,
was as it were a working for life and reconciliation.

Do not these words and terms inserted, As it were, and, in the way, and, as
if, and, is it were, clear me from such positive and exclusive assertions of
Free Grace as you would make me speak?

To the Third, That in saying the Preachers with their qualifications
over-heate Free Grace, I do by that make the Prophets deluders of the people,
etc. I answer: That way of preaching the Prophets used, pressing, as you say,
Repentance, Reformation, Humiliation, and with Commination, and the Law, etc.
was but according to the way, and method, and strain the Spirit taught them
under the Old Testament: but if the Prophets should have held forth Jesus
Christ under the New Testament, and when Christ was manifested in the flesh,
with such vails over him, and so much Law over him, as they did before, they
had sinned against the glory of that ministration, as well as some of you, who
bring Christ back again under the cool shadow of the Law, and make that Sun of
Righteousness that he warmes not so many with the love of him as he would do,
if ye would let them behold with open face as in a glass the glory of the
Lord, and if you would give his beams more liberty to shine upon them; does not
the ministration of the Spirit exceed in glory?

Nor were the Prophets deluders of the people then, because it was the peoples
time of Pupillage, and being under Bondage; they were shut up under the Law
till faith came; they were under Tutors and Governors till the time appointed:
So as that was truth, and right dispensation in them to preach so much of the
Law, of curse, and judgment, etc. as they did; and of Repentance and
Reformation in that strain they did: But in ye who pretend to preach Christ
come in the flesh; ye who pretend to be Preachers in the Kingdom of God, and
so greater then the greatest Prophet, then he that was more then a Prophet; in
ye, such preaching were delusion, because it were not as the truth is in
Christ, nor according to that glory of the Gospel, to that grace revealed, to
that manifestation of Christ in the flesh, to that ministration of glory; but
rather to those deceitful workers the Apostle speaks on, to those that
troubled them with words, subverting their souls, who preached Law and Gospel,
Circumcision and Christ. Acts 5. 24.


Master Gattaker. (1) That we gird at those that bid men repent, and be
humbled, and be sorry Matthew. 18. 3. 16. 23. Luk 14. 16. Luke 14. ^3.
for sins, and pray, etc. as Legal Teachers. (2) That Christ preached
repentance, humiliation self-denial, conversion, renouncing all in purpose:
this is not the same Gospel with that they preach, as in Free Grace, page 125,
126, 152, 153, 163, 191, 193.
Answer.
To your first, for our girding at those that bid men repent, and be humbled,
etc. as Legal teachers: If ye press repentance and humiliation legally, why
wonder ye at such words as Legal teachers? Will ye do ill, and not be told of
your faults? must we prophecy smooth things to you, and say ye are able
Ministers of the New Testament, when we are persuaded that truth is detained in
unrighteousness? We blame not any that bid men repent, or be sorry for sin,
etc. be humble, etc. if they preach them as Christ and the Apostles did; as
graces flowing from him, and out of his fullness, and not as springings of
their own, and waters from their fountains; as if the teachers, like Moses,
would make men believe they could with such Rods and exhortations, smite upon
men's hearts as upon rocks, and bring waters out of them, be they never so hard
and stony. We agree with you, that repentance, and sorrow for sin, and
humiliation, and self-denial, are all to be preached, and shall contend with
you, who preaches them most, and clearest: but then, because John said Repent,
and Christ said Repent, and Peter said Repent; are we to examine the Mystery no
farther? Know we not that the whole Scripture in its fullness and integrality
reveals the whole truth? and must we not look out, and compare Scripture with
Scripture, spiritual things with spiritual, and so finding out truth from the
degrees, to the glory and fullness of it, preach it in the same glory and
fullness as we find it? We hear Christ preaching before the Spirit was given,
Repent; and we find, when the Spirit was given, Christ is said to give
Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins; and shall we not now preach
Jesus Christ, and Repentance in Jesus Christ the fountain of repentance, the
author of repentance, and yet preach repentance, and repentance thus, and
repentance in the glory of it more? The Apostle in one place says, Believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved; and in another place, He is the
author and finisher of our Faith; Shall we not now preach Jesus Christ first?
and Jesus Christ the fountain, and Jesus Christ the author of faith and
beleeivng, and yet preach faith; yea and thus preach faith, faith in the glory,
faith in the revelation of it, faith from Christ, and faith in Christ?

One Scripture tells us godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, etc. And
another tells us, They shall look on him whom they have peirced, and they shall
mourn for him, etc. Shall we not now preach sorrow for sin took from Christ,
Christ piercing, and wounding, and melting the heart; Christ discovering sin,
and pouring water upon dry ground? this is sorrow for sin in the glory of the
Gospel.

One Scripture bids, He that will follow me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross. Another says, It is he that works in us both to will and to do
of his good pleasure, and I am able to do all things through Christ that
strenghneth me. Shall we not now preach Christ our strength, and Christ our
self-denial? and is not this selfe-denyall in the glory of the Gospel?

So as the difference betwixt us is this; Ye preach Christ and the Gospel, and
the graces of the Spirit in the parts as ye find it: we dare not speak the
mystery so in pieces, so in half and quarter revealings; we see such preaching
answers not the fullness of the Mystery, the riches of the Gospel, the glory
of the New Testament: We find that in the fullness of the New Testament, Christ
is set up as a Prince, as a King, as a Lord, as a crown and glory to every
grace and gift: nay, he is made not only righteousness, but sanctification
too; and so we preach him. Whereas to preach his riches without him, his graces
by themselves single, and private; as, repent, and believes, and be humbled, and
deny your selves, ye make the gifts lose much of their glory; Christ of his
praise, and the Gospel of its fullness.

To the Second, of your alleging my Book in such and such pages, as another
Gospel from Christ's: I shall print them as you quote them; and with them, I
desire these things to be considered, together with the other parts of my
Book, and the scope of it, which you have detained in unrighteousness: All
these I freely open to the judgment of all who are Spiritual.

Master Gataker. (1) That John, Christ's, and his Apostles Method were all one
for matter Mat. 3. 2, 8. Mat 4. 17. Mark 1. 15. Acts 20 21. P. 11, 12, 13.
and manner; for they all preached Faith and Repentance; and yet we are taxed
for these things as Legalists by this Author. (2) John and the rest preached
life and salvation upon condition of Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience. (3)
Where we find Faith only preached, it is because we have but the Summaries or
heads of their Sermons.
Answer.
To the first, that I tax you for preaching Faith and Repentance, as the
Apostles did, and John did, as Legalists. Nay, I tax ye only because ye preach
it not as they did, according to the full revelation of it in the New
Testament; but you preach it only as you find it in their Summaries, and in the
brief narration of their Doctrine; and this you ought not to do, if you will
preach according to that glorious Analogy of the Gospel: and to this, I shall
only bring in your own words to convince you, and so from your own mouth
condemn you. You say of the Apostles, We have but Summaries See p. 13.
of them, as in Acts 2. 40 and 16. 32. and you knowing this, preach only by
their first Methods and Summaries, not looking to the revelation of the
mystery, which the Apostle says is now made manifest. And for Rom.: 6. 25, ^6*
John's manner of preaching, his Preaching is to be no more an example to you
then his Baptism. You know the least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater then
he.

To the second, That Faith, Repentance, and Obedience, were conditions of life
and salvation. Why keep you not to the Form of wholesome words in Scripture?
Where does the Scripture call these conditions of salvation? They that are
Christ's, do believe, and repent, and obey; but do they believe repent, and obey
that they may be Christ's? Has not God chosen us in Ephesians. 1.
him, and predestined us unto the adoption of children in Jesus Christ? But I
know you will say, That when the Apostles did believe, repent, and obey, it is
by consequence as much as a condition, and the same with a condition. But
answer: The interpreting the Spirit thus in the letter, and in consequence,
has much darkened the glory of the Gospel. When some of Christ's Disciples took
his words as you do, under a condition, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man; etc. the words, says he, that I speak, are Spirit. Consider but what
st^^^ts you bring the Gospel into: first, you make life appearing to be had in
the Covenant of Grace, as at first in the Covenant of Works; Do this, and live;
so, believe, repent, obey and live; thus runs your Doctrine: nor can you with
all your distinctions make Faith in this consideration, less then a work, and
so put Salvation upon a condition of works again. Is this Free Grace* But you
say Faith is a gift freely given of God, and here is Free Grace still. But I
pray, Is this any more Free-Frace respectively to what we do for life, then the
Covenant of works had? All the Works wrought in us then, were freely of God,
and of free-gift too, as Arminius well observes in the point of universal
Grace; and we wrought only from a gift given. Either place Salvation upon a
free bottom, or else you make the New Covenant but an Old Covenant in new
terms; in stead of Do this and live, Believe this and live, repent and live,
obey and live: And all this is for want of revealing the mystery more fully.

To your third, That where we find Faith only preached, and so Salvation made
short work; that it is because we have but the Summaries. I agree with you that
we have but the Doctrine of the Apostles, as John's, of whom it is said, He
spoke many other things in his exhortation to the people: It is true, we have
much of what they said, and we want much; yet we have so much, as may show us,
that according to the work of Salvation in us, Faith is the work which gives
most glory to God: Abraham believed, it is said, and gave glory to God; they
that believe, give glory; and Faith of all the works of the Spirit, is the
glorious Gospell-worke; Christ calls it the work indeed, this is the work that
ye believe: So as the only reason why we hear so much of Faith in the Gospel,
is not only and merely as you insinuate, because we have but their Sermons in
Summaries, and because of another reason of yours, drawn from the qualification
of some they Preached to, that had other gifts, and not Faith: But because
Faith is of all Spiritual encreasings in us, the most gloriously working
toward Christ, Faith goes out, and Faith depends, and Faith lives in Christ,
and Faith brings down Christ, and Faith opens the riches, and Faith believes
home all strength, comfort, glory, peace, promises.

And Faith has so much put upon it, as becomes a stumbling stone, and a rock
of offense, to many: Justification, imputation of righteousness is put upon
Faith; Salvation upon Faith as Christ's Blood, is put upon the Wine; the Cup
that we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ; and Christ's
body upon the bread, the bread that we break, is it not the Communion of the
body of Christ? and yet neither the Wine nor the Bread, is his Blood or his
Body, no more then Faith is either Justification or Righteousness; but such a
work as goes out most into him, and carries the soul into him who is
Righteousness and Justification to us.

The Word were no mystery, if it were not thus ordered, and things so mingled,
that the Spirit only could discern and distinguish; Do not the Papists stumble
at Works? And why? because they see not Faith for Works: And do not others
stumble at Faith? And why? because they see not Christ for Faith! Do not some
say that the words, world, and all, and every man, makes some stumble at the
Election of some, and so conclude Redemption for all.

Master Gataker. (1) That Christ and his Apostles never Preached Free Grace,
without conditions and qualifications on our parts, Rom 8. 1. Mat. 5. 8. etc.
(2) Christ's Page 14, 15, 16.
Blood or Wine is not to be filled out too freely to Dogs and Swine, to sturdy
Rogues. (3) That saying, promises belongs to sinners as sinners, not as
humbled, etc. and all that received him, received him in a sinful condition,
is a Page 17.
creeping to Antinomiamsme. (4) That God may be provoked to wrath by his
Children, and David and Peter made their peace with God by repentance. (5) That
God loves us for his own graces in us; God is as man, and as a Father is angry
and chastises his for sin. (6) Faith is not a persuasion more or less of
Christ's love, all may have that, men may believe too suddenly, as Simon Magus.
(7) Christ bids us repent, as well as believe; yea, first to Page 20, 21.
repent, we are to try our Faith, 2 Cor. 13. 5. 1 John 4. 1. (8) That he clog^
men with conditions of taking and receiving, as well as we of repenting and
obeying. (9) The sum of this man's Divinity is, Men may be saved whether Page
24*
they repent or no, whether they believe or no.
Answer.
To the first, That Christ and his Apostles never Preached Free Grace, without
conditions, etc. on our parts:

I answer, They Preached Faith, and Repentance, and Obedience: But how? First;
in degrees of Revelation, the Gospel came not all out at once in its glory:
They Preached them, but how? not in parts, as we have their Doctrine, as you
confess they Preached them; but all along in the New Testament there is more
of their glory and fullness revealed concerning them; so as the degrees of
revealing, the parts or summaries of their Sermons, the fuller discovery in the
whole New Testament, are those things you consider not, and they are the things
we only consider, and so dare not Preach the Gospel so in halfes, in parts and
quarters as you do, and yet will not believe you do, which is so much worse, Ye
say ye see, and therefore your sin remains.

To the second, Christ Blood is not to be filled out to Rogues and Dogs.

Take heed you charge not Christ for being with Publicans and Sinners, you may
upon this ground say he Preached false Doctrine, because he said, He came not
to call the Righteous, but Sinners.

What, were all of us in our unregenerate condition sinners or righteous
persons? unholy or holy? men of Faith or unbelief? or not rather dead
intrespasses and sins, till quickened with Christ?

To the third. That saying, Promises belongs to sinners as sinners, and not
humbled, etc.

I pray, to whom does all Promises belong first, but to Christ? and from whom
to us, but from Christ? and what are the Elect, and the chosen in him, before
they are called or believe, but sinners as sinners? Do you look that men should
be first whole for the Physician, or Righteous for Pardon of sins, or justified
for Christ; or rather sinners, unrighteous, ungodly? While (...) (...)
we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us; He dyed for the ungodly. Christ is the
Physician, the Righteousness, the Sanctification, and makes them beleved that
were not beloved, and to obtain mercy that had not obtained mercy, and Saints
who were Sinners, and Spiritual who were Carnal.

So as we look at Christ and the Promises coming to men in their sins; but
those men were beloved of God in Christ, who suffered for sins before; so as
they begin not now to be loved, but to be made to love; God begins not to be
reconciled to them, but they begin to be reconciled to him; The love of God
being shed abroad into their hearts by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.
which is now given unto them.

So as we looking at persons as chosen in Christ, and at their sins, as borne
by Christ on his body on the Tree, we see nothing in persons to hinder them
from the Gospel, and offers of Grace there, be they never so sinful to us, or
themselves, they are not so to him who has chosen them, nor to him in whom
they are chosen: And this is the mystery, why Christ is offered to Sinners, or
Rogues, or whatsoever you call them, they are, as touching Romans 1^. 28.
the Election, beloved for the Fathers sake: I speak of such to whom Christ
gives power to receive him, and believe on him, and become the Sons of God; and
Christ finds them out in their sins, and visits them who sit in the region and
shadow of death, and them that are darkness, he makes light in the Lord.

To your fourth, That God may be provoked to wrath by his Children.

I pray, Can God be as the Son of man* Is there any variableness or shadow of
change in him? Can he love and not love? Does he hate persons or sins? Is he
said to chastise as Fathers, otherwise then in expressions after the manner of
men; because of the infirmities of our flesh must we conceive so of God as of
one another? Can he be provoked for sins done away and abolished? Has Christ
taken away all the sin of his? Has he borne all upon his body or no? Speaks
he of anger otherwise then by way of Allusion and Allegory? as a Father etc.
And is that, He is a Father after the fashion of men? Or speaks he not in the
Old Testament according to the Revelation of himself then, and in the New
Testament of himself now, only because our infirmity, and his own manner of
appearing which is not yet so; but we may bear him in such expressions, and
yet not so in such expressions, but we may see more of him and his love, and
the glory of Salvation in other expressions, and not make up such a love as you
commonly do of benevolence and complacence.

Did David and Peter, as you say, make up their peace with God by Repentance:
Is there any that makes peace but one Jesus Christ, who makes peace through the
blood of his Cross? Can Repentance make peace? Or Obedience make peace? Is
there any sacrifice for sin, but that which was once offered, even he that
appeared in the end of the world, to put away sin by the Heb. 9. 28. and 10 12.
sacrifice of himself? And was not this called by the Apostle, One sacrifice
for sins for ever?

Repentance, Obedience, etc. may make way for the peace made already for sin,
that is, in such workings of the Spirit, the love of God in the face of Jesus
Christ, may shine upon the Soul more freely and fully; and the more the Spirit
abounds in the fruits of it, the more joy and peace flows into the Soul; and
the more the Soul looks Christ in the face, so as peace with God is not made,
but more revealed by the Spirit in obedience and love, etc.

To your fifth, That God loves us for his own graces in us.

I thought he had loved us too in himself, and from that love given Christ for
us, and yet loved us in Christ ^op; Can any thing without God, be a cause of
Gods love? Does God love as we love one another, from complexions or features
without, or loves he not rather thus? God is love, and therefore we are made,
and Redeemed, and Sanctified; not because we are Sanctified, therefore he loves
us; We love him, because he first loved us; he loved us, because he loved us,
and not because we love him; not because of any Spiritual complexion or
feature in us; because of his Image upon us, that is but an earnest of his love
to us, that is only given us, because he loved us; he loves us from his will,
not from without; for though we are like him, yet we are not himself, and he
loves us as in Christ and himself.

Whereas you say, God is as man, and as a Father; I hope you mean not as in
himself, but as in his ways of speaking and appearing to us, and if so, we
are agreed: But your taking things more in the Letter, then the Spirit, makes
your Divinity less Divine, and your conceptions more like things of men then
of God. This makes the Gospel so legal and carnal, when we rise little
higher then the bare Letter or Scripture, not the inspiration by which it came
all Scripture being given by inspiration.

To your sixth, That Faith is not a pers^^sion more or less of Gods love, and
that all may have that.

I pray mistake not, Can all believe from the Spirit? Can all be more or less
spiritually persuaded? Do I speak of any persuasion of Christ's love which is
not Spiritual? Deceive not your self, nor your Reader, nor wrong not your
Author; or do I speak of Faith abstracted from all Repentance, Obedience, etc,
why deal ye thus? When you say men may believe too suddenly, because I press
men to believe, and you instance in Simon Magus; Was he blamed for believing
too suddenly, or for mis-beleeving? because he believed the gifts of the Holy
Ghost were to be bought with money? Can any believe too soon? if some
mis-beleeve, or believe falsely, what is that to Romans 3.
them that truly believe? Shall the unbelief of some make the Faith of God
without effect? God forbid: Can Christ be too soon a Savior to us? Can the
Fountain be too soon opened for sin? Can the riches of Christ be too soon
brought home? Paul counts it an honor to be first in Christ: Salute Andronicus
Romans 16. 5, 7.
and Iunia, who were in Christ before me, and the Church in Pr^scilla's house,
and Epenetus, who were the first fruits of Achai^ unto Christ.

To your seventh, That Christ bids us repent as well as believe; yea, first
repent.

Yea, but will you take the Doctrine of the Gospel from a part, or summary of
it, as you say, and not from the Gospel in its fullness, and glory, and
Revelation: Will ye gather Doctrines of Truth, as Ruth for a while did
gleanings, here one ear of Corn, and there another; and not rather go to the
full sheafe, to Truth in the Harvest and Vintage? Will you pluck up Truth by
pieces and parcels, in Repentance, and Obedience, and Selfe-dentall? and not
reveal these as Christ may be most glorified, and the Saints most Sanctified,
and these gifts most Spiritualized and improved? Will ye Preach Doctrines as
they lie in the Letter, or in their Analogy and inference of Truth? The
Papists Preach Christ's very flesh and blood to be in the Wine: And why? but
because they look but half way to the demonstration of Truth in the Spirit,
they shut up Christ in one Notion and not in another, and so loses the Truth by
revealing it in that Form of words which is too narrow for it, and too short
of the height, and depth, and length Ephesians.
of it.

You say, We are to try our Faith: So say I too, if you would not pick and
choose in my Book, to make me some other thing then you find me: But you mean,
we must try our Faith for assurance, as your other words imply; and so far I
say too, but you will not hear me speak: But you would have the best assurance
from trial; but so far I say not as you say, is that the best Spiritual
assurance that is from our own Spirits in part, or from Gods alone? from our
own reasoning, or his speaking? Can a Spouse argue better the love of her
friend from his Tokens and Bracelets, or from his own word, and Letter, and
Seal?

One of the three that bear witness on Earth is the Spirit, and in 1 John 5.
whom, after ye believe, ye were sealed with that Spirit of promise. Can any
Inference or Consequence drawn from Faith or Love or Repentance, or Obedience
in us so assure us, as the breathing of Christ himself, sealing, assuring,
persuading, convincing, satisfying; I will hear what God the Lord will say, for
he will speak peace to his Servants: A Saint had rather P^^l.
hear that voice, then all its own Inferences and Arguments, which though they
bring something to persuade, yet they persuade not so answerably 1 Pet. 1.
till the voice speak from that excellent glory.

To your eighth, That I clog men with conditions of receiving, as well as you
of repenting etc.

I answer, I preach not Receiving as a condition, as you do Repenting. I Preach
Christ the Power, and Life, and Spirit, that both stands and knocks, and yet
opens the door to himself. I Preach not Receiving as a gift, or condition
given or begun for Christ, but Christ working all in the Soul, and the Soul
working up to Christ by a power from himself. And if you would Preach
Repentance and Obedience as no other preceding or previous dispositions, we
should agree better in the Pulpit then we do in the Press.

To your ninth, That the sum of my Divinity is, That men may be saved whither
they Repent or no, or believe or no.

I answer, Should I say to you, The sum of your Divinity is this, That Faith,
and Repentance, and Obedience, are helps with Christ, and conditions with
Christ to man's Salvation; and that Salvation in not free, but conditional; the
Covenant of Grace is as it were a Covenant of Works? Should I do well in this
to upbraib you and those of your way?

Say not then that I think men may be saved that never repent nor believe: Why
do you thus set up and counterfeit opinions, and then engrave our Names upon
them? Could not I piece up your Book so (if I would be unfaithful) as make ye
appear as great an Heretic as any whom you thus fancy; because I preach not
Repentance, or Faith as you do; because I make all these as gifts from Gods
love in Christ, not as gifts to procure us God, or his love, or Christ; because
I make all these the fruits of the Spirit, given to such whom Christ has
suffered for, to such whom God has chosen in him; because I Preach Faith, and
Repentance, and Obedience, in that full Revelation in which they are left as in
the New Testament, and not in that sca^tling of Doctrine, as they are merely
and barely revealed in the History of the Gospel, or Acts of the Apostles,
only where the Doctrine is not so much revealed as the Practice, and the Story
in Summaries, because we Preach thus, therefore we are all Antinomians,
Heretics, men not worthy to live.

Brethren must ye forbid us to Preach, because we follow not with you, because
we Preach not the Law as ye do, nor Faith as ye do, nor Repentance as ye do?
therefore do we not Preach them at all.

We Preach them all, as we are persuaded the New Testament and Spirit will
warrant us, and as we may make Christ to be the power of all, and fullness of
all, as we may exalt him whom God has exalted at his own right hand. And we
wish that ye and all that hear us, were both almost, and altogether as we are,
except in reproaches.

CONCLUSION.
FRom the 29 Page to the last, all your Replies amount not to any thing of
substance, but of quarrelsome and humorous exceptions; and I shall, I hope,
redeem my time better then in making a business of things that will neither
edify the Writer nor the Reader: There are some things you might (had you
pleased) raised up into some Spiritual discourse, as that of Works, and Signs
for assurance, etc. But you say of your self (how becoming such a one as you I
leave) that you were like an Old Steed which neighs Page 43.
and prances, but is past service; so as I must take this of your age and
infirmity, as a fuller Answer, or Supplement to what you fail in against me.

There are two or three things more observable then the rest:

1. That you tax me for saying, That the marks in John's Epistles and James,
are delivered rather as marks for others, then our selves to know us by; and I
affirm it again, not as you say, excluding that other of our selves, but as I
said, rather marks for others, though for both in their degrees, and kinds of
manifestation.

So in James 2. 24. where he says, By Works a man is Justified, not by Faith;
So in Verse. 18. 21. All which set forth Works a sign to others rather then our
selves. So in 1 John 3. 14. Hereby know we, we are passed from death to life,
because we love the Brethren; compared with Ver. 17. 18. shows, That it is a
love working abroad in manifestation to the Brethren; and yet I exclude not any
evidence which the fruits of the Spirit carry in them, as in my Book, which yet
you allege to that purpose, after Page 81. 32.
you have been quarrelling so long with it, pulling my Treatise in pieces to
make your self work, and then bind it up again after your own fashion.

For your Story of your Lady, and your fallacy, That she might as well conclude
her self damned because she was a sinner, as one that Christ would save
because she was a sinner, And durst you thus sport with a poor wounded spirit,
that perhaps could see little but sin in her self to conclude upen? Know you
not that Christ came to call sinners, to save sinners? And durst you make use
of your Logic to cast such a mist upon the promises to sinners? Suppose one
should ask you how you gather up your assurance, now you are an old man? how
would you account to us? Would you say, such a m^asure of Faith, so much
obedience, so much love to the Brethren, so much Zeal, Prayer, Repentance, and
all of unquestionable evidence? But if we should go further, and question you
concerning your failings when you writ in the behalf of Cards and Dice, of the
Common Prayer Book; if we should ask ye of your luxuriarcy in quotations in
your Books and Sermons; whether all be out of pure zeal, no selfishnesse, no
vainglory? Whether all your Love was without bitterness to your Brethren of a
diverse judgment, whom you call Antinomian, etc. Whether you preached and
obeyed all out of love to Jesus Christ, and not seeking your own things, not
making a gain of godliness? Whether all your Fastings and Repentance were
from true meltings of heart, sound humiliation; or because the State called for
it, and constrained it? Whether your praying and preaching was not much of it
Self, of Invention, of Parts, of Art, of Learning, of seeking praise from man?
Oh, should the light of the Spirit come in clearness and glory upon your
spirit; Oh! how much of Self, of Hypocrisy, of Vanity, of Flesh, of
Corruption, would appear? how would all be unprofitable? For my part, I cannot
be so uncharitable but to wish you a better assurance then what you and your
Brethren can find in your own works or righteousness: For, it is not what we
approve, but what God approves is accepted. And I am persuaded, however you are
now loath, it may be to lose reputation by going out of an old track of
Divinity, as Luther once, yet when once your spirit begins to be unclothed of
forms of darkness and art, of self-righteousnesse, and that you with open face
behold the glory of the Lord, you will cry out, Woe is me, I am undone, for I
have seen the Lord; and Lord depart from me, for I am a sinful creature; and,
What went I out to see? My own unrighteousness; or rather, A Reed shaken with
the wind.

An Answer to a Book entitled A Plea for Congregationall Government: or, A
Defense of the Assemblies Petition, etc.
YOu write thus:

(1) That the independents confess you a true Church and Minstery. (2) Those
that are ordained by Bishops, may be true Ministers; else how am I a Preacher,
or they true Ministers? (3) Succession is not necessary to the essence of a
true Ministry. (4) If no true Ministry, no true Baptism. (5) Must not there
be persons ordaining, and persons ordained? And so the dissenting Brethren
hold. (6) That you abuse the Assembly in citing their Humble Advice touching
the Divine Right of a Congregationall Presbyteriall, and not of the other. The
Independents assort a Divine Right there, and in Synods too, as they do: They
hold a Divine Right in one as well as the other. (7) Their ordination by
Bishops though it should be null, yet they have all you can allege necessary
to a Preacher. (8) Parishes here are but as in New England, as in Jerusalem,
Antioch. (9) Some of the dissenting Brethren hold Synods an holy Ordinance of
God, and this Assembly so to be. (10) If no Presbyteries must be of Divine
Right, because not infallibly gifted, this concludes against Presbyteries and
Ordinances. (11) If you would have them content with a mixed power partly
prudentiall, because of their mixed dnointing, you contradict that pure one you
plead for. (12) The Apostles, and Elders, and Angels of the Churches of Asia
were not infallible as in diverse practices. (13) To say the Apostles did advise
in place of the written Word, is little less then Blasphemy. (14) The
Presbyterians in France, and Scotland, and the Netherlands, do not so imbroyle
Kingdoms. The fear of excommunicating Parliaments and Kingdoms, is but a
Bugbeare. (15) They ask not of the State an Ecclesiasticall-power, but a
liberty to exercise that power. (16) Has Christ^ said, that in a sound Church,
Church Officers shall excommunicate, Page 17.
and in an nnsound, the Magistrate shall do it? (17) He may in time say as much
against Equity and justice living upon voices in Assemblies, as Page 21.
against Truth.

Answer.
To the first, That the Independents confess you a true Chruch and Ministry.
You are not to prove what others confess or hold you to be, but what you are
indeed, according to Truth. Nor do I contend with those that hold you so, but
with you that hold your selves so; as the Spirit to the Laodiceans; Thou say
thou art full, etc. and, behold, thou art poor, etc.

To the second, That they ordained by Bishops, are true Ministers as the
Independents, and I a Preacher, for all that Ordination. If you mean that the
Bishops Ordination makes not one for ever a false or Antichristian Minister, I
grant it, because it is no mark to them that renounce it: Babylon is no more
Babylon to them that are gone out of it. But what is this to your Ministry or
Ordination, who are yet under the Mark and Babylonish Ordination? Renounce it,
come out as the Spirit calls ye, and then your being Antichristian is no more to
ye, then to the Ephesians that they should be less light because they were
once darkness, or less alive because they were once dead.

To the third, That Succession is not necessary to a true Ministry, It is both
true, and false, in several acceptions. When there was a true power, they
ordained others, and others them. There was succession. But that being lost
under Antichrist, so far as visibly to derive it to us, there can be no such
true visible Succession appearing. And yet you that pretend to stand by the
first power, must prove your Succession, if you will prove your power.

To the Fourth: If no true Ministry, no true Baptism. For that as you please:
I dare not exalt the truth of your Baptism above that of your Ministry, no
more then you.

To the Fifth: The dissenting Brethren hold there must be persons ordaining and
ordained, as well as we. Ye^, but do they hold Bishops ordaining, and
Presbyters ordained by Bishops, and Presbyters of their ordaining, ordaining
others as you do?

To the Sixth, of my unjust citing the Assemblies Model or Humble Advice: and
that there is no more Divine Right asserted in the Congregationall Presbytery
then in the Classical, etc. which is done so by the dissenting Brethren. I
answer: Let the Model be printed to the world, to end the difference betwixt
you and me. And for the Divine Right of the one and the other, I am of your
mind; they are able to prove both alike of Divine Right that is in their
Presbytery: The one is no more of Divine Right then the other, and neither of
them of any. And for the dissenting Brethren, it is not them, but you I deal
with. Why come you under their shadow in a storm, and yet will let them have
no liberty under yours, but would turn us all abroad as Heretics and
Schismatics.

To the Seventh: Though the Ordination by Bishops be null, yet they have the
other necessaries to a Preacher. Will ye undertake for the Assembly they shall
stand to this, that all their former Ordination by Bishops is null? If so, we
are agreed: if not, all their other necessaries are no more then Ahabs peace:
What peace, says Jehu, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Iezebell are
alive? So, what Ministry, so long as the whoredoms of Babylon yet remain?

To the Eighth, That the Parishes are but as in New England, as in Jerusalem,
etc. I pray forbear this; it is too manifest an error. Are the Parishes of
England and Churches of Ierusalm one and the same, so discipled, so
constituted? Were all of Jerusalem and Antioch reckoned for Christ's
Congregations, as all Parishes are?

To the Ninth, That some of the dissenting Brethren hold Synods Ordinances of
God, and this Assembly so. I know some of our Brethren for the Presbytery Mr
Tombs.
hold Infant Baptism unlawful, and Antichristian, and has better defended it
then any yet whom I have read, has answered it. And for this Assembly to be an
Ordinance of God, I thought that had been but an Ordinance of Parliament, and
stood by that power by which they were called by at first: Yet deny not but
that consultations for holy ends, about the things of God, are lawful by the
Word.

To the Tenth, That Presbyteries, because not infallibly gifted, are of no
Divine Right, and so concludes against all Presbyteries and Ordinances. Yea,
against all your Presbyteries to be of Divine Right as the first. But our
question is rather whether the first was any such Presbytery as you now
affirm: and for ought I see, you can no more prove the truth of the Presbytery
then in the sense you take it, then your Presbytery to be one with it, one only
in Divine Right, not in Divine power or gifts. And how are these things suitable?

To the Eleventh, That I contradict the pure Government I plead for, by
pleading for yours as prudentiall. It were true indeed, if I pleaded it in mine
own behalf. I plead it occasionally for them, who will needs have what the
State cannot in conscience allow them, and yet will not practice any other but
what the State shall give them; and so trouble both the State and their own
consciences, and would cast a snare upon both. Brethren, if ye will needs have
the State to allow ye your Presbytery, Why are ye not content with what they
can allow ye? If ye will have a Divine Right which they cannot allow ye, why do
ye trouble them, and sit down under a bondage of your own making? But how
justly is this yoke come upon you, who would have brought a worse upon your
Brethren.

To the Twelfth, That the first Presbyters, and Apostles, etc. were not
infallible as in diverse practices. What is this to the truth and gifts they
taught and taught by? They failed as men, but not as Apostles: They erred as
they were Peter and Paul, but not as moved by the Holy Ghost. Take heed by
opening the Apostles failings to justify your own you speak not worse
Blasphemy then you name in me, and make that glorious Word of Scripture
questionable which they preached, like the words that your selves preach from
that Scripture.

To the Thirteenth, That to say the Apostles did advise in place of the written
Word, is Blasphemy. What Blasphemy is it to say, that the same Word which they
writ and preached; the same Spirit spoke in them, and spoke the same truth in
them which writ in them? And is it so with any of your Presbyters? Therefore
till the same Spirit speak truth in them so as in the first Presbyters, will
they challenge the same right, the same power? Will they have a Divine Right
acted by a spirit less Divine then the Right?

To the Fourteenth, That the Presbyterians in France, Scotland, and the
Netherlands, do not embroyle Kingdoms. There is good reason: in France they
cannot if they would. I wish you would walk under the Magistrate as they do,
and as your dissenting Brethren here, and not make him serve you, And in the
Netherlands, do you as they do there, and leave your Brethren to the like
liberty that is in that State, and they will not grudge ye your Presbytery
amongst your selves. For Scotland they are Brethren I wish no worse to, then
Truth, and Peace, and power above their Ministers.

To that of excommunicating kingdoms being a bugbear. You do well to say so,
till ye be established: but you that dare so capitulate with States, whom ye
are called to advise in things only propounded, what more may be expected upon
all your principles, I leave to be judged.

To the Fifteenth, That they ask not of the State a power, but a liberty to
exercise that power. Well: and will ye trouble the State no further? Will ye
not entreat them to punish such a one, and such a one, whom ye judge an
Heretic and a Schismaticke? to fine and imprison, when you have done with
them at Excommunication? May the State be quiet if they say to ye, go all that
are so persuaded as you are, and worship and practice as your dissenting
brethren and other Saints, and trouble not us to provide for your Tithes, and
Rule for you in things of your own cognizance over Consciences.

But you would only have liberty from them; your power is of Christ. But you
cannot so clear things as you think. If your power and liberty respectively
to your selves and the Magistrate be so distinct, why have ye mingled them and
confounded them all this while? Why make ye the truth and power ye have from
Christ, wait so at Parliament-doores, as Master Case said? If the powers on
earth will not do for Christ, as you would make the people believe, Why do not
ye your selves more for Christ? Is it better to obey God or man? Thus the more
ye would single your selves in your power and right from the Magistrate, the
more your practice makes an argument against ye.

To the Sixteenth, That I should say, (...) sound Church* Church Officers shall
excommunicate and judge of offenses; and in an unsound the Magistrate, and the
Inference there: I answer, I spoke and writ so, according to your principles,
not to my own. Nor can I see how you can challenge such a one, entire, and
simple Discipline exclusively to the Magistrate, upon no more true, pure, and
Scripture-principles then your present Presbytery is. And I conceive the powers
on earth, or in the world, have to do in every Government that is more of the
world then of Christ* For if ye exclude them from a part in that Government
which is partly prudential, and of man, you exclude them from off part of their
own Kingdom, which is theirs by inheritance, and of more Divine Right then I
conceive yours to be. And whereas you would make us believe you stand only in
a pure Gospel strength and power, and desire no more of the Magistrate but
liberty: can this be so in truth, when all is esteemed invalid and nothing, if
the Magistrates power does not actuate the Ministers power? I know you may
distinguish of powers Scholastically, and Spheres of working for those powers,
and so tell the Magistrate and us, he does but act in his Sphere, when he acts
in yours, and indeed acts yours, making it to be stronger then it is in it
self. But is not his Civil power that which puts life, as you think, into all
your Presbytery? Yet he must think he does but as a Magistrate still, as if so
be that the Magistrate were made to be rods in the hands of the Church, and
Swords to be drawn by them, and Iron whips at their girdles. We are not now as
Aarois and Moset: we are not a Kingdom of Israel, nor a Church of Israel;
though too many of you have preached the Old Testament more then the New; for
what advantage, let the Magistrate judge.

To the Seventeenth, That he may in time say as much of justice living upon
voices in Assemblies, as of Truth* and so to be a Mystery of Iniquity. These
are but insinuations to the Magistrate, and ghosts of Jealousy which you
raise. And to put an end to such fears; when I make Church and State,
Magistrate and Ministry, Gospell-laws and Civil to be both one, then
challenge me for that opinion: But I have learned, that Christ's Kingdom and the
worlds have a several Policy; and that may be a Law in the one, which is not
to the other. And now is it your Inference, or my Principle, wrongs the
Magistrate?

An Answer in few words to Master Edwards his second Part of the GANGRENA, And
to the namelesse Author of a Book, called, An After-reckoning with Master
Saltmarsh.
MAster Edwards, the difference betwixt ye both, is this: You set your name to
more then you know, as has been well witnessed; and this man dare set his name
to nothing: You sin without shame, and your Partner is ashamed of what he does.
Sin is too powerful in you against Truth, because you show your self: and
Truth is too powerful for him, because he hides himself.

Master Edwards, I shall answer you in these few words: but first, The Lord
rebuke thee, even the Lord.

1. If the Image of Christ be in any of those you so persecute; how can you
answer it to Jesus Christ, to cast any dirt on the glory of him?

2. If God be in any of those you are so much an enemy to; how will you answer
it to fight against God, any thing of God?

3. If any of those be the children of the heavenly Father, or the little ones
of the Gospel, It were better that a millstone were hanged about your neck, and
you cast into the Sea: So Christ tells you.

4. What is it to sin against the holy Ghost, but to hate the Light once known,
or to blaspheme the works of the Spirit? And you once professed to me you had
almost been one of those whom you call Heretics. Oh take heed of that sin^
there is no more Sacrifice for that. And how if the works of those you so
judge, be wrought in the Spirit? shall you ever be forgiven in this world, or
in that to come? Read the words, and tremble.

5. Does not the Word bid you restore those that are fallen, in meekness* and
tell your brother his fault, first betwixt you and him? And you never yet came
to any of them that I could hear of; but print, proclaim, tell stories to the
world of all you hear, see, know. Is Christ in this Spirit? Is the Gospel in
this strain? Will this be peace to your soul hereafter?

6. Solomon tells us, that a man may seem fair in his own tale, till his
neighbor search out the matter. And how dare you then take all things at one
hand, and not at another? How dare you have one ear open for complaints, and
faults, and crimes, and the other shut against all defense? Did ever Justice do
this? Did you ever call for their accusers face to face? Did you ever traverse
Testimonies on both sides? And dare you judge thus, and condemn thus? Shall
not the Judge of* Heaven and Earth make you tremble for this Injustice? Shall
he not make Inquisition upon your soul for this blood?

7. Is it any other ground or bottom you stand on in this your way of accusing
the Brethren, but Paul you say named some, and the Fathers named some so, and
Calvin, as you told me the other day when I met you? And was there ever crime
without some Scripture, or shadow of the Word? Did not Canterbury on the
Scaffold* preach a Sermon of as much Scripture and Story for what he did, as
you can for yours, if you should ever preach there? He thought ye all
Heretics, as you do us; he thought he might persecute you, as you do us; and
he had a Word from John Baptist for his manner of death, and a Word from the
Red sea and Israelites for his death, and enemies; and a Word from Paul for his
Changing Laws and Customs: and for his crime of Popery, he had a Word f^^m
them that feared the Romans would come and take away their Government* Thus
Satan and Self can paint the worst kind of sin.

Poor soul* Is your conscience no better seated then in such a^ery
apparitious of Scripture, and failings of Fathers? Do not you hear the Prayers
of those souls you wound, pleading with God against your sin? Are you not in
the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity^ Is not your spirit yet flying,
when none pursues you? Are not your dreams of the everlasting burning, and of
the worm that never dies? Have you no gnawings, no flashings, no lightnings? I
am afraid of you. Your face and complexion shows a most sadly parched, burnt,
and withered spirit. Methought when I called to you the other day in the
street, and challenged you for your unanswerable Crime against me, in the third
page of the last Gangrena, in setting my name against all the Heresies you
reckon, which your own soul and the world can witness to be none of mine, and
your own confession to me when I challenged you: How were you troubled in
spirit and language? Your sin was, as I thought, upon you, scourging you,
checking you, as I spoke. I told you at parting, I hoped we should overcome you
by prayer. I believe we shall pray you either into Repentance, or Shame, or
Judgment, ^re we have done with you. But Oh might it be Repentance rather,
till Master Edwards smite upon his thigh, and say, what have I done?

For your Anagram upon my name, you do but fulfill the Prophecy, They shall
cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake.

And for your Book of Jeeres and Stories of your Brethren; Poor man! It will
not be long music in your ears, at this rate of sinning.

For the namelesse Author and his After-reckoning; let all such men be doing,
for me: Let them rail, revile, blaspheme, call Heretics: It is enough to me,
that they write such vanity they dare not own.

And now let me tell ye both, and all such Pensioners to the great accuser of
the Brethren, Fill up the measure of your iniquity, if ye will needs perish
whether we will or no. I hope I rest in the bosom of Christ, with others of my
Brethren: rail, persecute, do your worst, I challenge all the powers of hell
that set ye on work, while Christ is made unto me righteousness, wisdom,
sanctification and redemption.

And I must tell ye further, that since any of the light and glory of Christ
dawned upon me: since first I saw that Morning Star of righteousness, any of
the brightness of the glory in my heart, that heart of mine which once lived
in the coasts of Zebulon and Nephtaly, in the region and shadow of death, I can
freely challenge ye, and thousands more such as ye, to say, write, do, work,
print, or any thing, and I hope I shall in the strength of Christ, in whom I am
able to do all things, give you blessings for cursings, and prayers for
persecutions.

FINIS.
Page 144. line 37. for Antichristian, read great corruption.


