ESSAYS WITH Brief Adviso's. Accommodated to the Capacity of the Ladies and
Gentlemen, sometime Students of the English Academy, lately Erected at London.
To whose use and perusal they are recommended, in Exchange of their English
Lectures of late published.

Semel insanivimus omnes.

London, Printed by J. S. for Robert Blaggrave, at Oxon. 1657.

A Brief Account of such Discourses as are handled in this following Treatise.
1. Part: of Logical Discourses.
1. DIs. of Logic. page 1. 2. Whether Logic be necessary for the acquiring of
other Acts and Sciences? Aff. p. 2. 3. Of the ten Categories or Praedicaments.
p. 4. 4. Of a Praedicable or Universal. p. 5. 5. Of the 5th. Predicable or
Common Accidents. p. 7. 6. Whether an Accident can migrate or Travel from one
Subject to another, Neg. p. 11. 7. Of Syllogisms. p. 13. 8. Of Disputations. p.
14. 9. Of Fall acyes. p. 15.
2. Part: of Physical Discourses.
1. OF Physic or natural Philosophy. p. 17. 2. Of the first Matter. p. 20. 3.
Of the Original of forms. p. 23. 4. Of Monsters. p. 29.
3. Part: Containing Essays or Characters.
1. OF a Miser or Covetous man. p. 32. 2. Of Love. p. 34. 3. Of a Melancholy
Man. p. 36. 4. Of Choler or Passion. p. 59. 5. Of an Emperick or Country
Physician. p. 40. 6. Of a Fool or Natural. p. 43. 7. Of an Hypocrite. p. 44.
8. Of Books. p. 46.
4. Part: of Mifcellaneous discourses.
1. OF Ministers and Magistrates. p. 49. 2. Of the Platonic year. p. 52. 3. Of
Employments and Variety of Fortunes. p. 54. 4. Whether the Emperor Augustus did
wisely in making his Enemies his heirs, Neg. 56. 5. Of Thoughts. p. 61. 6. Of
Atheism. p. 64. 7. Of Writing Libells. p. 66.
5. Part: Of Advise, concerning these articulars.
1. REligion. page 68. 1. Manners. p. 69. 3. Self Knowledge. p. 67. 4.
Husbanding of time. p. 70. 5. Meditation. p. 71. 6. Study of Antiquities. p.
72* 7. Of overvaluing former Ages. p. 74* 8. Reverencing of Old Age. p. 75. 9.
Travail. p. 75. 10. Variety of Employments. p. 76. 11. Giving Respect. p. 77.
12. Honoring Soldiers. p. 78. 13. Passion. p. 80. 14. Pride. p. 81. 15.
Charity. p. 82. 16. Discontent. p. 83. 17. The fraylty of Yout^. p. 84. 18.
Writing Books. p. 85. 19. Vindication. p. 86. 20. Covetousness. p. 87. 21.
Boasting. p. 88. 22. Ambition. p. 90. 23. Study of causes. p. 90. 24. Policy.
p. 92. 25. Deliberation. p. 93. 26. Learning despised. p. 95. 27. Self Conceit.
p. 97. 28. Conclusion. p. 98. An Appendix of Death. p. 100.
ERRATA,
IF any having some spare minutes lying on their hands, shall think the
perusal of these discourses worth the loss of their time, they are desired to
Correct the following Errata's, and under the mantle of a Candid acceptance
shroud what other Lapses they shall discover.

Page 9. line 11. for this read the, p. 26* l. 18. for it r. its p. 27. l. 14.
for being r. beings. p. 29. l. the last, for advantage r. decorum; p. 37. l.
^2. for Muschado r. Mustachio's, p. 46. l. 5. for paper Books r. paper B^^ks
l.^^. for Corporate r. Corporeal, p. 51. l. 19. for the r. her Sphe, etc. p.
56. l. 9. for framer. fame, p. 26. l. 24. for us r. as, p. 67. l. 2. for frame
r. fame l. 16. for true r. fair, p. 72. l. 13. for sprawn'd r. spawned, p. 93.
l. 19. blot out I, p. 94. l. 20. for farther r. father, p. 98. l 12. blot out
it, p. 100. l. 13. for gain r. game, p. 102. l. 3. for groaneth r. groaned.

Humanum est errare.

-- Ridentem dicere verum
Qui vetat --
De Logica.
Logic pretends to furnish lame reason with Crutches, to Vamp Pigmey-Reason,
and set it upon Stilts, to accommodate blear-eyed, and dimsightted reason, with
Spectacles, and like a skillfull translator set reasons Shoo upright,
wheresoever it treads awry: and therefore is called the Science's Handmayd,
that pins on the Gorgers of their Definitions, and sets the stiff Ruffs of
their peremptory Axioms; And so makes the Muses (the Daughters of Jupiter) look
like grave Matrons, or rather Aldermens Wives.

The true reason our Mercuriall and Courtly gallants so much despise them.
Where as if this Antic dress, severe gravity, and starcht face, were laid
aside; And they either appeared in the Naked beauty of the Graces, or apparreld
by the more skillful tire-woman, Rhetoric, in the princely ornaments of
Oratory, they might look as beautiful as Madam Poetry, and be as much Courted
as Romances, the wits beloved Dalilahs.

An Logica sit necessaria ad alias arts acquirendas? Aff.
DISC. 2.
HAd not man's Intellect been lamed and cripl'd by its Fall in Paradise, it
might with ease have waded through the most intricate difficulties of humane
Sciences, and traveled the roughest paths of knowledge, without supporting its
quick and nimble reason with the wooden Crutches of Logic. The Roads of
Science had bin free from all fallacious ambushes, and therefore no danger of
Truth's being surprised by a cutthroat band of Sophisms. Nor needed the
Intellect doubt its being lost or wilder'd in the intricate Labyrinth of the
most subtle Arts, having the bright and splendid Sun of Reason to direct it; A
surer guide than the Moonshine Light of Logic. But ever since Mother Eve
forfeited the Charter of her Reason for an Apple, which her simplicity (in
suffering her-self to be outwitted by the Serpent) had dyed with a vermilion
blush; I say, ever since the serpent tript up the heels of Mother Eves Reason;
Man's Intellect can scarce with safety lanch forth into the Ocean of Science, to
traffic for the Orient-Pearls of truth; lest through the Piracy of Fallacyes
(with which the Coasts of all Arts are now infested) it be robbed of its
fraught, or betrayed into the Barbarous hands of Nonsense.

De 10. Praedicamentis: of the ten Categories or Predicaments.
DISC. 3.
THe ten Praedicaments are the ten Drawers of Natures Cabinet, wherein are laid
up all her treasure. They contain an exact Inventory of the worlds
housholdstuffe. Or are the 10. Tribes into which Philosophers have distributed
the whole offspring of Nature: as Romulus, in Romes Infancy, did the Romans.
Of which, Substance may be called the Elder house, or firstborn of Beings.
From whence all the Classes of Accidents like younger families receive the
Pensions of their Beings, and live in necessary Dependence: As if by Nature
produced for no other end, than the Ornament, pomp, and luster of their Elder
Brother Substance.

De Universali.
DISC. 4.
THat which our Conjurers the Schoolmen call Universale, is nothing but a
Meteor or Notion, exhaled from particular Objects, and by the Rays of the
Intellect carried into the Region of the Brain. Every Universal decking and
adorning it self with such jewels of Truth it has robbed and plundered from
many Particulars. Like the Jay in the Fable not having one feather of its own,
wherewith to hide its nakedness. And should it be called to an exact account,
and be compelled to make a full restitution, it must necessarily be divested of
all being, and dwindle into a Nonentity; yet what a stir does this Gull make
upon the stage of Learning and knowledge: this strumpet Fallacy having painted
itself with the fucus of truth, being made the very basis and foundation of
all Science; which, should any one desire thoroughly to understand, and strictly
embrace in the arms of his knowledge, he shall find it nothing but a condensed
body of air, that deluded the sight of his understanding. But were the Mask
(under which it has so long cheated the world) taken off, we should see it no
other than the similitude or resemblance that is between Beings. Or a Picture
drawn in the mind, by which the Intellect (as the Countryman by the thief's
picture shown him in the Conjurers glass) makes discovery of the things it
has in Quest o^ Pursuit.

De 5. Praedicabili. Of Common Accidents.
DISC. 5.
THe last and lowest form of the 5. Praedicables; contains the Rout of common
Accidents; which, being altogether Aliens and strangers to the essence of their
subjects, are said adesse and abesse sine subjecti interitu; as if Accidents
like Ciphers added nothing to the sum of any Entities essential worth or
dignity. But being mixed with essences (like chips in Pottage) no way alter the
nature of their Subjects: And therefore says the Proverb, A man's a man, tho
but a hose on's head; and Reynard is but Reynard the Fox, though commenced
Priest, or stepped into a Friars Cowle. Should any thing, with the Bird in the
Fable, deck and adorn it self with the plumes of many and various Accidents;
yet shall it no more change its species, than the Ass, in the Lions skin, was
transformed to a Lion.

For, the variation of Accidents is no Metamorphosis of Natures. The crow's a
crow, whether in a black Coat as here in England or a white as travelers
report him in other Countries. The fucus therefore, or varnish of accidents ads
no more to the intrinsecall worth of any Essence than a scarlet Coat to the
worship of my Lords Ape. The ruin of no essence is portended by the retreat of
accidents, as the fall of an Old Fabric by the departure of its vermin: nor
its life suffocated by the approach of the most malignant as a candle is
reported, by the presence of an evil spirit: nay should all thie troops and
cohorts of natures accdents muster all their forces together they were not able
to expugn or captivate the least and most inconsiderable Essence: and therefore
it is not without cause Philosophers permit not accidents to suffragat in the
court of essences, for should they by the popular breath of giddy fancyes be
voyc'd into the saddle of authority, they would act no more in the
Commonwealth of Entities, than Bibulus in his Roman Consulship; or the Log's
mild Majesty, Jupiter made Emperor of the Froggian Territories: yea were the
Alantick burden of essential differences supported by no greater strength than
the pygmy shoulders of common Accidents we might justly expect a ruit Coelum to
the whole fabric of Sciences. I confess some Accidents, as those our
Philosophers term inseparable, may like old friends hardly be separated from
the strict embraces of their essences: or like the shirt Deianeira sent
Hercules cleave so fast unto the skin of their subjects, as not to be put off
without devesting them of their actual existencies; but its impossible they
should ever be incorporated or matriculated into the family of the Essence.

An Accidens migrat de subjecto in subjectum? Neg.
DISC. 6.
ACcidents, like Aristotle's Intelligences, are strictly confined to the Orbs of
their peculiar Subjects, from which it is as capital to budge a foot, as
heretofore for a Roman slave to run from his Master. We may well grant, they
are no Straglers or great travelers, seeing they were never beyond the Island
of their Subjects. The snail (like a Pedlar with his pack at his back) travells
no farther than he can carry his house: And an accident no farther than his
Subject pleases to transport it. Most friends, like leaves of trees, desert
their Companions in the winter of adversity. But Accidents, like true Trojans,
accompany their subjects through thick and thin, through all weathers and
fortunes; the Ivy is not truer to the Oak, the Vine to the Elm, nor the
handmaid-shadow to the body it waits upon, than the Accident to its subject,
which as it was the Cradle of its infancy, is also the Urne of its ashes; as
the womb that gave it birth, so the tomb and sepulcher that receives it after
death: and indeed should it once start from that subject it has once espoused,
it would necessarily drop into the gulf of Nullity, or like a bough divided
from its tree, strait wither into a Nonentity; as having thereby forfeited the
Charter of its being.

De Syllogismis:
DISC. 7.
Syllogisms are the Fetters and Shackles of Reason, where the Plea of the
Argument cannot be heard for the Jangling of Ergoes. I love to see reason (the
Queen and Empress of the lesser world) triumph in the starely Chariot of a
rich similitude, and not carted, or led Captive in a Rumbling Wheelbarrow by a
Rout or band of barbarous* Terms. As if nothing looked like reverend truth,
that is not dressed in Aristotle's Ruff, that does nor dance in Mood and
Figure, or proceed from the Tripod of a Syllogism. But without doubt the
rattling of Ergoes, contributes no more help to laboring, and almost baffled
reason, than the Irish Kettles to the Moon under an Eclipse.

Of Disputations.
DISC. 8.
DIsputations are said to examine truth by the touchstone of Reason; or to be
the wind, by which truth is winnowed from the Chafe of Error. But I doubt with
as ill success; as when the maid having much dirt and lime fallen into her
meal, heaved it against the wind. I have seldom known any that filling the
sails of their reason with the wind of disputation, could ever arrive at the
terra incognita of any new discovery. And I could as soon believe the dropping
of Solane geese from Ashen keys in Scotland, as that the productions of truth,
like the horses of the Sun, or Spanish gennets, are begotten by the wind of
words; and therefore should think truth rather lost than found in the Cloud and
dust of a wrangling Disputation.

De Fallaciis.
DISC. 9.
THe Doctrine of Fallacies, is, the Art of Juggling truth out of Reasons pocket
by playing Hocus Pocus with the Understanding. Its professors are called
Sophisters, a generation of Mountebanks, skillfull in nothing but in casting
mists before the eyes of the Intellect; and by a sleight of perverse arguing to
trip up the heels of Truth. They have learned of Ops, the cunning wife of old
Saturn, to obtrude the pebble of falslhood (lapt in the swadling-clours of a
Syllogism) for the Jupiter or legitimate offspring of divine Reason. Or,
imitating our Coyners, set the Regal stamp of Sovereign truth, on the false
and counterfeit coin of Error. That which first hatched this imposture was the
facility that is found in most men to be deceived, who like Ixion embrace a
cloud instead of Juno, or our Countrymen, that if they see a Sophism (which is
truths Ape in a scarlet Coat) are ready to bless his Worship, and take it for
the learned Pallas that issued from the Brain of Iupipiter.

Natural Philosophy.
De Physica
DISC. 1.
Natural Philosophy brings man acquainted with his Stepmother Nature, and the
whole family of her Beings, by the skillful displaying their several Essences,
the true badges and Cognizances of the worth and eminency of each Rank, Order,
or Corporation in the Republic of the world: and here the Physiologist, like a
skillfull Herald, blazons the natures of things according to their several
dignities either by the various Colors and Metals of Accidents, or the
precious stones of virtues and effects, or the Celestial Planets of their
divine influences. Now of all Philosophy that which is grounded on experience,
may justly bear away the palm, as being not the Chimaeraes or offspring of
men's Phansies, but the real confession of dying nature, tortured on the wrack
of some Chymicall experiment. But whenever sullain Natures Pearl of
knowledge, like that of the Toad, may not otherways be obtained; rather let
her bowels, like the womb of Caesar's Mother, be ripped up, than that the least
truth should miscarry, or not be born into the world, and so perhaps the
Anatomists knife may perform what the Alchymists limbeck could not accomplish.
But as for those that are willing to herd with the common rout of Philosophers,
must expect no richer banquet than that of the foxes in the fable, ( i. e.)
instead of feasting their Intellects with the Viands of Knowledge, to lick the
outside of Natures glass. For since humane industry has as yet discovered but
two Keys ( sc.) Chemistry and Anatomy, that can unlock the Cabinet of natures
secrets, he that will neither go to the charge of the one, nor the trouble of
the other, is like to enrich his understanding with but few jewels of
Philosophical truth.

De Materia prima.
DISC. 2.
THe first matter being Natures table book whenever the Characters of any
form, either through the injury of corroding time, or some malignant Quality,
are become so slurred, or blotted as to be no longer legible; Its natures
Custom, with the sponge Philosophers term Corruption, to blot it out of her
Register, and with the pensill of Generation to place some other figure in its
Room. Therefore Corruption is but as it were the whiting of the table, and
generation the Drawing a new Picture; or if we may borrow a simile from the
stage, I should call it the re-apparelling the first matter, for acting a new
part on Natures Theater. Therefore the Metempsychosis; or rather
transmigration, that Pythagoras gave to souls, may be granted the Materia
prima, without an Allegory; seeing it has by Natures doom ever since the
Creation been running the gantlet of Forms, and suffering the Martyrdom of
perpetual corruptions, which through custom being now become a second nature,
it has as natural an inclination to the embracing of new Forms, as heavy
things to be received into the bosom of their Center: and therefore not
without cause have Philosophers termed it the grand strumpet, or harlot; the
fire of whose lust is unquenchable, and streams of whose desires are always
tyding toward new objects, ever loathing her old Mates, and thirsting after
new embraces, in coveting whereof she is so impetuous, that nature could never
knit her in so fast a Gordian knot to any form though of highest perfections,
that was not in short time deserted and widdowed by the levity and unchastity
of her fickle humor. For she is more unconstant than the wind, more fickle
than female levity, more slippery than an Eele, harder to be fixed than the
Alchymists Mercury, more difficult to be retayn'd, than the Devil to be
exorcis'd or charmed into a circle. She changes her self into more shapes,
than the Rainbow decks it self with colors, her whole work is to act the
fables of Ovids Metamorphosis, and is of skill in transformations able to
baffle Proteus, to whom the Poet has given this Character, Omnia transformat
sese in miracula rerum.

De Formis.
DISC. 3.
IF there be any jewel or pearl of knowledge, which nature may seem to have
envyed man the enjoyment, I should think, it were the right understanding of
Forms, which above all other things may justly be said to transcend the Zenith
of the most raised Capacity, and to be placed in a terra incognita, to the best
traveled of humane understandings: the spring or head of the famous river Nile
is not couched in a denser cloud of uncertainty and obscurity, than that in
which the original of forms is invell oped etc concealed, concerning which there
is as great contention amongst Philosophers; as heretofore between the seven
Cities, that strove for the honor of Homers Birth. Some according to the
Platonic fiction of the rational soul, do antedate the Existency of all
forms, with this only diffierence, that whereas the Platonist assigns
Caelestiall mansions, these quarter them with the materia prima, as if the
first matter, like the primitive, rude, and confused Chaos, did actually
contain all those various and different forms, with which nature has
interwoven and checkerd the worlds drapery: and therefore that Generation is
but the discovery producing or bringing into play, some new form that had
hitherto hid and conceald it self, in some obscure cell or remote corner of its
matter; and by consequence that corruption is the form's retiring and
withdrawing it self from the stages view, having had its Exit and finished the
part of nature's Fable that was assigned unto it.

There are others, who though they hold the praeexistency of forms, are more
modest then the former, therefore correct the harshnesse of actual
praeexistency with the lean terms of an incompleate and imperfect act; as if
the infant-plants of forms were in the first matter as in a common Nursery,
radically and seminally contained, that is to say, that nature, on the first
matter, as in her table Book, had rudely drawn the first lineaments or outward
strokes of all forms, which are in time to be perfected and completed by the
more accurate pencill of generation. These fancyes, however ingenious they may
seem, become a Poet rather than a Philosopher. If we consult the Peripatetick,
he will obtrude, as Jupiter did by Ixion, a cloud of Aenigmaticall words,
instead of the Juno we desire to embrace; or cast a mist of insignificant terms
before the eyes of the intellect, instead of giving us a view of the naked
truth, telling us, how that all forms lie dormant in the lap or bosom of the
first matter, or are treasured up in the womb of it potentia, whence, by the
powerful influence and charms of natural generation they are awakened and
conjured up, and again buried and entombed by the dissolving power of
Corruption. A late writer, that has dipped his pen in this Controversy,
finding the Gordian knot of this difficulty indissoluble, resolved rather with
Herculean courage to cut it, than suffer it any longer to crucify and baffle
the weakness of humane Intellects; and therefore expunging and crossing out of
natures Register all material forms, proscribed them the Commonwealth of
Beings; and substituted in their stead Accidents, as being of less nicery, and
greater freedom, in giving an account of their Originalls.

According to which Philosohpy, Generation should be nothing but the re-attiring
of the first Matter with a new livery, or suit of Accidents, when neither
Farriers nor Physicians (who are broken-natures Bodgers) can any longer patch
up the Rents of the old garment; or otherwise we may term it the new coining,
in Natures mint, such rusty pieces, as through the injury of all-devouring
time, or some malignant quality, have lost their primitive stamp or impression.
I was at the first view so pleased with this my Countryman Pemble's opinion,
that I had not only subscribed, but sung an Io Triumph thereto, had I not met
with Windeline, who in his admirable treatise of Physic, with no less modesty
then probability of truth has delivered his opinion, that not only those
primitive and firstborne forms (with which nature in the morning of time and
worlds infancy set up housekeeping) but al o all others of latter date, are
indebted to Creation as the Cause of their Existencies.

De Monstris.
DISC. 4.
MOnsters are the Errata's of natures printing-presse, which commonly happen
through the misspelling or misplacing the Letters of some external form, but
no more obstruct the legiblenesse of the worlds beauty and perfection, than a
literal fault the sense of a well-pen'd sentence. If deep shaddows, and dark
colors give the greatest grace to a well-limn'd picture; for certain, natures
landscape had been but rudely drawn, were not the bright and orient colors of
more perfect forms, shaddowed with the deep lines of monstrous productions.
Were Apelles to draw a beautiful Nymph to the best advantage, he would place
her bya rough and misshapen Satyr. And our Ladies, who are best skilled in
setting off beauty with the greatest advantage, think black spots rather
contribute luster, than Eclipse the Sun of their beauties: and on the same
account had rather a Blacke-moore, or an Ape should grace their pictures by an
Antiperistasis, than that their shadow should be outshin'd by the splendour of
a Brighter Complexion; counting two beauties in one table no less Monstrous,
than two Suns in onefirmament. Syncopes, Epenthese's with the rest of our
Grammarian's figures, were never counted false Orthography: nor may we, without
great blasphemy to reason, think nature the worse scribe, for contracting or
abbreviating forms in Pigmies, or writing in the Capital Letters of Gygantine
Statures; since the one as well as the other is of ornament to the worlds
Iliads.

ESSAYE'S OR Characters
I. Of a Covetous man.
A Covetous man, is one that never worshipped Jupiter, except descending in a
shower of Gold; the Form in which he sometime courted Danae. He thinks no
smell so pleasant as that of Gain, though like the sordid Emperors vectigal
it arise from urinalls; and therefore spreads his Canvas to no wind that brings
not in some profit. Had his fingers that Chymicall virtue, our Poets report of
long-ear'd Midas, he would wish a Fathom larger then the Zodiac, that he might
at once grasp the Universe, and by the Alchimy of a touch, convert it to a
globe of Gold. The life of his soul is the true Heliotrope to the Sun of his
fortunes, springing and withering with the day of his prosperity, the whole
source of his desires* do as naturally tide after riches, as the needle of the
compass turns Northwards. Nor without cause; there being as great a sympathy
between his foul and Silver, as Iron and the loadstone. No Philosophy can
persuade him that a greeny glass is better for the eye sight, than white and
yellow money. And his Divinity informs him that a vision of Iacobus's or
yellow Angels, is better than, those on Jacobs Ladder. Finally, his god is his
Gold which he worships in the temple of his heart, and is as careful to secure
as the Romans their tutelar Deityes they chayn'd to their temples; or the Jews,
Christ's Sepulcher. For, like Rachel he more fears the stealing of his god, then
the Pharisees did our Savior's resurrection.

2. Of Love.
LOve is a burning feavour of the heart, generated by a surfeit on ease and
luxury; or a fire that preys on the soul, as the Eagle is laid to do on
Prometheus' s liver. The balls of this wildfire are usually thrown in at the
Casements of the eyes. By whose treachery the Citadell of the heart is betrayed
to the most merciless of Tyrants, which is well hinted by our Poets, who make
Cupid the feigned god of this frantic passion, to level his shafts at the
eyes, when he intends to smite the heart, wherefore they that would not
sacrifice all the joys of their lives in the flames of this Ignis fatuus; that
would not shipwreck their felicity on the dangerous rock of this Passion, that
would not have Cupids Trophies erected on their martyred hearts; let them place
a faithful guard at the gates of their Eyes, that may take security of all
objects they admit to traffic with their souls, especially those that are
beautiful. For the splendent Rays of beauty being collected by an amorous
eye, do as naturally kindle the flames of love in the heart, as the beams of
the Sun, gathered in a burning-glasse, fire paper.

They are our eyes, that being captivated with the beauty of objects, as the
silly Roman maid with the Gaul's Bracelets, that betrays the Capitol into the
Enemies hands.

3. Of a Melancholy Man.
A Melancholy man is like Death in the pot, to all amongst whom he converses,
carrying a Countenance more solemn, than an Anatomy lecture, or sermon of
mortality. He may almost without a Metaphor be termed, A walking hearse, a
Deaths head, or a Skeleton of bones; he has even anticipated Death, and
praevented. destiny, by making his body the Coffin of his Soul.

He is one, that by beholding every thing, through the false glass of his
magnifying Fancy, is cog'd into as ridiculous a belief, as that of Don Quixot,
who supposed windmills, Giants; Papermils, Enchanted Castles; and the bearded
Goats of Wales, formidable Spaniards with great muschadoes. At the sound of a
Sow-gelders horn, he prepares for an encounter, supposing himself challenged
to a duel by the great Giant Aldeberoni Fusco Foni. If fortune be-friend him in
a dark night with vulcan in a lantern, he relates wonders, how he has been
led about pools by Will-a-Wisp, or Robin good fellow. Every night presents him
either in a dream or vision, with a new scene of blew spiders, Bugbears,
Ghosts, Hobgoblings, rattling chains, raw heads and bloody bones, sprights,
Devils, Haggs, Nightmares, and Witches, by which he is so terrifyed, that his
hair standing an end, and pushing off his nightcap, he swears the next
morning, it was pulled away by a dead-mans hand, and therefore the room's
haunted, without all peradventure: by these apparitions his countenance grows
so pale and ghastly, that if he chance to see his image in the water, he runs
away, thinking the Devil would have pulld him into the River, or that his
Genius like that of Brutus gave him a summons to make his appearance at Plutoes
Court.

The surfeit of which conceits, with the help of an hempen string, gives his
frighted soul an Exit from off the stage of his Body.

4. Of Passion.
PAssion, having put out the eyes of reason, as the Philistines did Sampson's,
exposes the wisest of men to the scorn and ludibrium of the world. This is that
rash Phaeton, which if it ascend the Chariot of the understanding, and have the
reins of the souls Government committed unto it, nothing can be expected, but
the ruin of the microcosme: Never did any poor, benighted understanding
rejoice in the false light, or commit it self to the guidance of this ignis
fatuus, that was not bemired in the bogs of error and indiscretion. Moderate
anger may be of some use for whetting the blunted edge of the souls motions,
and oyling the Wheels of action? But he that screws up the peggs of his
passion, beyond the E^a of reason, will sing to as sorry a tune as that of the
jangling Chimes of Carflax.

5. Of a Physician.
A Physician is commonly said to be the Son of Apollo, but I should rather
think of Prometheus: in whose art though he be not so good a proficient, as to
make; yet he can vamp, and as it were new translate, the bodies of men: and
therefore may without injury be called the bodger or patcher up of old,
decayed, and broken nature. For which end he consults much the
pispot-Almanacks, or urinalls; by which, as in a learned Calendar, he discovers
the good, or ill weather, that shall happen in the Microcosme, or I Will of Man:
And if providence once crown his endeavors with success; so that, like a
skillful Midwife, he give his patients a safe delivery of the disease,
wherewith they were brought to bed: he straight thinks, he has cancelled the
decrees of fate, and renewed the leases of his patients life, in spite of the
three Sisters. And will thenceforth undertake to make good the souls title to
the ruined cottage of her body, against the plea of death, and irrevocable
doom of destiny. Thinking his art able not only to reprieve poor mortals from
the arrest of death, but to give check to Jupiter himself; and is therefore
accounted of the Country People, a little God-Almighty here upon earth; to whom
they supplicate for Galenicall auxiliaries whenever the Economy of their
bodies is disturbed, for reducing all rebellious, and seditious humors, to
their pristine harmonies, and due allegiance. And this intitles him to as great
credit amongst women, as ghostly fathers; and opens a door of as free saccesse
to Ladies beds, as to the Priest or confessor. To conclude, he is of that kind
of animals that thrive best in the worst air and like vermin lives on the
soars and putrefactions of corrupted nature.

6. Of a Fool or Natural.
A Fool is an animal, the Organs and Pipes of whose body, like a sorry
instrument, being miserably out of tune, his soul cannot play those sweet
notes, and lofty strains of reason, that in better tuned bodies she uses to
do and therefore he is said to have reason only in the seed or root, which
shoots not forth, till death has broken up the tough clods of his body; and
his soul be tranplanted to a soil governed by better influences, than any
earth receives. Or in brief, he is one whom nature never suffered to take his
discretion into his own hands, and therefore the law trusts not with the
management of his own estate.

7. Of an Hypocrite.
AN Hypocrite walks in a bright could of seeming sanctity, like the Devil in a
body of condensed air; or is one that brightens and irradiates the whole
course of his life, with the splendent beams of a glorious profession; but
such as dart not from the Sun of righteousness, arisen in his heart: but
rather like the Meteor, Philosophers call ignis lambens, that usually adheres
to horses manes, being no other than an extrinsecall and borrowed luster.

He wears Religion, as a cloak for the palliating of bad actions, and
therefore no wonder he cuts and shapes it according to the mode and fashion of
the age and times he lives in: which if p^r^han^e they wax hot with the
scorching flames of a fiery persecution he will judge the heavy robe of
Religion, not only a cumbersome, but a needless and uncongruous garment for so
hot a season. And therefore thinks them in the highest class of folly, that
suffer their religion to prove their winding sheets; or like the shirt Deianira
sent Hercules, cleave so close unto them as not to be put off without
sacrificing their lives to the merciless flames of devouring fire. He esteems
it an admirable decorum to sprinkle bad actions with holy water, to say a long
grace before a breakfast of widows houses: but, so to espouse any religion, as
not to admit of a divorce when the Magistrates authority legitmates the act, he
reckons not only the height of folly, but also peevish perverseness.

8. Of Books.
BOoks (though but paper-books) are often fraught with the richest treasure of
wisdom, and knowledge: for they are daughters of the intellect, or the true
offspring of the spiritual soul, as it were, embodyed and made corporate; And
therefore may justly challenge as great a share, and interest in the stock of
our affections, as the natural offspring of our bodies. As being, not only
the productions of our more Noble part, the soul: But also stamped with the more
Noble Characters of our perfections, and bearing a greater resemblance of our
true selves then any Child of the outward lineaments of his parents. Now the
most masculine intellectual births are usually produced neither in the morning
or infancy of our days, the Sun of Reason having not then broke through the
mists and fogs of ignorance, that commonly attends the souls first arising in
the horizon of flesh. Nor also in the evening of old age, seeing the day of
man's life, most commonly sets in a cloud of Dotage. But rather at the full Noon
of manhood, when the Rational Soul, that is the Sun of the Microcosme, has
climbed the Zenith, or meridian, and with the fruitful rays of Reason has
compressed the Intellect. Then if ever is the time for Pallas to issue from the
Brain of Jupiter. The Books of the deceased are as it were the Shrines or
Temples of their Souls, where they vouchsafe a kind of residence, and give
forth their oracles, after they have quitted the mansion-houses of their
bodies. Here we may ask counsel of the dead without going to the Witch of
Endor, or being inshrined within the Circle of a Conjurer; by the help of
Books, we may set our Pigmy-Reasons on the Gygantine shoulders of the Ancients,
and so see farther than Antiquity, and shoot nigher the Goal of Truth than all
praecedent ages. But to the study of Books, is not amiss to join the Reading
of men. It being of greater concernment for the prudent stearing the course of
our lives, to understand the Genius of the age we live in, than to be
acquainted with the mind of Aristotle or Plato.

Miscellaneous Discourses.
Of Ministers and Magistrates.
THe Ministry and Magistracy, like Castor and Pollux, portend great
tranquillity and happiness to that Common wealth, where they shine together in
equal and mutual splendour: But, if divided, the unluckly omen of an
approaching storm, or unwellcome harbinger of inevitable ruin. The Romans
were as careful in maintaining their Vestall fire, as preserving the
Palladium, Counting that, no less than this, a pledge of their Empires durance
and felicity. For certain, it is not the Palladium or shield of the wisest
States-mans wisdom, or Policy, that is able to protect, or give a long life to
Empire, or Government, where the holy fire of Religion is extinguished, which
will quickly ensue where the Ministry is discouraged, who like the order of
Vesta's Priestshood, should blow up the Coals of Devotion, and maintain the
sacred fire of zeal on the Altars of the peoples hearts. Magistrates and
Ministers are the Planets by whose influences, and superintendency, God has
appointed the elementary and inferior Bodies of Republics to be governed and
directed; and that Commonwealth is blind to her own interest, that does not
tender them as the Apples of her eyes. For to speak truth they are in the body
politic, what the great luminaries in the universe; the very light and eyes of
the world, of which could the one without the other be put out (as some have
fondly imagined) it must needs render the body politic as monstrous and
prodigious, as that of our Poets one-eyed Polyphemus; But since these twins of
light kindl at each others flames, and can neither be extinguished without the
other, nothing can be expected from Eclisping the Sun of eithers authority, but
a sad night of ignorance and confusion. To conclude, that Commonwealth cannot
expect to hear the sweet melody, or be ravished with the Music of the Sphaers
motions, where the Orbs of Civil governments are not moved by these
Intelligences. The Ministers, therefore, and Statesmen are under God the two
pillars that bear up the Arc of Government; and they that endeavor the
subversion of either (whatever may be pretended) would open a door to Anarchy
and confusion.

1. De Anno Platonico.
PLato tells us, that after the revolution of a certain motion, by Philosophers
termed, motus trepipationis, Nature will again spin ore the thread of her old
productions, and put forth a new impression of the Worlds Iliads; as if her
whole business were but the setting forth of one Comedy, though consisting of
many Acts and Parts, of which every Age presents a new scene, and every
Generation produces new Actors, until the Catastrophe of the whole, and that
the Fable be again begun: which though a Chimaera, may yet teach us, how it
matters not whom we represent in the Fable of this life, whether a King or
Peasant; so we do it with a grace; there being as much art required for the
skillful personating a Clown, Corydon, or Fool; as an Emperor, Courtier, or
Philosopher. What ever person therefore nature has allotted us in the scene of
our generation, we ought so to act our parts, that at our souls Exit, we may
have the Plaudit of a good conscience; and then we shall retire from off the
stage of this World with comfort, and be received into eternal mansions.

Of Employment and variety of Fortunes.
VAriety and fullness of employment, as it is the best Antidote against the
poison of Melancholy: so no less improving than delightful to any, whom
nature has made Masters of any talents of reason. Wherefore, so long at it
shall please providence to continue me on the worlds theater, I should rather
desire to act diverse parts, and run the gantlet of various fortunes, having
the course of my life checkr'd with black and white, than to be the Darling of
that blind goddess, that is usually most propitious to those of least
understanding. He that expects a plenitude of content, whilst on this side
mortality, reckons without his Host, and feeds his fancy with fond and
ridiculous hopes; for nature has set such an high excise of care and trouble,
on her apparent Commodities, that they often become Bankrupts of reason, (the
richest Jewel of the lesser world) that much traffic with her. There is no
eating the sour Grapes of the worlds seeming pleasures, without setting the
teeth on edge; Much therefore is the voluptuarist mistaken, that thinks to
exact a large tribute of pleasure from all the objects, his soul converseth
with in this lower Region of nature, since all things are stamped not only with
vanity but also vexation of spirit, the true reason providence could never
stuff the Cushion of any man's fortune with so soft a down, but that he thought
it harder then Jacobs pillow.

An recte fecit Augustus, inimicos constituendo haeredes? Neg.
Does the Light of reason's lamp (by time sunk into the socket of old age) burn
so dim? or do the clouds of dotage in the evening of man's life no less obscure
prudence than the mists of ignorance that usually attend the first dawnings of
reason in the souls Infancy? Or did the Sun of Caesar's prudence set, before the
day of his life went down? that his understanding was so benighted, as to make
those heirs of his substance, that were the mortal enemies of his felicity;
That he should gratify those with the spoils of his Fortune, who had more
reason to expect a gibbet than a legacy. What greater blasphemy against reason
could Caesar have been guilty of? what more contrary to the rules of true
policy, could the most infatuated understanding have committed? was not this
madness beyond parallel, both of former ages molded by time, or the latter,
more pregnant in acts of folly? How much better had it been that Caesar had
dyed intestate, than that he should thus in the last act, and Catastrophe of
his life, Register himself a fool to prosperity? Certainly had Caesar divulged
his will before he concluded the fable of his life, he had never extorted a
Plaudit from his friends at his souls Exit from off the stage of his body.
Shall thine enemy's (Oh Caesar) reap the fruits of all thy Victories? shall
their brows be crowned with thy successes? shall those that hate thee, be
adorned with thy spoils? shall they wear the Laurels and garlands of thy
triumphs? shall the ashes of thy urne (like the Phoenix's) give birth to their
felicities? will thou now pay tribute to thy enemies who ere-while taxedst the
whole Earth? This is to invite future injuries, by rewarding past. It is an
argument of a low spirit to be obliged by discourtesies. The love of no
Creature, except the ignoble Spannell is confirmed by a cudgel: shall the
affections of divine Caesar (like base Meteors in the lower Region of the air)
be kindled by an Antipestasis? shall the rays of his favor dart cheiefly on
his enemies? shall the streams of his munificency tide most toward them that
hate him? if so, its better to be Caesar's enemy than his friend. And were he
again (according to the Platonic fiction) to act over the fable of his life,
he should have enemies enough. For who would not be Caesar's enemy to be his
Heir? But why does Augustus choose to erect the monuments of his frame in his
enemies hearts? Are they like to prove most grateful to his memory, most
civil to this ashes? or are they the most deserving of all the Romans? if so,
why Caesar's enemies? why did not his prudence rather (while the oil of life
lasted) register them in the catalogue of his friends? were not the eyes of his
understanding open, till death closed the casements of his body? was Caesar a
hater of virtue during life, but desiring her good word fawnes on her when he
is ready to turn his back upon the world? This is to salve his prudence with
impiety. Perhaps thinking the malignant breath of his enemies malice, might
either disturb or scatter his ashes, or blast the flour of his memory, or puff
out the blaze of his renouned name, that same had kindled in all parts of the
known world, thought it wisdom by a legacy to bribe their Tongues into a
compliance, that they might rather rebound and echo than damp the sound of his
good report. But for certain, had Caesar so well acted his part as to deserve
an Euge at his going off the worlds theater, he needed not to have bribed or
courted officious fame to egister and em balm his memory to all future ages. Or
what needed deifyed Augustus, that is placed among the Gods care more for the
railing of his enemies, than the Moon though place'd in a lower orb, does Dogs
barking at her shadow.

Of Thoughts.
ADmirable was that saying of a wise Heathen. Nunquam minus solus quam cum
solus, and will hold true not only in Contemplative men, and great Scholars,
who by their Genius and employments, are given much to meditation; but also in
all others: For as the good-mans heart is a rich treasury of good thoughts, or
as a living fountain, always flowing with Crystal streams to the refreshing
of his soul; so on the contrary, the wicked man's mind is a cage of unclean
birds, a den of foul beasts, a very jakes or sinck of all manner of pollutions
and uncleanness. For the rational soul, that beam (as I may so say) of
Divinity, or ray of divine Majesty, (like the sprightly element of fire) can no
more be confined than the wind, nor deprived of action than the Sea of its
Tides, or the Stars of their course, nay we may with as much ease, bottle up
the winds, and pull the Stars from Heaven, as impose a confinement on the
soul, or for the least moment, deprive it of all action and operation: and
therefore whenever it is vacant, from all external objects, and disengaged
from all other employments; it retires into the closet of its own breast, and
converses with the family of its own thoughts: which if trained up in the
School of virtue and religion, may administer us much pleasure, as to traffic
with the best of external objects, or to be employed in the most splendid of
human affairs. The good man (says our savior) out of the treasure of his
heart, brings forth good things, that is, good thoughts; for thoughts are the
pictures of the mind drawn by its own pencill. In thoughs the soul uncyphers
and as it were Coppies out it self; and limn's it is own effigies to the life;
they are the pulses, by whose beating is discovered the health or indisposition
of the heart, they are the looking-glass, in which the soul may take a view of
its own features; nay they are the offspring of the Intellect, which bears its
resemblance as Children do their Parents.

Now the wicked man's mind, being tainted with sin polluted with corruption, and
grown rank with iniquity, the whole stream and source of his thoughts (like
water flowing from a filthy fountain) must needs run muddy; or as liquor drawn
from a tainted and polluted vessel must needs carry a taste of the Cask: even
so are the wicked man's thoughts, tainted and tinctured with the sin and vanity
of his wicked heart, the loathsome womb that gave them birth.

On Atheism, or, not acknowledging a Deity.
ATheism is the most ridiculous piece of nonsense that ever was hatched, by the
unnatural heat of a feavourish and distempered brain, certainly that soul
never looked out at the casements of its eyes, nor reflected on the fabric of
its own body, that cannot discern the footsteps of a Diety. To date the worlds
existency from all eternity, or father its original on the fortuitous conflux
of Atoms, are alike ridiculous. For certain the most fabulous of religions
carries not so many absurdities in its womb, as the fools bolt, There is no
God. I could sooner, with the Turk expect Mahomets return in the form of a
Ram, to receive the Butterflyes of the Alcaron, into his curled fleece; or with
the leaden pated Papists, believe all the miracles of the golden legend; or
with the Jews give credit to the fables of the Talmud: Than suppose with the
Atheist that this beautiful and wellorderd system of Nature, could spring from
the womb of nothing without the midwifry of an infinite and eternal power.

Of writing Libells.
HE is to be accounted more rash than wise, and a greater lover of his wit than
safety, that will venture to libell any man, before he can fling the ashes of
his urn, instead of sand upon his papers. But to speak ill of those that have
turned their backs upon the world, is as unhumane, as to back-bite the living
is unsafe. Therefore to detract from any man's worth whether living or dead,
friend or foe, should be accounted a Theme too unworthy and base for an
ingenuous man either to dip his quill, or foul his mouth withal. For it is
more than probable, that he is Master but of few deserts, wherewith to set up
the credit of his name, that must lay the foundation of his own in the ruin of
another frame; for a noble and generous spirit will rather with the Sun,
endeavor to outshine; than with the malignant planet of the Moon to eclipse a
greater luster. We count that but a wan and faint beauty that stands in need of
a foil; nor are those, but low and pigmy-statured merits that cannot appear,
unless by dismounting all others perfections. To conclude, foul surely is the
complexion that has no other means of appearing true or rendering it self
comely, than by casting dirt upon all other men's faces, this is like the
Athenian that not knowing how to erect a more worthy Trophie to eternise his
fame would needs sow the memory of his name in the Embers of Diana's Temple.

An Appendix of Brief advice to Students.
Of Religion.
1. HE that sails by the Compass of a Conscience, not touched by Gods spirit,
will undoubtedly err in steering his course toward heaven: and split his soul
on the Rocks of Schism and error. Therefore since God has given us his law to
be a light to our feet, and a lanthorn to our paths: I should think it safer,
to follow the conduct thereof, than the false light of a deluded conscience,
that is tossed and driven about by every wind of Doctrine.

(2)
A wiseman lives more by precepts, Manners.
than example. And therefore will rather frame and fashion his life according
to an exact and perfect Idea of virtue, than (like the Ape) dress himself by
the false glass of others examples; or transcribe those corrupt and imperfect
copies that the best of mortals can prescribe unto him.

(3)
3. To be intimately acquainted with a man's self, Nosce teipsum.
and according to the Sages advice, arrive to (...), is a lesson hard enough
for the highest form and best Scholar in wisdoms School. But seeing its no
less necessary than difficult, we should be always conning thereof; The Poet,
in his Ne te quaesiveris extra, gives no bad advice, for attaining thereto. For
he that resides much at home, and is chiefly conversant with the family of his
own thoughts, will better understand his own value, than they that rate
themselves according to the estimate that the favor or malice of men may put
upon them.

4
Above all things prise the Golden minutes and Silver sands of time, Time
as knowing the loss irreparable, and therefore the profuse spenders thereof,
the worst of prodigalls. He that loses his Morning studies, gives an ill
precedent to the Afternoon, and makes such an hole in the beginning of the day,
that all the winged hours will be in danger of flying out thereat. I believe
Scholars of all others, are the greatest murderers of time, unless Masters of
some trade or art, wherein to spend their after-mealhoures. The custom
therefore of the Turk is commendable, that gives every man, a trade, as an
Antidote against idleness, the root and seed of all evil.

5.
He that reads much and never meditates, Meditation.
shall reap as little fruit of his labors, as the Daughters of Danaus in Hell,
who are said in sieves to carry water to a Tub, of as many holes, as Argus' s
head had eyes, there is no Eel more slippery, nor Mercury more volatile than
the winged motions of the mind, unless charmed and fixed by serious and
frequent meditation: for by meditation the mind does ripen, hatch, and bring to
maturity, such notions or seeds of knowledge, as much reading and ingenuous
company has as it were sown and sprawn'd in the Intellect.

6
If one whom nature has framed a Cyclops rather than a Janus, Antiquityes.
and in stead of granting two faces, furnished with but one eye, should
notwithstanding wear it behind him he would be accounted no less monstrous,
for the placing that one, than for the want of another light.

Such a production would be the true Hieroglyphick of a young man studying
antiquities: The eye of whose Intellect, by looking backwards has brought him
better acquainted with ages time has rusted, than those of his own wherein he
lives; and therefore all his learning and skill (like that of the Parthians)
may without injury be said, to consist in shooting backwards.

I cannot think it prudence for an Englishman to go visit Rome, before he has
been at London; nor for any that intend to be well traveled in the knowledge
of things, to advance their first steps in the obscure and dusty paths of
Antiquityes.

7
I can easily believe that the younger days of time, Overvaluing former ages.
and childhood of the world, might not be guilty of so much fraud and guile, as
the experience of above 5000 years may now have taught: but I could never
scrue up my belief (a fault incident to our Antiquaryes) to so high an opinion
of the sanctity and felicity of Elder times, as not to take the Golden age our
Poets report under the Reign of Saturn, for a poetical fiction.

8
No man ought to despise old age, by reason that years teach wisdom, Old age.
and time is the mother of experience; The true reason we so seldom find the
seeds of prudence sown, but where time has plowed up furrows, and in whom old
age is crowned with silver hairs. As if we were not to expect any fruit from
the tree of knowledge till the flower of Juvenile beauty be withered.

9
If it be true which Philosophers tells us, that nothing is in the Intellect,
Travail.
which passes not through the Door of some sense, then certainly their
intellects must be most improved, and possess the largest stock of knowledge
whose senses have traffiqu't and been entertained with greatest variety of
objects, which recommends travail as the means of no small improovment; and
may by one of a Mercurial Genius, or that is somewhat insighted in the way of
traffic, be accomplished without detriment of estate, and no small advantage
to the Intellect.

10
But he that would pass through all the forms of education, Variety of
employment.
and commence in the highest degree of accomplishment; that would be as much a
gentleman as a Scholar, and understand the world as well as books, the Genius
of men, as Authors; must not satisfy himself with what the School's ferula,
U^niversity) dicipline, or travail has taught him: but should run the gantlet
of diverse fortunes, and become pupil to the Experience of various employments.
A Princes Court is no bad School of policy, and the experience of our late wars
have proov'd the camp a place of little less improovment; and, to speak truth,
he is hardly a legitimate son of Pallas, in whose education Arts and Arms have
not espoused each other.

11
Deny do man that tribute of Respect, that is due to his merits, Respect.
though his original were clouded with never so mean a fortune. For honor is
the Crown and reward of virtue, the Air on which heroic spirits (like the
Camelion) are fed and nourished: therefore there can be no greater injury
offered a man of spirit, than to rob him of that respect and honor, his place
and merits seem to entitle him unto.

12
Of all men the Soldier is thought most tender of his reputation: Soldiers.
nor altogether without cause; having purchased his honor with the price of
his blood, a higher rate than most are willing to adventure, and to speak
truth, of all honor, that is truest, which has been won by the sword in a
purple field of blood; and he is the best Gentleman, that is the Son of his own
deserts, and not the degenerated heir of another virtue; that sets up with the
stock of his own, and not his ancestors merits; that is himself the Artificer
of his fortunes, hewing them out of his enemies bowels: therefore of all the
Sons of virtue, who by their merits have been crowned with glory and aray'd
with the purple robe of honor, the Soldiers scarlet which has been died in
blood may be justly thought the bravest tincture.

13
Be not like the Salamander delighted in the fire of contention, Passion.
but beware of Passion, as the most Capital enemy to the Crown and Empire of
Reason: for those Sons of Thunder (whom by the lightning and fire of their
blustering natures, one would suppose begotten in a storm) if we mark the
Catastrophe of their turbulent lives we shall find them coucluded in a tempest.
and not unoften like the Phoenix expire in a funeral pile themselves had
kindled. For like the Silly fly they so long sport in the flames of contention,
till at length sindging the wings of their understanding, and sacrificing their
Reason to their Passion, they become a prey to the malice of their enemies. A
little pot is soon hot, says our English proverb, and they are usually
observed to be men of least understanding, whose Choler can soon be set on
boiling.

14
Beware of Pride, Pride.
as the leven that sours men's best Actions and renders them ungrateful to the
gust both of God and Man: whenever therefore a puff or tumor of
self-conceit begins to arise, whether from an overvaluing apprehension of thy
worth, or blown by the venomous breath of parafiticall praise, be sure timely
to prick it with a serious reflection on some infirmity of thy nature, lest
otherwise like the toad in the fable, by ridiculous swelling beyond your
natural proportion you discover the narrowness of your spirit.

15
Let nothing obstruct, or hedge up your way from doing good, Charity.
or performing the acts of Charity; nor be like those narrow-spirited men, that
are so wedded to their own Interest, and so unconcerned in the public good of
humane nature, that they could be willing to reap an harvest of private profit,
sown in the ashes, and springing from the detriment of all mankind, that could
with dry eyes celebrate the obsequies of universal Nature; and picking up the
broken pieces of the heavens Axle-Tree, warm themselves at the ruins of the
world; that would rather, with the impious Giants, throw Rocks and Mountains
to destroy, than one of Deucalions stones to repair their species. These are
the base borne Sons of Earth, the offspring of the Dragons teeth, sown by
Cadmus, the common enemies of Mankind, and Traitors to the Common wealth of
Nature.

16
What ever fortunes providence may allot, give not entertainment to discontent,
Discontent.
and you cannot be unhappy: for that is the fly that corrupts the Ointment of
life's sweetest pleasures. The Breeze that stinging man's mind in the very
summer of his fortunes, suffers it no more to rest in the Paradise of
pleasures, than on a bed of thorns. Or like the Harpyes that infested Peneus's
table, spoils and devours all the pleasures and delights the most splendid of
fortunes can furnish forth; yea it lines the nightcap with such pricking
cares, as will make the strongest head to ache, whose hard fortune it is to
wear it.

17
Be not too confident of a young man's virtue, Youth.
nor think one that has made a good beginning and advanced sarrein the paths
of goodness, may not like the planets be found retrograde, giving a baff'le to
that expectation, and strangling those hopes the fair blossoms of their younger
years had given birth unto. This error has too often been confuted by sad
experience, the consideration whereof should awaken the care and jealousy of
those that are entrusted with youth's education.

18
He had need of a good Stock of Learning and knowledge, Writing Books.
that by printing books gives the world an Inventory of his brains furniture.

I know some expose their labors to public censure for the same reason
Apelles is said to have done his pictures: to wit, that they might come
acquainted with the errors of their pens or style, as he of his pencill: But
such usually conceal their names under a veil of modesty, as that famous
painter did himself, behind the cloth of his picture.

19
If any have cast dirt on the face of thy Actions, Vindication.
or with a fowl Tongue any way sulli'd the innocence of thy conversation give
not the world occasion by thy wincing, to think that truth has galled thee.
Nor so much endeavor, by a smooth apology, as the integrity of thy future
life, to put malice to the blush, and silense an ill report: Knowing that
however envy may for a time cloud, it can never totally Eclipse the light and
splendour of a virtuous conversation.

20
Raise thy estate rather by some profitable employment, Covetousness.
than a penurious brooding over those fortunes the hand of providence has
reached forth unto thee: lest imitating the miser's folly, thou also inherit his
opprobrious Character, of whom thou may justly imagine men thus to
discourse. He lives long, because he pays no Interest for the years nature
lends him, and has the thread of his life spun Gratis: But should old time
turn usurer, and charge his weeks with a Rent, and his Minuets with Excise: or
the three Sisters become Mercenary, and require wages for their spinning: he
would rather dye, so the Ferry-man of Hell would give him his passage, than be
at charges of farming hours, or defray the spinning of his vital thread.

21
Let him on whom the Sun of a good fortune is risen, Boasting.
be content to warm himself in the beams thereof, without suffering his Tongue
become the Herald of his prosperity, or his folly sound a trumpet to proclaim
his felicity: or, to speak more plain, the Language of our English proverb, let
the Minions of the blind goddess that by fortunes bounty fare better than
their neighbors, beware of crying Roastmeat: seeing that the tong's travailing
with such discourse, is of little less danger, in this greedy and rapacious
world, than riding amongst Thieves with a charge of money; for the breath of
such discourses have usually blown small profit to those that broach them, and
commonly kindle a desire in the hearers breast of sharing in those fortunes,
with whose report their ears have too imprudently been Tantalized. Had not the
found boasting of Collatine's intemperate Tongue set an edge on young
Tarquine's lust, he might have long enjoyed the sweet embraces of his
beautiful and chaste Lucretia, and never seen her soul forced by imperious
destiny, to wade to the Stygian shades in a purple Stream of blood. A just
punishment of Collatine's folly, and not Lucretia's guilt.

(22)
A wise man will not suffer his ambition to soar above the sphere of his
ability, Ambition.
or like the silly Tailor (that languish'd for love of Queen Elizabeth) court
any thing in his desire, of which he may not rationally expect the fruition;
but rather, with the prudent fox in the fable, will call those grapes sour,
with fortune has placed above his reach.

(23)
If admiration be the daughter of Ignorance (as most acknowledge), Search of
causes.
it is the duty of every intelligent person to be diligent in the search of
causes, that he be not suspris'd with amazement (the grandest Indecorum, and
most unbeseeming garb of a wise man) at any revolutions or alterations, that
may happen in the body politic, since that no less than things natural, is
subject to change and motion; there being nothing permanent under the Sun: the
greatest change, is but a nine days wonder, and that only to the shorter
sighted sort of people, that are not able to discern of causes. The
convulsions and distempers of States, spring from as infallible Grounds and
Reasons, as any disease of the body natural, though perhaps in the one they
may be more latent and difficult to unridle than in the other. For nothing
happens either in Nature or Republics that that may be called the Daughter of
chance, or said to owe it is existency to the will of the blind Goddess
fortune; but the whole empire of the world is governed by the scepter of Gods
providence, who since the ceasing of miracles has decreed all things to be
produced by the midwifry of second causes.

(24)
But beware, a too great inquisitivenesse into stare affairs purchase not the
odious epithet of a Politician; Policy.
for it is better to be wise than so accounted, since according to the opinion
of most, the time is not yet come, wherein we may expect the prudence of the
Serpent and innocence of the dove should couch together: and therefore, as some
are thought to inherit too small a stock of wit, to set up for Knaves; so in
others are found too many grains of Serpentine cunning, to admit much of the
doves simplicity: whereby it comes to pass that policy is of most use to those
that can best dissemble it, as if, like the art of juggling, or sleight of hand,
it were nothing worth when once discovered. I remember Solomon has said, It is
not good to be over wise: and there are many that want not wit, that had rather
be accounted fools than politicians.

(25)
It I has been always accounted prudence, Deliberation, or
before a man imbarks himself in any design or enterprise, to consider well of
the event or issue, Festina lent.
that it is like to arive unto; for the want of this has often proved the
ruin of many a glorious undertaking: for where one design has been gravelled
in the sands of delay, thousands have been split on the rock of praecipitancy
and rashness. Charybdis does not triumph in morewracks of ships than this in
ruins of great undertakings. The Spaniard who is reputed none of the worst
Politicians, accounts his designs ripened and not rotted by time. And
therefore it is usual for the farther to sow the seed, of what the grandchild
is to expect the fruit. Raw and extemporary plots, that discover themselves so
soon as ever they are hatched, that like young birds come into the world with
the shell on their crowns; or like forward Plants bud before the Sun of a good
opportunity has shined upon them, are usually nipt before they come to
maturity, and have their fruit blasted in their first blossoms.

(26)
Learning like dancing or playing on a Fiddle is counted by the proud world,
Learning despised.
a better accomplishment than profession: and therefore poor Scholars that
have nothing to live on but the Stock of their parts, and wits journey-work are
commonly entertained with as little respect as Dancing-Masters, or common
Fiddlers, which brings to my mind that of Solomon, that wisdom is good with an
Inheritance. It Is reported of Cleanthes, a poor Philosopher, that he drew water
by night to maintain himself by day in the Muses service.

The unworthiness of this age threatens Scholars with as bad employment,
unless furnished with two Strings to their bows: There are some trades too
ingenious for any but the Sons of Minerva, as Merchandise, Making Watches,
Limning, and Ingraving, with some others that depend on Mathematics, in some
of which, a Scholar might profitably employ some of his afternoon hours, not
as if I thought not learning a full employment, but because the most
industrious are often indisposed to study.

(27)
Let not a fond conceit of thy name being born on the wings of fame Conceit.
sing lull-aby, and rock asleep thy industry: for many had arrived to a great
height in Learning had they not too soon thought their knowledge at the Zenith;
and with Hercules setting up their pillars wrote their Ne plus Ultra. This, I
am persuaded, has robbed the world of many a splendent Star, of Light; but to
balance this, consider, that by reason of that veil of obscurity that covers
the face of nature, together with that night of Ignorance, that dwells on man's
understanding, the highest pitch that the best winged industry, can soar unto,
is but a discovery that it knows little or nothing, more than the various
opinions and fancyes of men.

To conclude, set him that has dedicated himself to the Muses service study
such things as are of use, Conclusion.
rather than ostentation; and, as one has well observed, rather with the Be
endeavor to gather Honey, than like the silly Butterfly paint it his wings.

Let the consideration of the shortness of the day of man's life Ars longae
v^ta brevis.
wherein he is to traverse the long and intricate paths of Learning, quicken up
our diligence to an indefatigable Industry; lest the night of death overtake
us, and cause the Sun of our life to set, before any light of knowledge has
dawned on ous souls, and so we go down to the Earth with the same veil of
Ignorance on our understandings, and our Reason^ as much hood winked as when we
came first into the world.

S^^ Verbum Sapienti.

Of Death.
WHat kind of Bugbear soever Death may be represented, through the
Sophisticated Glass of Melancholy apprehensions, as that he is the King of
terrors, the worme's Caterer, and natures Sargeant, that arrests poor
mortals, for the debt due to corruption, and gives checkmate not only to
life's pleasure, but also the pleasant gaire of man's life; and may therefore be
termed life's devourer, the grand Anthropophagus, or man-eater, that as it were
cracks the shell of the flesh for worms, himself preying on the sweet kernel
of the soul. These and such like are the black colors with which ignorance and
guilt paynts a visard and masks the face of death.

Whereas could we acknowledge the truth, we should confess it as natural to
dye as to be borne; Death being but the souls breaking up of house, or
dismantling it self of the no less cumbersom than dusty Garments of flesh, or
rather that it is the goal of the souls race, the palm of victory, the very
crown and reward of life.

Death is not the Jailer that captivates, but the Herald that proclaims
liberty and reprievs the soul from the confinement and prison of its body: that
knocks off the Fetters and Shackles of flesh, and gives it the desired Exit
from off the stage of this trouble some world, the traveler in the fable wishd
for death but quayling at his approach, desired his hand to help him up with his
burden; whereas death intended him a greater courtesy, to wit, the unloading
his soul of those heavy clods or earth, and bundle of corruption it groaneth
under. Thus many stand in their own light, and will not suffer themselves to be
befriended, like the little Poet that durst not put off his heavy shoes left
the wind, committing a rape on his leight Body should carry him away as the
Eagle is said to have done Ganymed: thus loath are the most of men that death
should take off the leaden shoes of their bodies, notwithstanding they hinder
their souls flight into Elysium.

Death is so far from being the murderer of life, that it rather hatches it by
breaking up the Shell of the body, in which it was imprisoned or rather
seminally conteyn'd: for as the chicken or young foul, is excluded from the
egg; or material form educ'd from the womb of its first matter, in which
nature had treasured it up; so springs the Phoenix (...) our lives from the
ruins and ashes of our bodies: Yea it is impossible the Sun of our true life
should shine forth in it is full glory till the cloud of our flesh be
dissipated, which occasioned the wisest of Kings to say. The day of a man's
death is better than the day of his birth. Which according to Platoes
Philosophy may be digested without a comment: for if the glorious lamp of the
soul were thrust into the dark lant-horn of its body, by way of punishment for
crimes committed in her Virgin estate, when she had her mansion among the
Stars; then certainly, when by death she shall be returned to her heavenly
socket, she is no way injured but restored to her primitive luster and glory.

Such a notion as this (though I confess erroneous enough as antedating the
souls existency) yet is of greater Analogy to the immunities and privileges
death puts the soul in possession of, than those cloudy and dastard
apprehensions that most Christians entertain thereof; who in this, seem shorter
sighted than the Barbarous Scythians who use to celebrate the obsequies of
their nighest Relations, more after the manner of a triumph than a funeral,
more rightly accounting, that we falsely term the expiring of of lives lease,
the haven of rest, the period of misery and souls reprieve from the Captivity
of flesh; whereas their childrens births they solemnized with all expressions
of grief and sorrow, as foreseeing the miseries that usually accompany the
souls entrance on earths theater. Nor did the Scythians alone ingrosse this
notion, for other Heathens were also Masters of it; witness the facetious end
of Augustus Caesar who is reported to have concluded the fable of his life with
a consort of Music and begged a Plaudit of his friends at his going off the
Stage of the World.

Mors ultima linea rerum.


