THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY, In Eight Parts.

By THOMAS STANLEY.



LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and Thomas Dring; and are to be sold at
the Princes Arms in Saint Paul's Churchyard, and at the George in
Fleet Street near Cliffords-Inne, 1656.

THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY, The First Part.

Containing those on whom the Attribue of WISE was conferred.



LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and Thomas Dring; and are to be sold at
the Princes Arms in Saint Paul's Churchyard, and at the George in
Fleet Street near Cliffords-Inne, 1656.

TO MY HONORED UNCLE JOHN MARSHAM, Esquire
SIR,
I Send this Book to you, because you first directed me to this design; The
learned Gassendus was my precedent; whom nevertheless I have not followed in
his partiality: For he, though limited to a single person, yet gives himself
liberty of enlargement, and takes occasion from his subject to make the world
acquainted with many excellent disquisitions of his own. Our scope being of a
greater latitude, affords less opportunity to favor any particular; whilst
there is due to every one the commendation of their own deserts. This benefit
I hope to have received from the variety of the subject; but far more are those
I owe to your encouragement, which if I could wish less, I should upon this
occasion, that there might seem to have been expressed something of choice and
inclination in this action, which is now but an inconsiderable effect of the
gratitude of,

Dear Uncle, Your most affectionate Nephew and humble servant THOMAS STANLEY.

PREFACE.
HIstory (which by expounding actions past teaches to regulate the future, and
furnishes us with wisdom at the cost of other men's experience) is not unlike
Painting: their scope is the same; and as in the latter it argues want of skill
to look upon the whole draught with an indifferent eye, but to select and
insist upon some chief particular is proper to an Artist; so he who rests
satisfied with the general relation of affairs, (not fixing upon some eminent
Actour in that story) loses it greatest benefit; since what is most
particular, by its nearer affinity with us, has greatest influence upon us.

Hence it is that there are two kinds of History; One represents general
affairs of State; The other gives account of particular persons, whose lives
have rendered them eminent. Homer has given an essay of each; of the first in
his Iliads, a relation of a war betwixt different Nations; of the second in his
Odysses, confined to the person of Ulysses.

Now the life of man being either practick, busied in civil affairs of peace
and war, or Contemplative, retired from public business to speculation and
study of wisdom, divine or humane, it follows that this personal history be
twofold likewise, describing either the actions of such persons as are wholly
interested in affairs of state (properly compared to the persons of a
drammaticall design, whose single Characters and parts serve one only to make
up one joint plot. Such are most of those whose lives are related by Plutarch,
and the twelve Caesar's of Sueronius) Or the lives of such as have been
excellent in some kind of learning; Thus Antipho writ of Poets; Eudemus of
Astrologers; Cicero and Plutarch of Orators, Suetonius of Grammarians. They
who writ of Philosophers exceeded the rest far in number, of whom to give a
particular account will be unnecessary, because their works are not extant,
and therefore we shall only name them, Aetius, Ana^ilides, Antigonus,
Antisthenes, Aristocles, Aristoxenus, Callimachus, Clitomachus, Diocles,
Diogenes La^rtius, Eunapius, Heraclides, Hermippus, Hesychius, Hippobotus, son,
Idomeneus, Nicander, Nicias, Panaetius, Porrius, Plutarch, Sotion and Theodorus.

Of almost all these (which is much to be deplored) there remain not any
footsteps; the only Author in this kind for the more ancient Philosophers is
Diogenes Laertius, for the later Eunapius And to make the misfortune the
great^r, that which Laertius gives us is so far short of what he might have
done, that there is much more to be found of the same persons dispersed amongst
other authors, which I have here collected and digested, with what diligence I
could.

Nor is it unseasonable at this time to examine the tenants of old
Philosophers, when so great variety of opinions daily spring up; some of which
are but raked out of the ruins of antiquity, which ought to be restored to
their first owners; others being of late invention will receive addition, when
advanced to such height we look down to the bottom from which Philosophy took
her first rise, and see how great a progress she has made, whose beginnings
are almost inscrutable.

Although some Grecians have challenged to their Nation the Original of
Philosophy, yet the more learned of them have acknowledged it derived from the
East. To omit the dark traditions of the Athenians concerning Musa^us, of the
Thebans concerning Linus, and of the Thracians about Orpheus, it is manifest
that the original of the Greek Philosophy is to be derived from Thales, who
traveling into the East, first brought Natural learning, Geometry, and
Astrology, thence into Greece, for which reason the attribute of wise was
conferred upon him, and at the same time upon six others for their eminence in
morality and politics Thus learning in the antientest times was by the Greeks
called Sophia (wisdom) and the prafessour thereof, who raised his soul to an
(...) degree of knowledge, Sophos (wise) Pythagoras first named it Philosophy
(love of wisdom) and himself a Philosopher, affirming that no man is wise; but
only God.

Laert. vi^. Thalet.
As concerning those who were honored with this attribute of wise, Damon the
Cyrenaean undervalues them all, especially the seven. Anaximenes says, they
were all addicted to Poetry; Dicaearchus, that they were neither wise men, nor
Philosophers, but upright men and Law givers: Archetimus the Syracusian wrote
concerning their meeting with Cypselus (Father to Periander) whereat he says
himself was present. Ephorus affirms they all met with Croesus, Thales only
excepted. Some say they met also at the Panionian feast, and at Corinth with
Periander at Delphi.

There is some controversy concerning their sentences, of which some are
ascribed to several persons, as that, Lacedaemonian Chilon this professed,
Nothing too much; a mean in all is best.


There is no less dissent concerning their number. Leandrius for Cleobulus and
Myson, inserts Leophantus Son of Not Leophantum Gorsiadem as the Interpreters
render.
Gorsiades a Lebedion, or Ephesian, and Epimenides the Cretan. Plato (in his
Protagoras) substitutes Myson for Periander: Ephorus, Anacharsis for Myson.
Some add Pythagoras. Dicaearchus alleges four, acknowledged by all Thales,
Bias, Pittacus and Solon: then names six more, out of which are to be selected
three, Aristodemus, Pamphilus, Chilon, the Lacedaemonian, Cleobulus,
Anacharsis, Periander; some add Se Suidas (...): by which Laertius is
explained contrary to the interpreters.
Acusilaus Son of Caba or Scabra an Argive. Hermippus in his Treatise of the
seven wise men says, they were in all seventeen, of which seven were variously
named, which were Solon, Thales, Pittacus, Bias, Chilon, Cleobulus, Periander,
Anacharsis, Acusilaus, Epimenides, Leophantus, Pherecydes, Aristodemus,
Pythagoras, Lasus of Hermionea, Son of Charmantides, or (according to
Aristoxenus) of Simbrinus, Anaxagoras. Hippobotus in his commentary of
Philosophers reckons Linus, Orpheus, Solon, Periander, Anacharsis, Cleobulus,
Myson, Thales, Bias, Pittacus, Epicharmus, Pythagoras.

Laertius reckons them thus, Thales, Solon, Chilon, Pittacus, Bias, Cleobulus,
Periander; whereto he adds Anacharsis, Myson, Epimenides, and Pherecydes.
These says he were called the wise men, to whom some annex Pisistratus the
Tyrant.

Amongst the Romans also three had the surname of Sapiens, M. Cato, C. Laelius,
and L. Acilius.

THALES.


THALES.
CHAP. I.
The Country and Parents of Thales.
GReat wits, which have been happy in benefiting Posterity by their excellent
inventions, have not always had the fortune to enjoy the just reward, their
glory being intercepted oftentimes by some later disguise of alteration or
addition. It were therefore gratitude in us, who find our selves instructed by
the Ancients, to vindicate the memory of our masters by enquiring diligently
the Authors of those labors whereof we reap the Harvest. This kind of injury
has happened very considerably to THALES the wise man of Miletus, who first
introduced Natural and Mathematical Learning into Greece, from whence it
derived into us; but the honor of so noble a design, the ambitious opposition
of some, the industry of others has so obscured that there is little of the
reputation left to the deserving Author. I have therefore esteemed it worth my
pains, to digest what I could collect or observe of a person, to whom all
lovers of Learning are so much obliged.

The Original of Thales is very obscurely delivered. Some conceive he was a
Phoenician by birth, whose opinion seeming to be strongly founded upon
Laertius, and the Authorities by him alleged, it is necessary that we begin
with a disquisition upon his words, which are, as commonly rendered, these.

Now Thales was born, as Herodotus, Duris and Democritus affirm, his Father
being Examius, his Mother Cleobulina, of the Thelidae, who were Phoenicians,
the most illustrious of all from Cadmus and Agenor, as Plato also saith] The
Testimony of Herodotus, though Astronom. Natione fuit Phoenix, ut Herodotus
Milesius dicit. Which doubtless is corrupt (for what Herodotus is that?) and
to be restored to this effect, Natione fuit Phoenix ut Herodotus, Milesius ut
alij dicunt.
Higynus and * Suidas seem to understand it according to the common error, as
if he were born in Phoenicia, expressly confirms the contrary, being thus;
Thales a Milesian, a far off by descent a Phoenician; Whence we may gather,
that the other two Authorities of Duris and Democritus imported little more, or
at least nothing to a contrary sense. So likewise that of Leander, which is by
* Clemens Alexandrinus cited jointly with Herodotus, to prove him of a
Phoenician extract.

He was made free of Miletus when he went with Neleus who was banished out of
Phoenicia] The learned In Voce Thales.
Casaubon to reconcile this story with that of Neleus, who was not banished out
of Phoenicia, when he built, Miletus for (...), as if Thales being banished out
of Phoenicia had gone with Neleus to Miletus; which alteration begets a very
strange Anacronism, for this Thales was above four hundred years later then
that Neleus. Therefore if Laertius meant the same Neleus, either he was
strangely mistaken, or his text is corrupt, and ought to be understood of the
Ancestors of Thales, to which sense it may be reduced with little alteration,
thus, (...), as if they being Phoenicians, went into ( arta, and became
Citizen^ of Miletus, at what time Neleus Son of Codrus, being put beside the
Kingdom of Athens by his younger brother Me^on, lead th^ther the Ionian
Colonies, whereof Miletus (which he built) was the chief City. Of this Colony
see Herodotus, (...) and Aelian.

But as most say he was born there, at Miletus, and of noble race] So they
render (...) but in oposition to the first opinion which only mentions his
Family, not Country, it may perhaps be understood here in the same relation:
Some (says he) think, he was of a Phoenician extract, of those who were
incorporated at Miletus; others that he was of a Grecian Family, and that
noble. Of this latter opinion is De Herod. ^nalign.
Plutarch who reproves Herodotus for making Thales descended afar off from a
Barbarian stock, and Laert. vit. Thal.
Hermtppus, who ascribes that saying to him, that he thanked the Gods he was a
Grecian, not a Barbarian.

CHAP. II.
Of the time of his birth.
Apollodorus says, that Thales was born the first year of the thirty fifth
Olympiad; Laert.
Demetrius Phalereus says, that he was honored with the title of wise, when
Damasias was Archon. Damasias was Archon according to Laert.
Dionysius Halycarnassaeus the second year of the thirty fifth Olympiad, Lib. 3.
when Ancus Martius the fourth King of Rome began his reign.

Hereupon an anachronism of one year is supposed by very learned men, who would
have Thales to be born the same year that Damasias was Archon. Whence De
Atheniens tempor.
Sigonius, De sctent. mathemat. 32. 8.
Vossius, and others bring drown the birth of Thales to the second year of this
Olympiad; In Eusebius.
Scaliger, Archont. 1. 11.
Meursius. Rationar. temp. 2. 12.
Petavius and others raise Damasias to the first year, that they may make his
Magistracy agree with Thales's birth; neither rightly; for the office of
Damasias relates not to the birth of Thales. For the clearing whereof we must
take notice, that Damasias in the Athenian Fasti is twice said to be Archon,
first in the second year of the thirty fifth Olympiad, the next year after the
birth of Thales, and again the fourth year of the forty eighth Olympiad, when
he obtained the title of Wise; The latter we cannot mention without
acknowledgement of the great light Chronology has received by Mr S^lden's
Marmora Arundeliana.

It will be also worth observance, that there was another of this name, whom
Eusebius places at the eighth Olympiad, and Lae^tius and Vita Lycurg.
Plutarch make contemporary with Homer, Hesiod and Lycurgus. In Eusebius.
Scaliger, who perceived the inconsistency of this account, perceived not the
reason of it; for Phlegon fragm.
Lycurgus and Iphitus instituted the Olympic games twenty seven Olympiads
before Coraebus was victor, who according to Eusebius is the first. These two
Thales are by some confounded, Eusebius calls the first a natural Philosopher,
whereas it is certain that kind of Learning was first introduced into Greece by
the 2d. In voce Thales.
Suidas cites Phlegon, that the latter Thales flourished in the seventh
Olympiad, which ^hi^gon doubtless meant of the first. See St. Augustine. de
civit. dei, lib* ^^ cap. 24. and 27.
They who place Thales about the seventh Olympiad, and make him contemporary
with Romulus, confound the latter Thales with the first, and the true Epoche of
the Olympiads with the vulgar. For the first Thales lived in the seventh
Olympiad from the first of Iphitus; Romulus lived about the same distance from
the Olympiad of Coraebus.

This time is mistaken by that learned Father Clemens Alexandrinus, to prove
Thales younger then the later Prophets. Stromat. 1.
Thus (says he) It is demonstrated that they who propheci'd in the time of
Darius Hystaspes in the second year of his reign, that is to say, Aggaeus,
Zacharias, and Malachy, who was one of the twelve seeing that they prophesied
in the first year of the forty eight Olympiad, were more ancient then
Pythagoras, who is said to have been in the sixty second Olympiad; and then
Thales eldest of the Greek Sages, who was about the fiftieth Olympiad; as if
this were not rather an argument to prove these Prophets contemporary with
Thales, which Eusebius allows. Praepar. Evangel. 10. 4.
About the time (says he) of Cyrus King of Persia, the seven wise men
flourished; this was the time in which the last of the Hebrew Prophets
prophesied, since Troy, above six hundred years, after Moses, no less then
fifteen hundred years. But if with Clemens Alexandrinus we account these
Prophets coaetaneous with Darius Hystas^es, they will appear much younger then
Thales, for Darius begun his reign in the last year of the sixty fourth
Olympiad.

CHAP. III.
His Travells.
HE employed the first and greatest part of his time to Creet, to inform
himself of the Mysteries of their Religion (for that Island was famous for the
birth of Jupiter) as is acknowledged by himself in an Laert.
Epistle to Pherecydes.

That he traveled also into Asia is affirmed in the same Epistle; some say
into Phoenicia, arguing from his Astrology which he is thought to have learned
of the Phoenicians, Masters of that Science; and particularly because he is
said to have first observed the constellation of the Lesser Bear by which the
Phoenicians sailed. D^ Scient. Mathemat. cap. 32.
Vossius essaies to prove the word Cynosura to be Phoenician, not as derived
from (...), but from (...) and (...) as being a Collection of light; or (...)
Umbilicus igneus.

His last journey (being Plut. de plac. phil. 1.
in years) was into Egypt, to confer (as he acknowledges in his Epistle to
Pherecydes) with Priests and Astronomers. There he was instructed by the
Priests at Memphis, particularly (says Vit. Pythag. 1. 2.
Iamblicus) by those of Jupiter. Laertius affirms he learnt Geometry of them; *
Plutarch implies as much of his Philosophy.

He was there in the reign of Plutarch. Symp. sept. s^p. conviv.
Amasis, by whom much favored and admired for many things, especially for
measuring the height of the Pyramids by the shadow; until at last accused to
him of dis-affection to Monarchs and that kind of Government, to which effect
many bitter sayings of his were alleged concerning Tyrants. As when Molpagoras
an eminent person of Ionia demanded what was the strangest sight he ever saw,
he answered, a Tyrant old. Another time being at a feast where a question
arose, what beasts were most dangerous; of wild, says he, a Tyrant, of tame, a
Flatterer; and Princes ( says Plutarch) however they profess themselves far
different from Tyrants, yet take no pleasure in such Apothegmes: hereupon he
lost the favor of Amasis. Thus having studied Philosophy in Egypt he returned
to Miletus, and Cyril.
transported that vast stock of Learning which he had there collected into his
own Country.

CHAP. IV.
How he lived at Miletus.
His life at Miletus (as Laert.
Heraclides affirms) was retired and private; some report he married and had
a Son named Cybissus, but the truer opinion is of those who say he lived
unmarried, and made his Laert. Suid in (...).
Sister's Son (whom Vita Solon.
Plutarch calls Cybisthus) his Heir. Laert. Plut. Sympsiac. 3. 6. Stob. Sermon.
66.
He put off his Mother when she first moved him to marry, by telling her it
was not yet time, and when he was more in years, being again solicited by
her, he answered, nor is it now time, meaning it was then too late. Being
demanded why he took not some course to have issue, he answered (...), which is
the same in pronouncing with (...), and may be taken either because he loved
children, or di^ not love them, as In Laertium.
Casaubon conjectures; but perhaps his meaning may better be gathered out of
another answer of his to the same question, Stob. sermon. 66.
that he did not mean to draw voluntary cares upon his life, and disturb the
quiet thereof; or from this story related by Vita Solon.
Plutarch.

Solon coming to Miletus to visit him, told him that he wondered he wholly
neglected marriage and issue. Thales at that time answered nothing, but some
few days after suborned a stranger to pretend that he came within ten days
from Athens; Solon demanded what news from thence; nothing (answered the other
as he was instructed) but the burial of a young man attended by the whole
City, being as was said Son of the most eminent person of the City, who at the
same time was abroad in travel. Unhappy man (cries Solon) what was his name? I
heard it answered the other, but have forgot, only I remember he was very
famous for Wisdom and Justice. Solon's fear increasing upon every answer, he at
last asked him if the Fathers name were not Solon, which the other affirming,
he beat his own head, and did other actions accompanied with speeches proper to
such as are transported with grief; whereupon Thales similing, and interrupting
him; These things, Solon said he, deterred me from marriage, which thus
disorder even thee a most constant person, but be not troubled at this news,
it is counterfeit.

In this privacy of life he was follicited and sent unto by many Princes, whose
invitations and amities, ( Plutarch Sept. sap conviv.
says) he refused; visited by many eminent persons.

Laert.
He is said to have cohabited some time with Thrasibulus (a man of excellent
wit and judgment) who was King, or (according to the Greek word) Tyrant of
Miletus, Arist. pol. 5. Iultim.
though his reign continued but eleven months; Herodot. 1.
about the time that the Milesians entered into a League with Alyates the
second then King of Lydia.

CHAP. V.
The attribute of wise conferred on him.
THE attribute of Wise, as Vit. Solon. de civit. d^i. 8. 2
Plutarch and Saint Augustine observe, was conferred upon the rest in respect
of their moral rules and practice, but upon Thales particularly for his
speculative Learning. It was first bestowed on Thales, at what time Damasias
was Archon, under whom (according to Laert.
Demetrius Phalareus) all the seven were called wise. The second Damasias was
Archon in the third year of the 49th. Olympiad, which Exercitat. Pli^ian. page
843.
Salmasius knew not, when to make the words of Laertius agree with the first
Damasias, he misinterpreted Eusebius and Clemens Alexandrinus, and subverted
all other accounts of the birth and death of Thales, whereas this fortunately
complies with the times of all the seven.

The first was Thales justly preferred before the rest in respect of his great
Learning, which he owed not to any master; The time when this honor was
conferred on him, falls upon the fifty ninth year of his age.

The second, Pittacus of Mitylene who flourished in the forty second Olympiad,
and died in the third year of the fifty second.

The third, Bias of Priene contemporary with Pittacus, living under Alyattes
and Croesus.

The fourth, Solon, who was Archon at Athens the third year of the forty sixth
Olympiad. He died Olymp. 55.

The fifth, Cleobulus of Lindus, coetanoeus with Solon.

The sixth, Myson of Chene.

The seventh, Chilon of Lacedaemon, who was Ephorus Olymp. 56.

The credit and glory of these seven, was much increased ( says Plutarch) by a
Tripod sent round from one to another, by a mutual, noble and modest
concession: the occasion related thus by Laertius and Valerius Maximus.

Laert.
Some young men of Ionia having bought a draught of the Milesian fishermen,
when the net was drawn up, there was found in it a Tripod, [ Valor. Maxim. 4. 1.
a golden Delphick Table of great weight.] Laert.
Hereupon arose a dispute, [ Val. Max.
those affirming they had bargained only for the fish, the others that they
bought the draught at a venturs; by reason of the strangeness of the case, and
value of the Tripod it was delivered to the City Miletus;] Laert.
The Milesians sent to the Oracle at Delphi about it, and received this answer.

Come thou Milesian to consult my shrine?
The Tripod to the wisest I assign.
Hereupon the Milesians by agreement presented it to Thales, he sent it to
Bias, Bias to Pittacus, he to another, till it past through all the seven,
coming at last to Solon, who affirming God to be the wisest, sent it back to
Delphi [ Val. Max.
giving him at once the title and reward of greatest wisdom.]

But Callimachus in his Iambicks, ( continues Laertius) relates it otherwise;
that Bathycles an Arcadian left a cup, with order that it should be given to
the wisest, whereupon it was presented to Thales, and past about in course till
it came to him again, who then dedicated it to Apollo Didymaeus, with these
verses, according to Callimachus.

Thales to him that rules the Ionian State
This twice obtained prize does consecrate.
In prose thus, Thales the Milesian, Son of Examius, to Delphian Apollo of the
Grecians offers this twice received prize of eminence. He that carried the Cup
from one to another, was Thyrion Son to Bathycles,] whither allude these Verses
of Athen. deipn.
Phoenix Colophonius.

Thales, whose birth his Country blessed,
Esteemed of all men the best,
Was of the golden Cup possessed.
Eudoxius of Gnidus, and Euanthes of Miletus, report that a friend of Croesus
having received from him a golden Cup to be given to the wisest of the
Grecians, delivered it to Thales, and that at last it came to Solon, who
sending to the Phythian Oracle to know who was the wisest, was answered Myson;
whom Eudoxius substitutes for Cleobulus, Plato for Periander; the Oracle
concerning Myson was this.

Octoean Myson I declare
Wiser then those that wisest are.
He that was sent upon the enquiry was Anacharsis. Daedacus the Platonist, and
Clearchus affirm, that the Cup was sent by Croesus to Pittacus, and so carried
about. Andron in Tripode, (which seems to have been a discourse wholly upon this
subject, and is likewise cited by Clemens Alexandrinus, to prove that Thales
and the other six flourished about the fiftieth Olympiad) writes, that the
Argi^es proposed this Trypod as a prize to the wisest of the Greeks, and that
it was adjudged to Aristodemus a Spartan, who resigned it to Chilon;
Aristodemus is mentioned by Alchaeus.

This speech we to Aristodemus owe,
Money's the man, none's poor and honest too.
There are who report that a ship richly laden, sent by Periande^ to
Thrasibulus Tyrant of Miletus, was cast away in the Coan Sea, and the^ ripod
taken up by some Fishermen. Phanodius affirms it was lost in the Athenian Sea,
and afterward brought to the City, and upon consultdtion voted to be sent to
Bias. Others say this Tripod was made by Vulcan, who gave it to Pelops as his
wives Portion; from him it came to Menelaus, and afterward being taken away
with Hellen by Paris, was by the Lacedaemonian [ Hellen] thrown into the Sea,
Plut. vit. sol.
calling to mind [ Plut. vit. sol.
an old Oracle] that it would prove in time to come the ground of many
contentions. After this some Lebeaians fishing thereabouts drew it up, and
quarrelling with the fishermen about it, it was brought to Coos, but the
controversy not decided, the business was told to those of Miletus which is
the chief City of that Country, they sent sent a messenger to demand it, and
finding themselves slighted, made war upon the Coans, in which many being slain
on both sides, the Oracle declared that the Tripod should be given to the
wisest, whereupon both parties with joint consent presented it to Thales [
Plut. vit. sol.
The Coans being willing to grant that to a private person, for which they
before contested with all the Milesians] who dedicated it to Apollo Didyma^us;
the effect of the Oracle to the Coans was this. This Contestation shall
continue till
The golden Tripod into the Ocean cast
By Vulcan, you present to one whose skill
Extends to things to come, present and past.
To the Milesians,

Come thou Milesian to consult my shrine? as before. Thus ^aertius. Vit. sol.
Plutarch adds, that Thales said, Bias was wiser then himself, whereupon it
past to him, from him to another, as wiser; so passing in a circle from one to
another, it came at last to Thales the second time. Finally it was sent from
Miletus to Thebes, and dedicated to Ismenian Apollo. Theophrastus says it was
first sent to Bias at Priene, then by Bias to Thales at Miletus, so passing
through all, it came again to Bias; and finally was sent to Delphi. This is
most generally reported, saving instead of a Tripod, some say it was a Cup sent
from Croesus, others that it was left there by Bathycles

Thus was the Priority of Thales confirmed by the Oracle, for which reason he
is by Cicero and Strabo styled Prince of the wise men, to whom the rest yielded
the pre-eminence.

CHAP. VI.
Of his Philosophy.
THales ( says Laertius) is by many affirmed to be the first that made
disquisitions upon Nature. Apud Lactant. and de Natura Deor. 1.
Cicero (who taught the Greek Philosophy first to speak Latin,) acknowledges
Thales to be the first Author thereof. Lib. 14.
Strabo says, that he first of the Grecians made enquiry into natural Causes
and the Ma^hematicks. De plac. phil. 1. 3.
Plutarch calls him Inventor of Philosophy; Iustine Martyr, Paraenes. ad. Graec.
The most ancient of Philosophers; Tertullian, first of Natural Philosophers;
Apologet.
Lactantius, De falls. rel. 1. 5.
the first that made enquiry after Natural Causes.

Sect. 1. That Water is the Principle of all things.
IN his disquisition of the natural Causes of things, he conceived Water to be
the first Principle of all natural Bodies, whereof they consist, and into
which they resolve. His reasons (as delivered by Placit. philot. 1. 3.
Plutarch, and repeated by Eclog. phys. 1. 13.
Stobaeus) these.

First, because natural Seed, the Principle of all living creatures, is humid;
whence it is probable that humidity is also the principle of all other things.

Secondly, because all kinds of Plants are nourished by moisture; wanting
which, they wither and decay.

Thirdly, because Fire, even the Sun it self and the stars are nourished and
maintained by vapors proceeding from Water, and consequently the whole world
consists of the same. Whence Homer supposing all things to be engendered of
water, says, (...)
The Ocean whence all things receive their birth.


In pursuit ( Metaph. 1. 3.
as Aristotle says) of this opinion, he assigned water the lowest place,
holding ( according to Nature. quast. 6. 6.
Seneca) that the whole Earth ^^oats, and is carried above the water, whether
that we call the Ocean or great Sea, or any simple moisture of another nature,
or a moist element. By this water ( says he) the earth is sustained as a great
ship, which presses upon the water that bears it up, because the most weighty
part of the world cannot be upheld by the Air, which is subtle and light. Thus
is Metaphys. 1. 3
Aristotle to be explained, who says, Thales held, that the Earth being
capable of swimming, rests as wood or the like; now of such things, none suim
upon Air, but upon Water.

Upon this ground it was that he held Water ( as Laertius says) to be the
cause of Earthquakes. Thus Nac. quaest. 3. 13.
Seneca; He holds that the Globe of the Earth is upheld by water, and carried
as a bark, and floateth by the mobility thereof, at such time as it is said to
quake. One of his reasons alleged by Not. quaest. 6.
Seneca, is this, because in all extraordinary motions thereof some new
Fountains commonly issued, which if they incline to one side, and show their
keel asidelong, gather water, which, if it chance the burden they bear be
overweighty, raises it self higher toward the right or left side.

From the testimony of Homer, by which Thales (according to Pluta^ch and
Iustine Martyr) defended this Tenet (that water is the principle of all things)
it is manifest it was delivered, (though imperfectly) by other Grecians before
Thales; Plutarch Ignis an aqu^ ^tilior?
else where producing this Authority of Theogon.
Hesiod. (...) --
Of all things Chaos was the first --
adds, the greater part of ancient Philosophers called water Chaos (...) from
dissusion. The Scholiast of Argonant. 4.
Apollonius upon these words. -- (...)
The Earth of slime was made,
affirms (citing Zeno) that the Chaos whereof all things were made according to
Hesiod was water, which settling became slime, the slime condensed into solid
Earth, to which add this testimony of Cited by Athenog^ras.
Orpheus.

(...)
Of Water slime was made:
This opinion they borrowed from the Phoenicians, with whom the Grecians had a
very ancient correspondence. Linus came from thence; Orpheus had his learning
from thence; as Thales is conceived to have done likewise, which appears
clearly in Porphyr. de antro. Nymph.
Numenius, an ancient Philosopher, who cites the very words of Moses for this
opinion, The spirit of God moved on the face of the waters. There is an eminent
place in Prae^ar. Evangel. 1. 10.
Eusebius to prove this; the divinity of the Phoenicians asserts the principle
of this world to be a dark spiritual air, or the spirit of dark air, and Chaos
troubled and involved in darkness; that this was infinite and a long time had
no bound, but (say they) the spirit being moved with the love of his own
principles, there was made a mixtion, which nexure was called love; this was
the beginning of the production of all things; but the spirit it self had no
generation, and from this connection of the spirit was begotten (...), which
some call slime, others corruption of watery mistion, and of this was made the
seed of all creatures, and the generation of all things.

Nor were the Indians ignorant of this, as Megasthenes delivers their opinion.
Strab. lib. 15.
They are of the same mind in many things with the Grecians, as that the world
had beginning, and shall have end; that God its Maker and Governor goes quite
through it; that all things had different beginnings, but that of which the
world was made was water.

The word (...), Principle, because with Philosophers it includes the efficient
cause, and consequently understood singly excludes the rest, that being the
most noble, has given occasion to some to mistake Thales, as is by
acknowledging no other principle, he consequently accounted Water to be God;
but that Thales understands by Principle only the material Cause, we may easily
gather from Plutarch, De placit. philot. 1. 2.
who condemns Thales for confounding a Principle with an Element, and for
holding them to be both one; Whereas (says he) there is great difference;
Elements are co^pounded, Principles are neither compounded, nor are any
complete substance, and truly water, air, earth, fire we term elements, but
principles we call other natures, in this respect that there is nothing
precedent ^to them, whereof they are engendered. For otherwise, if they were not
the first, they would not be Principles, but that rather should be so termed
whereof they were made. Now certain things there are precedent whereof Earth
and water are compounded, viz. The first inform matter, and the form it self
and privation. Thales therefore erres, affirming Water to be both Element and
principle of all things. Thus we see by Plutarch, that the objection can, only
be as to the name, not to reason of the name; for the distinction of principle
and element being not used in that time, Thales by principle, meant nothing of
the efficient cause which is most certain from Aristotle. Metaphys. 1. ^.
Thales, says, he affirms water to be the principle: wherefore he held the
earth to be above the water; perhaps he conceived so, because he saw that the
nutriment of all things is humid, that heat it self consists thereof, and that
every creature lives thereby; He held that of which things are made to be the
principls of all things, for these reasons he was of this opinion, as also
because the seeds of all things are of a humid nature, and water is the
principle of things humid.

Sect. 2. Of God.
TErtullian says, Ap^loge^. (...). gent. (...)
that Thales to Croesus, enquiring concerning the Deity, gave no certain
account, but desired several times of deliberating to no effect. He seems to
reflect upon the same or a like story to that which is reported of Simonides
and Hieron.

But what the opinion of Thales was concerning God, may be gathered from two
Apothegmes cited by Laertius, repeated with this gloss by Stromat. 5.
Clemens Alexandrinus; And what are not those the sayings of Thales that are
derived from hence, That God is glorified for ever and ever, and he openly
confesses that he is called (...), he who knows Hearts. For Thales being
demanded what God was, that (says he) which has neither beginning nor end.
Another asking of a man might do ill and conceal it from God. How says he,
when a man that thinks it cannot? Men ought to think (says De legib. 2.
Cicero in his name) that the Gods see all things.

He acknowledged God the first of beings, and Author of the world, asserting
(according to Laertius) that the most ancient of all things is God, ^or he is
not begotten; that the fairest is the world, for it is his work. This is
confirmed by Cicero. De nature. de or (...)
Thales the Mile^ian (says he) who first enquired into these things, said,
that water was the principle of things, but that God was that mind which formed
all things of water. If Gods may be without sense and mind, why did he join the
mind to water^ why water to the mind, if the mind can subsist without a body?
Thus Cicero who understands Thales to intend the material principle to be
co-eternall with the efficient; which Thales himself seems not to mean, when
he declared God to be the first of Beings. But that the Men's of ^naxagoras, for
the annexing of which to matter, he was so much famed, was no more then what he
borrowed from Thales, the words of Cicero make good.

He affirmed that God by the immutable decree of his providence governs the
world. Thales (says Stobaeus) being demanded what was most strong, answered
Necessity, for it rules all the world. Necessity is the firm judgment and
immutable power of providence. Hither we must likewise refer what is cited
under his name by the same Stobaeus, that the first mover is immovable, which
Physic. ^. 7.
Aristotle has borrowed from him, not owning the Author.

Something imperfectly was before delivered by Orpheus, concerning God,
alleged by Admonit. ad gent.
Clemens Alexandrinus and others; but as Cicero says; Thales was the first
among the Grecians, who made any search into these things; and that he brought
it out of Egypt, the Grecians themselves deny not, Herodot. lib. 2.
for they acknowledge, that they received the names of their Gods from thence,
and believed the Egyptians to be the first, who looking up to the world above
them, and admiring the nature of the universe, reflected upon the Deity.

Sect. 3. Of Demons.
THales ( says Placit. Philos. 1. 8.
Plutarch) with Pythagoras, Plato, and the Stoics hold, that Demons are
spiritual substances, and the Hero's souls separated from the bodies, of which
sort, there are two, good, and bad, the good Hero's are the good souls, the
bad, the bad. The same order Apolog.
Athenagoras attests to be observed by Thales, ranking the three degrees thus:
First, that of the immortal Gods, next Demons, thirdly Heroes: This was
followed by Pythagoras, that the Gods were to be prefered in reverence before
Demons, Hero's before men.

He affirmed (as Stobaeus says) the world to be full of these Demons. This is
thought the meaning of that of De anim^. 1. 8.
Aristotle, repeated by Cicero, Thales thought that all things were full of
Gods. The same assertion Laertius ascribes to Pythagoras, (...) legib. 2.
that all the air is full of souls, Vit. Pythag.
which are Hero's and Demons.

This opinion was asserted by the Greeks, before the time of Thales,
particularly by Hesiod; but whether that be argument enough, to deny, that
Thales had it from the Egyptians, I question; that they held it in the same
manner, we may learn by De myster. Egypt. sub initi^
Iamblichus. Besides, Pythagoras and Plato (whom Plutarch joins in this Tenet
with Thales) drew their learning from the same fountain.

Sect. 4. Of the Soul.
PLutarch and Stobaeus say, that Thales first affirmed the soul to be (...), a
self moving nature. De plac. Phil. 4. 2.
Aristotle that he calls it (...) in respect to the motion it gives to other
things, De anima. 1. 2.
in which are included both parts of the definition of the Plato in timae.
Platonists, a substance, having within it self a power to move it self and
other things: which Plato argues to this effect: The first of motions is that
whereby a thing moves it self; the second, that whereby it moves another:
every thing that moves it self, lives; every living thing lives, because it
moves it self, the resore the power of self motion is the essence of that
substance which we call the soul, which soul is the cause of the first
generation and motion of things which are, nere, and shall be; and of all their
contraries, as of all transmutation, the principal of motion, and therefore
more ancient than the body, which it moves by a second motion. And afterward
declares these to be the names of the souls motion, to will, to consider, to
take care, to consult, to judge rightly, and not rightly, to joy, to grieve, to
dare, to fear, to hate, to love, and the like. These which are the first
motions, and suscipient of the second corporal, bring all things into
augmention, and d^cre^se, conversion, or cond^mnation, and descretion, or
rarefaction. This opinion first raised by Thales, was entertained in the
schools with the assent of Stob. Ecl. phys. lib. 1.
Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, Socrates, and Plato, till exploded by Aristotle,
Arist. de anima. l. 2.
whose chief arguments against it were these. 1. That nothing is moved but what
is in place, nothing in place but what has quantity, which because the soul
wants, none of the four kinds of motion ( viz. Lation, Alteration, diminution,
accretion) are competible ( perse) to her. Secondly, that self motion is not
essential to the Soul, because she is moved accidentally, by external
objects. The first, if understood of Circumscription, not only denies the
motion of all things, that are definitively in place, as spirits, but of the
highest sphere, if compared with Aristotle's definition of place; yet that some
of these species of motion, though in a different extraordinary manner, are
competent to the soul, and not accidentally, may be argued 1. From the further
diffusion of the soul, according to the augmentation of the body. 2. From
intellection, which is acknowledged a perfection, and consequently a kind of
alteration, which that Thales understood to be one of the soul's motions, is
clear from that Apothegme ascribed to him by L^ertius, the swiftest of things
is the mind, for it over-runs all things: Whence Tuscul. quast. ^.
Cicero (confessing almost in the very words of Thales, that nothing is swifter
then the mind, that no swiftness may compare with the swiftness of the mind)
would interpret the (...) of Aristotle, a continued and perpetual motion.

The second reason may be questioned by comparing the acts of the memory, and
reminiscence; the first occasioned by exterior things, yet objective only, so
that the motion is within her self; but by the other she moves her self, from
a privation to a habit, without the help of any exterior.

It is worth notice, that among these and other reasons alleged by De anima.
1. 3.
Aristotle to destroy this assertion, one is the possibility of the
resurrection of the body; but this (...).

From the second part of the difference in the definition ( viz. from moving
other things) Thales argued, that the Lodestone, and Amber had souls; the
first because it draws Iron, the second Straw. He further (says Laertius)
asserted those things we count inonimate, to have souls, arguing it from the
loadstone and Amber: the reason of which latter example, In Laert.
Aldobrandinu^ falsely interprets its change of color, and jarring as it were
at poison: But De anima. 1. 2
Aristotle more plainly, for of those whom we mentioned, Thales seems to have
taken the soul to be something (...), apt to move, since he affirmed a stone to
have a soul, because it moved Iron.

He asserted likewise the soul (of man) to be immortal, and according to Laert.
Cherilus, was the first that held so. Tusc. quaest. 1.
Cicero ascribes the original of this opinion to Pherecydes, but it rather
seems to have been brought by Thales from the Egyptians; that they held so Lib.
2.
Herodotus attests.

Sect. 5. Of the World.
THales held, Plutarch. de plac. phil. 2. 1.
that there was but one world, and that Laert.
made by God; which truth was followed by all Philosophers, as De Coclo. 1. 1^.
12.
Aristotle confesses, until he rejected it, to defend, by the cont^arie an
assertion equally false, that the world is everlasting, which could not be,
says he, if it had beginning.

That Laert.
the world being Gods work, is the fairest of things, whatsoever disposed in
lively order, being a part thereof, for which reason Pythagoras (according to
De plac. phil. 2. 1.
Plutarch) called it first (...).

That night is elder then day. This circumstance of the creation was held
likewise by Timoth.
Orpheus, and Hesiod, who had it from the Phoenicians: for this reason the
Damascen.
Numidians, Tacit. de mor. Germ.
Germans, Caesar de bell^ Gail. ^.
and * Gauls reckoned by nights.

That the Laert.
world is animated, and that Plut. de plac. phil.
God is the soul thereof, diffused through every part, whose divine moving
virtue penetrats through the element of water. Thus explained by the Hermetick
Philosophers; ^he divine spirit who produced this world out of the first water,
being infused as it were, by a continual inspiration into the works of nature,
and diffused largely through, by a certain secret, and continual act, moving
the whole, and every particular according to its kind, is the soul of the world.

That the Laert. Plut. s^pt. sap. conviv.
World is contained in place. This agrees with the definition of place by
space; but they who with Aristotle define place a superficies, though they hold
the parts of the world to be in place, are forced to deny the whole to be so.

That in the world there is no vacuum, Plut de plac. phil. 1. 18.
in which (as Plut^rch observes) all Philosophers agree, who affirm the world
to be animated, and governed by providence; the contrary defended by those who
maintain that it consists of Atoms, is inanimate, not governed by providence.

That Plut. de plac. phil. 1. 9.
matter is fluid and variable.

That Plut. de pla phil. 1. 16.
Bodies are passible and divisible, in infinitum, and continuous as are also a
line, supers^cies, place, and time.

That Plut. de plat. phil. 2. 13. Achill. Ta^. (...) in Arat.
mistion is made by composition of the elements.

That * the stars are earthly, yet fiery; De c^el^. 2. 7. (...) de plac. phil.
2. 28.
the Sun earthly. They who affirm the stars to be fiery, says * Aristotle,
hold so, as conceiving the whole superior body to be fire.

That the Moon is of the same nature with the Sun, that she is illuminat^d by
him. Plutarch, and Stobaeus affirm this to be first held by Thales, though
Eudemus cited by Theon ascribe it to Anaximander.

That the monthly occulations of the Moon are caused by the neerness of the Sun
shining round her.

That there is but Plut. de plac. phil. 3. 9.
one earth, Plut. de plac. phil. 3. 10.
round, in fashion of a Globe, Plut. de plac. phil. 3. 11.
seated in the midst of the world, to which relates that speech ascribed to him
by Cleodemus, that, if the earth were taken out of the world, there must of
necessity follow a confusion of all things.

That Sept. sap. conviv
the overflowing of Nilus is caused by the Etesian (yearly) winds, which rise
with the Dog star, Laert.
after the summer solstice, and beginning to b^ow from the North, spread (as
Meteor. 2. 6.
Aristotle describes them) into remote quarters. These (says De plac. phil.
Pluta^ch) blowing directly against Egypt, cause the water so to swell, that
the sea driven by these winds, enters within the mouth of that River, and
hinders it, that it cannot discharge it self freely into the Sea, but is
repulsed. Whereupon (adds Lib. 1.
Diodorus Siculus) it overflowes Egypt, which lies low and level. But this
reason, though it seem plausible, is easily disproved; for if this were true,
all the Rivers which are discharged into the Sea, opposite to the Etesian
winds, should have the same overflowing. Thus Diodorus in his excellent
discourse upon this subject, which concludes with the opinion of Agatharchides,
that it is occasioned by rain, coming from the mountains of Ethiopia.

CHAP. VII.
Of his Geometry.
APuleius, who calls Thales the inventer of Geometry amongst the Grecians,
Florid. lib. 4. Laert. vit. Pythag.
is more just to his memory then Anticlides and others, who ascribe the honor
thereof to Moeris, or to Pythagoras, who by the acknowledgment of De vita.
Pythag. 1. 2.
Iamblichus, a Pythagorean, learnt Mathematics of Thales. The original and
progress of this science, In Eucli^. 2. 4.
to the perfection it received from Pythagoras (which gave occasion to that
mistake) is thus delivered by ^roclus.

Geometry was invented by the Egyptians, taking ^is beginning from measuring
fields, it being necessary for them, by reason of the inundation of Nilus,
which washed away the bounds of their severalls. Nor is it to be wondered at,
that as well this, as other sciences, should have their beginning from
commodiousnesse, and opportunity; since, as is said in generation, it proceeds
from imperfect to perfect; therefore not without reason is the transition from
sense to consideration, Supply the breach in the text, (...) etc. so Barocius
translates
and from consideration to the mind. As therefore among the Phaenicians, by
reason of merchandise and traffic, the certain knowledge of numbers had its
beginning; so likewise among the Egyptians, Geometry was found out upon the
foresaid occasion; and Thales going to Egypt, first brought over this science
in^o Greece: and many things he found out himself, and taught his followers
the principles of many things, declaring some more generally, other things more
plainly. Next him Ameristus, brother to Stesichorus the Poet, is remembered,
Read, (...).
as having touched Geometry, of whon Hippias the Elean makes mention, as
eminent in that knowledge: After these Pythagoras considering the principles
thereof more highly, advanced it into a liberal science.

Sect. 1. Propositions invented by him.
THat he improved (as Proclus implies) the Geometry which he learnt of the
Egyptians with many propositions of his own, is confirmed by Laertius, who
says, that he much advanced those things, the invention whereof Callimachus in
his Iambicks, asscribes to Euphorbus the Phrygian, as scalenous triangles, and
others. Nor is it to be doubted, but that many of them are of those, which
Euclid has reduced into his Elements; whose design it was to collect and
digest those that were invented by others, accurately demonstrating such as
were more negligently proved, but of them only, these are known to be his.

[1. Every Diameter divides its circle into two equal parts. Lib. 1. def. 17.
] This proposition which Euclid makes part of the definition of a Diameter, in
Euclid lib. 2. com. 14.
Proclus affirms to have been first demonstrated by Thales.

2. [ Euclid. lib. 1. prop. 5.
In all Isosceles triangles, the angles at the base are equal the one to the
other, and those right lines being produced, the angles under the base are
equal.] lib. 3. com. 9.
Proclus says, that for the invention of this likewise, as of many other
propositions, we are beholding to Thales, for he first observed and said, that
of every Isosceles, the angels at the base are equal, and according to the
ancients called equal like. These are three passages in the demonstration,
which infer nothing toward the conclusion, of which kind there are many in
Euclid, and seem to confirm the antiquity thereof, and that it was less
curiously reformed by him.

3. [If two lines cut one the other, the verticle angles shall equal the one
the other.] Euclid. lib. 1. prop. 15.
Eudemus attests this theorem to have been invented by Thales, Procl. lib. 3.
com. 19.
but first demonstrated by Euclid. Euclid lib. 1. prop. 26.


4. [ Procl. lib. 3. com. 31.
If two triangles have two angles equal to two angles the one to the other,
and one side equal to one side, either that which is adjacent to the equal
angles, or that which subtendeth one of the equal angles, they shall likewise
have the other sides, equal to the other sides, both to both, and the
remaining angle equal to the remaining angle] * Eudemus attributes this
theorem (says Proclus) to Thales, for showing the distance of ships upon the
Sea, in that manner as he is said to do, it is necessary that he perform it by
this.

Pamphila (says Laertius) affirms, that he first described the rectangle
triangle of a circle.] Geom.
Ramus attributes to Thales (upon this authority of Laertius) the second,
third, fourth, and fifth propositions of the fourth book of Euclid, which are
concerning the adscription of a triangle and a circle, and consequently takes
(...) here to include both inscription, and circumscription; whereas in all
those propositions, there is nothing proper to a rectangle triangle; so that if
the word (...) be retained, it must relate to the 31 proposition of the third
book, whence may be deduced the description of a rectangle triangle in a
circle. But because there is no such proposition in Euclid, and this has but
an obscure reference to part of that theorem; it is to be doubted that the Text
of Laertius is corrupt, and the word (or mark) (...) insered by accident,
without which these words (...) exactly correspond with those of Lib. 10. cap.
11.
Vitru^^ius, ^ythagoricum trigonum orthogonium describere: by which he means
(as he at large expresses Lib. 9. cap. 2.
elsewhere,) the forty fifth proposition of the first book of Euclid, that in
rectangle triangles, the square of the hypotenuse, is equal to the square of
the sides containing the right angle. That Vitruvius, Proclus, and others,
attribute this invention to Pythagoras, confirms it to be the same here meant
by Laertius; who adds, that Thales, for the invention hereof, sacrificed an
Ox, though others (says he) among whom is Apollodorus, ascribe it to
Pythagoras. And in the life of Pythagoras, he cites the same Apollodorus, that
Pythagoras sacrificed a Hecatomb, having foundout, that the hypotenuse of a
right angled triangle, is of equal power to the two sides, including the right
angle according to the Epigram That noble scheme Pythagoras devised,
For which a Hecatomb he sacrificed.


Cicero, though he differ in the Author, agrees in the quantity of the offering
with Laertius; affirming, that Pythagoras upon any new invention, used to
sacrifice an Ox: Which kind of gratitude begun by Thales, was imitated by
others also, as by Perseus.

Procl in Euclid. lib. 2. def. 4. where the words perhaps are inverted, and for
(...).
Finding three spirall lines, in sections five,
Perseus an offering to the Gods did give.
Sect. 2. Of his taking the height of the Pyramids.
THe Pyramids of Egypt are supposed by Polyhist. cap. 25.
Solinus, Idyll. 2.
Ausonius, Lib. 22.
Ammianus, Var. 7. form. 16.
Marcellinus, and * Cassiodorus, to cast no shadow at all, which (as Master
Greaves has observed in his excellent discourse upon this subject) must be
meant either of the summer time, or, which is nearer the truth, that for three
quarters of the year, they have none at midday.

For, that Thales by the shadow measured their height, is acknowledged. Laert.
Hieronymus says, he measured the Pyramids by the shadow, observing when they
are of equal bigness. Lib. 36. cap. 12.
Pliny affirms, he found out a way to take the height of them, and all such
like, by measuring the shadow, at what time it is equal to the body. But
Plutarch has given a more regular and exact account of his manner of
operation, by erecting a staff perpendicular upon the end of the shadow of the
Pyramid, and by two triangles made by the beams of the Sun, he demonstrated,
that what proportion there was between the shadows, the same was betwixt the
Pyramid and the staff: A demonstration so rational, that it is the ordinary
way of taking heights by shadows, founded upon this theorem.

Euclid. lib. 6. prop. 4.
Of equiangle triangles, the sides that are about equal angles are
proportional, and the sides that subtend the equal angles are homologous.

Which if Proclus had proceeded as far as the sixth book of Euclid, we should
in all likelihood have found ascribed to Thales; for the same argument
wherewith Eudemus proves him inventor of the fourth theorem in the foregoing
Section, whereby he took distances, is of equal force in this, whereby he took
altitudes.

The height of the great Pyramid (which Thales measured) is by its
perpendicular (according to Mr. Greaves) 499 feet, by its inclining ascent, 693
feet.

CHAP. VIII.
Of his Astronomy.
OMitting the fable of Orpheus's Harp, alluding to the seven Planets, and the
observations of Hesiod, which were little more then of the rising and setting
of some principal Stars, (so imperfect, that Plato calls all those who
satisfy themselves with such superficial knowledge, Astronomers according to
Hesiod) we may with Eudemus and others affirm, that Thales was the first of
the Grecians that was skillful in Astronomy. Which Science, lib. 5. Cap. 17.
Pliny asserts to have been brought out of Phaenicia; de Caelo. 2. 12.
Aristotle that the Grecians owe much of it to the Egyptians, where it had
been of a long time practiced: Thither indeed Epist. (...) pherecyd.
Thales acknowledges that he traveled to confer with Astronomers.

Sect. 1. Of the Celestial Spears.
THales, Pythagoras ( says De plac. phil.
Plutarch, repeated by * Sto^aeus) with his followers affirm, that the
Celestial sphere is divided into five Circles (which they call Zones) whereof
one is call, (...) Artick, and is always in view to us; one the summer
Tropic, one the Equinoctial, one the winter Tropic, one the Antartick
circle, never seen by us. The oblique Circle called the Zodiac, lies under
the three middle circles, it (...) them all three as it passes, and each of
them is cut in right angles by the Meridian, which goes from Pole to Pole.
Unjustly therefore is the invention of the Zones ascribed by Strab. lib. 2.
Posidonius to Parmenides; and that of the obliquity of the Zodiac by Plin. 2.
8.
others to Anaximander, Pythagoras, or Aenipodes.

Laert.
Eudemus says, that he first observed the Tropicks; Laertius, that he first
found out the accession of the Sun from Tropic to Tropic. The word (...)
signifies not only the Solstices, but the Equinoxes likewise: Advers. mathem.
5. 2.
Sextus Empiricus. The Tropic signs are those into which the Sun coming,
changes and makes conversions of the air; such a sign is Aries, and the
opposite to it Libra; so also Capricorn and Cancer: for in Aries is made the
vernall conversion, in Capricorn the winter, in Cancer the Summer, in Libra the
autumnall. This exposition La^^tius confirms, when he says that Thales
composed only two treatises, one of the Tropicks, the other of the
Equinoctialls; and that he distinguished the seasons of the year.

Sect. 2. Of the Sun, Moon, and Stars.
HE first observed the Apparent diameter of the Sun, which is the angle made in
the eye, to be the 720 part of his orb: This doubtless is the meaning of
Laertius, his words these, (...) Then which reading, which implies the Sun to
be 720 times lesser then the Moon, nothing is more ridiculous; for knowing (as
is granted by all) the cause of Eclipses, he must likewise know the Sun to be
greater then the Moon nor is it much mended by those who read (...) The text
seems rather to require (...) or something to that effect, of which, thus in
Arenarie.
Archimedes, this we suppose when Aristarchus says the Sun appears, as being
the 720 part of the circle of the Zodiac; for he considered how he might by
instruments take the angle made in the eye by the Suns apparent diameter: but
to take any such thing exactly is not easy; for ne then the sight, nor the
hand, nor the instruments wherewith the observation is made, are of credit
sufficient to demonstrate it exactly. This correction Apuletus thus confirms,
In his declining age he made an excellent demonstration of the proportion of
the Sun, which I have not only learned (says Apuleius) but confirmed by
practice, how many times the Suns magnitude is comprehended in the circle which
his motion makes. This, as soon as he found out, Thales showed to Mandraytus of
Priene, who being infin^tely delighted with this new and unexpected knowledge,
bad him ask what he would in recompense for such an excellent invention: It
will be reward enough for me, said Thales, if what you have learned of me,
whenever you communicate it to others, you profess me to be the Inventor.

He first found out the constellation of the lesser Bear, Eaert. and Achill.
Tat. Isag. in Arat.
Callimachus He to Miletus sailed, invited
By Thales glory, who quick-sighted
Is said to have marked the lesser Bear,
The star by which Phoenicians steer.


Higynus affirms that he first called it (...) the Bear.

Sect. 3. Of Eclipses.
HE was the first (says Laertius) that foretold Eclipses, as Eudemus affirms
in his Astrologick history; for which Zenophanes and Herodotus admire him;
attested also by Heraclitus and Democritus. Theon, Smyrnaeus, and Clemens
Alexandrinus cite the same place of Eudemus; the scope of whose book was the
History of Astrologers, and what every one found out. Thus likewise Pliny,
Amongst the Grecians, the first that searched into Eclipses, was Thales, the
Milesian.

De placit. phil. 2. ^.
Plutarch affirms, that he was the first that observed the Eclipse of of the
Sun, and said, that it was occasioned by the Moon, coming in a direct line
underneath him, which may be seen in a basin of water, or looking glass. Plut.
de plac. phil. 2. 28.
That the Eclipse of the Moon is caused by the shadow of the earth, which being
placed betwixt these two stars, darkens the lesser.

The testimony of Herodotus, alleged by Laertius is this: Lib. 1.
A five years war was raised between the Ly^ians and the Medes, in which,
sometimes the Medes had the better of the Lydians, sometimes the Lydians of the
Medes, and one battle was fought by night: The war being thus equal on both
sides, in the sixth year, the Armies being joined, it happened that as they were
^ighting, the day on a sudden became night; which alteration of that day,
Thales a Milesian had fortold the Ionians, designing the year wherein it should
happen. The Lydians and Mea^s seeing the day turned to night, left off
fighting, and labored to conclude a mutual peace, which by the mediation of
Syennenses King of Cilicia, and Labnitus King of Babylon ( whom Scaliger
conceives to be Nebuchadnezzar) was concluded, with the marriage of Aryaena
daughter of Alyattes, with Astyages, son of Cyaxares, ratified by drinking
blood.

This is the story of that memorable Eclipse, the time whereof is uncertain:
Lib. ^. cap. 12.
Pliny places it in the fourth year of the forty eight Olympiad, before the
building of Rome 170 years: cap. 20.
Solinus in the 49 Olympiad, the 604 year after the destruction of ^roy; which
falls upon the first year of that Olympiad. Strom. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus (citing Eudemus) about the fiftieth Olympiad, at what
time Cyaxares father of Astyages reigned in Media: Alyattes father of C^oesus
in Lydia. Eusebius in the second year of the forty eight Olympiad, 1430 years
after Abraham. Cleomedes says, it was total in Hellespont in Alexandria, but
of ten digits.

Lib. 6. (...) the M. S. prepared for the Press in the hands of my honored
friend Edward Byshe Esquire.
Johannes Antiochenus says, it continued many hours; but they could, not
exceed three.

Of latter writers differing accounts thereof are delivered by these.

Ricciolus places it before the incarnation 585 years, May 28. about 6 a clock
in the afternoon, the digits eclipsed 12. 56.

Calvisius before the incarnation 607 years. Olymp. 43. 4. differing from Pliny
18. years.

The learned Bishop of Armagh, in the reign of Cyaxares Olymp. 44. 4. the 147
year of Nabonassar, the fourth day of the Egyptian Month Pachon, according to
the Julian account September. 20. feria 1. beginning after Sunrise 1^. 3^^. 25^.
digits eclipsed 9. continuing almost two hours.

Petavius Olympiad 45. 4. Julian period 4117. before the incarnation 597, after
the building of Rome 157. July 9. feria 3 beginning after midnight 4^ 45^
digits eclipsed 9. 22^. continuance full two hours.

Kocca confutes Petavius, because that eclips suits not with the circumstances
of the story, as beginning too early in the morning, and being defective as to
the quantity in Pontus and lesser Asia.

Lansbergius, Olympiad 48. 3. the 163 year of Nabonassar, the 12 day of Tybi,
which is May 28. digits eclipsed 12. 2^^ in Hellespont: 10. 12^ in Alexandria.

Kepler, Scaliger, Buntingus, and Salianus, follow Pliny: digits eclipsed
(according to Buntingus) 11. 30^.

Neither is it easy to determine whether this variety arise from the
incertainty of the Astronomers, or of the Chronologers.

Sect. 4. Of the Year.
Laertius says, that he distinguished the seasons of the year, that he first
called the last day of every month (...) the thirtieth day: that he divided the
year into three hundred sixty five days.

This calculation of the year he seemed to have learned in Egypt, where it was
in use, thus explained and commended by lib. 2.
Herodotus, the Egyptians were of all men the first that found out the year,
distinguishing it into twelve months; this they gathered from the stars, and
more iudiciously (in my opinion) then the Grecians, for as much as the Grecians
every third year, intercalate a month to make up the time; but the Egyptians
to the number of 360 days, which twelve months make, add yearly five days,
whereby the account of the circle of time returning into its self is made good.

This was called in latter times, the Egyptian year (perhaps because used by
Ptolomy, who lived in Egypt) in distinction from the Julian year, which was
then used in all the western parts, and has the addition of six hours: The
most perfect is the Gregorian, consisting of three hundred sixty five days,
five hours, forty nine Minutes, twelve seconds.

Sect. 5. His Astrologicall Praedictions.
Thales being earnestly addicted to Astrology, became obnoxious to the censure
of some persons. As he was led abroad one night by an old woman, his Maid (a
Plat.
Thracian) to look upon the Stars, he fell into a ditch ( wherein she
purposely led him) to whom as he complained, Thales, said she, do you think,
when you cannot see those things that are at your feet, that you can understand
the heavens?

He was also, for preferring this study before wealth, reproved by some
friends, not without reproach to the Science, as conferring no advantage on its
professors; whereupon he thus vindicated himself and the art from that
aspersion. When they upbraid him, says Pol. 1. 7.
Aristotle, with his proverty, as if Philosophy were unprofitable, it is said,
that he by Astrology, foreseeing the plenty of Olives that would be that year,
before the winter was gone (antequam florere caepissent, says De divinat. 1.
Cicero) gave earnest, and bought up all the places for oil at Miletus, and
Chios, which he did with little money, there being no other chapman at that time
to raise the price; and when the time came that many were sought for in have,
he setting what rates on them he pleased, by this means got together much
money, and then showed, that it was easy for Philosophers to be rich, if they
would themselves, but that wealth was not their aim. To this Plutarch alludes,
when he said, that Thales is reported to have practiced Merchandise.

CHAP. IX.
His Moral Sentences.
Of his Moral Sentences those are first to be remembered which Sept. sap. conv.
Plutarch mentions upon this occasion.

Amasis King of Egypt entering into contestation with the King of Aethiopia
concerning wisdom, propounded these questions to be resolved by him; what is
oldest of all things, what fairest, what greatest, what wisest, what most
common, what most profitable, what most hurtful, what most powerful, what
most easy?

The answers of the Ethiopian were these, the oldest of things is time, the
wisest Truth, the fairest Light, the most common Death, the most profitable
God, the most hurtful the Devil, the most powerful Fortune, the most easy
that which pleases. Thales demanded of Niloxenus, whether Amasis approved
these solutions? Niloxenus, who was sent by Amasis into Greece with these other
questions to be resolved by the Sages, answered that with some he was
satisfied, with others not; and yet, replies Thales, there is not one but is
erroneus and betrays ignorance. As for the first, how can it be defended that
Time is the oldest of things, when one part of it is past, the other present,
the third yet to come, for that which is to come must in reason be esteemed
younger then all men or things? Next to to affirm the truth is wisdom, is as
much as if we should say, that the Light and seeing are all one. Again, if he
esteem Light fair, why does he forget the Sun? His answers concerning God
and the Devil are bold and dangerous, but that of Fortune most improbable, for
if she be so powerful, how comes it that she is so easily changed. Nor is
Death the most common, for it is not common to the Living. The most ancient of
things is God, for he never had beginning or birth, the greatest place of the
world contains all other things, place contains the world; the fairest the
world, for whatsoever is order disposed, is part thereof. The wisest is time,
for it has found out all things already devised, and will find out all that
shall be; the most common hope, for that remains with such as have nothing
else; the most profitable, virtue, for it muketh all things useful and
commodious Etiam apud Stob. sermon. 109.
the most hurtful vice, for it destroys all good things; the most powerful
Necessity, for that only is invincible; Etiam apud. Stob. sermon. 46.
the most easy, that which agrees with nature, for even pleasures are many
times given over and cloy us.

To which Apothegmes these are added by Laertius, The swiftest of things is the
mind, for it over-runs all. He affirmed that there is no difference betwixt
life and death; being there upon asked why he did not die; because says he,
there is no difference; to one who asked which was eldest, night or day; he
answered night by a day; Another enquiring whether a man might do ill and
conceal it from the Gods; not think it, said he. To an Adulterer questioning
him if he might not clear himself by oath, (...): not as counselling the
latter but reproving the former.
perjury, says he, is no worse then Adultery: Being demanded what was
difficult, he answered, To know ones self; what easy, to be ruled by
another; what sweet, to follow ones own will; what divine, that which has
neither beginning nor end. At his return from travel, being demanded what was
the strangest thing he had seen, he answered, a Tyrant old. What will help to
bear ill fortune? to behold our enemies in worse. How shall a man live justly?
by avoiding what he blames in others. Who is happy? he who has a sound body, a
rich fortune, and a docile nature.

Sympos. sept. sap.
Plutarch adds these; we may well report probable news, but improbable should
not be related. We ought not to believe our enemies incredible things, nor to
distrust our friends in incredible. Periander being much troubled at a monster
which a youth brought him, born of a Mare with the head only of a horse, the
rest resembling a man, he advised him not to take care for expiation of what
the prodigy portended, (...) (says he) (...).

Stobaeus these; Sermon 61.
Being demanded how far falsehood was distant from truth, Sermon. 104.
as far says he as the eyes from the ears. It is hard but good to know
ourselves, for that is to live according to nature.

His moral precepts are thus delivered by Demetrius Phalereus; S^ob. sermon. 28.
if thou art a surety, loss is nigh; Be equally mindful of friends present
and absent; study not to beautify thy face but they mind: enrich not thy self
by unjust means. i. e. be true to thy trust.
Let not any words fall from thee which may accuse thee to him who has
committed anything in trust to thee. Cherish thy parents. Entertain not evil.
What thou bestowest on thy Parents thou shall receive from thy children in thy
old age. It is hard to understand well. The sweetest thing is to enjoy our
desire. Idleness is troublesome. Intemperance hurtful. Ignorance intolerable.
Learn and teach better things. Be not idle though rich. Conceal thy domestic
ills. To avoid envy be not pitiable. Use moderation. Believe not all. If a
Governer, rule thyselfe. I follow those copies of Stobaeus, that ascribe these
to Thales rather then to Pittacus, because the greater part are confirmed by
Laertius.

Ausonius has reduced these into verse under his name.

Fear ere thou sin, thy self though none elsenigh,
Life fades, a glorious death can never die.
Let not thy tongue discover thy intent,
It Is misery to dread, and not prevent.
He helps his foes that justly reprehends.
He that unjustly praises, harms his friends.
That Is not enough that to excess extends.
His Motto was according to Laertius, Know thyselfe; according to Clem. Alex.
Didymus and Fab. 221.
Higynus, if thou be a surety, loss is nigh: By Laert.
Hermippus, this is ascribed to him, though by others to Socrates: He gave
thanks to fortune for three things: first, that he was born rational, not a
beast; secondly, that a man, not a woman; thirdly, that a Grecian, not a
Barbarian.

There are besides cited by Laertius, under the name of (...) or loose verses,
these sentences.

Not many words much wisdom signify,
Choose one thing excellent, to which apply
Thy mind, and stop the mouth of calumny.
CHAP. 10.
His judgment in Civil affairs.
Politics was, according to Laertius, his first study, in which his advice was
of great Authority, though he were the only person (as Cicero observes) of the
seven wisemen, that was not ruler of the City wherein he lived.

Of his judgment herein we have two instances; the first from Lib. 1. (...),
which Valla readers thus; Caeteras autem civitates habitatas nihilominus hule
parituras, qua aliarum civitatum tribus legibus parerent. Stephanui thus;
nihiloninus eodem loco haberi quo tribus; both (I conceive) amiss.
Herodotus; Good also, even before the destruction of Ionia, was the advice of
Thales, a Milesian, a far off by descent Phoenician, who commanded the
Ionians to build one common Council Hall, and that in Teos, for that Teos is
in the midst of Ionia, and the rest of the inhabited Cities, nevertheless to
be in repute, according as the Citizens were.

The other cited by Laertius (with no less applause) is this, In the first
year of the fifty eight Olympiad, Croesus King of Lydia, fearing the greatness
of Cyrus, and encouraged thereunto, as he conceived, by the Oracle, sent
Ambassadors and presents to the most considerable of the Grecians, persuading
them to join with him in an expedition against Cyrus, which the Lacedaemonians
with many others did: but Thales forbad the Milesians to enter into league with
him. It appears (adds Laertius) that his advice in civil affairs was
excellent; for this thing (Cyrus giving the better) preserved the City.

Yet did he afford Croesus his particular assistance in passing his Army over
Halys, as the Grecians affirm, though Herodotus be of a contrary opinion, who
gives this account of both. When Croesus was come to the River Halys, then, I
believe, by bridges that were there, he passed over his Army; but the common
report of the Grecians is, that Thales the Milesian was he who conveyed it
over: For Croesus being doubtful over what part of the River his Army should
pass, there being in those days no Bridges, Thales, who was in the sield with
him, is said to have caused the River that did run on the left hand of the
Army, to run also on the right, which he brought to pass thus. Beginning above
the trench, he dug a deep trench, and brought it in the fashion of a half
Moon, that the River being turned into the trench from the former channel at
the back of the Army, and passing by the camp, came into the old channel
again, so that as soon as the River was thus divided, (which In Hippia
Lucian says, was done in one night) it became fordable on either side: Some
say that the old channel was quite made up, but that I do not believe, for
then, how could they in their return pass over. That this is the meaning of
Herodotus, mistaken by Who renders (...), in quam cum introduxisset ex pristino
alveo sluvium, iterum cum ubi exercitus trajectus esset in suum alveum
resundere^
Valla, will appear from the In Nubes.
scholiast of Aristophanes, who relates it in the same manner, not without
applauding Thales for his excellency in Mechanics.

He was a great enemy to Tyrants, and accounted all Monarchy little better, as
appears by Plutarch, who makes him speak thus: As for taking one for the other,
(viz. a Monarch for a Tyrant) I am of the same mind with the young man, who
throwing a stone at a Dog, hit his Stepmother; it is no matter, said he, for
even so, it lights not amiss, Truly I always esteemed Solon very wise, for
refusing to be King of his own Country: and Pittacus, if he had not taken upon
him a Monarchy, would never have said, how hard it is to be a good man: and
Periander being seized (as it were an hereditary disease derived from his
father) by the same Tyranny, did very well to endeavor as much as he could to
disengage himself from it, by frequenting the conversation of the best men,
inviting Sages, and Philosophers, and being invited by them, not approving the
dangerous counsel of Thrasibulus, my countryman, who persuaded him to take off
the heads of the chiefest. For a Tyrant, who chooses rather to command slaves
then freemen, is like a husbandman, who prefers the gathering of locusts,
and catching of foul, before reaping of good corn. These sovereign authorities
have only this good, in recompense of many evils, a kind of honor and glory,
if men be so happy, that in ruling good men, they themselves prove betterj as
for such, who in their office aim at nothing but security, without respect of
honor or honesty, they are fitter to be set over beasts then men.

In the same Symposion, he gives this account of Monarchy, Democracy, and
Oeconomicks. That Prince is happy, Stob. sermon. 147.
who lives till he is old, Stob. sermon. 141.
and dies a natural death. That commonwealth is best ordered, Stob. sermon. 43.
where the citizens are neither too rich, nor too poor. That house is best,
wherein the Master may live most at ease.

CHAP. XI.
Of his writings.
Some a^^irme ( says laertius) that he lest nothing behind him in writing.
Others that he writ,

Of natural Philosophy: Saint De civi^. dei.
Augustine says, that Thales, to propagate his doctrine to succession,
searched into the secrets of nature, and committing his opinions to monuments
and Letters, grew famous.

Of Nautick Astrology (mentioned by Laert:
Simplicius) which is by some ascribed to Phocus, a Samian.

Of the Tropicks and Aequinoctialls: which two treatises Laertius, says, he
composed, as judging the rest easy to be understood. These seem to be those
Astrologicall writings which * Lobon, an Argive, who writ concerning the Poets,
affirms to have extended to two hundred verses.

Of Meteors: a treatise in verse, mentioned by Suidas.

The history of his own times: if we may give credit to Lib. 6. (...)
Johannes Antiochenus, who says, These things Thales, Castor, and Polybius
most wise Authors, committed to writing, and after them Herodotus the
historian: but perhaps this may be no more probable, then that Polybiu^ and
Castor should precede Herodotus.

(...), of which those that are cited by Laertius, we have inserted among his
moral sentences, for such they were, tending to the instruction of the common
people, a kind of loose verse, coming nere prose, whence Demosthenes makes two
kinds of Poets, (...) (as Casaubon observes) those that write in meeter, and
(if we may so term it) those that write in blank verse. Whatsoever Latertius
in the lives of the seven wisemen produces in this kind, seems not to be
taken out of any Poet, but to have been written by the wisemen themselves:
Epistles, of which two only are extant, preserved by Laertius.

Thales to Pherecydes.
I Hear, that you first of the Ionians, are about to publish a discourse to the
Greeks concerning Religion, and * But the interpreters render this to another
effect.
justly you conceive that your work ought rather to be laid in a public
library, then transmitted to uncertain persons: if therefore it may any way
pleasure you, I will willingly conser with you about that which you have
written, and if you desire, will visit you at Syrus; for neither myself, nor
Solon the Athentan should deserve the titles of wisemen, if we, who said to
Creet to inform our selves of matters there, and into Egypt, to conser with
Priests and Astronomers, should not likewise make a journey to you: Solon also,
if you think fit, will come. You who affect home seldom pass into Ionia, nor
care to enjoy the society of strangers; we, who write nothing, spend our time
in traveling through Greece and Asia.


Thales to Solon.
IF you leave Athens, you may, in my opinion, settle your self (with those you
take along with you) at Miletus, for here is nothing to trouble you. If you
dislike that we Milesians are governed by a ^yrant (for you are averse to all
Monarchs, even elective) yet may you please your self in the society and
conversation of me your friend. Bias likewise has sent to invite you to
Priene; if to abide at Priene please you better, we will also come and dwell
there with you.


CHAP. XII.
His Auditors and Scholars.
THe first eminent person of those who heard Thales and professed his
Philosophy, was Anaximander son of ^raxides a Milesian, who flourished in the
time of Polycrates Tyrant of Samos.

Next is Anaximenes a Milesian also, son of Euristratus, (who according to
Eusebius) flourished in the second year of the 56th. Olympiad. He was Scholar
to Anaximander and Parmenides; But that he heard Thales also, he acknowledges
in an ^ert. vit. Anax.
Epistle to Pythagoras.

We may (as in that Epistle Anaximenes does) amongst the disciples of Thales
reckon Pythagoras the Samian, institutor of the Italick Sect, who being from
his youth particularly addicted to investigation of Religious mysteries,
addressed his first journey to Thales at Miletus, as to one that best could
further his design, being (according to De vita Pythag 1. 2.
Iamblichus) not fully 18. years old; which if we follow the account of Eusebius.
us for his birth (the fourth year of the seventieth Olympiad) and that of
Sosicrates for his age eighty years (for the rest, the farther they exceed
that time, are so much the more incapable of reconcilement) will fall about the
second year of the fifty fourth Olympiad,) which is the 82. of Thales. From
Thales he received the Rudiments of that Excellence which he afterward
attained. This is acknowledged by Vit. ^ythag. 1. 2.
Iamblichus. Thales, says he, entertaind him very kindly, admiring the
difference between him and other youths, which exceeded the fame he had
received of him. After that he had instructed him as well as he was able in the
Mathematics, alleging for excuse his old age and infirmity, be advised him to
go to Egypt, and to converse with the Memphian Priests, especially those of
Jupiter, of whom he himself had in his Travells learned those things, for
which by many he was esteemed wises and Vit. Pythag. 1. 3.
again, among other things Thales chiefly advised him to husband his time
well, in respect whereof he a^tain'd from wine and flesh, only eating such
things as are light of digestion, by which means he procured shortness of
sleep, wakefulnesse, purity of mind, and constant health of body.

CHAP. XIII.
of his Death.
THales having now lived to a great age, being full of honor and wisdom,
Laert.
died in the first year of the fifty eight Olympiad (when according to
Pausanias Erxyclides was Archon) as he was beholding the Olympic games,
oppressed with heat, thirst and the burden of his years which amounted to ninty
two. Laertius under-reckons him to have lived but eighty seven years, having
before acknowledged his birth to have been in the first of the 35. Olympiad.
Rationar. temp. 1. 12.
Petavius over-reckons, who makes him live to the end of the 58. which could
not be, because he died spectator of the Olympic Games. De long ^vis.
Lucian and Chron^l.
Sincellus more, who say he lived 100 years. Sosicrates comes nearest to the
truth, who allows him to have lived 90. years, and to have died in the 58.
Olympiad; for from the first of the 58. is 23. entyre Olympiads.

The manner of his death gave Laertius occasion to favor him with this Epigram.

Vewing the Olympic games Elean Jove
Thou did wise Thales from that his race remove
Nigher thy self; and 'twas well done, now old
He could not well from Earth the Stars behold.
He was buried according to his own appointment in a poor obscure part of the
Milesian field, Plut. vit. S^lon.
where he presaged that in future times their Forum should be; upon his Tomb
this distich, Narrow the Tomb, the fame then heaven more wide
Of wisest Thales, whom this earth does hide.


There was also a statue erected in honor of him bearing this subscription.

Milesian Thales this does represent,
Who all in wise Astrology outwent.
Le^^t.
There were five more of this name mentioned by Demetrius the Magnesi^a, an
orator of Calatis, an affected imitator. A Painter of Sicyonia, of a great
spirit. The third very ancient, contemporary with Hesiod, Homer and Lycurgus;
The fourth mentioned by Duris: the fifth of later times, by Dionysius in
Criticis. Vit. S^crat.
Laertius names Pherecydes as a detractour from Thales the Philosopher.

SOLON.
CHAP. I.
Solon his Parents, Country, and Condition.
PHilocles, cited by Didymus affirms, that Solon's father was named Euphorion,
but by the unanimous consent of all other writers, he was called Execestides, a
person though of small fortune and account among the Citizens, yet of the most
noble family in Athens, descended from Codrus, Plut.
Solon deriving himself from Neleus, son of Codrus, and from Neptune: L^ert:
Plut.
His Mother near of kin to the Mother of Pisistratus; Laert. vit. Proclus in
Tima^m:
his Parents had another Son named Dropides, Archon, the year after Solon, from
him was Plato descended.

Solon was born (according to La^rtius) at Salamis, for which reason he desired
at his death that his body might be carried thither; but from his Parents and
the place of his residence, he was surnamed Athenian

Plut.
His father by munificence and liberality brought his estate so low, as to want
even necessaries: Solon (ashamed to receive from any, being of a house which
used to maintain others) betook himself to Merchandise: others say, he
traveled rather to improve his knowledge and experience, for he was a
professed lover of wisdom, and even to his last used to say, I grow old
learning; riches he esteemed not much, but to grow rich like -- him who abounds.
In heaps of gold, as in rank corn his grounds
In Mules and Horses, whilst his numerous wealth
Made pleasing by uninterrupted health;
If to complete these joys, he be possessed
Of wife and children, he is truly blessed.
And elsewhere. Riches I wish, not riches that are placed
In unjust means, for vengeance comes at last.


That he was profuse and delicate, and more luxurious in his verses then
beseemes a Philosopher, is attributed to his practicing Merchandise, such
persons requiring more then ordinary SOLON.
delicacies and freedoms in recompense of their many and great dangers. That
he was rather in the number of the poor then of the rich, is apparent from
these his verses.

Many unjust grow rich, and pious poor,
We would not change our virtue for their store.
For constant virtue is a solid base:
Riches from man to man uncertain pass.
Polit. 4. 11.
Aristotle ranks Solon amongst the inferior sort of Citizens, which (says he)
is manifest from his Elegies, meaning perhaps, some of these which Plutarch
cites. In Scytha.
Lucian says, he was extremely poor: Orat. ^.
Palaeologus, that he neither had nor valued wealth.

CHAP. II.
How by his means the Athenians took Salamis, Cyrrha, and the Thracian
Chersonesus.
MAny ( says Orat. de falsa legate.
Demosthenes) of obscure and contemp^ible have become illustrious by profession
of wisdom. Solon both living and dead flourished in extraordinary glory, to
whom the utmost honors were not denied, for he left a monument of his valor,
the Megaraean Trophie, and of his wisdom, the recovery of Salamis; the
occasions these.

Pausan.
The Island Salamis revolted from the Athenians to the Megarenses; Plut.
the Athenians having had a long troublesome war with the Magarenses for its
recovery, grew at length so weary, that giving it over, they made a Law,
forbidding any upon pain of death to speak or write any thing to persuade the
City to reattempt it: Solon brooking with much reluctance this ignominy, and
seeing many young men in the City desirous to renew the war, (though not daring
to move it, by reason of the Edict) counterfeited himself mad, which he caused
to be given out through the City, and having privately composed some elegiack
verses and got them by heart, came skipping into the ^orum with his Cap (or as
Laertius says, a Garland) on; the people flocking about him, he went up into
the place of the Crier, and sung his Elegy beginning thus, A crier I, from
Salamis the fair,
Am come in verse this message to declare:


Pausan.
The lines wherewith they were most excited were these. Rather then Athens
would, I owed my birth
To Pholegondrian, or Sicinian earth:
For men where ere I go will say this is
One of the Athenians that lost Salamis.
And, Then lets to Salamis, renew our claim,
And with the Isle recover our lost same.


Plut.
This Poem was entitled Salamis, it consisted of a hundred verses, very
elegant: when he had made an end of singing, it was much applauded by his
friends, particularly by Pisistratus, who excited the Citizens to follow his
advice: By this means the law was repealed, the war recommenced, wherein Solon
was made General: the common report is, that taking Pisistratus along with him
( whence it is, that some ascribe the whole glory of the action to Pisistratus,
of whom are Frontinus, Aeneas, and Justine) he sailed to Colias, where finding
all the women celebrating the festival of Ceres, he sent a trusty messenger to
Salamis, who pretending to be a runnagate, told the Megarenses, that if they
would surprise the principal women of Athens, they should go immediately with
him to Colias: The Megarenses believing what he said, manned a ship, and sent
it along with him; Solon, as soon as he saw the ship come from the Island,
commanded the women to retire, and as many beardlesse young men to put on their
gowns, head-tyre, and shoes, hiding daggers under their Garments, and so
danced and played by the Seaside, till the enemy were landed, and their ship at
^achor: By this time the Megarenses, deceived by their outward appearance,
landed in great have, and came upon them, thinking to take them away by force,
Poly^n lib. 1.
but they suddenly drawing their swords, showed themselves to be men, not
women; Plut.
the Megarenses were all slain, not one escaping, the Athenians going
immediately to the Island took it.

Plut.
Others deny it was taken in this manner, but that first receiving this answer
from the Delphian Oracle, Let sacrifice be to those Hero's paid,
Who under the Asopian ground are laid,
And dead, are by the setting Sun surveyed.


Solon by night sailed to the Island, and sacrificed burnt offerings to the
Heroes, Periphemus, and Cichris; then he received five hundred men of the
Athenians, with condition, that if they gained the Island, the supreme
government thereof should be in them: Shipping his men in fisher boats,
attended by one ship of thirty Oars, they cast anchor by Salamis, near a point
opposite to Euboea: The Megarenses who were in Salamis hearing an uncertain
rumor hereof, betook themselves confusedly to arms, sending forth a ship to
bring them more certain intelligence from the enemy, which Solon, as soon as it
came near, took, and killing the Megarenses, manned with choice Athenians, whom
he commanded to make directly for the City, with all possible secrecy; in the
mean time, he, with the rest of the A^henians, assaulted the Megarenses by
Land, and whilst they were in sight, they who were in the ship, making have,
possessed themselves of the Town. This relation is confirmed by their solemnity,
an Athenian ship comes thither first in silence, then falling on with cries and
shouts, an armed man leaps forth, and runs directly toward the Scirradian
Promontory, against those that come from the Land: hard by is the Temple of
Mars built by Solon, for he overcame the Megarenses, and let go ransomelesse
all those that escaped the misery of the war: V^r. hist. 7. 19.
Aelian says, he took two ships of the Megarenses, whereinto he put Athenian
Officers, and Soldiers, bidding them put on the armor of the enemy, whereby
deceiving the Megarenses, he slew many of them unarmed.

Plut.
But the Megaren ses persisting in obstinacy, to the loss of many lives on
both sides, the business was referred to the Lacedaemonians to be decided;
many affirm Solon alleged the authority of Homer, inserting a verse into his
catalogue of ships, which he thus recited at the trial. Ajax twelve vessel*
brought to Salamis,
And where the Athenian men had stood, ranked his.
( By which second verse of his own making and addition he ^vinc'd, that
Salamis of old belonged to the Athenians.) But the Athenians esteem this
relation fabulous, affirming, Solon demonstrated to the Judges, that Phylaeus
and Eurisaces, sons of Ajax, being made free denizons by the Athenians,
delivered this Island to them, and dwelt, one at Branco, in Attica, the other
in Melita, whence there is a Tribe named Philaidae, from Philaeus, of which was
Pisistratus. Elian. var. hist. 7. 19.
He ov^rcame the Megarenses in an oration, getting the better of them, not with
specious words, but weight of argument: Plut.
more clearly to convince them, he instanced in the burial of the dead, and
inscription of the names of towns, used by those of Salamis, Laert.
as he showed, by digging up some graves, after the manner of the Athenians,
not of the Megarenses, for in Megara they buried their dead with their faces to
the east, in Athens, to the west. But Hereas of Megara denying this, affirms,
the Megarenses buried also with their faces toward the west; for further
confirmation, Solon alleged, that the Athenians had for each man a several
Co^^in, the Megarenses buried three or four in the same. It is said also, that
Solon was much helped by certain Oracles of Apollo, wherein he calls Salamis
Ionia. This cause was decided by five Spartans, Critolaidas, Amomphoretus,
Hypsechidas, Anaxilas, and Cleomenes.

Plut.
By this action, Solon grew into great esteem and honor, but he became [ not
long after] much more admired and cried up by the Greeks, P^usan. in phoc.
for speaking concerning the Temple at Delphi. The Cyrrhaeans committed many
impieties against Apollo, Pausan in phoc.
and cut off part of the land belonging to him.] Plu^.
Solon declared, that it behoved them to relieve it, and not to suffer the
Cyrrhaeans to profane the Oracle, but that they should vindicate the Gods
cause. The Amphictions thus instigated by him, undertook the war with much
eagerness, as Aristotle a^^irms, ascribing to Solon the honor of that
Enterprise. Aeschines says, the motion made by Solon was confirmed by the
Oracle. Some affirm he was made General, others Alcmaeon: But the whole Army
of the Greeks was (according to In Phoc:
Pausanias) led by Clisthenes, ^yrant of Sycionia, along with whom they sent
Solon from Athens to be his counselor. In voce Solon.
Suidas says, he was chosen counselor by those, who were picked out for the
service of that war. Polyaen. lib. 3.
Whilst Clisthenes besieged Cirrha, Pausan.
they enquired concerning the victory, and from the Pythian Oracle, received
this Answer.

This Cities fort you shall not take before
Blew Amphitrites swelling billows roar
Against my water washed grove, and hallowed shore.
Where upon Solon advised to consecrate the Cyrrhaean field to Apollo, by which
means the sea should touch sacred land. Pausan. ibid.
He used also another stratagem against the Cirrhaeans; the River Plistus which
ran through the City, he diverted another way, the Town holding out against
the besiegers, some drunk well-water, others rain, which they saved in
Cisterns. He caused roots of Hellebore to be thrown into Plistus, and when he
found it was fully poisoned, turned the River again into its proper channel:
The Cyrrhaeans drinking greedily of that water, were taken with a continual
flux, and forced thereby to give over the defense of their works: the
Amphictions being possessed of the City, punished the Cirrhaeans, and avenged
the Gods. These two stratagems were ascribed to Clisthenes, the first by Lib. 3.
Poliaenus, the second by Lib. 3. cap. 7:
Frontinus, but the reason is apparent, he doing them by the direction of Solon

^aert.
Solon persuaded also the Athenians to reduce into their power the Thracian
Chersonesus.

CHAP. III.
How he composed differences and seditions at home, and was made Archon.
Plut.
THe Cylonian impiety had for a long time vexed the City, ever since the
accomplices of Cylon, having taken sanctuary, were persuaded by Megacles the
Archon to put themselves upon a trial, they laying hold of a thread which was
tied to the image of ^allas, when they came near the images of the furies, the
thread broke of it self, whereupon Megacles with the other Archons fell upon
them, as persons disowned by the Goddess; those that were without the Temple
they stoned, those who run to the Altars, they were murdered; they only escaped
who sued to their wives, whence being called impious they were accounted
odious: those that remained of the Cylonians were grown very rich, and had
perpetual enmity with the family of Megacles; at what time this di^^ention was
highest, and the people thereby divided into factions, Solon being of much
authority amongst them, taking with him the chiefest of the City interposed
betwixt them, and with intreatles and advice persuaded those who were called
impious to submit to the judgment of three hundred of the chief Citizens: Miro
was their accuser, they were condemned, the living to be banished, the bones of
the dead to be dug up, and thrown beyond the confines of the country.

During these commotions, the Megarenses took Nysaea, and recovered (...) from
the Athenians; the City was full of superstitious terrors and apparitions; the
Priests declared, that the entralls of the sacrificed beasts imported great
crimes and impieties, which required exp^ation. Laert.
There was also a great plague; Plut.
the Oracle advised them to lustrate the City; to this end they sent ( Laert.
Nicias, son of Niceratus with a ship) Plut.
to fetch Epimenides out of Creet, who coming to Athens, was ^ntertained by
Solon as a guest, ^onversed with him as a friend, instructed him in many
things, and set him in the way of making Laws. This lustration of the City
Eusebius under-reckons, placing it in the second year of the forty seventh
Olympiad, whereas Solons being Archon, which certainly happened after this, was
in the third of the ^ortie sixth. Suidas seems to over-reckon, ranking it in the
forty fourth: the opinion of In Epim^nid.
Laertius agrees best with the circumstances of the story, that it was in the
forty sixth.

Plut.
The commotions of the Cylonei, being thus appeased, and the offenders
extirpated, the people fell into their old difference about the government of
the commonwealth, whereby they were divided into as many factions, as the
Province contained distinctions of people; the Citizens were Democraticall, the
countrymen affected Olygarchy, the maritimes stood for a mixed kind of
government, and hindered both the other parties from having the rule; at the
same time the City was in a dangerous condition, by reason of a dissension
betwixt the rich and the poor, arising from their inequality, the business
seemed impossible to be composed, but by a Monarchy; the commons were generally
oppressed by the money which they had borrowed of the rich, and either had
tilled their land, paying to them the sixth part of the crop, whence they were
called Hectemoru, and Thetes, or engaged their bodies to their creditors,
whereof some served at home, others were sold abroad, many also (there being no
law to the contrary) were necessitated to sell their children, and leave the
City, through the cruelty of these usurers, the greatest part (such as had most
courage amongst them) assembling together, mutually exhorted one another not to
endure these things any longer, but choosing some trusty man to be their
leader, to discharge those that paid not their money at the set day, to share
the land, and quite invert the State of the comwon-wealth. The discreetest
amongst the Athenians looking upon Solon as a person free from any crime,
(neither engaged in the oppressions of the rich, nor involved in the
necessities of the poor) entreated him to take charge of the commonwealth, and
to compose the differences of the people. Phanias the Lesbian affirms, that
for preservation of the State, he deceived both parties, promising underhand
to the poor, a division of the land; the rich, to make good their contracts;
but that he first made scruples of undertaking the business, deterred by the
avarice of the one, and insolence of the other; he was chosen Archon, next
after Cleombrotus ( ^aern.
( in the third year of the forty sixth Olympiad) at what time he made his laws
also, being at once a peacemaker, and a lawgiver, acceptable to the rich, as
rich, and to the poor, as good; the people had often in their mouths this
saying of his, equality breeds no strife, which pleased alike both parties, one
side understanding it of number and measure, the other of worth and virtue;
upon which hope, the most powerful of both factions courted him much, and
desired him to take upon him the tyranny of that commonwealth, which he had now
in his power, offering themselves to his assistance: Many also of the moderate
part seeing how laborious and difficult it would be to reform the state by
reason and law, were not unwilling to have a Prince created, such an one as
were most prudent and just: some affirm he received this Oracle from Apollo,
Sit at the helm of state, their Pilot be,
The commonwealth's glad to be steered by thee.


But he was most of all reproved by his familiar friends, for being deterred by
the name of a Tyranny, as if the virtue of a King were not diffused through
the Kingdom, instancing in Tynondas long since Tyrant of Euboea, and Pittacus
at present of Mytelene: nothing they alleged could move him, he told them a
Tyranny was a fair possession, but it had no passage out: to Phocus writing
thus in verse, That I preserved free my native soil,
Nor did with bloody Tyranny desile
My honor, I not blush at by this deed,
All that was done by others I exceed.


Whereby it appears, he was of great authority before he writ his Laws. The
contumelies of such as reproved him for de^lining the government, he thus
expressed in verse: Nor wise is Solon, nor good counsel knows,
For he resists the good that God bestows,
The prey within his power he did behold,
But would not draw the Net; thoughts meanly cold:
Had but his soul with noble aims been ^ir'd,
The Kingdom for one day he had desired,
Then split, and all his family expired.


CHAP. IIII.
What alterations he made during his government, and first of the Sisacthia.
Plut.
THough he refused the tyranny, yet he behaved not himself remissely in the
government, not complying with the powerful, nor making laws to please those
who had chosen him, where things were tolerable, he corrected nor altered
nothing; fearing, lest if he should change and confound the commonwealth in
every particular, he should want strength to settle it again, and to temper it
with the best reason; but such things unto which he conceived he might persuade
the obsequious, and compel the refractory, those he enacted; joining (as he
said) force and justice, whence, being afterward demanded if he had given the
A^henians the best laws, the best (says he) they would receive.

Plut.
The first change he made in the Government was this, he ( Laert.
introduced the Sisachthia which was a discharge of bodies and goods, or as as
Hesychius defines it, a law for remission of private and public debts, so
called from shaking off the oppression of usury: Laert.
for at that time they engaged their bodies for payment, and many through want
were constrained to serve their creditors, he therefore ordained) that for the
time past, all debts should be acquitted, and for the future, no security
should be taken upon the body of any; this by a moderate term he called
Sisachthia; there want not (of whom is Androtion) who affirmed he contented the
poor, not by an absolute discharge of the debt, but by moderating the interest,
which he called Sysacthia; whereto he added the increase of measures, and
valuation of money; for the Mina which was before 73 drachmes, he made a
hundred: by this means the poorer sort paid a greater sum in less coin,
which was a great ease to the debtor, and no wrong to the creditor. but the
greater part hold it was an absolute discharge, which agrees best with the
verses of Solon, wherein he boasts he had removed the bounds throug^out the
land* f^eed such as were under oppression, called home those, who being forced
to travail, had forgotten their native language, and others that were at home
under ^ondage, set at liberty. The same Law, Lib. 1.
Diodorus Siculus observes to be among the Egyptians, conceiving Solon (though
as yet he had not been there) derived it from them.

Plut.
But in this design a great misfortune befell him, whilst he endeavored to
redress the oppression of usury, and was studying how to begin an oration
suitable to the thing, he acquainted his intimate friends in whom he reposed
most confidence, Conori, Clinias, and Hipponicus, that he meant not to meddle
with land, but to cut off all debts; they (preventing the Edict) borrowed of
the rich great sums of money, wherewith they purchased much land; the Edict
being published, they enjoyed their purchase, without satisfying their
creditours: Solon was much blamed, as not defrauded with the rest, but as being
a defrauder with those, and a partaker of their cousenage; but this imputation
was imediately washed away with ^ive Talents, so much he had forth at
interrest, which he first, according to the law, blotted out, ( Laertius says
six, persuading others to do the like) others, of whom is Polyz^lus the
Rhodian, fifteen; but his friends were ever after called (...).

Plut.
This pleased neither parts; he discontented the rich by cancelling their
^onds, the poor more, not making good a parity of estates, which they expected,
as Lycurgus had done, he being the eleventh from Hercules, having reigned many
years in Lacedaemon, great in authority, friends, and wealth, whereby he was
able to make good what he thought convenient for the state, rather by force
then persuasion, even to the loss of his eye, effected as a thing most
expedient to the preservation and peace of the commonwealth, that none of the
Citizens were either rich or poor: but Solon attained not this in the
commonwealth, he was one of the people, and of a mean degree; yet he omited
nothing within his power, carried on by his own judgment, and the faith which
the Citizens had in him; that he displeased many, who expected other things, is
thus acknowledged by himself.

Before they looked upon me kindly, now
With eyes severe, and a contracted brow:
Had any else my power, he would exact
Their riches, and their fattest milk extract.
But both parties soon found how much this conduced to the general good, and
laying aside their private differences, sacrificed together, calling the
sacrifice (...).

CHAP. 5.
How he divid^d the people into Classes, and ^rected Courts of Iudicatory.
HEreupon they chose So^on reformer and Law giver of the Commonwealth, Plut.
not limitting him to any thing, but submitting all to his power, Magistracies,
Convocations, Judgments, Courts to take an account of them, to prescribe what
number and times he pleased; to disanull or rati^ie of the present law what he
thought good.

Plut.
First, then he quite abolished all the Laws of Draco, except for murder,
because of their rigidnesse and severity, for he punished almost all offenses
with death; as that they who were surprised in Idleness should be put to
death; they who stole herbs or apples should undergo the same punishment with
such as had committed murder, or sacrilege; whence Demades wittily said,
Dreco writ his laws not in ink, but blood; he being asked why he punished
all offenses with death, answered, he conceived the leas^ deserved so much, and
he knew no more for the greatest; Arist. Rbe^. 2. 23.
Herodicus ^lluding to his name, said his laws were not of a man, but of a
Dragon, they were so rigid; And Aristotle says, there was nothing in them
extraordinary and worthy of memory, but that soverity and grea^nesse of penalty
which was so excessive, that Agell. 11. 18.
not by any edict or command, but by a silent and expressed consent amongst the
Athenians they were laid aside; afterward they used the milder laws made by
Solon, differing even in name, the first being called (...)* the latter (...).
Tetian. Cl^m. Alex. Suid.
Those of Draco were made in the 39th Olympiad, 47 years (as In demost. Timocr.
Vlpian accounts) before these of Solon.

Plut.
Next, Solon (being desirous that all offices might continue as they were, in
the hands of the rich, but that other privileges of the Common-welth, from
which the people were excluded, might be promiscuously disposed,) took an
account and valuation of the people [ ^ollux.
and divided them into four orders] those whose stock of dry and liquid fruits
amounted to 500. measures he ranked in the first place, and called
Pentacosiomedimni, [ Pollux.
these paid a talent to the public treasury.] In the second class were those
who were able to maintain a horse, or received 300. measures, these he called
[ Pollux.
for that reason] horsemen; they paid hal^e a talent. The third class were
Zengitae ( Pollux.
so called because) they had 200. measures of both sorts, Pollux.
these paid 10. minae, the rest were all called Th^tes, whom he suffered not to
be capable of any Magistracy, neither did they pay any thing, but only had so
far interest in the common wealth, as to have a suffrage in the public
Convocation, and at Judgments, which at first seemed nothing, but afterward
appeared to be of great consequence; for in whatsoever was brought before the
Judges, he gave them leave (if they would) to appeal to the common forum;
moreover writing his laws obscurely and perplexedly, he increased the power of
the forum, for not being able to determine controversies by the Law, they were
forced to have recourse to the Judges, as Masters of the law; this equality he
himself thus expresses, The Commons I sufficient power allow
Honor from none I took, on none bestowd,
Those who in power or wealth the rest outshin'd*
In bounds of moderation I confined;
To either part I was a ^irme defense,
And neither did allow pre-eminence.


Hither Epist. 90.
Seneca alluding says, Solon founded Athens upon equal right and Lib. 2.
Justine he carried himself with such temper between the commons and the
Senate, that he attracted equal favor from both, he suffered no man (says In
Theophrast.
Aeneus Gazeus) to have a peculiar law, but made all men subject to the same.

Plut.
He likewise ( continues Plutarch) constituted the court of the Areopagus,
consisting of the yearly Archons, whereof himself (being the chief) was one;
perceiving the people to be much exalted and enboldened by the remission of
their debts, he ordained a second Court of Judicature, selecting out of each
tribe (which were in all four) a hundred persons, who should resolve upon all
decrees before they were reported to the people; nor should any thing be
brought to them, until it had first past the Senate: the supreme Senate he
appointed Judge and preserver of the laws, conceiving the City would be less
apt to float up and down, and the people become more settled, relying upon
these two Courts, as on two Anchors; thus the greater part of writers make
Solon institutor of the Court of Areopagus, ( of whom also is De Offic. l. 1.
Cicero) whichseems to be confirmed, in that Draco never mentions the
Areopagites, but in criminal causes always names the Ephetae; but the eighth
law of the thirtieth table of Solon has these words, Those who were branded
with infamy before Solon was Archon, let them be restored to their fame, except
such as were condemned by the Areopagites or by the Ephetae, etc. And it is
certain, that the Court of Areopagus was long before Solons time, until then
consisting promiscuously of such persons as were eminent for Nobility, power,
or riches, but Solon reformed it, ordaining none should be thereof, but such as
had first undergone the office of Archon. See Meursius Areop. cap. 3.

Lib. 8. cap. 6.
Pollux says, that Solon ordained a thousand men to judge all accusations;
Schol. Arefloh. in Nub.
Demetrius Phalereus, that he constituted the Demarci, first called Nauclari.

CHAP. VI.
His Laws.
HAving thus disposed the commonwealth, and Courts of Judicature, he in the
next place applied himself to making laws, which he performed so excellently,
that he is generally remembered under that notion, which Minos of Creet, and
Lycurgus of Lacedaemon, whose laws those of Solon exceeded, ( as Annal. 3.
Tacitus says) both in exquisiteness and number: Man. ^^^olog. in protreptr.
a^ doctr.
of how much greater esteem they were then all before them, may be computed
from this, that they were the last, and continued always in the Ci^ty: They,
for whom they were made, thought them more illustrious then their public
ornaments, which transcended those of all other Cities, more impregnable then
their Tower, which they accounted the strongest of all upon earth, and far
better then th^se things wherein they gloried most: * nor were they of less
esteem among foreign nations, insomuch that the Romans Live. lib. 3.
agreeing concerning laws in general, but differing about the lawgiver, sent
Ambassadors to Athens, Sp. Posthumous Albus, A. Manlius, P. Sulpitius
Camerinus, commanding them to transcribe the renowned laws of Solon: Aurel.
Vict. de Vir. illust. c. 21.
which transferred out of the books of Solon the D^cemviri expounded in the
twelve Tables. Hence Lib. 22.
Ammianus Ma^cellinus says, that Solon assisted by the sentences of the
Egyptian Priests, having with just moderation framed laws, added also to the
Roman state the greatest foundation.

Of his laws, these have been preserved by Plutarch, and others.

Plut.
If any man were beaten, hurt, or violently treated, whosoever had the means
and will, might sue the offendour. Thus (says Plutarch) he wisely brought the
Citizens to a mutual sense of one another hurts, as if done to a limb of
their own body.

Plut.
Of infamous persons, let all such as were infamous before the government of
Solon, be restored to their fame, excepting whosoever were condemned by the
Ephetae, or in the ^rytanaeum by the Magistrates, banished for murder, theft,
or aspiring to tyranny. This was the eight Law of the thirteenth Table. There
were two kinds of infamy, by the lesser a man was degraded and made incapable
of all honor or office in the commonwealth; by the greater, he and his
children were liable to be killed by any man, and he not to be questioned for
it.

Plut.
Of his laws, those seem most singular and paradoxall, which declare him
infamous, who in a sedition takes neither part: it is cited out of Aristotle by
Lib. 2. cap. 12.
Agellius in these words: If through discord and dissension, any sedition and
difference divided the people into two factions, whereupon with exasperated
minds both parties take up arms and fight; he, who at that time, and upon that
occasion of civil discord shall not engage himself on either side, but
solitary and separated from the common evil of the City ^ithdraw himself,
let him be deprived of house, country and goods by banishment. Plut.
He would not that any one saving himself harmless, should he insensible of
the common calamity, or boast himself to have no share in the public grief,
but that instantly applying himself to the better and juster side he should
interest himself in the common danger, and assist, rather then out of all
hazard, expect which side should get the better. When we did read (says
Agellius) this law of Solon, a person endued with singular wisdom, at first
were mained in great suspense and admiration, enquiring for what reason he
judged those worthy of punishment, who withdrew themselves from sedition and
civil war; then one whose sight pierced more deeply into the use and meaning
of the law, affirmed, the intent thereof was not to increase, but appease
sedition; and so indeed it is, for if all good persons, who in the beginning
are too few to restrain a sedition, should not deter the distracted raging
people, but dividing themselves, adhere to either side, it would follow, that
they being separated as partakers of both factions, the parties might be
tempered and governed by them, as being persons of greatest authority; by which
means they might restore them to peace, and reconcile them, governing and
moderating that side whereof they are, and desiring much rather the adverse
party should be preserved then destroyed. ad (...). 10. 1.
Cicero citing this law, averreth the punishment to have been capital, perhaps
understanding infamy here of the more severe kind.

Absurd and ridiculous (says Plutarch) seems that Law which allows an
inheritrix, if he who possesses her by law as her Lord and Master be impotem,
to admit any of her husbands nearest kindred. But some aver it is just, as to
those, who though they are impotent, yet will marry rich heirs for their money,
and by the privilege of law wrong nature; for when they see it lawful for the
heir to admit whom she pleases, either they will refrain from such marriages,
or undergo them with the reproach of avarice and dishonesty: It is well
ordered also, that she may not admit any one, but only whom she will of her
husbands kindred, whereby the issue may be of his family and race. Plut.
Hither likewise it tends, that the Bride be shut up in a room with the
Bridegroom, and eat a Quince with him. (Intimating, according to In pracept.
conjugial:
^lutarchs interpretation, that the first grace of her lips and voice should be
agreeable and sweet) and that he who marries an heir, be obliged to visit her
thrice a month at the least: For though they have not children, this argues a
respect due to a chaste wife, and prevents or reconciles unkindnesse and
dissension.

Those words of the former law, He who possesses her by law as her Lord and
Master, have reference to another Law of his, mentioned by Lib. 11.
Diodorus Siculus, that the next of kin to an heir might by law require ho^ in
marriage, and she likewise might require him that was next of kin who was
obliged to marry her, though never so poor, or to pay 500 Drachms for her
dowry. Hereto Hec. Act 1. Scen. 2.
Terence alludes.

The Law commands an heir to marry with
Her Husbands next of kin, and him to take her.
And to the putting her off without a dowry of 500 drachms, (that is five
minae) Phorm. act. 2. scon. 3.
elsewhere.

Though I be injured thus, yet rather then
^le be contentious, or bound still to hear thee,
Since she is my kinswoman, take hence with her
The Domen the law enjoynes me, here is five pound.
Plut.
In all other marriages he forbad dowries, ordaining that a Bride should bring
with her no more then three gowns, and some slight household stuff, of small
vale^, the particulars whereof were expressed, as 1. 12. 15.
Pollux seems to imply, for he would not that marriage should be m^cenary or
vendible, but that the man and woman should co-habit for issue, love, and
friendship. Hither Lib. 3. Epist. 243.
Isidor alludes, amongst the Athenians legal marriage was said to be
contracted, in respect of issue.

That Law of his also was comm^nded, as Orat. in Leptin.
Demosthenes and ^lutarch attest, which forbad to revile the dead, Let no man
revile any dead person, though provoked by the revilings of his children. Plut.
To esteem the deceased holy is pious, to spare the absent just, to take away
the eternity of hatred civil.

Plut.
He forbad to revile any living person at sacred solemnities, Courts of
Judicature, and public spectacles, upon penalty of three drach^ to be paid to
the reviled person, two more to the common treasury. To moderate anger no where
he accounted rude and disorderly, every where difficult, to some impossible. A
law must be accommodated to what is possible, intending to punish some few, to
advantage not many to no purpose.

Plut.
His law concerning testaments is much approved; for before, no man had power
to make a will, but his goods and lands continued in the family of the deceased
person: Solon made it lawful for him that had no children to give his estate
to whom he pleased. he preferred friendship before kindred, and favor before
necessity, and ordered, that wealth should be at the disposal of him in whose
hands it was: yet he permitted not this rashly, or absolutely, but
conditionally, If he were not wrought upon by sickness, potions, bondage, or
the blandishments of a wife. Justly he esteemed it all one whether a man be
seduced by indirect means, or violently constrained, thus comparing deceit with
force, and pleasure with pain, as being of equal power to put a man out of his
right mind. This Law is mentioned likewise by Orat. in Lept.
Demosthenes.

* He also limited the visits* mournings, and feasts of women, by a law which
curbed their former licentiousness. Her who went abroad, he permitted not to
carry with her above three gowns, nor more meat and drink then might be bought
with an obolus, nor a basket above a cubit in bigness, nor to travel by
night, unless in a chariot, and with torch-light: He ^orbad them to tear their
cheeks to procure mourning and lamentation, at the funerals of those, to whom
they have no re^ion. He forbad to sacrifice an Ox at funerals, and to bury
more then three garments with the dead body; not to approach the monuments of
strangers unless at their exequies. Of which (says Plutarch) our laws are
full: De leg. lib. 2.
Cicero also affirms, that the laws of the twelve Tables for contracting the
pomp of funerals, and concerning mourning, are transferred from those of Solon,
who (as Phalereus writes) as soon as funerals began to be solemnised with pomp
and lamentation, took them away: which Law the Decemviri put into the tenth
table, almost in the very same words, for that of 3 neighbourhoods and most of
the rest are Solons, that of mourning in his express words, Let not women tear
their cheeks, nor make lamentation at a funeral.

Plut.
Considering that the City grew very populous, many recurring thither from all
parts of Attica, for liberty and security, that the country was for the most
part barren and bad, that such as trade by sea import nothing for those, that
have not wherewith to batter or exchange with them, he addicted the Citizens to
arts, and made a law, that the son should not be obliged to maintain his
father, if he had not brought him up to a trade (mentioned also by Prafat. lib.
6.
Vit^uvius, Exhort. Vrat. ad arts.
Galen, Epist. 7.
Theophylact, and others) and commanded the court of A^eopagus to examine by
what gain every man maintained himself, and to punish idle persons, whom he
made liable to the action of every man, and at the third conviction punished
with infamy. This law, Lib. 7.
Herodotus, and Lib. 1.
Diodorus Siculus affirm to have been in use amongst the Egyptians, made by
Amasis, and from them divided by Solon to the Athenians.

Plut.
Yet more severe was that mentioned by Heraclides of Pontus, which disengaged
the sons of concubines from maintaining their fathers. He who transgresses the
bounds of marriage, professes he does it not out of desire of issue, but for
pleasure, and therefore already has his reward, and can expect to have no
further tie upon those he begets, whose birth is their shame.

Plut.
Most incongruous seem those laws of Solon which concern women, for he
permitted that, whosoever surprised an adulterer (with the wife or ^ysias in
Orat. de (...) Eratusth.
concubine of any) might kill him, (or exact money of him) he that ravished a
free woman was fined 100 Drachmes, he that played the pandor, 20 ( Orat. in I
l'^arch.
Aeschines says to die) except to such women as were common. He also forbad
any man to give his sister or daughter to that profession, unless himself
first surprise her with a man. This (says Plutarch) seems absurd, to punish
the same offense sometimes severely with death, sometimes with a pecuniary
mulct, unless, because at that time money was very rare in Athens, the scarcity
thereof aggravated the punishment.

Plut.
He assigned five hundred drachmes to the victor of the Isthmian games, a
hundred to the Victor of the Olympic: attested also by Laertius, who says, he
contracted the rewards of the Athletas, judging them dangerous victors, and
that they were crowned rather against, then for their country.

Plut.
Whosover brought a hee-wolfe was to receive five drachms, for a sheewolfe one;
according to Demetreus Phalereus, this being the price of a sheep, that of an
Ox. It is customary with the Athenians, that such as have grounds fitter for
pasture then plowing, make war with the wolves.

Plut.
For as much as there is such scarcity of Rivers, Lakes, and Springs in the
country, that they are constrained to dig wells, he made a Law, where there was
a common well within a Hippicon, they should make use of it. (A Hippicon is the
distance of four furlongs) they that lived further off should procure water of
their own, and if when they have dug ten fathom deep, they find not any,
they might be allowed to fill a pitcher of six gallons twice a day at their
neighbors well.

Plut.
These exact rules he prescribed for planting: Whosoever planted any young Tree
in his ground, should set it five foot distant from his neighbors, who a
Fig Tree or Olive Tree, nine: Because the roots of these spread far, nor is
their neighborhood harmless to all, but sucks away the nourishment, and to
some their blatt is prejudicial.

Plut.
Whosoever diggeth any hole or ditch must make it so far distant from his,
neighbors, as it is deep. These are confirmed by lib. 4. ad leg. 12. tab.
Caius, adding; whosoever makes a hedge to divide himself from his neighbor,
must not exceed his own bounds; if a wall, he must leave the space of a foot,
if a house, two feet, if a well, a fathom.

Whosoever places a hive of bees, should observe the distance of thirty feet,
from those that were before placed by his neighbor.

Plut.
He commanded the Archons to curse him who exported any thing ou^ of the
Country, or that he should pay a hundred Drachmes to the public treasury,
whereby they are not to be rejected, who say, that of old the exportation of
figgs was prohibited, and that he, who discovered exporter, was called a
Sycophant.

Plut.
He made a law concerning such as should be hurt by a dog, wherein he ordained,
the dog that bit to be bound in a chain four cubits long.

Plut.
This law concerning Denization is difficult, That none should be made free of
the City, except such as were banished for ever out of their o^ne Country, or
came to Athens with their whole families to exercise some trade; this he did
not to drive away forraigners, but to invite them to Athens by certainty of
admittance into the City, conceiving such would be faithful, those out of
necessity, these out of good will.

Plut.
Likewise to be feasted in the public hall was the peculiar institution of
Solon, which he called (...) not permitting the same person to eat there
frequently: but if he who were invited, would not accept of it, he was
punished, conceiving this a contempt of the public honor, that an inordinate
appetite.

Hitherto Plutarch: these following are recited by Laertius.

Laert.
If any one maintain not his Parents, let him be infamous, as likewise he that
devours his patrimony. Hither Orat^ in Timarch.
Aeschines alludes; in the fourth place with whom has he to do? If any man by
prodigality has consumed his patrimony or hereditary goods; for he conceived,
he who had ordered his own family ill, would in the same manner take care of
the commonwealth; neither did the lawgiver imagine it possible, that the same
person should be privately wicked, and publicly good, or that it were fitting
such a one should go up into the chair, who took more care to frame an oration,
then to compose his life.

Laert.
He forbad such as haunted common women to plead; confirmed by Aeschines. In
Timarch.
In the third place with whom has he to do? If any man (says he) be a haunter
of common women, or procure money by such means; for he conceived, such a one as
sold his own fame for money, would easily sell the business of the state. And
In Androt.
Demosthenes, it is worth inquiry and consideration, Atheniens, how great care,
Solon, the author of this law, had in the commonwealth in all those which he
made, and how particularly solicitous he was herein above all other things,
which as it is evident by many other laws, so also by this, which forbids
those qui s^ prostituerunt, either to plead or judge in public.

Laert.
He augmented the rewards of such as should die in war, whose sons he ordered
to be brought up and instructed at the public charge. In Panathen.
Aristides, thou alone of all men did ordain these three things by law, that
such as died for their country should be annually praised publicly at their
sepulchers, their children, till grown men, maintained at the public charge,
then sent back to their fathers house with complete arms; likewise that infirm
Citizens should be maintained at the public charge. Menexen.
Plato adds that the same indulgence was allowed to the parents; you know the
care of the common wealth, which in the laws concerning the children and
parents of such as died in the war, commands the supreme Mag^strate to take
care, that the parents of those that died in the war, above all other Citizens
should not receive any injury. The state brings up the children also: Hereby,
says Laertius, they became eager of ^ame and honor in war, as Polyzelus, as
Cynegirus, as all those in the Marathonian fight: to whom may be aded
Harmodius, Aristogiton, Miltiades, and infinite others.

Lae^t.
Let not a guardian marry the mother of his ward, nor let not any one be ward
to him, who, if he die, shall inherit his estate; confirmed by In Hermog;
Syrianus, In Herm^g.
Marcellinus, and others, who add, that the same law forbad the ward to marry
her guardians son.

L^^rt.
Let not a graver keep the impression of any seal after he h^th sold it.

Laert.
If any man put out the eye of another, who had but one, he shall lose both his
own.

His law concerning theft, Laer^ius expresses thus; What thou laidst no^ down,
take not up, otherwise the punishment death. Orat in Timarch.
Aeschines adds, if they confessed themselves guilty: others affirm the
punishment was only to pay double the value, of whom is Lib. 11. c. 18.
Agellius and Parth. (...) 4.
Hermogenes, who affirm, the law made that distinction betwixt sacrilege and
theft, punishing the first with death, the latter with double restitution.
Orat. in Timo^r.
Dem^sthenes cleers this, reciting this law exactly in these words, If any man
steal in the day time above fifty drachms, he may be carried to the eleven
officers, if he ste^l any thing by night, it shall be lawful for any to kill
him, or in the pursuit to wound him, and to carry him to the eleven officers.
Whosoever is convict of such offenses, as are liable to chains, shall not be
capable of giving bail for his theft, but his punishment shall be death, and if
any one steal out of the Lyceum, or the Academy, or Cynosarges, a garment or a
small vessel of wine, or any other thing of little value, or some vesell out
of the Gymnasia, or havens, he shall be punished with death; but if any man
shall be convict privately of theft, it shall be lawful for him to pay a
double value, and it shall be also at the pleasure of the convictor, besides
payment of money, to put him in chains five days, and as many nights, so as
all men may see him bound. Schol. Aristoph. (...).
Even those who stole dung, were by Solon 's law liable to punishment.

Laert.
That if an Archon were taken drunk, he should be punished with death.

To those recited by Laertius, add these collected from others.

He allowed brothers and sisters by the same father to marry, and prohibited
only brothers and sisters of the same venture; Whereas contrariwise (says De
leg. spec Tib. 2.
Philo) the Lacedaemonian lawgiver allowed these, and prohibited those. Hence
In Praem. and in Cimoni^ vita
Cornelius Nepos affirms, Cimon married his sister Elpinice, invited, not more
by love, then the Athenian custom, which allows to marry a sister by the same
father.

Eschin. orat. in Timarch.
He writ according to the manner of the ancients, severally concerning the
discipline of Matrons, for a woman taken in Adultery he permi^ted not to wear
ornaments, nor to come into public Temples, lest by her presence she should
corrupt modest women; if she came into a temple, or adorned her self, he
commanded every one to rend her garments, to tear off her ornaments, and to
beat her, but not to kill, or maim her; By this means depriving such a woman of
all honor, and giving her a life more bitter then death. This is also
^^^firmed by in Nearam.
Demosthenes, who adds, If any man surprise an Adulterer it shall not be
lawful for him who took them to have the woman in marriage, if he continue to
keep her as his wise, let him be infamous.

Demosth. Orat. in Macartat.
Let the dead body be laid out within the house, according as he gave order,
and the day following before Sunrise carried forth; whilst the body is
carrying to the grave, let the men go before, the women follow; it shall not be
lawful for any woman to enter upon the goods of the dead, and to follow the
body to the grave, under threescore years of age, excepting those within the
degree of cosens, nor shall any woman enter upon the goods of the deceased
after the body is carried forth, excepting those who are within the degree of
cosens.

Clcer. de leg. 2.
Concerning sepulchers, he says no more, then that no man shall demolish them,
or bring any new thing into them; and he shall be punished, whosoever violates,
casts down, or breaks any tomb, monument, or column.

Elian. var. hist. 2^ 42. etc. 5. 14.
If any one light upon the dead body of a man un^uried, let him throw earth
upon it.

Demost. in Lipton.
Whosoever shall dislike a received Law, let him first accuse it, then if it be
abrogated, substitute another: The manner whereof is largely expressed by
Demosthen^s.

He ordained (according to Declam. 18.
Libanius) that Children should be obliged to persorm all due offices to their
parents. Pyrrh. Hipp. 3. 24.
Sextus says, he made a Law of indemnity, whereby he allowed any man to kill
his son; but Lib. 2.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus affirms, he permitted them to turn their children
out of doors, and to disenherit them, but nothing more.

Eschin. in Cres^ph.
He ordained that all such as d^clined to be engaged in war, or forsook the
Army, or was a Coward, should have all one punishment, to be driven out of the
bounds of the forum, not permitted to wear a garland, or to enter into public
Temples.

Demosth. Orat. in Timocr.
If any one be seized on, for having abused his parents, or forsaken his
colors, or being forbidden by law, has gone into places where he ought not,
let the eleven officers take and bind him, and carry him into the Heliaea, it
shall be lawful for any one that will to accuse him, and if he be cast, it
shall be at the judgment of the Heliaea to impose what punishment or fine they
should think sit, if a fine, let him be kept in setters till it be paid.

Athen^us deipu. lib. 15.
He permitted not a man to sell unguents, as being an effeminate office.

Eschin. in Ctesiph.
As concerning Orators, he ordered, that the Eldest of the citizens should go
up first into the pleaders chair modestly without tumult and perturbation to
move, he out of experience should conceive best for the commonwealth; then that
every Citizen according to his age should severally and in order declare his
judgment.

Liban. declam. 13.
He ordered that a Citizen of Athens should be tried no where bu^ at Athens.

Stob. 112.
He commanded that no young man should bear the office of a Magistrate, nor be
admitted to counsel, though he were esteemed exceeding wise.

Demost. in Aristogit.
For the common people he ordained slow punishments, for Magistrates and Rulers
of the people sudden, conceiving those might be punished at any time, but that
the correction of these would admit no delay.

Maxim. Tyr. 39.
As for the Gods and their worship, he decreed nothing, Cicer. ^rat. pro S.
Rosc. Amer. and Laert.
nor against Parricides, answering those who questioned him about it, he did
not think any could be so wicked.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Axes and Cyrbes, Senators Oath, and other institutions of Solon.
Plut.
THese Laws he ratified for a hundred years; They were Agyll. 2. 12.
(...) in different tables; Plut. Etymol.
Those which concerned private actions, in oblong quadrangular tables of wood,
with cases, which reached from the ground and turned about upon a pin like a
wheel, whence they were called (...) Pollux. 8. 10.
placed first in the tower, then brought into the Prytanaeum that al might see
them, where there were some remains of them in Plutarch's time. Those which
concerned Suid.
public orders and sacrifices, in * triangular tables of stone called (...)
either from Ammon. de differ vec.
Cyrbus who took the account of every man's estate, or (...) or (...) or (...)
or from the Corybantes, Suid.
to whom the invention thereof is by some ascribed. Schol. Aristot. in Ares.
These were placed in the Porticus regia; Didym. apud. Harp. and Suid.
Both the Axes and Cyrbes were written after the same manner as oxen to turn
in ploughing ((...)) whence Demosthenes calls that law the lowest which
begins on the left side.

Flud.
The Senate took one common oath to make good the laws of Solon for a hundred
years, each of the Thesmothetae sworn in the Forum at the Criers stone, if he
violated them, to dedicate a golden statute of equal weight with himself at
Delphi.

Some particulars of the oath imposed by Solon mentioned by several Authors
(as, not to abrogate his laws, by Plutarch, to admit no young man to be judge,
by Sermon. 112.
Stobaeu; ^o hear impartially bot^ the plaintiff and defendant, by Orat. de
coron ^.
Demosthenes;) argue it to be the same which the same Dem^st.
Author delivers in these words.

I will declare my opinion according to the laws of the Athenians, and five
hundred Senators. By no assistance from me shall Tyranny or oligarchy be
admitted, I will never side with him who has corrupted the people or intends
or indevors it. I will never suffer any new tables or any division of those
already received, or a parity of lands or goods. I will never call home any
banished or confined person, I will consent that he be expelled the City who
denies these laws decreed by the Senate, confirmed by the people, I will never
permit any to be injured; I will never constitute any Magistrate before he has
given account of his last Magistracy. I will never permit the same man to be
chosen twice in one year, or at once to hold two offices. I will neither take,
nor suffer any to take bribes or rewards. I am thirty years old, I will hear
impartially both plaintiff and defendant, and condemn without excuse those
that deserve it. I swear by Jove, by Neptune and by Ceres, may they destroy
me, my house and children, If I observe not all these particulars. Hence
perhaps it is that (...).
Hesychius affimes Solon in his laws to have ordained an oath by three Gods.

Considering the irregularity of months, and the course of the Moon, which
agreed not always with the rising and setting of the Sun, but some times
overtooke and went past him in one day, he called that day the (...) last and
first, attributing that part which precedes the conjunction to the last month,
the rest to the beginning of the next. Thus La^rt.
he taught the Athenians to accommodate the reckoning of their days to the
motion of the Moon: Plut:
and was (as it appears) the first who understood rightly that of Homer.

When one month ended and the next began:

The day following he called (...), The new moon: from the twentieth day to
the thirtieth he reckoned not by addition but by substraction, in respect of
the moons decrease: of this see The clouds, act. 4. scen. 2.
Aristophanes.

Laert.
He ordered the verses of Homer to be recited successively, that where the
first ended the next should begin; whence Diuchides says, he illustrated Homer
more then Pisistratus (by whom the Rhapsodies were first collected) the
principal verses were They who inhabit Athens, etc.

Athen. deipn. 13.
He first tolerated common Curtesans, and with the money they paid to the
State erected a Temple to Venus (...).

Sect. Empiric advers Mathem. 6.
He first taught Soldiers to march by the sound of Fifes and Harpes,
observing a kind of measure in their pace.

CHAP. VIII.
How he entertained Anacharsis, his Travells to Egypt, Cyprus, Miletus,
Delphi, Corinth, and Creet.
Laert.
IN the forty seventh Olympiad (according to ^ Sosicrates) Anacharsis came to
Athens; Eucrates being Archon, Plut.
he went immediately to the house of Solon, and knocking at the door, said he
was a stranger desirous of his friendship and Hospitality: Solon answered, it
is better to contract friendship at home; then you that are at home, (replies
Anacharsis) make me your friend and g^ist. Solon admiring his acuteness,
entertained him kindly, and kept him sometime with him* whilst he was employed
about public affairs, and ordering his laws; which Anacharsis understanding,
smiled, that he undertook to curb the injustice and covetousness of ^itizens
by written ordinances, nothing differing from cobwebs, holding fast the weak
and poor, whilst the powerful and rich break through them; whereto Solon
answered, that men stand fast to those covenants, which it is not convement for
^ither party to break: He gave the Citizens such laws, as it was evident to
all, that to keep, were better then to transgress; but the event agreed more
with the conjecture of Anacharsis, then the expectation of Solon.

Plut.
After his laws were promulgated, some or other coming daily to him, either
to praise, or dispraise them, or to advise him to put in or out whatsoever came
into their minds, the greater part to have the meaning explained, questioning
how every thing was to be understood, and entreating him to unfold the sense;
he (considering, that not to satisfy them, would argue pride, to satisfy them
would make him liable to censure) determined to avoid ambiguities,
importunities, and occasions of blame; (for as he said In things that are not
small
It Is hard to sing to all.)


Coloring his travail with being Master of a Ship, and having obtained leave
of the Athenians to be absent ten years, he put to sea, hoping in that time his
laws would become familiar to them.

Plut.
The first place of his arrival was Egypt, where he dwelt, as himself says.

At Nilus mouth, near the Canobian shore.

He studied Philosophy awhile with Psenophis, of Heliopolis, and Sonches of
Sais, the most learned of those Priests, by whom, Plato affirms, he was taught
the Atlantic language, which he afterward began to explain in verse; when he
questioned them in antiquities, the elder said to him, O Solon, Solon, you
Greeks are always children, there is not one Greek an old man.

Plut.
Thence he went to Cyprus, where he was much favored by P^ioc^prus, one of the
Kings of that country, who had a little Town built by D^mophoon, son of
Theseus, upon the River Clarius, in a strong place, but rugged and barren:
Solon persuading him, there lying a pleasant plain underneath it, to transfer
the Town thither, making it more spacious and delightful: Solon being present
at the doing hereof, took care it might be peopled, and assisted the King to
contrive it, as well for health as strength; whereupon many came into
Philocyprus, whom other Kings aemulated; for this reason he ascribed the honor
thereof unto Solon naming the City (which before was called Aepea) from him,
Soli. This foundation he mentions in his Elegies, addressing his speech to
Philocyprus.

May thou in Cyprus long as King abide,
And ore this people and this Town preside;
In a fleet vessel from this haven may
Cythera crowned with violets me convey.
Her kind aspect and happiness may she
Grant to this Town, a safe return to me.
He visited Thales also at Miletus, whose imposture toward him (related
already in Plutarchs words) receive from Tzetzes.

Solon's friend Thales lead a single life,
By Solon often moved to take a wife;
These a Milesian (Thales so contrived)
Meeting, pretends from Athens late ariv'd:
Solon asks curiously what news was there;
One that is abroad, says he, has lost his heir,
The City waited on his obsequies.
was it not Solon 's son, Solon replies?
To this the stranger (as suborned) assents:
He with torn hair in cries his passion vents;
whom Thales (tenderly embracing) leave
This grief, says he, I did thee but deceive;
'^is for these reasons Marriage I decline,
which can deject so great a soul as thine.
Whether it belong to this deceit, or to a real loss Laert.
Dioscorides, and Sermon. 121.
Stobaeus report, that weeping for the death of his Son, one told him, but this
helps nothing, he answered, and therefore I weep.

Laert.
At Delphi he met with the rest of the wise men, and the year following at
Corinth, by Perianders invitation, which was as Plutarch implies, long before
Pisistratus came to reign; nor does Orat. 37.
Dion Chrysostom intend the contrary, though so interpreted by 1 Meursius.
a learned person, his words importing only this; Solon fled not the Tyranny of
Periander, though he did that of Pisistratus.

That he went also to Creet (perhaps to visit Epimenides) is evident, from an
ad ^herecyd.
Epistle of Thales.

CHAP. IX.
The attribute of wise conferred on him: his moral Sentences.
Laert.
WHen Damasius (the second) was Archon, (in the year of the 49. Olympaid) all
the seven received the attribute of wise: of these was Solon, upon whom ( Orat.
4.
Themistius says) it was conferred as an honorable title full of dignity: Vit.
Sol.
Plutarch avers that all of them (except Thales) were so called from their
skill in civil affairs. And again, Vit. Sol.
In Philosophy Solon chiefly affected (as did likewise most of the wise men)
that part of morality which concerns politics; Vit. Themist.
and speaking of Mu^sip^^ilus, he was not (says he) an orator of those
Philosophers who are called natural, but embraced that wisdom which teaches
government of a State, and prudence in public actions, which he retained as a
Sect delivered by succession from Solon. Whence Somn. Scip. 2. 17.
Macrobius instanceth Solon, as skillful in that kind of learning which draws
Philosophy deeper, and establishes a state.

Hereto may be added his moral learning, for which (though Socrates reduced
it first to a Science, and was there upon honored as the inventor thereof) the
seven were so famous, that some affirm the title of wise was given them only
for excelling others in a laudable course of life, and comprehending some
moral rules in short sentences; of these they had three sorts, Apothegmes,
Precepts and (...).

Of his Apothegmes Laertiu^ recites these, Speech is the Image of Action; He is
a King who has power. Laws are like cob-webs which entangle the lesser sort,
the greater break through: Those who are in favor with Princes resemble
counters used in casting accounts, which sometimes stand for a great number,
sometimes for a lesser; so those are sometimes honored, sometimes cast down.
Being demanded how men might be brought to do no wrong, if says he, they who
have received none, and those who are wronged be alike concerned Satiety comes
of riches, contumely of Satiety.

Vit. Sol.
Plutarch and others, these; He conceived that City to be best governed, where
the people as eagerly prosecute wrongs done to others as to themselves. Sympos.
Sept. Sapi.
Being demanded how a City might be best ordered, he answered if the Citizens
obeyed the Magistrates, the Magistrates the laws, he affirmed that King and
Tyrant should become most glorious, who would convert his Monarchy to
Democracy. He esteemed that Family best, wherein wealth is gotten not unjustly,
kept not unfaithfully, expended not with repentance.

Arist. Ethic. 10. 8.
He defined the happy those who are competently furnished with outward
things, act honestly, and live temperately; which definition Aristotle approves.

Cicer. Epist. 15. ad Brut.
He said, a commonwealth consists of two things, reward and punishment.

Val* Max. 7. 2.
Seeing one of his friends much grieved, he carried him to the Tower, and
desired him to view all the buildings below, which observing, the other to have
done, now says he, think with your self, how many sorrows have heretofore
and do^ at present dwell under those roofes, and shall in future ages: and
forbear to be troubled at the inconveniences of mortality as they were only
yours. He said also, that if all men should bring their misfortunes together in
one place, every one would carry his own home again, rather then take an
equal share out of the common stock.

Stob. Sermon. 34
Being in drinking, demanded by Periander, whether he were silent through want
of discourse, or through folly, answered, no fool can be silent amidst his
cups. Stob. Sermon. 41
He said, that City was best ordered, wherein the good were rewarded, the bad
punished.

Johan. Salisb. Polier. ^. 14.
He said, a man ought to fear nothing, but that his end exclude not Philosophy.

Orat. in Yimocrat.
Demosthenes recites a discourse which he used to the Judges, in accusing one
who had moved a pernicious law, to this effect; It is a Law generally received
in all Cities, that he who makes false money should be put to death. Then he
demanded of the Judges, whether that Law seemed to them just and commendable,
whereunto they assenting, he added, that he conceived money to be used amongst
Citizens, in respect of private contracts; but that laws were the money of the
commonwealth: therefore Judges ought to punish those, who embased the money of
the commonwealth much more severely, then those who embase that of private
persons: and that they might better understand it to be a far greater offense
to corrupt laws, then adulterate coin, he added, that many Cities use money
of silver allaid with brass or lead, without any prejudice to themselves; but
whosoever should use laws so adulterated, could not escape ruin and death.

Laert.
Mimnermus writing thus, From trouble and diseases free,
At threescore years let death take me.
He reproved him, saying, By my advice, that wish extend,
Nor for his counsel slight thy friend.
Alter thy song, and let it be,
At fourscore years let death take me.


His moral precepts are thus delivered by * Demetrius Phalereus, Stob. sermon. 3.
some whereof are cited by Laertius. Nothing too much, Sit not as judge, if
thou do, the condemned will esteem thee an enemy. Fly pleasure, for it brings
forth sorrow. Observe honesty in thy conversation more strictly then an oath.
Seal words with silence, silence with opportunity. Lie not, but speak the
truth. Consider on serious things. Say not ought is juster then thy Parents.
Procure not friends in have, nor procured, part with in have. By learning to
obey, you shall know how to command. What forfeiture you impose on others,
undergo your self. Advise not Citizens what is most pleasant, but what is
best. Be not arrogant. Converse not with wicked persons. Consult the Gods.
Cherish thy friend. Reverence thy Parents. Make reason thy guide. What thou
see speak not. What thou know conceal. Be mild to those that belong to
thee. Conjecture hidden things from apparent.

His particular sentence according to Clem. Alex. Strom. 1.
Didymus and Laertius was, Nothing too much; according to Ausonius, Know thy
self, who ascribes these also to him; Him I dare happy call whose end I see,
Match with thy like, unequalls not agree.
By fortune guided, none to honor raise,
A friend in private, chide, in public praise;
Honors achieved created far exceed;
If fates be sure, what helps it to take heed?
And if unsure, there is of fear less need.


Of his (...) Laertius mentions these.

Of every man be careful, lest he hear
A sword conceald within his breast, a clear
Aspect, a double tongue, a mind severe.
CHAP. X.
How be opposed Pisistratus, and reprehended Thespis.
Plut.
DUring the absence of Solon, the former dissension broke forth again in the
City: Lycurgus was head of the country men, Megacle^ of the Maritimes,
Pisistratus of the Townsmen, who were most violent against the rich; Solon's
laws were still observed in the City, but the people aimed at novelty and
change, not as thinking it most just, but in hopes to be Masters of other men's
goods, and to suppress the adverse party. Solon, whilst things stood thus,
returned to Athens, where he was much reverenced and honored by all, but could
not speak or act in public, through the weakness of his body and spirits, yet
privately taking every one of the Commanders apart, he endeavored to reconcile
their differences, wherein Pisistratus seemed the most ready to be persuaded,
with whom he had a very ancient friendship, grounded as well upon their kindred,
as upon the good qualities of Pisistratus, then whom (as Solon used to say)
there could not be a person of more worth, if he were cured of his ambition.

Plut.
About this time (according to Plutarch) which was in the fiftieth Olympiad,
Thespis began to present Tragedies (which Suidas erroneously accounts ten
Olympiads latter, as is observed by Meursius) the people were much taken with
the novelty of the thing, for as yet there were no contentions therein. Solon
naturally desirous to hear and learn, and by reason of his age indulging more
to ease and pleasure, feasting and music, went to see Thespis himself act, as
was then the manner; the Play ended, he went to Thespis, and asked him, if he
were not ashamed to speak so many lies before so great an auditory? Thespis
answered, it was no shame to act or say such things in jest. Solon striking the
ground hard with his staff, replied, but in a short time, we who approve this
kind of jest shall use it in earnest, in our contracts and transactions. Laert.
In fine, he absolutely forbad him to teach or act tragedies, conceiving their
falsity unprofitable, whereto he dissimulated the deceit of Pisistratus, who
soon after, Plut.
having wounded himself, came into the Forum in a Chariot, pretending to have
been so used by his enemies in the behalf of the commonwealth, and inflamed
the people with much rage. Solon coming near to him, son of Hippocra^es (says
he) you act Homers Ulysses ill in using the same means to deceive the Citizens,
wherewith he (whipping himself) deluded the enemy. Immediately the people
flocked in to defend Pisistratus: Aristo moved he might be allowed a standing
guard of fifty men: Solon rose up to oppose it, using speeches, the effect
whereof, he afterward thus expressed in verse.

If evil your impieties befall,
Gods not the Author of those mischiefs call,
Your selves the causes, have given power to those,
Who in requital, servitude impose.
Lion whom the footsteps of the fox pursue,
Whose souls deceit and Vanity endue.
The man's smooth tongue and speech you only heed,
But never penetrate into the deed.
He also foretold them the aims of Pi^istratus, in an elegy to this effect.

Vapors condens' dingender hail and snow,
And thunder does from radiant lightning flow.
The sea is troubled by the raging wind,
When not disturbed by that, nothing more kind.
A City by great persons is orethrown,
And taught beneath a Monarchy to groan.
But seeing the poorer sort much addicted to Pisistratus, and tumultuous, the
richer afraid, consulting their safety by flight, he retired, saying,
Athenians, I am wiser then some, valianter then others, wiser then those who
understand not the deceit of Pisistratus, valianter then those, who understand
it, yet hold their peace, through fear. The Senate being of the same faction
with Pis^stratus, said he was mad, whereto he answered, A little time will to
the people clear
My madness, when 'th 'midst truth shall appear.


The people having granted Pisistratus his request concerning a guard,
questioned not the number of them, but connived so long at his pressing and
maintaining as many soldiers as he pleased, that at last he possessed himself
of the Tower; whereupon the City being in a tumult, Megacles, with the rest of
the Alcmaeonidae fled. Solon now very old, and destitute of those that might
back him, went into the Forum, Laert.
armed with a spear and shield, and made an oration to the people, partly
accusing them of folly and cowardice, partly inciting them not to forsake their
liberty, using this celebrious speech, It had been far easier to have suppressed
this tyranny in the grouth, but much more noble to cut it off now it is at the
height. No man daring to hear him, he went home, and taking his arms, set them
in the street before his door ( Laertius says, before the Magaz^n) saying, I
have helped my Country and the Law as much as lay in me; or as Laertius,O
Country, I have assisted thee both in word and deed. Plutarch adds, that from
that time he lived retired, addicted to his study; and told by many the Tyrant
would put him to death, and demanded wherein the confided so much, he answered,
in his age: but Laertius affirms (which seems truer) that as soon as he had
laid down his arms, he forsook the Country: and Lib. 17. cap. 21.
Agellius, that in the reign of Scovius Tullius, Pisist^atus was Tyrant of
Athens, Solon going first away into voluntary exile.

CHAP. XI.
How he traveled to Lydia, and Cilicia.
SOlon at his departure from Athens received invitations from many; by Thales
desired to come to Miletus, by Bias, to Priene, by Epimenides, to Creet, by
Cleobulus to Lindus, as is evident from their several letters to that effect:
even Pisistratus pressed him to return home by this Epistle.

Pisistratus to Solon.
Neither am I the only person of the Greeks, nor am I without right to the
Kingdom I possess, as being descended from Codrus: that which the Athenians
having sworn to give to Codrus and his heirs, took away, I have recovered; no
otherwise do I offend either God or man; I take care that the commonwealth be
governed according to the laws you ordained for the Athenians, and that better
then by a Democratie: I suffer none to do wrong, neither do I enjoy any
privileges of a Tyrant, more then honor and dignity, such rewards only as
were conferred upon the ancient Kings; every man paies the tenth of his estate,
not to me, but to the maintenance of public sacrifices, or other charges of
the commonwealth, or against time of war. You I blame not for discovering my
intents, you did it more in love to the state, then in hate to me; besides, you
knew not what government I meant to establish, which if you had, perhaps you
would have brooked my rule, and not banished your self; return therefore home,
and believe me without an oath: Solon shall never receive any displeasure from
Pisistratus, you know my very enemies have not, and if you will vouchsafe to be
of my friends, you shall be of the first, for I never saw anything in you
deceitful or false; if otherwise, you will live with the Athenians, use your
freedom, only deprive not your self of your country for my sake.


Solon returned this answer.

Solon to Pisistratus.
I Believe I shall not suffer any harm by you, for before you were Tyrant, I
was your friend, and at present am no more your enemy, then any other Athenian
who dislikes Tyranny: whether it be better they be governed by a single
person, or by a Democratie, let both parties determine. I pronounce you the
best of Tyrants; but to return to Athens I think not sitting, lest I incur
blame, who settled an equality in the Athenian commonwealth, and would not
accept of the Tyranny; by returning, I shall comply with thy actions.


Croesus also sent to invite him, to whom he thus answered.

Solon to Croesus.
I Love your humanity toward us, and by Pallas* but that I affect above all
things to live under a Democratie, I should much sooner choose to live in your
Kingdom, then at Athens, whilst Pisistratus rules there by force; but it is
most pleasing to me to live where all things are just and equal; yet will I
come over to you, being desirous to become your guest.


Solon upon this invitation went to Sandys, where Croesus (says Herodo^us)
received him kindly: after the third or fourth day the Officers at Croesus
appointment lead him into the treasuries, to show him all their greatness and
riches; when he had beheld all, Croesus spoke thus unto him. Athenian guest,
because we have heard much fame of your wisdom and experience, having out of
love to Philosophy traveled into many Countries, I have a desire to enquire of
you if ever you saw any man whom you could call most happy. This he demanded,
hoping himself to be esteemed such* Solon nothing flattering him, answered
according to the truth, saying, O King, Tellus the Athenian. At which speech
Croesus wondering. Why do you judge Tellus the most happy? Because (replied
Solon) in a well ordered state, he had children honest and good, and saw every
one of those have children all living; thus having passed his life as well as
is possible for man, he ended it gloriously: a fight happening between the
Athenians and their neighbors in Eleusis, he came in to their succor, and and
putting the enemy to flight, died nobly; the Athenians buried him in the place
where he fell, with much honor. Whilst Solon recounted the happiness of
Tellus, Croesus being moved, demanded to whom he assigned the next place,
making no question but himself should be named a second. Cleobis (says he)
and Bito, they were Argives by birth, they had sufficient wherewithal to
maintain themselves; and withal, so great strength of body, that both were
alike victors in the public games, of whom it is thus reported; the Argives
celebrating the feastivall of Juno, it was necessary their Mother should be
drawn to the* Temple by a pair of Oxen, there being no Oxen in the field ready,
these young men, streitned in time, under went the yoke, and drew the chariot
of their Mother forty five stadia, till they came to the Temple; when they had
so done, in the sight of all the people, they obtained the happiest end of
their days, whereby the God declared it better for a man to die then to live;
the Argive, pressing about them, the men applauding the piety of the Sons, the
Women the happiness of the Mother, the Mother her self infinitely joyed with
the action, and the glory thereof, standing before the image, prayed the
Goddess to give her sons, Cleobis and Bito the best thing that could happen to
man; after this prayer, having sacrificed and feasted, they lay down to sleep
in the Temple, and never waked more, but so ended their days: their Images (as
of most excellent persons) were made by the Argives, and set up at Delphi.
These Solon ranked in the second degree. Hereat Croesus growing angry; stranger
(said he) does our happiness seem so despicable, that you will not rank us
equal with private persons? He answered, do you enquire Croesus concerning
human affairs of me, who know, that divine prodence is severe and full of
alteration? In process of time we see many things we would not, we suffer many
things we would not; let us propose seventy years, as the term of man's life,
which years consist of twenty five thousand and two hundred days, besides the
additionall month, if we make one year longer then another by that Month, to
make the time accord the additionall months, belonging to those seventy years,
will be thirty five, the days of those months a thousand and fifty, whereof
one is not in all things like another: so that every man, O Croesus, is
miserable! you appear to me very rich, and are King over many, but the question
you demand I cannot resolve, until I hear you have ended your days happily;
he who has much wealth is not happier, then he who gets his living from day to
day, unless fortune continuing all those good things to him, grant that he die
well. There are many men very rich, yet unfortunate, many of moderate estates,
fortunate, of whom, he who abounds in wealth, and is not happy, exceeds the
fortunate only in two things, the other him in many; the rich is more able to
satisfy his desires, and to overcome great injuries; yet the fortunate excells
him, he cannot indeed inflict hurt on others, and satisfy his own desires, his
good fortune debarres him of these: but he is free from ills, healthful, happy
in his children, and beautiful, if to this a man dies well, that is he whom
you seek, who deserves to be called happy; before death he cannot be styled
happy, but fortunate; yet for one man to obtain all this is impossible, as one
country cannot furnish it self with all things, some it has, others it wants,
that which has most is best; so in men, no one is perfect, what one has, the
other wants; he who has constantly most, and at last quietly departs this
life, in opinion, O King, deserves to bear that name. In every thing we must
have regard to the end, whether it tends for many, to whom God dispenceth all
good fortunes, he at last utterly subverts. This story is related by Plutarch,
also mentioned by Laertius, who adds, that Croesus being magnificently adorned
and seated on his Throne, asked him, whether he had ever seen any thing more
glorious? who answered, C^^ks, Pheasants, and Peacocks, who are much more
beautiful in their natural power. Herodot.
Solon after this discourse with Croesus, not soothing him, or making any
esteem of him, was dismissed, and accounted unwise, for neglecting the present
good in regard to the future. Plut.
Aesope, the writter of fables was at that time at Sardis, sent for thither by
Croesus, with whom he was much in favor* he was grieved to see Solon so
unthankfully dismissed, and said to him, Solon, we must either tell Kings nothing
at all, or what may please them. No, says Solon, either nothing at all, or
what is best for them. Thus was Solon much despised by Croesus.

Herod.
Afterward Croesus being taken prisoner by Cyrus was at his command fettered
and set upon a great pile of wood to be burned: as he was in this posture, it
came into his mind what Solon had divinely said to him, that no living man is
happy; as soon as he remembered those words, he fell into a great defection of
Spirit, and sighing deeply, named Solon thrice, which Cyrus hearing, commanded
the interpreters to ask upon whom he called, they went to him and asked, he
was silent, at last pressing him further he answered, upon him who I desire
above all wealth, might have spoken with all tyrants; not understaning, after
much pressure and importunity, he told them, Solon an Athenian came long since
to him, and beholdi^g all his wealth, valued it at nothing moreover that all
which he told him had come to pass, nor did it more belong to him then to all
mankind, especially to those who think themselves happy. Whilst Croesus said
this, the fire began to kindle, and the outward parts thereof to be seized by
the flame. Cyrus being informed by an interpreter of all that Croesus said,
began to relent, knowing himself to be but a man, who delivered another man,
nothing inferior to him in wealth, to be burned alive, fearing to be punished
for that act, and considering that nothing was certain in human affairs, he
commanded the fire to be instantly quenched, and Croesus, and those that were
with him to be brought off, Plut.
whom^ ever after as long as he lived, he had in esteem. Thus Solon gained
praise, that of two Kings, his speech preserved one, and instructed the other.

Plutarch relates this done in the former ten years travail of Solon, upon the
finishing of his laws, whence he makes an Apology for the incongruity
thereof, with the rules of Chronology, which had less needed, if with
Laertius, he had placed it after Pisistratus his usurpation of the tyranny.

Laertius says, he went from hence to Cilicia, and built there a Gitty, called
after him Soleis, whither he brought also some few Athenians, whose language
growing corrupt by that of the country, they were said to solaecise; of this is
the Etymologist doubtless to be understood, who derives (...) (so read we, not
(...).) This is also attested by Suidas, as a distinct relation from that of
Cyprus, in confirmation whereof Laertius add^s, the Cilicians were called
Solenses, the Cyprians Solii.

CHAP. XII.
His death.
Plut.
HEraclides affirms, Solon lived long after Pisistratus began to reign; De
longavis.
Lucian that his life extended to a hundred years; with whom those best agree,
who say (as Suidas relates) he lived in the fifty six Olympiad; Plaut.
but according to Phanias, Pisistratus took the Tyranny upon him, when Comias
was Archon, and Solon died, Hegestratus being Archon, who s^cceeded Comias,
which was in the first year of the fifty ^ift Olympiad. If this latter opinion
had not every where taken place of the other, the disagreement betwixt the time
of Solon's death, and Croesus reign had not been urged by many, as an argument
against the story of their meeting.

He dyed (according to Laertius) aged eighty years (being as Var. hist. 8. 16.
Elian says, very decrepit) in Cyprus, (as is like wise attested by lib. 5.
cap. 3.
Valerius Maximus, and Laert.
Suidas) ^ and left order with his friends that they should carry his bones to
Salamis, and there causing them to be burnt, s^atter the ashes all over the
country; which story Plutarch (though he counts it fabulous) acknowledges to
be attested by many Authors of credit, particularly Aristotle.

Laertius confirms it by the testimony of Cra^inus, who makes him speak thus;
The Island I inhabit, sown
As fame reports, in Ajax Town:


That desire of knowledge which he usually professed continued with him to his
end, Val. Max. 8. 7.
confirmed the last day of his life; his friends sitting about him, and falling
into some discourse, he raised his weary head, and being demanded why he did
so, he answered, that when I have learnt that, whatsoever it be, whereon you
dispute, I may die: Stob. 29.
His brothers son singing an ode of Sappho, he delighted therewith, bad him
teach him it, and being demanded why, that, said he, I may learn whilst I (...)
out of this life.

After his death, the Athenians erected his statute in brass, before Pausan.
Attic.
the checkered cloistered Demosth. in Aristog. 2. Elian. var. hist. 8. 16.
in the forum: Another was set up at Salamis, hiding (as Demosthenes and
Eschines describe it) the hand within the garment, in the same habit wherein he
used to make speeches to the Athenians; perhaps the same that carried this
inscription, ^am'd Salamis, the Persian pride cast down,
And gave to Solon birth, the laws renown.


Laertius bestows this Epigram upon him.

A sorraign Cyprian fire burned Solon, yet
Salamis keeps his bones, their ashes wheat;
His Soul to heaven mounts with his laws, so light
A burden, they not clog, but help his flight.
CHAP. XIII.
His writinngly (...)
HIs excellency both in Rhetoratie, and Poetry is attested by many; Cicero, In
Bruto.
before Solo^ (...) no man is recorded for eloquence. De orat, lib. 1.
And again, Lycurgus and Solon we place in the number of the eloquent. Orat. 21.
Dion, Chrysostom, Aristides, Lycurgus, Solon, Epaminondas, and if there be
any other in the same kind, ought to be esteemed Philosophers in the
commonwealth, or Orators, according to ingenious true Rhetoric. Orat. Plat.
2.
Aristides, Solon is said to have sung those things which concern the
Megarenses, but neither his Laws nor Orations, which sometimes he made for the
rich to the commons, sometimes for the commons to the rich, did he sing or
comprise in verse, but used a rhetorical form, excellently demonstrating in
all these, that he deserved to be esteemed an Orator and a Wiseman, having
attained both those titles and faculties.

As to Poetry, Plu^^rch averres, he addicted himself thereto from the
beginning, not in serious matters, but ludicrous, used (as it seems) for his
exercise and pastime; afterward he included many Philosophical sentences in
verse, and many affairs of state, not in relation to history, but to vindicate
his own actions, sometimes also to correct and reprove the Athenians. Plato
says, In Tim^eo. 1. crit.
that at the Apaturian feast, the boys used to repeat his poems; and that if
he had applied himself to nothing but Poetry as others did, and had finished
the history he brought out of Egypt, and had not been constrained by seditions
and other distractions to lay aside that study, neither Hesiod, Homer, nor any
of the Poets would have been more famous.

Of his writings in Prose, we must with Laertius name in the first place his

Laws, of which already.

Orations to the people.

His Poems are cited under that general title by Eclig. dict. Attic.
Phrynicus, their particular subjects and titles these.

Exhortations to himself, mentioned by Laertius, In Orat. (...).
Aristides, and Suidas.

Elegies:

Salamis, of which Chap. 2.

of the Athenian commonwealth, which Laertius affirms to have extended to two
thousand verses, according to Attic.
Pausanias, and (...)
. Philo, Elegiack.

Iambicks, mentioned by La^rtius, cited by Athenaeus and Aristides.

Epodes, mentioned by Laertius.

Elegies to King Cypranor, cited by the author of Aratus, his life. (...),
cited by Laertius.

Some (says Plutarch ^in^irme, he began to reduce his own Laws into verse.
fifty si

The last work he urken plok was concerning the Atlantic speech or fable,
which beginning late, he was deterred by the greatness of the work, as
Plutarch says, and prevented by death.

Besides those Epistles already alleged, these are preserved also by Laertius.

Solon to Periander.
YOu send me word, there are many who plot against you; if you should put them
all to death, it would advantage you nothing; some one there may be of those,
whom you suspect not, who plotts against you, either fearing himself, or
disdaining you, or desirous to ingratiate himself with the City, though you
have done him no injury; it is best, if you would be free from jealousy, to
acquit your self of the cause, but if you will continue in Tyranny, take care
to provide a greater strength of strangers then is in your own City; so shall
you need to fear no man, nor to put any to death.


Solon to Epimenides.
NEither are my laws likely to benefit the Athenians long, nor have you
advantaged the City by lustration; for divine right and law^givers cannot alone
benefit Cities; it imports much of what mind they are who lead the common
people; divine rights and laws, if they direct them well, are profitable, if
they direct them ill, profit nothing; neither are those laws I gave in any
better condition; they who had charge of the commonwealth, not preventing
Pisistratus his usurpation of the tyranny, lost the City, of which, when I
foretold them, I could not be believed; the Athenians would rather credit his
flatteries, then my truth; wherefore laying down my arms before the Magazin, I
said, that I was wiser then those who did not see Pisistratus aimed at the
Tyranny; and stouter then those who durst not resist him: they reputed Solon a
mad man. Lastly, I made this profession, O country! behold Solon ready to
vindicate thee in word and deed: they again esteemed me mad. Thus I being the
only person that opposed Pisistratus, I came away from them; let them guard him
with their arms if they please; for know (dear friend) the man came very
cunningly by the Kingdom, he complied at first with the Democratie, afterward
wounding himself, came into Elioea, crying out, he had received those hurts
from his enemies, and required a guard of four hundred young men, which they
(not harkening to me) granted; these carried halberds: after this, he dissolved
the popular government; truly I labored in vain to free the poorer sort from
mercenary slavery, when they all now serve one Pisistratus.


Such fragments of his Poems as have been hitherto preserved are thus collected.

Out of his Elegies.
Sprung from Mnemosyne and Joves great line,
Pierian Muses, to my prayer incline,
Grant that my life and actions may call down
Blessings from heaven, and raise on earth renown:
Sweet to my friends, and bitter to my foes,
To these my sight bring terror, joy to those.
Riches I wish, not riches that are placed
In unjust means, for vengeance comes at last.
Riches dispensed by heavens more bounteous hand,
A base on which we may unshaken stand.
But that which men by injuries obtain,
That which by arts and deeds unjust they gain
Comes slowly, swiftly by revenged pursued,
And misery like a close spark include,
Which soon to a devouring flame dilates,
Wrong is a weak foundation for estates.
Jove does the end of every thing survey:
As sudden vernall blasts chase clouds away.
Ransack the bottom of the roaring main,
Then swiftly overrun the fertile plain,
Ruffling the wealthy ears; at last they rise
To Joves high seat, a^calm then smooths the skies.
The Sun's rich luster mildly gilds the green
Enamell of the meads, no clouds are seen,
Such is Joves heavy anger differing far
From men, whose every trifle leads to war:
They are not hid for ever, who offend
In secret, judgment finds them in the end.
Some in the act are punished, others late,
Even he who thinks he has deluded fate;
At last resents it in just miseries,
Which Nephews for their Ancestors chastise.
We think it fares alike with good and bad;
Glory and self-conceit our fancies glad
Till suffering comes, then their grieved spirits bleed,
Who did before their souls with vain hope feed.
He whom incurable diseases seize,
Sooths his deluded thoughts, with hopes of ease.
The coward's valiant in his own esteem,
And to themselves, fair the deformed seem.
They who want means, by poverty oppressed
Believe themselves of full estates possessed.
All is attempted, some new seas explore
To bring home riches from a foreign shore:
Seas, on whose boisterous back secured they ride,
And in the mercy of the winds confide:
Others to crooked ploughes their Oxen yoke,
And Autumn with their plants and setts provoke.
Some Vulcan's and Minerva's arts admire,
And by their hands, their livelyhoods acquire.
Others the fair Olympian muses trace,
And lovely learning studiously embrace.
One by Apollo is prophetic made,
And tells what mischiefs others shall invade;
With him the Gods converse, but all the skill
In birds or victimes cannot hinder ill.
Some to Peonian knowledge are inclined,
Nor is the power of simples unconfined.
The smallest hurts sometimes increase and rage,
More then all art of physic can assuage;
Sometimes the fury of the worst disease.
The hand by gentle stroking will appease.
Thus good or bad arives as fates design,
Man cannot what the Gods dispensed decline.
All actions are uncertain, no man knows
When he begins a work, how it shall close.
Some, who their business weigh with prudent care,
Often of the issue intercepted are:
Whilst others who have rashly ought designed,
An end successful of their labors find.
There is no bound to those who wealth acquire,
For they who are possessed of most, desire
As much again, and who can all content,
Even those full blessings which the Gods have lent,
Man variously to his own harm applies,
Whom Jove by means as various does chastise.
Again.
OUr City never can subverted be
By Jove, or any other Deity;
For Pallas eye surveyes with pious care
The walls, which by her hand protected are:
Yet the inhabitants of this great Town,
Fondly inclined to wealth, will throw it down;
And those unjust great persons who are bent
Others to wrong, themselves to discontent;
For their insatiate fancies have not power
T^enjoy the sweetness of the instant hour;
But by all wicked means, intent on gain,
From hallowed, nor from public things refrain.
Riches by theft and cozenage to possess,
The sacred bounds of justice they transgress.
Who silent sees the present, knows the past,
And will revenge these injuries at last:
Causing a cureless rupture in the state,
And all our liberties shall captivate.
Rouse war from his long slumber, who the flower
Of all our youths shall bloodily devour.
For Cities which injuriously oppose
Their friends, are soon invaded by their foes.
These are the common evils; of the poor
Many transported to a foreign shore,
To bondage there, and fetters shall be sold.
Each private house thus shares the public fate,
Nor can exclude it with a ban'd-up gate;
For scaling furiously the higher walls,
On those whom beds or corners hides, it falls.
My soul, Athenians, prompts me to relate
What miseries upon injustice wait:
But justice all things orderly designs,
And in strict fetters the unjust confines.
What Is sour, she sweetens, and allaies what cloyes.
Wrong she repells, ill in the grouth destroys,
Softens the stubborn, the unjust reformes,
And in the state calmes all seditious storms:
Bitter dissension by her reign suppressed,
Who wisely governes all things for the best.
Another.
NO man is blessed, bad is every one
That feels the warmth of the all-seeing S^n.
Another.
LEt me not die unpitti'd, every friend
With sighs and tears my latest hour attend.
CHILO.


CHILON.
CHAP. I.
Chilon his life.
Laert.
CHILON was a Lacedaemonian, son of Damagetus, corruptly termed in Sermon. 28.
Stobaeus, Page 6. He was eminent amongst the Greeks for two predictions.

The first to Hippocrates, Herodot. lib. 1. Laert.
to whom (being a private person) happened a great prodigy at the Olympic
games: having prepared an offering, and filled a Cauldron with flesh and water,
it boiled over without fire: This portent Chilon (accidentally present)
beholding, advised him that he should not take a wise by whom he might have
issue; that if he had one, he should put her away, and if a son, turn him out
of doors: Hippocrates not following this advice, brought up his son
Pisistratus, who in the sedition of the Maritimes and countrymen at Athens,
those led by Megacles, these by Lycurgus, stirred up a third faction, and
gained the tyranny.

Laert.
He was much renowwed also for his prediction concerning Cythera a
Lacedaemonian Island; examining the Situation thereof, would to God (said he)
it had never been; or since it is, it might be swallowed up by the sea, and
wisely did he foresee. Damaratus, a Laecedaemonian exile, counseled* Xerxes to
seize upon that Island, which advice if he had followed, would have ruined all
Greece. His words (according to Lib. 7. 235:
Herodotus) were these. You may effect your desires, if you send three hundred
ships to the Lacedaemonian coast; there lies an Island, named Cythera, of which
Chilon, a person of greatest wisdom amongst us, said, it were better for the
Lacedaemonians that it were under water then above: he, it seems, expected
from it some such thing as I am now going to declare, not that he foresaw your
Navy, but doubting any in the same kind; Let your men issue out of this Island
upon the Lacedaemonians, to strike them into terror. Laert.
Afterward, in the time of the Peloponesian war, Nicias taking the Island,
placed some Athenians therein, who much infested the Lacedaemonians.

Laertius says, that he was old in the fifty two Olympiad, at what time Aesop
flourished: that he was Ep^orus in the fifty sixth. (Casaubon reads the fifty
five) but Pamphila (continues Laertius) says in the sixth. He was first
Ephorus, when Euthydemus was Archon, as Sosicrates also affirms, and first
appointed the Ephori to be joined with Kings, which Satyrus says, was the
institution of Lycurgus. Hence it is doubtful whether Chilon was Ephorus in
the sixth Olympiad, or in the fifty sixth; the latter is more probable, in as
much as he bore that office when Euthydemus was Archon at Athens, which was in
the fifty sixth Olympiad, as appears by the Marmor Arunde lianum, where for
(...) is corruptly read (...) rendered Archonte populo. But it is likewise true,
that the Ephori were first created about the sixth Olympiad, when Polydorus and
Theopompus were Kings of Lacedaemon, a hundred and thirty years after
^ycurgus, as Plutarch (in his life) affirms, from which time there were five
annual Ephori chosen in Lacedaemon, whereof the first is called (...), because
the year had its denomination from him: the first of the first election was
Plut. vit. Lycur.
Elatus; Chilon in the fifty sixth Olympiad was the first of the five of his
year; which might perhaps give the occasion of the mistake to them, who take
him to be the first of that institution, of whom is * Scaliger.

In Eusebius. p. 67:
How he behaved himself in this office, may be gathered from his speech* Laert.
to his brother, displeased that himself was not Ephorus at the same time: I
can bear injuries, says he, you cannot.

He was so just in all his actions, Laert.
that in his old age he professed, he never had done any thing contrary to the
conscience of an upright man, only that of one thing he was doubtful; having
given sentence against his friend according to law, he advised his friend to
appeal from him (his Judge) so to preserve both his friend and the law: Lib. 1.
cap. 3:
Agellius relates it thus; When his life drew toward an end, ready to be
seized by death, he spoke thus to his friends about him: My words and actions
in this long term of years, have been (almost all) such as I need not repent
of, which perhaps you also know; truly even at this time I am certain, I never
committed any thing, the remembrance whereof begets any trouble in me, unless
this one thing only, which whether it were done amiss or not, I am uncertain:
I sat with two others as Judge upon the life of my friend; the law was such, as
the person must of necessity be condemned; so that either my friend must lose
his life, or some deceit be used toward the Law: revolving many things in my
mind for relief of a condition so despeate, I conceived that which I put in
practice to be of all other the most easy to be born: Silently I condemned
him, and persuaded those others who judged to absolve him: Thus preserved (in
so great a business) the duty both of a judge and friend; but from that act I
receive this trouble, that I fear it is not free from perfidiousnesse and
guilt, in the same business, at the same time, and in a public affair, to
persuade others, contrary to what was in my own judgment best.

CHAP. II.
His moral sentences, precepts, and verses.
OF his Apothegmes, these are remembered by Laertius; he said, providence of
future things collected by reason, is the virtue of a man. Being demanded
wherein the learned differ from the unlearned? he answered in a good hope? What
is hard? to conceal secrets, to dispose of leisure well; and to be able to bear
an injury.

Plutarch. Simpos. sept. sap
Being invited to a feast by Periander, (with the rest of the wisemen,) he
would not promise to come before he knew what other company would be there,
saying, a man is necessitated to brook an ill companion in a ship at sea, or in
a tent in a camp; but to mix indifferently with all sorts of people at a feast
is indiscretion. Upon the same occasion Plutarch recites these sentences of
his; A Prince must not think upon any transitory mortal things, but only upon
the eternal, and immortal. That commonwealth is best where the people mind
the Law, more then the Lawyers. A family must resemble as much as possible a
City governed by a King. Plut. de anima.
Hearing a man say he had no enemy, he asked him if he had any friend;
conceiving love and hate necessarily must follow one another.

His moral precepts are thus delivered by Stob. sermon. 28.
Demetrius Phalereus. Kn^w thy self. Speak not much in thy drink, for thou will transgress. ( or as Laertius, rule thy tongue, especially at a feast)
Threaten not free persons, for it is not just. (Laertius, threaten none, for
that is like a woman) Speak not ill of thy neighbor, if thou do, thou shall
hear what will trouble thee. Go slowly to the feasts of thy friends, swiftly to
their misfortunes. (Laertius, go more readily to a friend in adversity then in
prosperity.) Celebrate marriage frugally. Speak well of the dead. Reverence thy
elder (Laertius, honor age) Hate him who is inquisitive into the business of
others. Prefer loss before unjust gain ( for that (adds Laertius) brings
grief but once, this for ever) Deride not the unfortunate. If thou art strong,
behave thy self mildely, that thou may rather be resp^cted then feared
(Laertius, of thy neighbors. Learn to) Order thy house well. Let not thy
tongue run before thy mind. Bridle thy anger. Covet not impossibilities. In the
way hasten not forward. Shake not thy hand, (Laertius, in discourse) for it is
like a madman. Obey the Laws. Be reconciled to those who have wronged you,
but revenge contumelies. To which Laertius adds these, To preserve thy self.
Not to hate divination, make use of quietness.

Lib. 7. cap. 32.
Pliny speaking of authority, says, that men ranked Chilon amongst Oracles,
consecrating three precepts of his at Delphil, in golden letters, which are
these: Every man to know himself, and to desire nothing too much; the
companion of another money and strife is misery.

Agell.
He only kept within bounds the two most fierce affections of the soul, Love,
and Hate, saying, Love with such limitation, as if hereafter you might chance
to hate: hate so far, as that perhaps you might hereafter love.

Ausonius ascribes to him the effect of these verses.

Me, may the mean not fear, nor great despise,
Have death and health alike before thy eyes.
The benefits thou give, remember never,
Of those thou do receive, be mindful ever.
Learn of thy self and friend t'orecome cross fate,
Age, youth resembling, is a light estate,
Youth, age resembling, is a greater weight.
His particular sentence was, To a surety, loss is near.

Of his (...), Laertius mentions this, as most eminent.

Gold's worth we by the touchstone find,
Gold is the touchstone of the mind.
Laert.
He asked Aesop what Jupiter was doing, who answered, pulling down the high,
and raising the low.

CHAP. III.
His death, and writings.
HE died (according to Laert.
Hermippus) at Pisa, embracing his son, victor in the Olympic games, of the
caestus, the weakness of his age overcome with excess of joy; all who were
present at that great assembly attended on his funerals, as is affirmed by
Lib. 7. cap. 32*
Pliny and Laertius, who has this Epigram upon him, To thee illustrious Pollux
thanks I pay,
That Chilons son the Olive bore away:
The father died ore-joy'd his child to see
So crowned: a happy death! such befall me:


Upon his statue, this inscription.

The birth of Chilon warlick Sparta graced,
Who of the seven, in the first rank was placed.
Laert.
He was short in speech; whence Aristagoras calls that manner of speaking
Chilonian: Lud. sept. sap.
Ausonius also alludes hereto in the speech he makes under his name.

Laert.
He writ Elegies extending almost to two hundred verses: there is likewise an
Epistle of his extant to this effect.

Chilon to Periander.
YOu send me word of an expedition you are preparing against forraigners,
intending to go in person with your Army: a monarch, I think, has little
safety, even at home. That Tyrant I esteem happy who dies at home a natural
death.


PITTACVS


PITTACVS.
CHAP. I.
Pittacus his life.
Laert. and Suid.
PITTACUS was of Mitelene (the chief City of Lesbos) son of Caicus, So the
varican M. S: of Suidas, (...) better then the printed editions, which read
(...),
or (rather) Hyr^hadius, a Thracian, his Mother a Lesbian, born in the thirty
two Olympiad.

Laertius says, he flourished in the forty two Olympiad; Suid.
at that time he gave testimony of his great courage and love to his Country,
in killing (assisted by the brethren of Alcaeus the Poet) Melanchrus, tyrant of
Lesbos and Mitelene.

Laert.
Pittacus grown eminent by this action, was by the Mitelenaeans made ^enerall,
and Strab.
sent with a fleet against the A^henians, with whom they had a long contest
concerning the Achillaean field; the ground of their difference this: Herod. 5.
94.
Pisistratus took Sigeum by force from the Mitelaeans, and settled there (as
King) Hegesistratus his natural Son, by an Argive woman, who kept it, not
without much dispute; for betwixt the Mitelenaeans and Athenians there was a
long war, those sallying out of the Achillaean Town, these out of Sigaeum:
Strab. lib. 13.
those lay claim to the Town, as built by Archaeanactes of Mitelene, of the
stones of old Troy (for the Lesbians challenged the greatest part of Troas as
their hereditary right, where they had built many houses, some, says Strabo,
standing at this day, others demolished) Herod. continues.
these opposed their claim; alleging the Aeolians had no more right to this
Ilian country, then themselves or any other of the Greeks, who assisted
Menelaus in the recovery of Hellen. Strab. Laert.
The Athenians sent thither as General Phryno, a tall robust person, who had
been victor in all the Olympic exercises; perhaps the same whom Eusebius names
in the thirty six Olympiad. Strab. Laert.
Pittacus having been several times worsted in ba^tle, at last challenged
Phryno to single combat, and met him, being armed ^ith the ^eapons of a
fisherman, hiding a net under his s^ield, wherewith catching Phryno suddenly,
he sle^ him with his trident and ^agger, and by his death recovered the field.
From this stratagem of Pittacus, was derived the like kind of fighting amongst
the Roman gladiatours, called Retiarii (described by Saturnal.
Lipsius) as is expressly observed by Polyaenus and (...) Retiario:
Festus.

Strab. Laert.
But this war ended not so; until at last both parties referred themselves to
Periander, Herod. 5. 95:
choosing him Umpire; he awarded that each side should keep what they were in
possession of, whereby Sigeum fell to the Athenians. Strab.
Demetrius argues Timaeus of falsehood, for affirming Periander built Achilleum
( a small town, where was the tomb of Achilles) in opposition to the Athenians,
of Ilian stones, and thereby to have aided Pittacus: but neither was it built
of such stones (says Strabo) nor was Periander the founder: how could he be
chosen arbitratour, whose actions had declared him an enemy?

Laert.
Hereupon Pittacus was highly honored by the Mitelenaeans, who ( Aristot.
polit. 3. 14.
being infested by banished persons, under the leading of Antimenides, and
Alcaeus the Poet) Val. Max. 6. 5
either in obligation to his merit, or confidence in his equity, by their free
votes ( Plut. amator.
though Alcaeus deny it) instated him in the Tyranny; Aristot. pol. 3. 14.
with many acclamations of praise, and a great concourse of people (as is
manifest from Alcaeus, who for that reason reprehends them.) Plut. de ^aligd.
Herod. Laert. Suid.
They also with general consent offered him great gifts, and bad him take of
that field which he recovered from the Citizens as much as he would. He darting
his spear, demanded only so much as that had passed over, which he dedicated to
Apollo, called (even to the time of Plutarch, and Laertius) the Pittacaean
field: Laert.
Sosicrates averres, he took part of it for himself, saying, the half was
more then the whole: Val. Max. 6. 5
Thus he diverted his mind from the gift, conceiving it not fitting to diminish
the glory of the virtue, by the greatness of the reward.

Being possessed of this power, he showed the moderation wherewith his breast was
furnished, toward Alcaeus the Poet, who had behaved himself pertinaciously
against him, with bitter hate and scurrilous wit ( whereof see many instances
in Laertius) Pittacus only informed him how able he was to oppress him.

During his government, he made many Laws, one whereof is mentioned by De
legib. 2.
Cicero, forbidding any man to go to the funeral of such as he was not of kin
to. Another by F^lit. 2. 12.
Aristotle, that whosoever being drunk, should strike any man, should pay
double as much as if he had been sober; or as Laertius delivers it, whosoever
offended, being drunk, should pay a double forfeit; which he did to restrain
the Mitelenaens from drunkenness, because their Island abounded in wine. His
usual exercise, even whilst he was King, (as Cle. archus affirms) was to
grind corn, esteeming it a healthful exercise, much commending a mill, that in
so little room, it afforded exercise to many. There was a song, Pollux.
called for that reason (...), of which Thales Plut. Sympos. sept. sap.
affirms he heard a she-slave in Lesbos sing the beginning as the ground,
which was thus.

Grind, grind my Mill amain,
For Pittacus the Lesbian King
To grind does not disdain.
Being well in years, he was constrained to take upon himself the leading of an
Army, whereupon he said, it is hard to be good; which Hence correct Suidas, who
says Simon.
Simonides mentions, saying, Hard to be truly honest, this
The Pittaceian sentence is.


Plato also remembers it in his Protagoras (where Simonides reproves Pittacus
for saying, it is hard to continue good, which he affirms to be easy, but to
become good, hard; wherein he differs from Laertius his expression of it.

Laert.
He continued in the government of the Kingdom ten years, 6. 5.
Valerius Maximus says, only as long as the war with the Athenians concerning
Sigeum lasted, but afterward as soon as peace was obtained by victory ( having
in this time settled the affairs of the commonwealth) he laid it down,
notwithstanding the Mitelenaeans cried out to the contrary, lest he should
continue Lord of the Citizens longer then the necessities of the Kingdom
required, and lived ten years after a private person.

He went to Sardis at what time (as some say, though others apply it to Bias)
Croesus having made the Grecians in Asia tributary, had given order for the
building of a Navy to invade the Islanders: as soon as he came thither, Croesus
asked him what news from Greece? He by his answer, diverted the King from
going forward with his building ships: the Islanders, says he, have bought a
world of horses, intending an expedition against Sardis; and Croesus thinking
he had spoken truth, answered, I wish the Gods would put it in their minds to
come against the Lydians on horseback; he replied, it is not without reason,
great King, that you wish and hope to catch the Islanders on horseback in the
continent; and what think you the Islanders wish more, then (hearing your
preparation to set out a Navy against them) that they may catch the Lydians
upon the Sea, and revenge the cause of those inland Grecians whom you have
reduced to servitude. Croesus much delighted with this speech, and dissuaded
(for it seemed to him he spoke very ingeniously) from building a Navy, gave it
over, and contracted amity with the Ionian Islands.

CHAP. II.
His moral sentences, precepts, and verses.
OF his Apothegmes, Laertius recites these. The Gods themselves cannot resist
necessity. Power shows the man. Being on a time demanded what is best, he
answered, to do the present well. To Croesus, who asked which was the greatest
government, that of various (wood says he) meaning the Law, (carved) in wooden
tables. To a Phocaean, who said, I must seek an honest man: though you seek
much, (says he) you shall not find him. To some who demanded what was most
pleasing, he answered, Time. He said it was the part of wise men to foresee
inconveniences and prevent them before they came, of valiant men to order them
well when they come.

Add these from Symp^s. sept. sap.
Plutarch, That Prince is happy, who can make his subject afraid, not of him,
but for him. That commonwealth is best ordered, where the wicked have no
command, and the good have. That house is best ordered, which needs nothing
either of ornament or necessity.

Athen. deipn. ^ib. 10.
He counseled Periander to shun drunkenness and excess in feasting, least he
should be known to be what he was, not what he seemed.

Laert.
To a young man asking his advice concerning marriage, what directions he gave,
is thus expressed by Callimachus.

An Acarnaean stranger Pittacus
Hyrrhadius son of Lesbos questioned thus;
Father a double match is offered me;
The birth and means of one with mine agree;
The other far exceeds me, which is best?
By your advice my aim shall be addressed.
Lifting his staff (his ages sole defense)
He poynting said, go fetch advice from thence.
(There he espied some boys by chance at play,
As they were whipping topps along the way)
Follow their steps says he. When nigh he drew,
He heard them say, an equal take to you;
By which direction guided, he forsook
The richer fortune, and the equal took;
Be you (as he) by this wise counsel lead,
And take an equal to your Marriage bed.
Whither Aeschylus (as is observed by his Scholiast) alluded saying, From.
vinct.
Wise, truly wife was he
Who first sententiouslie
His judgment thus expressed,
An equal match is best.


His Moral precepts are thus collected by St^b. 28.
Demetrius Phalereus. Know opportunity; What thou intendest, speak not before
thou do it, for being frustrate of thy hope, thou will be derided. Use thy
friends. What thou take ill in thy neighbor, do not thy self. Reproach not
the unhappie, for the hand of God is on them. Restore what is committed to thy
trust. Bear with thy neighbor. I ove thy neighbor. Reproach not thy friend,
though he recede from thee a little; nor wish well to thy enemy, it is against
reason. It is hard to foresee the future, what is past is certain, what is to
come obscure. The earth is faithful, the sea faithless; Gain insatiable.
Acquire, honesty, Seek Obsequiousness, Love Discipline, Temperance, Prudence,
Truth, Faith, Experience, Dexterity, Society, Diligence, Economy and Piety.

Ausonius cites these as his;
None know to speak who know not to refrain,
One goodmans praise before many ill men's gain.
He Is mad who envies in the happy, pride;
Or grief in the unhappie does deride.
Who makes a law must not that law transgress,
Pu^chase all friends thou caust in happiness,
And to the fewest trust in thy distress.
Laert.
Of his (...), these were most celebrious, Who has a quiver and a bow
Against a wicked man should go
Whose doubtful tongue never expressed
The faithless meaning of his breast.


His particular sentence was, Know opportunity.

CHAP. III.
His Death; Brother, Wife, Son, Writings.
Laert.
HE lived to a full age, above seventy years, or (following the account of
Suidas for his birth) eighty. Long^v.
Lucian exceeds, who reckons him amongst those who lived 100. years; for he
Laert.
dyed when Aristomenes was Archon, in the third year of the 52. Olympiad, upon
his Monument this Epitaph, Weep citizens as sacred Lesbos weeps
For Pittacus; this Tomb his ashes keeps.


He had a brother who dying without issue, his estate devolved to Pittacus;
whereupon refusing the wealth Croesus offered him, he said, he had more by half
then he desired.

He married a wife of birth higher then himself, sister to Draco son of
Penthilus; she behaved her self imperiously toward him, whereof De anim.
tranquil.
Plutarch gives this instance; Having invited some friends, she came in and
overthrew the table; he seeing his guests troubled said, Each of you has some
misfortune, he is happiest who has no more then this. Laertius says, the
advice he gave concerning equal marriage (chap. 2.) was out of a resentment of
his own troubles.

Laert.
He had a son named Tyrrheus, who at Cuma sitting in a Barbers shop (as was
used amongst the ancients by such as loved to discourse of news) was casually
killed by a brasier with a blow of a hatchet; The Cumeans took the offender
and sent him to Pittacus, He being informed of the accident, set him at liberty
saying, pardon is better then penitence.

Of his writings Laertius mentions (...), already cited,
Elegies amounting to 600 verses.
Of laws in prose; directed to his own Countrymen.


Epistles of which this is preserved;

Pittacus to Croesus.
You command me to come to Lydia to behold your wealth; without sight whereof I
can easily believe the son of Alyattes, to be the richest of Kings, and
therefore need not in that respect go to Sardis; for I want not gold, but have
enough even for my friends also; yet I will come to you to enjoy your
conversation as a Guest.


Laert.
There was another Pittacus called the Lesser, a Lawgiver; mentioned by
Phavorinus and Demetrius.

BIAS.


BIAS.
CHAP. I.
Bias his life.
Laert.
BIAS was of Priene, sone of Tutamis; some affirm he was rich, others, that he
had no estate, but lived as an inmate. Sa^yrus ^anketh him first of the seven
wisemen; the occasion whereby that title was conferred on him, was this; he
redeemed some captive Messenian virgins, brought them up as his daughters, gave
them portions, and so sent them back to their Parents: a Tripod being
afterward found at Athens (as was related in the life of ^hales, the place
only different) with this inscription in gold, To the wise. These virgins (as
Satyrus affirms) or (as Phanodicus) their father came into the congregation,
and pronounced Bias wise, declaring what he had done for them: hereupon the
Tripod was sent to him, which Bias beholding, averred Apollo to be the most
wise, and would not accept it; some affirm he dedicated it to Hercules at
Thebes, as being descended from the Theban Colony, sent to Priene.

That he made good this attribute, there are many instances; Laert.
Alyattes besieging Priene, Bias turned out of the Town two exceeding fat
mules, which coming to the camp, Croesus wondered to see Laert (...)read (...).
their plenty extended to the very beasts, and desirous, of reconcilement, sent
a messenger to them. Bias causing many heaps of sand to be made, and covered
over with wheat, showed them to the messenger; whereof Alyattes informed, was
more eager of peace then before, and sent immediately to desire Bias to come to
him; but I (answered he) wish Allyattes may feed on onyons, meaning to weep.

Herod. 2. 7.
Some ascribe it to Bias, the diversion of Croesus his expedition against the
Greek Islands, by others imputed to Pittacus related in his life.

Herod. 1. 170.
Cyrus having taken Croesus, sent an Army against the Grecians; the Ionians
much troubled, assembled at the Panionium, where Bias gave them wise advice,
which had they followed (says Herodotus) they might have been the happiest of
all the Greeks: He counseled them to join together in one fleet, to sail to
Sardinia, and there build one City common to all the Ionians; whereby they
might preserve themselves from bondage, happy in possessing an Island far
greater then all the rest, and commanding them; but if they continued in Ionia,
there was no apparent hope of liberty. This advice was justified, the Ionians
being subdued.

Val. Max. 7. 2.
Bias (his country Priene invaded by enemies, all, whom the cruelty of war
suffered to escape, flying away laden with the most precious of their wealth)
being demanded why he carried none of his goods with him. I (says he) carry my
goods with me: He bore them ( adds Valerius Maximus) in his breast, not to be
seen by the eye, but prised by the soul; enclosed in the narrow dwelling of the
mind, not to be demolished by mortal hands, present with those who are settled,
and not forsaking such as fly.

Plut. conv. sept. sap.
He refused not the amity of Kings, (as Thales did) particularly, that of
Amasis, King of Egypt, who sent him a victim, commanding him to take from it
the best and worst part. Bias sent him the tongue, for which ingenuity, he was
much admired.

Plut. ibid.
Another question of Amasis he resolved, whilst he was at Corinth (invited
thither with the rest of the wisemen by Periander) where Niloxenus brought him
this letter.

Amasis King of Egypt says thus to Bias, wisest of the Greeks: the King of
Aethiopia contendeth with me for pre-eminence in wisdom; mastered in other
things, he in conclusion requires an absurd strange thing, that I drink up the
sea; this proposition if I resolve, I shall have many of his Towns and
Cities; if I resolve not, I must lose all those which are about Elephantina.
Ponder it, and send Niloxenus back with all speed; what ever we can do for your
friends and Country, shall not be wanting.

Having read the Letter, Bias with a short pause, recollecting himself, and
having whispered to Cleobub^s who sat next him. What (says he) Naucratites,
Amasis, who commands so many men, and possesses so excellent a Country, will
he, for a few obscure contemptible villages, drink up the sea? Bias (says
Niloxenus smiling) consider, as if he meant to do it, how it might be effected.
Bid the Ethiopian (replied Bias) withold the rivers from running into the sea,
until he has drunk off that which is now sea; for the imposition concerns
that only which is such at present, not what shall be hereafter. Niloxenus
embraced him with joy, the rest applauding his solution.

CHAP. II.
His moral sentence, precepts, and verses.
HIs Apothegmes are thus delivered by Laertius and others. He is unfortunate,
who cannot bear misfortune. It is a disease of the mind to desire such things
as cannot be obtained, and to be unmindfull of the miseries of others. To one
that asked what is hard, he answered, to bear courageously a change to the
worse. Being at sea in company with wicked, who, a storm arising, called upon
the Gods; hold your peace, says he, lest they know you are here. To a wicked
man enquiring what was piety, he was silent, the other asking the reason of his
silence: I answer not, says he, because you enquire after that which nothing
concerns you. Being demanded what is sweet to mankind, he answered, Hope. It
is better to decide a difference betwixt our enemies then friends, for one of
the friends will certainly become an enemy, one of the enemies, a friend.
Being asked what a man did with delight, he answered, gain by labor. We should
so live, as though our life would be both long and short: So love, as if
hereafter we might hate, conversing in friendship with caution, remembering that
it may possibly convert to enmity.

Agel. 5. 11.
To one demanding whether he should take a wife; she must be (says he) either
fair or foul; if fair, she will be common, if foul, a penance.

Flut.
That Tyrant shall gain most glory, who first himself obeyes the laws of his
country: That commonwealth is best ordered, wherein every man fears the Law
more then a Tyrant. That family is best ordered, where the Master behaves
himself voluntarily within doors, as he does without by constraint of the Law.

Stob. sermon. 28
Those who busy themselves in vain knowledge, resemble an Owl, which sees
only in the night, but is blind in the light; so is their mind sharp-sighted in
vanity, dark at the approach of true light.

Ausonius has these under his name.
What is our chiefest good? a conscience free,
Our greatest ill? man's, man's worst enemy.
Poor? th'avaricious. Rich? who naught desires.
A wifes best dower? the fame chaste life acquires.
Chaste? she of whom report dare speak no ill.
Wise? who has power to hurt, but wants the will.
A fool? who wants the power, and yet would kill.
His moral precepts, according to Stob. sermon ^3.
Demetrius Phalereus these. Most men are evil,. ( Laert.
His particular sentence) Before you do any thing, behold your face in a
glass; if it seem handsome, do handsome things; if deformed, suply the defects
of nature. Practice honesty. Undertake deliberately, but having once begun, go
through. Abhor to speak hastily. [ Laert. It is madnesse] lest thou sin, for
repentance follows. Be neither simple nor subtle. Admit not imprudence. Love
prudence. Every where profess there are Gods. Weigh what is to be done. Hear
much. Speak seasonably. If poor, reprove not the rich, unless great advantage
may arise thereby. Praise not an unworthy person for his wealth. Acquire by
persuasion, not by violence. When thou do good, impute it not to thy self,
but to the Gods. In thy youth, gain wealth, in thy age wisdom. [or as
Laertius, from thy youth to thy age, gain wisdom, for it will be more sure to
thee, then all other possessions] Preserve in thy actions remembrance; in
opportunity, caution; in thy manners, ingenuity; in labor, patience; in fear,
wariness; in wealth, love; in discourse, persuasion; in silence, a decorum; in
sentence, justice; in boldness, fortitude; in action, power; in glory,
eminence; in thy nature, generosity.

Laert.
Of his (...) these were most esteemed. To all the City where thou liv'st be
kind,
They who most favor show, most favor find:
But pride is often with destruction joined.
And Strength is a gift, which natures hand bestows.
Rhetoric and policy the wise soul knows,
Riches a present that from fortune flows.


CHAP. III.
His death, and writings.
Laert.
HE was much addicted to pleading, very earnest therein, but always employed
in just causes; which Laert. (...): perhaps it should be (...).
Demodicus the Alerian implies, saying, If thou chance to be a Judge, give,
sentence on the Prienaean side; and Hipponax, to plead a cause better then Bias
the Prienaean. And in that manner he died, being very old, as he was pleading,
having ended his speech, he reposed his head in the bosom of his sisters son;
his adversary having ended his defense; the Judges gave sentence on Bias his
side; the Court dismissed he was found dead in his Nephews bosom: the City
bestowed a magnificent monument upon him, with this inscription; Bias of
Prienaean famed descent
Lies here, Ionia's greatest ornament.


They also dedicated a Temple to him, called the Tutamian:

Laertius bestows upon him this Epigram.

Bias lies hidden here, whom Hermes lead
To th'grave, when age had snow'd upon his head.
His head, which (pleading for his friend) enclind
Upon his Nephew to long sleep resigned.
He writ concerning Ionia, by what means it might be most happy (perhaps that
counsel already mentioned) two thousand verses.

CLEOBVLE


CLEOBVLVS.
CHAP. I.
Cleobulus his life, death, and writings.
Laert.
CLEOBULUS was of Lindus, (a City of Rhodes) or according to Duris, of Caria,
son of Evag^ras, lineally descended from Hercules; excellent both in wisdom,
outward beauty, and Suid.
strength beyond all those of his time; learned in the Philosophy of the
Egyptians. That he was Tyrant of Lindus, is manifest from De (...) delph.
Plutarch. * He re-edified the Temple of Minerva, founded by Danaus.

He had a daughter Plut. con^iv sept. sap.
whom he named Eumetis, but was called commonly from her father Cleobulina: she
composed verses and riddles, in Hexameters, famous for her wisdom and
acuteness in those riddles, some of her questions having spread as far as
Egypt, which she used jocularly, like dice upon occasions, only contesting with
such as provoked her; she was also endued with an admirable height of mind, and
a wit both Politic, and full of humanity, causing her father to govern his
people with more mildness. Cratinus, also mentions her in a Comedy named from
her Cleobulae, often cited by Athenaeus.

Laert.
He died full of years, which extended to seventy, his tomb carried this
inscription, Wise Cleobulus death, the Lindian shore,
To which his birth was owing, does deplore.


Laert.
He composed Verses and Riddles to the number of three thousand, of which was
this Riddle concerning the Year, (by Suidas ascribed to his daughter
Cleobulina.)

One fire, twelve sons, from every one a race
Of thirty daughters with a double face:
Their looks are black and white successively;
Immortal they are all, and yet all die.
Laert.
Some assert him the Author of this Epigram upon Midas (not Homer, who, as they
account, lived long before Midas, though Herodotus otherwise.)

A brazen virgin stretched on Mida's tomb,
To last whilst water runs, and Trees shall bloom;
Whilst Sun and Moon dart their successive beams,
And the rough sea supplied by gentle streams.
I dwell upon this dismal sepulcher,
To tell all those that pass, Midas lies here.
There is likewise extant under his name this Epistle.

Cleobulus to Solon.
YOu have many friends, and a habitation every where; but I dare affirm,
Lindus would be most pleasing to Solon, being governed by a Democracy; an
Island where there is no fear of Pisistratus, thither your friends will come to
you from all parts.


CHAP. II.
His moral sentences, precepts, and verses.
Laert.
OF his moral saying are these. Employ thy self in something excellent. Be
not vain and ungrateful. Bestow your daughters, Virgins in years, Matrons in
discretion: implying, that the Virgins also should be instructed, which the
Greeks used not, the Romans brought them up in the liberal sciences. Do good
to your friend that he may be more your friend, your enemy that he may become
your friend: for we should beware of the calumny of friends, of the treachery
of nemies: When any man goes forth, let him consider what he is to do, when he
returns, examine what he has done.

Plut. sympos. sept. sap.
A Prince may be happy, if he trust none that are about him. That commonwealth
is best ordered, wherein the Citizens fear reproach more then Law. That family
is best, wherein more love then fear the Master.

His precepts thus collected by Stob. sermon. 28
Demetrius Phalereus, A mean is best. ( Laert.
His particular sentence) To reverence thy father is duty. (...) care of thy
body and soul. Hear willingly, but trust not hastily. ( o^ as Laertius, it is
better to love to hear, then to love to speak.) (...) better to know many
things, (Laertius, to love knowledge) then (...) be ignorant of all. Teach your
tongue to speak well. It is proper to (...), and contrary to vice, to hate
injustice. (Laertius, be a friend to virtue, a stranger to vice.) Preserve thy
piety. Advise thy country (...) what is best. Govern thy tongue. (Laertius,
pleasure.) Do nothing by violence. Instruct thy children. Pray to fortune.
Forgo enmity. The Enemy to thy conntry, esteem thy own. Fight not, nor be
kind (...) wife in the presence of others, one argues folly, the other
madness, Corect not your servants when they are drunk, it shows as if you
were drunk your self. Marry with your equal, for by matching into a higher
family, you procure Masters, not kinsmen. Laugh not in compliance with him who
derides, others, for you will be hated by those he derides. Rich, be not
exalted; poor, be not dejected: (Laertius adds, learn to bear the changes of
fortune.

Ausonius ascribes these to him, The more is in thy power, desire the less;
Not to be envi'dis unhappiness.
None long in his impieties can thrive,
In other much, naught in thy self forgive.
All men would spare the good, the bad cast down,
We share not in our ancestors renown:
But their inglorious actions often own.


Of his (...) these were most noted. * Laert.


By ignorence most deeds are swaid,
In many specious words arraid;
But all things shall by time be weighed.
PERIANDER


PERIANDER.
CHAP. I.
The Country, Ancestors, and Parents of Periander.
Laert.
PEriander was son of Cypselus Tyrant of Corinh, his mother Cratea, his
Ancestors the Heraclidae, ( Herod. 1. 7.
descended from Hercules and Iardana) reigned Kings of Lydia five hundred five
years, the son continually succeeding the father for two and twenty
generations. The original of Cypselus, and the manner of his obtaining the
Kingdom receive thus from Lib. 5. 92.
Herodotus.

When Corinth was governed by an Oligarchy, inhabited by the Bacchiadae, who
never would marry out of their own family, one of them (called Amphion) had a
lame daughter (by name Labda) whom when none of the Bacchiadae would take to
wife, Eetion married (son of Eche^rates of the Betraean tribe, but desended
afar off from Lapithe and Caenis) having no children, he consulted the Delphian
Oracle about it; as soon as he entered, the Prophetess spoke thus to him.

Eetion none will thee though great respect
A stone from Labdas fruitful womb expect,
Which shall the people crush, Corinth correct.
This Oracle to Eetion agreed with another delivered to the Bacchiadae (though
by them not understood) to this effect.

A Lion by an Eagle shall be laid
Upon a rock, fierce, making all afraid.
Corinthians, what I say consider well,
Who in tall Corinth and Pir^ne dwell.
The Bacchiadae who could not comprehend the meaning of this Oracle, when they
heard that to Eetion, understood their own by the affinity it had with the
other, and thereupon secretly designed amongst themselves to kill Eetions
child. His wife being delivered, they sent ten men of their own to the tribe
wherein Eetion dwelt, that they should murder the Infant; when thy came to
Petra to Eetions house, they demanded the child. Labda (not knowing their
intent, but thinking they came to congratulate with the Father,) brings her
son, and gives him into the hands of one of them: they had agreed (upon the
way) that he into whose hands the child were delivered should dash out its
brains against the ground, but by divine providence, the child smiling upon
him to whom Labda had given it, he was moved therewith to such compassion, that
he could not find in his heart to kill it, but delivered it to another, he to
a third, until at last it past through the hands of all the ten; None of them
having power to kill it, they restored it to the mother. Then going forth and
standing before the door, they began to find fault with one another, but
chiefly with him who took the child first, for not performing the agreement;
after some debate, they agreed to go in all and be equal sharers in the
murder; but it was decreed that Eetions child should be the oppressor of
Corinth, for Labda standing at the door heard all their discourse, and fearing
lest their minds changing, they should murder it, carried away the child, and
hid it in a measure of corn (called Cypsela) a place which she conceived they
could never search if they returned, and so it fell out: They came back and
sought all about; when they could not find him, they agreed amongst themselves
to tell those who sent them, they had done what they required, and returning
home, did so. Eetions son growing up was called Cypselus from the danger he had
escaped in the corne-measure; when he came to man's estate, he consulted with
the Delphian Oracle, and received a doubtful answer, in confidence whereof he
attempted Corinth and took it, the Oracle was this, Happy is Cypselus, who to
my fane
This visit makes; he Corinth's crown shall gain;
He and his Sons (but not their sons) shall reign.


Being possessed of the Kingdom, he persecuted the Corinthians, depriving many
of their estates, more (by far) of their lives; having reigned thirty years,
he dyed and was succeeded by his Son Periander, whose reign completed this
Tyranny, which lasted according to* Aristotle 73. years and six months: So
that Cypselus began to reign in the second year of the thirtieth Olympiad.

CHAP. II.
The time of his birth, his reign, and the change of his disposition.
PEriander (by computation from his death, which, according to Laertius was in
the eightieth year of his age, the last of the forty eight Olympiad) was born
in the last year of the twenty ninth Olympiad. His reign (according to Politic.
5.
Aristotle's account, lasting forty four years) begun in the fourth year of
the thirty seventh Olympiad. Suidas says, he succeeded in the Kingdom,
Excerpt. Nicol. Damasc. Suid.
as being his fathers eldest son, which Plutarch calls, a disease hereditary to
him, Conviv. sept. sap.
flourished in the thirty eight Olympiad.

Laert suid.
He was at first of a mild gentle disposition, but afterward grew very rigid
upon this occasion. His mother, whilst he was very young, kept him much in her
company, when he grew more in years, fell in love with him; with time, her
passion increased to such extremity, that she could no longer suppress it;
assuming confidence, she told her son, there was a beautiful Lady fallen in
love with him, and advised him not to slight her affection. He answered, he
would not transgress law and virtue, by touching a married woman. His mother
pressed him with entreaties; at last he consented; she appointed a night,
advising him not to have any light in his chamber, nor to constrain the Lady to
speak, but to excuse her for modestie's sake. Periander engaged himself to do
all she directed. She, attired as richly as she could, went to his chamber, and
departed again before daybreak: on the morrow she enquired if he were pleased,
and if the Lady should come again to him. Periander said, it was his chiefest
desire, and that he affected her excessively. From that time she visited her
son often: he, at last, was moved with a great curiosity to know who she was,
and solicited his mother very importunately that he might have some discourse
and acquaintance with her, seeing he was so much taken with love of her,
affirming it was unreasonable, he should be denied the sight of one, with whom
he had so often a nearer acquaintance. His mother affirmed it could not be
done, in respect to the modesty of the Lady. Hereupon he gave one of his
servants order to hide a light in his chamber: she came as she used, and when
she was asleep, Periander rose, took the light, and seeing it was his mother,
was about to have killed her, but withheld by some genius or apparition,
forebore: From that time forward he was troubled in mind, grew cruel, and
killed many of his subjects. His mother, much accusing her unhappy genius, slew
her self. Laertius says, they were both conscious hereof, and that being
discovered, he grew cruel to every one.

Herod.
In the beginning of his reign, he was much more merciful then his father, but
keeping correspondence by messengers with Thrasibulus Tyrant of Miletus ( Laert.
to whom in times past he had been a guest, before he arived to the government)
he became at last much more bloody then his father. He sent an express to
Thrasibulus, to know what course he should take to settle himself, and to
govern the City in the best manner. Thrasibulus led the messenger out of town,
and as they walked together in a corn field, questioned him concerning his
coming from Corinth, and in the mean time lopped off all the heads of corn
that grew higher then the rest, and threw them away; in this manner he went
over the whole field, not speaking one word to the messenger, and so sent him
home; where being returned, Periander greedily enquired what instructions he
had brought; he answered, Thrasibulus had given him none, and that he wondered
he would send him to a madman, who destroyed his own goods. Periander enquired
what Thrasibulus did, and immediately apprehended that he advised him to put
the most eminent in the City to death. Laertius recites a Letter to that
effect, which if not, suppositions must have been sent at another time after
this messenger departed.

Thrasibulus to Periander.
I Gave your messenger no answer, but carrying him into a field of Corn, lopped
off with my stick such ears as grew higher then the rest, whilst he followed
me; if you enquire, he will relate all to you that he has heard or seen: Do
you so likewise, if you mean to settle your self in the government, take off
the heads of the chiefest Citizens, whether your professed enemies, or others.
A Tyrant must suspect every friend.


Though Sept. sap. conviv.
Plutarch deny he followed this advice, Herodotus averres, that from thence
forward Periander exercised all cruelty upon his subjects, dispatching those
that had escaped the rigor and persecutions of his father. Laert.
He first appointed a guard of Halberdiers to secure his person, Suid.
which consisted of three hundred, and converted the government to a Tyranny (
Excert. Nicol. Damascen, and Suidas from him.
through his cruelty and violence) He forbad the Citizens to keep any servants,
or to be idle, always finding some employment for them: If any man sat in the
Forum, he was fined, for he feared lest they should plot against him. Laert.
The Citizens being desirous to live (...) he would not suffer them, Suid.
He was always in war, being of a martial disposition. He made ships with
three banks of Oars, which he used in both seas. Laert.
He attempted to dig the Isthmus off from the continent.

Of his friendship and correspondence with Thrasibulus, Lib. 1. 20.
Herodotus gives another instance, affirming he sent to inform him of the
Oracles answer to Alyattes King of Lydia, concerning the re-edifying of the
Temple of Minerva, and advised him to provide beforehand for his own security.

Laert.
He made a vow, if he were victor in the chariot-race at the Olympic games, to
erect a statue of gold: He chanced to be victorious, and wanting gold,
beholding upon a festival of that country the women richly adorned, he took
off all their ornaments, and so sent them home.

CHAP. III.
Of his being placed in the number of the seven Sages. His sentences and
writings.
PEriander (says Sept. sap. conv.
Plutarch) being become a Tyrant by a hereditary disease derived to him by his
father, endeavored to purge himself thereof as much as possible, by using the
sound conversation of good persons, and invited wisemen to come to him; Laert.
to which purpose he sent this Epistle to those of Greece, at such time as they
met at Delphi.

Periander to the wise men.
I Give Pythian and Apollo many thanks that you being met together, there will
also by my letters be brought to Corinth, I will entertain you as you well know
very kindly. I here that last year met at the Lydian Kings in Sardis: delay not
now to come to me, Tyrant of Corinth, for the Corinthians will look kindly upon
you, if you come to the house of Periander.


Upon this invitation they went to him, not seven, but twice as many, of whom
was Diocles, Perianders friend, in whose name Plutarch makes a large
description of their entertainment, which was not in the City, but at the Port
Lecheon, in a great hall, appropriated to solemn feasts, joining to the Temple
of Venus, to whom he had not sacrificed since the unhappy death of his mother
until that time, the particulars of the feast, by reason of the largeness of
the discourse, we refer to Plutarch.

He was also himself put into the number of these wisemen, who, De (...) Delph.
Plutarch says, were originally but five, but that afterward Cleobulus Tyrant
of Lindus, and Periander Tyrant of Corinth, who had neither virtue nor wisdom,
by the greatness of their power, the multitude of their friends, and the
obligations they conferred upon those that adhered to them, forced a
reputation, and thrust themselves violently into the usurped name of wisemen;
to which end, they spread abroad sentences and remarkable sayings throughout
all Greec, the very same which others had said before, whereat the other first
sages were much displeased, yet would not discover or convince their vanity,
nor have any public controversy about that title with persons of so much
wealth and power, but meeting together at Delphi, after some private debate,
they consecrated there the Letter (...) the fifth in the Alphabet, and in
numeration, to testify to the God of that Temple they were no more then five,
and that they rejected and excluded from their company, the sixth and the
seventh, as having no right thereto.

Of those Suid.
who excluded him put of the number of the seven, some (as Protag^r.
Plato) substitute in his room Myso: Laert.
others say there were two of this name, cozens, one the Tyrant, the other of
Ambracia: but Aristotle and others, assert him of Corinth to be the wise, which
attribute seems conferred upon him, not in respect to his actions, but moral
sayings and writings, which were these.

Do nothing for gain, that is proper to tradesmen. They who will rule safely,
must be guarded with love, not arms. Being demanded why he continued King,
because (says he) it is dangerous willingly to refrain, or unwillingly to be
deposed.

Plut. sept. sap. conv.
When the other six had given their opinions concerning Tyranny (at the feast
to which he invited them) he being desired to add his, answered with a
troubled countenance, Enough has been said to de^erre any man of sound
judgment from rule. When they had in like manner declared their opinions,
concerning a commonwealth, he added, the result of all which had been said,
commended that Democracy most, which came nearest an Aristocracy.

Stob. 28.
Being demanded what was the greatest in the least, he answered, a good mind in
a human body.

His precepts (according to Stob. ibid.
Demetrius Phalereus) were these, Consideration is all ( Laert.
which was his particular sentence) Quiet is good, temerity dangerous. Gain
sordid, the accusation of nature. A democracy is better then a Tyranny.
Pleasures are mortal, virtues immortal. In good fortune be moderate, in bad
prudent. It is better to die then to want. Study to be worthy of your Parents.
Be praised living, beatified dead. To your friends in prosperity and adversity
be the same. What thou have promised amiss, perform not. [Laert. Keep thy
word.] Betray not secrets. So reproach, as if thou should ere long be a
friend. Use new diet, but old laws. Punish those who have sinned: restrain
those that are about to sin. Conceal thy misfortune that it may not glad thy
enemies.

Ausonius ascribes these to him.

Pleasure and profit never disagree.
As more solicitous, more happy be.
It Is ill to wish, but worse to fear to die,
With what necessity enjoynes, comply.
If thou art feared of many, many fear.
Be not exalted when thy fortunes clear,
Nor be dejected if a storm appear.
Laert.
He writ two thousand verses of moral instructions.

CHAP. IIII.
The story of Arion.
DUring the feast we mentioned (by Plutarchs account) or rather according to
Eusebius, in the fortieth Olympiad, there happened a strange accident, which
(because Herodotus calls it a miracle showed to Periander) we shall relate in
his words.

Lib. 1. See also Agellius who translates this of Plutarch, Lucian, and others
^rion the most famous Lutinist of that time, having lived a long time with
Periander, took a voyage to Italy and Sicily, th^re having gotten together much
wealth, he designed to return to ( orinth: at Tarentum he hired a Corinthian
vessel, confiding above any in Corinthians; they, when they were at Sea,
plotted to cast Arion overboard, that they might be Masters of his wealth,
which he understanding, offered to give them all so they would save his life;
they refusing, bad him lay violent hands upon himself, if he would be buried
in his own Country, otherwise to leap immediately into the sea. Arion reduced
to this extremity, entreated them to give him leave to put on his richest
ornaments, and so standing upon the poop of the ship, to play a tune,
promising, as soon as he had done, to deliver himself into their hands. The men
moved with a great desire to hear the most excellent Lutinist in the world,
retired from the poop to the middle of the ship: he puts on his best ornaments,
and standing upon the poop, began that tune which they call the morning hymn,
as soon as he had ended it, he threw himself into the Sea, with his ornaments
and Lute; the ship sailed on to Corinth. It is reported a Dolphin took him upon
his back, and carried him to Taenarus, where he landed, and took shipping again
for Corinth; he arived there in the same habit, and related all that passed;
which Periander not believing, committed him to close custody, not permitting
him to go any whither, and in the mean time sent for the Mariners; when they
came, he asked them news of Arion: They answered, he was very well in Italy,
and that they left him safe at Tarentum: immediately Arion appeared, attired,
as when he he leaped out of the ship, whereat they were so confounded, they
could not say any thing in their own defense. This is attested both by the
Corinthians and Lesbians. At Taenarus there is a little Image given as an
offering of a man fitting upon a Dolphins back: that Periander caused such a
one to be made, is evident from this Epigram of Bianor.

This statue of Arion ore the main
Sailing upon a Dolphin's back was carved
By Perianders order. See, men slain
By cruel men, by fishes kind preserved.
CHAP. V.
Of his Wife.
Laert.
HIs wife was named Lysis, by him called Melissa, daughter to Procleus, Tyrant
of Epidaurus and Eristhenea, the daughter of Aristacrates, by the sister of
Aristomedes, which persons ruled over the greatest part of Arcadia. Athen.
Deipn.
He fell in love with her, seeing her in a Peloponnessian dress, in her
petticote, without a gown, giving drink to her fathers workmen: Laert.
Long after he killed her in his fury, big with child, with a stool, or a blow
of his foot, being wrought upon by the accusations of his concubines, whom he
afterward burned.

Herod. 5.
He sent one day to Threspotos upon the River Acheron, to enquire by Necromancy
concerning a depositum. Melissa appearing, said, she would not tell them in
what place it was laid, because she was cold and naked, the clothes wherein she
was buried doing her no good, for they were not burned, confirming the truth
whereof by Perianders putting bread into a cold oven; which answer carried to
Periander, made good the suspicion that ( Suid.
through excess of love) (...). Hereupon he caused proclamation to be made
that all the Corinthian women should come to Juno's Temple to celebrate a
festival, attyred in their richest ornaments, when they came, having placed a
guard of soldiers in ambush, he striped them all, without any distinction
(free women and servants) of their clothes, which he carried to Melissas grave,
and having praid, burned them to her* This done, he sent messengers to enquire
the second time, to whom Melissa's Ghost appeared, and told them where the
depositum was laid.

CHAP. VI.
Of his Children.
Herod. lib. 3. 49.
He had by Melissa two sons Cypsalus and Lycophron the younger ingenious, the
elder a fool; he had likewise a daughter; his elder son at the time of his
mothers death was eighteen years old, the younger seventeen. These their
Grandfather by the mothers side Procleus (Tyrant of Epidaurus) sent for over to
him, and loved them much as in reason he ought, being the children of his own
daughter; when he was to send them back, he said to them, do you know children
who slew your mother? the elder took no heed to that speech, but Lycophron
the younger was so troubled at it, that when he came to Corinth, he neither
spoke to his father, nor would make him any answer, looking upon him as the
murderer of his mother, where ^at Periander at length became so incensed, that
he turned him out of doors. He being gone, Periander questioned the Elder what
discourse his Grandfather had with him; he related to him how kindly he used
him, but told nothing of that which Procleus had said to t^em at their
departure, for he had not taken any notice of it * Periander said, it was not
possible but that he should say something more, and pressed him more strictly;
at last he calling it to mind, told him this also, which Periander resenting,
and not willing to use his son more mildly, sent to the people with whom he
lived in his ejection, forbidding them to receive him into any of their houses.
Turned out of that wherein he was, he sought to go into another, but was
denied; Periander having threatened those that should entertain him, and
commanded all to drive him away: expelled thence, he went to another of his
acquaintance, who knowing him the son of Periander entertained him though
with fear: at length Periander proclaimed that whosoever received him into
their house, or spoke to him, should pay what fine to Apollo, he should impose:
from that time none durst venture to entertain him or speak to him; nor would
he himself make trial of a thing which he knew to be desperate, but passed
his time in the common walks: Four days after, Periander seeing him poor
and extenuated with fasting, took compassion of him, and laying aside his
anger, drew nigh to him and said, Son which is better, to undergo what you now
suffer, or by obeying your father to enjoy my wealth and kingdom? you being my
son and next heir to the Kingdom of fruitful Corinth, have made choice of the
life of a Vagabond, angerly opposing him whom you ought not to oppose; if any
unhappiness befell in those things whereof you suspect me, it befell me, and I
have so much the greater share therein, in being the instrument thereof; hear
how much better it is to be envied then to be pitied, and what it is to be
angry with our parents or betters. In these words Periander reproved his son,
who made him no other answer then That he ought to pay a fine to the God for
speaking to him. Periander perceiving the evil of his son to be incurable,
removed him out of his fight, and sending him by ship to Corcyra, of which he
was also Tyrant: having thus disposed of him, he made war with his father in
Law Procleus as the chief cause of all that happened. Laertius mentions an
Epistle which he sent him to this effect.

Periander to Procleus.
We committed unwillingly that crime upon your Daughter, but you if willingly,
you alienate my Sons mind from me, you do unjustly* therefore either so^ten
his mind toward me, or I shall revenge this injury; I have satisfied your
daughter by burning in her honor the garments of all the women of Corinth.


Herod. ibid.
In fine he took Epidaurus and Proclus therein, whom he preserved alive.

Herod. ibid.
In process of time Periander growi^g old, and knowing himself to be no
longer fit for the charge of the commonwealth, sent to Corcyra to invite
Lycophron to the government of the Kingdom; conceiving his eldest son
uncapeable of that office by reason of his stupidity. Lycophron would not
vouchsafe so much as to speak to the messenger. Periander (affectionate to
him) sent the second time his sons sister, his own daughter, hoping he would
be sooner persuaded by her; she coming said to him, Brother, had you rather
the Kingdom should fall into the hands of others, and our fathers house be
dispersed then go home and have it your self? return to your own house,
injure your self no longer; obstinacy is an unhappy inheritance: our not one
evil with another; many prefer compliance before justice, many in pursuit of
their mothers right lose their fathers Kingdom: a Kingdom is a slippery
thing, coveted by many, our father is old and feeble, give not your own goods
to others: thus she pleaded to him as her father had instructed her; he
answered he would never come to Corinth whilst his father lived there* which as
soon as Periander understood, he sent a messenger the third time, to let him
know, he would remove to Corcyra, and to command him to come to Corinth to
take the government upon him; to thi^ the son assented. Periander prepared
for Corcyra, his son for Corinth: the people of Corcyra informed hereof, that
Periander might not come into their country, killed his son* in revenge of
which fact Periander sent three hundred boys of the chief of the Corcyraeans
to Sardis to Allyates King of Lydia there to be guelt, the Corinthians who had
charge of them, were driven upon Samos, the Samians understanding to what end
they were sent to Sardis, advised them to take Sanctuary in the Temple of
Diana, and would not suffer them as being suppliants to be pulled away: The
Corinthians not permitting any food to be given them, the Samians celebrated a
festival, which is observed (says Herodotus) at this day; when night was
come, the company of youths and maids danced whilst the children were pr^^ing*
and in their dance having made cakes of meal and honey, flung them amongst the
children, whereby they were sustained alive, this they did so long till the
Samians who had charge of the children, were feign to go away and leave them;
then the Samians conveyed the children home to Corcyra. Plutarch. de malign.
Herodot.
Antenor and Dionysius affirm the Gnidians came to Samos with a fleet, drove
away Perianders Guard from the Temple, and carried the children to Corcyra; for
which reason the Corcyraeans allowed the Gnidians many honors and immunities,
which they gave not (even) to the Samians.

CHAP. 7.
His Death.
Laert.
EXcessive melancholy (amidst these crosses) occasioned his death, in the last
year of the 48 Olympiad, the eightieth of his age, being desirous none should
know where he was buried, he thus contrived it. He commanded two men to go to
a certain place at night, and to kill whom they first met, and bury him. After
them he sent four to kill and bury the two; after the four, more: They obeyed
his order, the first killed him. The Co^inthians erected for him an empty
monument with this inscription.

Periander lies within Corinthian Ground,
For power and wisdom above all renownd.
Laertius has this Epigram upon him.
At whatsoere shall happen be not sad:
Alike for all that God dispenses glad.
Wise Periander did through grief expire,
Because events not joined with his desire.
AUSONII LUDUS septem Sapientum.
The Prologue.
THe seven wisemen, (that name times past applied
To them, nor has posterity denied)
Themselves this day unto your view present.
Why do thou blush Gown'd Roman? discontent
That such grave men should on the stage be brought!
Is It shame to us? 'twas none to Athens thought:
Whose Councell-Chamber was their Theater.
True; here for business several places are
Assigned, the Cirque for meetings, Courts to take
Enrolements, Forums in which pleas to make:
But in old Athens, and all Greece was known
No other place for business but this one.
[Viz. the Theater Which latter Luxury in Rome did raise.
The Aedile heretofore did build for plays
A Scaffold-stage, no work of Carved stone;
So Gallius and Murena, it is well known.
But after, when great Men not sparing Cost,
Thought it the highest glory they could boast,
To build for Plays a Scene more eminent,
The Theater grew to this vast extent;
Which Pompey, Balbus, Caesar did enlarge;
Vying which should exceed for state and charge.
But to what end all this? we came not here
To tell you who first built the Theater,
Forum, or City Gates, but t'usher in
Grave sages, who by Gods approved have been.
Such as in pleasing and instructive verse,
Their own judicious sentences rehearse,
Known to the learned, and perhaps to you:
But if your Mem'ries cannot well renew
Things spoke so long since; the Comedian shall,
Who better then I knows them, tell you all.
Enter Comedian. AThenian Solon, Fame sings, wrote at Delphis
(...); whose sense Know thy self, is:
But this to Spartan Chilon most assign.
Some question Chilon, whether this be thine,
(...), The close
Of a long life regard: but most suppose
That Solon this to Lydian Croesus spoke.
From Lesbian Pittacus this motto take,
(...); that is Know time: But he
By (...) here means opportunity.
(...), Bias, did proceed
From thee; that is, Most men are ill. Take heed
You not mistake him; for by ill men here
He means the ignorant: The next you hear
Is Periander's (...);
That is, Thought's All in All; a Thoughtfull Man!
But Lyndian Cleobulus does protest
(...);Mean in All is best.
Thales, (...) cries.
Upon a Surety present damage lies.
But this, 'for those who gain by it, to tell,
May 'chance displease: Now Solon comes farewell.
Exit. Enter Solon. LO! Solon in his Greeks dress treads the stage,
To whom (as of the seven the greatest Sage)
Fame gave the prize of wisdom from the rest;
But fame is not of Censure the strict Test.
Nor first nor last I take my self to be,
For there is no order in Equality.
Well did the Delphick Prophet sport with him
Who asked, which first of the Wisemen might seem,
Saying; if on a Globe their names he writ,
None first or lowest he should find in it.
From midst of that learned Round come I; that so
What once I spoke to Croesus, All here now
Might take as spoken to themselves; it is this:
(...) which is,
Mark the end of a long life; till when forbear
To say, these wretched, or those happy are:
For All till then are in a doubtful state,
The proof of this we will in few words relate.
Croesus the King or Tyrant (choose you which)
Of Lydia, happy thought, and strangely rich;
Who to his Gods did gold-wall'd Temples build,
Invites me ore, I to his summons yield.
His royal summons went to Lydia,
Willing his subjects by our means might find
Their King improved, and bettered in his mind.
He asks me whom I thought the happiest Man?
I said Telana, the Athenian,
Who his life nobly for his Country gave;
He pishes at it, will another have.
I told him then Aglaus, who the Bounds
Nere past in all his life of his own grounds.
Smiling, he says* what think you then of Me
Esteemed the happyest in the whole world? We
Replied, his End could only make that known,
He takes this ill: I, willing to be gone,
Kiss his hand, and so leave him: For some ends
Meantime, against Persia he a war intends*
And all things ready, does in person go.
How speeds? he is vanquished, Prisoner to his foe,
And ready now to yield his latest breath,
(For by the Victor he was doomed to death)
Upon the funeral Pile, rounded with Flames
And smoke, he thus with a loud voice exclaimes
O Solon! Solon! now I plainly see.
Thou Art a true Prophet! Thrice thus naming me
Moved with which words, Cyrus, (the Conqueror)
Commands the Fire be quenched, which, by a shower
Of Rain then falling, happily was laid.
Thence to the King, by a choice Guard convay'd,
And questioned who that Solon was? and why
He called so on his Name? He, for reply,
In Order all declares: Pity at this
The Heart of Cyrus moves; and Croesus is
Received to grace, who in a Princely Port
Lived after, honored in the Persian Court.
Both Kings approved, and praised Me, but what I
Said then to one, let each man here apply
As spoke t'himselfe, 'twas for that end I came.
Farewell: your liking let your hands proclaim.
[Exit. Enter Chilon. MY Hips with sitting, Eyes with seeing ache,
Expecting when Solon an End would make.
How little and how long your Atticks prate!
Scarce in three-hundred lines one word of weight,
Or a grave sentence, how he looked on me
At going off? -- Now Spartan Chilon see!
Who with Laconian Brevity commends
To you the Knowledge of your selves, kind Friend^!
(...) carved in a Delphos Fane.
It Is a hard Work, but recompensed with Gain.
Try your own strength; examine what it is you
Have done already, what you ought to do.
All Duties of our life, as Modesty,
Honor and Constancy included be
In this, and glory, which we yet despise.
Farewell, your claps I not respect nor prize.
[Exit. Enter Cleobulus. I Cleobulus, though my Native Seat
Be a small Isle, am Author of a great
And glorious Sentence; (...);
A man is best: You Sirs that sit upon
The fourteen middle Benches next unto
The Orchestra, best may judge if this be true.
Your Nodd shows your assent: We thank you; but
We shall proceed in Order: Was it not
One Afer (who a man of your own Clime is)
That said once in this place, Ut ne quid Nimis?
And hither does our (...) aim.
The Dorick and the Latin mean the same.
In speaking being silent, or in sleep.
In good Turns, or in bad, a mean still keep,
In study, or what ever you intend.
I Have said, and that I mean, I keep here end.
[Exit. Enter Thales. I AM Thales, who maintain (as Pindar sings)
Water to be the best and first of things.
To whom by Phoebus Mandate, fishers brought
A golden Tripod, which they fishing caught,
By him as present to the wisest meant,
Which I refused, and unto others sent
In knowledge my superiors as I thought.
From one to the other of the Sages brought
By them again returned, to me it came,
Who to Apollo consecrate the same.
For Since to seek the wisest, he enjoined,
I Judge no man but God by that designed.
Now on the stage (as those before) I come
TO assert the truth of my own Axiom.
Perhaps by some t'may be offensive thought:
But not by those by sad experience taught.
(...), say we.
Be Surety, and be sure a loser be.
A thousand Instances I could produce
To prove Repentance is the only use
That can be made of it, but that we here
Examples by their Names to cite, forbear.
Make your own Application, and conceive
The Damage, Men by this sole act receive.
Nor this our good intention take amiss,
You that like, clap, you that dislike it, hiss.
Enter Bias. I Am Priaenean Bias, who once taught
(...), That most men are naught.
I wished had been unspoke; for Truth gains Hate.
But by bad men I mean illiterate,
And those who barbarously all Laws confound,
Religion, Justice; for within this Round
I see none but are good: believe all those
Whom I proclaim for bad amongst your Foes:
Yet there is none so partially applied
To favor Vice, but with the good will side:
Whether he truly be such, or would fain
Of a good man the Reputation gain:
The hated name of an ill man all shun.
Then ( most good Men) your praise, and I have done.
Enter Pittacus. I AM Pittacus, who once this Maxim penned,
(...) That Is, time apprehend.
But by Time we meant Time in Season, as
In tempore veni is your Roman Phrase.
And your own Comic Poet Terence, he,
Chief of all things makes opportunity,
Where Dromo comes unto Antiphila.
In The nick of Time; consider what I say,
And mark how great an inconvenience
Most suffer through this want of providence.
But now it is more then time we should be gone;
Farewell, and give your Aprobation.
[Exit. Enter Periander. NOw on the Stage see Periander move!
He who once said, and what he said will prove
(...). Thought is all in all.
Since him a perfect Agent we may call,
Who first considers what he undergoes;
For we should still forecast, as Terence shows,
The Event of business, whether good or bad,
Ever w'undertake it: where may best be had
Convenience for planting, where to build,
When to wage War, and when to pitch a Field:
Nor inconsiderately take in hand
Or great, or small Things, for that makes a stand
In the free progress of all new designs;
In which there is nothing policy enjoynes
Like consultation; hence we see it clear,
Who use it not, by chance, not counsel steer,
But I retire, whilst you with better Fate
Employ your Thoughts how to uphold your State:
ANACHARSIS.
CHAP. I.
Anacharsis his life and writings.
THose Nations (says Lib. 4* 46*
Herodotus) which border upon the Euxine Sea, are of all most illiterate, the
Scythians only excepted; we can allege nothing relating to learning of any
people within the compass of that Sea, neither know we any person learned but
the Scythians Ana^harsis; Strab. lib. 7.
Amongst these, notwithstanding the roughness of their education, (for they
fed upon mares milk and dwelt in wagons) were some who far exceeded all in
justice.

Such was Anacharsis, Laert.
son of Gnurus brother of Cadovides King of Scythia; his mother a Grecian, by
which means he had the advantage of two languages, but was owner of no other
house then the custom of that country allowed, a Chariot, whence Plut. conviv.
sept. sap.
he compared his dwelling to that of the sun, carried in that manner round the
heavens.

Elian. var. hist. lib. 5.
The Scythians never travel beyond their own confines, but Anacharsis as a
person endued with more then ordinary wisdom extended his journey further,
Herod. 4. 46.
being sent by the King of Scythia to Greece, Laert.
He came to Athens in the first year of the 47. Olympiad, Eucrates being
Archon: and Lucian. Scyth.
first met with Toxaris one of his own country, by whom, as the most
compendious way to take a survey of Athens and Greece, he was addressed to Solon:
how Solon received and entertained him is already related in his life: he
instructed him in the best disciplines, recommended him to the favor of
noblest persons, and sought all means of giving him respect and honor.
Anacharsis admired his wisdom, continually followed him, in a short space
learnt all things of him, and was kindly received by every one for his sake;
being (as Theoxenus attests) the only stranger whom they incorporated into
their City.

Strab. lib. 7.
Thus was he much honored by the Grecians for his perfection, Clem. Alex.
Strom. 1.
wisdom, temperance, wherein he excelled many of their Philosophers, Clem.
Alex. Strom. 5.
whereupon they conferred the attribute of wise upon him, Elian. lib. 2.
some accompting him one of the seven: Periander invited him with the rest to
Corinth; the feast is largely described by Plutarch: There Anacharsis carrying
with him Chaplets of Flowers, Ivy, and Laurel, drunk, as the Scythians use, to
great excess, Athen. deipn. 10.
and required the prize of drinking to be given him, because he was first
drunk: In a race (says he) he wins, who comes first at the ^ost, in drinking,
he who comes first to the end deserves the r^ward.

Herod. 4. 76.
Having seen much of the world, and improved his knowledge, he returned to
Scythia (as Lucian conjectures, not until Solon were dead) As he sailed along
the Hellespont, he put in at Cyricum, and finding the people celebrating a
festival to the Mother of the Gods, with much splendour and muni^icence; he
made a vow, if he got safe home, to sacrifice in the same manner as he had seen
those of Cyricum, and to institute a Vigill. When he came into Scythia, he
withdrew himself privately to Hylaea, near the Achillean course, a place
abounding with (...)* and performed the Rites of the Goddess with a Timbrell
(and Cymball Clem. Alex. admonit adgent.
about his Neck) A Scythian espying him, carried word to Sauli^s the King, who
went immediately thither, and being an eyewitness thereof, shot him through
with an Arrow ( Clem. Aleu. ibid.
to punish his effeminacy, and prevent the infection thereof in others)
Herodot. continues.
And now if any enquire concerning Anacharsis, the Scythians deny they knew
him, because he traveled into Greece, and affected the customs of that
Country. As I am informed by Timnes, tutor of Spargapithes, he was uncle to
Indathyrsus, King of Scythia, son of Gnurus, son of Lycus, son of Spargapithes:
Now Anacharsis being of his family, it is manifest he was For (...) read (...).
Spargapitbes. 1.
slain by his brother, (that his brother was King of Scythia, and slew him, is
confirmed by Laertius, though he differ in the name) for Indathyrsus was son of
Saulius, Saulius was he who slew Anacharsis, Lycus. 1.
and consequently is the same whom Laertius calls Cadovides, adding, Gnutus. 1.
some report that he shot him in hunting; for being addicted to the Greek
customs, and endeavoring to alter the laws of Scythia; whereupon he dying,
Anacharsis. Saulius, or Caduida. 1.
said, he returned safe out of Greece, guarded by his own wisdom, but was
slain at home by the envy of others. Upon him Laertius has this Epigram,
Indathyrsus.
From travel Anacharsis came at last,
And Scythia in a Grecian mould would cast*
Whilst he was teaching how, by the surprise
Of a winged arrow carried to the skies.


Laert. Plut. conviv. sept. sap.
There were many statues erected in honor of him by the Grecians, upon which
was writ, (...) Laert. Plut. con^^iv. sept^ sap.
He was temperate and skillful in many things; he freely and largely discoursed
of the manner of diet and medicine, which the Scythians used in curing the
sick. Laert.
From the plain freedom he used in speech, arose a Proverb, The Scythian
phrase. He writ eight hundred verses of orders for the Scythians and Greeks,
concerning frugall living, and martial affairs. There are also two Epistles of
his extant.

Anacharsis to Croesus.
KIng of the Lydians, I came into Greece to be informed of their manners and
studies; I need not money, it is enough if I can return into Scythia bettered:
but ^ will come to Sardys, because I highly esteem your favor.


Cic. Tuscul. quaest. 5.
Anacharsis to Hanno, health.
Clem* Alex. cites this fragm^nt, doubtless out of the same Epistle, (...)etc.
Strom. 1.
MY apparel is a Scythian rug, my shoes the hardness of my feet, my bed, the
earth, my sauce hunger; I feed on milk, cheese, and flesh: you may come to me
as to one that is contented: but those gif^s which you so much esteem, bestow
either on your Citizens, or the immortal Gods.

Strab. lib. 7.
He is said to have invented tinder, Laert. Suid.
the anchor, and the Potters wheel; but this latter is by Strabo evinced
clearly to be false, because mentioned by Homer, who lived long before him,
Anacharsis being in the time of Croesus. Suidas.



CHAP. II.
His Apophthegmes.
HIs apothegmes are these, Laert*
He said a vine bare three grapes, the first of pleasure, the second of
drunkenness, the third of repentance. He wondered, that amongst the Greeks,
Artists contended, and they who were no Artists determined. Being demanded by
what means a man might be brought not to love wine, he said, by s^tting before
his eyes the unseemly actions of drunken persons. He wondered the Grecions who
punished injuries by law, rewarded the Athletae a^ public exercises for
beating one another. Being told a ship is four inches thick, so far from death
said he are they who sail. He said oil was a receipt procuring madness,
because the Athletae, the more they were anointed therewith, the more fierce
they were against one another. How comes it, said he, that they who forbid
lying, themselves lie openly, when they put off their wares? He wondered that
the Greeks in the beginning of a feast drunk in little cups, and when they were
full in great. Plut. conviv. sept. sap. Strab. 15.
Being demanded (by Ardalus) whether there were any Flutes in Scythia, he
answered, not so much as vines (which Analyt. post. 1. 13.
Aristotle calls a demonstration (...), by the remote cause) Plut. conviv.
sept. sap.
Ardalus adding, are there not Gods amongst the Scythians? yes, replied he,
which understand all languages. Laert.
Being asked what ship was safest, he answered, that which is in the Haven. He
affirmed the most remarkable thing he had seen among the Grecians to be this,
that they left the smoke upon the mountains, and carried the wood into their
Cities. Being demanded whether the number of the dead or of the living were
grea^est, amongst which, says he, do you account those who are at sea? To an
Athenian, who reproached him for being a Scythian, my country, (says he) is a
disgrace to me, but you are a disgrace to your country. Being demanded what in
man is both good and bad, he answered the tongue. He affirmed it is better to
have one friend worth much, then many worth nothing. He said the Forum was the
proper place for c^eating and unjust gain. To a young man who reproached him at
a feast; youth, says he, if at these years you cannot bear wine, when you
grow old, you will not be able to bear water.

Herod. 4. 46.
When he returned to Scythia, he told the King who sent him, the Greeks were
busied in all kinds of wisdom, except the Lacedaemonians, who only knew how to
give and receive prudently.

Plut. de profect. virtut. sent.
He said the Greeks made no other use of money but to account with it.

Plut. vit. Sol.
At a public assembly in Athens, he said, he wondered, why in the Greek
convocations, wise men propounded business, and fools determined it.

Plut. conv. sept. sap.
That Prince is happy who is wise. That City is best, wherein (all things eise
being equal) virtue has the better condition, vice the worse.

Stob. sermon. 16.
To one who, as they were drinking, said, beholding his wife, Anacharsis, you
have married one who is nothing handsome: I am (answered he) of that opinion
also; but put less water in my wine, that I may make her handsome.

Relating the qualities of the Vine to the King of Scythia, and showing him
some slips thereof, he added, and by this time it would have reached into
Scythia, if the Greeks did not every year cut off its branches.

Athen. deipn. lib. 10.
At a feast, such being sent for, as might procure mirth, he alone smiled not;
afterward, an Ape being brought in; he laughed, saying, that beast is
ridiculous by nature, man by art and study. Athen. deipn. lib. 10.


Whilst he slept, Athen. deipn. lib. 14.
he used (...), implying, that a man ought to take great care to govern both,
but that it is harder to restrain our pleasure then our tongue. Clem. Alex.
strom. lib. 5.
He said that to him all the Grecians were Scythians. Clem. strom. 1.


MYSON.
Laert.
MY SON was (according to Hermippus) son of Stremon, born at Chene, a Village
either of Oetaea, or Lacedaemonia, his father A Tyrant. Anacharsis demanding of
the Oracle, if any were wiser, was answered (as was in the life of Thales
mentioned of Chilon) Oetaean Myson I declare
Wiser then those who wisest are.


His curiosity increasing by this answer, he went to the village, and finding
him fitting a plow-share to the plow, said, Myso, it is not yet time to plow:
But it is (answered he) to prepare. Others affirm the Oracle called him Etean,
about which there is much difference: Parmenides says, that Etea is a
Lacedaemonian Village, whereof Myson was. Sosicrates, that he was Oetaean by
his father, Chenean by his mother. Euthyphron, that he was a Cretan, Etea a
City of Creet. Anaxilaus an Arcadian. Hipponax mentions him in these words, And
Myso, whom Apollo declared wisest of all men. Aristomenus affirms, he was of
the same humor as Timon and Apemantus, a Man-hater. He retired from Lacedaemon
into the desert, and was there surprised all alone, smiling; being demanded why
he smiled, no man being present, he answered, for that reason. Aristoxenus
says, he was of no account, because not of the City, but of an obscure
village; whence some ascribe his sayings to Pisistratus, but others reckon him
one of the seven; Plato puts him in the room of Periander. he said, we must
not seek things from words, but words from things; things were not made for
words, but words for things. He dyed 97. years old.

EPIMENIDES.
EPimenides is by all acknowledged a Cretan (though contrary to the custom of
that place he wore long hair;) but in the Town where he was borne they agree
not. Laertius following the greater part of writers says it was Val. Max. 8.
13.
Cnossus, Strabo, Phaestus. There is no less difference about the names of his
Parents; some call his father Phaestius, or Phaestus, other Dosiades, his
Mother Blasta, others Agasiarchus; Apollonius, Bolus, Laertius, and Suidas,
name Plutarch One of these names perhaps is corrupt.
Balta, a supposed Nymph.

It is reported, that when he was a youth, being sent by his father and
brethren to their field to fetch home a sheep to the City, tired with the heat
and travel in search thereof, he withdrew himself at noon (or as Apollonius,
at night) from the common way into a private Cave, where he slept (according to
^pollo^. hist. com. cap. 1. Plin. 7. 52. Laert.
Theopompus fifty seven years, according to De ling. lat. 6.
Varro, An seni sit gerenda resp.
Plutarch, and de anima. 46.
Tertullian, fifty, Attic. the number in Suidas seems false, as also in the
Vatican appendix of adages; one has 6. the other 7.
Pausanas forty, in which intervall of time, most of his kindred died; at the
end hereof awaking, he betook himself again to the search of his sheep,
thinking it the same, or the next day to that wherein he lay down, and that he
had slept but a little while; not finding it, he returned to the field where he
saw all things changed, and a stranger in possession thereof: thence to the
City much amazed; going into his own house, they questioned who he was; at last
he met with his younger brother, now grown old, by whom he was informed of all
that passed, and the time of his absence. Plutarch says, he waked an old man;
Plin. 7. 52.
Pliny and Laertius, that he grew old in as many days as he had slept years:
Laert. Suid.
some affirm he slept not, but retired a while, employing himself in cutting
up roots.

Many (other) wonders are reported of him; Apollon.
some say, he received food of the Nymphs, which he kept in an Oxes hoof, and
took thereof a little every day, requiring no other sustenance, never being
seen to eat: Laert.
he often counterfeited resurrection from death to life; his Suid.
soul going out of his body whenever he pleased, and returning again.

Laert:
He is reported the first that lustrated houses and fields, Strab.
which he performed by verse. To this end the Athenians in the forty sixth
Olympiad, visited with a Plague, and commanded by the Oracle to lustrate the
City, sent Nicias, son of Niceratus with a ship to Creet, to desire Epimenides
to come to them, which he did, and there contracted acquaintance with Solon,
whom he privately instructed, setting him in the way of making Laws. He
reduced the divine rites to a lesser charge; he moderated the mournings of the
Citizens, he added some sacrifices to the ceremonies of funerals, taking away
barbarous customs which the women used upon those occasions: and (which was of
greatest concernment) by propitiations, procurations, and offerings, he
lustrated and expiated the City, rendering the people more obsequious to justice
and unity, Laert.
and stayed the Pestilence in this manner: He took sheep, black and white, and
brought them into the Areopagus; there he let them loose, to go whither they
would, giving order to those who followed them, that whenever any of them lay
down, they should sacrifice in that place to the proper Deity, whereby the
Plague ceased. Hence it is, that at this day, (says Laertius) are to be seen
in many Athenian Villages, namelesse Altars, monuments of that expiation. Some
affirm he imputed it to the Cylonian impiety (of which already in the life of
Solon) and assuaged it, by putting to death two young men, Cratinus and
Ctesibius.

Laert.
He is supposed first to have built Temples; one he erected in Athens to the
Eumenides; another he intended to consecrate to the Nymphs, but a voice from
Heaven was heard in these words, Epimenides, not to the Nymphs, but to Jupiter.

Plut. vit. Sole
Beholding the haven Munychia, he said to those who stood by, how blind is man
to the future! The Athenians would tear this haven in pieces with their teeth,
if they foresaw how much it will infest the City: This he foretold many years
before it came to pass, which was in the second year of the 114 Olympiad, when
Antipater put a garrison of Macedonians into the Munychia.

The Athenians being afraid of the Persian Navy, he told them, it would not
invade them for many years, and when it did, the Persians should not effect the
least of their hopes, but depart home with greater loss to themselves then
they had given their adversaries: which was fulfilled in the sights at Marathon
and Salamis.

He foretold the Lacedaemonians, (and Cretans also) the overthrow they should
receive by the Arcadians, which happened when Euricrates and Archidamus reigned
in Lacaedemon.

These predictions (for which the Laert.
Grecians esteemed him ( Plat.
divine) beloved of the Gods, Plut. Sol.
and put him in the number of their Sophists; the Laert.
Cretans, (whose Prophet he is styled by Tit. 1.
Paul) sacrificed to him as a God) were either not known, or not credited by
Aristotle, who averres, he used not to Prophecy of future things, but only such
as were past and obscure.

For his lustration of the City and other things he was much honored by the
Athenians who offered him many gifts, would have rewarded him with a Talent,
and appointed a ship to transport him back to Creet: he refused their gift and
money, nor would accept of any thing but a little branch of sacred Olive, out
of the Tower, wherewith (having procured a league betwixt the Cnossians and
Athenians) he returned home; and soon after died Laert. citing Phlegm; Plin. 1.
52.
157. years old, or according to Apollon. Hist. com. 1. citing Phlegon. Suid.
others 150. the Cretans say he wanted but one of 300. Xenophanes affirms he
heard him when he was 154 years of age. His body the Lacedaemonians kept by
direction of the Oracle. It was taken up many years after, marked all over with
Characters, whence arose a proverb, concerning abstruse things, the skin of
Epimenides; He called himself Aeacus, others named him Cur^s.

He was a great Suid.
Poet, and writ many things in verse; the subjects of his writings were these,

Initations, Lustrations, and other obscure matters in verse.

The generation and Theogony of the Curetes and Corybantes, 5000, verses.

The building of Argo, and expedition of Jason to Colchos, 6500* verses.

Of sacrifices, in prose

Of the Cretan Commonwealth.

Of Minos and Rhadamanthus.

D. Hieronym. in Epistol. ad Titam. see the place.
Of Oracles and responses, out of which Saint Paul cites this verse, (...).
The Cretans are always liers, evil beasts slow bellies.


There is extant under his name (says Laertius) an Epistle to Solon concerning
the orders of Government given by Minos to the Cretans: which Demetrius
conceives of later date, not written in the Cretan but Athenian language; but I
have met with another to this effect. Tit. ^1 2.


Epimenides to Solon.
Be of comfort friend; for if Pisitratus were ruler of Athenians, inured to
servitude and void of discipline, his way perhaps might continue for ever. But
now he subjects not base people, but such as are mindful of Solons
instructions, who ashamed of their bondage will not brook his Tyranny. And
though he should settle himself in the government unmovable, yet I hope it
will not devolve to his children; for it is hard for free persons, brought up
under excellent laws, to suffer bondage. As for you, wander not, but come to
Creet to me, where you will find no oppressive Monarch. If in travailing up and
down you should light upon some of his friends, I fear you may suffer some
mischief.


Laert.
There were two more of this name, one a Genealogist; the other writ in the
Dorick dialect concerning Rhodes.

PHERECYDES.
PHerecydes. was of Syrus (one of the Cyclades near Delus) son of Badys, or as
others, Babis; born according to Suidas in the 46. Olympiad; he lived in the
time of Alyaltes King of Lydia; contemporary with the seven Sophists by some
accounted one of them. Laertius says, he was in the fifty ninth Olympiad,
Tusc. quaest. 1.
Cice^o in the time of Servius Tullus.

There are who affirm he heard Pittacu^; others say he had no Master, but
procured and studied by himself the abstruse books of the Phoenicians.

Laert.
Many strange things are related of him; Apollon. hist. comment. cap. 5.
In Syrus being thirsty, he required water of one of his Scholars, which (
Laert.
being drawn out of a well) he drank, and thereupon declared there would be an
Earthquake within three days in that Island; which happening as he foretold,
gained him much credit: though ascribed by Cicero not to a divine but natural
cause.

Apollon. ibid Laert.
Again, going to Juno's Temple in Ianus, he beheld a ship with full sail
entering the Harbor, he said to those that were present, it would never come
into the Haven, whilst he was speaking, a storm arose and the ship sunk in
their sight.

Laert.
Going by Messana to Olympia, he advised Perilaus, at whose house he lay, to
remove thence with all his Family; which he obeyed not: Messana was soon after
taken.

Laert.
He bad the Lacedaemonians not to esteem gold or silver. Hercules having so
commanded him in a dream: who appeared likewise to the Kings, and bad them obey
Pherecydes: this some ascribe to Pythagoras.

He held opinions contrary to Thales, but Achil. Tat. Isag. in Art.
agreed with him in that of water, that it is principle of all things. He said
the Gods called a Table (...) Cicer. Tusc. quast. 1.
He first asserted ^he immortality of the soul, according to some. ^biliad.
Tzetzes affirms he was Master to Thales, but that suits with their times: That
he in structed Pythagoras is generally acknowledged.

The manner of his death is variously related. Laert.
Hermippus says, in a war betwixt the Ephesians and Magnesians, he desirous
the Ephesians might be victors, demanded of one present, whence he was, who
answered of Ephesus: draw me then, says he, by the legs into the Magnesian
Territory, and bid your country men, after they have gained the battle, bury
me. I am Pherecydes. This message he delivered; they overcame the Magnesians
and finding Pherecydes dead, buried him honorably: some affirm he went to
Delphi and threw himself from the Corycean Mountain; But the more general
opinion is that Aelian. 4. 28. see alsa 5. 2.
he died most miserably, his whole body eaten up with lice ( Pliny says, with
Serpents which broke out of his skin) whereby when his face became deformed, he
avoided and refused the sight of his acquaintance; when any one came to visit
him (as Pythagoras did) and demanded how he did, he putting out his finger at
the key hole, consumed by his disease showed them the condition of his whole
body: Saying (...), the skin shows: which words the Philosophers take in an
ill sense: The Delians affirm the God of that place sent this disease to him
out of anger, because he boasted much of his own wisdom to his disciples,
saying if he should never sacrifice to any God, he should lead a life no less
pleasant then those that offered hecatombs. Pythagoras buried him; his tomb
carried this inscription, Of wisdom I comprise the utmost bound;
Who further would be satisfied, must sound
Pythagoras, of Greeks the most renowned.


Some affirm he was the first that writ in prose, which others ascribe to
Cadmus: He writ Heptamuchos or Thocrasia; perhaps the same with his Theology,
ten books containing the origin and succession of the Gods (if not mistaken
for the Theogony of the younger Pherecydes) an obscure dark work, the
allegories whereof Isidore cited by Clemens Alexandrinus conceives taken from
the prophecy of Cham.

Concerning this Book there is extant an Epistle under the name of Pherecydes,
but may well be suspected to be spurious.

Pherecydes to Thales.
WEll may you die when ever your fatal hour arrives; as soon as I received
your letter I fell sick, was overrun with lice, and had a feavour: whereupon I
gave order to my servants, that as soon as I were buried they should carry the
Book to you; if you with the rest of the wise men approve it, publish it; if
you approve it not, publish it not, for me it does not please; there is no
certainty in it: whatsoever the Theologist says, you must understand
otherwise; for I write in fables. Constrained by my disease, I have not
admitted of any Physician or friend, but when they came to the door, and asked
how it was with me, putting my finger out at the keyhole, I showed them how
desperately ill I was, and bespoke them to come on the morrow to the funeral
of Pherecydes.


There was another of this name of the same Island, an Astrologer: there are
more mentioned by Suidas*

FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY.

The Second Part.

Containing the Ionick Philosophers.



LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, and by Thomas Dring, at the George in
Fleetstreet near Cliffords Inn. 1655.

ANAXIMANDER.
CHAP. I.
Of his life.
Laert. praes.
PHilosophy had a twofold beginning, one from Anaximander, another from
Pythagoras. Anaximander was Disciple to Thales; whence that Philosophy was
called Ionick; Thales being an Jonian, for he was of Miletus. Pythagoras was
Disciple to Pherecydes; that king of Philosophy called, from the place where he
taught, Italick. Thales was succeeded by Anaximander, Anaximander by
Anaximenes, Anaximenes by Anaxagoras, Anaxagoras by Arceolans, in whom (as
Plutarch, Laertius and others affirm) it ended, Socrates (the scholar of
Archelans) introducing Morality.

Anaximander a Milesian, Cic. acad. quaest. 4.
^ountryman, companion and Suid.
Kinsman of Thales was his Disciple also, and Strab. lib. 1. and 4.
successor in the propagation of his Doctrine; son of Praxiades (corruptly
called by Clem. Alex* Strom. 1.
some Praxidamus) born the third year of the 42 Olympiad. Laert.
He flourished most in the time of Polycrates Tyrant of Samos.

Suid.
He demonstrated the compendium of Geometry; Strab. lib. 1.
being next Homer the first Master of that science; he first set forth a
Geographick table, of which Laertius is to be understood who affirms, he
designed the circumference of the Sea and land.

Plin. 2. 8.
In the 50. Olympiad he found out the obliquity of the Zodiac, that is (says
Pliny) he opened the gates of things. Laert.
He invented the Gnomon, and set up the first in an open place at Lacedaemon.
Suid.
He found out the Aequinoctiall Solstices and Horologies; Laert.
He framed Horoscopes to denote the Tropicks and Aequinoxes; whence Plinian.
Excit.
Salmasius conceives the use of his dial was only to delineate the Tropic
and Aequinoctiall points, that they did not serve to distinguish the hours or
twelve parts of the day, he proves, because the very name (...) in that sense
or the division of the day into twelve equal parts, was not known a long time
after.

Cicer. divinat: ^lin. 2. 79.
He advised the Lacedaemonians to quit their City and houses, and to lie armed
in the open field, foretelling an Earthquake which threw down the whole City,
and tore away piece of the Mountain Taygetus.

Laert:
As he sung, the boys used to deride him, whereupon he said, we must learn to
sing better for the boys.

Of his Auditors are remembered Anaximenes and Parmenides. Of his writings these.

Suid.
(...), Of Nature. This treatise perhaps Laertius means, who says he digested
his opinions into Commentaries, which Book fell into the hands of Apollodorus
the Athenian.

(...).
(...).
Of the Sphere, with other things.
He was according to Apollodorus 64 years old the second year of the 58.
Olympiad, and died soon after.

CHAP. 2.
Of his Opinions.
Sect. 1. That Infinity is the principle of all things.
THales (says Acad. quaest. 4.
Cicero) who held that all things consist of water, could not persuade his
Countryman and Companion Anaximander thereto, for he asserted That infinity is
that whereof all things were made; or (according to De plac. phil. 1. 3.
Plutarch, Laertius, and Paran. ad Graec.
Iustine Martyr) that it is the principle and element of things (for these two
he confounded, as was observed of his Master Thales) Laert.
but not declared what this infinity is, whether Air, Water, Earth, or any
other body, for which condemned by Plutarch.

That it is Symplic. in phys. 1. 2. phis. 1. 5.
one, infinite in magnitude (not number) whence Plut. plac. phil. 1. 3.
Aristotle reprehends him for imagining contrarieties can proceed from the same
principle. Laert.
That it is for that reason infinite that it may not fail.

Cap. 6.
That the parts thereof are changed; the whole is immutable ( Cicer. Acad.
quaest. 4.
Symplicius says moveable) Plut. plac. phil. 1. 3. Just. Mart. paraen
That out of it all things proceed, and resolve into it.

That there are infinite worlds generated which corrupt into that whereof they
were generated.

Sect. 2. Of the Heavens.
HIs opinion (according to De not. deor. 1.
Cicero) was, that the Gods are native (having a beginning) rising and setting
by long intervalls, and that there are innumerable worlds: This Plac. Phil. 1.
7.
Plutarch and Stobaeus apply to the Heavens and Stars. But how can we (adds
Cicero) understand a God that is not eternal. Stob.
That Heaven consists of cold and heat mixed.

That the stars are globous instances* consisting of air full of fire,
respiring flames at some certain part: Stob.
moved by the circles and spears wherein they inhere; which assertion
Aristotle borrowed from hence.

That the Sun is seated highest, the moon next, Stob.
then the sixed stars and Planets.

That the circle of the Sun is Plut. plac. phil. 2. 20.
28. times (Theodoret says 27.) greater then the earth, having a hollow circle
about it like a Chariot wheel, full of fire; in one part whereof there is a
mouth, Plut plac. phil. 2. 21*
at which the fire is seen as out of the hole of a ^lute, which is the Sun
Laert.
equal in bigness with the Earth.

Plut. plac. phil. 2. 24 Stob.
That the cause of the Sunn's Eclipse is the stopping that hole in the midst,
out of which the fire issues.

Plut. plac. phil. 2. 25.
That the circle of the Moon is 29. times greater then the Earth, like a
Chariot wheel, having a hollow or be in the midst full of fire (like the Sun)
and oblique, breathing fire out at one part as out of a tunnel. Plut. plac.
phil. 2. 29. Stob.


Plut. plac. phil. 2. 28.
That the Eclipse of the Moon happens according to her conversions, when the
mouth out of which the ^ire issues, is stopped.

Laert.
That the Mooon has a light of her own: but very thin; As a learned person
conceives, upon those words of Laert.
that she shines in the light she borrows from the Sun; which two assertions
are so far See Erasm. Reinholdus in Theoricas purbachii page 164
from being inconsistent, that it is the common opinion ^ both are true.

Sect. 3. Of Meteors.
Plut. plac. phil. 3. 7.
THat wind is a fluxion of the air, when the most subtle and liquid parts
thereof are either stirred or resolved by the Sun.

Plut. plac. phil. 3. 3.
That Thunders, lightnings, presters, and whirlewinds are caused by the wind
enclosed in a thick cloud, which by reason of its lightness breaks forth
violently; the rupture of the cloud makes a crack; and the divulsion by reason
of the blackness causes a slashing light. Not. quaest. 2. 18
Seneca more expressly, He ascribed all to wind. Thunder (says he) is the
sound of a breaking cloud: why unequal? because the breakings are unequal.
Why does it thunder in a clear day? Because even then the wind breaks through
the thick and dry air. Why sometimes does it thunder and not lighten? Because
the thinner and weaker spirit is able to make a flame but not a sound. What is
lightning? The agitation of the air severing it self and rushing down,
disclosing a faint fire. What is Thunder? The motion of a piercing thick spirit.

Sen. not. quaest. 2. 19.
All things are so ordered, that some influence descend from the Ether upon
inferior things; so fire sounds, forced upon cold clouds: When it breaks them
it shines; the fewer flames beget lightnings, the greater, thunder: a great
part, the rest was altered from its natural kind by his excessive heat.

Plut* plac. phil*
That the first creatures were bred in humidity, and enclosed within sharp
thorny barks, but as they grew older they became dryer, and at last the bark
being broken round about them, they lived some little time after it.

ANAXIMENES.
CHAP. I.
His life.
Laert.
ANaximenes was a Milesian, Son of Euristratus, Simplic.
friend, Cic. acad. quaest. plin. 2. 76
Disciple and Suid.
sucessour to Anaximander. According to Eusebius he flourished in the second
hear of the 56. Olympiad, Suidas says he lived in the 55. Olympiad at the
taking of Sardys, when Cyrus overthrew Croesus. So that the acompt of Laert.
Apollodorus, (who affirms he was born in the 63. Olympiad) is corrupt. He
heard also, as some affirm, Parmenides. He used the Jonick Dialect, plain and
incomposed. Lib. 2.
Pliny calls him the inventour of Gnomonicks* but perhaps it is a mistake for
Anaximander. Of his auditors were Anaxagoras and Diogenes Apolloniates.

These two Epistles of his are preserved by Laertius.

Anaximenes to Pyt^agoras.
THales having lived happily even to old age, ended his days unfortunately.
One night going out of his house (as he used) with his maid to contemplate the
stars, gazing and not taking heed to the place, ^elighted upon a precipice and
fell down. This was the fate of the Milesion Astronomer. But let us who were
his Auditors, preserve the memory of the person, and our sons and auditors
after us. Let us still retain his sayings, and begin all our discourses with
Thales.


Anaximenes to Pythagoras.
YOu are more advised then we, who leaving Samos for Crotona live there in
quiet, the Aeacides prove in^urious to others, and the Milesians want not
Tyrants of their own choosing. The King of Media is likewise terrible to us,
but would not be so, should we pay him tribute. The Ionians are resolved to war
with the Medes for the g^neral liberty, and if they sight we have no hope of
safety. How then can Anaximene* ^erplexed with fear of death and slavery apply
his mind to celestial speculations. But you are coveted by the Crotonians, and
all Italians; Auditors come to you as far as from Sicily.


CHAP. II.
His opinions.
Sect. 1. That the Air is the principle of all things.
HE held that the Air is the principle of the Universe, Plut de plac. Justin
Martyr. paraen. 1. 3. phil.
of which all things are engendered, and into which they resolve; Our souls by
which we live are air, so spirit and air contain in being all the world; for
spirit and air are two names signifying one thing.

That Cic. de not. deor. 1.
the air is God, begotten, immense, infinite, ever in motion; Cic. ^cad.
quaest. 4.
but that those things which arise out of it are finite. First is begotten,
earth, water, fire, then of these all things. That the air is God understands
of the faculties penetrating through the Elements or bodies.

Sect. 2. Of the Heavens.
THat Plut. plac. phil. 2. 11.
the outward super^icies of Heaven is earthly.

That the stars are of a fiery substance, invisible earthly bodies intermixed
with them; that they are inherent, as nails in Crystal.

That Plut. plac. phil. 2. 23.
they are forced back by the thick resisting air, Laert.
and move not above (or under) but about the earth.

Plut plac. phil. That
the sun is ^lat as a plate, of s^ery substance.

That Plut. plac. phil. 2. 19.
the signs of sum and winter come not by the moon, but by the sun only.

That Plut. plac. phil. 2. 24.
the sun is eclipsed when the mouth out of which issues his beat is closed.

That the Moon is likewise of a fiery nature. Plut.


That the Moon is eclipsed when the mouth out of which issues her heat, is
closed.

Sect. 3. Of Meteors.
That the clouds are made by condensation of air, rain by condensation of the
clouds, Plut. plac. phil. 3. 4.
out of which it is squeezed; snow of rain congealed in falling, and hail of
the same contracted by a cold wind.

Concerning Thunder, Stob.
lightning, etc. to the assertion of Anaximander he added the comparison of the
Sea, which being broken with Oars shines. Plut. de plac. phil. 3. 5.


That the rainbow is made by reflection of the Sunns beams upon a thick cloud,
which, not able to pierce it, are refracted upon it.

That Earthqu^kes proceed from the rarity and dryness of the Earth, Plutarch,
deplac^ 3. 15.
one being caused by excessive heat, the other by excecessive cold. Further
explained by Meteor. 2. 7. Senec not. quaest. 6.^0.
Aristotle thus; He held that the Earth, as well when it is moist as when it is
dry, breaks, and by these great pieces thereof which use to fall upon it, is
shaken: Hence it is that Earthquakes happen either in droughts or great raines:
by droughts it is broken, and by great showers excessively moistened parts
likewise in sunder.

He called the contraction and condensation of matter, cold; the laxation and
rarity thereof, heat: whence a man breaths out of his mouth both hot and cold;
his breath comprest by his lips, and condensed is cold; but breathed forth with
an open mouth is hot by reason of the rarity.

ANAXAGORAS.
CHAP. I.
Anaxagoras Country, time, and study of Philosophy.
ANaxagoras was of Clazomenae, son of Hegesibulus or Eubulus, born in the 70th.
Olympiad according to Apollodorus; in the first year thereof; Eminent for his
noble birth and wealthy fortunes, but more for his magnanimous contempt of
them. Plut. contra usar. Lysand
He left his lands and patrimony, (says Tusc. quaest. S.
Cicero,) to learn and obtain the divine delight of Philosophy: and De orator.
3.
converted himself from civil affairs to the knowledge of things. Sutdas
affirms he left his grounds to sheep and Camells to be eaten up; and therefore
Apollonius Tyaneas said, he read Philosophy to beasts rather then to men. Hipp.
man.
Plato, derides him for quitting his estate; Laertius reports he assigned it to
his friends; whereupon being by them accused of improvidence; why (answered he)
do not you take care of it? To one who reproved him as taking no care of his
Country, wrong me not, said he, my greatest care is my Country, pointing to the
Heavens. To another asking for what end he was born, he answered, to contempla
^e the Sun, Moon and Heavens. Laert.
In fine, he withdrew himself to contemplation of natural Philosophy not
regarding civil affairs. In this study Anaximenes was his Master Cicer. de Na.
deor 1.
from whom he received his learning.

La^rt.
In the twentieth year of his age the first of the 75. Olympiad, Colliades
being Archon (whom Laertius corruptly calls Callias) at the time of Xerxes
expedition into Greece he went to Athens to study Philosophy, where he
continued thirty years, and was honored with the title of (...) the Mind, ad
being the first that added that principle to matter, so Amon.

Where ^wells famed Anaxagoras, the mind,
Laert. perhaps (...)(...)
For he that agent first to matter joined
Which things confused orderly designed.
CHAP. II.
Of his opinions.
Sect. 1. Of the first principles, and beginning of things.
HE held that the material principle of all things is one and many ((...))
par^s in^inite, similar, and contrary, continuous to the touch, ^lut. plac.
phil. 1. 3.
sustaining themselves, Arist. phys. 3. 4
not contained by any other. Arist. phys. 3. 7
His grounds these: First, because, according to the common rule of natural
Philosophers, of nothing proceeds nothing, it is not possible any thing can be
made of that which is not; or that which has a being can be resolved into that
which has none, Secondly, because contraries are made mutually of each other,
therefore they were in each other before; for if it be necessary, that
whatsoever is made, be made of that which is, or is not, but that it should be
made of that which is not impossible, wherein all agree, that ever discoursed
upon nature, it follows necessarily, that they be made of things that are, and
are within these very things, though by reason of their smallness, not
discernable by us: Hence is it that they say, every thing is mixed with every
thing; because they see any thing made of any thing: but things seem different,
and are called diverse in respect to one another, by reason that the multitude
of infinites which are within abounds in the mistion; for the whole is
neither quite white nor black, flesh nor bone, but every thing seems to be of
the nature of that whereof it has most Plut.
of simple nourishment, as bread, water, and the like, are bred the hair,
veins, arteries, nerves, bones, and other parts of the body, all things are
therefore in this food, as nerves, bones, and the like, discernable by reason,
though not by sense: Of these Atoms the whole world consists, Laert.
as gold of grains; these homogeneall parts are the matter of all things* his
opinion is thus expressed by Lib. 1.
Lucretius.

Next Anaxagoras we must pursue,
And his Homoiomeria review;
A term that is no where mentioned but among
The Greeks; too copious for our na^row tongue:
Yet may the sense be in more words arraid;
The principle of all things, entrails made
Of smallest entrails, bone of smallest bone,
Blood of small sanguine drops reduced to one;
Gold of small grains, earth of small sands compacted,
Small drops to water, sparks to fire contracted;
The like in every thing supposed, yet he
Nature asserted from all vacuum free;
And held that each corporeal being might
Be subdivided into infinite.
That Lactan. falls. rel. 1. 5.
God is an infinite selfe-moving mind, that this divine Cic. not. deor. 1
infinite mind, not enclosed in any body, August. cir. de^. 8. 2.
is the efficient cause of all things; out of the infinite matter consisting of
similar parts, every thing being made according to its species by the divine
mind, who, when all things were at first confusedly mingled together, came and
reduced them to order.

Sect 2. Of the Heavens.
That the higher parts of the world are full office, the power that is there he
called ether, and that properly, says Aristotle, Aristot. Met. 1. 3.
for the body, which is continually in quick motion, is conceived to be divine
by nature, for that reason called ether, none of those that are here below
being of that kind.

That Plut. plac. phil. 2. 13.
the ambient ether being of a fiery nature by the swiftness of its motion,
snatcheth up stones from the earth, which being set on fire, become stars,
Plut. plac. phil. 2. 16.
all carried from East to West.

That plut, plac. phil. 2. 23.
the Startes are impelled by the condensation of the air about the Poles,
which the Sun makes more strong by compressing.

That the stars are earthly, and that after the first secretion of the
Elements, the fire separating it self, drew some parts of the earth to its own
nature, and made them like fire: Whereupon he farther affirmed

Plut. plac. phil. 2. 20. Laert. Achil. Tat. Isag. in Arat.
The Sun is a burning plate or stone, Plut. plac. phil. 2. 21.
many times bigger then Peloponnesus, whose conversionn is made by the repulse
of the Northern air, which he, by compressing, makes more strong.

Plut. plac. phil. 2. 25.
the Moon is a dark body, enlightened by the Sun, habitable, having plains,
hills and waters; that Plut. plac. phil. 2. 30. Laert.
the inequality in her face proceeds from a mixture, cold and earthly, for
there is darkness mixed with her fiery nature, whence she is called a star of
false light. In Cratylo.
Plato says, that the Moon was occasion of dishonor to him, because he
assumed the original of this opinion of her borrowing light to himself,
whereas it was much moreantient.

That Plut. plac. phil.
the milky way is the shadow of the earth upon that part of heaven, when the
Sun, being underneath, enlightens not all: Mei^eor. 1. 8.
Or as Aristotle, that the Milkie way is the light of some stars, for the Sun
being under the earth, looks not upon some stars, the light of those on whom
he looks is not seen, being swallowed up in his; the proper light of those
which are hindered by the earth from the Suns illumination, is the Galaxy;
Laertius says, he held the Galaxy to be the reflection of the light of the Sun.

Sect. 3. Of Meteors.
THat Comets are the co^apparition of wandering stars, Arist. Meteor. 1. 6.
which approach so near each other, as that they seem to touch one another: Or
as Laertius; the concourse of Planets, emitting flames.

That falling stars are shot down from the ether, as sparkles, and therefore
soon extinguished.

That Laert.
Thunder is the collision of Clouds, lightning their mutual attrition: Or as
Plutarch; the cold falling upon the hot, or the aetheriall, Plut. plac. phil.
3. 3.
upon the aeriall, the noise which it makes is Thunder: of the blackness of
the cloud is caused lightning, of the greatness of the light Thunderbolts, of
the more corporeal fire whirle-winds, of the more cloudy Presters.

That lightning distills from the ether; and that from that great heat of
Heaven many things fall down, which the clouds preserve a long time enclosed.

That the Rainbow is a refraction of the Suns light upon a thick dark cloud,
Plut. plac. phil. 3. 5.
opposite to him as a looking glass; by the same reason (faith he) appeared
chiefly in Pontus, two, or more Suns.

That Earth quakes are caused by the air or ether, which being of its own
nature apt to ascend, Arist. Meteor. 2. 7. Plut. plac* phil. 3. 15. Senec. not.
quaest. 6.
when it gets into the veins and cavernes of the earth, finding difficulty in
the getting out, causes that shaking; for the upper parts of the earth
contract themselves by the benefit of rain, Nature having made the whole body
thereof alike, laxe and spungy, the parts, as in a Ball, superior, and
inferior, the superior, that which is inhabited by us, the inferior, the
other: This wind getting into the inferior parts, breaks the condensed air,
with the same force as we see clouds broken, when, upon the collision of them,
and motion of the agitated air, sire breaks forth: this air falls upon that
which is next, seeking to get out, and tears in pieces whatsoever it meets,
until through those narrow passages, it either finds a way to Heaven, or
forces one: which Laer^ius obscurely expresses, the repulsion of the air upon
the earth.

THat Snow is not white, Cic. Acad. qu^st. 4.
but black, nor did it seem white to him, because he knew the water whereof it
is congealed to be black.

Sect 4. Of the Earth.
THat the beginning of motion proceeding from the mind, Laert.
the heavy bodies obtained the lowest place, as the earth; the light the
highest, as the fire; those betwixt both, the middle, as the air and water:
thus the sea subsists upon the superficies of the earth, which is flat, the
humidity being ratified by the Sun.

That the primitive humidity being diffused, Plut. plac. phil. 3. 16.
as a pool was burned by the motion of the Sun about it, and the unctuous part
bring exhaled, the remainder became salt.

That as soon as the world was made, Plut. plac. phil. 2. 8.
and living creatures produced out of the world, the world inclined of it self
toward the south, according to divine providence; that some parts thereof
might be habitable, others not habitable, by reason of the extremities of heat
and cold.

That the mistion of the Elements is by apposition. Plut. plac. phil. 1. 17.


That the inundation of Nilus is caused by the snow of Aethiopia, which is
dissolved in summer, Plut. plac. phil. 4. 1.
and congealed in winter.

Sect 5. Of living Creatures.
THat Creatures were first generated of humidity, calidity, Laert.
and earthly matter, afterward mutually of one another, males on the right
side, females on the left.

That the soul is that which moves, Plu* plac. phil. 4. ^.
that it is aeriall, and has a body of the nature of air.

plut plac. phil. 5. 24.
That there is a death of the soul likewise, which is separation from the body.

That all Animalls have active reason.

Plut. plac. phil. 5. 25.
That sleep is an action of the body, not of the soul.

Plut. plac. phil. 5. 25.
That in the hand of man consists all his skill.

Plut. de am^re frat.
That the voice is made by the wind, hitting against firm resisting air,
returning the counter-blow to our ears, which is the manner whereby also the
repercussion of the air is formed, called Echo.

That the Gall is the cause of acute diseases, which overflowing, is dispersed
into the lungs, veins, and costs.

CHAP. III.
His predictions.
SUidas says, he foretold many things: of those, two instances only have been
hitherto preserved. The first thus related by Pliny, The Grecians celebrate
Anaxagoras of the Clozomenian, and for foretelling by his learning and Science
in the second year of the 78. Olympiad, on what day a stone would fall from
the Sun, which happened in the day time in a part of Thrace at the river Agos
which stone is at this day shown about the bigness of a became of an adust
color, a Comet also burning in those nights.

Vit. Ly^and.
Plutarch adds, that it was in his time not only shown, but reverenced by the
Peloponnesians. Eusebius reckons the fall of this stone upon the fourth year
of the 78. Olympiad, which is two years after Pliny accounts of the
prediction. Silenus cited by Laertius, says, it fell when Dimylus was Archon,
which if it be to be red Dyphilus (for the other name is not to be found near
these times) will be the first year of the 84 Olympiad. But the marble at
Arundell House (graven about the 129. Olympiad to be preferred before any other
chronologicall account) expressly names the fall upon the 4th year upon the
77. Olympiad, when Theagenides was Archon, two years before. Pliny says it
was foretold. It was believed to have portended (as Plutarch testifies) the
great defeat given to the Athenians by Lysander at the river Agos 62. years
after, viz. the fourth year of the 39. Olympiad.

Of the wonder Meteor. 1. 7.
Aristotle gives a very slight account, affirming It was a stone snatched up by
the wind, and fell in the day time, a Comet happening in those nights, which is
disproved by Vit. Lysand.
Plutarch, who has this large discourse upon it: It is said that Anaxagoras
did prognosticate that one of the bodies included the Heavens it should be
loosed by shaking, and fall to the ground, the Stars are not in place where
they were first created, they are heavy bodies, of the nature of stone,
shining by reflection of the ether, being drawn up by force, and kept there by
the violence of that circular motion, as at the beginning in the first
separation of things, cold and heavy they were restrained. There is another
opinion more probable which says, those which we call falling stars are not
fluxions of the ether extinguished in the air almost as soon as lighted, nor
inflammations or combustions of any part of the air, which by it spreads
upwards, but they are celestial bodies failing of their retention by the
ordinary course of heaven thrown down, not upon the habitable earth, but into
the Sea, which is the cause we do not see them; yet the assertion of
Anaxagoras is confirmed by Damachus, who writes in his book of Religion, that
75. days together before this stone fell, they saw a great body of fire in the
Air like a cloud enflamed, which tarried not in one place, but went and came
uncertainly removing, from the driving whereof issued flashes of fire that fell
in many places like falling stars; when this great body of fire fell in that
part of the Earth, the Inhabitants emboldned, came to the place to see what it
was, and found no appearance of fire but a great stone on the ground, nothing,
in comparison of that body of fire. Herein Damachus had need of favorable
hearers: But if what he says be true, he confuseth those Arguments who
maintain it was a piece of a Rock by the force of a boistrous wind torn from
the top of a Mountain, and carried in the air so long as this whirlwind
continued, but so soon as that was laid, the stone fell immediately; unless
this lightning body which appeared so many days was fire indeed, which coming
to dissolve, and to be put out did beget this violent storm of force to tear
off the stone, and cast it down.

This it is likely Senec. not. quaest. 7. 5.
Charimander meant, who in his book of Comets says, Anaxagoras observed in the
Heavens a great unaccustomed light of the greatness of a huge pillar, and that
it shined for many days.

The other memorable prediction of Anaxagoras was Suid.
of a storm, which he signified by going to the Olympic games, when the
weather was fair in a shaggy gown, the rain pouring down all the Graecians
(says Aelian) saw and gloried, that he knew more divinely then according to
humane Nature.

CHAP. IV.
His Scholars and Auditors.
THese are remembered as his Scholars and Auditors. Cicer.
Pericles Son of Xantippas being instructed by Anaxagoras, could easily reduce
the exercise of his mind from secret obstrusive things to public popular
causes* Plut. vit. Pericl.
Pericles much esteemed him, was by him instructed in natural Philosophy, and
besides other virtues fre'd from superstitious fears arising from ignorance of
physical causes; whereof there is this instance; the head of a Ram with but
one horn being brought to Pericles, was by the South sayers interpreted
prodigious: Anaxagoras opening it, showed that the brain filled not its
natural place, but contracted by degrees in an ovall form toward that part
where the horn grew. Afterward Anaxagoras neglected and decrepit with age in a
melancholy resentment thereof lay down and covered his face, resolving to
starve himself, which* Pericles hearing, came immediately to him bewailing, not
Anaxagoras, but himself, who should lose so excellent a Counselor: Anaxagoras
uncovering his face said, They, Pericles, who would use a Lamp, must apply it
with oil.

Archela^s Son of Apollodorus was Disciple to Anaxagoras, and, as Laertius
affirms, called the natural Philosopher for first bringing that kind of
learning to Athens, but how that consists with his relation to Anaxagoras, who,
as he acknowledges, studied natural Philosophy thirty years in Athens,
Casaubone justly questions.

Euripides, His words (because never published) these: (...)* (...), (...)
as the writer of his life affirms, son of Mnesarchus, born at the first time
of Xe^xes's expedition into Greece, the same day that the Grecians overthrew
the Persians, was first a Painter, then an Auditor of Anaxagoras; but seeing
him persecuted for his opin^ons, lastly converted himself to Tragic poesy.

Socrates, Son of Sophroniscus, was according to Aristoxenus an Auditor of
Anaxagoras till he left the City, and thereupon applied himself to Archelaus,
which Porphyrius reckons above the 17th. year of his age, or rather the
ninteenth.

Democritus also is by some affirmed, being younger then Anaxagoras forty
years, to have applied himself to him, but Laertius affirms he could not endure
Democritus, and shunned his conversation; Phavorinus likewise attests, that
because he would not admit him, Democritus professed himself his Enemy, and
denied his opinions of the Sun and Moon, but said they were ancient, and that
he stole them, as likewise his description of the world, and assertion
concerning the mind.

Me^rodorus of Lampsacum is likewise mentioned by Laertius as friend to
Anaxagoras.

CHAP. V.
OF his trial, Death sentences and writings.
Of his trial says Laertius there are several reports Sotion in his treatise
of the succession of Philosophers says, he was accused by Cleon of impiety,
for asserting the Sun to be a burning plate, but being defended by Pericles his
Scholar, he was fined five Talents and banished.

Satyrus, that he was cited to the Court by Thucydides, who was of the contrary
faction of Pericles, Laert.
accused not only of impiety, but of holding intelligence with the Persians,
and in his absence condemned to death; when news was brought him at the same
time both of the death of his Sons, which (according to Aelian) were two, Cic.
Tus^. qu^st. 3. Plut. de ira cohib.
all that he had, and his own condemnation of the latter he said, Varr. hist. 3.
Nature long since condemned both them and me to death; of his Plut. consol. ad
Apol^on.
Sons ( Simplic. in Epiclet.
with a calm look) Val. Max. 5. 10.
You tell me nothing new or unexpected; I knew that I beget them mortal, which
some ^scribe to Solon, others to Xenophon, Demetrius Phalereus says, he
buried them with his own hands.

Laert.
Hermippus, he was imprisoned to be put to death, but Pericles appearing before
the Judges, asked if they knew any thing in his life that they could accuse, to
which they answered nothing, but I, says he, am his disciple, then be not
tansported by Calumnies to kill the man, but believe me and set him at liberty,
so he was dismissed, but not able to brook the disgrace, he killed himself.

Laert.
Hieronymus says, that Pericles brought him into the Court in poor garments
extenuated with sickness, an object ^itter for compassion then Justice. And
thus much says Laertius of his Trial.

Suidas, that he was cast into Prison by the Athenians for introducing a new
opinion concerning God, and banished the City, though Pericles undertook to
plead his cause, and that going to Lampsacum he there starved himself to death.

Josephus, that the Athenians believing the Sun to be God, which he affirmed to
be without sense and Knowledge, he was by the votes of a few of them condemned
to death.

But if we credit Vit. Pericl*
Plutarch, he was neither condemned nor accused but by Pericles, who feared the
Ordinance of Diopithes, which cited those that held profane or sublime
Opinions sent out of the City. De superstit.
Yet elsewhere he confesses he was accused.

His departure from Athens, being 30. years after his coming thither, falls the
third year of the 82. Olimpiad the 63. of his age. Thence he went to Lampsacum,
where he continued the rest of his age, which extended to 22. years more, so
little mindful of A^hens, or of his Country, as to one, who told him that he
was deprived of the Athenians, he answered, no, but they of me; and Cic Tus^.
quaest. 1.
to his friends, who when he fell sick, asked, if he would be carried to
Clazomonae his Country, no said he, there is no need, the way to the grave is
alike every where. Plut. instruct. polit.
Before he died the Magistrates of the City asked him, if he would they should
do any thing for him, he answered, that his only request was that the boys
might have leave to play yearly on that day of the month, whereon he died;
which custom (says Laertius) is continued to this time. Those of Lampsacum
buried him magnificently with this Epitaph.

Here lies, who through the truest paths did pass
O'th world Celestial, Anaxagoras.
Aelian mentions two altars erected to him, one inscribed to the mind, the
other to truth; Laertius concludes his life with this Epigram.

Famed Anaxagoras the Sun defined
A burning plate, 'for which to die designed,
Saved by his Scholar Pericles; But he
Aelian.
Abandoned life to seek Philosophy.
Laert.
He is observed never to have been seen either to laugh or smile.

Lacrt.
Being demanded if the Mountains of Lampsacum would in time become Sea, he
answered, yes, if time fail not first.

Laert.
Beholding the tomb of Mausolus, he said, a sumptuous Monument was a sign the
substance was turned into stone.

Laert.
He first affirmed the poesy of Homer to consist of virtue and Justice, to
which Metrodorus added, that the Poet was skillful in natural Philosophy.

Stob.
He conceived that there are two lessons of death, the time before our birth,
and sleep.

Laertius and Clemens Alexandrinus assert him first of the Philosophers that
put forth a Book. He writ.

Of Natural Philosophy, out of which Aristotle cites these fragments, All these
things were together: which was the beginning of the book: and, ^o be such is
to be changed. Phys. 1. 5. Plut. Georg.
Plato this, The mind is the disposer and cause of all things. Hip. may.
Athenaeus this, what is commonly called the milk of the hen, is the white of
the egg. Lib. 2.
Plato censures the book as not using the mind at all, nor assiging any cause
of the order of things, but aeriall, aetheriall and aquatick Natures, and the
like incredible things for causes.

The quadrature of the Circle: which treatise De exsul.
Plutarch says he composed during his imprisonment.

Laert.
There were three more of the same name; the first an Orator, follower of
Isocrates: the second a statuary, mentioned by Antigonus; the last a
Grammarian, Scholar to Zenodotus.

ARCHELAVS.
ARchelaus was either an Athenian, or a Milesian; his Father Apollodorus, Laert.
or according to some, Mylon; he was Scholar to Anaxagoras, Master to Socrates.
He first transferred natural Philosophy out of Ionia to Athens, (But how that
can be, when Anaxagoras his Master taught there thirty years, Casaubone justly
questions) and therefore was called the Natural Philosopher: in him natural
Philosophy ended, Socrates his Scholar introducing morality; but he seems
also to have touched moral Philosophy, for he treated of laws, of things
honest and just; from whom Socrates receiving his learning, because he
increased it, is therefore thought to have invented it; whereas as Gassendus
observes, moral Philosophy was far more ancient, that being the principle
ground of the attribute of wise conferred upon the Seven, whose learning lay
chiefly that way: but Socrates is called the Author thereof, because he first
reduced it to a science. Archelaus asserted

That the principles of all things are twofold, one incorpore all, Stob*
the mind, (not maker of the world) the other corporeal, infinite in number,
and dissimilar Plut. plac. phil. 1. 3.
which is the air, and its rarefaction and condensation, whereof one is fire,
the other water.

That the universe is insinite.

That the causes of generation are two; heat and cold.

That the stars are burning iron plates.

That the Sun is the greatest of stars.

That the Sea is made by percolation of the hollow parts of the Earth.

That living Creatures are generated of slime c^warm Earth, emitting a milky
kind of slime like the chile; that this humid matter being dissolved by the
fire, that of it which settles into a fiery substance is earth, that which
evaporates is air.

That the winds getting into the hollow places of the Earth, Sen. Not. quaest.
6. 12*
filling all the spaces, the air condensed as much as possible, the wind that
comes next presses the first, forcing and disturbing it by frequent
impulsions. This wind seeking a room through the narrow places, endeavors to
break prison, whereby it happens the wind struggling for passage, that the earth
is moved.

Of the definition of the Voice, by Plutarch attributed to Anaxagoras, Laertius
makes Archelaus the Author, describing it a percusion of the air.

That what is just, or dishonest is defined by Law, not by Nature.

Plut. Laert.
These five, Anaximander, Anaximenes Thales, Anaxagoras, Archelaus, by
continual desent succeding one another, complete the Ionick sect*

FINIS
THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY.

The Third Part.

Containing the Socratick Philosophers.



LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and Thomas Dring, and are to be sold at
their shops at the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the George in
Fleetstreet near Cliffords Inn. 1655.

SOCRATES


SOCRATES.
CHAP. I.
Socrates, his Country, Parents, and time of birth.
SOcrates was by Country an Athenian, borne at Alopece, Laert.
a town, according to Suidas and Phavorinus, belonging to the Antiochian
tribe. This was one of those small villages scattered through Attica, before
These^s reduced the people into the walls of a City, which notwithstanding his
decree, were not deserted, but continued and preserved by their Inhabitants.

His Parents were very mean; Laert. ^lat. The^at. Alcib.
Sophroniscus (an Liban.
Athenian) his Father, Laert. (...) (...). Val. Max. marmorarius.
a statuary, or carver of Images in stone, Phaenareta his mother a Midwife, a
woman of a bold, generous and quick spirit, as is implyd by the character
Thea^tet.
Plato gives her (though wrested by Deipnos. 5.
Athenaeus) of which professions of his Parents, he is Liban. Apol.
observed to have been so far from being ashamed, that he often took
occasion to mention them.

Apol^g.
Apollodorus, Laertius and Suidas affirm he was borne in the fourth year of
the 77. Olympiad, which may likewise be collected from the marble at ^rundel
Horse, which says, he dyed when Laches was Arc^on, and reckons 70. years of
his life, which was complete, because Laert.
Plato says (...), and from Lib. 11.
Dometrius Phalereus (who was himself archon the fourth year of the 117.
Olympiad,) who says, he dyed the first year of the 95. Olympiad, when he had
lived 76 years, the 70. year inclusively upwards, is the fourth of the 77
Olympiad, when Apsephion, (or, as some call him Aphepsion) was Archon, of whose
name in Archont. 2. 7*
Diodorus Siculus no more is left then Dialog. de script. Socr.
(...), which should be (...), but has been incuriously altered into (...),
which if * Meursius had observed, he had not corrected Laertius without cause,
nor he and * Allatius followed the mistake of Scaliger (whom they term
Anonymus) in placing Aphepsion in the fourth year of the 74. Olympiad.

The day of Socra^es birth, was Laert.
according to Apollodorus, the sixth of the month Thargelion, memorable (says
Laertius) for the birth of Diana according to the traditions of the Delians;
upon which day the Athenians did yearly lustrate the ^ City. Many other good
fortunes happening to the A^henians upon this day are recorded by Var. hist. 2.
Aelian. The day following, viz. the seventh of this month was the birthday of
Pla^o, both which were kept with much solemnity by the Greek Philosophers, (
Porphyr. vit. Plut.
even to the time of Plotinus) as is affirmed by Sympos. 8. 1
Plutarch, who thereupon observes it as the effect rather of Providence, then
of chance, that their birth-daies should be so near, and that of the Master
precede the Scholer's.

To accommodate this time with our account, is neither easy nor certain, yet
in respect it may give some satisfaction by way of conjecture, we shall found
it upon these hypotheses, taking that order of months which Petavius gives.

1. That after the Olympiads the beginning of the Grecian year was always on
the first of Hecatombaeon, and Olympic games on the 15th.

2. That the Neomenia of Hecatombaeon, did (at least in the times wherein we
enquire) never precede the solstice, being then about the Calends, or pridie
Calendarum Iulij, they supposing them in octavis signorum, it did not precede
the ninth of July. This postulatum, though it be doubly questioned by Petavius,
yet none of his Argumen ts pretend beyond Meton's time.

3. That upon that supposition, if Scaliger has rightly ordered the Neomenia
in his Olympic period (against which Petavius brings no one sufficient
Argument) and consequently the rest, the Olympic period does certainly
exhibi^t the Neomenia of Hecatombaeon. It is true that Petavius disputes the
period of 76 years, as having never been used till Calippus his time, but we
take it here only proleptically, as the Julian year, to which we would
accomodate it.

4. That this being after Solon's time, the Civil year was Lunary (and
consisted of months, which were alternately of 29. and 30. days,) at Athens,
though diverse places of Greece, especially the more remote from thence, did
not for a long time after part with their tricenary months.

These things supposed the sixth of Thargelion, (will according to the Julian
account taken proleptically) fall upon Tuesday the twentieth of May: according
to the Gregorian, upon Tuesday the thirtieth of May, in the year of the Julian
period, 4247. before the Incarnation 467. years, the fourth year of the 77.
Olympiad, at what time Socrates was born.

CHAP. II.
His first Education.
De Genesis Socr^
PLutarch says, that as soon as he was born, Sophroniscus his Father
consulting the Oracle, was by it advised to suffer his Son to do what he
pleased, never compelling him to do what he disliked, nor diverting him from
that whereto he was inclined; to give thanks for him by Sacrifice to Jupiter
Agoraeus and the Muses; to be no further sollicitous for him, he had one guide
of his life within him, better then five hundred masters.

But his Father not observant of the Oracle's direction, applied him to his own
trade of carving Statues, contrary to his inclination, whereupon Aristoxenus
apud Theodoret. de Graec. affect. cur lib. 12.
some have argued him of disobedience, reporting that often times, when his
Father bad him work, he refused, and went away following his own will.

His Father dying, left him (according to Apol. Soc.
Libanius) four score minae, which being entrusted with a friend for
improvement, they miscarried. This loss (though it were of all his stock, and
he thereby reduced to incredible poverty) Socrates past over with silence, but
was thereupon necessitated to continue his trade for ordinary subsistence.
Laert.
This Suidas intimates when he says he was first a Statuary. Lib. 9.
Duris, In nub.
Pausanias, and the * Scholiast of Ar^stophanes affirm three statues of the
Graces clothed, (for so they were most anciently made, not naked) set up
before the entrance into the Tower at Athens, were his work. Pausanias implies
as much of a statue of Mercury in the same place; which 36. 5.
Pliny seems not to have understood, who says, they were made by a certain
person named Socrates, but not the painter. Hence Timon, From these the fluent
statuary came
Honored through Greece, who did against the name
Of Orator abusiv^y declaim.


But being naturally averse from this profession, ^ee only followed it when
necessity enforced him: Aristoxenus says, he wrought for money, and laid up
what he got till it came to a little stock, which being spent, he betook
himself again to the same course.

These intermissions of his Trade were bestowed upon Philosophy; whereunto he
was naturally addicted, which being observed by Crito a rich Philosopher of
Athens, Laert.
he took him from his shop, being much in love with his candor and ingenuity,
and instructed, or rather gave him the means* to be instructed by others;
taking Laert. vit. Crit.
so much care of him, that he never suffered him to want necessaries. And
though his poverty were at first so great as to be brought by AElian. var.
hist. 2. Plut. de util. virtut.
some into a Proverb, yet he became at last, as Plutarch. comparat. vit.
Aristid. and Caton.
Demetrius affirms, Master of a house, and fourscore minae, which Crito put out
to interest: But his mind (says Apolog.
Libanius) was raised far above his fortune, and more to the advantage of his
Country; not aiming at wealth, or the acquisition thereof by sordid arts, he
considered that of all things which man can call his, the soul is the chief;
That he only is truly happy who purifies that from vice; That the only means,
conducing thereto is wisdom, in pursuit whereof he neglects all other ways
of profit and pleasure.

CHAP. I.
His Master.
THE first Master of Socrates was Laert.
Anaxagoras, whereby amongst other circumstances it is demonstrable, that the
account of Laertius is corrupt, Anaxagoras not dying in the 78. but 88.
Olympiad.

Aristoneus says, that as soon as Anaxagoras left the City, he applied himself
to Cic. Tusc. quaest. 5.
Archelaus, which according to Porphyrius was in the 17. year of his age. Laert.
Of him he was much beloved, and traveled with him to Samos, to Pytho, and to
the Istmus.

He was Scholar likewise to Damon, whom Plato calls a most pleasing teacher of
Music, and all other things that he would teach himself, to young men. Damon
was Scholar to Agathocles, Master to Pericles, Clinias and others; intimate
with Prodicus. He was banished by the unjust Plut.
Ostracism of the Athenians for his excellence in Music.

He heard also ( Plat. Men.
as he acknowledges) Prodicus the Sophist a Cian, whom Eusebius ranks in the
86. Olympiad, contemporary with Gorgias, Hippias, and Hippocrates the Physician.

To these add Diotyma and Aspasia, women excellently learned, the first
supposed to have been inspired with a prophetical spirit. By her he affirms
that he was instructed concerning love, by corporeal Beauty to find out that
of the soul; of the Angelical mind; of God. See Plato's Phaedrus, and that
long discourse in his Symposium upon this subject, which Socrates confesses to
be owing to her.

Aspasia was a famous Milesian woman, not only excellent her self in
Rhetoric, but brought many Scholars to great perfection in it, of whom were
Pericles the Athenian, and ( Plat. menex.
as himself acknowledges) Socrates.

Maxim. Tyr.
Of Euenus he learned Poetry, of Ichomachas, Husbandry, of Plat: Theaetet.
Theodorus Geometry.

Schol. Aristoph in Nub.
Aristagoras a Melian, is named likewise as his Master.

Last in his Catalogue is Connus, ^pist. 9. 22.
nobilissimus fidicen, as Cicero terms him, which art Socrates learned of him
in his Quintil. 1. 10.
old age, Plat. Euthy^.
for which the boys derided Connus, and called him the old man's Master.

CHAP. IV.
Of his School, and manner of Teaching.
THat Socrates had a proper School, may be argued from Nub.
Aristophanes, who derides some particulars in it, and calls it his
Phron^ist^rium.

Phaedr.
Plato and Epist. Socratic.
Phaedrus mention as places frequented by him and his Auditors, the Academy,
Lycaeum, and a pleasant meadow without the Ci^y on the side of the River
Ilissus, where grew a very fair plane-t^e^. Thence according to the fable,
Boreas s^atch'd away Orithia, to whom three farlongs from thence there was a
Temple, and another to Diana.

Memor. 1.
Xenophon affirms he was continually abroad, that in the morning be visi^ed the
places of public walking and exercise; when it was full, the Forum; and the
rest of the day he sought out the most populous meetings, where he d^sputed
^penly for every one to hear that would.

He did not only teach, says Vtrum. sen. ger. vesp.
Plutarch when the benches were prepared, and himself in the Chair, or in set
hours of reading and dis^ourse, or appointments of walking with his friends,
but even when he played, when ^e eat or drank, when he was in the camp or
market, finally when he was in prison, thus he made every place a school of
virtue.

His manner of teaching was answerable to his opinion, that the soul
praeexistent to the body, in her first separate condition, endewed with perfect
knowledge, by immersion into matter, became stupefied, and in a manner lost,
until awakned by discourse from sensible objects; whereby by degrees she
recovers her first knowledge, for this reason he taught only by Irony and
Induction: the first Lib. 9. cap. 2.
Quintilian defines an absolute dissimulation of the will more apparent then
confessed, so as in that, the words are different from the words, in this, the
sense from the speech, whilst the whole confirmation of the cause, even the
whole life seems to carry an Irony, such was the life of Socrates, who was for
that reason called (...); that is, one that personates an unlearned man, and is
an admirer of others as wise. De orat. 2.
In this Irony (says Cicero) and dissimulation he far exceeded all men in
pleasantness and urbanity; it is a very elegant, sweet and facete kind of
speech, acute with gravity, accommodated with Rhetoric words, and pleasant
speeches; Cicer. Ac^d. quast. 4.
He detracted from himself in dispute, and attributed more to those he meant
to confute, so that when he said, or thought another thing, he freely used that
dissimulation which the Greeks call Irony, which Annius also says, was in
Africanus.

Induction by De invent. 1.
Cicero desin'd a manner of disco^rse, which gains the assent of him with whom
it is held, to things not doubtful, by which assents it causes that he y^eld
to a doubtful thing, by reason of the likeness it has to those things
whereunto he assented: this kind of speech Socrates most used, because he would
not himself use any argument of persuasion, but rather chose to work something
out of that which he granted him with whom he disputed, which he, by reason of
that which he already yielded unto, must necessarily approve; of which he gives
a large example in Plato's Plat. Lach.
Meno. Thus, whosoever disputed with him of what subject soever ( Liban. Apol.
his end being only to promote virtue) was at last brought round about to give
an account of his life past and present, whereinto being once entered, he never
gave him over till he had sufficiently examined those things, and never let
them go ( Plat. Euthyphr.
Proteus like) till they came at last to themselves.

For this reason ^lat. Theaetet. Plutarch. quaest. Platon. 1.
he used to say, his skill had some affinity with that of his mother, he being
like a Midwife, though barren (as he modestly affirms) in himself, endeavored
with a particular gift in assisting others, to bring forth what they had within
themselves; Schol. Aristoph. in nub. p. 129.
and this was one reason why he refused to take money, affirming, that he knew
nothing himself, and that Plat. Apol.
he was never Master to any.

These disputes of Socrates were committed to writing by his Scholars, wherein
Laert. vit. Xenoph.
Xenophon gave example to the rest, in doing it first, as also with most
punctualnesse, as Plato with most liberty, intermixing so much of his own, as
it is not easy to distinguish the Master from the Scholar; Laert. vit. ^lat.
whence Socrates hearing him recite his Lysis, said, how many things does this
young man feign of me? And Epist. ad Aeschin.
Xenophon denying Socrates ever disputed of heaven, or of natural causes, or
the other disciplines which the Greeks call (...) says, they, who ascribe such
disserta^ions to him, lie falsely, wherein (as 14. 3.
Agellius observes) he intends Plato, in whose books Socrates discourses of
Natural Philosophy, Music, and Geometry.

CHAP. V.
Of his Philosophy.
POrphyrius (who was so abusive, as Histor. eccles. 10. 36.
Nicephorus observes, that hetraduced Socrates with no less bitterness, then
as if he endeavored to outdoe his accusers, Anytus and Melitus) affirms;
Theodoret.
He was ingenious in nothing, unlearned in all, scarce able to write, which
when upon any occasion he did, it was to derision, and that he could read no
better then a stammering schoole-boy: To which we shall oppose these
Authorities: Xenophon who attests he was excellent in all kinds of learning,
instanceth in Arithmetic, Geometry, and Astrology; Plato, in Natural
Philosophy; Id^meneus, in Rhetoric; Laertius, in Medicine: In a word, Cicero
averres, that by the testimony of learned men, and the judgment of all Greece,
as well in wisdom, acuteness, politenesse, and sultlety, as in eloquence,
^a^ietie, and copiousnesse, to wha soever part he gave himself, he was without
exception Prince of all.

Having searched into all kinds of Science, he observed these inconveniences
and imperfections: Xen. mem. 1. page 710.
First, That it was improper to leave those affairs which concern mankind, to
enquire into things without us. Secondly, That these things are above the reach
of man, whence are occasioned all disputes and oppositions, some acknowledging
no God, others worshipping stocks and stones; some asserting one simple being,
others infinite; some that all things are moved, others, that all things are
immovable. And Thirdly, that these things, if attained, could not be practiced,
for he who contemplating divine mysteries, enquires by what necessity things
were made, cannot himself make any thing, or upon occasion produce winds,
waters, seasons, or the like.

Thus esteeming speculative knowledge as far only as it conduces to practice,
he cut off in all sciences what he conceived of least use: Xenoph. mem. 4.
In Arithmetic, he approved only as much as was necessary ( Deleg.
Plato instanceth in Merchandise and Tacticks) but to proceed to useless
operations he disallowed. In Geometry he allowed that part which teaches
measuring, as no less easy then useful; but to proceed to infinite
propositions and demonstrations he disallowed, as wholly unprofitable. In
Astrology he approved the knowledge of the Stars, and observation of the
night, months, and seasons, as being easily learned, and very beneficial in
Navigation, and to those who hunt by night; but to examine the difference of
spears, distance of stars from the earth, and their circles, he dissuaded as
useless.

Laert.
Finally, noting how little ad^ant^ge speculation brought to the life and
conversation of mankind, he reduced ^er to action. He first, says Acad.
quoest. 1.
Cicero, called Philosophy away from things involved by nature in secrecy,
wherein, until his time, all Philosophers had been employed, and brought her
to common life, to enquire of ^ertues and ^ices, good and evil.

Man, who was the sole subject of his Philosophy, having a twofold relation of
divine speculation, and human conversation, his Doctrines were in the former
respect Metaphysicall, in the latter Moral.

Sect. 1. Metaphysics.
His Metaphysicall opinions are thus collected and abridged out of Plato,
Xenophon, Plutarch, and others:

Philosophy is the way to true happiness, the offices whereof are two, ^lat.
Phaed.
to contemplate God, and to abstract the soul from corporeal sense.

There are three principles of all things, God, matter, and Ideas, Plutarch.
plac. phil. 1. 3.
God is the universal intellect, matter the first subject of generation and
corruption; Idea an incorporeall substance, the intellect of God; God the
intellect of the world.

God is one (...); Plat. Phaed.
perfect in himself, giving the being, and well being of every creature; what
he is (says he) I know not, what he is not I know.

Xen. memor. 1.
That God, not chance, made the world, and all creatures, is demonstrable from
the reasonable disposition of their parts, as well for use as defense, from
their care to preserve themselves, and continue their species, that he
particularly regards man in his body, from the excellent uprigh^ form thereof,
from the gift of speech, from allowance (...) in his soul, from the excellency
thereof above others; in both for divinations, predicting dangers; that he
regards particulars, from his care of the whole species; that he will reward
such as please him, and punish such as displease him from his power to do it,
from the belief he has imprinted in a man that he will do it; professed by the
most wise and civilized Cities and ages; that he at once sees all things, from
the instances of the eye, which at once over-runs many miles; and of the mind,
which at once considers things done in the most distant places. Finally, that
he is such, and so great, as that he at once sees all, hears all, is every
where, and orders all. This is the sum of his discourse with Aristodemus, to
which we may annex what is cited under his name (if not mistaken) by Stobaeus,
Care, if by care ought may effected be,
If not, why ca^'st thou, when God cares for thee?


Xen. mem^r. 1: page 711.
He held, that the Gods knew all things, said, done, or silently desired.

Xen. memor. 4.
That God takes care of all creatures, is demonstrable from the benefits he
gives them of light, water, and fire, seasonable production of fruits of the
earth; that he has particular care of man, from the nourishment of all plants
and creatures for man's service, from their subjection to man, though they
excused him never so much in strength, from the variety of man's sense,
accommodated to the variety of objects, for necessity, use, and pleasure; from
reason, whereby he discoursed through reminiscence, from sensible objects, from
speech, whereby he communicates all that he knows, gives laws, and governs
states; that God, notwithstanding he is invisible, has a being from the
instances of his Ministers, invisible also, as thunder and wind, from the soul
of man which has something with the divine nature in governing those that
cannot see it. This is the effect of his discourse with E^thid^mus.

The Soul is immortal, Schol. Aristoph. in nub. p. 128.
for what is always moveable is immortal; but that which moves another, or
is moved by an other, has a cessation of motion and life.

The soul is praeexistent to the body, endued with knowledge of eternal
Ideas, which in her union to the body she loses, as stupisied, until awakened
by discourse from sensible objects. Thus is all her learning only reminiscence,
a recovery of her first knowledge.

The body being compounded is dissolved by death, Plat. Phaed.
the soul being simple, passes into another life, incapable of corruption.

The souls of men are divine, to whom, when they go out of the body, Cic. de
amicit.
the way of their return to heaven is open, which to the best and most just is
the most expedite.

The souls of the good after death, Plat. Phaed.
are in a happy estate, united to God in a blessed inaccessible place; the bad,
in convenient places, suffer condign punishment; but to define what those
places are, is hominis (...); whence being demanded what things were in the
other world, Stob. Eth. 269.
he answered, neither was I ever there, nor ever did I speak with any that came
from thence.

Sect. 2. Ethics.
HIs moralls, consider a man either as a single person, or as the father of a
family, or as a member of the commonwealth; In the first respect are his
Ethics, wherein such sentences as have been preserved by Xenophon, Diogenes
Laertius, Stobaeus, and others, are thus collected.

Of virtue and vice.
HE exhorted his friends to Endeavor to be the most wise and beneficial, Xen:
mem. 1: p. 720.
because, what wants reason, wants respect, as the bodies of dead friends, and
hair, nails, and the like, which are cut off and cast away.

To be employed is good and beneficial, to be idle hurtful and evil: Xen
mem. 1. p. 720.
they that do good are employed, they that spend their time in vain recreations
are idle.

He that has most advantage by gifts of nature, Xen. mem. 3. p. 778.
as well as he that has least, must learn and meditate on those things wherein
he would be excellent.

He only is idle who might be better employed. Xen. mem. 3. p. 779.


To do good, Xen. mem. 3. p. 78.
is the best course of life, therein fortune has share.

They are best, Xen. mem. 3. p. 780.
and best pleasing to God, who do any thing, with any art or calling; who
follows none, is useless to the public, and hated of God.

Clem. Alex. Strom. 2. 417.
He taught every where, that a just man and a happy were all one, and used to
curse him who first by opinion divided honesty and profit ( Cicer. de. offic.
3. and de leg. 1.
which are coherent by Nature) as having done an impious act, for they are
truly wicked who separate profitable and just, which depends on law. The
Stoics have followed him so far, that whatsoever is honest, the same they
esteem profitable.

He asked Memnon, a Thessalian, who thought himself very learned, Plut. de.
amicor. multit. p. 93.
and that he had reached (as Empedocles says) the top of wisdom, what is
virtue? He answered readily and boldly, that there is one virtue of a child,
another of an old Man, one of a Man, another of a Woman, one of a Magistrate,
another of a private Person, one of a Master, another of a Servant. Very good,
replies Socra^es: I ask for one virtue, and you give us a whole swarm; truly
conceiving, that he knew not one virtue, who named so many.

Being demanded by Gorgias If he accounted not the great King of Persia happy?
Plut. de lib. educ.
I know not, answered he, how he is furnished with learning and virtue: as
conceiving that true happiness consists in these two, not in the frail gifts
of fortune.

Euripides in his Auge saying of virtue; Laert.
It is best carelessely to part with these; he rose up and went away, saying,
It was ridiculous to seek a lost servant, or to suffer virtue so to go away.
La^rt.


He said, he wondered at those who carve Images of stone, that they take such
care to make stones resemble men, Laert.
whilst they neglect, Laert.
and suffer themselves to resemble stones.

He advised young men to behold themselves every day in a glass, What (...)
means, is explained by Aristotle, polit. 5. 3. and physic. 5. 4.
that if they were beautiful, they might study to deserve it; if deformed, to
supply or hide it by learning.

He said, to begin well is not a small thing, Clem. Alex. strom. 5.
but depending on a small moment.

He said, virtue was the beauty, vice the deformity of the soul.

He said, Nonn in Greg. Stelicut.
outward beauty was a sign of inward beauty, and therefore chose such Auditors.

In that life of man as in an Image every part ought be beautiful. Stob. Each.
sermon. 1.


Incense to God, praise is due to good men. Stob. 1.


Who are undeservedly accused ought to be defended, Stob. 1.
who excel others in any good quality to be praised,

A Horse is not known to be good by his furniture, Stob. 1:
but qualities, a man by his mind, not wealth.

It is not possible to cover fire with a garment, Stob. 37.
sin with time.

Being demanded who live without pe^turbation? he answered, Stob. 46.
they who are conscious to themselves of no ill.

To one who demanded what Nobility is, Stob. 218.
he answered, a good temper of soul and body.

Of affections, Love, Envy, Grief, Hope, etc.
THat two brothers God meant should be more helpful to each other then two
hands, Xenep. mem. 2.
feet, eyes, or whatsoever nature has formed; doubtless because if they love,
they may great distance mutually help one another is the scope of his discourse
with Chaeracrates.

That all things are good and fair to those things where with they agree, Xen.
mem. 3.
but ill and deformed in respect of those things with which they agree not, is
the conclusion of his second discourse with Aristippus.

Envy is a grief, not at the adversity of friends, Xen. mem. 3.
nor the prosperity of Enemies, but at the prosperity of friends; for many are
so foolishly inclined as to malign those in good fortune, whom in misfortune
they pitied.

A ship ought not to trust to one Anchor, Stob 1.
nor life to one hope.

To ground hopes on an ill opinion is to trust a ship to a slight anchor. Stob.
16.


The beauty of fame is blasted by envy as by a sickness. Stob. 139.


Many adorn the tombs of t^ose, whom living, they persecuted with envy. Stob.
139.


Envy is the saw of the soul. Stob. 139.


Nothing is pleasant or unpleasant by nature but by custom. Stob. 144.


Unseasonable love is like hate. Stob. 215.


Being demanded, what is grievous to the good, he answered, the prosperity of
the wicked. Stob. 240.


Being demanded how a man might live without trouble, Stob. 240.
he answered, it was not possible but that he who lives in a City or a Family
must sometimes be afflicted.

Wicked hopes like ill guides deceive a man and lead him into sin. Stob. 258.


A woman cannot conceive without a man, Stob. 261.
nor a good hope produce any benefit without labor.

Winter had need of garments, Stob. 269.
old age of disingagement from grief.

In life as in a Theater, Stob. 892.
we should continue so long as the sight of things, and actions of life seem
delightful.

The mad should be bound, Xen. mem. 1. p. 7. 9.
the ignorant instructed.

That we should endeavor to shun the censorious, Xen. men. 2.
and to apply our selves to such as are candid, that we should undertake only
such things as we can perform, and decline such as we cannot; that whenever
we undertake any thing, we should employ therein our utmost study and
endeavor, is the sum of his advise to Eutherus.

He said, Xen. mem. 3.
the office of a wise man is to discern what is good and honest, and to shun
that which is dishonest.

They who know what they ought to do, Xen. mem. 3.
and do it not, are not wise and temperate, but fools and stupid.

Justice and every other virtue is wisdom. Xen. mem. 3.


To be ignorant of our selves, Xen. mem. 3.
to seem to know those things whereof we are ignorant, is next to madness.

That a pious person is rightly defined, Xen. mem. 4.
such a one as knows what is lawful as to the gods; a just, he that knows
what is lawful as to men; that a man is wise as far as he knows; that what is
profitable is fair to that whereto it is profitable; that they who know how to
use terrible things and dangerous are valiant, the contrary timorous, is the
sum of his discourse with Euthydamus.

He conceived the only wisdom of man to consist in not thinking he understands
those things which he does not understand. Cicer.


To one that complained he had not benefited himself by travel, Senec. Epist.
1. 103
and not without reason says he, because thou did travel with thy self.

He affirmed there is but one good thing, Laert.
knowledge; one ill, ignorance; but that riches and nobility had nothing in
them of worth, but on the contrary all evils.

When a wise man opens his mouth the virtues of his are manifested as Images
in a Temple. Stob. 1.


In navigation we ought to be guided by the Pilot; Stob. 28. and 42.
in the course of life by those of better judgment.

Being demanded what wisdom was, Stob. 28.
he answered, the composure of the Soul, being demanded who were wise, they
says he, who not easily err.

The souls reason augmenteth it self as in a play, Stob. 28.
the wisest not the richest ought to bear the prize.

Fugitives fear though not pursued, Stob. 32.
fools though not in adversity are troubled.

Seeing a young man rich and unlearned, a Stob. 31.
behold (says he) golden slave.

The luxurious is hardly cured in sickness, Stob. 32.
the fool in adversity.

The coward uses arms against himself, Stob. 32.
the fool money.

Ac^illes armor sits not Thersiles, Stob. 32.
nor the good habits of the soul a fool.

Be not forward in speech, Stob. 87.
for many times the tongue has cut off the head.

In war, steel is better then gold, Stob. 211.
in life, wisdom excels wealth.

Of Piety and Obedience.
THat the greatest of vices is ingratitude, Xen. mom. 2.
of obligations that to Parents, that a disobedient Son the Gods will not
bless: nor men love as doubting his return of either, knowing he does it not
where so much is due; is the sum of his discourse with Apiles

Our prayers should be for blessings in general, Xen. mem. 1. 722. 4. 804.
for God knows best what is good for us, our offerings proportioned to our
abilities, for he considers integrity, not munificence.

He said (with the Pythian Oracle) that the Gods are to be worshipped according
to the Law of the City where a man lives, Xen. mem. 1. 722.
they who do otherwise, he thought superstitious and vain.

The best way of worshipping God, Xen. mem. 4. 803.
is to do what he commands.

Superstition is obedient to pride as its parent. Stob. 43.


A harsh Father like a severe law, must not withstanding be obeyed. Stob. 193.


The reproof of a Father is a kind remedy; Stob. 201.
it brings more ease then pain.

Of fortitude and imbecility.
THat a man ought to inure himself to voluntary labor and sufferance, Xen.
mem. 1.
so as what shall be imposed by necessity may appear in him not compulsive but
free, that soft ways of living, in pleasures beget no good constitution of
body, nor knowledge of the mind; That tolerance raises us to high attempts is
the effect of his discourse with Aristippus.

To one who was fearful to go so far on foot as Olympia, Xen. mem. 3.
he demonstrated (to make the journey seem easy) that it was no more then his
daily walk within doors, if extended at length, would easily reach.

Xen. mem. 3.
One that complained he was weary of a journey, he reproved hi^ for being more
weary then his servant that followed him laden.

He said, Plut. consol. ad Apollon.
death resembled either a deep sleep, or a long journey out of our Native
Country, or an absolute annihilation of soul and body, examining all which he
affirmed, death to be in none of those respects evil; as to the first, says
Plutarch, it is not ill with those that sleep, and we esteem that sleep
sweetest which is deepest; as if we look on it as a journey, it is rather a
blessing, for thereby we are freed from the slavery and affections of the flesh
which possess and infatuate the mind; in the last respect, it makes us
insensible of ill and pain, as well as of good and pleasure.

A statue stands firm on its base, Stob. 1. and 296.
a virtuous man on firm resolutions.

Voluntary labors are delighted with assurance of ease; Stob. 5.
idleness, and transitory pleasures beget neither a good constitution of body,
nor any good habit in the Soul.

Stob. 48.
Being demanded what is strength? he answered, the motion of the soul with the
body.

Seeing the gates of Corinth strongly barred, Stob. 49.
he asked, dwell women here?

An honest death, Stob. 269.
is better then a dishonest life.

He used to say, liberty is sister to sloth, Aelian. var. hist.
instancing in the Indians and Persians, both lazy; the Phrygians and Lydians
very industrious, as being under servitude.

Of Temperance, Continence, and Contentedness.
HE advised to shun all occasions of incontinence, Xen. mem. 1.
affirming that such as conversed much with fair women could not easily be
continent.

That the sight and kisses of the fair, Xen. mem. 1.
infuse a poison more dangerous then that of Scorpions and Spiders, is the sum
of his discourse to Xenophon and Critobulus.

That a free man ought not to entertain a servant addicted to pleasures, that
he which is slave to pleasures, Xen. mem. 1.
should pray to the gods for better Masters, is the conclusion of his discourse
de continentia.

That happiness consists not in luxury and pride, Xen. mem. 1.
that to want nothing is divine, to want the least next to divine, is the the
conclusion of his discourse with Antipho.

He advised such as could not easily abstain at feasts, Xen. mem. 3.
to take heed of such things as persuade those that are not hungry to eat, and
those that are not thirsty to drink, for they destroyed the appetite, the head,
and the soul. He used to say merrily, Circ^ turned men into Swine, by feasting
them with such meats, but that ulysses, partly through Minerva's advice, partly
through his own temperance, refraining from such things, remained unchanged.

That health of body ought diligently to be preserved, Xen. mem. 3.
as that whereon all knowledge of the soul dependes. Is the sum of his
discourse with Epigenes.

He advised one that complained, Xen. mem. 3.
he took no delight in his meat, to refrain from eating, whereby his diet would
become more pleasant, cheap, and wholesome.

In the word (...) (to feast) the particle (...) implies, Xen. mem. 3.
that we should eat only such things as will not hurt the mind nor the body,
and are easy to be gotten.

That only temperate persons, Xen. mem. 4.
that discern and choose the best things, refraining from the worst; that by
temperance men become the most excellent, and most happy, sit for
discourse: is the sum of his discourse with Euthidemus.

Hearing one of his friends say, this Town is exceeding deer, Plut. de anim.
tranquil.
Chian wine costs a Mina, purple three, a pint of honey five Denaries; he
carried him to the Meal-men, hear, says he, a pint is sold for an obolus; it
is cheap living in this Town: then to those that sold Olives, a Chaenix two
farthings; thence to the frippery, a Suit ten Drachmes: things are cheap in
this Town.

He said, the hungry wanted no sauce, Laert.
the thirsty no choice of wines.

He commended quiet and leisure above all things. Laert.


He said, they who buy early fruits at dear rates, Laert.
believe they will not come in their due season.

Being asked what was a young man's virtue? he answered, Laert.
to do nothing too much.

Seeing one eat broth very greedily, he said, Laert.
Which of you here present uses bread for broth, and broth for bread?

Of which, see more at large, Xenophon his Memorab. Lib.

One saying, that it was a great matter to abstain from what a man desires, he
answered, Aelian. var. hist. 9.
but it is much a greater not to desire at all.

A clear fire becomes the chimney, serenity the mind. Stob. 28.


He said, Stob. 37.
We ought not to seek pleasures in others, but in our selves, the body being
predisposed according as it ought.

He said, Stob. 37.
It is the property of God to need nothing, to need least, nighest to God.

Being demanded from what things we ought to refrain most, Stob. 37.
he answered, from sordid unjust pleasures.

Contentedness is like a short and pleasant way, Stob. 37.
it has much delight, little toil.

He that would see virtue as his Country, must pass by pleasures, as Sirens.
Stob. 37.


Being demanded whom he thought richest, he answered, Stob. 40.
him who is contented with least; for content is the riches of Nature.

Being demanded what continence is, he answered, Stob. 84.
government of corporeal pleasures.

He said, Stob. 8
the wicked live to eat, but the good eat to live.

When a woman says she loves thee, Stob. 183.
take heed of those words, more then when she revileth thee.

Of Liberality, Prodigality, and Covetousness.
HE conceived, Xen. mem. 1.
that they who took money of any, owned them for their Masters in the meanest
degree of servitude.

That wisdom is prostituted as well as beauty, Xen. mem. 1.
by taking money for it; that he who meets with an ingenious person, ought to
acquaint him with all the good he can gratis, whereby he acquires a friend, and
does the part of a good member of the commonwealth; is the sum of his second
discourse with Antipho.

He said, D. Basil hom. 24. de legand. lib gentil.
if a rich man be proud of his wealth, that he could not praise him, till he
knew how he would employ it.

None can safely manage a horse without a bit, Stob. 28.
nor riches without reason.

He compared covetous persons to birds, Stob. 54.
one devoures what ever it meets till it choakes it self, the rest falling
upon what the first left, are one after another choked also.

The wealth of covetous persons is like the Sun after he is set, Stob. 55.
delights none.

He that gives to a rich man throws water into the Sea. Stob. 77.


The life of a covetous person is like the feasts made for the dead, Stob. 78.
he has all, but enjoyes nothing.

He compared the wealth of prodigalls to fig trees, Stob. 230.
growing on a precipice, for these, none are the better, but Kites, and Crows;
for those only harlots and flatterers.

Being demanded who were covetous, he answered, Stob. 230.
such as seek after sordid gain, and neglect their necessary friends.

Wine changes with the Vessel, Stob. 231.
riches follow the manners of the owner.

Of Magnanimity and Pride.
TO one angry for having saluted a man that returned not his salutations; Xen.
mem. 1.
It is ridiculous, says he, if you are not angry with every one you meet of
worse shape or for^ then your self, to be angry with any for having lest
manners.

Pride like an ill potter or statuary represents the forms of things inverted.
Stob. 43.


Wind puffes up empty bladders, opinion fools. Stob. 43.


To be exalted with good fortune, is to run in a slippery way. Stob. 246.


Of Patience.
THere is less danger in drinking intemperately of troubled water, Plut. de
his qui sero a number. Fun.
then with a troubled mind full of wrath, before it be allayed and purified to
satisfy thy anger in the punishment of a kinsman or countryman.

If every one should bring his misfortunes into a public stock to be shared
alike amongst all men, Plut. de consol. ad Apollon.
the greater part of those that now complain so much, would be contented and
glad to keep their own.

It is all one if a man being overcome in any gymnick sports should sue his
adversary, Stob. 256.
as for a man over mastered by Fortune to accuse her; not knowing upon what
conditions we entered into the contests of life.

Of Veracity and Flattery.
THere is no better way to glory then to endeavor to be good, Xen. memor. 1.
as well as to seem such.

The kindness of flatterers is chased away by adversity. Stob. 64.


Hunters take hares with hounds, Stob. 64.
many take fools with their own praises.

Wolves resemble dogs, Stob. 64.
and flatterers friends, but their aims are quite contrary.

Flattery is like a painted armor, only for show, not use. Stob. 64.


Think not those faithful who praise all thy words and actions, Stob. 69.
but those who reprove thy faults.

Suffer not a talker and slanderer, Stob. 71.
for he tells not thee any thing out of good will; but as he discourses the
secrets of others, so will he thine to others.

Good men must let the world see that their manners are more firm then an
oath. Stob. 114.


Of Vrbanity and Conversation.
A Little Hall will serve to dance in, Plut. de sanittuend.
and every place and posture to speak.

Wind kindles fire, Stob. 37.
conversation Love.

Freedom of discourse like the seasons of the year, Stob. 67.
is best in its proper time.

Its arrogance to speak all, Stob. 134.
and to be unwilling to hear any thing.

Converse at distance, Stob. 296.
and softly with those that are in Authority.

Of Justice.
THat the Gods prescribe just things by law, Xen. mem. 4.
and that just and lawful is to them the same thing, is the sum of his
discourse with Hippias.

They who convert goods ill gotten to good uses in a commonwealth, Stob. 52.
do like those who make religious use of sacrilege.

Of Friendship.
THat a discreet virtuous friend is of all possessions the most fertile, Xen.
mem. 2.
and ought chiefly to be regarded, is the scope of his discourse, de amici^ia.

That every man should examine himself of what value he is to his friend, Xen.
mem. 2.
and endeavor to be of the most worth he can to him, is the effect of his
discourse with Antis^henes:

That wicked men cannot be friends, Xen. mem. 2.
either amongst themselves, or with the good: That the way to procure friends
is, first, to endeavor to be good, wherein he would seem good; that all
virtues may be augmented by study and learning, is the scope of his discourse
with Critobulus.

That we ought to our utmost abilities to relieve the necessities of our
friends, Xen. mem. 2.
is the effect of his discourse with Aristarchus.

He said, Plut. de srat. amore.
he had rather have Darius to his friend, then his Daricks, a coin so named
from him.

He wondered that every man kept an inventory of his goods, Laert.
none of his friends.

They who violate friendship, Stob. 213.
though they escape the punishment of their friends, shall not escape the
vengeance of God.

They who forsake their own brethren to seek out other friends are like those
who let their own grounds lie fallow to till another. Stob. 213.


Fear not a friend in adversity. Stob. 213.


We esteem not that corn best which grows on the fairest ground, Stob. 218.
but that which nourishes best, nor him a good person or friend who is of
highest birth, but most noble in qualities.

Physicians must relieve the sick, Stob. 258.
friends the afflicted.

Its pleasant to grow old with a good friend and sound sense. Stob. 263.


Sect. 3. Oeconomicks.
IN the second respect are his Oeconomicks, which he learned of Ischomachus, by
Xenophon expressly delivered in a treatise upon that subject, to which add
these few sentences.

So contrive the building of your house, Xen. mem. 3.
as that those parts which are toward the South may be highest, that the
winter Sun be not excluded; those toward the North lowest; that they may be
less subject to wind; In fine, so order it, that a man may live in every
quarter thereof with most delight and safety: Pictures and colors take away
more pleasantness then they afford.

To one who beat his servant for gluttonous, Xen. mem. 3. p. 7. 88. see more
there.
covetous, and idle, he said, did you at any time consider whether you deserve
not more to be beaten your self? Laert.


To one that asked his advice about taking a wife, Stob 183.
whether you do or do no: says he, you will ^^pent it.

To others that asked his opinion concerning marriage, Stob. 183.
he said, As fishes in a net would fain get out, and those without wo^ld get
in, take heed young men it be not so with you.

Men must o^^y the laws of their Country, Stob. 193.
wives their husbands.

Sect. 4. Politics.
IN the 3d. respect are his politics, which. Hesychius Illus^ius makes to be the
same which Plato has delivered under this name, where you may have them though
disguised with the language and additions of Plato, to which may be annexed
those sentences of his in that kind out of Xenophon, Stobaeus, and others.

They who cannot upon occasion be useful either to an Army, Xen. mem. ^.
a City, or a Commonwealth; yet have confidence of themselves, ought, though
never so rich, to be under restraint.

Antipho demanding how he might make others skillful in Politics whilst
himself meddled not therein, Xen. mem. 1.
although he knew that he could manage them, which way says he; Antipho, I do
most act the business of the Commonwealth, if I practice it only, or if I
endeavor to make many able to act therein.

That place is fittest for Temples and Altars which is most open, Xen. mem. 3.
and yet retired; for it is fitting that they who pray see, and no less
fitting that they come thither pure.

They are not Kings, Xen. mem. 3. 779.
who are in possession of a Throne, or come unjustly by it, but they who know
how to govern.

A King is a ruler of willing Subjects according to the Laws, Xenop. mem. 4.
813.
a Tyrant is a ruler of subjects against their will, not according to the
Laws, but arbitrary; an Aristocracy is that government wherein the Magistrates
are.

The offices of a good Citizen are in peace to enrich the Commonwealth, Xen.
mem. 4.
in War to subdue the Enemies thereof, in Embassy to make friends of foes,
insedition to appease the people by eloquence.

Of common people he said, Laert.
they were as if a man should except against one piece of bad money, and except
a great sum of the same.

He said, Clem. Alex. strom. 4.
the Law was not made for the good.

Deserving persons ought to be sharers in the good fortunes of the
Commonwealth. Stob. 141.


Being demanded what City is strongest? Stob. 141.
he said, that which has good men.

Being demanded what City is best ordered? Stob. 141.
he said, that wherein the Magistrates friendly agree.

Being demanded what City is best? Stob. 141.
he said, that wherein are proposed most rewards for virtue.

Being demanded what City lives best, Stob. 141.
he said, that which lives according to law, and punishes the unjust.

CHAP. VI.
Of his Demon.
THat Socrates had an attendant spirit (meant as Plutarch conceives by the Sup.
cap. 2.
Oracles answer to his Father) which diverted him from dangers, is impugned by
Athenaeus, not without much prejudice, which the bitterness of the discourse
betraies, souls that are not candid, and think ill of the best, says Origin,
never refrain from Calumny, seeing that they mock even the Genius of Socrates
as a feigned thing. On the contrary, we have the testimony of Plato, Xenophon
and Apud. Athenaeum. ^
Antisthenes contemporary with him, confirmed by Laertius, Plu ^arch, Maximus
Tyrius, Dion Chrysostomus, Cicero, Apuleius, by Fathers, Te^tullian, Origin,
Clemens Alexandrinus and others, whereof a great many instances (as Cicero
says) were collected by Antipater: these only preserved by other Authors. De
divinat. ib. 1


Theocritus going to consult Euthyphron a Sooth-sayer, Plut. de Genesis Socr.
found him with much company walking in the streets, amongst whom were Simias
and Socrates, who was very busy, asking him many questions. In the midst of
his discourse he maue a sudden stop, and after some pause, turned back and
went down another street, calling out to the rest of the company to return and
follow him, as being warned by the Demon. The greater part did so, the rest
went forward, on purpose to confute the Demon, and drew along with them one
Charillus that played on the flute; but in the way which was so narrow, as not
to give them room to pass by, they were met and overturned in the dirt by a
great herd of swine; by repetition of which accident, Charillus often
afterward defended the Demon.

Nor did the advice of this spiritual attendant only respect the good of
Socra^es, but extended to such friends as conversed with him, whereof him self
gives these instances.

Plato. Theag. Aelian var. hist. 8. 1.
Charmides Son of Glauco, going to exercise in the Nemean race, as he was
discoursing with Socrates, was by him upon notice of the voice dissuaded from
going, to which he answered, that perhaps the voice only meant that he should
not get the victory, but, said he, however I shall advantage myself by
exercising at this time, which said, he went to the Games; where he met with
some accident, which though it be not related, is acknowledged to have
justified the counsel given him by the Demon.

Tymarchus and Philemon Son of Philemonides having plotted together to murder
Nicias, Plat. Theag.
Son of Hircoscomander, were at the same time drinking with Socrates. Timarchus
with intention to execute what they had determined, offered to rise from the
table, saying to Socrates, well Socrates, drink you on, I will but step a
little way and return immediately. Rise not said Socrates, ( hearing the Demon
as soon as he spoke) for the Demon has given me the accustomed sign;
whereupon he sat still, presently after he offered again to be gone; Socrates
hearing the voice withheld him. At last, as Socrates was diverted by something,
and did not mind him, he stole away and committed the murder, for which being
brought to execution, his last words to his brother Glitomachus were, that he
was come to that untimely end for not obeying Socrates.

Another time, seeing his friend Crito's eye ti'd up, Cic. de divinat. 3.
he asked him the reason, who answering, that as he walked in the field, one
pulling a bough, it gave a jerk back, and hit him in the eye; Then you did not
take my advise, replies Socrates, for I called you back, making use, as I have
accustomed of divine presage.

That it had likewise a great influence upon the souls of those who conversed
with him, and lived with him, Plat. Theag.
he alleges as examples Aristides Son of Lysimachus, and Thucydides Son of
Melissus. The first leaving Socrates to go to the wars, lost, with his company,
the habit of learning, which he acknowledged to have gained, not by any verbal
instructions, of which he had none from him, but by being near him, seeing him,
and sitting in the same room with him: The second as easily, by the same means
attained the same habit.

And not only to particular persons, but to general affairs did these
predictions extend: He foretold some friends the defeat of the Athenian Army in
Sicily, as is attested by Plutarch, and mentioned by himself in Plato, where he
gives another fair example, or rather trial of the truth of the Demons
predictions, speaking of a business, whereof the event was at that time
doubtful: Plat. Theag.
You will hear, says he, from many in Sicily, to whom it is known what I
foretold concerning the destruction of the Army, and we may now have an
experiment if the Demon speak true. Samionus, son of Calus is gone in an
expedition, the sign came to me: he goes with Thrasylus to war against Ephesus
and Jonia: my opinion is, that he will either be slain, or at least, in much
danger, I greatly fear the whole design. These are his words in Plato,
delivered as before, the event of that action, which fell out according to his
prediction; for Xenoph. hist. Graec. 1.
Thrasylus was repulsed, and beaten by the Ephesians, the Athenians put to
flight, with the loss of four hundred men; of which Victory the Ephesians
erected two trophies. this was in the twenty one year of the Peloponnesian war.

We have alleged the universal consent of Authors, that Socrates had such a
spiritual attendant; yet is there some disagreement concerning the name, more
concerning the nature of it.

It is commonly named his Demon, by which title, he himself owned it: Plato
sometimes calls it his Guardian, Apuleius his God, because (says Saint De civ.
dei. 8. 4.
Augustine) the name of Demon at last grew odious. But we must observe, that
he did not account it a God, but sent from God, and in that sense affirmed the
signs to come from God, to wit, by mediation of this spirit. This, besides
other places we may argue from his first Epistle, where he speaks of the sign
it self; he uses the word Demon, when of the advice, whereof that sign was
the instrument, he names God. Thus are we to understand these, and all other
places of the same nature in Plato, where Socrates speaking of the Demon
says, if it please God, you shall learn much, and the sign from God did not
offer to stay me.

As for the sign or manner of the prediction, Plutarch. de genesis Socr.
some affirm it was by sneezing, either of himself or others; if any chanced
to sneeze standing before him, behind him, or on his right hand, he went
immediately about that which he intended; if on the left hand, he refrained or
desisted: if he sneezed himself before the enterprise, it was applausive, if
in the action, disswasive. There needs not much argument to prove this opinion.
If this sternutation proceeded either from chance, or his natural
constitution, it could not have that provident supernatural effect; if it
proceeded from some more excellent outward cause, we recurre to the Genius.

Others confine this prescience within the soul of Socrates himself, that he
said, his Genius advised him, they interpret it, as we usually say, his mind
gave him, or so inclined him: In this sense indeed Demon is not seldom taken;
but this is inconsistent with the description which Socrates gives of a voice
and signs, ab exteriore, besides this knowledge is not above humane nature.

Plutarch having exploded the opinion of Terpsion concerning sneezing,
conjectured first, that it might be some apparition; but at last concludes,
that it was his observation of some inar^culate unaccustomed sound (or voice)
conveyed to him by some extraordinary way, as we see in dreams. This avoids
not the inconvenience of the former; if Socrates did first of himself
interpret this sound, it is the same with the last opinion, that his soul had
a Prophetic inspiration, if by any help, it will come at last to the Genius.

Some conceive it to be one of those spirits which have the particular care of
men; which Maximus Tyrius, and Apuleius describe in such manner, that they want
only the name of a good Angel.

But there want not those who give it that appellation: De Orig. error. 2. 15.
Lactanius having proved that God sends Angels to guard mankind, adds, and
Socrates affirmed that there was a Demon constantly near him, which kept him
company from a child, by whose beck and instruction he guided his life.
Eusebius upon these words of the Psalmist, He has given his Angels charge
over thee, In Psalm. 91.
that they should keep thee in all thy ways. We learn out of Scripture (says
he) that every man has a Guardian appointed him from above; and Plato doubts
not to write in this manner: All souls having chosen a condition of living,
they proceed in order thereunto, being moved by the Demon, which is proper to
every one, and is sent along with them to preserve them in this life, and to
perfect those things whereof they have made choice. And immediately after; You
may believe, says he, that Socrates meant this, when he often affirmed that he
was governed by a Demon. More plainly De perenn. philos. 25.
Eugubinus, The Demon of Socrates, says he, mentioned so often by Plato (
seeing that Socrates was a good man, and exhor^ed all men to virtue, and by the
Demon was always excited to that which was good) may perhaps not unjustly be
thought his Angel, as that which appeared to Balaam the Prophet, and diverted
him from his wickedness. Argum. ad Apol. Soc.
But Ficinus expressly; If you are not pleased, says he, speaking of this
spirit, to call the familiar guide of a man his spirit, call it, if you please,
his good Angel.

The chiefest argument of De anim. pagan. 5. 14.
Collius, who opposes this opinion, and endeavors to prove it was an evil
spirit, is, that the Demon never dissuaded or diverted from vice, but only
from outward danger, whereas the contrary is evident enough from the foregoing
story of Tim^^^^us and Philemon.

True it is, that the advice of the Demon was always disswasive, never, as De
divinat. 1.
Cicero says, impulsive, often coercive. Apuleius flatters Socrates with this
reason; Socrates, says he, as being a man absolute and perfect of himself,
ready in all offices that concerned him, never needed any exhorter, but
sometimes a prohibitour, if it happened there were any danger in that which he
went about, that being forwarned he might take beed, and decline the
undertaking for that time; which afterward he might reassume, or attempt some
other way.

CHAP. VII.
His military Actions.
Eaert.
IT is observed by many, that Socrates little affected travel, his life being
wholly spent at home, saving when he went out in military service.

In the second year of the eighty sixth Olympiad broke forth a war, the greatest
that ever happened amongst the Grecians, betwixt the Lacaedemonians and the
Athenians, the occasions and pretexts of it arising from the controversies of
the Athenians with the Corinthians, concerning Corcyra, and Polydaea, both
which being revolted from the Athenians, to whom they had been tributary,
sought for aid from the Lacedaemonians, who sent forces to the relief of
Polidaea.

In this war was Socrates thrice personally engaged; first, at the siege of
Polidaea, in the year of the Olympiad, against which the Athenians sent one
thousand six hundred choice men of arms, under the conduct of Phormis, who
besieged it from the Sea by his Gallyes, and on the land side by a wall:
amongst these were Socrates and Alcibiades: Laertius says, they were on the
sea side, and that there was no means to come on the land side further. Sympos.
Plato, that they served both a-foot, which disagrees not with the other; for
there was not any set battle during all the time of the siege, only sallies and
skirmishes. Here as Plut. Sympos.
Alcibiades his comerade, attests, Socrates outwent all soldiers in
hardiness; and if at any time, says he, as it often happens in war, the
provisions failed, there was none could bear the want of meat and drink like
him, yet on the other side in times of feasting, he only seemed to enjoy them,
and though of himself he would not drink, yet being invited, he far out-drank
all others, and which is strangest of all, never any man saw him drunk. The
excesses of cold in the winter, which in that Country are extraordinary, he as
wonderful endured, when the frost was so sharp, that very few durst go out of
their Tents, and those wrapping their legs and thighs in skins and furrs, he
went along with them, having no more cloths then those he usually wore: He
walked bare footed upon the Ice with less tenderness, then others in shoo^s,
to the wonder of the soldiers who thought themselves reproached by his
hardiness. His contemplative raptu^e at the same time was no less worthy
admiration; he fell into a deep contemplation one morning, and continued all
the while standing in the same posture, at noon it was taken notice of by the
soldiers, who told it from one to another, that Socrates had stood still in
the same place all that morning: In the evening some Ionian soldiers wrapping
themselves warm, came, and lay down by him in the open field, to watch if he
would continue all night in the same posture, which he did, until the morning,
and as soon as the Sun arose, saluted it, (...) retired. Of these kind of
raptures Agellius says he had many. Lib. 2. cap. 1.
We must not omit how he behaved himself there in fight; Plut. Symp. Athen.
deipnos. citing Antisthenes.
seeing his friend Alcibiades deeply engaged, and much wounded, he stepped
before him, defended him and his arms from the enemy, and brought him safely
off. Nor was his modesty inferior to his love or courage, for whereas after
the battle the generals were to bestow an honorable reward upon him that had
fought best, the Judges assigning it to Socrates, he declined it, and by his
earnest intercession, procured that it might be conferred upon Alci^iades.

The second action of Socrates was in the first year of the eighty ninth
Olympiad at Delium, a Town in Boetia, which the Athenians took. The Boetians
(says Thucydides) led by Pagondas, followed them, and bid them battle, the
left wing of the Boetians to the very middle of the Army was overthrown by the
Athenians, and fled to the other parts, where they were yet in sight: but the
right had the better of the Athenians, and by little and little forced them to
give ground, and followed them from the veryfirst. Pagondas, whilst the left
wing of his Army was in distress, sent two companies of horse secretly about
the hill, whereby that wing of the Athenians which was victorious, apprehending
upon their sudden appearing that they had been a fresh Army, was put into a
fright, and the whole Army of the Athenians, now doubly terrified by this
accident, and by the Thaebans that continually won ground, and broke their
ranks, betook themselves to flight, somefled toward Delium and the sea, others
the Mountain Parnes, and others other ways, as to each appeared hope of
safety. The Boetians, especially their horse, and those Locrians that came in,
after the enemy was defeated, followed killing them. Socrates in this
engagement behaved himself with his accustomed valor (so well, that Apud.
Plac^n.
La^hes confesses, if the rest had fought like him, they had not lost the day)
and care of his friends; Strab. lib. 9.
for seeing Xenophon unhorsed in the flight, and thrown down on the ground
(himself likewise having had his horse slain under him, Laert.
sought on too) he took him upon his shoulders, and carried him many a fladia,
and desended him until they gave ever the pursuit. And being thus at the loss
of the day with other dispersed in flight (amongst whom was Laches the Archon,
and Alcibiades) Plat.
in the constant slownesse of his retreat expressed a courage far above
Lache's, frequently looking back and round about, as greedy to be revenged of
the enemy if any should pursue them; which was the means that brought him off
more safely, for they who express least fear in thrir retreat, are less
subject to be assaulted, then such as repose their confidence in flying.

Plut. de demon. Socr. and Socrat. Epist. 1.
As they came to a way that was divided into two, Socrates made a stand, and
advised those that were with him not to take that way which they were going
into, along the Mountain Parne, but the other by the way Retiste, for says he,
I heard the Demons voice. The greater part were angry, as if he had trifled at
a time so serious; some few were persuaded to go along, amongst whom were
Laches and Alcibiades, and got safely home; the rest were met by some horsemen,
who returning from the pursuit, fell upon them; they at first resisted, but at
last enclosed by the Enemy who exceeded them in number; they gave back, and
were in the end oppressed, and all killed except one, who by the help of his
shield getting away, brought the news to Athens, and Pyrilampes Son of
Antiphon, who being wounded by a Javelin, was taken Prisoner; and when he
heard by those that were sent from Athens to Thehes to treat of peace, that
Socrates and the rest with him got safe home; he openly professed to the Thebans,
that Socrates had often called him and others of his company back, who not
following the advice of his Genius were slain.

The last military engagement was the same year at Plat. Apol. Laert.
Amphipolis, Thucyd. 4.
which was then taken by Brasidas the Lacedaemonian General.

CHAP. IX.
How he carried himself in the Democracy and the Oligarchy.
SOcrates forbore to accept any office in the Commonwealth, (except in his
later years that of Senator) either (as Var. hist. 3.
Aelian says) because he saw the Athenian government, though under the form
of a democracy, was yet nearer to a Tyranny or Monarchy, or Plat. Apol.
as himself professes* being dissuaded by his Genius from meddling in public
affairs, which advice was his preservation, being too honest to comply with the
injustices of the Commonwealth, and to oppose them was extremely dangerous, as
he found experimentally in that short time.

Plat. Apol. Gorg.
He was chosen to the Senate for the Antiochian tribe, whereunto ( Chap. 1.
as we have said) Alopece the Town were he was born belonged, and Xen. memor.
1. p. 711.
in order thereto took the oath which Solon appointed to be given to every
Senator, to give sentence according to the Laws, not biassed either by
favor, hatred, or any other pretext: In the third year of the 93. Olimpiad (
Plat. Apol.
the pre-eminence coming in course to the Antiochian tribe, and Socrates
thereupon becoming President of the people,) he had this occasion of
manifesting his constancy. Xenoph. hist. Graec. 1.
There happened a Sea fight between the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians at
Arginusae: The Athenian Commanders were ten; the Lacedaemonians Commander in
chief, Callic, atidas; the Lacedaemonians were overthrown, their Adm^al sunk;
the Athenians went back to Arg^uae with the loss of 25 ships, and all the men
in them except some few that escaped to land; The ten Commanders ordered
Theramenes and Thrasilulus (Captains of the Galleyes) to look out after the
vessels that were shipwrackt, which as they were going to do, a sudden
tempest arose and hindered them; Six of these Commanders returned to Athens
where they no sooner came, but upon the account they gave of the fight, the
Senate committed them to prison; Theramenes was their accuser, who urged that
they might be questioned for not relieving those that were lost by shipwreck;
The Commanders just^y answered, that they had given order for their relief, and
that Theramenes and Thrasibulus, on whom that charge was imposed, were (if any)
to be condemned; but that they would not retort the fault on their accusers,
for the Tempest sufficiently excused them. This satisfied the Senate for that
time, but at the next feast being the Apaturia, some friends of Theramenes, by
his instigation shaving their hair, and putting on mourning apparel,
pretending to be kinsmen of those that were drowned, came in that habit to the
Senate, and causing the charge against the ten Commanders to be renewed, so
much incensed the people, that they by menaces contrary to all law, enforced
the Senate to condemn them. Socrates being ordered to write the decree against
them, avoided it by pretending he could not write; and knew not the form, which
occasioned laughter in the Senate (and perhaps that aspersion of Porphyrius,
that he was scarce able to write, which when he did, it was to derision) but
the true reason is by Athenaeus acknowledged to be his constant fortitude, in
that he would not violate the laws of the Commonwealth contrary to the Oath
he had taken, Xenoph. memor. 1.
to which he took more heed then to the violence wherewith he was threatened;
For when the Senate proceeded to their condemnation, he Laert (...)perhaps (...)
alone opposed it with his suffrage, whereupon many Orators prepared to accuse
him, and the people cried out with loud clamours, that he might be brought to
answer for it: but he chose rather to hazard himself for Law and Justice, then
through fear of imprisonment and death to consent to injustice, as the death of
these men was afterward known to be, even to the Athenians themselves: and was
soon after punished in Theramenes by the like, wherein Socrates gave the same
testimony of his Courage upon this occasion.

Athens after a long war with the Lacedaemonians of 27. years, being taken at
last by Lysander, the Lacedaemonian General in the first year of the 94th
Olympiad, there grew some debate concerning the alteration of the Government,
from a democracy to an Oligarchy; Theramenes stood for the continuance of the
democracy, but being oveswai'd by the power and threats of Lysander, yielded to
the constitution of thirty persons, Diod. Sic. lib 14.
by title Governors, in effect Tyrants, of which number was Theramenes (whom
they took, in regard of his known moderation and equity, to bridle the rapine
and avarice of others) Critias, (first a friend, but now a great enemy to
Socrates for reproving his love of Euridamus) Charicles and others, whose names
are set down by Xenophon, as are also their murders unjust sequestrations of
lands, and confiscations of goods; They began with punishment of the worst
persons, proceeded to the richest, and ended with the best. Never (says
Seneca) was any City more miserable; 1300. ( Aechines says 1500.) of the best
persons they put to death without any legal trial, nor was their fury thereby
assuaged, but more exasperated; That City where was the Areopagus, the most
religious Court of Judicature, where the Senate and people like the Senate used
to assemble, was daily made a sad College of Executioners, an unhappy Court
too narrow for the Tyrants without rest from oppression, without hope of
liberty or remedy. All fled the City but Socrates, who all this while set not
his foot out of the gates; he was continually amongst the people, comforted the
lamenting Fathers, encouraged those that despaired of the state, reproached to
the rich, that had lived in fear to lose their wealth, the late repentance of
their dangerous avarice, and to those that would imitate him, gave great
examples, whilst he walked free amidst the thirty oppressors.

Theramenes opposing this cruelty and injustice, was accused by Critias for
betraying the trust of the Commonwealth, whereof he acquitted himself to the
satisfaction of the Senate; But Critias and his faction fearing he might
overthrow the Oligarchy, seized upon him with a troop of soldiers; Theramenes
run to the Altar, but being dragged from thence by the officers, he behaved
himself like (says Diodorus) the Disciple of Socrates; the people pitied him,
but none of them durst offer to help him, because he was compassed in by the
soldiers, except Socrates and two of his companions, who ran to him and
endeavored to rescue him out of the hands of the officers; Theramenes desired
them to forbear, telling them that he much loved and commended their kindness
and virtue, but that it would be the greatest misfortune he could have, if
their love to him should occasion their deaths; whereupon Socrates and his
companions seeing none come in to join with them in his aid, and that the
contrary party was too strong for them, gave over: Theramenes was carried to
prison, and there (being sentenced to drink hemlock) died.

These outrages of the thirty Tyrants Socrates did not forbear to censure.
Aelian. var. hist. 2.
Seeing many eminent persons put to death, and the rich circumvented and
betrayed to excessive punishments, he said to Antisthenes, does it repent thee
that we have done nothing in our whole lives great and remarkable, as those
Monarchs who are described in Tragedies, Atreus's, Thyestes's Agamemnon's and
Aegisthus's? they are in those plays beheaded, teasted with their own flesh,
and generally destroyed; Bu^ no P^et was ever so bold and impudent as to bring
a hog killed upon the stage.

Laert.
To another who murmured because he was not looked upon since they began to
rule, are you sorry for it said he? He said likewise, Xenoph. memor. 1.
that it were strange if a Neatherd who diminished and impoverished his herd,
should not confess himself an ill Neatherd; but more strange that one who
being set over a City, made the Citizens worse, and their number less, should
not confess himself an ill Governor. This came to their knowledge, whereupon
Critias and Charicles sent for him, and forbad him strictly to teach or
discourse with any of the young men. Socrates asked them, if in a^s of
prohibition he might be permitted to question what he understood not, which
they granting; Then (continues he) I am ready to obey the Laws, but lest I
transgress them through ignorance, I desire to be informed, whether when you
forbid me the act of speaking, this act be to be understood of things spoken
rightly or not rightly; if of the first, I must abstain from speaking what is
right; if of the second, I must take care to speak nothing but what is right;
Hereupon Charicles being displeased, said, Since you understood not that
Socrates, we command you what is easier to be understood, that hence forward
you speak not at all with any of the young men; To take away all ambiguity
replies Socrates, that I may not exceed my limitation; let me know expressly at
what years you call a man young: so long says Charicles, as he is incapable of
being Senator, and bath not attained to the height of his judgment; you are
not to speak with any under thirty; May I not buy, answers Socrates, of any
under that age, nor ask them the price of any thing? That you may, says
Charicles, but your custom is to ask questions of things which you know very
well; forbear those: and shall I not then, replies Socrates, make answer if
anyone ask me where Charicles dwells, or where Critias is? To such questions
says Charicles you may. You must (continues Critias) refrain from the
artisicers, whose ears you have sufficiently grated with your impertinent
discourse; I must then obstain (says Socrates) from justice, piety, and the
like; Even from the very Neatherds replies Charicles, which unless you do,
take heed your head come not short home.

This ill will and jealousy which they had conceived against Socrates was
increased by the secret departure of some friends of his out of the City, which
was reported to be done by his contrivement, to give intelligence to the
Thebans: nor was that suspicion without reason, as is manifest by his last
Epistle: hereupon they sumon'd him into the Court, where some complaints were
brought against him, of which having acquitted himself, they (to get a better
cause of quarrel against him) gave order to him and four more to go to the
Pyraeum, and to apprehend Leon, whom they meant to put to death, that they
might possess his estate: But Socrates refused, adding, that he would never
willingly assist an unjust act; whereupon Cha^icles said, do thou think
Socrates to talk thus peremptorily, and not to suffer? A thousand ills,
answered Socrates, but none so grievous as to do unjustly. Charicles made no
reply, nor any of the rest; the other four went for Leon, Socrates directly to
his house; but from thence forward, the jealousy they had of him was so much
increased, that Plat. Apol.
if their power had not been soon dissolved, they would have gone near to have
taken away his life.

CHAP. XI.
His falling out with the Sophists, and with Anytus.
THe Sophists, Masters of language in those ^imes, says Brut:
Cicero, (whereof were Gorgias of Leontium, Thrasymachus of Chalcedon,
Protagoras o^ Abdera, Prodicus a Cian, Hippias an Elian, and many others) who
professed in arrogant words to teach, how an inferior cause (such was their
phrase) might by speaking, be made superior, Cic. Orator.
and used a sweet fluent kind of Rhetoric, argute in sentences, lofty in
words, sitter for ostentation then pleading, for the Schools and Academies,
rather then the Forum) were so highly esteemed, that Liban. Apol.
wheresoev^r they came, they could persuade the young men to forsake all other
conversation for theirs. Cie. But.
These Socrates opposed, and often by his subtlety of disputing, refelling
their principles Liban. Apol.
with his accustomed interrogatories, demonstrated, that they were indeed much
beneath the esteem they had gained, that they themselves understood nothing of
that which they undertook to teach others; he withdrew the young men from their
empty conversation: These, who till then had been looked upon as Angels for wit
and Eloquence, he proved to be vain affecters of words, ignorant of those
things which they professed, and had more need to give money to be taught, then to
take (as they used) money for teaching. The Athenians taken with these reproof's
which Socrates gave them, derided them, and excited their children to the study
of solid virtue.

Another quarrel Socrates had of long continuance, for it was the occasion of
his death, but begun many years before, with Anytus, an Orator by profession,
privately maintained and enriched by Leather-sellers: He had put two of his
sons to Socrates to be taught, but not being pleased, that whilst they were in
that way, they had not learned so much, as to be able thereby to get their
living; he took them from Socrates, and put them to that trade which himself
was ashamed to own; wherewith Socrates being much displeased in respect of the
two youths, whose ruin he presaged, (and truly, for they fell afterward into
debaucheries which occasioned it) spared not to reproach Anytus in discoursing
to his Scholars, Socratic. Epist.
telling them, That the Trade of dressing Leather was not sit to be spoken of
amongst young men; for they who benefit themselves by any art, cherish and
profess it, as Acumenus Physic, Damon and Connus Musl^ck; even Any us whilst
his sons were his scholars, was not ashamed of that which they learned, though
it were not sufficient to maintain them by pleading; but for himself he
gloryed that he walked invisible with Pluto's Helmet, or Giges Ring, concealing
from the people the true means of his subsistence, which indeed was by dressing
Leather, which was not just, to be ashamed of the trade, and not of the profit;
for he ought to own this, or to disclaim that.

Anytus (says Var. hist.
Aelian) to answer this reproach, studied all occasions and ways of revenge;
but feared the Athenians, doubting if he should accuse Socrates, how they would
take it, his name being in high esteem for many respects, chiefly for opposing
the Sophists, who neither taught nor knew any solid learning. He Schol.
Aristoph.
advises with Melitus, a young man, an Orator, unknown to Socrates, described
by * Plato, with long plain hair, a high nose, and a thin beard, Liban.
one that for a drachine might be bought into any thing, by whose counsel
Aelian.
He begins, by making trial in lesser things, to sound how the At^enians would
entertain a charge against his life; for to have accused him upon the very
first, he conceived unsafe, as well for the reason already mentioned, as lest
the friends and followers of Socrates should divert the anger of the Judges
upon himself, for falsely accusing a person so far from being guilty of any
wrong to the State, that he was the only ornament thereof. To this end he
subbornes Aristophanes, a Comic Poet, whose only business was to raise mirth,
to bring Socrates upon the Stage, taxing him with crimes which most men knew
him free from, impertinent discourse, making an ill cause by argument seem
good, introducing new and strange deities, whilst himself believed and
reverenced none; hereby to insinuate an ill opinion of him, even into those who
most frequented him. Aristophanes taking this Theme, interweaves it with much
abusive mirth; the best of the Grecians was his subject, not Cleon the
Lacedaemonians, the Thebans, or Pericles himself, but a person dear to all the
Gods, especially Apollo. At first (by reason of the novelty of the thing, the
unusual personating of Socrates upon the Stage) the Athenians, who expected
nothing less, were struck with wonder: Then, (being naturally envious apt to
detract from the best persons, not only of such as bore office in the
commonwealth, but any that were eminent for learning or virtue) they begun to
be taken with the Clouds, (so was the play named) and cried up the actour that
personated Socrates with more applause, then ever any before, giving him with
many shouts the victory, and sending word to the Judges that they should set
down no name but that of Aristophanes. Socrates came seldom to the Theater,
unless when Euripides contested with any new Tragaedian, there, or in the
Pyraeum, then he went, for he affected the wisdom, goodness, and sweetness
of his verse; sometimes Alcibiades and Critias would invite him to a Comedy,
and in a manner compel him; for he was so far from esteeming Comedians, that
he contemned them, as lying, abusive, and unprofitable; whereat they were much
displeased: These (with other things suggested by Anytus and Melitus) were the
ground of Aristophanes his Comaedy, who, it is likely, got a great sum of
money by it, they being eager in prosecution of their design, and he prepared
by want, and malice to receive their impression: In fine, the play got
extraordinary credit, that of Cratinus being verified, The Theater was then
Filled with malicious men.


It being at that time the feast of Bacchus, a multitude of Grecians went to
see the play: Socrates being personated on the Stage and often named, (nor was
it much the Players should represent him, for the Potters frequently did it
upon their stone-jugs) the strangers that were present (not knowing whom the
Comedy abused) raised a humme and whisper, every one asking who that Socrates
was? which he observing (for he came not thither by chance, but because he knew
himself should be abused in the play, had chosen the most conspicuous seat in
the Theater) to put the strangers out of doubt, he rose up, and all the while
the play lasted, continued in that posture, ( Aelian. var. hist. 5.
laughing) Plut. de educand. lib.
One that was present asked him, if it did not vex him to see himself brought
upon the Stage? Not at all, (answered he) me thinks I am at a feast, where
every one enjoyes me. Schol. Aristoph
This comedy was first acted when Isarchus was Archon, Cratinus victor in the
first year of the eighty ninth Olympiad: Aristophanes being by some reprehended
for it, to vindicate himself, caused it to be acted again the year following,
Amyntas being Archon, but with worse order then at first.

Lacrt.
Amipsias also (another comic Poet) derided him thus in Tribone.

O Socrates, the best of few, the vainest
Of many men; and art thou come amongst us?
Where is thy gown? did not this great misfortune
Befall thee by the leather-dresser's help.
CHAP. X.
His Trial.
Plat. Apul. Liban. Apol.
MAny years past since the first falling out betwixt Socrates and Anyt^us,
during which time one continued openly reproving the other, secretly
undermining, until at length Anytus seeing the time suit with his design,
procured Melitus to prefer a bill against him to the Senate, in these terms.

Melitus Son of Melitus, a Pythean, accuses Socrates Son of Sophroniscus an
Alopecian. Socrates violates the Law, not believing the ^^^ities which this
City beliveth, but introducing other new Gods. He violates the law likewise in
corrupting youth; the punishment death.

This bill being preferred upon oath ( Plato See Suidas upon that word.
(...)) Crito became bound to the Judges for his appearance at the day of
trial. Liban. Apol. p. 644.
Soon after Anytus sent privately to him, desiring him to forbear the mention
of his Trade, and assuring him that he would thereupon withdraw his action; but
Socrates returned him answer, that he would never forbear speaking truth as
long as he lived, that he would always use the same speeches concerning him;
that his accusation was not of force enough to make him refrain from speaking
those things which he thought himself before obliged to say.

Xenoph. Apol* and memor. 4.
The intervall of time betwixt his accusation and trial, he imploi'd in his
usual Philosophical exercises, not taking any care to provide his defense, for
which being observed and questioned by Hermogenes son of Hipponicus, I provide
apology enough (says he) in considering and pursuing the constant course of my
life; Hermogenes demanding how that could be? because (says he) I never did
any unjust act, which I conceive the best apology: but we often see Judges
(says Hermogenes) overswai'd by Rhetoric, to condemn the innocent and acquit
the guilty: the truth is, (replied Socrates) going about to make my apology, I
was twice withheld by the Demon, whereat Hermogenes wondering, is it strange
(continues he) that God should think it fit for me to die at this time?
hitherto no man has lived more uprightly, which as it is now my greatest
comfort, so it was the greatest delight to my self and friends; if I live
longer, I know I mustundergoe what is proper to old age, defects of hearing and
sight, slownesse to apprehend, aptness to forget, how can I then be pleased to
live longer and grow worse: It is likely God in his love to me has ordained
that I should die in the most convenient age, and by the gentlest means, for
if I die by sentence, I am allowed the benefit of the most easy kind of death;
I shall give my friends the least trouble, I shall do nothing unseemely before
those that are present, and shall depart sound in body and soul; is not this
very desirable? God with much reason forbids me to make any defense; If I could
effect it, I should only stay longer to be taken away by the torment of
diseases and imperfections of age, which truly Hermogenes I desire not; If when
I give an account of my actions toward God and men, the Judges think fit to
condemn me, I will rather chufe to die then to beg of them a life worse then
death. Other friends used the same persuasions to him with assurance of
victory, Cicer. de Oral. 1. Laeart.
Lycias an excellent Orator offered him an Oration, which he had written in
his defense, desiring him if he thought good to make use of it at his trial;
Socrates perused it, and told him, that it was a good one, but not fit for him.
Lysias asking how that could be? why (says he) may not a garment or shoes be
rich, yet not fit for me? if you should bring me Sicyonian shoes, I would not
wear them though they were fit for my feet, because they are effeminate: he
conceived the Oration to be ingenious and eloquent, but not stout and manly,
Plut.
for though it were very bitter against the Judges, yet Laert.
was it more rhetorical then became a Philosopher.

The day of trial being come, Plat. Apol.
Anytus, Lyco, and Melitus prepared to accuse him, one in behalf of the
people, the second of the Orators, the last of the Poets: Melitus first went
up into the chair proper for that purpose, and there spoke an Oration which
was in it felt mean enough, but withal delivered so unhappily and
school-boy-like, that sometimes he was out with fear, and turned about to be
prompted like a player, enough to beget laughter, even in those that were most
concerned in so serious a caufe: Part of the effect whereof seems to be the
same which is thus by Xenophon dispersedly delivered, some particulars whereof
are confirmed by Libanius.

That Socrates persuaded his auditors to contemn the received Laws, saying, it
was sit only for fools to be governed by a bean, (meaning the suffrages of
the Senate so gathered.)

That he was intimately conversant with Critias and Alcibiades, one most
covetous and violent in the Oligarchy, the other ambitious of Tyranny.

That he taught direspect and obedience to Parents, telling his scholars he
would make them wiser than their Fathers, and that it was lawful for any one
to bind his Father if he were mad, and for those that were the more wise to do
as much to those that were less wise.

That he taught also direspect of all other kinsmen, saying they were not
useful to the sick, or to the accused, the first being in more need of a
Physician, the latter of an Orator; that the good will of unable friends was
nothing worth: that only the most knowing persons were most worthy of honor,
by which means he would arrogate all respect to himself.

That he selected out of the Poets some ill places, and perverted others that
were not so, to excite his friends to impious actions; as that of Hesiod, There
is no work pursued shame;
It Is idleness, hat merits blame.
He expounded, as if the Poet meant all acts might be committed for gain.

That he often repeated and misinterpreted tese words of Homer, as if the poet
allowed the poor to be beaten.

When he a Prince or some great person meets,
Such with soft language kindly thus he greets;
Happy above the reach of fear are you;
Sit down, and bid your followers do so too.
But of the lower fort when any speaks,
Forth these words with blows his anger breaks:
Be quiet; to shy betters wretch submit;
For action and advice alike unsit.
Melitus (his oration ended) came down; Liban. Apol.
next him came Anytus with a long malicious speech, and last of all Lyco with
all the artisice of Rhetoric concluded the accusation.

Socrates Cic. T^^c.
would not (as was the custom) procure an Advocate to plead for him; all the
while his accusers were speaking, he seemed to employ his mind about nothing
less: as soon as they had done, quest. 1.
he went up into the chair, ( Cic. de divinat. 1.
in which action he observed that the Demon did, not withhold him) an^ with
Socratic. Epist. 14.
an angry smile begun this Plat. Apol.
unpremeditated answer, Cic. Tusc. quest. 1.
not as a suppliant or guilty person, but as if Master of the Judges
themselves, with a free contumacy proceeding not from pride, but the greatness
of his mind.

Xenoph.
But I wonder first ( Athenians) how Melitus came by this knowledge, that (as
he says) I do not worship those Gods the City worships? Others have seen me
(and to might Melitus if he had pleased) sacrifice at common festivalls on the
public Altars; How do I introduce new deities when I profess to be directed
in all my actions by the voice of God? they who observe the notes of birds, or
answers of men, are guided by the voice: none doubts of thunder whether it be
loud or oraculous; Does not the Priestesse on the Tripod convey to us by voice
what the God delivers to her* and that he foreknowes events, communicating them
to whom pleases him, all men (as well as I) believe and profess: others call
those that foretell events, Augurs, Soothsayers and Diviners, I the Demon, and
(I conceive) more religiously then they who ascribe a Divine power to birds:
That I am no impostor, herein many can attest, who have asked my advice, and
never found it fail.(Here there arose a murmur in the Senate, some not
believing, others envying what he said, that he should surpass them in such a
particular favor of the deity;) Let such as are incredulous hear this also to
confirm their opinion that I am not favored of the Gods; when Chaerephon in
the presence of many witnesses questioned the Delphian Oracle concerning me,
Apollo answered, that no man was more free, more just, or more wise; (here
another murmur arose amongst the Judges: he proceeded) Yet the same God faid
more of Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian Lawgiver, that he knew not whether to call
him a God or a man; me he compared not with the Gods, though he gave me the
priority amongst men. But trust not the God herein, consider me exactly your
selves; whom know you less a servant to corporeal pleasures? whom more free?
I accept not either rewards or gifts? who more just then he who so conformes
himself to the present time, as he needs not help of any other? who will say he
deserves not the title of wife, who since he was able, never desisted to learn
by enquiry all good possible* and that I took not this pains in vain, is
evident in that, many Citizens and strangers studious of virtue, prefer my
conversation above all others: what is the reason that though all men know I
have no wealth to require them, so many desire to oblige me by gifts? that I
require no return from any, yet engage so many? that when the City being
besieged, every one lamented his condition, I was no more moved then when It
was most flourishing? That whilst others lay out money on outward things to
please themselves, I furnish my self from within, my self with things that
please me better? If none can disprove what I have said, deserve I not the
commendations both of Gods and men? and yet you Melitus pretend that with these
instructions I corrupt youth; Every one knows what it is to corrupt youth; Can
you name but one that I of religious have made impious, of modest impudent, of
frugal, prodigal, of sober, debauched, of hardy effeminate, or the like? But I
know those answered Melitus whom you have persuaded to be more obedient to you
then to their own Parents. That as far as concerns instruction, replied
Socrates, I confess; this they know to be my proper care; for their health men
obey Physicians before their Parents, in Lawsuits Counselors before their
kindred; do you not in war prefer the most experienced soldiers to command
before your own allies? yes answers Melitus, it is fit we should; and do you
think it reason then, replies Socrates, if others are preferred for such things
as they are excellent in, that, because in in the opinion of some, I have an
advantage beyond others in educating youth, which is the greatest benefit
amongst men, I ought therefore to die? Plut de tranqu. anim.
Anytus and Melitus (says he, addressing himself to the Judges) may procure my
death, hurt me they cannot: Plut. de consol. ad Apol.
To fear death is to seem wise, and not to be so; for it is to pretend to
understand that which we understand not: no man knows what death is, whether it
be not the greatest happiness that can arrive to a man, and yet all fear, and
shun it as if they were sure it were the greatest misfortune.

This and more (says Xenophon) was said both by himself and his friends, but
the Judges were so little pleased with his unusual manner of pleading, that
Leart:
as Plato went up into the Chair and began a speech in these words; Though I
Athenians am the youngest of those that come up in this place, they all cried
out, of those that go down, which he thereupon was constrained to do, and they
proceeding to vote, Socrates was cast by 281* voices; It was the custom of
Athens, as Cicero observes, when any one was cast, if the fault were not
capital, to impose a pecuniary muict; when the Judges had voted in that
manner, the guilty person was asked the highest rate whereat he aestimated his
offense; The Judges willing to favor Socrates, propounded that demand to him,
He answered 25. (or as Eubulides says, 100.) drachmes, nor would he suffer
Xenoph.
his friends, Plat Apol.
Plato, Crito, Critobulus, and Apollodorus (who desired him to aestimate it at
50. minae, promising to undertake the sum) to pay any thing for him, saying,
that to pay a penalty was to own an offense, and telling the Judges that (for
what he stood accused) he deserved the highest honors and rewards, and daily
sustenance at the public charge out of the Prytanaeum, which was the greatest
honor that was amongst the Graecians; with this answer, the Judges were so
exasperated, that they condemned him to death by 80. votes more.

Xenoph. Apol.
The sentence being past, he could not forbear smiling, and turning to his
friends, said thus, they who have suborned false witnesses against me, and they
who have born such testimonies, are, doubtless conscious to themselves of
great impiety and injustice; but as for me, what should more deject me now then
before I was condemned, being nothing the more guilty: They could not prove I
named any new Gods for Iupitr, Juno, and the rest, or swore by such: How did I
corrupt young men by inuring them to sufferance and frugality? of capital
offenses, as Sacrilege, Theft, and Treason, my very adversaries acquit me;
which makes me wonder how I come to be condemned to dye; yet that I dey
unjustly will not trouble me, it is not a reproach to me, but to those who
condemned me; I am much satisfied with the example of Palamedes, who suffered
death in the like manner; he is much more commended then ulysses the procurer
of his death; I know, both future and past times will witness, I never hurt,
or injured any, but on the contrary have advantaged all that coversed with me
to my utmost ability, communicating what good I could, gratis. This said, he
went away, his carriage answerable to his words, his eyes, gesture, and gate
expressing much cheerfulness.

CHAP. XI.
His imprisonment.
Socrates (says Consol. ad Melv.
Seneca) with the same resolved look, wherewith he singly opposed the thirty
Tyran^s, entered the prison, and took away all ignominy from the place, which
could not be a prifon whilst he was there: Here ( Maxim. Tyr.
being fettered by the eleven Officers) he continued Xenoph. memor. 4.
thirty days after he was condemned upon this occasion: Plat. Phad.
The ship which carried Theseus and fourteen more persons into Creet; he vowed
if they got safe home (as it fortuned they did) to dedicate to Apollo, and to
send it every year with a present to Delos, which custom the Alhenians
religiously observed; before the solemnity, they used to lustrate their City,
and all condenmed persons were reprieved till it returned from Delos, which
sometimes, the wind not serving, was a long time. The Priest of Apollo began
the solemnity, by crowning the Poop of the ship, which happening the day before
Socrates was condemned, occasioned his lying in prison so long after.

In this intervall he was visited by his friends, with whom he past the time in
dispute after his usual manner: he was often solicited by them to an escape,
some of them offered to carry him away by force, which he not only refused, but
derided, asking, if they knew any place out of Attica whither death could not
come? Plat. Crit.
Crito, two days before his death, came very early in the morning to him, to
the same purpose, having by his frequent visits and gifts gained some interest
in the jaylour, but finding him asleep, sat still by him, admiring in the
soundness of his sleep, the happy equality of his mind; as soon as he waked, he
told him, that he came to bring sad news, if not such to him, yet to all his
friends, that the ship would certainly be at home to morrow at furthest (some
that came from Sunium affirming they had left it there) but that in all
likelihood it would come that day, and he should dye the next. In good timebe
it, answered Socrates, but I do not believe it will come to day; for the day
following I must dye, as they say, who have the power in their hands; but that
I shall not dye to morrow but the day after, I guess by a dream I had this
night, that a woman very beautiful in a white garment, saluted me by my name,
saying, Thou, e* e three days are told,
Rich Pthya shall behold.
(The same relation, according to Laertius, he made to Aeschines) This occasion
Crito took to persuade him to save himselfe^, which he pressed with many
arguments; That his friends, would be accused of covetousness, as more
desirous to spare their wealth, then to redeem him; that it might be effected
with little trouble and expense to them who were provided for it; that himself
was rich enough to do it, or if not, Simmias, Cebes and others, would join
with him; that he ought not voluntarily to thrust himself into destruction,
when he might avoid it; that he should leave his children in an uncertain mean
estate; that it would not be construed constancy but want of courage. Consider
well these reasons, says he, or rather (for it is now no time to stand
considering) be persuaded, what is to be done, must be done this night^ or it
will be too late. Socrates answered, that his cheerful readiness to relieve
him was much to be esteemed, if agreeable to justice, otherwise, the less
just, the more blamable: that opinion and censure ought not to be regarded, but
truth and equity; that wrong must not be requi^ed with wrong; that faith should
be kept more strictly with a City then with private persons; that he had
voluntarily subjected himself to the laws of his Country, by living under
their government, and to violate them at last, were great in justice: that by
breaking Prison, he should not only draw his friends into many inconveniences,
but himself also into many dangers, only to live and dye in exile; that it
such a condition, he should be nothing more capable to bring up his children
well, but dying honestly, his friends would take the more care of them: That
whatsoever inconvenience might ensue, nothing was to be preferred before
justice; that it he should escape by treachery, the remainder of his life would
be never the more happy, nor himself after death better entertained in the
next world. These things (says he) I hear like the Corybantian pipes, the
sound of these words makes me dease to every thing else; therefore whatever you
shall say to the contrary, will be to no purpose; but if you have any other
business, speak. Crito answering, he had not any else, as for this then
(concludes he) speak no more of it, let us go the way which God points out to
us.

CHAP. XII.
THe time and manner of his death.
The time of Socrates death, is formerly touched; the Marble at Arundell-House
says, he died when Laches was Archon, aged seventy years, which (according to
Plato) were complete, for he says (...) Leart
Demetrus Phalerius says, he dyed the first year of the nintie fifth Olympiad,
having lived seventy years. Lib. 14.
Dioclorus Siculus averres, it was done in that year Baches being Archon.

Although there be not any thing in the Greek story settled by better
authority, then the years of Socrates; Leo Ailaius with much confidence, and
little reason, controverts the received Chronology of his life and death, the
occasion is this; the fourteenth of the Socratick Epistles published by him,
mentions an oration of Polycrates, as spoken at the arraignment of Socraes;
but the Walls of Athens repaired by Conon six years after the death of
Socrates, being spoken of in that Oration, the Epistle is thereby rendered
suspicious, the truth seems to be this: After the death of Socrates, it became
an ordinary Theme in the Schools of Rhetoric (which was at that time much
studied at Athens) to speak for and against Socrates: Polycraes, a Sophister,
to exercise his wit, wrote an invective: Ly^ias, a famous Orator, who died
about the 100 Olympiad, had written (as we have already said) an Apologetick,
which is by the Scholiast of Aristides cited in answer to Polycrates. Apologies
were in like manner written by Plato, Memorab. lib. 1.
Xenophon, and (long after by) Libanius; although Isocrates admonished
Polycrates of certain errors in his Oration against Socrates, yet the
Anachronism continued, for Chronology was not yet studied in Athens; and thence
it is that Plato himself is in that respect so much reprehended by A^henaeus,
Aristides, Macrobius, and other: the writer of the Socraticall Epistle admits
^olycrates as the accuser at the trial, and oration as then, and there spoken,
so also does Hermippus whom Laertius cites to the same effect; But Phavorinus a
Critic of later times, when Chronology was more exact, detects the error by
computation of times: Allatius will by no means have the criticism of
Phavortnus allowed, and labors to introduce an uncertainty of the time, to the
end he may persuade that Socrates lived beyond the reparation of the walls of
Athens: the great Engine where with he labors to demolish all that has been
afferted by the ancients, is the testimony of Suidas, who (I know not upon what
authority) says he lived 80. years: his smaller artillery are the groundless
emendation of Meursius, and the mistake of Scal^ger before noted; the absurd
Metachronism of the Chronicum Alexandrinum, which makes Socrates die in the
104th Olympiad, and in the 90th year of his age; the anistoresie of the unknown
writer of Aristoles life, who supposes him in the 17th. year of his age to
have heard Socrates three years, and which is most ridiculous, the notorious
anachronisms of Plato must serve asirrefragable arguments to impugn the truth.
With these proofs in the sophistical disguise of a Dialogue, he endeavors
to puzzle the unwary reader.

The manner of his death receive from Plato in the person of Phaedo an
Eyewitness; Every day (says he) I went with other friends of his to visit
him; we met in the Court where he was tried, it being near the prison; where we
entertained our selves with discourse till the prison was opened, then went in
unto him and spent many times the whole day with him: But that day we met
sooner then ordinary, for the evening before as we came out of the Prison, we
heard the ship was come from Delos, and thereupon we appointed to meet early
the next morning at the usual place, where being come, the Porter came out to
us, and told us that that we must stay a while before we could be admitted, for
the eleven Officers were there taking off his fetters, having brought him word
that he must die to day: not long after he came out again, and told us we might
go in, where when we came, we found Socrates his fetters newly taken off, and
Xantippe sitting by him with a child in her arms: She as soon as she saw us
burst forth into tears, and cried out ah, Socrates, this is the last time thy
friends shall ever speak to thee, or thou to them, Crito (says Socrates,
addressing himself to him) let some body carry her home; whereupon some of
Crito's servants lead her away exclaiming, and beating her breast. Socrates who
was sitting upon the bed, drew up his leg and rubbed it, saying the whilst, How
strange a thing, friends, is that which men call pleasure, how near a kin to
pain to which it seems so contrary? they arrive not indeed together, but he
that takes one, is immediately overtaken by the other, as if they were tied
together* If Aesop had observed this, certainly he would have made some fable
of it, as if God willing to compose their difference, had joined them by the
end, not being able to make them absolutely one; so that whosoever has one,
must strait have the other also; As it happens to me at this time, the pain my
^etters even now gave me, is now turned to a kind of pleasure, and tickles me.
You have opportunely (said Cebes) put me in mind to ask, why since your
imprisonment (which you never did before) you have writ Poems, a hymnne to
Apollo, and Aesops Fables rendered into verse; many have questioned me about
it, particularly E^^nus, if he repeat this demand, what answer shall I give
him? Tell him (answers Socrates that truly I did it not to to contend with him
and his verses, but to comply with a dream (which I have had more then once)
enjoining me to practice Music; in obedience whereunto I first made verses in
honor of the God whose feast this was; Then, conceiving it essential to a Poet
to write sictions, which of my self, I use not, I made use of some of Aesops
which I had in memory, as they first came into my fancy; Tell Euenus this, and
bid him from me farewell, and if he be wise, follow me, for it seems I must go
hence to day, the Athenians have so ordered it. What is that said Stmmtas which
you bid Euemus do, I have often conversed with him, but as far as I understand
him, he will not be at all ready to be ruled by you; what, says he, is he not
a Philosopher? he seem so, answers S^mmias, then he will (replied Socrates) and
so will all who deserve that name; but perhaps he will not lay violent hands
upon himself, that is not lawful: and as he was speaking thus, he set down his
leg again to the ground, and sitting so, continued all the rest of the dispute.
Then Ce^es asking why, how it could be that it should be prohibited to ones
self, yet that a Philosopher ought to desire to follow a dying person? he
answered, men are the possessions of God, would you not be angry if your slave
should kill himself against your will, and if it were in your power punish him?
we must expect a suinmons from God, an inevitable necessity (such as I have at
this time) to take us hence. This is truth, replied Ceb^s, but what you
asserted even now is inconsistent with it; God taking care of us as his
possessions, can a wise man desire to be out of his protection? he cannot think
to mend his condition by freeing himself from so excellent a government
Socrates seemed much pleased with the subtlety of Ceb^s, and turning to us
said, Cebes is always inquisitive, nor will easily admit any thing; to me said
Simmtas what he has said seem^, reason, how can wise men endure, much less
endeavor to part with those that are so much better then themselves? but Co^es
herein reflects upon you, who are so ready to leave us, and the Gods whom you
acknowledge good Governors* you say well, answers Socrates, I suppose your
would have me answer as in a Court of Judicature; by all means says Simmias^*
well then replies he, I will endeavor to defend my self better against you
then I did before the Judges: Truly did I not believe I should go to just Gods,
and to men better then any living, I were inexcusable for contemning death; but
I am sure to go to the Gods, very good Masters, and hope to meet with good men,
and am of good courage, hoping that something of man subsists after death, and
that it is then much better with the good then with the bad. Here Crito
interrupting him, told him that he who was to administer the poison, advised
him to speak little, and not heat himself with dispute; for it agreed not with
that kind of poison, which some neglecting, had bin constrained to take it two
or three times: mind him not said Socrates, let him provide as much as may
serve twice or thrice if need be; Then he proceeded in a large discourse to
declare that the chief office of a Philosopher is to meditate on death;
therefore he ought not to fear the approach of it; That as death is the
solution of the Soul from the Body, so is it the office of a Philosopher to
free the soul from corporeal affections; That if we understand the better, the
more the soul is disengaged from sense, we shall understand most perfectly when
she is wholly freed from the body by death, which perfection of knowledge is
the sole end of Philosophy.

This part of the discourse ended, Cebes occasions the renewing of it by the
desiring him to prove the immortality of the soul, which he does first from
the necessary succession of generation and corruption as contraries, the ground
of the Pythagorean transmigration; next from the Souls manner of reasoning,
which being only by reminiscence argues it had a being before the body (when it
had perfect knowledge of those Ideas which upon occasion of sensible objects it
recovers) and consequently shall subsist after it; much more is spoken by Plato
under his name, whereof almost all is manisestly Plato own, nor is it possible
to select that which is not from the rest; the conclusion of his discourse (as
contracted by Cicero was, Tusc. quast. page 127.
That there are two ways, and a twofold course of Souls when they go out of
the body: for such as have defiled themselves with humane vices given over to
pleasures where with they are blinded, according as they are polluted with
domestic sins, or have used inexpiable deceits to wrong the public, take a by
way secluded from the Council of the Gods: But they who have preserved
themselves entire and chaste from the least contagion of their bodyies, having
always withdrawn themselves from them, and in humane slesh imitated the lives
of Gods, find a ready way open for them, leading them to those from whom they
came: and as swans are (not without reason) sacred to Apollo, because they
seem to have learnt divination from him, whereby foreseeing the good that is
in death they dye with songs and delight, so ought all good and knowing persons
to do: Plat.
Let every one therefore prepare for this journey against the time that fate
shall call him away; You Simmtas, Cebes and the rest here present shall go at
your appointed hour, me sat now summons (as the Fragedian says) and perhaps
it is time that I go into the Bath, for I think it best to wash before I take
the poison, that I may save the women the labor of washing me when I am dead.

When he had made an end of speaking (...) asked him what directions he would
leave concerning his Sons and other affairs, and if they could do any thing
that might be acceptable to him? I desire no more (says he) then what I have
often told you, if you take care of your selves, whatsoever you do will be
acceptable to me and mine, though you promise nothing, if you neglect
yourselves and virtue, you can do nothing acceptable to us though you promise
never so much; that answered Crito we shall observe; but how will you be
buried? as you think good says he, if you can catch me, and that I give you
not the slip then with a smile applying himself to us, I cannot persuade Crito
says he, that I am any thing more then the carcass you will anon behold, and
therefore he takes this care for my enterment; it seems that what even no I
told him that as soon as I have taken the poison I shall go to the joys of the
blessed, has been to little purpose; He was my bail, bound to the Judges for
my appearance, you must now be my sureties to him that I am departed; let him
not say that Socrates is carried to the grave, or laid underground, for know
dear Crito such a mistake were a wrong to my soul; be not dejected; tell the
world my body only is buried, and that after what manner thou please. This
said, heearose and retired into an inner room, taking Crito with him, leaving
us discoursing upon our own misery, shortly to be deprived like Orphans of so
dear a Father. After his bathing, came his wife and the other women of his
Family with his Sons, two of them children, one a youth; when he had taken
order with these about his domestic affairs, he dismissed them and came out to
us.

It was now Sunset (for he (...) staid long within) when the officer entrid,
and after a little pause (...) not Socrates observ^d that carriage in you which
I have found in others, but as I thought you the most genero^s over the (...)
and best of all men that ever came into this (...) so I how see you hate me*
not for that wh^^ of other are the cause* you know the message I bring,
farewell, bear what you cannot remedy, with that he departed weeping; and fare
the^ well. (said Socrates) I will: How civil is this man? (...) found him the
same all the time of my imprisonment, he would often (...) me, discourse with
me, used me always curt cously, and now see how kindly he weeps for me: but
come Cri^o, let us do as he bids us, if the poison be ready, let it be brought
in The Sun is yet scarce set answers Crito* others take it late after a
plentiful supper and full cups* make not so much have, there is time enough;
he replies, they who do so think they gain time, but what shall I gain by
drinking it late, only deceive my self as covetous of life, and sparing of
that which is no longer mine; pray let it be as I say; Then Crito sent one of
the attendants, who immediately returned, and with him the man that was to
administer the poison, bringing a cup in his hand, to whom Socrates, prithee
honest friend (for thou art well verst in these businesses) what must I do?
nothing said he, but as soon as you have drunk, walk till you find your legs
begin to fail? then lie down, and in so saying, he gave him the Cup; Socrates
took it cheerfully, not changing either countenance, or color; and looking
pleasantly upon him, demanded whether he might spill any of it in libation, who
answered, he had made no more then would just serve; yet says Socrates I may
pray to God, and will, that my passage hence may be happy, which I beseech him
to grant, and in the same instant drank it off easily without any disturbance;
many of us who till now had refrained from tears, when we saw him put the cup
to his mouth and drink off the poison, were not able to contain any longer;
which Socrates observing, friends (says he) what mean you? for this reason I
sent away the women left they should be so unquiet: I have heard we should die
with gratulation and applause, be quiet then and take it patiently; These words
made us with shame suppress our tears; when he had walked a while, perceiving
his legs to fail, he lay down on his back as the Executioner directed him; who
looking on his feet pinched them hard, asking him if he felt it, he answered
no; he did the like to his legs, and showing us how every part successively
grew cold and sti^^e, told us when that chillness came at his heart he would
die; not long after liee spoke these his last words, O Crito I owe Aesculapius
a Cock, pay it, negglect it not. It shall be done, said Crito; will you have
any thing else? He made no answer, lay still a while, then stretched himself
forth; with that the executioner uncovered him, his eyes were set, Crito closed
them. This (says Plato) was the end of the best, the wisest, and most just of
men: A story, which Cicero professes, he never read without tears.

Aristole says, that a Magus coming from Syria to Athens, not only
reprehended Socrates for many things, but foretold him also that he should die
a violent death. Laertius closes his life with this Epigram, Drink Socrates
with Jove, next whom enthroned,
By Gods and wisdom's self as wisest owned.
Thee, the Athenians gave a pois' nous draught,
But first same they from thy lips had quast.


CHAP. XIIII.
What happened after his death.
HE was buried with tears and much solemnity (contrary to his own direction) by
his friends, amongst whom, Plut. de virt. mor.
the excessive grief of Plato is observed by Plutarch, Plut. vit. dec. Orat.
and the mourning habit of Isocrates: As soon as they had performed that last
service, fearing the cruelty of the Tyrants, they stole out of the City, the
greater part to Megara to Euclid, where they were kindly received, Liban.
the rest to other parts.

Socrat. Epist.
Soon after, I Lacaedemonian youth, who had never more acquaintance with
Socrates then what fame gave him, took a journey to Athens, intending to become
his disciple; being come as far as the City-gates, and ready to enter, with joy
to be near the end at which he aimed, instead of Socrates, he meets there the
news of his death, whereat he was so troubled, that he would not go within the
City-gates, but enquiring the place where he was buried, went thither, and
breaks forth into a passionate discourse, accompanied with many tears, to the
enclosed dead body; when night was come, he fell asleep upon the Sepulcher; the
next morning, affectionately kissing the dust that lay upon it; and with much
passion taking leave of the place, he returned to Megara.

Suidas tells a like story (for that there were more examples then one in this
kind, Libanius implies) of a Chain, named Cyrsas, who coming to Athens to hear
Socrates, went to his Tomb, and slept there, to whom Socrates appeared in a
dream, and discoursed with him; with which only satisfaction he went directly
home again.

Socrat. Epist.
By these accidents the Athenians were awakened into a sense of their
injustice, considering they were obnoxious to the censure of the Lacedaemonians
by extraordinary crimes whose children were so affectionate to the Philosophers
whom they had murdered, as to take such long journeys to see Socrates, whom
they would not keep when he was with them; hereat they became so exasperated,
that they were ready to tear those wicked men, that were the occasion of his
death, peecemeal with their teeth, the whole City cried out, they disclaimed
the act, and that the authors thereof ought to be put to death, Antisth^nes
furthered their rage by this means Laert (...) Antisth.
Some young men of Pontus invited. o Athens by the same of Socrates, met with
Antisthenes, who carried them to Anytus, telling them, he was much wiser then
Socrates; whereupon those tha^ ^ present, with much indignation, turned Anytus
out of the City: thence he went to Heraclea, where some say the Citizens also
expelled him, Themist. Orat. 2.
others that they stoned him to death: Mlius was by the Athenians condemned and
put to death, Laert.
others affirm the like of all his accusers without trial, Diod Sic. 14.
Socratic. Epist.
Platarch, that they so much ha ^d them, De invid. and (...).
as they would not suffer them to kindle ^ire at their houses, they would not
answer them any question, they would not wash with them, but threw away the
water they had touched, as impure, until unable to b^ook this hatred, they
hanged themselves.

In further testimony of their penitence, they called home his friends to their
former liberty of meeting, they forbad public spectacles of games and
wrestling for a time, they caused his Statue, made in bras^e by Lysippus, to be
set up in the Pompeum, and (a Plague ensuing, which they imputed to the
injustice of this act) they made an order, that no man should mention Socrates
publicly, or on the Theater, that so they might so, get what they had done:
Euripides (restrained by this order from doing it directly) reproached them
covertly in a Tragedy, named Palamedes (in whom he alluded to Socrates)
particularly in these verses, A Philomele near mischief knew,
Is stain (alas) is slain by you.


At which words, all the spectators understanding they were meant of Socrates,
fell a weeping.

The death of this sole person (says (...). For (...) seems to have been some
gloss to explain (...). So Callimach. Epigr. As (...) (...).
Eunapius) brought a general calamity upon the City; for it may easily be
collected by computation of times, In Aedes:
that from thence forward the Athenians did nothing considerable, but the City
by degrees decayed, and with it all Greece.

CHAP. XV.
Of his person and virtues.
AS to his person, he was Plat. Phaedr. Theaetet.
very unhandsome, of a melancholy complexion, Schol Arisloph.
bald, Flat. Phaedr. Theaeter.
a flat nose, eyes sticking out, a severe down-cast look, difficult in speech,
and Flat. Protagor.
too concise, his language rough and careless, but more efficacious then all
the eloquence of Themistocles, Pericles, or any other; so acute, that he could
maintain either side in any question, and therefore is reproached by
Aristophanes, as having two languages, whereof one was to defend wrong; fervent
in dispute, often so transported, that he would beat himself, and tear his
beard, to the derision of the standers by, which he took quietly: Patient to be
redargued; Plut. Phaedr.
sometimes he covered his face in discourse, that he might not be diverted by
any object of sight: Sen. Epist. 1. 103.
His constitution strong and hardy, Xenoph. mem. 1. Laert.
which he preserved such, by taking diligent care of his health; Plat. Sympos.
well bearing cold, hunger, and upon occasions, excess of wine without
disturbance: Socrat. Epist. Liban.
His habit the same in winter as in summer, having but one garment a year;
Plat. Phaedr.
no shoes, his diet sparing. In fine, his countenance promised so little, that
Cicer. Tusc. quaest. 5. and de fato.
Zopyr^s a Physiognomist who undertook to discover the dispositions of men by
their looks, said, he was stupid, because there were obstructions in his
jugular parts; adding, he was given to women and many other vices; whereat
Alcibiades, and other friends of his that were present, knowing him free from
those imputations, fell a laughing; but Socrates justified his skill,
answering, he was by nature prone to those vices, but suppressed his inclinations
by reasons, whence Plat. conviv.
Alcibiades used to say, he resembled the image of Silenus ( Schol. Aristoph.
p. 136.
as he did indeed in his countenance, baldness, and flat-nose) carved on the
outside of little boxes, sitting, and playing on a Pipe, for as those boxes
within held images of the Gods, so was he adorned with chastity, integrity, and
all inward beauty, revished as Advers. Colos.
Plutarch says, with a divine zeal to virtue, in all kinds whereof, Xenophon,
Laertius, and others, assert these instances.

Xenoph.
He was so wise, that he never erred in judging betwixt better and worse, nor
thereto needed any others help: Yet he constantly professed, that he only knew
that he knew nothing; Plut. ^duers. Colo^. Liban. Apolog.
for which reason he was by the Oracle of Apollo at Delphi, declared of all men
the most wise, in this manner to Charephon, many witnesses being present;
Schol. Aristoph.
Wise Sophocles, wiser Euripides,
But wisest of all men is Socrates.


Academ. quaest. 1.
Apollo (says Cicero) conceiving the only wisdom of mankind to consist in not
thinking themselves to know those things whereof they are ignorant. Laert.
This Oracle, though he were nothing exalted with it himself, procured him
much envy.

Xen memor. 4. p. 818.
He was so rligious, that he never did any bing, without advising first with
the Gods, Xen. mem. 1. p. 710.
never was known to attempt or speak any impiety. Pl^t Philib.
He bare a reverence to the Gods, not human, but such as transcended the
greatest fear: Suid
Some say it was out of his great reverence to the Divinity that he used to
swear by ( Schol. Arisloph.
a Cock) a Dog and a Plane-Tree, (under which they used to sit) though it were
imerpreted Atheism.

Laert.
He was constant, and a lover of the public good, as appears in his acquitting
the ten Captains, in his denying the thirty Tyrants to fetch Leon in, his
resusing to escape out a Prison, and r^proving such as grived for his dath.
Aelian. 9. Cic. Tusc. quaest. 3. offic. 1.
Xantippe used to say, that when the State was oppressed with a thousand
miseries, he always went abroad and came home with the same look, ( Plin. 7.
19.
never more cheerful, or more troubled) for he bore a mind smooth and
cheerful upon all occasions, far remote from grief, and above all feat. In his
declining age, falling sick, he was asked by one that came to visit him, how he
did? Very well (says he) either way* if I live, I shall have more aemulation,
if I die, more praise.

Xenoph. mem. 4. p. 818.
He was so temperate, that he never preferred that which is pleasant before
that which is wholesome. He never did eat more than appetite (which was his
sauce) made delightful; all drink was pleasing to him, because he never drank
but when he was thristy, and then with such temperate caution, that Plut.
he powered out the first draught of water upon the ground, and if he were at
any time invited to a feast, he which to others is very difficult, with much
ease took care not to eat more then consisted with his health, Xen. mem. 1. p.
712.
whereof he was very careful, because the exercises of the soul depend
thereon; and in order thereto, used to walk constantly before meals; whereupon
being asked by one that observed it, what he did? I get broth, says he,
*Aelian. 13.
for my supper. To this temperance it is imputed, though Athens were often in
his time visited with the pestilence, he alone escaped it.

Xenop^. me mor. 1. p. ^11.
He was so strugall, that how little so ever he had, it was always enough.
Liban.
wanting the means to live splendidly, he sought not anxiously how to acquire
more, but how to accomodate his manner of life to that which he had, Laert.
wherewith he was so contented, that he affirmed himself to come nearest the
Gods, because he wanted least. Seeing the great variety of things exposed to
sale, he would say to himself, how many things there are that I need not; and
often had in his mouth these verses, Purple, which Gold and Gems adorn,
Is by ^ragaedians to be worn.


Alcibiades ambitiously munisicent, Aelian. 9.
sent him many great presents; Xantippe admiring their value, desired him to
accept them: We (answered Socrates) will contest in liberality with Alcibiades,
not accepting, by a kind of munificence what he has sent us.

Laert.
To the same, who offered him a large plot of ground to build a house upon: And
if I wanted shoes, (says he) would you give me leather to make them? but
deserve I not to be derided if I accepted it?

Laert.
He slighted Archelaus, King of Macedonia, and Scopas, son of Cranomas, and
Eurilocus, son of Larisaeus, not accepting their money, nor going to them,
Senee, de benefic. 5. 6.
Archelons sending to him to desire his company; He said, he would not go to
one, from whom he should receive benefits, which he could not equal with
return. Antonin. vit. lib 11.
To Perdicas, who demanded why he would not come to him, he answered, lest I
die the most ignoble death; that is, lest I receive a benefit I cannot requi^e.

Coming home late one night from a feast, Aelian. 9.
some wild young men knowing of his return, lay in wait for him, attined like
furies, with vizards and torches, whereby they used to affright such as they
met: Socrates, as soon as he saw them, nothing troubled, made a stand, and fell
to question them, according to his usual manner, as if he had been in the
Lyceum, or Acauemy.

Laert.
He despised those that cavilled at him. S^b. 71.
Being told, that such a one had reviled him behind his back. Laert.
Let him beat me, says he, whilst I am not by; and that another spoke ill of
him: He has not yet learnt, says he, to speak well.

^lut. de educ. liber.
Being kicked by an insolent young fellow, and seeing those that were with him
much incensed, ready to pursue him; he said, what if an Ass kick me, would you
have me kick again, or sue him? but the fellow escaped not unpunished, for
every one reproached him for this insolence, and called him the reviler, so
that at last, for vexation, he hanged himself.

Another striking him a box on the ear, Seneca de ira. 3
he said no more, but that it was hard a man knew not when to go abroad with a
helmet.

Another fell upon him with much violence, D. Basil.
which he endured without the least disturbance, suffering him to vent his
anger, which he did so long, till he made his face all swelled and bruised.

Whenever he perceived himself to grow incensed with any of his friends,
^lut. de ira cohib
Before the storm arose,
He to a harbor goes.
He used to moderate his voice, to look smilingly and moderately upon them,
reserving himself untainted with passion, by recourse to the contrary.

Xenoph. memor. page ^12.
He taught not such as conversed with him to be covetous, for he took no money
of his Scholars, therein expressing his own liberality.

Laert.
Hunger or want could never force him to flatter any: Yet was he very
compleasant and facete in company: as he one day openly at dinner reproved one
of his friends something harshly, Plato said to him, had not this been better
told in private? Socrates immediately answered, and had not you done better, if
you had told me so in private. Plut. de exsul.
Being demanded what countryman he was? He answered, neither of Athens, nor
Greece. but of the World. Sometimes he would feast in a fine Robe, as Plato
describes him, and when the time allowed; learned to sing, saying, it was not
shame to learn any thing which one knew not: He also danced everyday,
conceiving that exercise healthful; Sense. de tranquil.
nor was he ashamed to play with little children.

X^nopb memor 4. p^ (...).
He was so just, that he never in the least wronged anyman, but on the
contrary, benfited all such as conversed with him, as much as he could.

Quinil. 8. 4.
His continence was invincible: He despiesed the beauty of Alcibiades, derided
Theodota and Calliste, two eminent Curtesans of that time.

Xen. memor. 1. p. 731.
He took great delight in the conversation of good men; to such he communicated
whatsoever he knew; with them he studied the writings of the ancient wisemen,
selecting what was good out of them (which confirms what was said before in
the life of Solon, that moral Philosophy was commenced by the Sophoi) and
esteemed this mutual friendship which he contracted with them above all
treasure. Xenoph: memor. 2. p. 752.
Toward this his outward endeavor was so affected and desired by them, as
much as he affected and desired them.

CHAP. XVI.
His Wives and Children.
HE had two wives, the first Xantippe, a Citizens daughter of Athens, as
Theodoret affirms, who adds, that she was dishonest before he married her,
even with himself, besides others: Athenaeus also says, that after he was
married, he lent her to a friend, and that Alcibiades lay with her: But
Aristokenus and Porphyrius, from whom these as persons are derived, have been
noted of too much malignity, to be of any authority.

She was (according to the Character 1. 17.
Agellius gives her) cursed, froward, chiding, and ^colding always both day and
night, L^^n.
and for that reason he chose her, as he professed to Antisthenes, from
observing, that they who would be excellent in horse-manship, chose the
roughest horses, knowing, if they are able to manage them, they may easily rule
others: He, desirous to use much coversation with men, took her to wife;
knowing, if he could bear with her, he might easily converse with all men. To
Alcibiades, who said, her scolding was intolerable, he professed it was nothing
to him, being used to it like such as live in the continual noise of a mill.
Besides, says he, cannot you endure the cackling of hens; but they answered
Alcibiades, bring me Eggs and chickens; and my Xantippe, replies Socrates,
children.

Of her impatience, and his sufferance, there are several instances; Laert.
one day before some of his friends, she fell into the usual extravagance of
her passion, whereupon he not answering anything, went forth with them, but was
no sooner out of the door, when she running up into the chamber, threw down
water upon his head, whereat turning to his friends, did I not tell you, says
he, that after so much thunder we should have rain.

Another time she pulled his Cloak off from his shoulders in the open Forum;
Laert.
some friends present counseled him to beat her. Yes, says he, that whilst we
two fight, you may all stand by, and cry, Well done Socrates, to him Xantippe.

To some other story in the same kind* Lib. 2. 26.
Antoninus alludes in these words; how Socrates looked when he was sain to gird
himself with askin, Xantippe having taken his cloths away, and carried them
forth with her, and what he said to his friends, who out of a modest
respectsulnesse, went back, secing him so attired.

Having brought Euthydemus from the Palaestrae to dine with him, Plut. de ira
cahib.
Xantippe running to the table, angry, and scolding, overturned it; Euthydemus
much troubled, rose up, and would have gone away, when Socrates did not: a Hen,
says he, the other day did the very samething at your house, yet I was not
angry thereat.

Alcibiades having sent him a crious march-pane, Aelian v^r. hist. 11. 12.
Xantippe furiously (as her manner was) threw it our of the basket, and trod
upon it; whereat Socrates laughing, and shall not you (says he) lose your
share in it.

Another time she offered to go to a public show attired undecently; Aellan.
7. 10. Laert. Stob.
take heed, says he, you be not rather the spectacle then the spectatour.

With reason therefore he said, Stob. 188.
I had three evils, Grammar, Poesy, and an ill wife; two I have shaken off,
but my ill wife I cannot.

His other wife was named Myrto, Theodoret.
Niece to Lystmachus daughter of (...), not the just, as Laertius, and from him
Suidas affirm; but another of that name, the 3d. from him as is observed by
Athe^aeus, for the two daughters of Aristides the just, could not but be of
great age before the 77. Olympiad, wherein Socrates was born, long before,
which time Aristides died an old man in Exile; for that Themistocles died the
second year of the 77. Olympiad is certain. and as Aemilius Probus affirms,
Aristides dyed four years before Themistocles was banished Athens, hereupon
Plutarch more cautio^sly calls her not the daughter, but Niece of Aristides.

Some because Xantippe(as is manifest from Plato outlived him, believe he was
first married to Myrto, but that he had both these wives at the same time,
which is attested by Demetrius Pholereus, Aristoxenus (to whom Athenaeus says,
that Aristotle gave the ground) Callisthenes and Porphyrius: whence Aristippus
in his Socratic. Epist.
Epistle to his daughter Myrto, advises her to go to Athens, and above all to
honor Xantippe and Myrto, and to live with them as he with Socrates.

The occasion, whereupon the Athe^ans, who from the time of Cecrops had
strictly observed single marriage, allowed bigamy, in the time of Socrates was
this; In the second year of the 87 Olympiad, and the third of the 88. Athens
was visited extremely with the pestilence, which attended by war and famine,
occasioned to great a searcity of men, that they made in edict it might to be
lawful for any that would to take two wives, Euripides made use of this
indulgence, and that Socrates also did so, is attested by Satyrus the
peripatetick, and Hieronymus the Rhodian, who recorded the order; to which
Athenaeus imputes the silence of the Comic Poets in this particular, who
omitted no grounds of reproach. Plutarch implies, that he took her out of
charity, for she was a widow ( Laert.
without any portion or dower) extremely in want.

Theo^oret.
Perphyrius reports, that these two ( Xantippe and Myrto) quarreled they would
at last fall both upon Socrates. and beat him, because he stood by and never
parted them, but laughed as well when they fought with him, as with one
antother.

By Xantippe he had a son named Lamprocles, who could not brook her impatience
so well as his Father, and being (...) by her into disobedience, was reclaimed
by Socrates; He died young, as may be gathered from Plutarch, who says,
Tim^chus of Chaero^ca dying very young, desired earnestly of Socrates that he
might be buried near his son Lamprocles, who died but few days before, being
his dear friend, and of the same age. It appears from Plato, that he had more
sons by her for in his Apology he mentions three, two grown men, the other
child, which seems to be the same, brought by Xantippe to him in prison the day
of his death, and as Plato describes it, held in her lap.

By Myrto he had two sons, the eldest Sophroniscus, the youngest Menedemus or
Menexenus, though some say he had Menedemus by Xantippe.

CHAP. XVII.
His Scholars and Auditors.
Whereas (says De oratore. lib. 3.
Cicero) many springing from Socrates by reason that out of his several
various disputes diffused every where, one many servrall Families differing
amongst themselves much disioyned and disagreeing; yet all these Philosophers
would be called, and conceived themselves to be Socraticks: of these were

Plato, from whom came Aristotle and Xenocrates, the first taking the name of
Peripatetick the other of Academick.

Antisthenes, who chiesly affected the patience and bardinesse in Socrates his
discourse, from whom came first the Cynicks, then the Stoics.

Aristippus, who was more delighted with his more volupuous disputations, from
him sprung the cyrenaick Philosophy.

Others there were who likewise called themselves Socraticks, but their sects
by the strength and arguments of the former are broken and quite extinxct: such
were.

Phaedo an Elean, who instituted a particular school, from him called Eliack,
which a^terwards was called Eretriack, from Menedemus who taught at Eretia,
from him Pyrrho, thence the Pyrrhonians.

Euclid of Megara, Institutor of the Magarick school of named from him, from
Clinomachus his Disciple called the Diatectick, ending in Zeno the Cittiean,
who introduced the stoic.

The Herillians are named also as a Scot that would be called Socratick. To
these recited by Cicero, Suidas adds.

Bryso of Heraclea, who together with Euclid invented disputative logic.

Theodorus surnamed the Atheist, who invented a peculiar sect called
Theodorean, the opinion which he taught was (...) indifference.

Other Disciples of Socrates there were, who followed his Philosophy, not
appropriating out of it any particular sect, and therefore most properly
deserve the title of Socraticks, such are Crito, Chaerephon, Xenophon,
Aeschines, Simmias, Cebes, Glauco and Terpsion.

The last kind of his auditors were those who made no profession of
Philosophy, of whom were

Critias and Alcibiades, who afterward proved the most ambitious spirits of
the Athenians, but it was discovered in neither whilst they covers'd with
Socrates, either that their youth was not capable of expressing that vice, or
that they cunningly complled (as Xenophon conjectures) with Socrates, in hopes
of being by his conversation enabled to manage their forward designs, which as
soon as they attempted they left off their friendship with Socrates, Critias
fell from him and converted his affection into hate, because he reproved his
love to Euthydenius; Alcibiades naturally dissolute, was reclaimed by Socrates
and continued such whilist he conversed with him; He was of form so exquisite
as gave occasion to some to calumniate the friendship betwixt him and Socrates,
to which effect Aristoxenus is cited by Laertius and Athenaeus, and some verses
of Aspasia by the latter, his vindication we refer to Plato and Xenophon.

Of Socrates, his instructions to Alti^iades there are these instances.

Cicer. Tusc. quaest. Pl^t conviv. Plutarch.
He told him that he was nothing of what a man ought to be; that he had no
advantage by the greatness of his birth above an ordinary Porter, whereat
Alcibiades much troubled with tears, besought him to instruct him in virtu^,
and to reform his vices.

Aelian. 3. 28.
Perceiving Alcibiades to be exceeding proud of his riches and lands; he showed
him a Map of the world, and bad him find Attica therein; which done, he desired
that he would show him his own lands; he answered, they were not there. Do you
boast replies Socrates of that which you see is no (considerable) part of the
Earth?

Aelian. 2. 1.
Alcibiades being by reason of his youth bashful and fearful to make an
Oration to the people, Socrates thus encouraged, him, do you not esteem (says
he) that shoemaker (naming him) an inconsiderable fellow? Alcibiades assenting,
and so likewise (continues he) that crier and that tent-maker? Alcibiades
granting this, does not says he, the Athenian Commonwealth consist of these?
if you contemn them single, fear them not in assembly. To these add.

Laert. vit. Crit.
The four sons of Crito the Philosopher; The oldest Critobulus. Macrob. Saturn.
7. 3.
exceeding handsome and rich, but by Socrates (who valued his own estate at five
minae) Xenoph mem.
demonstrated to be poorer then himself.

The second Hermogenes, Xenoph. mem.
whom falling into poverty, Socrates persuaded Diodorus his friend to entertain.

The third Epigenes, Xenoph. mem. 4. p. 786.
a young man of an infirm body whom Socrates advised to study his own health,
as that wherein consisted the well-being and knowledge of his mind.

The youngest Ctesippus.

Of Poets, (...).
Euripides (as the writer of his life affirms) and Euenus.

Of Oratous Lysias, eminent in that kind (...). (read (...) to which effect
also Plutarch) (...) Dion. Halicarn. in Critic.
easy to be understood, hard to be imitated; he came to Athens in the second
year of the 82. Olympiad. Lysis, whom of refractory he made pliant, and
Isocrates, of whom when very young Socrates presaged great things. In the
number of his Scholars and Auditors were also.

Plat. Apol.
Adimantus and Xenop. mem. 3. p. 772. and p. 774. Lecrt.
Glauco sons to Aristo, brothers to Plato: and Charmides son of Glauco. Glauco
before he was 20. years old had taken upon him to be an Orator, and aimed at
some great office in the Commonwealth, not to be wrought off from this fancy
which made him every where appear ridiculous, until adrest by some friends to
Socrates, who made him acknowledge his own error and ignorance of that which
he had undertaken. On the contrary his son Glauco of excellent parts, fit for
any office in the Commonwealth, yet timerously shunning all public affairs,
was by Socrates induced to undertake the Magistracy.

Plat. Apol.
Nicostrastus son of Theodotides and his brother Theodotus.

Plat. ibid.
Aeantodorus, and his brother Apollodorus.

Lysanias, Father of Aeschines.

Xenoph. mem. 2. p. 743.
Chaerecrates, brother to Chaerephon, betwixt whom there was a great quarrel,
but reconciled by Socrates.

Plat. Apol.
Paralus, son of Demodocus whose brother was Theages.

Plat. Apol.
An^ipho a Cephisiean, Father of Epigenes: with whom he discourses of
self-sufficience, teaching gratis, and of veracity in Memor. 1. p. 729. 731.
732.
Xenophon.

Eumares a Phliasian, and Xenomedes, an Athenian.

Besides these, there are with whom Socrates discoursed and instructed.

Xen. mem. 1. p. 725.
Aristodemus surnamed the little, who would not sacrifice, pray, or use
divination, but derided all such as did, was by Socrates convinced.

Xen. mem. 2.
Aristarchus troubled that he had a charge of kindred lying upon him, by
Socrates converted to a willing liberality toward them.

Xen. mem. 2.
Eutherus, who returning from travel, his lands taken away, his Father having
left him nothing, chose rather to follow a trade then to apply himself to
friends; but diverted by Socrates, Diodorus, Xen. mem. 2.
whom Socrates persuaded to take Hermogenes.

Euthydemus, Xen. mem. 4.
who had collected many sentences of Poets and Sophists, thought he excelled
all his equals, and hoped no less of his superiors, was by Socrates
constrained to acknowledge his own error and ignorance and departed much
troubled.

Hippias an Elean, Xen. memt 4.
with whom Socrates discoursed of Justice.

Xenoph.
Nicomedes; Pericles and ^phtcrates, with whom he discoursed concerning the
office of a General. Laert.
Into the last he infused courage by showing him the Cocks of Midas (...) est
quod gallinas Indicas facere videmus aliquando tumentes and caudam pandentes.
brustling against those of Callias.

Plat. Laert.
Theaetetus disputing of knowledge, he dismissed, inspired as it were with divine
wisdom.

Plat. Laert.
Euthyphron who intended to accuse his own Father, he dissuaded.

With Parrhasius a painter, Clito a Statuary, and Pistias an armourer; he
disputes in mem. 3.
Xenophon concerning their several arts.

CHAP. XVII.
His writings.
THey who affirm that Socrates writ nothing (as Cicero, Plutarch, Dion
Chrysostom, Aristides, Origin, and others) mean inrespect to his Philosophy, in
which kind he never wrote any thing himself, but what he discoursed was
committed to writing by Xenophon, Plato and others of his Scholars. Hence the
works of Plato (particularly Phaedo,) went under the name of Socrates, and are
so cited by Aristotle; But that some things were written by Socrates himself,
is evident from those who affirm.

Laert.
He writ together with Euripides, and aided him in making Tragedies, whence
Mnesilochus. The Phrygians is Euripides new play.
But Socrates gave it the best array.


And again, Euripides is steered by Socrates and Callias.

Now thou with pride and self-conceit ore'stowest,
But all the cause to Socrates thou ou'est.
Hither refer we that of Tusc. quest. 4
Cicero, who says, when Euripides made his play Orestes, Socrates revoked the
three first verses. He writ also

Some Fables of Aesop inverse, not very elegant, mentioned by Plato, Plutarch,
and Laertius, beginning thus: To those who dwelt in Corinth, Aesop said,
Virtue with vulgar wisdom be not weighed.


A Paean or hymn in honor of Apollo and Diana: One that went under his name
beginning thus. Daelian Apollo, and thou fair
Diana, hail; immortal pair.
is by Dionysidorus denied to be his: This is mentioned also by Plato, to which
some add

Laert. vit. Xenoph.
The Encomium of Gryllus, son of Xenophon, slain in the Mantinean sight, which
the disagreement of times will not allow; more certain it is he framed

Laert. vit. Aeschin.
Dialogues, which he gave to Aeschines, seeing him in want, that he might get
money by them; to these add

Epistles, some whereof are published by Leo Allatius; that he write more is
employed by Arrian and Athenaeus

Socrates his Epistles.
Epist. I.
YOu seem unacquainted with my resolutions, else you would not have sent the
second time, and enlarged your offers; but you believe Socrates, as well as the
Sophists, mercenary of his counsel, Allatius otherwise:
and that what I write before was not real, but only to draw greater virtues
from you: therefore now you promise wonders, in confidence to oblige me by your
many presents to quit my interest and commerce with the Athenians, and to come
over with you: I think it most unbeseeming a Philosopher to sell his advice,
and extremely contrary to my practice; for ever since by Gods command I first
entered into Philosophy, I was never known to take any thing, but keep my
exercises in public, (...) In this sense the words are passable (so is not the
interpretation of Allatius, aeque omnihus audiendi etiam si nolint potestate
facta.) But I conceive the words of Socrates were (...).
for every one to hear that will; I neither lock the door when I teach, as is
reported of Pythagoras, nor go abroad to the multitude, and exact money of the
hearers, as some heretofore have done, and some in our times yet do; I have
enough from within my self, should I accept of more from others, I know not
where to deposit it, nor whom to trust better then the givers themselves, whose
faith, if I suspect, I shall be thought improvident to confide in, if honest, I
can receive from them, though I lay up nothing with them; for they that would
be faithful keepers of money, will not be unfaithful preservers of their own
gratitude, and they will never go about to defraud me of what they would have
given, but receiving that of me gratis, for which others take money, they will
Allatius otherwise.
consider me when I want. In a word, if friends, they will, For (...) reading
(...).
like you, impart of their own to us, if not friends, they will seek to deprive
us of what is ours.

Besides, I have not leisure to hoard up money, but wonder at them that say,
they get riches This interpretation seems to be confirmed by the particle
(...), before (...).
for their own sake, and have a high opinion of themselves for their means, who
neglect learning to addict themselves to gain, and so become admired for their
riches, derided for their ignorance, esteemed for all things except themselves.
otherways Allatius.
But if we so much abhor to have recourse to friends, reading (...).
to depend on others to eat their bread, how comes it that we are not ashamed
to suffer the same from money? do we not know that these men are respected only
for their wealth, and if fortune turn, they live in all disrespect? they are
not fully contented when they are in esteem, because it is not for their own
sakes, but in disesteem are much more discontented, being themselves the cause
of their own dishonor.

First, therefore you were mistaken, if you did imagine Socrates would do that
for money which he would not without, not knowing that many occasions, but
chiefly the necessities of my country detain me: wonder not that I say I
discharge my countries business, being not employed either in Army or Court,
every one ought to apply himself to that which he is capable of, (...); by
which we may have some light to find perhaps the true reading, (...).
things above his reach he must leave to others, and perform those that are
within his compass: and in such Cities as this, not only counselors or
commanders for sea or land are requisite, but some likewise, that may Allatius
otherwise.
admonish others in their offices; for it is Perhaps (...).
nothing strange, that they fall as it were, asleep, under the weight of their
charge, and need a goad to waken them: Over these God has placed me, for which
I become, and not without cause, odious to them.

But he, in whom I most confide, will not suffer me to go, he knows better
then my self what is good for me; when I resolved to come to thee, he
withheld me, and when thou sentest the second time, forbid me, I dare not
disobey him; Pindar taught this wisdom, saying, when God points out the
beginning of any work, it is the direct way to obtain to obtain virtue, the end
glorious: The verses are much to this purpose. Other Poets have said as much of
the Gods, that what is undertaken with their advice, succeeds well, but what
without God, is unprofitable to the undertakers. The wisest Cities of Greec^
consult the Oracle of Delphi,, and as many as follow it have good success, who
do not most commonly receive prejudice.

Yet I not wonder, if you give no faith to what I deliver of the Demon, for I
have met with not a few alike incredulous; most of those that were in the
Delian fight did not believe me; I was then in arms, and fallied forth the
City with the people to skirmish, many of us were dispersed in flight, and as
we came to a certain way, the accustomed sign came upon me; I stopped, and said,
in my opinion, friends, we should not go this way, for I heard the Demons
voice: the greater part were angry, as if I had trifled at a time so serious;
some few were persuaded to go along with me another way, and got safe home; one
that came from the others brought word they were all slain, some horsemen
returning from the pursuit, had fallen upon them, whom they at first resisted,
but being at last enclosed by them, who were more in number, they gave back,
and were in the end oppressed and killed; he that brought this news was
dangerously wounded, and escaped only by help of his shield. I have also by
instructions from God, foretold many events to particular persons.

You offer part of your Kingdom, and invite me to it, not as to a changed
government, but to rule both your subjects and your self: but I confess, I
have not learned to command, and would no more undertake to rule, not knowing
how then to play at dice, having never been taught: And doubtless if other men
were of the same mind, there would be fewer troubles in life; whereas now the
confidence of such as are ignorant, undertaking things they do not understand,
occasions these many disturbances: Hence is it, they make fortune greater then
she is, and by their own folly, increase her power. Besides, I am not ignorant,
that a King ought to be more honored and admired then a private person, and as
I would not undertake to be a horseman having no (...) in Horsemanship, but had
much rather be a footman, though the charge be less honorable: the same is my
opinion as touching Kings and private persons, nor puffed up by ambition will I
desire more glorious afflictions: they who invented the fable of Bellerophon
seemed to imply something to this purpose, for he was oppressed with misfortunes,
not because he sought to rise higher in place, but for aiming at things above
him, and being thrown down from his hopes, led the rest of his life poorly and
ignominiously, driven by mocks out of Cities into the Wilderness, and shunning
path-waies, not what we commonly call so, but the freedom wherewith every one
orders his life. But let this be taken how the Poets please, my resolution you
now hear again, that I will not change this place for that, (...) Other, (...)
Perhaps (...) Or (...).
conceiving this fittest for me: nor is God willing I should, who has been
ever until now, my counselor and guide.

Epist. II.
YOu are not ignorant how great esteem we have of Chaerephon, who being chosen
Ambassador by the City to the Peloponnesians, will perhaps come to you; a
Philosopher is entertained with small trouble, but the journey is dangerous,
especially, because of the tumults that are there at this time, from which, if
thou protect him, thou will preserve our friend, and infinitely engage us.

Epist. III.
ANeso of Amphipolis was commended to me at Potidaea, he is now coming to
Athens, being thrown out of his house by the people; for at present, affairs
are much embroiled and clouded there, but I believe within a little while they
will clear up. In assisting you will oblige a deserving person, and benefit
both the ^ities; Amphipolis, lest by rebelling it incur irremediable danger:
Ours, lest we be involved in their troubles as at this present we are reduced
almost to extremity for Potidaea.

Epist. IIII.
MEeting with Critobulus, I persuaded him to study Philosophy, but I think he
is of another mind, and more addicted to affairs of State, in which he intends
to make choice of the fittest method, and best instructor for the most
excellent so journe now in Athens, and with many of them we are intimate. Thus
much concerning him; as for us, Xantippe and the children are well, and I
continue to do, as when you were with me.

Epist. V.
WE hear you are at Thebes, and Read (...).
Proxenus gone into Asia, to take part with Cyrus; whether your designs will
prosper God knows, they are here condemned by many, for it is conceived unfit
the Athenians should assist Cyrus, through whose means they were deprived of
command by the Lacedaemonians and fight for him, who fought against them. It is
not therefore strange if the state being altered, some be ready of themselves
to accuse you of temporising, and the better your success is, the greater will
be their calumnies; for I am well acquainted with the dispositions of some of
them: But since we have undertaken this, let us prove our selves honest men,
and call to mind what we use to say of virtue, accounting this one of the best
sentences of the Poet, Our Fathers house must not be discredited. Know
therefore, that to war, these two are requisite, Courage an Bounty, for this,
we are loved of our friends, for that, feared of our enemies, of both, thou
have domestic precedents.

Epist. VI.
I Have taken such care of your strangers as you desired, and retained one to
plead their cause before the people, Perhaps Lysias.
a friend of ours, who professed himself the readier to undertake it, out of his
desire to serve thee.

As for that which you write in jest concerning wealth, and such as are
sollicitous for it, perhaps it is not unreasonable. First, because whilst
others study to be rich, I choose to live meanly. Then though I might receive
many gifts and legacies from living and dead friends; yet I freely disclaim
them, and for a man thus inclined to be by others judged mad, is nothing
strange: But we must examine not this only, but the rest of our life; and
since we disagree in the use, no wonder that we differ in the acquisition of
(...) (...) read (...).
Riches; my diet is very sparing, my habit the same in winter as in summer: I
never wear shoes, I am not taken with Popular applause, but with the study of
wisdom and integrity. But they who are intemperarate, Luxurious in meat, not
every year, but every day putting on new apparel are transported with
unlawful delights, and as they who lose their natural complexion have
recourse to paint. So these losing the true glory of virtue which every one
ought to have, fly to that which depends upon complaisance with others,
courting vulgar applause with Largesses and feasts. Hence I suppose it comes,
that they need much wealth; They themselves cannot live upon a little, nor will
others adm^^ them into their society, unless they receive a salary for
commending them.

But my life is well as to both these, I will not deny but in some things I may
fail, I know that wisest men prefer those, most men these; Reflecting sometimes
within my self upon God; I find that he exceeds us, in that he has need of
nothing; it is the property of a most excellent nature not to want any thing,
and to comprehend within himself all that he enjoyes. Thus is he wiser then
others, who imitates the most wise (...)
and happier, who resembles the most happy. If riches could do this, riches
were to be preferred; but since virtue only can obtain it, it were folly to
forsake the real good to pursue the seeming. Hence I cannot easily be
persuaded but that my Condition is better then the^rs.

As for children, who as you say ought to be provided for, the care that I take
for them all men may see, I know but one ground of happiness, wisdom. The fool
who reposeth his trust in gold, possesses not that which he has, and is
withal so much more miserable then others, in that they who are oppressed with
poverty may grow wise hereafter. But he out of an opinion of his own
happiness, neglecting true gain corrupted with plenty. (...) (...).
Besides that he never yet obtained, man's essential good is deprived of hope
thereof for the future. Nor is it possible that such a man can go on securely
to virtue, who is entangled in the slatteries of those who are Masters in all
insinuating Arts, and in the Charms of pleasures which glide into the soul
through every sense, and drive out all sound and wise judgment. How then can
he choose but give his Children occasion of folly rather then instruction,
(...)etc. which (...), reading immediately after for (...).
who not only in words but actions expresses that in these things she has
placed his hope, who not proving good, their subsistence fails, and they die
miserably for want of food: Justly punished for their idleness; Parents are by
Law enjoined to bring up their children till they are men. But you, perhaps
some Citizen may say to his Sons greedy to inherit, spare me not dying, and
whilst you live rely for maintenance upon me, though dead not ashamed to lead
a life more lazy then death; you expect that my fortunes should extend to
others even after my decease, but your own are not competent for your selves
whilst you are yet alive. Such rough speeches happily he will use to his
Children, taking the libery both of a Father and a Patriot. My fortunes in the
estimate of other men are mean, but in the effect nothing inferior to the Rich.
I will not leave my Children money, but a more honorable heritage, discreet
friends, whom as long as they keep they can want as necessaries, and if they
use them ill, doubtless they would use their money worse.

But if to you, who know the negligence of friends, I seem to give ill advice;
I answer, that all men are not alike affected to their friends, for some take
care of them after they are dead, and it is likely that ours are not of a
neglectfull humor, but pleased with the past advantage they have received by
us, no less then with the present of a short benefit, the requital is short;
lasting benefits produce a return equal to their profit, and I foresee that
what is mine, will hereafter appear more gracious to my friends, and therefore
I exact no rewards of them. I account nothing of equal value in exchange with
Philosophy but friendship, nor like the Sophists have I any diffidence of those
things that are mine, for being old they renew, and in their decaying age
Pe^haps (...). So Allatius seems to read.
flourish, which makes them more acceptable to the Disciples, and their Father
more esteemed; For (...) reading (...).
Living he obtains honor, dead is thought worthy of memory, and if he leave an
Kinsman behind him, they will respect him like his Nephews and Brethren, and
show him all kindness, as being allied to him by more then a Natural
affinity; Neither if they would, can they neglect him in misfortunes, no more
then we can slight them, who are near to us in blood; for affinity in soul
forces them to relieve the Son of the dead as if he were their own brother;
when they call to mind his Father, whose dishonor they account their own.

Now judge if I order my affairs ill, or take no care for my Children, so as
when I die they shall be destitue of necessaries, who leave them not wealth but
such Guardians as will have a care of them and wealth No History makes mention
of any man that has been made better by riches; A tried friend in this is to
be preferred before tried gold, that he is not beneficial to every one who
desires him, but to those he lovse best. Nor does he supply only the
necessities of life, but is serviceable as well to the soul of him that has
him, and is most conducing to virtue, without which nothing profieth; but we
will consider more exactly upon these things when we meet; thus much serve as a
cursory answer to your demand.

Epist VII.
I Wonder not at what you write, that you do suspect the Thirty continue the
same mind to us since your departure, which they had when you were here. As
soon as you were gone, they began to have a jealousy of me, and there past
amongst them a murmr that these things were not done without Socrates; within
few days they cited me to the Court, where some complaints were preferred
against me, and when I defended my self, they commanded me to go to the Pyraeum
to apprehend Leon, their intention was to put him to death, that they might
enjoy his estate, and make me partner in their injustice; when I refused, and
said something to this effect that I would never willingly subscribe to an
unjust act; Charicles was present, and inwardly vexed, Socrates says he, do
thou think to talk thus peremptorily, and not suffer ten thousand ills?
Charicles, said I, but none so heinous as to do unjustly. He answered not a
word, nor any of the rest, but ever since they have liked me the worse.

As for you, some that were then present, reported that your affairs succeed to
your wish, that the Thebans in your exile received you kindly, and will assist
your return to their utmost. Some were troubled at this news, and the more
because it lessened their hopes of supply from Lacedaemon, for they who came
along with the Ambassadors, affirmed, that the Lacedaemonians were engaged in
a great war, and the Ephori hearing of those troubles, were discontented, and
said, that the Lacedaemonians had not entrusted with the City to see it
destroyed; Perhaps. (...) etc.
for if they would have done so, it were most easy for them who had the
Command, being withal instigated thereunto by the Corinthians and Thebans, and
that the City might be better governed under an Oligarchy then a Democracy. If
all this be true, and your affairs succeed as they report, there is great
likely hood that upon you, coming in with the Thebans, the Lacedaemonians not
aiding these, all things here may be easily composed. Besides, many of the
Natives who now are quiet through fear, if they perceived never so little that
you were firm, will readily forsake this party, because in this government of
the City, nothing is left them entire, but through many and continual
enormities all is in confusion; the greater part is revolted as well as you,
the rest if they had the least encouragement from abroad would suffer the same
that you have. So that if no other, yet this example would manifest that the
greatest unhappiness of Cities is the wickedness of their Rulers, for they
are so blinded with self interest that they will not desist, though they see
all things go to ruin, but with what they first troubled, think to settle
affairs, continuing banishments, sequestrations, and unjust deaths; not
considering he is an ill Physician who prescribes for a Remedy the cause of the
disease. But those are incurable; you shall do well to have a care of your
self, for all that are here have but this hope left, if you act wisely to be
freed from a heavy and grievous Tyranny.

THE CLOVDS of Aristophanes.
Added (not as a Comicall divertisement for the Reader, who can expect little
in that kind from a subject so ancient, and particular, but) as a necessary
supplement to the life of Socrates.
Act. I.
Scen. I.
Strepsiades, Phidippides, Servant. Streps. OH, oh,
Great Jove, how long a night is this, how endless!
Will It near be day? I heard the Cock again,
Yet still my servants snore; it is but of late
They durst do thus: The Athenians in time of war with the Lacedaemonians made
an Edict, that no man should beat his servants, lest they should go over to the
enemy. Schol.
curse of this war that awes me,
And will not suffer me to beat the Rogues.
My good Son sleeps too, wrapped ore head and ears:
Well, let me try to bear them company;
Alas, I cannot, so perplexed and tortured
With charges, bills for Horse-meat, interest:
All for this hopeful Son, who in's curled locks,
Aides matches, keeps his Coach, and dreams of Horses,
Whilst I (unhappy!) see the unwelcome Moon
Bring on the Quarter day, and threaten use-mony.
Boy, snuff the light, bring my account book hither,
That I may sum my debts and interest:
Let Us see, twelve pound to Pasia; ha! twelve pound
To Pasia, how laid out? to buy Their horses were named from the marks they
had; if a K. Ceppatia; if an an S, Samphor^. Schol.
Coppatia:
Would I had paid this eye for him.

Phid. Hold Philo,
You Are out of the way, begin again.

Streps. I this,
This is the misery that ruins me;
His very sleeps are taken up with Horses.

Phid. How many courses will the manage hold.

Streps. Many a weary course thou leads thy Father:
But how much more owe I then this to Pasia?
Three pound to Amynias for Chariot wheels.

Phid. Go sirrah, take that horse and turn him out.

Streps. I thou have turned me out of all my means,
Charges at Law will eat me up, my Creditours
Threaten to sue me to an execution.

Phid. Why do you wake all night, and toss so Father?

Streps. I cannot sleep, the Scrivener does so bite me.

Phid. Yet let me rest a little longer.

Streps. Do so.
All these will one day light upon thy head,
Cursed be the hour when I first saw thy Mother,
I lived before most sweetly in the Country,
Well stock't with Sheep and Bees, Olives and Grapes,
Till from the Megaclean house I took
This Niece of Megacles out of the City,
Well fashioned, highly bred, and richly clothed;
We married, as I said: and lay together:
I sinelling strong of Drugs and greasy Wool;
But she of Unguents, Crocus wanton Kisses,
Of vain expense, dainties, and luxury;
I will not tell the idle life she led,
And yet she spun that I have often told her,
Showing this Coat, (...) Sch. MS.
you spin a fair thread woman.

Serve. Sir, all the Oil in the Lamp is wasted.

Streps. Ha?
Why did thou put in such a Drunken week?
If thou were near me I would beat thee.

Ser. Why Sir?

Streps. Because the week is thicker then the oil.
Well, at last my good Wife and I betwixt us got
At last this Son; about his name we differed;
She Would have it something that belonged to horses,
Callippides, Xanthippus, or Charippus;
I from his Grandfather) Phidontdes.
Long time we wrangled thus, at last agreed
He should be called Phidippides; this Son
She takes, and stroaking kindly, thus instructs him,
"When thou art grown a man, frequent the City,
"Follow the fashion, keep a Coach and Horses,
"Like Megacles thy Uncle. No, said I,
"Go in a homely Coat, and drive thy Goats
"Into A stony craggy place in Attica, in such Goats delight most. Soli. M. S:
Phelleus, as they father does.
But my advice prevailed so little on him,
That now he wastes my means in keeping horses,
Which all this night I have been thinking how
To remedy, and now have found the way;
To which could I persuade him, I were happy.
Phidippides, Phidippides,

Phid. Your will Sir.

Streps. Kiss me, give me thy hand.

Phid. Here Sir.

Streps. Do love me?

Phid. By Neptune God of Horses.

Streps. Do not name
That God, for it is from him springs all my sorrow:
But if thou love me truly, heartily,
O son be ruled.

Phid. In what should I be ruled?

Streps. Change without more delay thy course of life,
And do^as I would have thee.

Phid. What is that?

Streps. But will thou do it?

Phid. Yes by Bacchus will I.

Streps. Come hither then, see thou that little door?
That is the (...) Schol. M. S.
Ph^ontistherium of wise souls,
Of learned men, that tell us Heaven's an Oven,
And we the Coals enclosed in the wide arch:
They, if we give 'em but a little money,
Will teach us gain all causes, right or wrong.

Phid. Who can these be?

Streps. Their names I know not; good
They are, and busied in continual study.

Phid. Oh now I know the wretches that you mean,
The meager, wan, proud, barefoot, begging fellows,
Whose evil Geniuss's are Socrates
And Chaerephon.

Streps. Peace, talk no more so idly;
If you will obey a father, let me see you
Give ore your horses, and turn one of these.

Phid. Not I, by Bacchus, no though you should tempt me
With all (...) Schol. M. ^.
Leogoras his breed of Racers.

Streps. Dear son be ruled and learn.

Phid. What should I learn?

Streps. It Is said they have two tongues, and one of them
Able to prove any injustice reason;
Could thou but learn that language, we were made,
And might dispute our stubborn Creditours
Out of the debts I have incurred for thee;
They get not then a penny more then words.

Phid. I cannot do it, were I so lean and Pale,
I durst not look a Jocky in the face.

Streps. By Ceres then you stay with me no longer,
You, nor your Coach-horse, nor your Samphoras,
But all together pack out of my doors.
My Uncle Megacles will neither see
Me nor my horses want, so long I care not.

Scene 2.
Strepsiades, Scholar. Streps. THough I have failed, i will not give over thus,
But say my prayers, and go my self to school
To learn this Art: but how can I, by Age
Dull and forget full, reach such subtleties?
Yet on I will, why should I doubt? ho, friend.

Sc^ol. A mischief on you, who is that knocks at door?

Streps. Strepsiades, Cecinnian Phaedo's Son.

Schol. 'T was rudely done to knock so hard, you have made
My laboring brain miscarry of a Notion.

Streps. Forgive me, I was bred far off in the Country:
But pray what notion was it that proved abortive?

Schol. It Is lawful to discover that tonone
But fellow-scholars.

Streps. Then you may tell me,
For I come hither to be one of you.

Schol. I will; so will value't as a mystery.
Socrates the other day asked Chaerephons eyebrow,
And leaped from thence upon the head of Socrates.

Streps. How could he measure this?

Schol. Most dexterously.
Both feet oth' flea he dipped in melting wax,
Which strait congeals to shoes; these he plucks off,
And with them most exactly measures it.

Streps. Great Jupiter, how subtle are these wits!

Schol. If you should hear their other speculations,
You would say so indeed.

Streps. Pray what was that?

Schol. This Charaephon the Sphettian asked him once,
If a Gnat sounded from her mouth or tail.

Streps. And what said he?
It had a strait thin gut,
At end of it a bladder, into which
The air being forced, sounded in breaking forth.

Streps. Then I perceive that a gnat's tail's a Trumpet;
How blessed is this Anatomist of Gnats!
Sure he can hide himself from purblind justice,
That knows so well these dark intestine ways.
Why should we cry up Thales any longer?
Come open me your Phrontisterium,
And quickly let me see this Socrates,
I long to learn, open the door -- The School discovered; the Scholars in
several postures: Socrates hanging in a basket.
O Hercules
What strange beasts have we here!

Schol. Why do you wonder?
Whom do they look like think you?

Streps. Like the poor
Lacedaemonian Captives taken at Suid. lib.
Pylus.
Why look they so intently on the ground?
These seek out things that appertain to Earth!
Oh they seek leeks; trouble your selves no more friends,
For I know better where are good and great ones.

Schol. Come let us go in.

Streps. Let Us stay a while and talk with 'em.

Schol. No, no, they cannot long endure the air.

Streps. What Is this, for Heavens sake say?

Schol. This is Astronomy.

Streps. And this?

Schol. Geometry.

Strop. But what is it good for?

Schol. To measure land.

Streps. What, arable or pasture?

Schol. No, the whole Earth.

Streps. A pretty jest indeed.
That were a mighty help to husbandmen.

Schol. Here Is all the world, and this is Athens.

Streps. How?
I Will scarce believe that, what is become oth' Judges?
Where the Cicynians my Countymen?

Schol. Here; this Eubaea; see how far it is stretched.

Streps. I, almost stretched in pieces betwixt us,
And Pericles; and where is Lacedaemon?

Schol. Here.

Strepss. It Is too nigh us, why, with all your skill
Do you not help to thrust it farther off.

Schol. It is not possible.

Streps. No? you will rue't then.
But what man's that hangs yonder in the basket?

Schol. That Is he.

Streps. He, what he?

Schol. Socrates.

Streps. How, Socrates?
Call him.

Schol. Call him your self, I Am not at leisure.

Scene. 3.
Strepsiades, Socrates. Streps. HO Socrates

Socr. The words of Silenus (whom Socrates resembled for deformity) in Pindar.
Schol.
Why do thou call me mortal?

Streps. First I would gladly know what thou do there?

Socr. I walk in the air, and gaze upon the Sun.

Streps. Why in a basket do thou view the Gods,
Not from the ground?

Socr. I could not elevate
My thoughts to contemplation of these mysteries,
Unless my Intellect were thus suspended,
Where my thin thoughts melt into air (their likeness)
Stood I upon the ground, I should find nothing,
Though I sought nere so strictly up and down,
For the magnetic virtue of the Earth
Would draw away the humor of my brain,
Just as we see in nose-smart.

Streps. How, hows that?
Does the brain draw the humor out of nose-smart?
Come down sweet Socrates, and teach me quickly
The knowledge of those things for which I came.

Socr. What came thou for?

Streps. To learn the art of speaking,
With debts and usury I Am torn in pieces
Tossed up and down; forced to pawn all my goods:

Socr. On what occasion did you run in debt?

Streps. By horses eaten into this consumption;
And I would learn of you your other language
Which teaches men to pay nothing: for which
By all the Gods i will give you what you will ask.

Socr. By all what Gods? we do not here allow
Those Gods the City worships.

Streps. How then swear you,
By copper farthings like the Byzantines?

Socr. Would thou be skillful in divine affairs.

Streps. By Iovr (if any such there be) I would.

Socr. You must be then acquainted with the Clouds,
Our reverend Goddesses.

Streps. With all my heart.

Socr. Sit down upon this Couch then

Streps. Well.

Socr. Now take
This Garland.

Streps. Why a garland? alas Socrates,
Do You mean (like Athamas) to sacrifice me?

Socr. No, these are rites that every one performs
At his admission.

Streps. But what shall I gain by it?

Socr. Thou shallt be made most voluble in speech,
A very rattle, bolting words as fine
As flower.

Streps. Thou Art right by Jove, I shall be powderd.

Socr. silenced old man, and listen to our prayer.
"Great King, unbounded air, whose arms are hurld
"About the surface of this pendant world,
"Bright Ether, reverend Clouds, that from your Sphere
"Thunder and lightning dart, rise and appear.

Streps. Not yet, not yet, till I have wrapped my self
Close in my Cloak, lest I be wet: it was ill
That I forgot to bring my Riding hood.

Socr. "Your power, great Clouds, make to this suppliant known
"Whether now seated on Olympus Throne,
"Or whether you your sacred revells keep
"In the wide Gardens of your Sire the deep:
"Or of his flowing Crystal seaven-mouth'd Nile,
"In golden Ewers wantonly beguile:
"Or in Mauritian marshes keep your Court;
"Or on the snowy top of Mimas sport.
"Come, to our servant vows propitious be;
"Grace with your presence our solemnity.
"We humid fleeting Deities,
"The bright unbounded clouds thus rise
"From our old Sire, the grumbling Flood, Chorus of clouds.

"Above the tallest hill or wood,
"To those high watch-towers, whence we may
"The hallowed fruitfull-ground survey;
"Rivers that in soft murmurs glide,
"And the loud sea's rebellious tide;
"From thence heavens restless eye displaies
"The splendor of his glorious rays,
"Chasing all dusky mists, that we
"In shapes divine may mortals see.

Socr. Thanks reverend Clouds for favoring thus our prayer.
Did you not hear 'm speak in Thunder to us?

Streps. Great Clouds, I worship too, but am so frighted,
I scarce can hold from answering your Thunder.

Socr. Jest not profanely in such sacred rites:
Peace, for the swarm of Goddesses come singing.

Chor. "Come virgin Mistresses of showers,
"Let Us visit Pallas pregnant bowers,
"The far renowned Cecropian plain
"Where shines the (...). at Eleusis in Attica were celebrated the my^eries of
Ceres, to which Athenians only were admitted, not strangers; if any one dis
covered them to a person not initiated, they were both put to death. Schol. M.
S*
Eleusinian Fane,
"Where are the most retired aboads,
"Statues and Temples of the Gods:
"Where Altars blaze with Incense, where
"The holy day lasts all the year;
"Where the brisk Craces every spring,
"And youths with virgins dance and sing.

Str^pe. Tell me good Socrates, what things are these
That speak so sinely? are they Ladies?

Socr. No,
They Are Clouds, the Deities of idle men;
From these we have our sense, discourse, and reason,
Our high Capriccio's, and elaborate whimseys.

Streps. My soul, me thought, did leap, while they were speaking,
And now most subtly would dispute of smoke,
Sharply confute opinion with opinion:
Oh how I long to see them once again.

Socr. Look yonder toward Parnes, look how gently
They glide to earth.

Stre^s. Where? show me.

Socr. See in sholes
They creep into the Caverns of the Mountain.

Streps. What things are these? I cannot yet behold'em.

Socr. There in the entrance look.

Streps. Yet I scarce see them.

Socr. Either thou see them now, or thou art blind.

Streps. I do by Jove, great Clouds, for you hold all^

Socr. Did thou not know these Deities before?

Streps. Not I, I thought them only mists and vapors:

Socr. Thou knew not then those who maintain the Sophists.

Streps. If these be Clouds, how comes it that they look
Like women? for the Clouds have no such shape.

Srce. No, what shape have they then?

Streps. I know not justly;
They look like flying fleeces, but by Jove,
Nothing at all like women; these have noses.

Socr. The Socratick way of dispute by question.

Answer to what I ask.

Streps. Ask me quickly.

Socr. Did ere behold a Cloud shaped like a Centaure,
A Leopard, Bull, or Wolf?

Streps. I have, what then?

Socr. The Clouds can take what form they list, as when
They see a hairy fellow curled like Clitus,
They mock his madness in a Centaures shape.

Streps. And when they see one that defrauds or plunders
The Commonwealth, like Sinon, what then do they?

Socr. They do resemble him, turn ravenous wolves,
This was the reason yesterday, when they
Beheld Coward.
Cleonymus, they fled like deer:
And seeing E^^eminately attired.
Clisth^nes are now turned women.

Streps. Great Queens, if you ere design to speak to mortals,
Make me acquainted with your rumbling voice.

Chor. "All hail old man, who do on wisdom prey,
"And thou the Priest of subtle trifles say,
"What would thou have with us, to none but thee,
"Of all the Meteor Sophists thus stoop we;
"Save ^rodicus, to him as grave and wise,
"To thee, because thou walkst upright, thy eye^
"Rolling on every side, thy look severe
"And barefoot many miseries do bear.

Streps. Good heavens, what voice is this, how strange and stately.

Socr. These are our Goddesses* the rest are toys.

Streps, Is then Olympian Jove no Deity?

Socr. What Jove? there is no such thing; mere fancy.

Streps. How?
Whence then proceeds all Whereof Jupiter was the particular Deity; thence
surnamed (...)
rain?

Socr. Only from these.
Did thou ere see a shower without them? take
The Clouds away, and heaven must rain fair weather.

Streps. By Phoebus thou have cleared it well, till now
I thought Jove made water through a ^ive.
But whence comes thunder? when I Am sick, that frights me,
These thunder as they tumble up and down.
How can that be?

Socr. Deriding Socrates as ignorant in Natural Philosophy.

When they are full of water,
By their won weight, driven upon one another,
They roar and break.

Streps. But who is it that drives them,
Is not that Jove?

Socr. No, an aetheriall whirlewind.

Streps. A whirlwind, hum! I knew not that til now.
But whence comes lightning then, that glittering fire
Which terrifies and burns us? Jupiter
Uses to dart this down on perjured men.

Socr. And how (thou phlegmatic, dull Saturnine,)
If darted on the perjured, how comes Sinon,
Theorus, and Cleonymus to scapeit?
No, his own Temple, or the Sunian Promontory,
Or sturdy Oaks he strikes, did they ere wrong him?
Did the Oak ere forswear it self?

Streps. I know not:
That which you say seems reason; but what then
Is lightning?

Socr. When the winds are shut up close,
They swell the clouds like bladders, and at last
Break out with violence and horrid noises;
And by contrition kindle one another.
But thou who searchest amongst us for wisdom,
How happy will thou be above all Graecians
If thou conceive well, and remember, and
Can suffer much, and never wilt be tired
Standing or walking, nor have sense of frost,
Nor care for dyning, and refrain from wine,
From exercises, and all other toys.

Streps. O for a solid soul restless with cares,
Sparing, self-torturing, one that can feast
Upon a dish of herbs, you never could
Be better ^itted; a mere an vile I.

Socr. Do thou believe no Gods but those we teach,
The Chaos, Clouds and Tongue, only these three.

Streps. I Will not so much as speak of any other,
Much less bestow an offering on their Altars.

Chor. "Say boldy then, say what is thy request,
"For if thou honor us thou shall be blessed.

Streps. Great Queens I sue for a small matter, that
I may out-talk all Greeks a hundred furlongs.

Chor. To thee alone this gift we will allow,
None speak such mighty sentences as Thou.

Streps. I do not care for mighty sentences,
But subtle ones to cheat my Creditours.

Chor. It is not much thou askst, and shall obtain it,
Learn of our Ministers and thou shall gain it.

Streps. I shall, relying on your promise; forced
By want, Co^patia and a lucklesse match.
Now let them use me as they list, beat, starve me,
Burn, freeze, or flea me, so I escape my debts:
I care not though men call me impudent,
Smooth-tongu'd, audacious, petulant* abominable,
Forger of words and lie, contentious Barretour,
Old, winding, bragging, testy, crafty fox.

Socr. Said like a man of courage; if thou learn
Of me, thy fame shall spread wide as the Heavens*

Streps. What shall I do?

Socr. Thou shall spend all thy time
With me; a life the happiest in the world.

Streps. I long to see that day.

Socr. Thy door shall always
Be thronged with Clients that will come to thee
For Counsel, and discourse of cases worth
The wealth of kingdoms, to thy h^arts desire.

Chor. "Try this old man; first see if he be sit;
"Put him toth' test, and sound the depth of's wit.

Socr. Come tell me now your disposition,
That when I know it I may sit my Machines
Accordingly.

Streps. You will not undermine me.

Socr. No, I would know if you have any memory.

Streps. Yes, when another owes me any thing,
I can remember very well, but what
I owe my self, i am ready to forget.

Socr. Have thou a natural faculty in speaking

Streps. No, I can mar words sooner far then make'em.

Socr. How will thou learn then?

Streps. Fear me not, I tell you
Well, when I make some learned deep discourse.

Socr. As the Scholars of Socrates used, especially Xenephon and Plato.
You must be sure to caught up presently.

Streps. What must I snap at learning like a dog?

Socr. This is a very fool, an unknown Clown;
I am afraid old man thou will need whipping.
What if thou should be beaten?

Streps. Then i am beaten.

Socr. But what would do?

Streps. I would take witness on it
And sue them on an action of Battery.

Socr. Off with your Cloak.

Streps. Why, how have I offended?

Socr. No; but our orders admit none but naked.

Streps. I came not hither to steal any thing.

Socr. Down with your Cloak, why do thou trifle.

Streps. Now
Tell me if I prove apt and diligent,
Of all your scholars who shall I come nighest?

Socr. Thou may perhaps be like our Chaerephon.

Streps. Alas, alas! what an Anatomy?

Socr. No, no: but if thou will be any thing,
Follow me without more delay.

Streps. I want
A Cake for your Cerberus; I go me thinks
As if 'twere into the Trophonian Cave.

Socr. On, on, why stayst thou gazing at the door.

Chor. "Go, for thy courage blessed whose aged mind
"To wisdom soars, and leaves the young behind.

Act. 2.
Socrates, Strepsiades. Socr. BY Chaos, and this air I breath, I never
Met any thing so stupid as this fellow,
So clownish and oblivious; easy toys
He learns, not half so fast as he forgets'em,
I Will call him forth; what, ho, Strepsiades;
Come out and bring your bed along with you.

Str. The fleas will hardly let me bring my self.

So. Quick, down with it there; and mark what I say to you.

Str. I Am ready.

So. What have you most mind to learn,
Measures, or Verse, or Rhyme?

Str. By all means measures;
For I was cheated by a Meal-man lately
Two pecks.

So. That Is not the thing I demand;
I Would know^which you conceive the fairest measure.
The Trimeter or the Tetrameter.

Str. The fairest measure in my mind's a Bushel.

So. It Is nothing that you say.

Str. What will you lay
That your Tetrameter holds not a Bushel.

So. Away, away, how dull thou art, and blockish,
But thou will be perhaps more apt at Rhyme.

Str. What help can rimes afford me in my meal.

So. First they will make thee pleasant in all company.
Then thou shall know which suits with Anapaestick,
And which with Dactyles.

Str. Dactiles? I know that sure.

So. Why what is a Dactyle.

Str. What but this same ^inger,
^Thas been a Dactyle ere since I was a child.

So. Thou Art an unprofitable Dunce.

Str. I care not
For learning these devices.

So. What then would thou?

Str. That, that unjust and cheating Sophistry.

So. But there are things that must be learnt before
You come to that; what Creatures are there Masculine.

Str. Sure I know that or I were mad indeed.
A Ram, a Bull, a Goat, a Dog, a Pigeon.

So. Deriding Socrates a^ ignorant in Grammar.
See how thou err'st, that call'st both male and female
A Pigeon.

Str. Right, by Neptune, how then must I?

So. Call this a Cock-Pigeon, and that a Hen.

Str. A Pigeon, Cock and Hen, ha! by this air,
For this sole document, I will replenish
Your A meal-trough the Greek word has a Masculine termination but feminine
article.
Cardopus with meal.

So. Again thou art wrong;
Thou call'st it Cardopus, but it is haec Cardopus,
And therefore henceforth call it Cardopa.
Next it is fit you know which names are Masculine,
And which are feminine.

Str. I know well which
Are feminine, I Am sure.

So. Lets hear.

Str. Philina,
Cletagora, Demetria, and Lystha.

So. And which are Masculine?

Str. A world, Philoxenus,
Milesias, and Amynias.

So. Thou art out.

Str. Are not these Masculine with you?

So. Esseminate Cowards.
By no means.
How if you saw Amynias, would you call him?

Str. Amynia, ho!

So. What, make a woman of him.

Str. And reason good, h'has thrown away his arms,
And will not ^ight, But to what purpose learn I
These common trifles.

So. Not so common neither,
But come, lie down.

Str. What must I do?

So. Consider
With your self the business that concerns you.

Str. Not in this bed, I thank you, if I must
Lie down, I Will meditate upon the ground.

So. But here is no room besides.

Str. Wretch that I am.
How I shall be tormented with these ^leas!

So. Now think into the depth of thy affairs,
Try every turn and winding, every double;
And if you stick at any thing: give't ore,
And to some other; but be sure you sleep not,

Str. Oh, oh.

So. How now the matter?

Str. I am killed
By these blood-suckers, these Corinthians.

So. Do not torment your self.

Str. How can I choose
When I have neither money left, nor color,
Scarce life, no shoes, grown almost to a Ghost
With watching?

So. Now what think y'on, nothing?

Str. Yes
By Neptune.

So. What?

Str. I Am thinking if the fleas
Will leave a piece of me or not.

So. Death on thee.

Str. You might have spared your curse, I Am dead already.

So. Fie, fie, you must not be so tender, So Socrates disputes in ^lato's
Phadrus, that exterior objects might not divert him; which Aristophanes here
derides.
cover
Your face, and study for some subtle cheat.

Str. Would I could learn to cheat these wicked fleas.

So. Let Us see what does he? what, asleep, ha'ye thought
Of nothing yet?

Str. What would you have me think on?

So. What would you learn?

Str. I Have told you that already
A thousand times; I Would learn to pay no use-mony.

So. Come then, cover your self, and subtilize
Your thoughts, dissect your business into Atoms.

Str. Alas.

So. Ly still; and if you stick at any thing,
Pass by it a while, and come to it again.

Str. Ho, my dear Socrates.

So. What is it old man?

Str. I have found out that will do it.

So. As how.

Str. First tell me
Where I may meet with some Thessalian witch;
For I would steal the Moon one of these nights,
And having got her, lock her in a chest
As charily, as I would keep a glass.

So. What will thou get by that?

Str. What, if the Moon
Never rise again, I Am bound to pay no use.

So. How so?

Str. 'Cause use you know is paid by th'Month,

So. It Is well, but I Will propound another business;
Suppose that you were tied upon a statute
To pay five Talents, could you raze figures?

Str. I know not, but I Will try.

So. You must not limit
Your thoughts so narrowly within your self,
But like a beetle fettered in a thread,
Allow them play and flutter in the air;

Str. I have it, I have it, the rarest way to cancel
A deed, as you will confess when you have heard it.

So. What iis't?

Str. Did you nere see at any Grocers
A clear transparant stone, with which they use
To kindle fire?

So. You mean a burning-glasse.

Stro. The very same.

So. What would thou do with it?

Str. Whilst that the Scrivener writes the deed, do you mark,
Thus standing by him with my burning glass
Against the Sun, I Will burn out every letter.

So. Wisely by all the Graces.

Str. How I long
To cancel thus a bond of fifty pound.

So. It Is well, now tell me if thy adversary
Sue thee, and thou art like to be orethrown
For want of witnesses, how will thou 'void
His suit.

Str. Most easily.

So. Which way?

Str. Before
It comes to judgment, I would hang my self.

So. Push, thou say nothing.

Str. Yes, by love there is none
Will prosecute a suit against the dead.

So. Away, thou fool'st; i will teach no more.

Str. Why dear Socrates,
Why?

So. Thou forget'st as fast as thou can learn.
Tell me the first thing thou were taught to day:

Str. The first, stay let me see; the first thing say you?
How call you that we use to put our meal in?
Wretch, Iv'e forget it!

So. See, deserve thou not
Forget full to be punished for a dunce.

Str. Alas what shall I do? for if I learn not
The cheating language, I am quite undone:
Good Clouds advise me what course I shall take.

Cho. "If an ingenious son thou have at home,
"Thou had best send him hither in thy room.

Str. I have a son, and he is ingenious too;
But will not learn, the more my misery.

Cho. And will thou suffer't?

Str. Of a promising person
His mother is a woman of great spirit;
Once more I Will try; if he refuse, i'I make
No more ado but turn him out of doors;
Stay but a while, I will be quickly back.

Act. 3.
Strepsi^des, Phidippides, Socrates. Str. NOw by the Clouds thou staist no
longer here?
Hence, and go feed in Megacles his stable.

Ph. Alas what fury has possessed you Father?
By Jove I think you are besides your self.

Str. See, see, he swears by Jove, art thou not mad
At these years to believe there is a Jove?

Ph. Is truth to be derided?

Str. Well I see
Thou Art still a Child and credit'st old wives tales.
But come I will tell thee that shall make thee
A man, so you be sure to tell it no body.

Ph. Pretty; what is it?

Str. Thou swor'st even now by Jove.

Ph. I did so.

Str. See how good it is to learn;
There Is no such thing as Jove.

Ph. What then?

Str. A whirlwind
Has blown Jove quite away and rules all Heaven.

Ph. What fooleries are these?

Str. They Are serious truth son.

Ph. Who tells you so?

Str. Our Socrates the A^ if he should say, the Atheist: for the Melians were
infamous for Atheism for Diagoras who professed it: Socrates was Scholar to
Aristoras a Melian. See chap. 3.
Melian,
And Chaerephon, that trace the steps of fleas.

Ph. How, are you grown to such a height of madness,
As to believe such melancholy dreamers.

Str. Good words: defame not men of such deep wisdom
And subtle spirits; these live sparingly,
Are never at the charges of of a Barber,
Unguents, or Baths, whereas thou wastes my means
As freely as if I were dead already.
Come then, and be their scholar in my room.

Ph. What can be learnt that is good of such as they are?

Str. All things that are accounted wisdom Boy;
And first to know thy self, and what a dunce
Thou art, how blockish, rustic and forgetful.
But stay a little, cover thy face a while.

Ph. Alas my fathers mad, what shall I do,
Accuse him to the Court of folly,
Be speak a Coffin for him, for he talks
Idly, as he were drawing on?

Str. Come on now.
Let Us see, what that?

Ph. A Pigeon.

Str. Good; and that?

Ph. A Pigeon.

Str. Both the same? ridiculous.
Take heed you make not such mistakes hereafter.
This you must call a Cock, and that a Hen.

Ph. A Hen? Is this the goodly learning Father
You got since your admission amongst these earth-wormes?

Str. This and a great deal more; but being old,
I soon forget what I am taught.

Ph. I think
'Twas want of memory made you lose your cloak.

Str. No, it is hung up upon the arts and sciences;

Ph. And where your shoes?

Str. Lost for the common good,
Like Pericles: But lets be gone and see
You learn to obey me, and to wrong all else.
Remember that I bought thee, when thou were
But six years old, a little Cart to play with.

Ph. Alas you will be the first that will repent this.

Str. Take you no care for that; do as I bid you.
Ho, Socrates, I Have brought my son at last,
Though much against his will.

So. I, that is because
He Is rude, untaught, a child of ignorance,
And unacquainted with our hungry baskets.

Ph. Go hang your self in one of them.

Str. How impudence; do thou talk thus to thy Master?

Socr. So go hang, with what a seeming grace was that pronounced!
How do you think that he should ever learn
To overthrow a nimble adversary,
Or win a Judges heart with Rhetoric?

Str. Fear not, but teach him; he is ingenious
By Nature; for when he was but a little one,
He Would build you houses, and make leather Coaches,
And ships, and cut frogs out of apple parings.
What Is your opinion then? do you not think
He Is capable to learn both languages?
Or if not both, be sure he learn the worse.

Socr. Well, we shall try what may be done with him,

Str. Farewell, and so remember that in all
I say that is just, you learn to contradict me.

Act. 3.
Scoen. 1.
Strepsiades. Streps. THe From the twentieth day of the month they reckoned
backward, see the life of Solons Chap.
fifth, the fourth, the third, the seconds, hum.
The most abhord and dreadful day's at hand,
The old and new; all I ow money to
Threaten to sue and vow my utter ruin;
Yet I require nothing but what is just reason:
My friend forbear me till some other times;
But they all answer me, words are no payment,
Revile me, swear they will put their bonds in suit,
And let them, what care I, so my Phidippides
Have learnt the art of cheating: I shall know straight;
It is but knocking at the school, ho son.

Scoen. 2.
Strepsiades, Socrates. Socr. SAve you Strepsiades.

Streps. The like to you.
Such guif^s Socrates sometimes accepted, though not money. See Chap.
First take this bag of meal, for it is fit
We pay our duty to our reverend Master,
Now tell me, has my son attained the art
For which I placed him with you.

Socr. Yes exactly.

Streps. Thanks to deceit, the Queen that governs all things.

Socr. Now you may overthrow all adversaries.

Streps. What though a witness swear that I have borrowed.

Socr. I though a thousand swear't.

Streps. Io. Io.
Triumph my boys, woe to you money-mongers,
You and your bonds, your use on use may hang now,
You Will trouble me no more! O what a son
Have I, that senceth with a two-edged tongue,
My Houses prop and Guardian, my foes terror,
Quickly come forth, and meet my glad embraces,
Come forth and hear thy Father.

Socr. See the man.

Streps. O my dear boy!

Socr. Away and take him with you.

Scoene. 3.
Strepsiades, Phidippides. Streps. IO my son! O how I joy to see
Thy changed complexion! Thou lookst now me thinks
As if thou were inspired with contradiction
I read,^ erosse questions in thy very face,
Thy very eyes me thinks say, how, how is that?
Thou can persuade the world that thou art wronged,
When thou art, he that does the wrong. I see it,
I plainly see it; a very (...) Schol. M. S.
Attick mine;
Now let it be thy study to recover
Him, whom thou almost have undone,

Phid. Why, what
Is that you fear?

Streps. The old and the new day.

Phid. Can one and the same day be old and new?

Streps. I know that: I Am sure my Creditors
By joint consent that day threaten to sue me.

Phi^. They Will loose by it if they do: for it is impossible
To make two days of one.

Streps. How is it impossible?

Phil. As for a woman to be old and young
At once.

Streps. But law has so determined it

Phil. But these men know not what the law does mean.

Streps. Why what is the meaning of it.
See the life of Solon. Ch^p.


Phil. Ancient Solon
Was naturally a lover of the people.

Streps. What Is that to this?

Phid. He did appoint two days,
The last day of the old month for citation,
The first oth' new for payment of the money.

Streps. But why the last day for citations?

Phil. That
The debtor having thus one day of warning
Might fly and shun the trouble of the next.

So. Why do the Magistrates then take all forfeits
Upon the old and new day?

Ph. They are hungry,
And taste their meat before they should fall too.

Str. We the fools that sit still and do nothing,
We that are wise and quick have done the business;
Ye blocks, ye stones, ye sheep, ye empty bubbles;
Let me congratulate this son of min
My self and my good fortune in a song.
Now Strepsiades thou art blessed
Of the most discreet the best,
What a Son thou have, now may
All my aemulous neighbors say,
When they hear that he alone
Has my creditours orethrown.
But come my boy, now thou shall feast with me,

Sect. 4.
Pasias, Strepsiades, Witness. Pas. ANd must a man be outed of his own thus?
Better take any course then suffer this.
You must assist me in this business neighbor,
That I may call my debtor to account;
There Is one friend made a foe; yet I Will not shame
My country, ere I do it, I Will give him warning.

Strepsiades.

Streps. How now, what would you have?

Pas. The old and new days come.

Streps. Bear witness friend,
He named two days. What sum is it you demand.

Pas. Twelve pounds you borrowed when you bought your
Son
A Race-horse; with the interest.

Streps. A race-horse,
You know I near cared for'em in my life.

Pas. And swor'st by Jove and all the Gods to pay it.

Streps. By Jove? 'twas then before my son had learned
The all-convincing speech.

Pas. You Will not deny't.

Streps. What have I got but that, for all this learning?

Pas. Dare thou deny't, if I should put thee to
Thy oath, and make thee call the Gods to witness it?

Streps. What Gods de'e mean?

Pas. Jove, Mercury, and Neptune.

Streps. By Jove? yes that I will I hold thee three pence.

Pas. Curse on thee for this impudence.

Streps. If thou were rubbed with salt, 'twould make thy wit
the quicker.

Pas. De'laugh at me?

Streps. Thou will take up six bushells.

Pas. So help me Jupiter, and all the Gods,
I will even be with you for this scorn.

Streps. I am extremely taken with your Gods,
And this same Iupiter^ you swear by, they
Are excellent pastime to a knowing man.

Pas. Well, you will one day answer for these words.
But tell me, whether I shall have my money
Or not, give my answer, and I Am gone.

Streps. Stay but a little, I will answer presently,
And plainly.

Pas. Sure he is gone to fetch the money

Streps. Where is the Man that comes to ask me money?
Tell me, what is this?

Pas. That which it is, a Cardopus.

Streps. You ask for money, and so very a dunce;
I Will never whilst I live pay him a penny.
That calls a Cardopa a Cardopus.

Pas. You will not pay then?

Streps. Not for ought I know:
You Will stay no longer, pray about your business.

Pas. Yes, I Will be gone, but in the mean time know
I Will have my money, if I live this day.

Streps. You may chance go without it; yet I Am sorry
You should be punished so for a mistake.
For saying Cardopus for Cardopa.

Scoen. 8.
Amynias, Strepsiades, Witness. Amyn. OH, oh, alas.

Streps. Who Is that keeps such a bawling?
What art thou? one of Which were Xenocles, Xenotimus, and D^motimus, ^^agick
^oets and Actors.
Carkinus his sons?

Amyn. It Is I unhappy!

Streps. Keep it to thy self.

Amyn. Unlucky chance, oh cruel destiny,
To spoil at once my Cart and all my Horses^
This and the following line are takes from Xenocles the Tragadian, which is
the reason of Strepsiades his answer.
Oh Pallas, how unkindly have thou used me?

Streps. What hurt did ere Tlepolemus do thee?

Amyn. Deride me not, but rather bid your son
Pay me the money which he had of me,
For I was never in more need of it.

Streps. What money man?

Amyn. That which he borrowed of me.

Streps. Then I perceive you're in a sad condition.

Am. I had a scurvy fall driving my horses.

Streps. Thou do but jest, 'twas driving an Ass rather.

Amyn. I do not jest when I demand my money.

Streps. Upon my word thou art not right.

Amyn. How so?

Streps. Thy brain me thinks is troubled.

Amyn. E^ther pay me
My money strait, or I will trouble you.

Streps. Tell me, does Jove beget and send down rain.
Or does the Sun exhale it from the sea?

Amyn. I neither know nor care.

Streps. What? are you sit
To receive money, and so ignorant
Of these sublime and subtle mysteries?

Amyn. Well, if you cannot let me have the principal,
Pay me the interest.

Streps. Interest, what kind
Of creature's that?

Amyn. What, but th'encrease of money
By months, and days, as time runs on.

Streps. It Is well.
And do you think the sea is fuller now
Then 'twas at first?

Amyn. No, not a drop, it is
Not fit it should.

Streps. The sea by your confession
Is nothing grown; then with what conscience
Can you desire your money should increase.
Go get you from my doors, fetch me a whip there.

Witn. Well, I Will bear witness for him.

Streps. Why de'e not go, will you move The Horses name which he bought of him.
Samphoras?

Amyn. Is not this riotous?

Streps. Will you be gone?
Or shall I lead you in a chain, and make you
Show tricks? if you but stay a little longer,
I Will send you, and your Cart and Horses packing.

Chor. "Now observe what it is to bend
"Studies to an evil end
"This old man, that is intent
"Creditours to circumvent,
"Foolishly himself has crossed,
"And will find so to his cost;
"That in this false Art his son
"Has attained perfection:
"Justice cunning to refute)
"That at last he will wish him mute.

Act. 5.
Scene. 1.
Strepsiades, Phidippides. Streps. O Neighbors, Kinsmen, Countrymen, help,
help,
I Am beat all all over: oh my head, my back^
Thou strik'st thy Father Rogue.

Phid. I do so father.

Streps. See, see, he stands in it too.

Phid. I do indeed.

Streps. Thief, villain, Patricide.

Phid. More I beseech you,
I am much taken with these pretty Titles.

Streps. Rascal,

Phid. Pray stick me fuller of these roses:

Streps. Do beat thy Father?

Phid. Yes, by Jove, and justly.

Streps. Oh' rogue what justice can there be in that.

Phid. I will demonstrate it by argument.

Streps. By argument?

Phid. Most easily, which language
Shall I dispute in.

Streps. Language?

Phid. Yes the greater
Or lesser?

Streps. I have bred thee well indeed
If thou can make this good, that any son
May beat his Father.

Phid. You Will confess as much
If I so prove it, that you cannot answer't.

Streps. Well, I will hear for once what you can say.

Scoen. 2.
Chorus, Streps, Phidip. Cho. "OLd man it much concerns you to confute
"Your son, whose confidence appears to suit
"With a just cause; how happened this dispute?

Str. I shall relate it from the first; as soon
As we had dined, I took a lute and bid him
Sing the sheep-shearing of Simonides,
He told me 'twas an old and ugly fashion
To sing at dinner like a millers wife.

Phi. And was not this sufficient to deserve
A beating; when you would make men chirp like At noon Virgecl. 2.

Grasse-hoppers?
Str. Just so he said within; and added that
Simonides was an unpleasant Poet.
I must confess I hardly could forbear him;
But then I bid him take a Myrtle, branch,
And act some piece of Aeschylus, that Aechylus
Says he, is of all Poets the absurdest,
The harshest, most disorderly and bumbast.
Did not my heart pant at this language think you?
Yet I represt it; Then said I, rehearse
A learned speech out of some modern wit;
He strait repeats out of Euripides
A tedious long Oration, how the Brother
(Good Heavens) did violate his sisters bed.
Here I confess I could contain no longer
But chid him sharply; to dispute we went,
Words upon words till he at last to blows,
To strike, to pull, to tear me.

Phi. And not justly?
You that would discommend Euripides,
The wisest of all Poets.

Str. Wisest? ah
What did I say, I shall be beat again.

Ph. By Jove, and you deserve't.

Str. How, deserve it?
Ungrateful wretch, have I not brought thee up,
Fed and maintained thee from a little one,
Supplied thy wants? how then can I deserve it?

Chor. "Now I believe each youthful breast
"With expectation possessed,
"That if the glory of the day
"Be from the Plantiffe born away,
"By this example they may all
"Upon the old men heavy fall;
"What you have done with utmost art,
"To justify is now your part.

Phid. How sweet it is to study, sage new things;
And to contemn all fundamental laws!
When I applied my mind to Horse-coursing
I could not speak three words but I was out;
Now since I gave it one, I am acquainted
With ponderous sentences and subtle reasons,
Able to prove I ought to beat my Father.

Str. Nay, follow racing still, for I had rather
Maintain thy horses then be beaten thus.

Phid. I will begin where you did interrupt me,
And first will ask, did you not beat me when
I was a child?

Streps. But that was out of love.

Phid. It Is very right, tell me then, ought not I
To recompense your love with equal love;
If to be beaten be to be beloved,
Why should I suffer stripes, and you have none?
I am by nature born as free as you;
Nor is it fit the sons should be chastised,
and not their parents.

Str. Why?

Phid. You urge the Law,
That does allow all children to be beaten:
To which I answer, Old men are twice children.
And therefore ought, when they offend, be punished
As well as we,

Str. But there is no Law that says
The Parents should be punished.

Phid. Was not he
Who made that Law, a man as you and I,
He formed a Law, which all the old men followed;
Why may not I as well prescribe another,
And all the young men follow my advice:
But all the blows before this Law was made
Must be forgiven wihtout all dispute.
Besides, mark how the Cocks and other creatures
Fight with their sires, who differ not at all
From us, save only that they make no laws.

Streps. Why then if you will imitate the Cocks,
Do you not dine upon a Dunghill, and
Lodge in a hen-roost?

Phid. It Is not all one case,
Our Socrates does not approve so far.

Streps. Approve not then their sighting, but in this
Thou plead'st against thy self.

Phid. How so?

Streps. Because
The Authority I exercise over thee
Will be thine own, when ere thou have a son.

Phid. But if I never have any, then I never
Shall have authority, and you will go
To th'grave deriding me.

Streps. It Is too much reason.

Phid. Hear now another argument.

Streps. I Am lost.

Phid. And then perhaps you will take the blows I gave you
Not half so ill.

Streps. What good shall I get by them?

Phid. I Will bent my mother too.

Streps. What say thou, thou?
Why this is worse then the other.

Phid. What if I
Prove by the second language that I ought?

Streps. Why then you will have nothing more to do
But prove that you, and your wise Socrates,
And wiser language may hang all together.
O Clouds, all this I suffer through your means,
For I in you wholly reposed my trust.

Chor. "Thy self art author of this misery,
"Because to ill thou did thy mind apply.

Streps. Why did you then give me no warning of it?
You know I was a rude and aged man.

Chor. "This is our custom, whensoere we find
"Any to malice or deceit inclined,
"Into some dreadful mischief such we thrust,
"That they may fear the Gods, and learn what is just.

Streps. Alas, this is a mischief, and a just one,
For I ought not, when I had borrowed money,
To seek out ways to avoid restoring it.
Come then my son, let us be revenged
Upon that wicked Socrates and Ch^^raephon,
Who have abused us both.

Phid. I will not wrong
My Masters.

Streps. Reverence Celestial Jove.

Phid. Celestial Jove, see how you rave now father*
There Is no such thing as Jove.

Streps. There is.

Phid. Act. 3.
A whirlwind
Has blown Jove quite away, and rules all.

Streps. No son, he is not expelled, I was but fooled
To worhip in his room a fictile deity.

Phid. Nay if you will needs be mad, be mad alone.

Scoen. 3.
Strepsiades. Streps. MAd that I was to trust in Socrates,
And cast off all our Gods; good Mercury
Be not displeased or punish, but forgive me.
That took such pains, and studied to talk idly;
And tell me what I Would best do with these fellows.
Sue them or punish'em some other way --
Thou Art in the right, I will not sue them then,
But as thou bidst me set their Nest on fire;
Come Xanthias, come, a fork and ladder quickly.
Get up and pluck the house about their Ears,
Quick if thou love thy master; one of you
Go light a torch, and bring it hither strait:
Proud as they are I mean to bring'em lower,

Scoen. 4.
Scholar, Strepsiades, Socrates, Chaerephon. Schol. OH, oh!

Strep. Torch to thy work, set fire apace.

Schol. What art thou doing man?

Streps. That which I Am doing;
Disputing somewhat hotly with your school here.

Schol. Alas, who is this that sets our house on fire?

Streps. He whom you cosen'd of his cloak.

Schol. Thou kill'st,
Thou kil'lst us man.

Streps. That is the thing I mean,
If my fork hold and ladder, do not fail me.

So. How now, what do you make on our house-ridge.

Streps. Act. 2. (...). 3.
I walk in the air and gaze upon the Sun.

So. Alas I Am choked.

Streps. Why do thou scorn the Gods then?

Chaer. Oh me I burn;

Streps. Now you may^ calculate
The motions of the Moon; tear, pluck, beat, burn'em.
For many reasons they deserve the flame,
But most because they did the Gods disclaim.

XENOPHON


XENOPHON.
CHAP. I.
Xenophon, his Country Parents, and following of Socrates.
Xenophon was an Atheni^n, Lae^^.
son of Cryllus, of the Erchiean Tribe: The time of his birth is no where
expressly delivered: Laert.
Stesiclides affirms he died the first year of the 105. Olympiad. de Longave.
Lucian that he outlived 90. years: whence it is evident that he was born at
or before the first year of the 82. Olympiad, which if the learned Causabone
had observed, he had not Anima^^. ^. 12.
altered Athenaeus upon supposition, that he was but ten years old, the fourth
year of the 89. Olympiad (the time of his Symposium) whereas he was then no
less then 36. years of age. Laertius says, he flourished the fourth year of
the 94. Olympiad. (Suidas reads, of the 98.) Or, according to others, that he
flourished in the 89. Olympiad with the rest of the Socratick Philosophers; of
whom he became one upon this accident.

Laert.
Meeting Socrates in a narrow lane, he stopped him with his staff, and asked
him where all kind of meats were to be sold; to which Socrates made a serious
answer: and then demanded of him, where it was that men were made good and
virtuous! whereat Xenophon pausing, follow me then, says he, and learn; from
thence forward he became a Disciple of Socrates.

In the time of that great war betwixt the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, called
the Peloponnesian war (the natural forwardness of his spirit being perhaps
excited by the example of his Master Socrates) he was personally engaged in
the fight before Delium, the first year of the 89. Olympiad^ wherein the
Boeotians overcame the Athenians; in which defeat Strab. 9. Laert.
Xenophon in the flight unhorsed and thrown, down, Socrates (who his horse
being likewise slain under him, fought on foot) took him upon his shoulders and
and carried him many furlongs, until the Enemy gave over the pursuit. This was
the first essay of his military profession, which he afterward resumed upon
this occasion.

CHAP. 2.
Upon what occasion he followed Cyrus into Asia.
Xenoph. expedit cyr. lib. 1.
ARtaxerxes succeeded Darius his Father in the Kingdom of Persia, Cyrus his
younger brother having been sent for out of his Government of Lyd^a upon his
fathers sickness, which is that first (...) placed by the Arundelian stone in
the second year of the 93. Olympiad, confounded by Ad Gre^. Epoch. c^n. Chron.
page 113.
a learned person with the latter, six years after) was imprisoned by his
brother upon the accusation of Tissaphernes, but released by the mediation of
his Mother Parysa^is. Being returned to his Government, he used all secret
means to strengthen himself. the Ionian Cities were delivered to Tissaphernes
by Artaxerxes, but revolted to him, all except Myletus. His pretenses for
levying forces were, the Garrisoning of those Cities, and his opposing
Tissaphernes: Clearchus likewise raised for him many in Chersonesus, upon
pretense of warring against the Thracians. He privately also kept an Army on
foot in Thessaly under Aristippus: and Proxenus of Boeotia brought him forces
as against the Pisidians; this Proxenus (who had been scholar to Gorgias the
Leontine, and Xen. lib. 3.
guest to Xenophon) sent to invite him to Cyrus, assuring him he should be of
more esteem with him then of his own Country: Xenophon consulted with Socrates
about this letter, who doubting that if he took part with Cyrus, the Athenians
would be disples'd with him ( Cyrus having before aided the Lacedaemonians
against them) counseled him to ask the advice of the Delphian Oracle. Xenophon
went thither, and demanded of Apollo to which of the Gods he should address his
vows and sacrifice for the good success of his intended journey. He was
answered, that he should sacrifice to those Gods to whom it was due: Returning
to Athens, he imparted this Oracle to Socrates, who blamed him, because he had
not demanded whether it was best to stay or no, but (as already determined to
go) how he might best perform his journey; Nevertheless (says he) since you
have so proposed your demand, you must do as the Gods command: Xenophon having
sacrificed according to the Oracles direction, took shipping, and at Sardis
found Proxenus and Cyrus ready for their expedition into Asia, and was
immediately recommended to Cyrus, being by both earnestly entreated to stay:
he continued with him Xen. lib. 3.
not in any command, but as a volunteer, Chio. Epist. ad Metrid.
In which condition he did not any thing misbeseeming a soldier, whereupon he
was in the number of those whom Cyrus esteemed most.

Xenoph. lib. 1.
Cyrus having drawn all his forces together, marched up and gave battle to
Artax^rxes (in the beginning of the fourth year Laert.
of the nintie fourth Olympiad, when Xenenetus was Archon) at Cunaxa, five
hundred Stadia from Babylon, by the River Euphrates. Whilst he was viewing both
Armies, he told Xenophon, who rode up to him, that the sacrifices were
auspicious; then Xenophon gave him the Grecians word, Jupiter the pres^ruer.
The Greeks prevailed against Tissaphernes; but Cyrus assaulting, the King, was
through his too much forwardness ^lain; the Grecians thinking themselves
Masters of the field, and Cyrus to be alive, returned to their Camp, which they
found rif^ed by the enemy. Xenoph. lib. 2.
The next day the King sending Phalinus to them, to deliver their arms,
Xenophon answered, That they had^ nothing left but their arms and valor; as
long as they kept their arms, they might use their valor, surrendering them,
they were not Masters of themselves; It were indiscretion (says he) to
surrender what we have left, since thereby perhaps we may make our selves
Masters of what you have. Phalinus smiling, replied; Young man, you look and
speak like a Philosopher; but assure your self, your valor will not
over-master the Kings power. Clearchus returned this answer for the whole Army,
If we be esteemed friends, it will be better for him that we are armed, if
enemies, better for our selves. Tissaphernes having made a Truce with
Clearchus, perfidiously got him with four other Commanders, Proxenus, Menon, (
Laert.
with whom Xenophon had particular enmity) Agias, and Socrates, twenty Captains
of Cohorts, and two hundred common soldiers into his power; and delivering
them up to the King, they were beheaded. The Greeks being summoned to lay down
their arms, pretending that Clearchus was executed for treason discovered by
Menon and Proxenus, who were very highly rewarded. Xenophon required to have
them sent, who were fittest to direct them, being friends to both; whereto the
Persians not able to answer, departed.

CHAP. III.
How he brought off the Grecian Army.
Xe^ph. lib. 3;
THe Greeks finding themselves in such a strait, were in despair ever to see
their Country again. Xenophon calling together the Officers of Proxenus, told
them, They were not to expect any mercy from the King, who had shown none to
the body of his dead brother, having fastened his head and hand to a Gibbet, and
that they must reslove to put their safety in their arms. Apollonides a
B^eotian alleged, that there was no means of safety but in the Kings favor
and began to reckon the dangers wherewith they were surrounded. Xenophon
answered. That when upon the death of Cyrus, they marched up to the Kings
armies, he labored for a cessation, but when their Captains went to him
unarmed, he abused them; and that Apollonides deserved to be cashierd, as the
dishonor of his Nation. Agasthias replied, (which words Laertius ascribes to
Xenophon) he was an inconsiderable fellow, whose ears were boared as the slaves
of Lydia: So they turned him out. Having called together all the Commanders,
Xenophon advised them to choose new in the room of those that were lost, of whom
he was elected in the place of Proxenus: Hereupon he put on his richest habit,
as fittest either for death or victory, for Aelian. var. hist. 3. 24.
his greatest delight was in fair polished arms, affirming, that if he
overcame, he deserved such, if he were overcome and died in the field, they
would decently express his quality, and were the fittest sepulchrall ornaments
of a valiant man. His shield was of Argos, his breastplate of Altica, his
helmet of B^eotia, his horse of Epidaurium; whereby Aelian argued the elegance
of the person, in choosing such things as were fair, and esteeming him worthy
of such. Thus adorned, he made an oration to the Army, advising them (from the
examples of their late commanders) not to trust the enemy, but in order to
their return, to burn their Cariages, and Tents: this advice was put in
execution; Cherisophus a Lacedaemonian had charge of the Van, Xenophon of the
Rear, chosen (says) Chio as well for his courage as wisdom, being in both
excellent: betwixt these two there grew so great a friendship, that in all the
time of the retreat they never had but one difference; their march was directed
toward the heads of those great rivers which lay in their way, that they might
pass them where they were fordable; having crossed the River Zathe, Mithridates
came up to them, and galled the Rear with shot, which the Greeks not able to
requite, Xenophon provided two hundred slings, and finding fifty horses fit for
service, employed among the Carriage, mounted men upon them, whereby having
frustrated the second attempt of Mithridates, they marched to Larissa, seated
upon Tigris, thence to Mespila; in their march from thence, Tissaphernes
overtook them with a great Army, but was twice worsted; whereupon (as the
securest course) he seized on a Mountain, under which they must of necessity
pass; Xenophon with a party gained by another way the top of that Mountain,
not without much difficulty of passage and trouble; and to animate his
soldiers, one of them, named Soteridas, murmured that he was on horseback,
whereas himself marched on foot, oppressed with the weight of his shield; which
Xenophon hearing, alighted, took his shield from him, and thrusting him out of
his rank, marched (notwithstanding he had also a horseman Cuirasse) in his
room: But the soldiers beat and reviled Soteridas, till they constrained him
to take again his shield and place. When they had gained the top, the enemy,
being prevented fled, and set fire on the villages. Xenoph. lib. 4.
The Grecians, (intercepted by the River Tigris) marched over the mountains
into the Country of the Carduchi, a people enemy to the Persians, rough and
warlike, from whom they found such opposition, that in seven days march
through their country, they were put to continual fights, and suffered more
distresses then the Persian had put them to, Fording the River K^ntrites, which
bounds that country, they passed into Armenia, where having put to flight some
troops of horse raised by the Kings deputies in these parts to oppose their
passage, they marched without disturbance to the heads of Tigris, which they
passed; thence to the River of Tele^od in west Armenia, molested with extreme
snowes, losing many by extremity of cold, till they came to the River Phasis,
near which lived the Phasiani, Tacc^i, and the Chalybes; the Tacchi into whose
country they first came, conveying their provision into strong holds, reduced
the Greeks to great want, until with much pains they forced one of them,
where they took as much Cattle as maintained them in their passage through the
country of the Chalybes, a stout Nation, of whom they could get nothing but
blows: thence they marched to the River Harpasus, so to the Scy^hini, where
the Lord of Gymnias, a town in those parts, led them through the enemies
country (which he willed them to burn as they went) to the Mountain Theches^,
from whence they might behold the sea, to the great joy of the soldiers.
Passing friendly through the country of the Macrones, to the Colchian
Mountains, discom^iting the Colchi, who opposed them, they arived at
T^aprezond, a City upon the Euxine sea, where was a Greek Colony; here they
sacrificed and celebrated games: Xenoph. lib. ^.
Cherisophus they sent to Anaxibius, the Lacedaemonian Admiral, (with whom he
was intimate) to procure ships for their transportation home. Whilst they
stayed in expectation of his return, they maintained themselves by incursions
upon the Colchi and Dryla^; but he not coming, and their provision failing,
Xenophon persuaded the Cities adjoining to clear them a passage by Land, which
they took to Cerasus a Greek City, where mustering their men, they found but
eight thousand six hundred left of ten thousand that went up with Cyrus; the
rest consumed by enemies, snow, and sickness: They shared the money that had
been made by the sale of Captives, reserving a tenth for a offering to Apollo
and Diana: Xenophon reserved his to be disposed at Delphi and Ephesus, From
Cerasus they passed through the Country of the Mosyna^ci, a barbarous people,
divided into factions; the stronger part despising their friendship, they
joined with the weaker, whom they left Master of all: Then they marched to the
Chalybes, thence to the Tibarenes, passing quietly through their Country to
Cotyora, a Greek Town and Colony of the Sinopians Thus far the Army marched on
foot; the distance of the place where they fought with Artax^rxes to Cotyora,
being one hundred twenty two encampings, six hundred twenty parasangs, ten
thousand eight hundred twenty furlongs, the time eight Months.

Those of Cotyora refusing to afford them a Market or entertainment for their
sick, they entered the Town by force, and took provision, partly out of Pap
^lagonia, partly out of the Territory of the Cotyonites; whereupon the City of
S^nope to which Cotyora was tributary, sent Ambassadors to them, complaining
of this dealing, and threating to join with Corylas and the Paphlagonians;
whereto Xenophon answered, that they feared not, if need were, to war against
them both, but could, if they pleased, gain the friendship of Corylas and the
Paphlagonians as well as they. Upon which answer, the Ambassadors growing
calm, promised them all friendship from the State of Sinope, and to assist them
with shipping for the whole Army, it being impossible to go by Land, by reason
of the Rivers ^hermod^^, Halys, ^^is and Parthenius.

Xenophon had designed to plant a Colony there, but his intention being
divulged by Silanus, a Sooth-sayer, those of Sinope, and Heraclea sent to the
Grecians, promising them not only a sufficient fleet, but desiring under hand
Timasion a Greek Commander to promise the Army a good sum of money to convey
them to Tro^^; which offers Xenophon (who only desired the common good)
persuaded them to accept, and to engage mutually, not to forsake one another
till they were all in safety: those of Heraclea sent shipping, but not the
money; whereupon Timasion and other commanders fearing the soldiers, desired
Zenophon the Army might go to Phasis, which he refused, but thereby was
occasioned a suspicion that he should plot to deceive the Army and to bring
them back to Phasis, whereof he acquitted himself. Here a general inquisition
was made of all offenses since the death of Cyrus, and they were punished; some
accused Xenophon for beating them, all which proved for just causes, one for
offering to bury his sick companion alive; some for forsaking their ranks;
others for lying on the ground in the snow, or lingering behind. Thus were all
things quietly settled.

CAAP. IV.
End of the Retreat.
THe Greeks, as soon as their fleet was ready, Xenoph. lib. 6.
set sail for Harmond, the Port of Stnope, when Chirisophus met them with some
Galleyes from Anaxibius, who promised them pay as soon as they should come into
Greece. The Army desirous of a General, entreated Xenophon (with extraordinary
testimony of affection) to accept that command: Xen^phon refused, either
dissuaded by inauspicious sacrifice, or unwilling to displease the
Lacedaemonians, in putting by Chir sophus, who was thereupon chosen, but soon
after deposed, for refusing to extort a great sum from Heraclea, a Greek
City, their friends: Xenophon also denying to be employed therein the Army
thereupon became divided; they chose ten Captains out of themselves, with
Chirisophus remained two thousand one hundred, with Xenophon two thousand foot
and forty horse; Chirisophus went by land to meet Cleander Governor of
Bizanti^m, at the mouth of the River Calphas* leaving such shipping as he had
to Xenophon who landing in the confines of Thrace, and of the Heraclean
Country, marched quietly through the midst of the land: the Mutineers landing
at Calphas, surprised and spoiled the country thereabout; the Thracians rising
up against them, cut off two Regiments, and besieged the hill where the rest
encamped, Xenophon on the way being informed of the desperate condition of
these Greeks, went directly to the place, setting on fire as he went all that
was combustible; the enemy fearing to be set upon in the night, stole away, as
did the Greeks also, whom Xenophon overtaking in the way to the Port of
Calphas, they embraced him with great joy, and ariving at the Haven, made a
decree, that it should be death for any man to propound to divide the Army, and
that they should depart the Country in their first order. The former Commanders
being restored in the room of Chirisophus who died, they substituted Neon, who
going forth with two thousand men to pillage the Country, was discomfitted by
Pharnabazus Lieutenant to the King of Persia, and lost five hundred men; rest
rescued by Xenophon, the Army by his encouragement marched through a large
Forest defeating Pharnabazus, who opposed their passage there. Cleander came
over to them, and having expressed much kindness to Xenophon, and contracted
hospitality with him, departed. The Army marched through Bythinia to
Chrysopolis in the territories of Chalcedon. Xenoph. lib. 7.
Thence Anaxibius the Lacedemonian* Admiral transported them to Byzantium,
where he had promised they should as soon as they arrived receive pay, without
which he sent them out of the City, whereat the soldiers incensed, returned
and entered the City by force, intending to spoil it: but Xenophon thrusting
himself amongst the crowd, dissuaded them, and appeased the tumult, as it
particularly attested by In ^pis^ola ad (...).
Chio an eyewitness. By this means they were brought to depart the City
quietly, which as soon as they had done, Xenophon desirous to go home, took
leave of the Army, and returned to Byzantium with Cleander. Anaxibius being put
out of the Admiralship, and thereupon slighted by Pharnabazus (at whose
instigation he had treated the Greeks so hardly) desired Xenophon to return to
the Army to lead them to Perinthus, whence they should be transported into
Asia; The Army received him with much joy: when they came to Perinthus,
Aristarchus the Governor would not suffer them to be transported: Seuth^s King
of Thrace had invited them to aid him against Medocus, usurper of his Kingdom,
with large offers of money to every soldier, of his daughter to Xenophon: to
him therefore not knowing where to winter they went. At supper every one
(according to the custom) drunk to the King, and made him a present: Xenophon,
who sat next him, rising up, and taking the cup, told him, he gave him himself
and all his Companions to be his faithful friends, and ready servants in the
recovery of his Kingdom: Herin their assistance did much advantage Seuthes: the
Army wanting pay, Xenophon reproved Heraclides for not taking order about it;
who threupon endeavored to work him out of favor with Seuthes, to whom he
brought the rest of the Commanders, counselling them to say, that if need were,
they could lead the Army upon service as well as Xenophon; but they jointly
protested unto Seuthes, they would not serve at all without him: So he sent for
Xenophon also, and being agreed to proceed, they marched toward the Country of
the Melinophagi as far as Salmydesson: which places having reduced, they
returend to the plains of Selybria: thither came Chaminus a Lacedemonian,
Polinicus sent from Thymbro* who told them that the Lacedaemonians had designed
war against T^ssaphernes, the charge thereof was committed to Thymbro, who
desired this Army of Greeks to assist them, promising them good pay. Seuthes
willingly yielded the Army into their hands; they sent Xenophon to demand their
areares, which not without much importunity he obtained. Thence they failed to
Lampsacus, where Euclides a soothsayer of Xenophons acquaintance asked him, how
much Gold he had brought? Xenophon protested he had not had enough to carry
him home, but that he sold his horse and other things which he had about him.
The next day they marched to Ophryn^um, whither came Bito and Euclides to pay
the Army; they being Xenophons friends, restored (refusing the price of
redemption) his horse which he much loved, and had pawned at Lampsa^us. Then
marching forward by A^ra^yttium, and Kertonium; not Far from A^arna to the
plain of C^ious, they reached Pergamus a City of Lydia. Here Hellas wife of
Gongylus an Eretrian; mother of Gorgion, and Gongylus entertained Xenophon: By
her information Xenophon surprised Asidates a rich Persian, with his wife and
children, and all his goods: Returning to Pergamus, the Lacedaemonians,
Captains ans Soldiers, by agreement gave him also an extraordinary share of
horses, oxen, and other things; then came Thymbro, and taking the Army, joined
it to the rest of the Grecian forces, wherewith he made war against
Tissapher^^s.

Of the Kings Provinces, through which they passed, the Governors were these;
A^tim^s of Lydia, Artacam^s of Phrygia, Mi^^ridates of Lacaonia, and
Cappodocia; of Cilicia; Which perhaps was a common name to the Kings of that
Country, as Ptolomy to those of Aepypt* see Thales chap.
Syennesis: of Phaenicia and Arabia, Dernes; of Syria and Assyria, Belesis: of
Babylonia, Roparas: of Media, Arbacas, of the Phasiani and Hesperitae,
Te^ibazus, the Carduchi, Chalybes, Chaldaeans, Macrones, Colch^, Mosynaechi,
Coeti, and Tibareni are free Nations; Paphlagonia governed by Coryla; the
Bithynians by Pharnabazus, the Europaean Thracians by Senthes; The total
number of the Ascent and Descent is two hundred and fifteen encampings, one
thousand one hundred and fifty parasangs, thirty four thousand two hundred
fifty five furlongs; the time of the Ascent and Descent one year and three
months.

CHAP. V.
His following of Agesilaus, and banishment.
Laert.
After this expedition the defeat in Pontus, and breach of promise of Senthes
King of the Odrysians; Xenophon went into Asia with Agesilaus King of the
Lacedaemonians, to whom he delivered for a sum of money the soldiers of Cyrus,
and beloved infinitely, ^as (...) Aemilius Probus says, he conversed
intimately with him: ^lcero, that he instructed him. Plutarch affirms, that by
his advice Agesilaus sent his sonns to be educated at Sparta, to learn and art
them, which none was more excellent how to obey and command. Agesilaus. passed
into Asia the first year of 96* Olympiad; He warred successefully with the
Persian, but the year following was called home by the Lacedaemonians to help
his Country invaded by the Thebans, and their allies, whom the Persian had
corrupted, thereby to withdraw the war out of his Country. Xenophon in his
returning with Agesilaus out of Asia into Boeotia, apprehending the danger of
the war they were entering into, when he came to Ephesus left one half of the
gold Supr. chap. 36.
which he had reserved for an offering out of his share (of ^ the money which
the Army divided at Cerasunt in their return the expedition of Cyrus,) with
Megabyzus Diana's Priest, willing that if he escaped the danger of that war, it
should be restored to him, if he miscarried, consecrated to Diana, and either
made into an Image dedicated to the goddess, or disposed some way that he
should conceive nmost acceptable to her: the other half he sent an offering to
the Athenian treasury at Delphi, Xenoph. lib. 5.
inscribing thereon both his own name, and that of Proxenus, his predecessor in
the command of that Regiment. Agesilaus returning, wasted Boeotia, and overcame
the Thebans and their allies in a great battle at Coronea Agesil
particualrly described by Xenophon, who was there present.

During the absence of Xenophon out of his own Country, the Athenians (because
he took part against the King of Persia, their friend, and followed Cyrus,, who
had assisted the Lacedaemonians against them, (...)
supplying Lysander their General with money for a Navy) proclaimed a decree of
bainshment against him: Laert.
Ister says, he was banished by the decree of Eubulus, and called home by the
same; Laertius, that he was banished for Laconism, upon his going to Agesilaus;
Some place this decree in the third year of the 96. Olimpiad, but the writer of
the History of Cyrus, his expedition inplyeth, that it was before his first
return out of Asia, affirming that before the delivery of the Army to Thymbro,
Xenophon ignorant of this decree, intended to have gone home.

CHAP. VI.
How ^e lived at Scilluns, and at Cotinth.
THe Lacedaemonians to requite him for suffering in their cause, Laert. Paus^n.
Eliac.
maintained him at the public charge, and purchasing Scilluns of the Eleans,
built a Town there, and bestowed a fair house and land upon Xenophon, whereupon
he left Agesilaus and went thither, carrying with him his wife named Philesia,
and his two sons which he had by Suid.
her, Diodorus and Gryllus, called the Dioscuri. Laert.
Pelop^das a Spartan (...) sent him Captives for slaves from Dardanus for a
present, to dispose of them as should please him.

Scilluns was near Olympia, Xenoph. de exped. Cyr. 5. Laert.
eminent for celebration of the Games, which Megabyzus coming to see restored
to Xenophon the money which he had left in his custody, wherewith ^trab. 8.
by advice of the Oracle he purchased a portion of land, and consecrated it to
Diana in a place designed by Apollo, through which ran the River Selinus, of
the same name with that at Ephesus, running by Diana's Temple; the River was
stored as well with shellfish as others, the land with all kind of beasts for
game; he built also a Temple, and after with the consecrated money offering the
tithes of the fruits of the land to Diana, all the Citzens and Neighbors, men
and women, were invited to the feast, where they had from the Goddesses
allowance, bread, wine, and part of the flesh of such beasts as was either
taken out of the consecrated ground, and sacrificed, or killed in hunting with
the Sons of Xenophon and other Citizens exercised against the time of the feast
out of the sacred ground, and out of Phaloe were taken wild Boars, Goats, and
Staggs; the place lies in the way betwixt Lacedaemonia and Olympia, twenty
Stadia from the Temple of Olympian Jupiter. In the sacred ground were woods and
hills, stored with trees sufficient to maintain swine, Goats and sheep, whereby
the beasts of carriage of such Merchants as come to the feast are maintained
plentifully: about the Temple a Grove of fruit trees of all sorts. The Temple
was an imitation in little of that at Ephesus: an image of Cypress here
resembling that of Gold there: A Pillar near the Temble bare this inscription,
GROUNDS ACRED DIANA. HE WHO POSSESSES IT LET HIM PAY THE TITHE OF HIS YEARLY
INCREASE, AND WITH THE SURPLUS AGE MAINI AIN THE TEMPLE, IF HE NEGLECT, THE
GODDESS WILL TAKE ORDER FOR IT. Laert.
At this place. of retirement Xenophon employed his time in hunting, and
writing Histories, inviting his friends thither. Epist. Socratic. 1^.
of whom amongst others came Phaedo and Aristippus, much delighted with the
situation, building, and trees planted by the hand of the owner.

Laert.
At length a war arising betwixt the Eleans and Lacedaemonians, the Eleans
invaded Scilluns with a great Army, and before the Lacedaemonians came to their
relief, seized on the house and lands of Xenophon; His sons with some few
servants got away privately to Lepreum; Xenophon first to Elis, then to Lepreum
to his sons, and lastly with them to Corinth, where he took a house and
continued the rest of his life. During this time the Argives, Arcadians, and
Thebans, jointly opposed the Lacedaemonians, and had almost oppressed them, when
the Athenians made a public decree ( G^^c. (...).
mentioned by a Xenophon) to succor them; Xenophon sent his Sonns upon the
expedition to Athens, to fight for the Lacedaemonians; for (as Diocles affirms)
they had been educated at Sparta in the discipline of that place.

This enmity ended in a great battle at Mantinea in the second year of the
hundredth and fourth Olympiad: Diodorus without acting any thing memorable, gave
off safe, and had afterward a son of his brothers name. Gryllus was ranked
opposite to the Theban horsemen: the Thebans having by the valor of their
General Ep^^minondas got the better of the day, a resolute company of Spartan
horsemen broke in upon him, of whom was Gryllus, who slew Epaminondas with his
own hand, as Pausanias affirms to have been attested both by the Athenians,
and the Thebans, adding, that he had seen at Ahtens a picture of the battle at
Mantinea, confirming the same; and that at Mantin^a was erected a Pillar with
the statue of Gryllus on horseback. In this noble action Gryllus lost his life,
the news of whose death came to Xenophon at Corinth, as he was sacrificing,
Laert. Aelian. var. hist. 3. 3. D. (...) ^pitaph. Nepot. ad Heliod. Stob. Sermon.
106.
Crowned with a Garland; as soon as he heard his son was slain, he took off his
Garland, and laid it aside; then demanding after what manner he died, it was
answered, sighting stoutly in the midst of his enemies, of whom, having slain
many, he fell at last himself: Hereupon Xenophon took again his Garland, and
putting it upon his head, proceeded to sacrifice, not so much as shedding one
tear, only saying I knew that I had begot a mortal; Val. Max. 5. 10.
and calling the Gods to whom he sacrificed to witness, that the virtue of his
son gave him more content, then his death sorrow. Laert. citing Aristotle
Innumerable were the Epitaphs and Encomiums that were written upon Gryllus, to
please Xenophon whence may be collected in how great esteem he was.

That he made a visit to Dionysius Tyrant of Sicily (but at what time is
uncertain) is implied by Deipnos. lib. 10.
Athenaeus, who relates, that being at a feast of his, compelled by the
Cup Bearer to drink, he called the Tyrant by name: What is the matter Dyonysius
(says he) your Cook though excellent in that art does not enforce us to eat
against our inclination?

CHAP. VII.
His Death, Person, Virtues.
Xenophon being Laert.
full of years (which according to De long^v.
Lucian exceeded ninety) died at Corinth, in the first of the hundredth and
fifth Olympiad, Callidemus, or Callimedes being Archon, at what time Philip son
of Amyntas began his reign in Macedonia. He had an ingenious modest look, long,
thick hair, handsome (to use the words of Laertius) beyond expression, Adroit
in every thing, particularly addicted to horses and hunting skillful in
Tacticks, as his writings attest; devout, a great lo^er of sacrifices, skillful
in interpreting them; an exact imitatour of Socrates, temperate, as appears
from his saying that Athen. deip^. 4.
It is pleasant: hungry, to eat herbs; thirsty, to drink water. So candid and
ingenious, that Laert.
when he might have stolen the writings of Thucydides which lay concealed, he
chose rather to publish them with honor.

In a word, he was a person every was absolute, as well for action, as
contemplation. Xenophon.(says Pro^m.
Eunapius) was the only man of all the Philosophers who adorned Philosophy with
his words and actions; he describes moral (...) in his discourses and
writings: in his ac^ions he was singular; as to his conduct, a most excellen^
General. Alexander had not be^n great, i^ Xenophon had not said, even the
perfunctory actions of valtant persons ought to be recorded.

Laert
He was the first that committed the disputes of Socrates his Master to
writing, and that with much sidelity, not inserting excursions of his own, as
Plato did, whom for that reason, as Lib. 14.
^gellius observes, he argues of falsehood; that there was a great enmity
betwixt these two is affirmed by the same Author; who, as a proof thereof
alleges, that neither of them, names the other in any of their writings: De
Histor. Graec. 1. 5.
only observes, that Xenophon mentions Plato once in his (...), overseen by
Agellius. This enmity is further acknowledged by Lib. 3.
Athenaeus and Laertius, confirmed by the Epistle of Xeno^hon to Aeschines,
wherein he condemns Plato, that not being satisfied with the Doctrine of
Socra^es, he went to the Pythagoreans in Italy, and to the Egyptian Priests;
arguments of a mind not constant to Socrates. That he was at difference with
Laert. vit. Aristipp.
Aristippus also, argued from his writings.

Laertius has two Epigrams concerning him, the first upon his going with Cyrus
into upper Asia. Great Xenophon at once made two ascents,
To Asia in person, and to Heaven by fame:
His style and action (lasting Monuments)
Lay to Soc^atic-wisdome equal claim.
The other upon his banishment.

Thee the Cecropians, noble Xenophon,
Banished the^r land, 'cause Cyrus ^hou did aid;
But strangers proved far kinder then thy own:
What Athens owed thee, was by Corinth paid
Laerti^s reckons seven Xenophons, this the first, the second and Athenian,
brother to Nicostratus, Author of the Theses; besides many other things, he
writ the lives of Pelo^idas and Epaminondas; the third, a Physician of Coos;
the fourth writer of the History of Hannibal: the fifth, writer of fabulous
Monsters: the sixth, of Paros a statuary: the seventh, an old Comic Poet:
Suidas reckons three more; one of Antioch, the second of Ephesus, the third of
Cyprus: Historians, or rather writers of Romances; that of the first called
Babylonica, of the second Ephesiica in ten books; of the third Cypriaca: the
story of Cynaras, Myrrha, and Adonis.

CHAP. VIII.
His writings.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus says, that Xenophon was a studious aemulatour of
Herodotus, both in words and language: His style (according to Cicero) Brut.
and de oratore. lib. 2.
soft and Orator.
sw^et (melle dulcior) s^ ^^ffering from the noise of Orators in the Forum: in
his voice, Cic Orat.
the Muses seem to speak, whence he was surnamed the Attick Muse; or according
to others, the Attick Be, a Title formerly conferred on Vit. Sophocl.
Sophocles. His style and manner of writting isat large discoursed upon by
Aristides, Adrianensis in an express tract, erroneously ascribed to Hermogenes.

The Books of Xenophon (which Cicer. Tusc. quaest. 3.
Scipio Africanus had always in his hand, and De senect.
Cicero advises to read, as very profitable in many things) were (as reckoned
by La^rtius) forty, which several persons distinguish severally; hte general
titles these.

(...) the li^e and discipline of Cyrus (as Cicero renders it) in eight books,
written non ad historiae ^idem (though Lib. 15.
Diodorus Siculus seems to take it in that quality) sed ad effigiem justi
imper^i; no^ as a faithful History, but the description of an exact Prince:
Whence Great. act.
Ausonius says, in relating the virtues of Cyrus, he has given rather a wish
then a history, describing, not what he was, but what he ought to have been.

(...); the going up of Cyrus the younger into Asia, in seven Books; each of
which (as Laertius observes) has a Prooem, the whole none: Masius suspects
that Xenophon was not the Author of this book; the Bishop of Annal.
Armach ascribes it to Themistogenes, though owned as Xenophons by Plutarch,
Cicero, Dionysius Halycarnaessuus, Hermogenes, Laertius, Athenaeus, and others.

(...); the Greek History, in seven books, continuing where Thucydides left;
the same was done by Theopompus, but he went nor further then sixteen years,
Xenophon to forty eight.

Agesilaus, of which piece Cicero says, that Agesilaus would not suffer his
picture or statue to be made, this book alone surpasses all pictures or images
in his praise.

The Republic of the Lacedaemonians, and the Republic of the Athenians, which
Laert.
denies to be Xenophons.

The defense of Socrates, and them emorialls of Socrates, which perhaps is that
history of Philosophers mentioned by Suidas.

Oeconomicks, the last book of the memorable discourses, wherewith Office. 2.
Cicero was so much delighted, that in his younger years he translated it.

Symposium, accommodated to the fourth year of the eighty ninth Olympiad, for
which reason reprehended by Athenaeus, as erroneous in Chronology; vindicated
by the learned Casaubon.

Hie^ro, Or, of a Kingdom.

The accounts of revenues.

Of Horses.

Of Horsemanship.

Of Hunting.

Epistles.

Besides these which are extant, Xenophon seems to have written other things;
8. 13.
Valerius Maximus and 7. 48.
Pliny cite his Per^plus.

There is a treatise of Aequivokes under Xenophon's name, but made and imposed
upon the world by Annius.

XENOPHONS EPISTLES.
stob. se^^.
To Aeschines. Epist. 1.
MEeting with Hermogenes, amongst other things I asked him what Philosophy you
followed, he answered, the same as Socrates. For this inclination I admired
you, when you lived at Athens, and now continue the same admiration for your
constancy above other students of wisdom; The greatest argument to me of your
virtue is, your being taken with that man, if we may call the life of Socrates
mortal. That there are divine beings over us all know: we worship them as
exceeding us in power; what they are is neither easy to find, nor lawful to
enquire. It concerns not servants to examine the Nature and actions of their
Masters, their duty is only to obey them; and which is most considerable, the
more admiration they deserve who busy themselves in those things which belong
to man; the more trouble this brings them, who affect glory in vain
unseasonable objects: For when ( Aeschines) did any man hear Socrates discourse
of the Heavens, or advise his Scholars to Mathematical Demonstrations? we
know he understood Music no further then the Ear: But was always discoursing
to his friends of some thing excellent; what is fortitude and justice and other
virtues. These he called the proper good of mankind; other things he said men
could not arrive at; or they were of kin to fables, such ridiculous things as
are taught by the supercilious professors of wisdom. Nor did he only teach
this; his practice was answerable; of which I have written at large elsewhere,
what I hope will not be unpleasing to you, (though you know it already) to
peruse. Let Meaning Plato, who added much of his own to the discour ses of
Socrates and went to Egypt, Italy, and Sicily.
those who are not satisfied with what Socrates delivered, give over upon this
conviction, or confine themselves to what is probable. Living, he was attested
wise by the Deity; Dead, his Murderers could find no expiation by repentance:
But these extraordinary persons affect Egypt and the prodigious learning of
Pythago^as, which unnecessary study argues them of inconstancy toward
Socrates, as does also their love of Tyrants, and preferring the luxury of a
Sicilian table before a frugal life.

To Crito. Epist. 2.
Socrates often told us, Stob. sermon. 201.
that they who provide mcuh wealth for their Children, but neglect to improve
them by virtue, do like those who feed their horses high, and never train them
to the manage: by this means their horses are the better in case, but the worse
for service, whereas the commendations of a horse consists not in his being
fat, but serviceable in war. In the same kind err they who purchase Lands for
their Children, but neglect their persons; Their possessions will be of great
value, themsleves of none, whereas the owner ought to be more honorable then
his estate. Whosoevever therefore breeds his Son well, though he leave him
little, gives him much: It is the mind which makes him great or small:
whatsoever they have to the good seems sufficient, to the rude too little. You
leave your Children no more then necessity requires, which they being well
educated will esteem plentiful. The ignorant though free from present trouble,
have nothing the less fear for the future.

To Sotira. Epist. 3.
Stob. sermon. 892.
DEath in my opinion is neither good nor ill, but the end of the life, not
alike to all, for as stronger or weaker from their birth, their years are
unequal; sometimes death is hastened by good or evil causes: and again? Stob.
sermon. 278.
Neither is it fitting to grieve so much for death, knowing that birth is the
beginning of man's Pilgrimage, death the end. He died, as all men (though never
so unwilling) must do: but to die well, is the part of a willing and well
educated' person. Happy was Gryllus, and whosoever else chooses not the
longest life, but the most virtuous; though his (it pleased God) was short.

To Lamprocles. Epist. 4.
You must first approve the excellent assertion of Socrates, Stob.
that Riches are to he measured by their use. He called not large possessions
riches, but so much only as is necessary; in the judgment whereof he advised
us not to be deceived, these he called truly rich, the rest poor, laboring
under an incurable poverty of mind, not estate.

Epist. Socratic. 18.
Epist. 5.
THey who Allatius otherwis^.
write in praise of my Son Gryllus, did as they ought; and you likewise do well
in writing to us the actions of Socrates; we ought not only to endeavor to
be good our selves, but to praise him who lived chastely, piously, and justly;
and to blame fortune, and those who plotted against him, who ere long will
receive the punishment thereof. The Lacedaemonians are much incensed at it,
(for the ill news is come hither already) and reproach our people, saying,
they are mad again, in that they could be wrought upon to put him to death whom
Pythia declared the wisest of men. If any of Socrates friends want those things
which I sent, give me notice, and I will help them, for it is just and honest;
you do well in in keeping Aeschines with you, as you send me word. I have a
design to collect the sayings and actions of S^crates, which will be his best
apology, both now and for the future, not in the Court where the Athenians are
Judges, but to all who consider the virtue of the man. If we should not write
this freely, it were a sin against friendship and the truth. Even now there
fell into my hands a piece of Plato's to that effect, wherein is the name of
Socrates, and some discourse of his not unpleasant. *But we must profess that
we heard not, nor can commit to writing any thing in that kind, for we are not
Poets as he is, though he renounce Poetry; for amidst his entertainments with
beautiful persons, he affirmed that there was not any Poem of his extant, but
one of Socrates, young and handsome: Farewell, both dearest to me.

Epist. Socratick* 21.
Epist. 6.
INtending to celebrate the feast of Diana, to whom we have erected a Temple,
we sent to invite you hither; If all of you would come, it were much the best,
otherwise if you send such as you can conveniently spare to assist at our
sacrifice, you will do us a favor. A^istippus was here, and (before him)
Phaedo, who were much pleased with the situation and structure, but above all,
with the plantation which I have made with my own hands. The place is stored
with beasts, convenient for hunting, which the Goddess affects; Let us rejoice
and give thanks to her who preserved me from the King of the Barbarians, and
afterward in Pontus and Thrace from greater evils, even when we thought we
were out of the Enemies reach. Though you come not, yet am I obliged to write
to you. I have composed some memorialls of Socrates, when they are perfect you
shall have them. Aristippus and Phaedo did not disapprove of them; Salute in my
name Simon* the leather-dresser, and commend him that he continues Socratick
discourses, not diverted by want, or his trade from Philosophy, as some others,
who decline to know and admire such discourses and their effects.

Epist. Socratic. 19.
Epist. 7.
COme to us dear friend, for we have now finished the Temple of Diana, a
magnificent structure, the place set with trees and consecrated, what remains
will be sufficient to maintain us; for as Socrates said, if they are not fit
for us, we will fit our selves to them; I writ to Gryllus my son and your
friend to supply your occasions, I writ to Gryllus, because of a little one you
have professed a kindness for him.

To Xantippe. Epist. Socratic. 21.
Epist. 8.
TO Euphron of Megara I delivered six measures of meal, eight drachmes, and a
new raiment for your use this winter: accept them and know that Euclid and
Terpsion are exceeding good, honest persons, very affectionate to you and
Socra^es; If your sons have a desire to come to me, hinder them not, for the
journey to Mega^a is neither long nor incommodious: Pray forbear to weep any
more, it may do hurt, but cannot help. Remember what Socrates said, follow his
practice and precepts; In grieving you will but wrong your self and children;
They are the young ones of Socra^es, whom we are obliged not only to maintain,
but to preserve our selves for their sakes: lest if you or I, or any other, who
after the death of Socracrates ought to look to his Children, should fail, they
might want a Guardian to maintain and protect them. I study to live for them,
which you will not do unless you cherish your self. Grief is one of those
things which are opposite to life, for by it the living are prejudiced.
Apollodorus The reason manifest from Xenophon and Laertius, who describe him
such; Xenophon calls him (...), Apologe Socrat.) in all things but his
affection to Socrates* Leo Allatius is much perplexed concerning this
appellation.
surnamed the soft, and Dion praise you, that you will accept nothing from any,
professing you are rich; it is well done; for as long as I and other friends
are able to maintain you, you shall need none else. Be of good courage
Xantippe, lose nothing of Socrates, knowing how great that man was; think upon
his life, not upon his death; yet that to those who consider it will appear
noble and excellent. Farewell.

Epist. Socratic. 22.
To Cebes and Simmias Epist. 9.
IT is commonly said, nothing is richer then a poor man, this I find true in my
self, who have not so much, but whilst you my friends take care of me, seem to
possess much: and it is well done of you to supply me as often as I write: As
concerning my Commentaries, there is none of them but I fear should be seen by
any in my absence, as I professed in your hearing at the house where Euclid lay.
I know dear friends a writing once communicated to many is irrecoverable.
Plato, though absent, is much admired throughout Italy and Sicily for his
treatises; but we cannot be persuaded they deserve any study; I am not only
careful of losing the honor due to learning, but tender also of Socrates,
lest his virtue should incur any prejudice by my ill relation of it. I conceive
it the same thing to calumniate, or not praise to the full those of whom we
write; This is my fear ( Cebes and Simmias) at present, until my judgment
shall be otherwise informed. Fare ye well.

AESCHINES.
CHAP I.
His life.
Laert.
AESCHINES was son of Charinus (...), or, as Plato and others, of Lysanias, an
Athenian, of the Sphet^ian Tribe: He was from his childhood very industrious;
addressing himself to Socrates, he said to him, I am poor, and have nothing to
give you but my self: Do you not know, answered Socrates, that you have made
me a rich present? He was the most diligent of all his Scholars, and never
quitted him; whereupon (...) said, that he only* (...) valued him: He was not
beloved of Plato, nor Aristippus: I domeneus says, it was he who counseled
Socrates to escape out of Prison, which Plato ascribes to Crito. Being very
poor, Socrates bad him take some of his Dialogues and make money of them, which
Aristippus suspecting when he read them at Megara, derided him, saying, how
came you by these Plagiary? Another time Flut. de ira cohib.
Aristippus falling out with him, was questioned what became of his ^^iendship,
he answered, it is asleep, but I will wake it; and meeting Aeschines, do I seem
so inconsiderable to you, says he, and unfortunate, as not to deserve
correction? It is no wonder, answers Aeschines, if your nature exceeding mine
in every thing, find out first what is expedient. Laert. Philostrat. vit.
Apollon; and from him Suidas.
Instigated by poverty, he went to Sicily, to Dionysius the Tyran^, at what
time Pla^o and Aristippus were there: Plato being out of favor with the
Tyrant, took occasion, by presenting Aeschines, to ingratiate himself:
Plutarch. de adulat. and amici discrim.
He desired he might be admitted to speak with him, which the ^yrant granted,
supposing ^e would allege something in defense of himself; as soon as he came
into his presence, he began thus: If you knew Dionysius, ofiany that came with
a hostile intent to do you hurt, though he failed of the ^ccasion, would you
suffer him to depart unpunished? Nothing less, answered Dionysius; for not
only the ill actions, but designs of enemies deserve to be chastized. Then
(replies Plato) if any man should come hither out of an intent to do you a good
office, and you not (...) him leave, ought you to neglect and despise him?
Dionysius demanded whom be meant. Aeschines ( says he) a person of as (...) of
Socrates his friends, able to reform those with whom be converseth, who having
undertaken a great voyage by sea to come hither, and discourse Philosophically
with you, is neglected. Dionysius was so pleased at this, that he embraced
Plato, admiring his candor and greatness of spirit, and entertained Aeschines
bountifully and magnificently. Thus Plutarch; but Luertius says, that
Aeschines coming thither, was despised by Plato, and recommended by
Aristippus, the latter, the Socratick Epistle confirms: to Dionysius he
imparted some Dialogues, and was gratified by him, with whom he lived until he
was deposed, and Dion brought into the Kingdom; then returned to Athens, where
not daring to profess his Philosophy, because the names of Plato and
Aristippus were so great, he taught and ^^^r^. He^yc^. Illustr.
took money privately, at last applied himself to framing orations for the
Forum, in which Timon says, he was very persuasive: Ly^^as wrote one Oration
in answer to him, entitled (...), or according to Athenaeus (...), wherein he
asperseth him for many things, which are not any way probable, as (besides
patronizing an unjust cause, and borrowing without intent to restore) for
pretending to sell unguents, contrary to the laws of Solon, and precepts of
Socrates, and for injuring Hermaeus, his wife and children; see Athenaeus.
Aristole surnamed (...) was his intimate friend. Laertius reckons eight of this
name; the first, this Aeschines the Philosopher; the second wrote of Rhetoric;
the third an Orator, contemporary with Demosthenes; the fourth an Arcadian,
scholar to Isocrates; the fifth of Mitelene, surnamed Rhetoromastix; the sixth
a Neopolitan, an Academick Philosopher, disciple to Melanth^us a Rhodian; the
seventh a Milesian, who wrote Politics, friend to Cicero; the eight a statuary.

CHAP. II.
His writings.
HE wrote Dialogues, Orations, and Epistles; by the first Athenaeus affirms, he
gained a great esteem of temperance, humanity, and integrity: Menedemus
accuses him of owning many Dialogues of Socrates, which he had of Xantippe;
Panaetius believes them to be his own, not counterseit: those (says Laertius)
Leart. Athen.
which express the Socratick habit, are seven; the first, Miltiades, written
in a lower style: the second, Callias, wherein he is blamed by Athenaeus for
treating of the enmity betwixt Callias and his fathers, and for deriding
Anaxagoras and Prodicus in their scholars Theramenes, Philoxenus, and
Ariphrades, The third, Rhinon; the fourth, Aspasia, cited by Athenaus and
Harpocration: the fifth Alcibiades, cited also by Lib. 14.
Athenaeus: The sixth Axiochus, wherein (says Lib. 5:
Athenaeus) he traduceth Alcibiades as given to Wine and women; which
particular not being to be found in that Axiochus, extant amongst the spurious
Platonic Dialogues, argues (contrary to the opinion of Vossius) that it is not
the same. The last, Telauges, the scope whereof was a Satyricall derision of
the vices of that person, as appears from Demetri^s Phalereus, and Lib. 5.
upon which see C^saubon, cap. 20.
Athenaeus.

Laert.
There were seven other Dialogues, styled (...), which went under the name of
Aeschines, very loose, and not expressing enough the Socratick severity; whence
Pisistratus the Athenian, denied that they were his; and Perseus says, the
greatest part were written by Pasiphon of Eretria, falsely mingled with the
Dialogues of Aeschines: their names (according to Suidas) were Phaedon,
polyanus, Dracon, Eryxias, (perhaps that which is extant) of Virtue,
Erasistratus, the Scythians.

Laert.
His O^a^ions gave full testimony of his perfection in Rhetoric, in
confirmation whereof, Laertius instanceth, that in defense of the father of
Phaeacus the General, and those wherein he thiefly imitated Gorgias the
Leontine; of which Epist. ad Iul* August.
Philostratus cites that concerning Thar gelia.

Of his Epistles, one to Dionysius the Tyrant is mentioned by Laer^ius, as
extant in his time: another there is under his name amongst the Epist. 23.
Socratick Epistles in these words;

As Soon as I arived at Syracuse, Aristippus met me in the Forum, and taking me
by the hand, carried me immediately to Dionysius, to whom he said, Dionysius,
if a man should come hither to insinuate folly into you, did he not aim at your
hurt? to which Dionysius consenting, what then, continues Aristippus, would you
do to him? the worst, answ^rs Dionysius, that could be: But if anyone, says
he, should come to improve you in wisdom, did he not aim at your good? which
Dionysius acknowledging: Behold then (continues he) Aeschines, one of Socrates
his disciples, come hither to instruct you; he aims at your good, therefore on
him confer the benefits you confess due to such. Dyonisius ( said I,
interrup^ing him) Aristippus expresses an admirable friendship in this
address; but we are owners only of so much wisdom, as restrains us from
abusing those with whom we converse. Dionysius hereat pleased, commended
Aristippus, and promised to make good what he had con^est due to me: He heard
our Alcibiades, and delighted it seems therewith, desiredif we had any other
Dialogues, that we would send them to him, which we promised to do, and
therefore dear friends we intend to be shortly with you. Whilst I read, Plato
was present (which I had almost forgot to tell you) and whispered something in
my behalf privately to Dionysius, by reason of Aristippus; for as soon as he
was gone out, he told me that he never spoke freely when that man (naming
Aristippus) was present; but for what I said to Dionysius concerning you, I
refer my self to him; The next day, Dionysius in the Garden confirmed his
speech as said of me, with many sportive sayings (for they were no better) I
advised Aristippus and plato to cease their aemulation, because of their
general fame; for we shall be most ridiculous, if our actions correspond not
with our profession.

CRITO.
CRITO was an Athenian Suid.
scholar to Socrates: whom he loved so entirely that he never suffered him to
want necessaries, of which more has been already said in the life of Socrates:
Xen.
Being much troubled and sued by those who had not received any injury from
him, but abused the quitnesse of his disposition, which would sooner part with
money upon no ground then go to law, Socrates advised him to entertain one of
the same busy, troublesome humor, to keep off the rest; Crito in pursuit of
this counsel made choice of Archidemus, an excellent Lawyer, but poor, who
being obliged by his gifts and kindness, persecuted eagerly all such as
molested not him only, but any of his friends: Crito wrote seventeen dialogues
comprised in one volume, thus reckoned by Laertius. That the good are not made
such by learning. Of having most. What is expedient, or the Politician. Of
lon^sty, of wickedness, of security, of Law, of Divinity, of arts, of
conversation, of wisdom; Protagoras or the Politic. Of letters, Of Poetry, of
what is honest, of learning, of knowing or science, what it is to know. He writ
also an Apology for Socrates.

Suid.
He had four sons, Critobulus, Hermogenes, Epigenes, and Clesippus, all
auditors of Socra^es; of whom already.

Suidas reckons three more of this name: One wrote Getick stories; the second
was of Pieria a City in Macedonia; the third of Naxus, both Historians.

SIMON.
L^^rt.
SIMON was an Athenian, a leather-dresser. Socrates coming to his shop, and
disputing there, he committed to writing all that he remembered thereof; whence
his dialogues were called (...). They were three and thirty, all in one volume:
of Gods, of good, of honest, what is honest. Of just, the first, the 2d.
Ofvirtue, that it cannot be taught. Of fortitude, the first, second, third. Of
law, of Popularity, of honor, of Poetry, of health, of love, of Philosophy, of
knowledge, of music, of Poetry; what is honest. Of doctrine, of disputation,
of judgment, of that which is, of number, of diligence, of labor, of avarice,
of boasting, of honesty, or according to others, of Counsel, of discourse, of
expedients, of doing ill. He is reported the first that used the Socratick
discourses. Pericles promising that if he would come to him, he should want
nothing, he answered, that he would not sell his freedom of speech. There is
extant amongst the Socratick Epistles, this under his name, as in answer to
Aristippus.

THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY.

The Fourth Part.

Containing the Cyrenaick Sects. Megarick Eleack Eretriack



LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and Tho* Dring. An. Dom. 1656.

ARISTIPPVS.


THE CYRENAICK SECT. ARISTIPPVS.
CHAP. I.
Aristippus, his Country and Parents.
THE estimation which Philosophers had daily gained among the Grecians about
this time caused it exceedingly to multiply, whilst every Professor ambitious
to be held wiser then his Master, and reaching something new, desired to have
the honor to be Author of a Sect.

The Succession of the Ionick Philosophy, which before Socrates was single;
after him was divided into many Schools, whereof some were but of short
continuance, others had longer succession. Of the less durable were the
Cyrenaick, Megarick, Eleack, Eretriack,
so called from the places where the Professors flourished. Others of longer
succession, the Academick, out of which came the Peripatetick, Cynick, Stoic.

We shall first dispatch those which were of shortest continuance, whether that
they were founded upon less reason, and were in short time broken, as De
Oratore lib. 3.
Cicero says, and quite extinct by the strength and Arguments of the others;
or that being instituted and founded in more obscure parts; they were not so
lasting as those which were professed in the most flourishing City of Athens.

Aristippus a Disciple of Socrates, after his death, returned home into his
Country at Cyrene in Africa, from whence the Doctrine which his Scholars
retained had the name of Cyrenaick. Suid.
He was Son of Aretades, Laer^.
of Cyrene.

CHAP. II.
How he went to Athens, and heard Socra tes.
FRom Cyrene Aristippus went first to Athens, invited by the fame of Flut. de
curiosit.
Socrates, concerning whom he fell into discourse with Ischomachus, meeting him
casually at the Olympic Games, and enquiring what manner of disputes they were
wherewith Socrates prevailed so much upon the young men, he received from him
some little seeds and scatterings thereof, wherewith he was so passionately
affected, that he grew pale and lean, until to assuage his servent thirst, he
took a voyage to Athens, and there drunk at the Fountain, satisfying himself
with the Person, his discourse and Philosophy, the end whereof was to know our
own e^ils, and to acquit our selves of them. But as Cic. de Not. Deor.
Aristo said, Philosophy does harm to those who misinterpret things well said.
Aristippus Cic. de Orat. 3.
chiefly delighted with the more voluptuous disputes of Socrates, asserted
Pleasure to be the ultimate end wherein all happiness does consist. Athen.
deipn. 12.
His life was agreeable to the opinion, which he employed in Luxury, Sweet
unguents, rich garments, Wine and Women; maintained by a course as different
from the precepts and practice of Socrates as the things themselves were. For,
notwithstanding he had a good Estate (and three Country-Seats) Laert.
he first of the Socratick Disciples, took Money for teaching. Which Socrates
observing, asked him how he came to have so much? he replied, how come you to
have so little? A further dislike of this course Socrates expressed, when
Aristippus sending him twenty minae, he returned it, saying, his Demon would
not suffer him to take it.

CHAP. III.
How he went to Aegina.
LEaving Socrates, Athen. deipn. 12.
he went to Aegina, where he lived with more freedom and luxury then before:
Socrates sent exhortations to reclaim him, frequent but fruitless, and to the
same end published that discourse which we find in Xenophon. Here he became
acquainted with Lais the famous Corinthian Curtezan, Athen. deipn. ^2.
who came thither yearly at the Feast of Neptune, and was as constantly
frequented by Aristippus, for whose sake Athen. deipn. 13.
Hermesianax says, he took a voyage to Corinth (mentioned among his
Apothegmes) To Corinth Love the Cyrenean lead,
where he enjoyed Thessalian Lais bed;
No Art the subtle Aristippus knew
By which the power of Love he might eschew.


Laert.
Whilst he was upon his voyage to Corinth, a great Tempest arose, whereat he
was much troubled: one of the Passengers saying unto him, we ordinary people
are not afraid, but you Philosopher^ fear (or as Var. Hist. 9. 20.
Aelian, are you asraid like other people?) Agel. 19. 1.
our Souls answered he, are not of equal value, Aelian. ibid.
you hazard a wicked and unhappy life, I Felicity and Beatitude.

Laert.
To those who blamed him for frequenting Lais; I p^ssesse ^er says he, not she
me. Athen. Deipn. 13.
Lais in emulation of Phryne gave admittance to all sorts of people, rich and
poor, whereupon Aristippus reprehended by his servant for bestowing so much on
her, who entertained Diogones the Cynick gratis, I give her money says he,
that I may enjoy her, not that others may not. Athen. Deipn. 13.
Diogenes reproached him for frequenting the company of Lais, saying,
Aristippus, you and I converse with the same woman, either give over, or be
like me a Cynic; Do you think it absurd, says he, to awell in a house, wherein
others lived before, or to sail in a Ship that has carried other Passengers?
It is no more absurd to affect a woman whom others have enjoyd.

At Aegina he continued till the death of Socrates, as (besides the testimony
of In Phaedone.
Plato) appears by this Socratic. Epist. 16.
Epistle of his written upon that occasion.

Of the death of Socrates, I and Cleombrot^s have received information, and
that when he might have escaped from the eleaven Officers, he said he would
not, unless he was acquitted by Law; for that were as much as in him lay to
betray his Country. My opinion is, that being unjustly committed, he might have
got his Liberty any way, conceiving that all which he could do ill or
inconsiderately must be just. From whence again I blame him not, as if he had
done ill even in this. You write me word that all the friends and Disciples of
Socrates have left Athens, out of fear the like should befall any of you; it is
well done; and we being at present at Aegina will continue here a while, then
come to you, and wherein we are abl^, serve you.

CHAP. IV.
His Institution of a Sect.
ARistippus returning at length to his own Country, Cyrene, professed
P^ilosophy there, and instituted a Sect called Eaert.
Cyrenaick from the Place, by some Galen. Hist. Phil.
Hedonick, or voluptuous from the Doctrine. Laert.
They who followed the institution of Aristippus, and were called Cyrenaick,
held thus.

They rejected Physic and natural disquisitions from the seeming
incomprehensibility thereof. Logic they handled because of its great
usefulness. But Meleager and Clitomachus affirm they despised both Physic and
Dialectick alike, as unusefull, for that without these, a man who has learned
what things are good, what cvil, and able to discourse well, and to shake off
superstition and the fear of death.

Sect. 1. Of Judgment und Iudicatories.
Laert.
THey held that the Senses inform not always truly, Cicer. Acad. Quest. lib. 4.
that nothing extrinsecall can be perceived, those things only can be
perceived, which are felt by inward touch, as grief and pleasure, neither know
we what color any thing is, nor what sound it makes, but only that we feel
our selves affected after such a manner; that Laert.
Passions are comprehensive; that objects not comprehensi^e. That Cic.
nothing judges but by interior permotion, and the judgment of true and
false consists in inward touch.

advers. Mathom.
Sextus Empericus more fully. They assert that passions or affections are the
Judges and the only things that may comprehend, and not fallacious; but of
those things which cause passions, there is nothing which is comprehensible, or
that may not deceive us. For, that we are made white or affected with sweet,
may be said expressly and firmly, but that the thing which causes this
affection is white or sweet, cannot in like manner be asserted. For it is
possible that we be affected with whiten^sse from a thing that is not white,
and with sweetness from a thing that is not sweet; as to him who is dimsighted
or has the yellow jaundies, all things seem yellow to one, duskish to the
other, and he who pincheth his eye, thinks he sees things double, he who is
mad fancies two Thebes's, two Suns; in all these, they that are so affected, to
wit, with yellowness or duskishnesse, or duplicity, is true, but that the
thing which moves them is yellow or duskish, or double, is conceived to be
false: So it is most consonant to reason, that we comprehend nothing more then
our own passions. For we must hold that the things seen are either the passions
themselves, or the causes of those passions; if we say our passions are the
things seen, we must likewise affirm all things seen, to be true and
comprehensive; if we say the things seen are the causes of those passions, we
must confess all things seen to be false and incomprehensible. For that
passion which happens to us, shows us its self and nothing more, so that to
speak truly, the passion or affection it self is the only thing that is
apparent to us, and for that reason, in their proper affections none err, but
in the external object, all. The first are comprehensive, the second
incomprehensive, the soul being weak in the discernment thereof, by reason of
places, intervalls, motions, mutations, and many other causes.

Hence they assert, that there is not in man any one common thing which
judges, but they impose common names on the judgments; all commonly name white
and sweet, but something common that is white and sweet they have not, for evey
man apprehends his own affection. Now whether the same affection happens to
any one, and to him that is next him from white, neither is he able to say, as
not receiving the affection of the other, neither can the other that is next
him say, as not receiving his affection. There being therefore no common
affection in us, it were a rash thing to assert, that whatsoever seems such
to me, seems also such to him that is next me; for perhaps my constitution is
such as to be whitened from that which externally incurreth, another has his
sense so ordered, as that he is affected otherwise. That therefore which is
seen and appears is not common.

That by reason of the differing constitutions of the sense we are not moved
alike nor in the same manner, is manifest from those who have the Iaundies, and
those that are purblinde, and those that are affected according to Nature. For
as from the same object, some are so affected as to be black, others red,
others white; so is it likewise consonant to reason, that they who are affected
according to nature, by reason of the different constitution of senses, are not
moved alike by the same things, but one way the white, another way the black,
another way he whose eyes are blew, another way he whose eyes are black, whence
we impose common names on things, having our selves proper and particular
affections.

Sect. 2. Of the End, or chief Good.
TO these assertions (continues Sextus Empericus) concerning the Judicatories,
agrees what they assert concerning Ends. Of Affections, some are pleasant,
some harsh and troublesome, some mean; the harsh and troublesome are ill, whose
end is grief; the pleasant, good, whose end, which cannot be deceived, is
pleasure; The mean are neither good nor ill, whose end is neither good nor ill,
which is an affection between pleasure and grief. Affections therefore are the
judges and ends of all things, and we live say they, observing evidence and
liking, evidence in the rest of the affections, liking, in pleasure.

Laertius says, they assert two passions or affections, Grief and Pleasure;
pleasure, a soft smooth motion; grief, a harsh motion. One pleasure differs
not from another pleasure, nor is one pleasure sweeter then another pleasure;
this pleasure is coveted by all living creatures, the other shunned.

They assert corporeal pleasure to be our ultimate end, as Panaetius says in
his book of Sects, not catastematick permanent pleasure, which consists in
privation of grief, and a quiet void of all disturbance, which Epicure held.

The End differs from Beatitude; for the End is some particular pleasure;
Beatitude is that which consists of all particular pleasures, wherein are
included both the past and future. Again, particular pl^asure is expetible in
it self, felicity, not in it self, but for particular pleasures.

That pleasure is our chief end is manifest, in that from our first infancy,
without any instruction of others, we naturally aim thereat, and having
obtained it, seek nothing else. Moreover, we avoid not any thing so much as
its contrary, grief.

Pleasure is good, though proceeding from the most sordid dishonest thing, as
Hippobotus in his Book of Sects; for, although the action be dishonest, yet the
pleasure thereof is expetible in it self, and good.

Indolence, which Ep^cure held, they esteem not pleasure, nor want of pleasure,
grief, for both these consist in motion; but Indolence and want of pleasure
consists not in motion, for Indolence is like the state of a sleeping man.

They hold, that some men may not desire pleasure, through perversity of mind.

All spiritual pleasures and pains arise not from corporeal pleasures and
pains; for from the simple prosperity of our Country or our self, we are
affected with joy.

But neither the remembrance of past goods, nor expectation of future complete
pleasure, as Epicure thought; for by time and expectation the motion of the
soul is dissolved. Athen. deipn. 12.
Pleasure, according to Aristippus, is (...), consists only in one part of
time, the present; for the remembrance of past pleasures, or expectation of the
future, is vain and frivolous, and nothing appertains to beatitude; but that
only is good which is present. With those pleasures which he received
heretofore, or shall receive hereafter, Aristippus said, he was nothing at all
moved, the first being gone, the other not yet come, and what it will prove
when it is come, is uncertain. Hence Ael. var. Hist. lib. 14. 6.
he argued, that men ought not to be folicitous either about things past or
future, and that not to be troubled at such things is a sign of a constant
clear spirit. He also advised to take care only for the present day, and in
that day, only of the present part thereof, wherein something was done or
thought; for he said, the present only is in our power, not the past or ^uture,
the one being gone, the other uncertain whether ever it will come.

Neither do pleasures consist merely in simple sight or hearing, for we hear
with delight those who counterfeit lamentation, and those who lament truly, we
hear with displeasure. This privation of pleasure and grief they called mean
states.

The pleasures of the body are much better then those of the soul, and the
pains or griefs thereof much worse; for which reason those who offend actually,
are most grievously punished.

To grieve, is more unnatural to us, to delight, more natural; for which
reason, much more care is requisite for the ordering of one then of the other;
yet, many times we reject things which effect pleasure, as being grievous; so
that the concurrence of pleasures which effects beatitude, is very difficult.

Moreover they hold, that every wise man does not live pleasantly, nor every
wicked man unpleasantly, but so for the most part; for it is enough that a man
be affected and reduced by incidence of one single pleasure.

They held, that Cic. Tusc. quaest. 4.
Grief is the greatest ill; that grief is not effected by every ill, but by
the unexpected and unforeseen; that one man is more grieved then another.

They assert, that Riches are efficient causes of pleasure; yet, not expetible
in themselves.

Sect. 3. Of Virtue.
Cic. de. Offic. 3.
ALL good consists in Pleasure, Virtue it self is only laudable, as being an
efficient cause of pleasure.

Laert.
Nothing is just, honest, or dishonest by Nature, but by Law and Custom; yet a
good man will do nothing that is evil, because of the censure or esteem which
would fall upon his actions, and So Casaubon reads, but doubtless there is a
def^ct in the Text.
that such a one is wise.

Prudence is a good, yet not expetible in it self, but for the sake of those
things which proceed from it.

A friend is to be embraced for the use we may have of him, as the body
cherishes every part thereof as long as it remains found.

Of Virtues, some are in the unwis^e. Corporeal exercise conduces to the
acquisition of Virtue. A wise man is not subject to En^y, Love, or
Superstition, for all these proceed from the vanity of Opinion; but, he is
subject to Grief or Fear, as being Natural accidents.

CHAP. V.
How he went to Dionysius his Court.
ABout this time Dionysius, the Sicilian Tyrant, flourished, Philostr. vit.
Apoll.
to whom resorted many Philosophers, amongst the rest Aristippus, invited by
his sumptuous magnificence. Laert.
Dionysius asked him the reason of his coming; he answered, to give what I
have, and to receive what I have not; or, as others, when I wanted wisdom, I
went to Socrates; now I want money, I come to you. He soon insinuated into the
favor of Dionysius; for he could conform himself to every place time, and
person, act any part, construe whatsoever happened to the best: and thus
enjoying present pleasure, never troubled himself for the absent, as Horace.

Every condition, habit, and event
with Aristippus suits with all content.
Of his compliance with Dionysius's humor, there are these instances. Laert.
Dionysius at a Feast commanded, that all should put on purple robes: Plato
refused, saying, I will not with a female robe disgrace
My self, who am a man of manly race.
But Aristippus took it, and beginning to dance, said, If it come pure, a
mirthfull Feast
Never corrupts a modest breast.


Laert.
Another time suing to Dionysius in the behalf of his friend; he would not
hear him; at last he threw himself at his feet, and his petition was granted;
for which being reprehended, Blame not me, says he, but Dionysius, Whose ears
are in his seet.

Laert.
Dionysius showed him three Curtezans, bidding him take his choice; he leading
them all three away, said, Paris was punished jor preserring one before the
other two. But, having brought them to the door, he dismissed them, as ready to
contemn as accept: whereupon Strato (or as others Plato) told him, You only can
wear old garments and rags; for which likewise they admired him, that he would
wear a threadbare, and a rich Milesian Cloak with equal decorum, accommodating
himself to both.

When Dionysius did spit upon him, he took it patiently; fcr which being
reproved, Fishermen says he, suffer themselves to be wet all over that they
may catch [(...)] a Gudgeon, and shall I be troubled at a little spitle, who
mean to take Which being pronounced is equiv^call: for, (...) signifies a
^ish like a Gudgeon, and (...) Tyrant: as I find in a M. S. Lexcion
communicated by (...) learned friend Mr. John Pearson, (...) o (...) and again
B^^ (...) (read (...)) (...) confirmed by Atha^neus, deipn. 7. 10.
(...)?

Laert.
He begged Money of Dionysius, who said to him, You told me, a wise man wanted
nothing; Give me, and we will talk of this afterward. When Dionysius had given
it him; Now says he, you set I do not want.

By this complaisance, he gained so much upon Dionysius, that he had a greater
esteem for him, then all the rest of the Philosophers, though sometimes he
spoke so freely to Dionysius, that he incurred his displeasure.

Laert.
To Dionysius asking, why Philosophers haunted the gates of rich men, but rich
men not those of Philosophers: Because, says he, the one knows what he wants,
the other not.

Laert.
To Dionysius, urging him to treat of Philosophy: It is ridiculous, said he, if
you learn of me what it is, to teach me when it should be said. Whereat
Dionysius displeased, bad him take the lowest place, which he did quietly,
saying, You have a mind to make this seat more honorable. Athen. deipn. 12.
citing Hegesander*
The next day the Tyrant asked him what he thought of that place wherein he
then sat, in respect of that wherein he sat the night before: He answered, they
were alike to him; to day, says he, because I left it, it is contemned, what
yesterday was esteemed the most honorable; that where I sit to day esteemed
most honorable, which yesterday, without me, was accounted the lowest.

Laert.
Being asked why Dionysius fell out with him, he answered, for the same reason
he falls out with others.

Laert.
Dionysius saying, (out of Sophocles, as Plutarch affirms, who ascribes this
to Zeno.) Who ere goes to a Tyrant, he
A servant is, though he came free.
He immediately answered, No servant is if he came free.

Dionysius offering Plato a great sum of money, which he refused; Aristippus
being at the same time in the Court of Dionysius said, Dionysius bestows his
liberality upon sure grounds, to us who ask much, he gives little; to Plato,
who requires nothing, he offers much.

Plut. vit. Dion.
Another time Helicon of Cyzicus, one of Plato's friends, having foretold an
Eclipse of the Sun, which when it fell out accordingly, he was much honouored
for it: Aristippus jesting with other Philosophers, said, he could foretell a
stranger thing; They demanding what it was: I prognosticate, says he, that
Plato and Dionysius will ere long be at variance, and so it happened.

CHAP. VI.
His A^mulators.
THis favor which he found with Dionysius, was perhaps the occasion, for which
he was maligned by the rest of the Philosophers, amongst whom was.

Laert.
Xenophon, who out of ill will to him, published the Memorab. lib. 2.
discourse between him and (...) about Pleasure.

Laert.
Plato likewise, through the same disaffection tacitly reprehends him, in
Phaedone; for being in Aegina at the time of Socrates's death. Laert.
Plato being in Dionysius's Court, when he was there, reproved his sumptuous
life: Whereupon Aristippus asked him, whether he thought Dionysius a good man
or not: Plato affirmed, he thought him good: Yet he, replied Aristippus, lives
much more sumptuously; therefore it is not incompetible with goodness.

Laert.
Phaedo likewise seemed to deride him, demanding who it was that smelt so
strong of Unguents: It is I, unhappy man that I am, answered Aristippus, and
the Persian King, who is more unhappy then I; but, as other things are not the
worse for this, neither is a man. Senec. de ben^fic. Clem. Alex.
A curse on those effeminate persons, who brought a scandal upon so good a
thing.

Laert.
Aeschines also and he were sometimes at difference: Once after some falling
out betwixt them, Aristippus said to him, Shall we not be friends, shall we not
give over fooling? or, do you expect some body should kick us into kindness?
Willingly, answered Aeschines. Now, says, Aristippus, remember, that though I
am the elder, yet I yielded first. Aeschines replied, and justly, for you are
better then I; I begun the enmity, you the reconcilement. L^ ir a Cohib.
Plutarch relates it thus; Being fallen out with Aeschines, he met one who
asked him, Where is now your old friendship, Aristippus? It is asleep, says
he; but I will awake it: and going straight to Aeschines, Am I so unhappy,
says he, and so inconsiderable in your esteem, as not to deserve correction.
Aeschines answered, It is nothing strange, that exceeding by nature in all
things, you should first know what is ^it to be done.

Antisthenes is to be numbered also amongst those, who were displeased at his
manner of life, as appears by an Epistle of his to that effect, extant
amongst the Socratick Epistles, to which Aristippus returned this answer.

Socratic. Epist. 9.
Aristippus to Antisthenes.
WE are Aristippus, Irenically answering a former letter of Antisthenes.
unhappy beyond measure; how can we be otherwise, living with a Tyrant, daily
eating and drinking deliciously, persumed with choicest (...) nguents, attired
in rich loose Garments brought from Tarentum: and none will deliver me from the
cruelty of Dionysius, who detains me, not as a rude person, but one that is
verst in Socratick learning; supplying me (as I said) with Meat, Unguents,
Garments, and the like; fearing neither the judgments of Gods nor men. And now
the misfortune is much increased; He has bestowed on me three Sicilian Virgins
of extraordinary beauty, and many Utensils of silver; and when this man will
give over doing such things I know not; you do well therefore to be concerned
for the miseries of others; in requital whereof I rejoice in your happiness,
and return you thanks; Farewell.

The figs which you have, lay up against Winter, and the Cretan meal; for these
things seem to be better then For (...) ros (...) (...) insiead of (...) the
last word of the following Epistle, ^ (...) (...) sceptic^
riches; wash and drink of the Fountain of Enneacrunus; wear the same garment
in Winter as in Summer, and that sordid, as becomes a free person living under
the Athenian Democracy: As for me, I knew as soon as I came into a City and
Island governed by a Monarch, I should suffer those ills of which you write to
me; Now the Syracusians, Agrigentines, Geloans, and the rest of the Sicilians
Make a point at (...) and read (...) Dorice; a ridiculous and acute irony; for
(...) signifies to look on a thing with admi^ation, which is not proper to
compassion.
compassionately admire me; But Re^^ (...) ^ps, (...)
for my madness in coming inconsiderately to these unseemly things, I wish this
curse to sall upon me, that I may never be quit of these evils; (...)
because being of years of discretion, and pretending to wisdom, I would not
undergo hunger and cold, nor contemn glory, nor wear a long beard; I will send
you some great white Lupines to eat, after you have acted Hercules to the
boys; of which things it is reported you esteem it not absurd to discourse and
write: but if any man should speak of Lupines to Dionyf^us, I think it were
against the rules of Tyranny: of the rest go and discourse with Simon the
Leather-dresser, then whom you esteem nothing more wise; for I am not allowed
familiarity with Artificers, because I live under obedience to others.


Notwithstanding, this jarring betwixt them, Aristippus was nothing backward in
employing the Interest he had at Court, for some friends of Antisthenes; to
preserve them from death; as this Letter of his to Antisthenes does manifest.

Socratic. Epist. 11.
The Locrian young men of whom you write to me, will be set at liberly, neither
put to death, nor fined, though they were very near death. The Letter seems to
be written to Antithenes; and this meant ironically.
Let not Antisthenes know I have saved his friends, for he loves not to
converse with Tyrants, but with meal-men, and Victualers, such as sell meat and
drink at Athens without fraud, and such as sell thick clothes in cold weather,
and such as serve The Leather-dresser.
Simon, these are not Riches.

Diogenes followed the example of his Master Antisthenes in deriding
Aristippus, Laert.
calling him the Court-Spaniel. As Aristippus passed by, Diogenes busied about
washing Herbs, called to him, saying, If you had learned to do thus, you
needed not have followed the Courts of Princes; and you, said he, if you had
known how to converse with men, needed not to have washed Herbs; thus
expressed by Epist ^. 17.
Horace.

Diog. On Herbs if Aristippus could have dined,
The company of Kings he had declined.

Arist. He who derides me, had he wit to use
The company of Kings, would Herbs refuse;
I mine own jeaster; thou the People's art,
My choice is of the better, nobler part,
I by a King maintained, on horseback ride,
Thou by the meanest people art supplied,
Then those that do maintain thee thou art less;
Yet to want nothing vainly do profess.

Eaert.
Theodorus in his Book of Sects, reproached Aristippus; and Athen. Deipn. 12.
Alexis the Comic Poet, in his Galatea brings in a servant speaking thus of
one of his Disciples; My Master young on Rhetoric first intent,
Next to Philosophy his study bent:
A Cyrenaean lived at Athens then,
Named Aristippus, justly first of men,
Esteemed for subtlety and Luxury,
A Talent him my Master gave to be
His Scholar, but of Arts be none was taught,
Save only Cookery; that away be brought.


CHAP. VI.
His Apothegms.
OF Apothegms, (in Suid.
which kind he was conceived to have an acuteness beyond all the other
Philosophers,) these are remembered.

Laert.
He once gave fifty drachms for a Partridge, for which being reproved by
another; you would have given a penny for it says he, which the other
granting; so much, says he, are fifty drachmes to me.

Being demanded what was the greatest benefit he had received by Philosophy; he
answered, To converse freely with all men.

Being reproached for living high; if Magnificence were a sin says, he, it
would not be practiced upon days of Festival to the Gods.

To one who asked wherein Philosophers excelled other men; Though all Laws were
abolished says he, we should lead the same lives.

Being demanded how the Learned differ from the unlearned, he answered, as
Horses unback'd from such as are well managed.

Going into the house of a Courtezan, a young man of the Company blushed, to
whom he said, It is not ill to go in, but not to be able to come out.

To one who defired him to resolve a Riddle, Thou fool, says he, why would
thou have me resolve that which unresolved ^inds us such entertainment?

He said, it is better to be a Beggar then unlearned, for one wants only
Riches, the other Humanity.

Being reviled, he went aloof off; he that reviled, asked why he fted; Because
says he, to speak ill is in your power, not to hear is not in mine.

One saying he saw Philosophers at the gates of rich men, and Physittans says
he, at the gates of the sick; but no man would for that reason choose to be
sick rather then a Physician.

To one who boasted he learned much; as they says he, who eat and exercise
much, are not better then those who eat only to satisfy Nature, neither are
they learned who make large but profitable collections.

An Orator pleading for him, and gaining the Cause, asked him, what are you
the better for Socrates? so much says he, as that I make good those things
which you alleged in my defense.

He instructed his Daughter Arete to contemn all that is too much.

To one who demanded what his Son would be the better for Learning; if
innothing else, in this says he, that in the Theater one stone shall not sit
upon another.

Of one who would have preferred his Son to him, he demanded 500. Drachmes, For
so much says the other I can buy a slave; Do so, answered he, and then you
will have two ( Plut. de puet. educ.
your Son, and him you buy.)

He said he took money of his friends, not to make use of it himself, but to
let them know the right use of it.

Being reproached for entertaining an Orator to plead his Cause; and when I
would feast, says he, I hire a Cook.

To one who boasted of his swimming, are you not ashamed said he, to glory in
the property of a Dolphin.

Being demanded wherein the learned differed from the unlearned; send them
naked to strangers, says he, and you shall see.

To one who boasted he could drink much without being drunk; So, says he, can
a Mule.

Being blamed that he took money being the Disciple of Socrates; and justly,
says he, For Socrates when they sent him wheat and Wine, took a little for his
present use, and sent back the rest, the chief of all the Athenians were his
Purveyors, mine Eutichydes, a mercenary Ser^ant.

Being reproved by Plato for buying a great quantity of fish; they cost me,
says he, but an obolus, would not you have given so much for them? to which
Plato assenting, It is not that I am prosuse then, says he, but that you are
covetous.

Simon Pantler to Dionysius, a Phrygian, a man of ill conditions, brought him
to his house paved curiously with marble; Aristippus spits in his face, whereat
the other growing angry, I could not find says he a fitter place.

Being demanded how Socrates dyed; as I would wish to do, says he.

Polixenus the Sophist coming to his house, and seeing there women and a great
feast, reproved him, Aristippus gave him way, and after a little pause, will
you dine with me, says he? whereto he consenting: Why then, continues he, do
you reprove me? it is not the feast but the cost which you condemn.

His servant being upon a journey, weary with carrying of money; throw away,
says he, what is too much, and carry as much as you can.

Horat. sat. 2. 3.
He bad his slaves away his money throw,
Because ore-charg'd with weight they went too slow.
Laert. Cic. de invent.
Being at Sea, and understanding the owners of the Vessel were Pirates, he took
his Money and counted it, then let it fall into the Sea, as unwillingly, and
sighed: some affirm that he said, It is better these perish for Aristippus,
then Aristippus, for them.

He reproved men for looking upon goods exposed to sale, and taking no care to
furnish their minds. Others ascribe this to Diogenes.

Living in Asia, he was seized by Antaphernes, the King's Lieutenant, whereupon
one saying to him, And where is now your confidence? When, said he, you fool,
should I be confident, if not now, when I shall meet with Antaphernes.

Those who forsook Philosophy, to apply themselves to Mechanical Sciences, he
compared to the Suitors of Penelope; they could get the good wills of Melantho,
Polydora, and others of the servants, but could not obtain the Mistress in
Marriage. Not unlike is that of Aristo, who said, that Ulysses, when he went to
Hell, saw all the dead, and spoke to them, but could not come so much as to the
sight of the Queen.

Being demanded what Boys ought to learn? That, says he, which they ought to
practice when they are men.

To one who accused him for going from Socrates to Dionysius: To Socrates,
says he, I went for (...), education; to Dionysius for (...) recreation.

To a Curtezan, who told him she was with child by him: You know that no more,
said he, then if passing through a bush, you should say, this thorn pricked you.

To one, who blamed him, that he took Money of Dionysius, Plato a Book; he
answered, I want Money, Plato Books.

Plut. de tranq. anim.
Having lost a great Farm, he said to one, who seemed excessively to
compassionate his loss, You have but one field, I have three left; why should
not I rather grieve for you. It is madness (adds Plutarch) to lament for what
is lost, and not rejoice for what is left.

Stob. Eth. 46.
When one told him, the land is lost for your sake; Better, says he, is it,
that the land be lost for me, then I for the land.

St. Eth. 99.
Seeing one angry vent his passion in words; Let us not, says he, suit words
to our anger, but appease our anger with words.

St. Eth. 12.^
Seeing a little Woman exceeding fair; This, says he, is a little evil, but a
great beauty. They who invert these words, and read, a little fair one, but
great evil, mistake the meaning of Aristippus, who plays upon that ordinary
saying, applying the inversion to his own luxurious humor.

St. Eth. 18^.
To one, who demanded his advice whether he should marry or no: he said no, If
you take a fair a wife, says he, she will be common, if foul, a fury.

St. Eth. 210.
He used to advise young men to carry such provision, as in a shipwreck they
might swim away withal.

St. Eth. 229.
As a shoo that is too big is unsit for use, so is a great estate; the bigness
of the shoe troubles the wearer; wealth may be used upon occasion, either
wholly or in part.

CHAP. VIII.
His writings.
Laert.
SOme affirm (of whom is So^icrates) that he wrote nothing at all: others that
he wrote.

The Lybian History, three Books dedicated to Dionysius.

Dialogues twenty five (or rather twenty three; for, the number seems corrupt)
in one Book; some in the Attick dialect, others in the Dorick: their Titles
these: 1. Artabazus. 2. To the shirwrackt. 3. To Exiles. 4. To a poor man. 5.
To Lais. 6. To Porus. 7. To Lais concerning a Looking-glass. 8. Hermias. 9. The
Dream. 10. To the Cup Bearer. 11. Philomelus. 12. To servants. 13. To those who
reproved him for using old wine and common women. 14. To those who reproved him
for feasting. 15. An Epistle to Arete. 16. To the Olympic exerciser. 17. An
Interrogation. 18. Another Interrogation. 19. A Chria is a short commemoration,
aptly relating the speech or action of some person. The third of these (viz. to
Dionysius his Daughter) Vossius inserts amongst the Greek Histories; if that
were Historical, it is likely this to Dionysius was of the saine Nature.
A Chria to Dionysius. 20. Another on an image. 21. Another on Dionysius his
Daughter. 22. To one who conceived himself dishonored. 23. To one who
endeavored to give advice.

Exercitations ^ix Books.

Laert.
Of pleasure, mentioned by Laertius in the life of Epicure. Of Physiology, ont
of which Laertius cites, that Pythagoras was so named, because he spoke no less
truth then Pythius.

Of the luxury of the Ancients, four Books, containing examples of those who
indulged to love and pleasure; as, the love of Laert. in vit. Emped. Periand.
Ar^stot. etc.
Empedocles to Pausanias, in the first Book; of Cratea to her son Periander: of
Aristotle to the Concubine of Hermias, in the fourth, of Socrates to
Alcibiades, Xenophon to Clinias, plato to Aster, Xenocrates to Polemo. But,
these latter instances show, that these Books were not write by this Aristippus.

Epistles. four are extant under his name, in the Socratick col lection, put
forth by Leo Allatius.

Laert.
Socion and Panaetius reckon his treatises thus, Of discipline. Of virtue, an
Exhortation. Artabazus. The shipwrackt. The banished. Exercitations six Chria
three. To Lais. To Porus. To Socrates. Of Fortune.


CHAP. VIII.
His death.
HAving lived long with Dionysius, at last his daughter Arete sent to him, to
desire him that he would come to Cyrene to her, to order her affairs; for, that
she was in danger of oppression by the Magistrates. Aristippus hereupon took
leave of Dionysius, and being on his voyage, fell sick by the way, and was
forced to put in at Lipara, an Aeolian Island, where he dyed, as may be
gathered from this Epistle, which he then sent to his Daughter.

Socr. Epist. 27.
Aristippus to So supplied by Leo Allatius.
Arete.
I Received your Letter by Teleus, Wherein you desire me to make all possible
have to Cyrenc, because your business with the Praefects goes not to your
mind, and your Husband is unsit to manage your domestic affairs, by reason of
his bashsulness, and being accustomed to a retir^^ life, remote from the
public. Wherefore as soon as I got leave of Dionysius, I sailed toward you,
and being upon my journey, fell sick by the way at Lipara, where the friends of
Sonicus provide carefully for me, with such humanity, as is needful for one
near death. As for your demand, what respect you should give those whom I
manumised, who prosess they will never desert Aristippus whilst they have
strength; but, ever serve him and you; trust them in all things, they have
learned from me not to be salfe. For your self, I advise you to apply your
self to the Magistrates, which counsel will pro^it you, if you affect not
rather to have much: You will live most at ease if you contemn excess; for,
they cannot be so unjust as to leave you in want. You have two Orchards left
sufficient to maintain you plentifully: and that possession in Bernicia* if
alone left you; were suffici^nt to supply you fully. I do not counsel you to
neglect small things ^ but, not to be troubled for small things, since vexation
is not good even for great. If when I am dead, you (...) my advice for the
education of young Aristippus, go to Athens, and above all, esteem Xantippe and
Myrto, who have often spoke to me to bring you to the Eleusin^an Festivalls.
Whilst you lead this pleasant life with these, let the Cyrenaean Praefects be
as unjust as they please, in your natural Pleasure.
end they cannot prejudice you. Endeavor to live with Xantippe and Myrto, as I
did hereto fore with Socrates, composing your self to their conversation; for,
pride is not proper in that place. If Leo Allatius reads Lam. procles; but,
that cannot be; for Lamprocles was dead long before; see life Socratic. Chap.
16.
Tyrocles, the son of Socrates, who lived with me at M^gara, come to Cyrene, it
will be well done to supply him, and to respet as your own son. If you will not
nurse a daughter; because of the great trouble it gives you, send for the
daughter of Eubois, to whom you have heretofore expressed so much kindness, and
named after my Mother, and I also have often called her my friend. Above all,
take care of little Aristippus, that he may be worthy of us and of Philosophy:
Eor, this I leave him as his true inheritance, the rest of his estate finds the
Cyrenaean Magistrates adversaries. But, you writ me not word that any offered
to take that away from you. Rejoice, dear daughter, in the possession of those
riches which are in your power, and make your son possess them likewise: I wish
he were my son; but, being disappointed of that hope, I depart with this
assurance, that you will lead him in the pa hs trodden by good men. Farewell,
and grieve not for us.


Stob. Eth. 195.
Of his Children, besides this Arete his Daughter, whom he educated in
Philosophy, is remembered also a Son, whom for his stupidity he disenherited,
and turned out of doors; for which, being reproved by his Wife, who alleged,
that he came from himself; He, spitting, said, This comes from me too, but
profits me nothing. Or, as Laertius, We cast (...), all unnecessary things as
far as we can from us.

Arete had a Son named from his Grandfather Aristippus, and from his Mothers
instructing him in Philosophy, surnamed (...).

Besides these two ( Aristippus the Grandfather and the Grandson) Laertius
reckons two more of the same name. One writ the History of Arcadia: the Other
was of the new Academy.

CHAP. IX.
His Disciples and Successors.
Of the Auditors of Aristippus, besides his daughter Arete, (whom he taught
with much care, and brought up to great perfection in Philosophy) are remembered
Aethiops of Ptolemais, and Antipater of Cyrene.

Arete communicated the Philosophy she received from her Father, to her Son
Aristippus the younger: Aristippus transmitted it to Theodorus the Atheist, who
instituted a Sect, called Theodorean.

Antipater communicated the Philosophy of Aristippus to Epitimides his
Disciple; Epitimides to Paraebates; Paraebates to Hegesias and Anniceris: These
two last improving it by some additions of their own, obtained the honor each
of them, to have a Sect named after them, Hegesiack and Annicerick.

HEGESIAS.
CHAP. I.
His Life.
HEGESIAS, Disciple to Paraebates, was surnamed (...), Death's Orator, from a
Cic. Tusc. qu. 1.
book he writ, entitled (...), upon occasion of one who had famished himself
nigh to death, but was called back to life by his friends, in answer to whom,
he in this Book demonstrated that death takes us away from ill things, not
from good, and reckoned up the incommodities of life, and represented the
evils thereof Val. Max. 8. 9.
with so much Rhetoric, that the sad impression thereof penetrated so far into
the breasts of many hearers, that it begot in them a desire of dying
voluntarily, and many laid violent hands upon themselves. Whereupon he was
prohibited by Ptolomy the King to discourse any more upon this Subject in the
Schools.

CHAP. II.
His Philosophy.
HIS Disciples were from him called Hegesians. Laert.
They held the same chief good and Evil with the Cyreneans; further asserting;

That Kindness, Friendship, and Benevolence are in themselves nothing; not
expetible, but in respect of those benesits which cannot consist without those
persons.

That Perfect Felicity is absolutely impossible, because the body is disordered
by many troubles, in which the Soul shares, and most of those things which we
hope are prevented by chance.

That Life and Death are in our choice.

That nothing is by nature pleasant or unpleasant, but by the ra^ity and
unusuallness of things, or satiety, some are delighted therewith, others not.

That Poverty and Wealth confer nothing to Pleasure, neither are the rich
poor affected with Pleasure several ways. Servitude and Liberty, Nobility and
Meanness, Glory and ignominy differ nothing in this respect.

That to live is advantageous for a fool, indifferent to a wise man.

That a wise man ought to do all things in consideration of himself, and
prefer none before himself, for though possibly he may receive benefits from
others very great in outward appearance; yet are they nothing in comparison of
those which he dispenses.

That Sense conferrs nothing to certain knowledge, for all act by the rules of
t^eir own reason.

That offenses ought to be pardoned, for no man offends willingly, but
compelled by some affection.

That we should hate no man, but instruct him better.

That a wise man should not insist so much upon choice of good things, as upon
evil, making it his scope and end to live neither in Labor nor Grief; which
they do, who are inclined neither way to the objects of Pleasure.

ANNICERIS.
CHAP. I.
His Life.
Laert.
ANNICERIS was of Cyrene, Disciple to Paraebates, yet Suidas says he was an
Epicurean, and that he lived in the time of Alexander. Ael. var. hist 2. 27.
He was excellent in Chariot-racing, of which one day he gave a testimony
before Plato, and drove many courses round the Academy, so exactly, that his
wheels never went out of the track, to the admiration of all that were
present, except Plato, who reprehended his too much industry, saying, it was
not possible but that he, who employed so much pains about things of no value,
must neglect those of greater concernment, which are truly worth admiration.

Laert. vit. Plat.
When Plato, by the command of Dionysius, was sold as a slave in Aegina,
Anniceris fortuned to be present, who redeemed him for 20. or according to
others 30. minae, and sent him to Athens to his friends, who presently returned
the money to Anniceris, but he refused it, saying, they were not the only
persons that deserved to take care of Plato.

Suid.
He had a Brother named Nicoteles, a Philosopher; he had likewise the famous
Posidonius to be his Disciple.

CHAP. II.
His Philosophy*
HIS Disciples were called Annicerians; Cic. de offic. 3.
They as the rest placed all good in Pleasure, and conceived virtue to be only
commendable as far as it produced Pleasure. Laert.
They agreed in all things with the Hegesians, but they abolished not
friendship, good will, duty to parents, and actions done for our Country. They
held,

That although a wise man suffer trouble for those things, yet he will lead a
life nothing the less happy, though he enjoy but few Pleasures.

That the Felicity of a friend is not expetible in it self; for to agree in
judgment with another, or to be raised above and fortified against the
general opinion, is not enough to satisfy reason, but we must accustom our
selves to the best things; because of our innate vicious inclinations.

That a friend is not to be entertained only out of useful or necessary Ends,
nor when such fail, is to be cast off, but out of an intimate goodwill, for
which we must also undergo trouble. For though they placed (as the rest) the
chief end and good in pleasure, and professed to be grieved at the loss
thereof, yet they affirm that we ought to undergo voluntarily labors, out of
love to a friend.

THEODORUS.
CHAP. I.
His Life.
Laer^.
THEODORUS heard Anniceris, Dionysius the Logician, Suid.
Zeno the Cittiean, and Pyrrho the Ephectick. He was called the Atheist,
because ^lut. plac. Phil. 17. Cicde not. deor. 1.
he held there was no God, and wrote a treatise ( Suidas says many) wherein he
endeavored to refell all arguments to the contrary, out of of which Epicurus
borrowed much. Afterward he was abusively called (...), upon occasion of a
dispute with Stilpo to this effect, Do you believe says Stilpo, you are
whatsoever you affirm your self to be? Theodorus granting; then continues
Stilpo, if you should say you were a God, were you so? To which Theodorus
assenting, Stilpo replied; Then impious man you are a Bird, or any thing else
by the same reason.

He was ejected out of Cyrene by the Citizens, whereupon he said pleasantly;
You do not well Cyreneans to thrust me out of Lybia into Greece. Thence he went
to Athens, where he should have been cited to the Court of Areopagus, and lost
his life, but that he was freed by Demetrius Phalereus. Being likewise banished
thence, he went to Ptolomy the Son of Lagus, with whom he lived, and was by him
sent on Embassy to Lysimachus, to whom speaking Atheistically; Lysimachus said,
Are not you that Theodorus that was banished Athens, he answered, it is true,
the Athenians when they could bear me no longer, as Semele Bacchus, cast me
out. Lysimachus replied, see that you come no more to me; No answered he,
unless Ptolomy send me. My^hro Son of Lysimachus being present, said, you seem
not only ignorant of the Gods but of Kings. How says he, am I ignorant of the
Gods, who believe you an Enemy to them? Lysimachus threatened them with Death;
Sen de tranq. anim. 6. Cic. Iuse. qu. 1. ^lut. an vitios. ad infel. suff.
you glory ^aith he in a great matter, a Cantharides can do as much. Or as
Stobaeus, I knew not that you had not the power of a King but of poisor. Hereat
incensed, he commanded he should be crucified; Threate^ says he, those things
I pray to your purple Nobles; it is all o^e so Theodorus whether he rot above
or under ground.

Finally he went to Cyrene, and lived with Marius in much repute, in that City
out of which he was first ejected.

Disputing wit^ Euryclides a Priest, he asked, what persons those were who
de^ile mysteries: Euryclides answered, Those who communicate them to persons
not initiated. Then, replied he, you do impiously, in declaring them to such.

What o^^ers ascribe to Aristipp^s and Diogene^ s^ime ^ ^ttri^^te to Theodorus
and Metrocleus, a Cynick, who saying, You would not want Disciples if you
washed Herbs: Theodorus an^wer'd, Neither would you wash Herbs, if you knew how
to converse with Men.

He said of Hipparchia the Wife of Crates; This is she who has given over the
Shuttle to put on a Cloak.

CHAP. II.
His Philosophy.
HE taught all manner of Learning, and instituted a Sect, called Theodorean.
Suid. in Socrate.
He asserted Indifference, that there is no difference of things.

Laert.
That our end, or chief good and greatest ill, are joy and sorrow; one
consisting in prudence, the other inimprudence.

That prudence and justice are good things, the contrary habits ill, the mean,
pleasure and grief.

He took away Friendship, because it is neither in fools nor wisemen; those
being incapable to make use of it, the thing it self vanishes; these not
needing it, as being sufficient to themselves.

That it is reasonable that a wise man expose not himself to danger for his
Country; Wisdom ought not to be lost for the preservation of fools.

That the World is our Country.

That a man upon occasion may commit theft, adultery, and sacrilege, there
being nothing in these naturally evil, if that opinion were taken away which
is built upon the agreement of fools.

That a wise man may publi^kly without shame (...).

He used such inductions as these: Is not a woman that is skillful in Grammar,
prositable in that respect as a Grammarian? Yea; is not the same of a youth?
Yes. Is not a beautiful woman then profitable, as being handsome? Yes: Then
she who makes right use of it does not amiss. In these kinds of Questions he
was very subtle.

CHAP. III.
His death, writings, etc.
Laert.
AMphicrates says, that he was condemned by the Law for Atheism, and drunk
Hemlock.

He wrote, besides that which appertained to his sect, many other things.

Laertius reckons twenty of this name: The first a Samian, son of Rhaecus, who
advised to lay the foundation of the Temple at Ephesus upon Embers: For, the
place being wet, he said, that Coals, when they forsake the nature of Wood,
acquire a solidity not to be violated by moisture.

The second of Cyrene, a Geometrician, whose Disciple Plato was.

The third this Philosopher.

The fourth writ of exercising the voice, a famous Book.

The fifth writ of Lawgivers, beginning with Terpander.

The sixth a Stoic.

The seventh writ the Roman History.

The eight, a Syracusian, writ Tacticks.

The ninth a Byzantine, a Sophist, Suid.
eminent for civil Pleas.

The tenth of the same Country, mentioned by Aristotle in his Epitome of
Orators.

The eleventh of Thebes, a Statuary.

The twelfth a painter, mentioned by Polemon.

The thirteenth of Athens, a Painter, of whom writes Menodotus.

The fourteenth of Ephesus, a painter, of whom Theophanes in his treatise of
painting.

The fifteenth a Poet, who wrote Epigrams.

The sixtee^th wrote of Poets.

The seventeenth a Physician, Disciple to Athenaeus.

The eighteenth of Chios, a Stoic.

The ninteenth of Miletus, a Stoic.

The twentieth, a Tragic Poet.

BION.
CHAP. I.
Bion his life.
OF the Theodorean Sect was BION, Laert.
Beristhenite. What his Parents were, and what his employments, he diverted
himself to Philosophy, he related to Antigonus, King of Macedonia, in this
manner. Antigonus asked Whence art thou? Who thy Parents? What thy Town? Bion
perceiving himself to be reproached, answered thus, my Father was a freeman,
(...), implying, he was a seller of salt-fish, a Boristhenite; he had not a
face, but instead thereof a brand mark, which declared the ill disposition of
the owner: My Mother he married out of a common Brothel-house; [ Athen. deipn.
a Lacedemonian Curtezan, named Olympia,] being such a Woman as such a man
could get. My Father, for couzening the State, was sold, and all our Family for
slaves. I being a young likely youth, was bought by an Orator, who dyed, and
left me all he had. I tore and burnt his Papers, went to Athens, and there
applied my self to Philosophy.

This is the blood and race I boast to own. Thus much concerning my self: Let
Perseus therefore, and Philonides forbear to enquire after these things, and
look you upon me, as I am in my self. You do not use, O King, when you send
for Archers, to enquire of what Parentage they are; but, set them up a mark to
shoot at: Even so of friends, you should not examine whence, but what they are.

Bion indeed, setting this aside, was of a versatile wit, a subtle Sophist, and
gave many furtherances to the exercisers of P^ilophy: in some things he was --

He first heard Crates the Academick; but, despising that Sect, rook a ^ordid
Cloak and Scrip, and became a Cynick: to which Laertius ascribes his constancy,
expert of perturbation. Then he followed Theodorus the Atheist, who professed all
manner of learning; to whose opinions he addicted himself, and was called a
T^^odorea^: Afterward he heard Theophrastus the P^ripatetick.

CHAP. II.
His Apophthegms.
HE left many memorialls, and profitable Apophthegmes; as, Being reproved for
not endeavoring to Catch a young man; new Cheese says he, will not stick to
the hook.

Being demanded what man is most perplexed, he says, he who aims at the
highest Content.

To one who asked his advice whether he should marry or not, (for this some
ascribe to Bion, which Agellius to Bias, the mistake perhaps grounded upon the
nearness of their Names) he answered, if you take a fowl Wife, she will be a
Torment; if a fair, Common.

He said, that Age is the Haven to which all ills have recourse; That Glory is
the Mother of years; That beauty is a good which concerns others, not our
selves; That Riches are the Sinews of Things.

To one who had consumed his Patrimony, Earth, says he, devoured Amphiaraus,
but you devour Earth.

He said, it is a great ill, not to be able to bear ill.

He reproved those who burn men, as having no Sense, and again burn them as
having Sense.

He used to say, it is better to yield our own youth and Beauty to others, then
to attempt another; for he that does so, injures both his body and Soul.

He vilified Socrates, saying, if he could enjoy Alcibiades, and did not, he
was a fool, if he could not, he did no great matter.

He said, the way to the next World is easy, for we find it blindfold.

He condemned Alcibiades, saying, when he was a boy, he drew away Husbands from
their Wives, when a man, Wives from their Husbands.

At Rhodes, whilst the Athenians exercised Rhetoric, he taught Philosophy; for
which being reproved, I bought Wheat says he, and shall I fell Barley?

He said, they who are punished below would be more tormented if they carried
Water in whole Vessels, then in Vessels full of holes.

One that was extremely talkative, desiring his assistance in a business, I
will do what I can for you says he, if you send a Messenger to me, and come
not your self.

Traveling with very ill Company, they fell amongst thieves; we shall be
undone says he, unless we be known.

He said, Arrogance is the obstruction of Virtue.

Of a rich man Covetous, he has not money says he, but money him.

He said Covetous persons keep their Wealth so strictly, that they have no more
use of their own then of another.

He said, when we are young, we use Courage, when old, Wisdom. Wisdom excells
other Virtues as the Sight the other Senses.

He said no man should be reproached for old age, that being a Condition all
pray they may arive at it.

To an envious man sad, I know not says he whether some ill has befaln you,
or some good another.

He said impiety is an ill companion to bold language; For though his Speech he
free,
To Bondage yield must he.


That friends whatsoever they prove ought to be retained: lest we seem to have
conversed with wicked persons, or to shun Good.

Being Demanded if there were any Gods, he said, Old man, will thou not drive
this ^roud away.

He conceived that he might make a Field fertile sooner by praising then by
manuring it.

He said, they who love to be flattered, are like Pots carried by the ear.

To one who asked him what folly is, he said the Obstruction of Knowledge.

He said good men, though Slaves are free, but wicked men though free are
slaves to many Pleasures.

He said Grammarians whilst they enquire after the Errors of Ulysses, mind not
their own, nor see that they themselves go astray as well as he, in taking
pains about useless things.

He said Avarice is the Metropolis of all Evil.

Athen.
Seeing a Statue of Persaeus, under which was written, (...), Persaeus of Zeno
a Cittiean, he said, the writer mistook; for it should be, (...), Zeno's
servant; as indeed he was.

CHAP. III.
His Death.
AT last falling sick (as those of Chalcis say* Laert.
for he died there) he was persuaded to suffer ligatures (by way of charm) he
recanted and professed repentance for all he had said offensive to the Gods. He
was reduced to extreme want of such things as are most necessary to sick
persons, until Antigonus sent to him two servants; and himself followed in a
litter, as Phavorinus affirms in his various History, of that sickness he
dyed; on whose death thus Laertius; Bion the Boristhenite,
By his Birth to Scythia known,
Did religious duties slight,
Gods affirming there were none.
If to what he then professed,
Firm he had continued still,
Then his tongue had spoke his breast,
And been constant though in ill.
But the same who Gods denied,
He who sacred fanes despised,
He who mortals did deride,
When to Gods they sacrificed;
Tortured by a long disease,
And of deaths pursuit afraid,
Gifts their anger to appease
On their hearths and Altars laid.
Thus with smoke and incense tries
To delight their sacred scent;
I have sinned, not only cries,
And what I professed repent.
But unto an old wives charms
Did his willing neck submit,
And about his feeble arms
Caused them leather thongs to knit.
And a youthful sprig of bays
Did set up before his gate:
Every means and way essaies
To divert approaching fate.
Fool to think the Gods might be
Bribed with gifts, their favors bought,
Or the sacred Deity
Were, and were not as he thought.
But his wisdoms titles (now
Tum'd to ashes) not avail
With stretched arms, I know not how,
Hail he cried, great Pluto hail.


Of this name Laertius reckons ten; The first contemporary with Pherecydes the
Syrian, of Proconnesus; who writ two Books extant in his time.

The second a Syracusian wrote of the Art of Rhetoric.

The third this Philosopher.

The fourth an Abderite of the Family of Democritus; a Mathematician: he wrote
in the Attick and Ionick Dialect: He first said there were some habitable parts
of the earth, where it was six months day and six months night.

The fifth of Soleis; he wrote the Aethiopick History.

The sixth, an Orator, who wrote nine Books entitled by the names of the Muses.

The seventh a Lyrick Poet.

The eight a Milesian Statuary; mentioned by Polemon.

The ninth a Tragic Poet, one of those who were called Tar^ici.

The tenth a Statuary of Clazomene or Chios, mentioned by Hip^^nax.

THE MEGARICK SECT. EVCLID.
CHAP. I.
His Country and Masters.
Laer^.
EUCLID (instituter of the Megarick Sect) was born at Megara, Town adjacent
upon the Isthmus; though others say at Geta, a City of Sicilie.

He first studied the writings of Parmenides, then went to Athens to hear
Socrates: Afterward the Agell. 6. 10.
Athenians made an order, that if any Citizen of Megara came into the City of
Athens, he should be put to death: So great was the hatred the Athenians bore
to the Megarenses. Lib. 1.
Thucydides mentions this Decree, whereby the Megarenses were prohibited to
make use of any Laws within the Athenian jurisdiction, or the Attick Forum:
Which Order the Lacedaemonians requiring to be repealed, and not prevailing, the
Peloponnesian War ensued thereupon, the cruellest and longest that ever was
amongst the Grecians.

Agell. 6. 10.
Euclid, who was of Megara, and before that Decree used to go to Athens, and
hear Socrates, after it was promulgated, came by night in a long woman's Gown,
and Cloak of several colors, his head attired in a woman's Vail (so Varro
expounds Rica) from his house in Megara to Athens, to Socrates, that he might
be in that time partaker of his counsel and instructions, and went back again
before that day in the same habit, above twenty thousand paces.

Laer^.
Upon the death of Socrates, Plato and the rest of the Philosophers, fearing
the cruelty of the Tyrants, went to Megara to him, who entertained them kindly.

CHAP. II.
His institution of a Sect.
Laert
HE affected litigious disputes, and Laert. vit. Soc^.
was therefore told by Socrates, that he knew how to conte^d with Sophists, but
not with me^^ Suitable to this contentious humor, he instituted a Sect, Laert.
first called Megarick from the place, afterward Eristick, from the litigious
sophistical nature thereon, Whence Laert. vit. Diog.
Diogene^ said* it was not (...) a School, but (...) anger: Laert.
thus reproved by Timon, O^ all these triflles, I not value ou^ht,
W^ich^ Phaedo nor litigious Euc^^d caught^
Who the Megareans mad contention taught.


Lastly, it was called Dialectick; which name Dionysius, a Carthaginian first
gave them, because their discourses consisted of question and answer.

He affirmed, that there is but one good, which is called by several names;
sometimes Prudence, sometimes God, sometimes the Mind, and the like: He took
away all things opposite to good, saying, there was no such thing.

He used arguments not by assumption, but by inference.

He took away disputation by similitude, saying, that it consisted either of
like or unlike; if of like, it were better to examine the things themselves to
which they are like: if of unlike, the comparison is to no purpose.

CHAP. III.
His Apothegmes, Writings.
HE was famous in the Schools (says De fraterno amore.
Plutarch) for as much as hearing his Brother in in a wild rage, say, Let me
perish, if I be not revenged: he answered, and I, unless I persuade you to lay
aside your anger, and love me as at first. If Stob. sermon. 32.
Hierocles (who relates the same story) for (...) writ not as Plutarch (...),
that epithet occasioned the mistake.

Stob. Eth. 38.
He said, (...) there is one kind of sleep, a young pliant Deity, easy to be
driven away; the other gray and aged, chiefly frequenting old men: Pertinacious
and inexorable, from this God, if he once come, it is hard to get loose; words
avail nothing, for he is deaf; nor can you show him any thing that may move
him, for he is blind.

Stob. Eth. 47.
Being demanded what the Gods are, and wherein they delight: Of all things else
concerning them, says he, I am ignorant but of this, I know they hate curious
persons.

Laert.
He wrote (besides other things) six Dialogues ( Laert. vit. Aes^hin.
Panaetius doubts whether they were genuine or spurious) their Titles these,
Lamprias. Aeschines. Phaenix; or (as Suidas) the Phoenixes. In voce Euclides.
Crito. Alcibiades. The Erotick.


Of the same names are numbered

Euclid the Mathematician, a Megarean also, whence confounded by Lib. ^. cap.
13.
Valerius Maximus with the Philosopher: Plato (says he) ^ent the undertakers
of the sacred Altar (who came to confer with him concerning the manner and form
thereof) to Euclid the Geometr^cian, yielding to his skill and pr^^ession: That
these undertakers came to Plato, is evident from the testimony of many others;
but, that he remitted them to Euclid the Geometrician; or, that Euclid the
Philosopher owned that profession, is no where to be proved. Oh the contrary,
In Euclid. lib. 2. Cap. 4.
Proclus affirms, that Euclid the Mathematician was of the Platonic Sect; and
that The Text is imperfect, read Ka^ (...), etc. and so (well nigh) Barocius.
Ptolomy King of Egypt asking if there were any shorter way to Geometry, he
answered, Not any Kings-high-way. From the death of Socrates to the first of
the Ptolomies are 95 years. So that Euclid the Mathematician was much latter
then the Philosopher.

Euclid the Archon in the second year of the 88th Olympiad, according to Lib.
Diodorus Siculus; but, Meteor. 1. 6.
Aristotle names the Archon for that year Euclees, confirmed by his
Commentators, and by (...).
Suidas, who only erres a little in the distance of years betwixt him and
Euclid the other Archon. Inscript. p. 235.
Salmasius not knowing the name Euclees to be any where found amongst the
Archontes, and expressly affirming the contrary, endeavors to corrupt the Text
of Suidas reading Diocles.

Euclid the Archon, in the second year of the 94th Olympiad.

Euclid the Soothsayer, friend to Xenophon, who Expedit. cyr. lib. 7.
mentions him.

Euclid the Stone-cutter, named in Plato's Will.

EVBVLIDES.
Laert.
EUBULIDES a Mile^ian succeeded Euclid. some affirm, that Demosthenes the
Orator was his Scholar, and that Demosthenes not being able to pronounce the
Letter R, he taught him by continual exercise to do it. He was a great enemy
to Aristotle, and much aspersed him.

In Dialectick he invented many kinds of Interrogation or argument, (...), the
Lying; (...), the occult; (...), Electra; (...), the Veiled; (...), Sorites;
(...), the horned; (...), the bald: Of which thus Demosthenes.

The Orators sharp Eubulides knows
With subtle forked questions how to pose,
Speech from Demosthenes not sweeter flows.
These are several kinds of Sophisms, which Yop. ^. 4.
Aristotle in general defines Eristick Syllogismes: from this School borrowed
and enlarged afterward by the Stoics.

(...), termed by Deipn. 8.
Athenaeus (...), by Divinat. 2.
Cicero mentiens, is a captious reasoning not to be dissolved; named, as most
of the rest, not from the form, but matter; the ordinary example being this:
Cic. L^cull.
If you say that you lie when you speak truth, you lie: But, you say that you
lie when you speak truth; therefore you lie. Such is that in Lib. 5. quest.
Africanus, A man having four hundred (Crowns) disposes in Legacies three
hundred; next he bequeaths to you a piece of ground worth one hundred Crowns;
provided, his Will be not liable to the Falcidian Law, [by which all Legacies
are made void, if the surplusage remaining for the Heirs, amount not at the
least to the fourth part of the Goods] The Question is, what right you have. I
say, the question is not to be resolved, being of that kind which the
Dialecticks call (...), what part soever we take for true will prove false. If
we say the Legacies are valid, the Will comes within compass of the Falcidian
Law, whereby the condition being defective, the Legacy is invalid. Again, if
because the condition being defective, the Legacies are not valid, it is not
liable to the Falcidian Law; and if the Law take not place upon the condition,
you are not to have what was bequeathed you. So much was this Sophisme
esteemed, that Epist. 6. 45.
Seneca affirms, many Books to have been written upon it: Vit. Chrysip.
Laertius reckons six distinct Treatises of Chrysippus. Deipn. 8.
Athenaeus and Suidas averr, that Philetus a Choan dyed of a Consumption,
occasioned by excessive study upthis Question only.

Electra, named (likewise) from the chief Examples; of which thus Lucian:
Electra the illustrious Daughter of Agamemnon, knew and knew not the same
thing. Orestes unknown standing by her, she knew that Orestes was her Brother,
but she knew not that he was Orestes.

(...)* the veiled; named also from the matter, thus instanced by Lucian. CHR.
Answer me, Do you know your Father? MERC. Yes. CHR. What if I should bring one
unto you veiled, what would you say, that you knew him or not? MERC. That I did
not know him. CHR. And yet that man proves to be your Father; therefore if you
`knew not the man, you knew not your Father. MERC. No truly; but, ^pul off his
vail, and I shall discover the truth. Of the same kind is that of the Sophists,
which Analy. poster. 1. 1.
Aristotle affirms, Socrates (in Plato's Meno) vainly labors to resolve; Do
you know all Paires are even or not? The other answering he knew it. The
Sophist brings forth a pair of some thing which he had held hidden under his
Cloak, and asks, Did you know that I had this Even pair or not? the other
confessing he knew not, Then says he, you know and know not the same thing.

Sorites, By Cicero termed Divin. 2.
a Cervalis, who defines it to be Cic. Luc^l.
when any thing by degrees is added or taken away: as a Heap ((...)) is made by
adding a grain, or rather as Digest. lib. 1^
Iulianus, when from things Evidently true, by very short Mutations the Dispute
is led to such things as are Evidently false; the same, Lib. 48. ad Sabin. in
titde verbor. and rer. sig^ifit.
ulpian, The Common example mentioned by In Lucullo.
Cicero, In Chrysip.
Laertius, Adv. L^gic.
Sextus Empiricus, and others in this: are not two a few? are not three so
likewise? Are not four the same? So on to ten. But two are a few, and therefore
ten.

(...) the horned; Denominated as the rest from the Example, what you lost not
you have, you lost not Horns, therefore you have Horns. Repeated by Seneca,
Agellius and others. Of this kind Lib. 5. i^ Mat.
St. Hierome observes that to be which the Pharisees objected to our Savior.
He came (says he) from Galilee to Judea, wherefore the faction of Scribes and
Pharisees asked him whether it were lawful for a man to put away his Wife for
any cause, that they might Entrap him by a Horned Syllogism, whatsoever he
would answer being liable to exception: if he should say a Wife might be put
away for any cause, and another taken; he being a Professor of modesty should
contradict himself; but if he should answer, a Wife ought not to be put away
for any cause, he should be accounted guilty of Sacrilege, and judged to do
contrary to the Doctrine of Moses, and by Moses of God. Our Lord therefore so
tempers his answer, that he passes by their trap, alleging for Testimony the
sacred Scripture and Natural Law, opposing the first Sentence of God to the
second, which was granted not from the will of God, but Necessity of Sin. The
same Father instanceth another of the same kind proposed to him, Epist. 83.
I was assaulted at Rome by a very Eloquent person, with that which they call a
Horned Syllogism, so as which way soever I turned I was more entangled. To
marry a Wife says he, is it a sin or not? I plainly, not thinking to avoid his
ambush, said, it is not a sin; He then propounded another Question, in Baptism
are good works remitted or Evil? I with the like simplicity answered, sins are
remitted: when I thought my self secure, Horns began to bud out on each side
on me, and the hidden forces to discover themselves, if says he to marry a
Wife be not a sin, and that Baptism remitteth Sins, whatsoever is not
remitted is reserved.

ALEXINUS.
Laert.
Amongst the many Disciples of Eubulides was Alexinus an Elean; a great lover
of Contention, and therefore called (...) from redarguing; He most opposed Zeno.

Herm^ppus says, he went to Olympia, and there professed Philosophy; his
Disciples questioning why he lived there, he answered, he meant to institute a
Sect, and call it Olympic, but his Disciples wanting subsistence, and
disliking the Air departed, he continued there solitary with one servant only,
and swimming in the River Alphaeus, was hurt with a Reed, whereof he dyed.

He wrote against other Philosophers besides Zeno. And against Ephorus the
Historian.

EUPHANTVS.
Laert.
From Alexinus came Euphantus an Olinthian, Master to King Antigonus, Father of
Demetrius, Grandfather of Antigonus Gonatus; He died of Age; He writ

The History of that time.

Tragedies many, which upon their public representations were much applauded.

An Oration upon a Kingdom, to Antigonus, very Celebrious.

APOLLONIVS CRONVS.
Laert.
OF the Disciples of Eubulides, was Apollonius Cronus; Lib. 14.
Strabo says, he was Cyrenaean by birth, and calls him Cronus Apollonius,
implying the latter to be a surname from Apollonia a Town of Cyrene.

DIODORVS.
CHAP. I.
His Life.
Laert.
DIodorus was of Iossus a City of Caria; Son of Ameinias; Laertius says, he
heard Eubulides; Lib. 14. and 17.
Strabo that he heard Apollonius Cronus, after whom he was called Cronus; the
name of the Master being transmitted to the Disciple, by reason of the
obscurity of the true Cronus; Laert.
of Diodorus thus Callimachus; -- even Momus writ
Upon the Walls, Cronus has wit.


He lived with Ptolomeus Soter, in whose presence being questioned by Stilpo,
in such things as upon the sudden he could not answer; he was not only punished
by the King, but reproached with the name of Cronus: whereupon he went from the
Feast, and having written an Oration upon that question, died of grief.

CHAP. II.
His Philosophy.
Lib.
STrabo and Laertius affirm he was a Dialectick; The Dialecticks (says Lucul.
Cicero) teach in their Elements to judge whether a ^onnex (a proposition which
has the conjunction if) be true or false; as this, if it be day, it is light,
how much is it controverted; Diodorus is of one opinion, Philo of another,
Chrysippus of a third, That Diodorus labored much herein, appears from an
Epigram of Callimachus, cited and explained by Advers. Gram.
Sextus Empiricus.

Concerning these propositions, the Disagreement of Diodorus from Philo and
Chrysippus (already mentioned by Cicero) is thus explained by Fyrrh. Hyp. 2.
Sextus Empiricus; But when says he, or how it follows they disagree among
themselves, and those things whereby they determine a consequence to be judged,
oppugn one another^ as Philo said, it is a true Connex, when it begins not
from true, and ends ^n false. So that according to his opinion, a true Connex
may be three several wa^es, a false only one way. For when it begins from
true, and ends in true, it is true; as this, if it be day, it is light.
Again, when it begins from false, and ends in false, it is true: as this,
if the Earth flies, the Earth has wings. Likewise that which begins from
false, and ends in true is true; as this, if the Earth flies it is Earth:
that only is true which begins from true, and ends in false. Such is this,
if it be day it is night. For if it be day, that it is day is true, which is
the Antecedent. But that it is night is false, which was the Consequent.
Diodorus says, that is a true Connex which is not contingent, beginning from
true, and ending in false. This is contrary to the opinion of Philo, for such a
Connex as this, if it be day I discourse, and if at present it be day, and I
discourse is according to Philo's opinion a true Connex: for it begins from
true, it is day, and ends in true, I discourse. But according to the opinion of
Diodorus it is false: for it may so happen, that though it begin from true, to
wit, it is day, yet it may end in false, to wit, that I discourse when I am
silent. Thus by Contingencie it may begin in true, and end in false; for before
I began to discourse it began from true, to wit, it is day: but ended in false,
to wit, I discourse.

And again, Cap. codem:
for that we examine not many opinions concerning a Connex, let us say that
Connex is in it self right, which begins not from true, and ends in false.
This, if there be motion, there is Va^uity according to Epicures Opinion,
beginning from true, to wit, there is motion, and ending in true, will be true.
According to the Peripateticks, beginning from true, to wit, there is motion,
and ending in false, to wit, there is Vacuity, will be false: according to
Diodorus, beginning from false; to wit, there is motion, and ending in false,
to wit, there is vacuity, will be true, for the assumption, to wit, there is
motion, he denies as false.

Laert.
Some affirm, he invented the veiled and horned arguments (of which already in
the life of Eubulides) In lib. 1: Pri^r.
Alexander Aphrodiseus, says he, used (...), the dominative argument: Of whose
original and efficacy thus lib. 2. cap. 19.
Epictetus; The Dominative argument seems to have been interrogated and
collected upon such like occasions as these: for, there being a common ^ight
amongst these three propositions to one another: The first, that every thing
past is necessarily true. The second, that possibility follows not
impossibility. The third, that what is not possible, neither is nor shall be
true. This fight Diodorus observing, made use of the two first, to prove, that
nothing is possible, which is not, nor shall be. And In lib. ^. Prior.
Alexander, For that I be at Corinth is possible, if that I have been, or ever
shall be there; but, if neither, it is not possible. It is possible, that a
child to be made a Grammarian, if he be made such, in confirmation hereof
Diodorus interrogated by the Dominative argument.

He held, that nothing is moved, Sext. Empir. ^yrrhon. hyp. 3. 8.
arguing thus: If a thing be moved, it is either moved in the place wherein it
is, or in the place wherein it is not: but not in that wherein it is; for it
rests in the place wherein it is: nor in that wherein it is not; for where a
thing is not, there it can neither act nor suffer. Therefore nothing is moved:
and Sext. Empir. advers. Gram.
consequently nothing is corrupted or perishes.

Sext. Empir. Pyrrh. hyp. 3. 4.
He asserted, that the principles of things are least indivisible bodies, Stob.
Eclog. ^bys. 13.
in number infinite, in magnitude finite.

ICHTHYAS.
(...)
ICHYHYAS son of Metallus, an eminent person, is remembered amongst these
Philosophers that are derived from Euclid: To him Diogenes the Cynick dedicated
a Dialogue.

CLINOMACHVS.
Laert.
AMongst these descended from Euclid, was likewise CLINOMACHUS, a Thurian: He
first wrote concerning Axioms, [Propositions] Categorems, [that part of a
Proposition which is praedicated of the other] and the like.

STILPO.
CHAP. I.
Stilpo his life.
Laert.
STILPO was of Megara in Hellas; he lived in time of the first Ptolomy: Of the
Masters which he heard are reckoned Euclid the founder of this School: but,
this agrees not with his time, as was before observed.

Some followers of Euclid,

Thrasymachus of Corinth, friend to Ichthyas: So Heraclides attesteth.

Laert. vi^. Diogenis.
Diogenes the Cynick.

Pasicles, a Theban, who heard Crates the Cynick, his own Brother.

Dioclides of Megara.

Cicero says; he was very acute, much approved by those times: his friends
(says he) writ, he was much inclined to wine and women, yet relate not this in
his dispraise; but, rather in his commendations, that he by Learning so subdued
and represt his vicious nature, that none ever saw him drunk, none ever
discovered any lasciviousness in him. Plutarch magnifies his height of
courage, mixed with meekness and temperance.

He was much addicted to civil affairs. Besides his Wife, he kept company with
Nicareta, a Curtezan: He had a daughter of ill fame, whom Simmias, a
Syracusian, his intimate friend, married; she living incontinently, one told
Stilpo she was a dishonor to him: No more, says he, then I am an honor to
her.

Ptolemeus Soter much esteemed him, and when he took possession of Megara by
conquest, gave him money, and invited him along with him to Egypt: Of the money
he took a little, but absolutely refused the journey: Going to Aegina stayed
there, till Ptolomies return. Dem^trius son of Antigonus, upon the taking of
Megara, gave order, that his house might be preserved, and whatsoever belonged
to him restored; and bidding him give them an inventory of such things as he
had lost, he said, that he had lost nothing that belonged to him, for none had
taken away his learning; his learning and knowledge were both left.

With Demetrius he disputed of Humanity so efficaciously, that he became a
studious Auditor of him.

Concerning Minerva's Statue, carved by Phidias, he asked a man, whether
Minerva Daughter of Jove were a God? He affirmed she was: But this, says he,
is not of Jove, but of Phidias; to which the other assented: Then, says he,
she is not a God. Hereupon being cited to the Court of Areopagus, he denied it
not, but justified it, (...) she was not a God, but a Goddess. But, the
Areopagites nothing satisfied with this evasion, ordered that he should depart
the City. Hereupon Theodorus surnamed (...), said in derision, How came Stilpo
to know this, did he put aside her vail, and look upon her breast? Theodorus
was bold of speech; but, Stilpo reserved, in so much, as being demanded by
Crates, whether the Gods delighted in bent knees and prayers: Thou fool, says
he, do not question me in public, but when we are alone together.

He was sincere and plain, void of all artifice: Crates the Cynick not
answering him, but (...), I knew, says he, you would speak any thing rather
then that which is decent.

Crates in propounding a question delivered a fig to him, which he took and
eat: Crates presently cried out, that he had lost his fig: Yes, says he, and
your question also, of which that was in earnest.

Seeing Crates half frozen in cold weather, Crates, says he, me thinks you
want (...), (which one way implies a new garment, another way both a garment
and wit) Crates ashamed, answered thus; Stilpo at Megara I saw oppressed,
Where vast Typhocus lies with weight oppressed.
To hear him wrangle, many Scholars came;
Fair truth to chase away was all their aim.


At Athens he wrought so much upon the people, that they would run out of their
shops to see him: They wonder at thee Stilpo (said one to him) as a monster:
No, says he, but as a true man.

As he was speaking with Crates, in the midst of their discourse he went away
to buy fish; Crates pursued him, crying out, that he gave over the discourse:
No, says he, I carry along the discourse with me; but, I leave you, the
discourse will stay, the fish must be bought.

Being asked, Stob.
what is harder then a stone, he answered, a fool.

CHAP. II.
His Philosophy.
Laert.
HE was Master of the Megarick School, excellent in Eristick Disputes, by his
subtle Tenants and Discourses, beautifying himself, his Country and friends.

He took away all Species (Universalls) affirming, that he who says, a man,
denotes not any man, the Term being not proper to this or that person, for why
to one rather then to another, therefore not to this; and again, that which we
see is not an Herb, for an Herb was many years ago, Therefore this was not an
Herb.

Plut.
He likewise denied one thing to be praedicated of another arguing thus; if
running be praedicated of an Horse, the subject is not the (...) with the
praedicate; the definition of man is one thing, that o^ good another, so an
horse is a di^^ering thing from running, for upon (...), we give several
Definitions of each; for if a man, and good, or a horse, and running were the
same, how could good be praedicated of Food or Physic, and running of a horse,
which are things so different. Thus he admitted no conjunction with the
subject, in things which are in a subject, or praedicated of a subject, but
conceived that both these, unless they be the very same with the subject,
cannot be praedicated of it, even not as an Accident. This, though it were one
of those little sayings which Stilpo sportively used to cast out amongst the
Sophisters, Colotes the Epicurean opposed so eagerly, that he framed a large
discourse against Stilpo, grounded only upon this assertion, (which yet he
neither re^elled nor resolved) affirming that by holding one thing is not
praedicated of another, he takes away good life; But that Stilpo (says
Plutarch) was offended only at some words, and opposed the manner of speaking,
but took not away the course of life, or abolished things, is most evident.

Senec. Epist. 9
He asserted the chief good to be a mind not subject to passion.

CHAP. III.
His Disciples.
Laert.
He so far exceeded others in fluent discourse and learning, that he converted
almost all Greece to the Megarick Sect, Philippus of Megara says, he drew
Metrodorus surnamed the Theoretick, and Timagoras the Geloan from Theophrastus.

(...) and Simmias from Aristotle the Cyrenaean.

Of Dialecticks, Paeonius, from Aristides.

Diphilus Son of Euphantus, and Myrmex Son of Exenaetus coming to dispute
against him, became both followers of him: Thus far Philipp^s: he likewise
attracted

Phaesidemus the Peripatetick, excellent in Natural Philosophy.

Alcimus, the most eminent Orator at that time in Greece.

Ze^o the Phaenician, an Epicurean Philosopher.

Crates, and others; in a word, whomsoever he would himself.

Heraclides says, that Zeno the Citican founder of the Stoicall Sect was his
Disciple.

CHAP. IV.
His Death, Writings.
HErmippus affirms that he died of age; but drank a draught of wine to hasten
his end.

Suidas says, he wrote 20. Dialogues; Laertius but nine; and those not very
efficacious; their Titles these Moschus, Aristippus or Callias, Ptolemaeus,
Chaerecrates, Mitrocles, Anaximenes, Epigenes, To his Daughter, Aristotle,


He had a Son named Dryso, a Philosopher also.

THE ELEACK and ERETRIACK SECTS. PHAEDO.
Laert.
THe Eleack Sect was instituted by Phaedo, an Elean of a noble Family; It
chanced that he was taken by Thieves or Pirates, and sold to a House of common
dishonest resort; where being forced to sit at the door, he was observed by
Socrates in passing, who noting the ingenuity of his countenance (which was
extraordinary) persuaded (as Laertius says) Alcibiades or Plato, or (as
Agellius,) Cebes, to buy him, from which time he addicted himself diligently to
Philosophy, and was a constant Disciple of Socrates; so much affected by Plato,
that he called that most excellent discourse of the immortality of the Soul,
after him, Phaedo.

He instituted a Sect called from him Eleack; The Dialogues ascribed to him
were Zopyrus, Medus, Simon, Antimachus, or the old man, Nicias, Simmias,
Alcibiades, Critolaus.


Laert. vit. A^sch.
Panaetius doubts whether any of these were written by Phaedo; Medus is by some
ascribed to Aeschines, by others to Poliaenus as are also Antimachus and the
Scythian discourses.

PLISTHENES.
Laert.
THe Eleack Sect was continued by Plisthenes an Elean; successor to Phaedo;
Plisthenes was succeeded by Menedemus and Asclepiades.

MENEDEMVS.
CHAP. I.
His Country, Parents, Teachers.
Laert.
MEnedemus was one of those Philosophers that continued the School of Phaedo,
which hitherto was called Eleack, but from Menedemus was termed Eretriack: he
was an Eretrian, Son of Clisthenes; Clisthenes was of the Family of the
Theopropidae; yet though noble by descent, Mechanic by profession and
indigent; some affirm he was a maker of Tents ( Hesychius Illustris terms him
an Architect) adding that he taught both Arts to his son Menedemus, so that
when Menedemus wrote a decree, an Alexinian Philosopher reproved him, saying,
it becomes not a wise man to frame both Tents and decrees.

Menedemus being sent by the Eretrians with a command of Soldiers, to Megara,
went from thence to Athens to hear Plato at the Academy, with whom he was so
taken, that he gave over his Military employment.

By Asclepiades a Phlyasian, his intimate friend, he was carried to Stilpo at
Megara, whom they both heard; Thence taking a journey to Elis, they met with
Anchypillus and Moschus, who belonged to the School of Phaedo.

Some affirm he despised Plato and Xenocrates, and Paraebates the Cyrenaean;
but admired Stilpo; concerning whom, being demanded his opinion, he only
answered that he was free.

CHAP. II.
His School and Philosophy.
BEing returned home to Eretria, he set up a School, and taught Philosophy
there: the Elia. Laert.
School being thus transferred to Eretria, was from thence forward called
Eretriack.

In his School there was no order of place, no seats round about it; but, as
every man chanced to be sitting, or standing, or walking, in the same postures
they heard him.

He held, that there was but one virtue and good, reprehending those who
asserted more; whence of one who held there were many Gods, he demanded
ironically how many? and whether he thought there were more then a hundred?

He was of a versatile wit, and in composure of his speech a difficult
adversary; he turned himself every way, and found something to say for every
thing: He was very litigious, as Antisthenes in his successions affirms, and
used this question, What is not the same, is different from that with which it
is not the same? Yes, To benefit is not the same with good, therefore good does
not benefit. He took away negative propositions, leaving only the affirmative;
and of these he admitted the simple only; but rejected those which were not
simple, calling them conjoined and complexe.

Heraclides says, he was a Platonic, and derided Dialectick. Hexinus asking,
whether he had given over beating his Father? I neither did beat him, says he,
nor have given over. The other replied, Either say yes or no, to dissolve the
ambiguity. It is ridiculous, says he, to follow your Laws, when a man may
withstand them in the very entrance.

He writ not, or composed any thing, because (says Antigonus Carystius) he was
of no certain opinion: yet, in dispute he was so vehement, that he many times
went away with black and blew eyes.

CHAP. III.
His manner of living.
Laert.
HE contracted a strict friendship with Asclepiades, nothing inferior to that
of Pilades to Orestes: Asclepiades was the elder, whence there went a common
saying, that he was the Poet, Menede^us the Player.

Athe^. Dei^n.
When they were yet both young Philosophers, and indigent, they were cited to
the Court of Areopagus, to give account ( See life Solon.
according to Solon's Law) by what means (spending the whole day amongst
Philosophers without any labor, and having no estate) they subsisted, and were
in so good a condition: They desired, that one of the Masters of the common
Prison might be sent for; who, when he came, attested, that they went down
every night into the Prison, where the common malefactors grownde, and did
there grind, and in pay of their labor, received two drachmes: at which the
Areopagites much wondering, bestowed as an honorable reward upon them two
hundred drachmes.

They had other Patrons that bestowed gifts upon them; Archepolides gave them
three thousand pieces of silver; they both contended which should receive last,
and in conclusion, neither accepted it. The chief persons that received them
were Hipponicus a Macedonian, and Aegetor a Lamiean: Aegetor gave each of them
thirty Minae. Hipponicus gave Menedemus two thousand drachmes toward the
marriage of his Daughters, which, as Heraclides says, were three, by his Wife
Oropia.

For Asclepiades and Menedemus took each of them a Wife; Asclepiades married
the daughter, Menedemus the Mother: Asclepiades, his Wife dying, took the Wife
of Menedemus; Menedemus being made a chief Magistrate, married a rich Wife;
notwithstanding, he allowed his first Wife an equal interest in the government
of the House. Asclepiades having lived with Menedemus in great plenty; yet,
with great temperance, died old at Eretria. At that time, one, whom Asclepiades
much loved, coming late at night, intending to have feasted with him, the
servants shut him out of doors: but, Menedemus bad them let him in, saying,
Asclepiades would admit him even under ground.

Menedemus was much given to entertainments, and, because the Country was
unwholesome, made many Feasts: what order he observed therein is thus delivered
by Antigonus Carystius, and out of him (though not cited) by Laertius. He dined
but with one or two companions at the most; if any came to him, they were
admitted after dinner was ended; if they came sooner then the set time, they
walked short turns before the door, and demanded of the servants what course
was carried in; if they told them fish-broth (with which they begun their
dinner) they went away; if any flesh, they went into a room prepared for that
purpose. In Summer time, Menedemus had the Couches or Beds of his Dining Room
covered with flags and rushes, in Winter with sheep-skinns. Every guest brought
a Cushion; the Cup they had was no bigger then a large spoon: instead of
sweetmeats they had Lupines and Beans: sometimes such fruit as the season
afforded; in Summer, Pomgranats, in Spring, Pulse, in Winter, Figs. This
Lycophron the Chalcidian confirms in his satyricall Comedy upon Menedemus,
where Silenus speaks thus to the Satires.

Sons impious of a pious Father, I
(You see) with your delights and sports comply:
But never by the Gods at such a Feast
In Caria, Rhodes, or Lydia was a guest.
How plentiful!
And not long after, A little pot half full of water clear,
Rated at farthings five, a boy did bear
To every guest; about vile Lupines went,
With which the beggar's table's scarce content.


Whilst they drank (after the feast) Menedemus proposed questions, and instead
of a desert gave them discourse, which excited all to temperance and
continence: these continued sometimes till the crowing of the Cock broke them
off, much against the will of his guests, who never thought they had enough of
them.

CHAP. IV.
His civil employments.
Laert.
HE was first contemned by his Countrymen, and called dog and fool; but at
last so much honored by them, that they committed the government of the
Commonwealth to his charge, Laert.
and paid him yearly two hundred Talents, whereof he sent back fifty.

After he applied himself to civil business, he was so thoughtfull, that
going to put Incense into a Censer, he put it besides. Crates reproaching him
for undertaking public employments, he sent him to Prison; whereupon as he
chanced to pass by, Crates rose up, and saluted him with the title of
Agamemnonian, leader of the City.

He was sent Ambassador from the Eretrians to Ptolomy, and to Lysimachus (much
honored wheresoever he came) and to Demetrius, Eusebius.
all three Kings of Macedonia, of whom, Demetrius first reigned, then
Lysimachus, and after him ( Pyrrhus intervening) Ptolomy.

Some accused him to Demetrius, that he would betray his City to Ptolomy, of
which charge he acquitted himself by an Epistle, beginning thus, Menedemus to
king Demetrius, health. I hear that you are informed many things concerning us,
etc. advising him to take heed of one of those that were his enemies, named
Aeschylus. When he was on Embassy to Demetrius, he spoke very earnestly and
effectually concerning Oropus.

Antigonus also, King of Macedonia, loved him exceedingly, and professed himself
his Disciple: In his behalf he made a Decree, clear and void of assentation,
beginning thus; For as much as King Antigonus, having overcome the Barbarians
in fight, returns into his own Country, having good success in all his
undertakings: The Senate and people have thought good, etc.

CHAP. V.
His Virtues and Apothegmes.
MENEDEMUS was of exceeding gravity, for which Crates deriding him, said,

Asclepiad the Phliasian, and the proud Eretrian, and Timon.

He supercilious bumbast speech begins. In this severity he was so awful, that
Eurylochus being invited by Antigonus, together with Clippides, a youth of
Cyzicum, refused to go, fearing Menedemus should know it.

In reproof he was bitter and bold, of which Laertius instanceth his sayings to
a young man over-confident, to Hierocles, etc. to an Adulterer boasting, etc.
to a young man crying, etc.

Antigonus asking his advice, whether he should go to a luxurious banquet; not
speaking whether he should go or not, he bad him send them word, that he was a
Kings son.

One who intruded himself upon him, and discoursed very absurdly, he asked, if
he had a farm; he answered, many: Go then, says he, and look after them, le^t
in losing you rusticity you lose them also.

To one asking, whether a good Man may take a Wife, he said, Do you think I am
good or not? The other assenting; But, I (says he) have taken one.

Not able to limit the prodigality of one who invited him to supper, he
silently reproved him, eating nothing but Olives.

This freedom brought him into danger when he was in Cyprus with Nicocreon,
together with his friend Asclepiades; for, the King having invited him with the
rest of the Philosophers to a Monthly feast, Menedemus said, this convention if
it be good, ought to be every day; if otherwise, this day is too much: The
Tyrant answered, that he had set apart that day to converse with Philosophers.
Menedemus persisting in his assertion, demonstrated from what he had said of
the sacrifice, that Philosophers ought to be heard at all times. Whereupon if
one of the Musicians had not helped them to escape, they had been put to death,
whence the Ship being endangered by a storm, Asclepiades said, that the
humanity of the Musician preserved them, the roughness of Menedemus had undone
them.

He was negligent, and (as we said) careless in every thing that concerned the
order of his School; likewise high-minded, and covetous of glory: insomuch that
when he and Asclepiades first exercised the trade of building, Asclepiades was
seen upon the house top carrying clay; but Menedemus, if he espied any man
passing by, hid himself.

He was somewhat inclined to superstition; having eaten ^n a Cooks shope the
flesh of something that had died of it self ignorantly with Asclepiades, as
soon as he knew it, he grew sick, and looked pale, till Asclepiades reproved
him, saying, He was not sick of the meat, but of fancy.

In all other respects he was a person of a great and free soul* in strength
even in his old age equal to those who wrastled in exercise, strong made,
swarthy of complexion, sat and corpulent; but of indifferent stature, as
appears (says Laertius) by his statue in Eretria, in the old Stadium, so
exactly carved, that it expresses the naked proportion of his limbs.

He loved Aratus and Lycophron the Tragic Poet, and Antagoras the Rhodian, but
above all he was studious of Homer; next of the Lyricks; then of Sophocles: In
Satyrs he assigned the second place to Achaeus; the first to Aeschylus, whence
to those in the state who defended the contrary part, he said thus, The swift
in time outstript are by the slow,
A Tortoise thus an Eagle may outgo.


These are verses of Achaeus; they therefore are mistaken, who say he read
nothing but the Medea of Euripides, which is put among the Poems of Neophron
the Sicyonian.

Of Bion, who spoke with much diligence against Prophets, he said, he murdered
the dead.

To one who said, the greatest good is to enjoy those things which we desire;
it is a much greater says he, to desire those things which are fitting.

He was violent (as we said) in controversy, but most affable in conversation
and action: Alexinus, whom in dispute he had often circumvented and bitterly
derided, he gratified in deed; taking care for the safe conduct of his Wife
from Delphi to Chalcis, the way being much infested with Thieves.

He was an excellent friend, as is manifest from his affection to Asclepiades,
of which we have already spoken, only to Persaeus, he was constantly a professed
enemy, for it was known that when Antigonus for Menedemus his sake would have
restored the Eretrians to their first liberty, Persaeus withstood it, whereupon
at a Feast Menedemus openly enveigh'd against him, using amongst many others
this expression; he is indeed a Philosopher, but of all men that are, were, or
ever shall be the most wicked.

CHAP. VI.
His departure from Eretria, and Death.
THe friendship he held with Antigonus, made him suspected by his own
Countrymen, as if he meant to betray the City to him; of which being accused by
Aristodemus, he fled, and lived a while at Oropus in the Temple of Amphiaraus:
thence some golden Cups chancing to be stolen, he was by a public decree of the
Boeotians forbidden to stay there any longer, whereupon he returned privately
into his Country, and taking his Wife and Children along with him, went from
thence to Antigonus, where he died of grief.

But Heraclides on the contrary affirms, that whilst he was prefect of
Eretrians, he often defended his Country against those who would have made
Demetrius Tyrant thereof; Neither would he therefore have betrayed it to
Antigonus; but that was falsely laid to his charge; he afterward went to
Antigonus, petitioning that he would restore his Country to their liberties;
which Antigonus denying he out of grief fasted seven days, and so died; The
same relation is delivered by Antigonus Carystius. Heraclides says, he lived
84. years.

FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY.

The Fifth Part.

Containing the Academick Philosophers.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO


LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Mosely, and Tho: Dring. An. Dom. 1656.

PLATO.


PLATO.
CHAP. I.
The Country, Parents, and Time of PLATO.
THE most eminent of all the Sects derived from Socrates was the Academick, so
called from the Academy, a place in Athens, where the Professors thereof
taught: This Sect was instituted by Plato, continued by Speusippus, Xenocrates,
Polemon, Crates, Crantor, thus far called the first or old Academy.
Arcesilaus, succeeding Crantor, instituted the middle Academy, continued by
Lacydes, Telecles, Euander, and Hegesinus. Carneades founded the new Academy,
of which was also ( ^litomachus: Some reckon a fourth Academy, instituted by
Philo and Charmidas: a fifth by Antiochus.

Laert.
Plato was out of doubt an Athenian, nor are they to be credited who relate him
Tzetz. Chiliad. 11. 390.
a Theban, born at Cynocephalus; Laert.
Antileon affirms his Parents to be of Colly^tus. Laert. Suid.
He was born (according to Phavorinus) in the Island Aegina, in the house of
Phidiades, son of Thales; his Father sent with others thither at the division
of the Land (upon their defection from, and subjection by the Athenians, at the
beginning of the Peloponnesian War) and returned to Athens, at what time those
Athenians were ejected by the Lacedaemonians, in aid of the Aeginetae.

Laert. Apul. Suid.
He was of an eminent Family; his Father Aristo (Son of Aristoteles) of the
race of Codrus, Son of Melanthus, who (as Thrasylus affirms) derived
themselves from Neptune. Melanthus flying Messena, came to Athens, where
afterward by a Stratagem killing Xanthus, he was made King after Thymocles,
the last of the Theseidae. His Mother Perictione, by some called Potone, whose
Kindred with Solon is thus described by Laertius and In Timaeum.
Proclus. Execestides had two Sons, Solon and Dropides: Dropides had Critias,
mentioned by Solon in his Poems.

Bid fair-haird Critias his Sire observe;
A wandering mind will from his leader swerve.
Critias had Callaeschrus, Callaeschrus had Critias, one of the thirty Tyrants,
and Glaucon (whom Apuleius calls Glaucus) Glaucon had Charmides and Perictione;
Perictione by Aristo had Plato, the sixth from Solon; Solon was descended from
Neptune and Neleus, [Father of Nestor.] Thus Laertius, from whom Proclus
dissents only in that, that he makes Glaucon Son of the first Critias, Brother
to Callaesch^us, which Critias manifestly (says he) in Plat. Charmides
confirms, calling Glauco (Father of Charmides) his Uncle. Thus was Plato
descended both ways from Neptune.

^here are (says D^gm. Plat.
Apuleius) who assert Plato of a more sublime race: Aristander, followed by
many Platonists, thinks, he was begotten on his Mother by some Spectrum in the
shape of Apollo: Laert (...): perh. (...). it should be (...) amongst the
writings of ^peusippus is mentioned (...)
Speusippus in his Treatise, entitled Plato, or (...), Clearchus in his Eulogie
of Plato; Anaxili^es in his second Book of Philosophers; Sympos. 8. 1.
Plutarch, Suidas, and others, affirm it to have been commonly reported at
Athens, that he was the Son of Apollo, who appearing in vision to her (being a
woman of extraordinary Beauty) Apul. d^gm. Plat.
Perictionae se miscuit, she thereupon conceived: Aristo (her Husband) having
often attempted to enjoy her, but in vain; at last Apollo appearing to him in
a vision or dream, and a voice commanding him to refrain the company of his
Wife for ten Months, until her delivery were past, he forbore; whence Tyndarus
He did not issue from a mortal bed;
A God his Sire; a God-like life he led.


Some thereupon (as Advers. Iul.
Saint Hierom says) affirmed, he was born of a Virgin, and Laert.
it was a common speech among the Athenians, that Phoebus begat Aesculapius and
Plato, one to cure Bodies, the other Souls.

Laert. Suid.
Aristo had afterward by Perictione, two Sons, Adimaretus and Glauco, and a
Daughter Potone, Mother to Speusippus: These relations of Plato will be more
conspicuous in this Genealogicall Table.



For the Year of his Birth, (to omit the mistakes of Eusebius, who places it
in the fourth year of the eighty eight Olympiad, in the Archonship of
Stratocles, and of the Chronicon Alexandrinum, that places it the year
following) Laertius says, He was born, according to the Chronology of
Apollodorus, in the eighty eight Olympiad, which seems to be toward the
beginning of the first year, whilst Aminias was yet Archon. For Laertius
elsewhere says, that he was six years younger then Isocrates; for Isocrates
(says he) was born, when Lysimachus, Plato, when Aminias was Archon, under
whom Pericles dyed: in the third year of the Peloponesian War. This Aminias is
by the Argum. Hippol.
Scholiast of Euripides called Ameinon, by Deipn. 5.
Athenaeus, Epameinon, by Lib.
Diodorus Siculus, Epaminondas. The various reading, occasioned either by
addition or detraction of the Preposition (...), but by which of these two
cannot easily be evinced. Plin. Exercit. p. 157.
Salmasius endeavoring to prove the name to be (...), positively affirms, that
the Greeks never name an Archon without the Preposition (...), but that error
Doctr. temp.
Pe^ avius confutes, whose opinion is confirmed by the ancient Marble at
Arundell-house, which adds not the Preposition to the names of the Archons.

Neither is the opinion of Deipn. 5.
Athenaeus much different, who affirms, Plato was born (the Year before)
Apollodorus being Archon, who succeeded Euthydemus, who was Archon the third
Year of the eighty seventh Olympiad, and that under Euphemus, in the fourth
year of the nintieth Olympiad, he was fourteen years old. For both Laertius and
Athenaeus agree in the Year of his death, viz. the first of the hundred and
eight Olympiad, when Theophilus, the successor of Callimachus, was Archon;
Athenaeus only differs in this, that, computing eighty two Archons, he
attributes so many years to Plato's life, whereas it is certain, that he lived
but exactly eighty one.

The day of his birth, Laert.
according to Apollodorus, was the seventh of Thargelion, at which time the
Delians did celebrate the Feast of Apollo. So likewise Florus, cited by Sympos.
8. 1.
Plutarch, who adds, that the Priests and Prophets call Apollo (...), as being
born upon this seventh day; whence perhaps was occasioned the fiction, that he
was Son of Apollo, which Plutarch esteems no disparagement to his Deity. In
the first year of the eighty eight Olympiad, the Neomenia of Hecatombaeon fell
upon the second of August, and (upon those Hypotheses which we laid down
formerly in the Cap. 1.
life of Socrates) the Dominicall Letter for that Year being E. the seventh of
Thargelion will (according to the Julian account taken proleptically) fall upon
Friday, the thirtieth of May; according to the Gregorian, upon Friday the ninth
of June, in the year of the Julian period, 4286.

This is according to the faith of the Historians, with whom the Astrologers do
not agree; for Astron.
Julius Firmicus has erected the Scheme of his Nativity after this manner.



If the Ascendent says he shall be (...) and (...) therein posited; and if
(...) then be placed in the seventh, having (...) for his sign, and in the
second the (...) in (...) and the (...) in (...) in the fifth house beholding
the Ascendent with a (...) aspect, and (...) in the ninth from the Ascendent in
(...). This Geniture renders a man Interpreter of Divine and heavenly
Instituti^ns, who endued with instructive speech, and the power of divine wit,
and formed in a manner by a celestial Inst^^tion, by the true license of
disputations shall arrive at all the secrets of Divinity. Thus Firmicus, whose
Scheme agrees not with the other Calculation, as being betwixt the midst of
February and of March, during which time the (...) is in (...).

Hence will appear the great Anachronisme of those, who affirm, that Plato went
to Egypt in the time of the Prophet Hieremie (whom Eusebius places in the
thirty sixth Olympiad) and heard him there. Hieremie at the captivity of the
Jews into Babylon, was carried by Iohanan son of Caree into Egypt: The Jews
were carried away by Nebuchadnezzar, at what time Tarquinius Priscus reigned at
Rome, Vaphres in Egypt, to whom the rest of the Jews fled, which was in the
forty seventh Olympiade, 160 years before Plato was born. This opinion De
Doc^r. Christ. 2. 28.
once held, was afterward retracted by Saint Augustine, in his Book of
Retractations, and confuted, de Civit. Dei. 8. 11.

CHAP. II.
His first Education, Exercises, and Studies.
Aelian. var. hist. 10. 21.
WHilst Plato was yet an Infant carried in the arms of his Mother P^rictione,
Aristo, his Father went to Hymettus (a mountain in Attica, eminent for
abundance of Bees and Honey) to sacrifice to the Muses or Nymphs, taking his
Wife and child along with him; as they were busied in the divine rights, she
laid the Child in a thicket of Mirtles hard by; to whom, as he slept ( Cic.
divinat. lib. 1.
in cunis dormients) came a swarm of Bees, artists of Hymettian Honey, flying
and buzzing about him, and (as it is reported) made a honey-combe in his mouth.
This was taken for a pre^age of the singular sweetness of his discourse; his
future eloquence foreseen in his Infancy.

His Parents (says Laert.
Alexander) named him after his Grandfather, Aristocles: Apul. dogm. Plat.
Speusippus ( instituted in his domestic documents) extolleth his sharpness
of apprehension, whilst yet a Child, and the admirable modesty of his
disposition ( Laert.
which was such, that he was never, even all those years, seen to laugh
immoderately) affirming, that the beginnings of his youth were seasoned with
labor and love of Study; which Virtues increased and met with all the rest;
when he came to man's estate.

Laert.
Of Dionysius the Grammarian (mentioned in his (...)) he received the first
^udiments of Learning. Of Aristo, an Argive, he learned the Art of Wrestling
(at that time much in esteem, as being one of the Olympic Exercises) wherein
he became so great a Proficient, that some affirm, he wrastled at the Isthmus,
in the Pythian Games.

Laert.
As in years and virtue, so likewise he increased extraordinarily in outward
proportion and shape, insomuch, that Aristo named him Plato (which implies
Latitude) in allusion to the largeness of his person; others say, to the
wideness of his shoulders; Neanthes of his forehead: some, to his large
Eloquence. Whatsoever the occasion were, this name wore out and displaced the
other. That he was called also Sarapis, is affirmed by In verbo (...).
^esychius. There was not any imperfection throughout his person, except a
gibbosity in the hinder part of his head, and (as Timotheus affirms) a kind of
Laert. (...). which (besides (...) smalness of voice, in which sense it is here
taken by ^ he Interpreters and Ficinus signifies an imperfecti on of speech by
stammering: Arist. Pr^b. 11. 30. unless there and here ^e should read (...).
Hesitation in his speech.

^aert. Suid.
He learned also (as Dicearchus relates) to Paint: He addicted himself much to
Poetry, and wrote many Poems: First, Dithyrambs; then Epick Poetry, which
comparing with Homer, and finding far short of him, he burned. Then he betook
himself to writing Tragedies: He made a complete Tetralogie (four Drama's, as
the manner was, when they contested, to be presented at four several
Festivalls, Lenaean, Panathenaean, Chytraean, the fourth Satyricall) and gave
it to the Players to be acted, intending to contest for the Palm upon the
Olympic Theater: but the day before it should have been presented, chancing to
hear Socrates discourse at the Olympic Theat^r ( Aesian. var. Hist. 2. 20.
before the Bacchanals) he was so taken with that Siren, that he not only
forbore to contest at that time, but wholly gave over all Tragic Poesy, and
burned all his Poems, saying that of Homes, Vulcan come hither, Plato needs thy
aid.

From that time (the twentieth year of his age, which falls about the 4th of
the 92 Olympiad) he became a follower of Socrates, and studied Philosophy.

Some affirm (of the truth of which report, Var. Hist.
Aelian justly doubts) he was driven by poverty to betake himself to the
Wars, but intercepted by Socrates, and instructed in that which concerns
M^nkind, he sold his arms, and through his persuasion, addicted himself to
Philosophy.

That he fought for his Country is certain, expressed in his answer to
Afterward, cap. 11.
Crobylus the Sycophant: Laert.
Aristoxenus and Aelian affirm, he was engaged thrice: First, at Tanagra; the
second time at Corinth; and lastly at D^lium, where he fought best of all the
Soldiers. Thus Aristoxenus. But that this is false, may be easily evinced by
computation of times. The first fight of the Athenians at Tanag^a, was in the
4t year of the 80^ Olympiad, 17 years before Plato was born: The second, in the
first of the 89^ when he was but six years old. The fight at D^lium, was in the
first of the 89th, at what time (...) was^ but four years old; from the last
words of Aristoxenus, (...) (implying, that at Delium he had the prize for
sigh^ing best) may be conjectured, that this was meant of Socrates, who was
thrice personally engaged, and at See Socrates life, cap.
Delium should have had the prize for fighting best, but that his modesty
procured it to be conferred upon Alcibiades.

CHAP. III.
His Masters in Philosophy, and his Travells to that end.
Apul. dogm. Plat. Laer^. Suid.
Socrates, the night before Plato was recommended to him, dreamed, that a young
Swan fled from Cupid's Altar in the Academy, and sat in his lap, thence flying
up to Heaven, it delighted both Gods and Men with its Music. As Socrates [the
next day] was relating this to some of his Auditors, Aristo came at the same
time, and presented his Son Plato to him, to be his Disciple. As soon as
Socrates saw him, reading in his looks his ingenuity; Friends, says he, this
is the Swan of Cupid's Academy.

Eight years he lived with Socrates, in which time, he committed (as others of
his Disciples) the effect of his Masters discourse to writing: hereof he
composed Dialogues, but with so great additions of his own, that Laert.
Socrates hearing him recite his Lysis, cried out, Oh! Hercules, how many
things does this young man feign of me? For not a few things (adds Laertius)
of those which he writ, Socrates never spoke.

At the time of Socrates's arraignment, the first year of the 95th Olympiad, he
was one of the Senate, the youngest of that Convention. That he was a Senator,
implies he was full thirty years old at that time, according to Solon's Law.
This argues Laert.
Hermodorus of a mistake, who says, he was twenty eight years old when he fled
to Megara, upon the death of Socrates; and subverts the accounts of those who
under-reckon his birth. Laert. vit. Socr.
The Judges being much displeased at Socrates, Plato went up into the Oratour's
Chair, intending to plead in his defense, and began thus; Though I (Athenians)
am the youngest of those who come up into this place. But all the Senate crying
ou^ of those who go down, he was thereupon constrained to do so. Socrates being
condemned, Plato offered him to procure so much money as might purchase his
liberty, but Socrates refused the offer. Athen. deipn. lib.
About that time, Socrates his friends being met together to condole his death,
Plato encouraged them, and bid them not despair, for that himself was capable
to govern the School: and in so saying, drunk to Apollodorus, who answered, he
would sooner take up the cup of poison from the hand of Socrates, then pledge
him upon that condition. Upon the death of Socrates, Plato (whose excessive
grief upon that occasion is observed by De virtu^. moral.
Plutarch) with others of his Disciples, fearing the Tyranny of those persons,
who put their Master to death, Laert.
^ed to Euclid at Megara, who friendly entertained them, till the storm was
blown over.

Dogm. Plat.
Apuleius says, that before he came to Socrates, he was initiated in the Sect
of Heraclitus. But more likely is that which is affirmed by Laertius, that
after Socrates's death, he applied himself to Cra^ylus, a follower of
Heraclitus, and to Hermogenes. He conceived, says De Civ. dei. lib. 8. cap.
Saint Augustine, that his own invention, and Socrates' s instructions came
short of the true aim of Philosophy: He considered with himself what course
he should take to benefit himself most, for this purpose he determined to
travel to any place, where report told him he might drink of the spring of
Learning, even to the farthest parts of the Earth, says De finih. 5.
Cicero: Apul. dog^. Plat.
First, to Italy, where he addicted himself to the discipline of Pythagoras,
which, though he saw replenished with curious and high reason, yet, he chiefly
affected to imitate the continence and chastity thereof; though the Porphyr.
vit. ^ythag.
Pythagoreans themselves affirm he had all his natural Philosophy from thence.

Apul.
Perceiving the knowledge of the Pythagoreans to be assisted with other
disciplines, he went to Cyrene, to learn Geometry of Theodorus the
Mathematician: thence to Egypt (which was then under the Empire of Artaxerxes
Mnemon) Plut. in Solon
under pretense of selling Oil, but the scope of his journey was to fetch
Astrology from thence: To learn Arithmetic and Celestial Speculations of the
Barbarians, (says De finib. 5.
Cicero) Apul.
and to be instructed in the rites of the Prophets. Val. Max. 8. 7.
He traveled over the Country, in^orming himself all the way by their
Priests, of the multiplicious proportions of Geometry, and the observation of
Celestial motions. At what time the young Students at Athens ^ere enquiring
for Plato to instruct them, he was busied in surveying the inexplicable banks
of Nilus, the vast extent of a barbarous Country, and the winding compass of
their trenches, a Disciple to the Egyptian old men. Epist. Socratic. 26.
Having taken a full survey of all the Country, he at last settled himself in
the Province of Sais, Learning of the Wise men there, what they held concerning
the Universe, whether it had a beginning, and whether it is moved at present,
wholly, or in part, according to Reason. From these, Messen.
Pausanias affirms, he learned the Immortality of the Soul, which that they
held, as likewise the transmigration thereof into several bodies, is affirmed
by Lib. 2.
Herodotus. Laert.
Some say, that Euripides followed him to Egypt, and falling sick, was cured
by the Priests with Seawater, whereupon he said, The Sea does wash away all
ills of Man.

But this agrees not with the time of his death, which was before that of
Socrates, viz. in the 93d Olympiad.

From Egypt Plato returned to Tarentum in Italy, at what time L. Camillus and
P. Claudius were Consuls at Rome, as Cat. Major.
Cicero affirms. What Fasti he used, I know not, for in those which are now
with us received as authentic, there are no such Consuls during the whole life
of Plato. And indeed, in those times, Rome was, for the most part, governed by
Tribunes. Cic. Apul.
Here he conversed with Eurytus of Tarentum, the Elder; Archytas the Elder (at
whose discourse concerning Pleasure he was present) and with the rest of the
Pythagoreans, Echecrates, Timaeus, Acrio (corruptly in 8. 7.
Valerius Maximus, Ario) and Coetus Locrians. Thus to the learning of Socrates
he added that of Pythagoras, and informed himself in those things which
Socrates neglected: He would have gone also to the Indians, and to the Magi,
but that the Wars which at that time were in Asia hindered him.

CHAP. IV.
What Authors he followed.
Peren. Philos. 1. 27. and 5. 2.
EUgubinus affirms, that Plato borrowed the mystic part of his Philosophy
from Hermes Trismegistus; particularly, that concerning the Divine Goodness:
which, I suppose, he rather asserts from his own conjecture, in regard Pla^o
had been long in Egypt, then from any good Authority. He was induced thereunto
by those Books, which are now commonly, but falsely, vented under the name of
Hermes Trismegistus; whereas, the learned Casaubon, in his Exercit. 1. number. 18.
Exercitations upon Baronius, has sufficiently taught us the forgery of those
Books, which seem by some Impostor, to have been compiled out of the works of
Plato, and the Divine Scripture.

That Plato received some light from Moses, is affirmed with much greater
Authorities of several Nations and Religions: Of Jews by Eusebius. praep. Evang.
Aristobulus, Plato (says he) followed our Law in many things, his various
allegations evince him a curious observer thereof: for the Volumes of Moses
were translated before Alexander's time. And Contra. Apion. lib. 2.
Josephus, Plato chiefly followed our Lawgiver. Of Philosophers, by Clem.
Alex. Strom. 1 Suid.
Numenius, what is Plato, (says he) but Moses speaking Greek? Of Fathers, by
Paraen.
Iustine Martyr, Strom 1.
Clement Alexandrinus, Praepar. Evan. lib. 11.
Eusebius, Theodoret, Civ. Dei. 8. 11.
Saint Augustine, etc.

Laert. and again in Philola^
When Plato went to Sicily, he bought the Books of Philolaus, a Pythagorean,
which were three, of N^turall Philosophy, the first that ever were published
out of that School: Some say, he had them of Dionysius's friends, for four
Alexandrian Minae: Others, that Dionysius had them of a young Man, one of
Philolaus's Disciples, and gave them to Plato. Others, that he sent to Dion at
Syracuse to buy them for him, which he did for 100 Minae: 3. 17.
Agellius says, ten thousand Denaries: For, having received of Dionysius above
eighty Talents, he was very full of money. Out of these, he is said (as Agellius
and Laertius affirm) to have taken a great part of his Timaeus; for which
derided by Timon, (in Sillis) thus: You ( Plato) with the same affections
caught,
With a great Sum a little Treatise bought,
Where all the knowledge, which you own, was taught.


Laert.
Alcimus in his four Books to Amyntas, affirms, that Plato borrowed much from
the writings of Epicharmus, the Comic Poet, in the first Book he has these
words: In Sensibles (says Plato) neither magnitude nor quality is permanent,
but in continual fluxion and mutation; as if we should substract number from
them, which are neither equal, nor certain, nor quantitative, nor qualitative;
these are they where generation is always, their essence never. To Insensibles
nothing can be added, nothing taken away. This is the nature of Eternal
Beings, the like and same ever. Thus Plato cited by Alcimus. Indeed, he
teaches this in many places, particularly in Timaeo, where he at large
explaineth what is that which never is, and never had beginning, and that which
has beginning, but no being. He concludes the first comprehensible, by the
Intellect with Reason, the other by sense and opinion. But the citation of
Alcimus seems to refer to Plato's Theaetetus, the subject of which Dialogue is
Science: there he examines some Definitions of Science by the Ancients, amongst
the rest, the assertion of Protagoras, that Science is Sense; against which he
disputes largely, the sum this. That the Soul apprehends some things by
mediation of the Body, others without; of the first kind are things warm,
light, dry, sweet, etc. of the other, Essence and not being, similitude and
dissimilitude, identitie and diversity, uni^e and number. Hence it follows,
that Sense apprehends not Essences, and consequently not Truths, for Essence
and Truth are convertible. This assertion of Plato Laert.
Alcimus deduceth from Epicharmus, who (says he) has plainly spoken of things
subject to Sense and Reason, in these words: Gods always were, to be, desisted
never,
Like them Eternal, still the same persever.
Chaos the first begotten Deity
Is styled: of something how can nothing be?
Thence nor the first nor second nothings are,
How we ^steem of those we thus declare:
If we an even or uneven sum
Alter, by adding or substracting one,
Seems it to you the same? to me not so;
If a continued measure shrink or grow,
It is not the same measure: such the lives
Of Men are, one decays, another thrives;
That Nature, which new being ever takes
Is different from the being it forsakes,
Not yesterday the same were I and you,
Nor shall tomorrow be what we are now.


Laert.
Again, Alcimus, The wise say, that the soul apprehends some things by
mediation of the body, as when she hears or sees; others, she conceives within
her self, without using the body, whence of beings, some are subject to sense,
others, c^mprehensible by the Intellect. Therefore Plato says, that they who
desire to know the principles of the Universe, must first distinguish the Ideas
in themselves, as similitude, unity, multitude, magnitude, restoration.
Secondly, add in it self, honest, good, just, and the like; thirdly, examines
what Idaea's cohaere mutually with one another, as Science, Magnitude, Power:
and withal, to think that those who are amongst us, because they participate
of them, should be called by the same name, as for instance, just things are
those which participate of Just, Honest, which of honest: one of every Species
is eternal, perceptible by the mind, and consequently free from perturbation.
Wherefore, he asserts Idaea's in nature as Exemplars, after whose likeness
other things are made. Thus Alcimus; the first part whereof seems to be taken
out of Plato's Theaetetus, the latter out of his Parmenides. The words of
Epicharmus concerning Gods and Idea's, to which Alcimus referrs this of Plato,
are these: Is Music then a thing? It is; the man
Music? no: what then? a Musician
A man or not? he is the same of good,
Good from the thing apart is understood:
whoever learns good by that art is made,
who Music a Musician: of each trade
As dancing, weaving, and the like the same,
The Art and Artist have a different name.


Laert.
Again, Alcimus: Plato in his opinion of Idea's says thus; if there is memory,
there must be also Idea's, for memory is of a quiet permanent thing, but
nothing is permanent except Idea's, for how, says he, could living creatures
be preserved unless by their Idea and receiving a natural mind; Now they
remember Similitude and their nourishment: showing that all Creatures have an
innate understanding of their own similitude, and therefore perceive things
belonging to their kind. Thus Alcimus: What place of Plato he means I know not,
In Arist. de animal.
Scaliger reads, (...), etc. omitting (...), as if he made a doubt whether that
both of the opinions of Idea's were Plato's; but I rather think Alcimus meant
not the title of any Book, having named none in the rest of his citations, but
what himself abstracts out of Plato's opinion concerning Idea's. Plato in
Philedo, teaches this concerning memory, that sense is a motion common to the
Soul and Body; this suffering from external Senses, the other acting and
dijudicating; that memory is a conservatory or repository of the Senses. For
the Soul, as often as she in her self, or by assistance of the Body, calls to
mind what she has suffered, she is said to remember. To Plato's assertion,
Alcimus applies this of Epicharmus: Eumaeus Wisdome's not to one consigned;
Various in every living knowing mind.
The Hen first does not living things beget,
But sits and hatcheth with enlivening heat:
This Wisdom only Nature's friend discerns,
Of whom (her Mistress) she this lesson learns.


And again, This is not strange for every thing we find
Is to its proper species most inclined;
To Dogs a Bitch seems fairest, and to kine
A Bull, an Ass to Asses, swine to swine.


These things Laertius cites out of Alcimus, adding that there are more of the
same kind in those four Books, whereby he intimates the help that Plato
received by the writings of Epicharmus; neither was Epicharmus himself ignorant
of his own wisdom, as may be collected from these Verses, predicting that he
should have a follower: This I assert, and what I now maintain,
Shall Monuments to future times remain,
Some one hereafter will my verse review,
And clothing it in language rich and new
Invincible himself, others subdue.


Laer^*
Moreover Phavorinus alleges the whole form of Plato's Commonwealth in
Protagoras's Antilogicks, others say, he borrowed his Politics from Socrates.

Laert.
Lastly, it is related, that much of Plato's morality was in the Books of
Sophron the Mimographe, which having been long neglected, were by him first
brought to Athens, and were found lying under his head, when he was dead.

CHAP. V.
His School.
Laert.
BEing returned to Athens from his Journey to Egypt, he settled himself in the
Academy, a Gymnasium or place of Exercise in the Suburbs of that City, beset
with woods, taking name from Ecademus one of the Hero's, as Eupolis, In sacred
Hecademus shady walks.

And Timon, The fluent sweet-tongu'd Sage first led the way,
Who writes as smoothly as from some green spray
Of Hecademe, Grasshoppers chirp their lay.


Hence it was first called Ecademy, the occasion of his living here, was, that
he was poor and had nothing but one Orchard in or adjoining to the Academy,
which was the least part of his Successors. This Orchard at first yielded but
three aurei nummi of yearly rent to the Owners, afterward the whole Revenue
amounted to a thousand or more. It was in process of time much enlarged by
well-willers, and studious persons, who dying, bequeathed by will something to
the Professors of Philosophy, their riches to maintain the quiet and
tranquillity of a Philosophical life. Plato (the Academy being said to be a
sickly place, and Physicians advising him to transfer his School to the Lyceum,
would not be persuaded, but answered, I would not live on the top of Athos to
linger my life. The unwholsomnesse of the place brought him to a Quartan ague,
which lasted eighteen months, but at length by sobriety and care he mastered
it, and recovered his strength more perfect then before.

First, he taught Philosophy in the Academy, and after in the Gardens of
Colonus. At the entrance of his School in the Academy was written, LET NONE
IGNORANT OF GEOMETRY ENTER HERE, meant, not only of the measure and proportion
of lines, but also of the inward Affections.

CHAP. VI.
How he instituted a Sect.
HAving thus settled himself in the Academy, he began out of the Collection he
had made from others, and his own invention to institute a Sect, called from
the place where he taught Academick. Laert.
He mixed the Heraclitian discourses, with the Socratick and Pythagorick,
following in sensibles Heraclitus, in Intelligibles Pythagoras, in Politics
Socrates. Whereas Philosophy, says, Civil. dei. lib. 8.
St. Augustine, concerns either action or contemplation (thence assuming two
names, Contemplative and Active) the Active consisting in practice of moral
Actions, the contemplative, in penetration of abstruse Physical causes, and
the nature of the Divinity, Socrates excelled in the Active, Pythagoras in the
Contemplative. But Plato joined them into one perfec^ kind, which he subdivided
into three several parts; Moral, consisting chiefly in Action, Natural in
Contemplation, Rational in Distinction of true and false, which though useful
in both the other, yet belongs more particularly to Contemplation. So that
this Trichotomy contradicts not the other Dichotomy, which includes all within
Action and Contemplation. Laert.
And as of old in a Tragedy, the Chorus acted alone, then Thespis making some
intermissions of the Chorus introduced one Actour, Aeschylus a second,
Sophocles a Third, in like manner Philosophy was at first but of one kind,
Physic, then Socrates added Ethick, thirdly, Plato inventing Dialectick, made
it perfect.

Of these three parts as they were held by Plato, and the rest of the old
Academy, we cannot have a general better account then this of Acad. quaest. 1.
Cicero.

Sect. 1.
Ethick.
The first, concerning well living they sought in Nature, affirming that she
ought to be obeyed: and that in nothing else but Nature was to be had that
chief good whereto all things should be referred, that the ultimate being of
desirable things, and end of all good in the mind, body and life were acquired
by Nature. Those of the body they placed in the whole, and in the parts:
Health, Strength, Beauty in the whole, in the parts, sound Sense, and a certain
Excell^nce of particular parts, as in the feet swiftness, strength in the
hands, clearness in the voice, in the Tongue, plainness of expression. Of the
mind were those which are proper to comprehend the power of wit, which they
divided into Nature and Manners. To Nature they ascribed quickness of
apprehension, and memory both proper to the mind and wit; To manners belonged
study and a kind of wisdom formed partly by continual exercise, partly by
reason, in which consisted Philosophy it self, wherein that is begun and not
perfected, is called progression to virtue, what is perfected, Virtue;
perfection of Nature of all things in the mind, the most excellent. Thus of
Min^s: The Adjuncts of life, that was the third, they asserted such things as
conduced to the practice of Virtue.

Sect. 2.
Physic.
Of Nature (for that was next) they so treated as to divide it into two things:
One the efficient, the other giving it self to this, that, thereof might be
made something. In that they conceived to be a power, in this a certain matter
to be effected: in both, matter could not cohere, unless contained by some
power, nor the power without some matter, for there is nothing which is not
enforced to be some where: that which consists of both, they called Body and
Quality: Of Qualities, some are primary, others arising from these: the
primary are uniform and simple; hose which arise from these are various, and as
it were multiform. Air, Fire, Water, and Earth are Primary, of these arise
forms of living Creatures, and of those, things which are made of the Earth.
These principles are called Elements, of which, Air and Fire have a faculty to
move and effect; the other parts, Water and Earth to suffer. To all these there
is subjected a certain matter without form, destitute of quality, out of which
all things are expressed and formed; It is capable of admitting all; and of
changing all manner of ways, in the whole, and in every part: This resolves
nothing to nothing, but into its own parts, which are divisible into infinite,
there being in nature no least which cannot be divided. Those which are moved,
are all moved by intervalls, which intervalls likewise may be divided
infinitely, and that power which we call quality, being moved and agitated
every way, they conceive the whole matter to be thoroughly changed, and by that
means those things, which they call qualitative, to be produced, of which, in
all coherent nature continued with all its parts, was effected the World,
beyond which there is not any part of matter or body: The parts of the World
are all things therein, kept together by a Sensitive nature, wherein is
likewise perfect reason; It is also sempiternall, for there is nothing more
strong whereby it may be dissolved: This power they call the Soul of the World,
God, a certain providence over all things sub^ected to him, regarding in the
first place heavenly things, next on the Earth those thing which appertain to
man. The same they sometimes call Necessity, because nothing can be otherwise
then is by him ordained; a fatal immutable continuation of eternal order;
sometimes Fortune, as producing many things not foreseen or expected by us, by
reason of the obscurity and our ignorance of the Causes.

Sect. 3. Dialectick.
Of the third part of Philosophy, consisting in reason and dissertation, they
treated thus. Though Judgment arise from the Sense, yet the Judgment of truth
is not in the Senses. The mind they affirmed to be Judge of things, conceiving
her only sit to be credited, because she alone sees that which is simple, and
uniform, and certain; This they called Idea. All sense they conceived to be
obtuse and slow, and no way able to perceive those things which seem subject to
sense, which are so little, as that they cannot fall under sense, so moveable
and various, that nothing is one, constant, nor the same, because all things
are in continual alteration and fluxion. All this part of things they called
Opimative; Science they affirmed to be no where but in the Reasons and Notions
of mind, whence they approved definitions of things, and applied them to all
whereon they discoursed. They approved likewise explications of words by
Etymologies: They used Arguments and marks for things, to prove and conclude
what they meant to explain; In this consisted all the discipline of Dialectick,
that is, of Speech concluded by Reason.

This account in general Cicero gives of the old Academy; Plutarch, Laertius,
Apuleius, and others have made collections more particular: we shall make
choice of that of Alcinous, as most full and perfect, which by reason of the
length is referred as an Appendix to Plato's life.

CHAP. VII.
His Inventions.
HE added much to learning and language by many inventions, as well of things
as of words. To omit Dialectick, of which we treated last, L^^rt.
Phavorinus attributes to his invention, discoursing by way of Question; but
Aristotle ascribes it to Alexamenus, a Styrian or Teian, and it appears by the
Dialogues of Plato, that Socrates also used that form of arguing. Laertius
informs us, that Zeno Ele^tes was the first composer of Dialogues; yet in my
opinion, says he, Pla^o has so much refined the form thereof, that he
deserves to be preferred before all others, as well for invention as
reformation.

More properly may be attributed to him the invention of Laert. Procl. in
Euclid. lib. 3.
Analyticall Method, which reduces the thing sought unto its principle, the
best of Methods. He taught it to Leodamas, and by it found out many things in
Geometry: Analysis, as defined by the Lib. 13.
Scholiast upon Euclid, is a sumption of the thing sought, by the consequents,
(as if it were already known) to find out the truth. Examples thereof we find
in the five first propositions of the 13t^ Book of Euclid, besides several
others, that occur in Apollonius Pergaeus, and Pappus Alexandrinus.

Amongst his Geometrical Inventions also must be remembered the duplication of
a Cube, the occasion and manner whereof is related by de (...) delph.
Plutarch and In Anal. post. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Philoponus. The Delians afflicted with the Pestilence, consulted the Oracle of
Apollo; he answered, the Plague would cease if they doubled their^ Altar, which
was of a Cubick figure. Plu^arch says, that hereupon the Overseers of the
Altar made all the four sides double to what they were before, and so instead
of doubling the Altar, they made it octuple to what it was. Philoponus says,
they caused another Cube of the same bigness with the former to be set upon
it, whereby they changed the figure of the Altar, which was no longer a Cube,
but (...), a quadrilaterall Pillar. The first way, it was Cubicall, but not
double, the second way double, but not Cubicall. The Plague not ceasing, they
consulted the Oracle again. Apollo answered, they had not fulfilled his
Command, which was to build a Cubicall Altar as big again as the former.
Hereupon they went to Plato, as most skillful in Geometry, to learn of him the
Oracle's meaning, and how they should find out the way of doubling a Cube,
retaining the Cubick figure. Plato answered, that the God mocked the Grecians
for their neglect of Philosophy and Learning, insulting over their ignorance,
that he commanded them seriously, to addict themselves to Geometry, that this
could not be done any other way, then by finding out two mean proportionalls
between two right lines in a Duple proportion ( Plato's particular method
herein is delivered, Eutocius in his comment upon the first proposition of the
second Book of Archimedes de Sphaera and Cylindro.) He added that Eudoxus the
Gnidian, or Helico the Cizycene would do it for them, That the God needed not
this duplication of his Altar, but commanded all the Grceians, that avoiding
war and the miseries wherewith it is attended, they should apply themselves to
the Muses; and having settled the turbulent commotions of their minds, converse
harmlessly and beneficially with one another. Philoponus adds, that Plato
expounded this Problem to his Disciples, who writ much upon this subject,
though nothing thereof be extant. Of the Ancients, labored in this Problem
besides Plato, Archytas the Tarentine, Menaechmus, Eratosthenes, Philo of
Byzantium, Hero, Apollonius Pergaeus; Nicomedes, Diocles and Sporus. 8. 13.
Valerius Maximus says, that Plato remitted the Overseers of the sacred Altar
to Euclid the Geometrician, as submitting to his Science and Profession; but
this is an Error, because Euclid the Geometrician was much later then Plato,
and the other Euclid, Plato's contemporary, nothing eminent in Mathematics, as
has been before me observed by Praele^. 1.
Sir Henry Savile.

That Plato invented many other things in the Mathematics, (more then appears
from those writings of his that are extant) and was most eminent therein, may
be argued from the three Books of Theon Smyrnaeus, the first Arithmetic, the
second Harmonicks, the last, (not yet published) Astronomy. Those Books
contained many things, singular and choice, not to be met elsewhere. The design
is acknowledged by the Author, to be as an introduction necessary to the
understanding of Plato's writings.

There are also diverse words of which he is esteemed to be the first Author, as
Laert.
Antipodes, a word by him first introduced into Philosophy, to signify those
people whose feet are diametrically opposite.

Laert.
(...), Element, until his time was confounded with (...), Principle, by all
Philosophers from Thales. Plato distinguished them thus, (...), principle is
that which has nothing before it whereof it might be generated; (...),
Elements are compounded.

Laert.
The word Poem also, though since very trivial, was not used by any before him.

Laert.
He first used this term, (...), oblong number, [in Theaeteto] thereby
signifying the product of a greater number multiplied by a lesser.

Laert.
He also first introduced the word (...), Superficies, for which before was
used (...) a Plane. Thus Laertius, though In Euclid. lib. 2.
Proclus implies, that neither Plato nor Aristotle use the word, but for it
(...). Divine Plato, says he, calls Geometry the Contemplatrix of Planes,
opposing it to Stereometry, as if Plane and Superficies were the same. So
likewise does Aristotle. But Euclid and those who succeed him, make Superficies
the genus, plane a species thereof.

Laert.
(...), Divine Providence, a word since much used by Christians, was first the
expression of Plato.

Laert.
He first of Philosophers wrote against Lysias, Son of Cephaluo, in Phaedro.

Laert.
He first considered the force and efficacy of Grammar.

Laert.
He first wrote against all that were before him, whence it is wondered at that
he never mentions Democritus.

CHAP. VIII.
His Distinctions.
OF his Distinctions Aristotle made this Collection in some piece not extant,
cited by Laertius.

Good is threefold, in the Soul, as Justice, Prudence, Fortitude, Temperance,
and the like. In the Body, as Beauty, good habit, strength. External, as
friends; prosperity of our Country; Wealth.

Friendship is threefold. Natural, which Parents bear to their Children, and
kindred to one another; which kind is also amongst beasts. Sociable, begotten
by conversation, without any relation of kindred; such was that betwixt Pylades
and Orestes. Hospitable, toward Guests, or wherewith we affect strangers even
upon letters of recommendation. Some add a fourth kind, amatory.

Government is of five kinds. Democraticall; a Democracy is that wherein the
people rules and has power to make Magistrates and Laws. Aristocraticall; an
Aristocracy is that wherein neither rich nor poor nor Nobles govern, but the
best persons of the whole City. Oligarchicall; an Oligarchy is when Governors
are elected by the votes of Magistrates, for they are fewer then the poor.
Regal: Elective by Law; as that of the Carthaginians; for it is civil.
Successive in a Family; as that of the Lacedaemonians and Macedonians, who
confine themseves to a certain race. Tyrannical, Tyranny is that wherein men
are brought to subjection either by fraud or force.

Justice is threefold Toward the Gods; they who sacrifice as the Law requires,
and perform the Divine rites, are just toward the Gods. Toward men: They who
restore what was lent or committed to their trust, are just toward men.
Towwards the dead: They who take care of Sepulchers are just toward the dead.

Science is threefold. Practick, as playing on the flute, lute, and the like;
which effect nothing visible. Mechanic, as architecture of Houses, Ships, or
the like, which produces a visible effect. Theoretick, as Geometry, Harmonick,
Astronomy, which act not, neither produce any thing. The Geometrician considers
the proportion of lines to one another; Harmonick sounds: Astronomy stars and
the World.

Medicine is of five kinds. Pharmaceutick, cures diseases by application of
Medicine. Chirurgick by incision or cauterising. Diaetetick, by diet.
Nosognomonick discernes diseases. Boethetick removes diseases.

Law is twofold. Written; such are those by which states are governed. Not
written, grounded upon custom; as that no man shall go naked into the forum, or
habited like a woman, is not forb^dden by any written law, but forborne because
of the unwritten.

Speech is of five kinds. Political, used in Orations by such as govern
States. Rhetorical, used by Lawyers in pleading either to confirm, praise,
dispraise or accuse. Vulgar, used by people in common discourse. Dialecticall,
used by such as discourse in short questions and answers. Artificial, used by
Tradesmen in their several professions.

Music is threefold. Of the Voice only. Of the Voice and hands, as singing to
the Lute. Of the Hand only, as the Harp.

Nobility is of four kinds. If the Predecessors were upright, just, and honest.
If the Predecessors were rulers of Princes. If the Predecessors acquired
honors, as the command of an Army, or were crowned in public games: those who
are descended from such we call Noble. If a man be endued with a generous mind;
this is the best kind of Nobility.

Beauty is threefold. Commendable, as a fair form. Useful, as an instrument,
house, or the like. Beneficial, as all that belongs to institution of Laws.

The Soul has three parts, the Rational, the principle whereby we judge,
discourse, and the like. Concupiscible, whereby we desire meat, coition, and
the like. Irascible, whereby we are emboldned, joined, grieved, enraged.

Perfect virtue has four kinds. Wisdom, the principle of doing things aright.
Justice, the principle of doing things equally in private conversation and
public affairs. Fortitude, the principle of not flying danger through fear,
but meeting it. Temperance, the principle of subduing desires, and yielding to
no pleasures, but living moderately.

Government is of five kinds. By Law: Those who are chosen Magistrates in a
City govern by Law. By Nature: the males not only of mankind, but of most other
creatures are predominant over the Females by nature. By Custom, as that which
Masters have over their Disciples. By Descent, as the Lacedaemonian Kings, who
succeed out of one Family: and in Macedonia they use the same custom. By
force, as those who rule a Kingdom against the will of the people.

Of Rhetoric are six kinds. Adhortation, as when we persuade to war against
any. Dehortation, as when we dissuade from War. Accusation, when we declare
that we have been injured by one whom we prove cause of our misfortune.
Defense, when a man proves he did not an injury or offense. En^omium, when we
speak well of another. Vituperation, when we declare a man to be wicked.

Of Right speaking are four kinds; when we speak What is requisite; those
things which will benefit both the hearer and speaker. As much as is requisite,
if we speak neither more nor less then concerns the business. To those to
whom it is requisite; as when we speak to old men that have done amiss in such
terms as are fit for old men, or to young as becomes young. When it is
requisite, neither too soon nor too late; for if that be not observed, nothing
can be spoken aright.

Benificence is of four kinds. In Wealth, when we relieve the wants of any
according to our means. In Body, when we succor those who are beaten. In
Knowledge, when we instruct, cure, teach any good. In Speech, he, who pleads
in defense of another, helps him in words.

The end of things is of four kinds Legal, imposing an end to things by
decree. Natural, such as days, years, and hours have. Artificial, as the
building of a house. Accidental, by chance unexpected.

Of powers are four kinds One in the mind, to think and conjecture. Another of
the body, to walk, give, receive, and the like. A third, consisting in a
multitude of Soldiers, and store of wealth, in which respect, Princes are
called Powerful. The fourth, as to suffer good or evil to be done to us; as
to be capable of Sickness, Learning, health, or the like.

Of Humanity are three kinds. In calling, as those who call all they meet, and
salute them, taking them by the hand. In relieving, in relieving the
misfortunes of another willingly. In feasting and conversation.

Felicity is divided into five parts. Prudent Counsel, acquired by learning
and experience. Soundness of senses, consisting in the parts of the body, as
to see with the eyes, to hear with the ears, to smell and taste. Prosperity of
affairs, when those things which a man intends, he performs fully. Good
reputation amongst men, when a man is well spoken of. Plenty of riches, and
things necessary to life, so as to be able to supply friends, and perform works
of public magnificence: He who has all these five kinds is perfectly happy.

Arts are of three kinds. The first diggeth out mettalls, and fells wood. The
second gives variety of shape to things, as Woodwork and Iron-work. The third
makes use of these, as horsemanship of bridles, Soldiery, of arms, music of
instruments.

Good is of four kinds. One, as wen we call a man good from his proper
goodness. A second, as we call Virtue and Justice it self good. A third, as we
say, food, exercise and medicines are beneficial. The fourth good we call the
act of playing on music, or acting in a play.

Of things some are Ill, always capable to do hurt, as ignorance, imprudence,
injustice, and the like. Good, the contrary to the former; Indifferent, which
sometimes may benefit, sometimes hurt, as walking, sitting, eating, or cannot do
hurt at all, being neither good nor bad.

Good Government is threefold. If the Laws be good. If the Laws be well kept.
If without Laws the people live orderly by custom.

Ill Government is threefold. If the Laws be bad for Natives and Forainers. If
the Laws in being are not observed. If there are no laws at all.

Contraries are of three kinds. Good to ill, as justice to injustice, wisdom to
imprudence, and the like. Ill to ill, as prodigality to avarice, unjust
torments to just. Neither to neither, as heavy to light, swift to flow, black
to white.

Good is of three kinds. Some we have, as Justice and Health. Of some we
participate, as good it self cannot be had, but may be participated. Some are
sixth, which we can neither have, nor participate as to be virtuous and just.

Consultation is threefold. From the Past, by example; as what befell the
Lacedaemonians through overmuch confidence. From the present, as considering
the timerousnesse of men, weakness of walls, scarcity of provision, and the
like. From the Future, as that Ambassadors should not be injured upon
suspicion, least it cast infamy upon all Greece.

Voice is Animate, of living creatures. Articulate of men. Inarticulate of
Beasts. I^animate, sounds and noise.

Tings are Divisible, compounded as Syllables, Symphonies, living creatures,
water, Gold. Homogeneous, consist of similar parts, differing from the whole
only in number, as water, gold, and all liquid things. Heterogeneous, consist
of dissimilar parts. Indivisible, compounded of nothing, as a point, sound.

Things are Absolute, requiring nothing else to express them, as a man, a
horse and other creatures. Relatives, which imply another thing, as greater
(then others) swifter, fairer, and the like, for what is greater relates to
something lesser, and the like.

These according to Aristotle were Plato's divisions of first things.

CHAP. IX.
His three voyages to Sicily.
Laert* Apul:
PLato made three voyages to Sicily; the first to see the f^ery ^bullitions of
Aetna Plat. ^pist.
and to improve the knowledge of States, and Philosophy, which he got by his
other travells; This was about the 40th year of his age, Laert.
at what time Dionysius the elder, Son of Hermocrates, reigned in Syracuse; In
Di^ne.
Plutarch says, he was led thither by providence, not fortune, and that some
good Genius, designing a far off the liberty of the people of Syracuse, brought
him acquainted with Dion then very young, who entertained him as his Plat.
Epist. 3. and 7.
guest: He much disliked the luxury of that place, feasting, nocturnal
lucubrations and the like; Conversed frequently with Dion, discoursed with him
of those things which were best in man, and with his best arguments exhorted
him thereto; by which he seemed to lay grounds for the subversion of that
Tyranny, which afterward happened; Plut. in Dione.
Dion though young, was the most ingenious of all Plato's followers, and most
eager in pursuit of Virtue, as appears as well by the testimony of Plato, as
his own actions. Though he had been brought up by the King in an effeminate
luxurious kind of life; yet as soon as he tasted of Philosophy the guide to
Virtue, his soul was enflamed with love thereof, and from his own ^andour and
ingenuity was persuaded that Dionysius would be no less affected therewith:
And therefore desired him when he was at leisure to admit and hear Plato:
Hereupon the Tyrant sent for him; at that meeting all their discourse was
concerning fortitude; Plato affirmed none was further from that Virtue then a
Tyrant, and, proceeding to speak of Justice, asserted the life of the Just to
be happy, of the unjust miserable. Dionysius was displeased at this discourse
(as reflecting upon himself) and with the standers by for approving it, at last
much exasperated, he asked Plato why he came into Sicily? Plato answered, to
seek a good man: it seems, replied Dyonisius, you have not yet found him.
Laertius says, Plato disputed with him concerning Tyranny, affirming, that is
not best which benefits our selves, unless it be excellent also in Virtue;
whereat Dyonisius incensed, said to him, your discourse favors of old age; and
yours, answered Plato, of Tyranny. Dionysius, enraged, commanded him to be put
to death; I will have, says he, your head taken off; at which words Xenocrates
being present, answered, He that does it must begin with mine: but Dion and
Aristomen^s wrought with him to revoke that sentence. Dion thinking his anger
would have proceeded no further, sent Plato away at his own request in a Ship
which carried Pollis (whom Laertius calls Polis, Aelian Polis,) a Lacedaemonian
Captain (who at that time had been sent Ambassador to Dionysius) back to
Greece: Dionsiyus secretly desired Pollis to kill him whilst he was on
Shipboard; or if not, by all means to sell him, alleging, it would be no
injury to Plato, for he would be as happy in bondage as at liberty, as being a
just man. Some affirm the occasion of Dionysius his anger was, because, that
when he asked what was the best brass, Plato answered, that whereof the
Statues of Wh^s s^ew Hipparchus, brother of Hippias the Tyrant of Athens; upon
which the Pisistratidae were expelled.
Aristogiton and Harmodius were made. Others, that it was because he was
over-mastered in learning. But Tzetzes rejecting these, as idle fictions of
Philosophers, and falsifiers, affirms the true reason to have been, that he
perceived, he advised Dion to possess himself of the Kingdom: Pollis
transported him to Aegina; there Charmander, son of Charmandrites, accused him,
as meriting death by a Law they had made, that the first Athenian that should
come to that Island, should, without being suffered to speak for himself, be
put to death: Which Law, as Phavorinus affirms, he himself made. One that was
present, saying in sport, he is a Philosopher, they set him at liberty: Some
say, they brought him to the public assembly, to plead for himself, where he
would not speak a word, but underwent all with a great courage. Then they
altered their intent of putting him to death, and agreed to sell him for a
slave. Plutarch says, that upon a decree of the Aeginetae, that all Athenians
taken in that Island, should be sold for Slaves; Pollis sold him there:
Anniceris, a Cyrenaick Philosopher, being accidentally present, redeemed him
for twenty, or as others thirty Minae, and sent him to Athens to his friends;
they immediately returned the money to Anniceris, but he refused it, saying,
they were not the only persons concerned in Plato's welfare: Some say, Dion
sent the money, which he would not accept, but bought therewith a little Orchard
in the Academy. Pollis was defeated by Chabrias, and afterward drowned in
Elice. The report goes, that an apparition told him, he suffered those things
for the Philosophers sake. Dionysius understanding what had happened, writ to
Plato, to desire him not to speak ill of him; Plato returned answer, that he
had not so much time vacant from Philosophy, as to remember Dionysius. To some
detractours who upbraided him, saying, Dionysius has cast off Plato; no, says
he, but Plato Dionysius.

Dion continued to live, not according to the ordinary luxury of the Sicilians
and Italians, but in virtue, until Dionysius died, for which maligned by those
who lived after Tyrannical institutions. Then considering, that these
documents were not practiced by himself alone, but by some others, though few,
he entertained a hope, that Dionysius the younger, who succeeded his Father in
the Government, might become one of those, to the extraordinary happiness of
himself, and the rest of the Sicilians: To this end, he used many exhortations
to invite him to virtue, intermixed with some sentences of Plato, with whom
Dionysius, upon this occasion, became extremely desirous to be acquainted: To
that effect, many Letters were sent to Athens to him, some from Dionysius,
others from Pythagoreans in Italy, desiring Plato to go to Syracuse, who, by
prudent Counsel, might govern the young man, transported by his own power to
luxury. Plato, as himself affirms, fearing to be thought a Person only of
words, and not willing to engage in action, and withal hoping, by purging one
principal part, to cure the disease of all Sicily, yielded; Laertius says,
upon a promise made to him by Dionysius, of a Place and People that should live
according to the rules of his Commonwealth; which he made not good. Hence
Athenaeus accuses Plato of Ambition. In the mean time, the enemies of Dion,
fearing a change in Dionysius, persuaded him to call home from banishment
Phil^stus (a person very rational, but educated in Tyrannical principles) as
an Antidote against Plato's Philosophy; but Dion hoped, the coming of Plato
would regulate the licentious Tyranny of Dionysius.

Plato at his arrival in Sicily (placed by Agellius, betwixt the beginning of
Philips reign, four hundred years from the building of Rome, and the
Chaeronean fight) was received by Dionysius with much respect: One of the Kings
magnificent Chariots stood ready to receive him as soon as he landed, and
carried him to the Court. The King offered Sacrifice to the Gods for his
coming, as a great blessing upon his government. The temperance of their
Feasts, alteration of the Court, meekness of the King, gave the Siracusians
great hopes of reformation: The Courtiers addicted themselves to Philosophy so
much, that the Palace was full of Sand (wherein they drew Geometrical
figures.) Not long after Plato's coming, at a Sacrifice in the Castle, the
Herald, according to the usual manner, made a solemn Prayer, that the Gods
would long preserve the Kingly Government: Dion standing by, said, Will you
never give over praying against me? This troubled Philistus and his friends,
who feared Plato would insinuate into the favor of Dionysius so much, as that
they should not be able to oppose him, since in so short time, he had effected
so great an alteration in him: Hereupon they all jointly accused Dion, that he
wrought upon Dionysius, by the eloquence of Plato, to resign his Government,
that it might be transferred to the Children of his Sister, to quit his command
for the Academy, where he should be made happy by Geometry, resigning his
present happiness to Dion and his Nephews. With these and the like
instigations, Dionysius was so incensed, that he caused Dion to be unexpectedly
carried on Shipboard in a little bark, giving the mariners order to land him
in Italy. This happened four months after Plato's coming. Plat. Epist.
Plato, and the rest of Dion's friends, feared to be put to some punishment, as
partakers of his offense. A report was raised, that Plato was put to death by
Dionysius, as author of all that happened: but, on the contrary, Dionysius,
doubting, lest something worse might happen from their fear, treated them all
kindly, comforted Plato, bid him be of good cheer, and entreated him to stay
with him: Plutarch.
He caused him to be lodged in his Castle, Plat. Epist. 7.
in the Orchards adjoining to his Palace, where not the Porter himself could
go out without Dionysius his leave; thus cunningly, under pretense of
kindness, he watched him, that he might not return into Greece, to give Dion
notice of the wrong done to him. Dionysius by frequent conversation with Plato
(as wild Beasts are tamed by use) fell into so great liking of his discourse,
that he became in love with him; but, it was a Tyrannical affection, for, he
would not that Plato should love any but him, offering to put the power of the
Kingdom into his hands, if he would value him above Dion. With this passion,
troublesome to Plato, Dionysius was sometimes so far transported, as men
jealous of their Mistresses, that he would upon the sudden fall out with him,
and as suddenly be reconciled, and ask him pardon. He had indeed a great
desire of Plato's Philosophy, but a great respect likewise on the other side
for those who dissuaded him from it, telling him, that it would ruin him to be
too far engaged therein. Plat. Epist.
In the mean time, there happening a War, he sent Plato home, promising, that
the next spring (as soon as there was peace) he would send back for him and
Dion to Syracuse: but he kept not his promise, for which he desired Plato to
excuse him, protesting the War to be the occasion thereof, and that as soon as
it were ended, he would send for Dion, whom he desired in the mean time to rest
satisfied, and not attempt any thing against him, not to speak ill of him to
the Grecians. This Plato endeavored to effect; he instructed Dion in
Philosophy, in the Academy: Dion lay in the City at the house of Calippus, with
whom he had been long acquainted. He purchased a Country house for pleasure,
whither ^e sometimes went; this he bestowed afterward, at his return to Sicily,
upon Speusi^pus, with whom he conversed most intimately, as being so advised by
Plato, who knew the cheerful humor of Speusippus to be a fit divertisement
for the reserved disposition of Dion. Plato had undertaken the expense of some
Plays and Dances by some youths; Dion took the pains to teach them, and paid
the whole charge: By this liberality which Plato suffered him to confer upon
the Athenians, he gained more love then Plato honor.

In the mean time, Dionysius, to acquit himself of the disesteem he had gained
amongst Philosophers in Plato's cause, invited many learned men, and in a vain
ostentation of Wisdom, applied improperly the sentences he had learned of
Plato: Hereupon he began to wish for Plato again, and to blame himself, for
not knowing how to use him well when he had him, and that he had not learned so
much of him as he might: and being like a Tyrant transported with uncertain
passions and changes, a sudden vehement desire came upon him of seeing Plato
again. Plat Epist. 3.
The peace being now concluded, he sent to Plato to come to him (but not (as he
had promised) to Dion) writing to him, that he would have him to come
immediately, and that afterward he would send for Dion. Hereupon Plato refused
to go, notwithstanding the entreaties of Dion; alleging for excuse his old
age, and that nothing was done according to their agreement. In the mean time,
Archytas, whom, with others of Tarentum, Plato, before his departure, had
brought into the acquaintance of Dionysius, came to Dionysius; there were also
others there, Auditors of Dion. Dionysius being refused upon a second
invitation, thought his honor deeply concerned, and thereupon sent the third
time a Galley of three banks of Oars ( ^li^.
trimmed with Fillets) and other Ships, and with them Archidemus, whom he
conceived Plato most affected of all his friends in Sicily, and some Sicilian
Noblemen: Plut.
He had by all means obliged Archytas the Pythagorean, to let Plato know, he
might come without danger, and that he would engage his word on it. Plat.
Epist. 7.
As soon as they came to Plato, they all protested, that Dionysius was much
inclined to Philosophy, and delivered an Epistle from him to this effect.

Dionysius to Plato.
(AFter the accustomed way of Preface) nothing (says he) should you do sooner,
then come to Sicily at my request. First, as conc^rning Dion, all shall be done
as you will; for, I think you will only moderate things, and I will condescend:
But, unless you come, you shall not obtain any thing which you desire for
Dion, nor in anything else, not in those which chiefly concern your own
particular.


Plat Epist.
Other Epistles were sent from Archytas, and other Italians and Tarentines,
praising Dionysius for his love of learning; adding, that if Plato came not, it
would reflect upon his friends, as well as on himself. Plutarch.
Many Letters and entreaties were sent to Dion, from his Wife and Sister: Plat.
Epist.
to these were joined the importunities of some friends of Plato's at Athens,
Plut.
insomuch that Dion brought it to pass, that Plato ( Plat.
lest he should desert him and the Tarentines) yielded to Dionysius, without
any excuse; and, as he writes himself, was driven the third time to the
Sicilian straits.

Once more Charybdis dangers to essay. At his arrival in Sicily, Dionysius met
him with a Chariot, drawn by four white horses, Aelian. var. Hist. ^. 18.
whereinto he took him, and made him sit, whilst himself played the Coachman:
whereupon a facete Syracusian, well versed in Homer, pleased with the sight,
spoke these verses out of the Iliads, with a little alteration: The Chariot
groaned beneath its weight,
Proud that the best of men there sat.


And as Dionysius was much joy'd at his coming, so were the Sicilians put in
great hopes, being all desirous, and endeavoring, that Plato might supplant
Philistus, and subvert Tyranny by Philosophy: The Ladies of the Court
entertained Plato with all civility; but above all, Dionysius seemed to repose
more confidence in him, then in any of his friends; for, whereas he was jealous
of all others, he had so great respect for Plato, that he suffered him only to
come to him unsearched ( Aelian. var. Hist. 4. 18.
though he knew him to be Dions intimate friend) and offered him great sums of
money, but Plato would not accept any: (yet Laert.
Onetor says, he received eighty Talents of him, wherewith enriched, he
purchased the Books of Philolaus) whence Aristippus the Cyrenaean, who was at
the same time in the Court, said, Dionysius bestows his bounty on sure
grounds; he gives little to us who require much, and much to Plato who
requires nothing. And being blamed, that he received money of Dionysius, Plato
books, I want money, says he, Plato books. So untrue it is, as Epist. ad
Aeschin.
Xenophon asperseth him, that he went thither to share in the Sicilian luxury:
or as Chillad.
Tzetzes, that he studied the art of Cookery, and lived with Dionysius as his
pensioner and parasite. So far was he from any sordid compliance, that at a
Feast, Laert. vit. Aristip.
Dionysius commanding every one to put on a purple Gown, and dance, he refused,
saying, I will not with a female robe disgrace
My self, who am a man of manly race.


Some likewise ascribe this to him, which others to Aristippus, that Dionysius
saying, Who ere comes to a Tyrant, he
A servant is, though he came free.
He answered immediately, No servant is, if he came free.

Plat. Epist. Plut.
Plato, after a while, began to put Dionysius in mind of the City he had
promised him to be governed by his rules; but Dionysius retracted his promise:
He moved him also in the behalf of Dion; Dionysius at the first delayed him,
afterward fell out with him, but so secretly, that none saw it, for he
continued to confer as much honor on him, as he could possibly, thereby to
make him forsake his friendship to Dion? Plato from the beginning perceived
there was no trust to be reposed in what he said or did, but that all was
deceit; yet concealed that thought, and patiently suffered all; p^etending to
believe him. Thus they dissembled with each other, thinking they deceived the
eyes of all men besides; Helicon of Cyzicum, a friend of Plato, foretold an
Eclipse of the Sun, which falling out according to his prediction, the Tyrant
much honored him, and gave him a Talent of Silver: then Aristippus jesting
with other Philosophers, said, he could tell them of a stranger thing that
would happen; they desiring to know what that was, I foretell, says he, Plato
and Dionysius will be at difference ere long; and it came to pass. Plat. Epist.
Dionysius detained Dion's Rent which he used to send yearly to him to
Peloponnesus, pretending he kept it for his Nephew, Dion's Son. Plato
discontented hereat, desired he might go home, saying, he could not stay, Dion
being used so ignominously: Dionysius spoke kindly to him, desiring him to
stay: He thought it not convenient to let Plato go so soon to divulge his
actions: but being not able to prevail with him; he told him he would provide
a means for his Passage; Plato had designed to go with the Passage^boates;
Dionysius seeing him bent upon his voyage, the next spoke thus kindly to him;
that the differences betwixt Dion and me may be composed, I will for your sake
condescend thus far, Dion, shall receive his revenewes living in Peloponnesus
not as a banished person, but as one that may come hither when he and I, and
you his friends shall think convenient. The Trustees for this business shall
be your self, and your and his friends who live here; Dion shall receive his
Rents, but through your hands, otherwise I shall not dare to trust him * in you
and yours I have more confidence; stay for this reason a year here; and then
you shall carry along with you his money, wherein you will do Dion a great
courtesy. To this Plato after a days deliberation consented; and writ to that
effect to Dion; but as soon as the Ships were gone, that Dionysius saw he had
no means to away, forgeting his promise; he made sale of Dions Estate.

Plat. Epis^^:
At this time happened a mutiny amongst the Soldiers of Dionysius, of which
Heraclides a friend of Plato's was reported the Author: Dionysius laid out to
take him, but could not light on him: Walking in his Garden he called Theodot^s
to him; Plato being accidently walking there at the same time; after some
private discourse with Dionysius, Theodotes, turning to Plato, Plato says he,
I persuade Dionysius that I may bring Heraclides to him to answer the crimes
wherewith he is charged, and then if Dionysius will not suffer him to live in
Sicily, that he at least permit him to take his Wise and Children along with
him to Peloponnesus, and live there, and, whilst he shall not plot any thing
against Dionysius, that he may there enjoy his Revenewes. With this ussurance I
have sent to Heraclides, and will send again to him to come hither; but if he
come either upon the first or second notice, I have made an agreement with
Dionysius, and obtained a promise from him that he shall receive no harm,
either in or without the City; but, if he be so resolved, that he send him
away beyond the con^ines of this Country, until he shall be better satisfied
with him: Do not you Dionysius consent hereto says he, I do, answered
Dionysius, neither if he be in your house shall he receive any prejudice; The
next day (about 20. days before Plato left Sicily) came Eurybius and Theodotes
to Plato in so much have and trouble; Plato, said Theodotes, you were yesterday
present at the agreement betwixt Dionysius and me, concerning Heraclides. I was
so, answered Plato, but since continues Theodotes, he has sent out Officers to
apprehend him, and I fear he is somewhere very nigh; therefore go along with us
to Dionysius, and let us use our utmost endeavor with him: They went, when
they came before him, Plato (the rest standing silent by, and weeping) began
thus, ^hese men, Dionysius, are afraid lest you should do something against
Heraclides contrary to the agreement you made yesterday, for I suppose he is
come near here abouts, Dionysius at this grew angry, his color often changed
with rage; Theodotes fell at his feet, and taking him by the hand, besought him
not to do any such thing: Plato continuing his speech; Be of good cheer, says
he, Theodotes, for Dionysius will not do any thing contrary to the promise he
made yesterday. Dionysius looking severely upon Plato, to you, says he, I made
no promise; yes by the God's answered Plato, you promised not to do those
things which Theodotes now beseeches you not to do. Archedemus and
Aristocritus being present; he told Plato (as he had done once before, when he
interceded for Heraclides,) That he cared for Heraclides and others more then
for him: and asked him before them, whether he remembered that when he came
first to Syracuse, he counseled him to restore the Grecian Cities: Plato
answered, he did remember it, and that he still thought it his best course, and
withal asked Dionysius whether that were the only counsel he had given him.
Dionysius returned an angry contumelious reply, and asked him, laughing
scornfully, whether he taught him those things as a School boy; to which Plato
answered, you well remember, what replies he, as a Master in Geometry, or how?
Pla^o forbore to reply, fearing it might occasion a stop of his Voyage; But
immediately went away; Dionysius resolved to lay wait for Heraclides; but he
escaped to the Carthaginian Territories.

From this displeasure against Plato, Dionysius took occasion to forbear to
send to Dion his money; and first sent Plato out of his Castle, where, til
then, he had lain next the Palace, pretending that the women were to Celebrate
a Feast ten days in the Gardens where he dwelt; For that time he commanded
Plato to live without the Castle with Archedemus; during which time T^eodotes
sent for him, and complained to him of Dionysius his proceedings. Dionysius,
receiving information that Plato had gone to Theodotes, took a new occasion of
displeasure against him, and sent one to him, who asked him whether he had gone
to Theodotes. Plato acknowledged that he had, then says the Messenger,
Dionysius bad me ^ell you; you do not well to prefer Dion and his friends
before him. Never from that time did he send for Pl^to to the Court, looking
upon him as a professed friend to Theodotes and Heraclides and his professed enemy:
Plut.
Plato lived without the Castle amongst the Soldiers of the Guard* who, as
Dionysius well knew, had born him ill will long, and sought to murtler him,
because he counseled Dionysius to giv^ over the Tyranny, and live without a
Guard. Pl^t. Epist.
Some, who came to visit him, gave him notice that calumnies were spread
against him amongst the Soldiers, Laert.
as if he excited Dion and Theondas to restore the Island to liberty, and that
some of them threatened, when they could light upon him to kill him. Hereupon
Plato began to think of some means of Escape, which he effected in this manner;
He sent to Arobytas at Tarentum, and to other friends advertising them of the
danger wherein he was; They, under pretense of an Embassy in the name of the
Country, sent Lamascus (whom Laertius calls Lamiscus) one of their party with a
Galley of three banks of Oars to redemand Plato, declaring that his coming to
Syracuse upon the engagement of Archytas: His letter was to this effect.

Architas to Dionysius, health.
WE all Plato's friends have sent Lamiscus and Photides to redemand the man
according to your agreement with us: You will do well to consider with what
importunity you prevailed with us to invite Plato to you, promising to yield to
all things, and to give him liberty to go and come at his pleasure; remember
how much you prized his coming, and pre^erred him before all others: if there
has happened any difference betwixt you, it will be^it you to treat him
courteously, and restore him safe to us. This if you do, you will do justly,
and oblige us.


Plutarch. vit. Dion.
Dionysius to excuse himself, and to show he was not angry with Plato, feasted
him magnificently, and then sent him home with great testimonies of affection:
One day amongst the rest he said to him, I am afraid Plato you will speak ill
of me when you are amongst your friends. The Gods forbid, answered, Plato,
smiling, they should have such scarcity of matter in the Academy, as to be
constrained to discourse of you. Dionysius at his departure, desired him to
find out whether Dion would be much displeased if he should dispose of his Wife
to another; there being at that time a report that he did not like his match,
and could not live quietly with his Wi^e. Plato in his return, came to
Peloponnesus at what time the Olympic games were celebrated; where the eyes of
all the Grecians were taken off from the sports and fixed upon him as the more
worthy object: Here he found Dion beholding the exercises, To whom he related
what had happened. Dion protested to revenge the discourtesie of Dionysius
toward Plato, from which Plato earnestly dissuaded him: Being come home to
Athens, he wrote to Dionysius, and gave him a plain account of every thing,
but that concerning Dion's Wife, he set it down so darkly, that he alone to
whom the letter was directed could understand him; letting him know that he had
spoken with Dion^ about the business which he knew, and that he would be very
much displeased if Dionysius did it: so that at that time, because there was
great hopes of reconciliation between them, the Tyrant forbore a while to
dispose of his Sister Arete, Dions Wife, as, soon after, when he saw the breach
irreconcilable, he did, marrying her against her will to one of his friends
named Timocrates. Dion thence forward prepared for War against Plato's advice,
who endeavored to dissuade him from it, as well for respect of Dioonysius his
good reception of him, as for that Dion was well in years; though Aelian says,
he put Dion upon that war; which Plutarch imputes to the instigations of
Speusippus.

CHAP. X.
His Authority in Civil Affairs.
AT home he lived quietly in the Academy, Laert.
not engaging himself in public Affairs; (though he were a person very knowing
therein as his writings manifest,) because the Athenians were accustomed to
Laws different from his sense.

Aelian. var. hist. 2. 41.
His fame spreading to the Arcadians, and Thebans, they sent Ambassadors
earnestly to request him to come over to them, not noly to instruct their young
men in Philosophy, but, which was of higher concernment, to ordain Laws for
Megalopolis a City then newly built by the Arcadians, upon occasion of the
great defeat given them by the Lacedaemonians, in the first year of the 103.
Olympiad. Plato was not a little pleased at this invitation, but asking the
Ambassadors how they stood affected to a parity of Estates, and finding them
so averse from it, as not to be by any means induced thereto, he refused to go:
but sent Aristonimus his familiar friend.

The Cyrenaeans likewise sent to him, Plutarch. ad princip. in^rudit.
desiring him to send them Laws for their City, but he refused, saying, it was
difficult to to prescribe Laws to men in prosperity.

Yet to several people upon their importunities he condescended.

To the Syracusians he gave Laws upon the ejection of their King.

To the Cretans, upon their building of Magnesia, he sent Laws digested into
twelve Books.

To the Ilians he sent Phormio; to the Pyrrheans, Mededimus (his familiar
friends) upon the same design.

This is enough to justify him against those who Athen*
accuse him, of having written a form of Government, which he could not
persuade any to practice, because it was so severe: and that the Athenians, who
accepted the Laws of Draco and Solon, derided his.

CHAP. XI.
His Virtues and Moral Sentences.
Laert.
HE lived single, yet soberly and Suid.
chastely, insomuch as in his old age (in compliance with the vulgar opinion) he
sacrificed to Nature, to expiate the crime of his continence. So constant in
his composure and gravity, that a Youth brought up under him, returning to his
Parents, and hearing his Father speak aloud, said, I never found this in Plato.
He ate but once a day, or, if the second time, very sparingly; he slept alone,
and much discommended the contrary manner of living. Of his Prudence, Patience,
Magnanimity, and other Virtues, there are these instances.

Plut.
Antimachus a Colophonian, and Niceratus a Heracleot, contending in a Poetic
Panegyric of Lysander, the prize was bestowed upon Niceratus: Antimachus in
anger tore his Poem; Plato, who at that time was young, and much esteemed
Antimachus for his poetry, comforted him, saying, Ignorance is a disease proper
to the ignorant, as blindness to the blind.

Senec. de ira. 3. 1^.
His servant having offended him, he bad him put off his coat, and expose his
shoulders to be beaten, intending to have corrected him with his own hand; but
perceiving himself to be angry, he stopped his hand, and stood fixed in that
posture; a friend coming in, asked him what he was doing, Punishing an angry
man, says he.

Senec. de ira. 3. 12.
Another time, being displeased at his servant for some offense, do you (says
he to Speusippus (or as Laertius to Xenocrates) accidentally coming in) beat
this fellow, for I am angry. And another time to his servant he said, I would
beat thee, if I were not angry. Val. Max.
Fearing to exceed the limits of correction, and thinking it unfit the Master
and servant should be alike faulty.

Laert.
Chabrias the general being arraigned for his life, he alone showed himself
on his side, not one of the Citizens else appearing for him. Crobulus the
Sycophant met him, accompanying Chabrias to the Tower, and said unto him, Do
you come to help others, you know not that the poison of Socrates is reserved
for you? Plato answered, When I fought for my Count^y I hazarded my life, and
will now in duty to my friend.

Aelian. var. hist. 4.
At the Olympic Games, he fell into company with some strangers, who knew him
not, upon whose affections he gained much by his affable conversation, Dining
and spending the whole day with them, not mentioning either the Academy or
Socrates, only saying, his Name was Plato. When they came to Athens, he
entertained them courteously. Come Plato, said the strangers, show us your
namesake, Socrates his Disciple; bring us to the Academy; recommend us to him,
that we may know him. He smiling a little, as he used, said, I am the man:
Whereat they were much amazed, having conversed so familiarly with a person of
that eminence, who used no boasting or ostentation; and showed, that besides
his Philosophical discourse, his ordinary conversation was extremely winning.

When he went out of the School, he always said, See (Youths) that you employ
your idle hours usefully.

At a Feast he blamed those that brought in Musicians to hinder discourse.

Seeing a young man play at Dice, reproved him, he answered, What, Laert.
for so small a matter? Custom (replies Plato) is no small thing.

Being demanded, Laert.
whether there should be any record to posterity of his actions or sayings, as
of others before him: First, says he, we must get a Name, then many things
will follow.

Getting on Horseback, Laert.
he immediately lighted again, saying, He feared lest he should be carried away
(...) by a high wilful conceit, a metaphor taken from a Horse.

He advised drunken and angry men to look in a Glass, Laert.
and it would make them refrain from those vices.

He affirmed, that to drink to the excess of drunkenness was not allowable at
any time, Laert.
unless upon the festival of that God who gives Wine.

Sleep also much displeased him, whence he says in his Laws, Laert.
No man sleeping is worth anything.

That truth is more pleasing to all, then any feigned story, Laert.
so of truth he says, de legibus: Truth, O guest, is an excellent thing, and
durable, but to this we are not easily persuaded.

Being told, Val. Max. 4. 1.
that Xenocrates had spoken many unjust things against him, he presently
rejected the accusation; the informer persisted, asked, why he would not
believe him? He added, it was not probable, that he whom he loved so much,
should not love him again. Finally, the other swearing it was thus; he, not to
argue him of perjury, affirmed, that Xenocrates would never have said so, but
that there was reason for it.

He said, Senec. de ira. 1. 16.
No wise man punishes in respect of the fault past, but in prevention of the
future.

Seeing the Agrigentines magnificent in Building, Aelian.
luxurious in Feasting, These people (says he) Build, as if they were to live
for ever, and Eat, as if they were to die instantly.

Hearing a wicked person speak in the defense of another, Stob.
This man, says he, carries his heart in his tongue.

Being told, Stob.
that some spoke ill of him, he answered, It Is no matter, I will live so that
none shall believe them.

Seeing a young man of a good family, Stob.
who had wasted all his means, ^itting at the door of an Inn, feeding upon
bread and water, he told him, If you had dined so temperately, you would never
have needed to sup so.

To Antistenes, Stob.
making a long oration, You know not, says he, that discourse is to be
measured by the hearer, not the speaker.

Seeing a youth over-bold with his Father, Stob.
Young man, says he, will you under-value him, who is the cause you overvalue
your self?

To one of his Disciples, who took too much care of his body, he said, Why do
you labor so much in building your own prison?

Of a prisoner fettered, he said, That man is dead in his own body, he lives in
another.

He said, that whosoever neglected himself for another, was the most happy of
all persons, for he enjoyed neither.

One Leo, an eminent Citizen, being blamed for loud and immoderate clamor in
the Senate, That is, says he, to be a Lion indeed.

His Disciples wondering, that Xenocrates, severe all his life time, had said
something that was pleasant, Do you wonder (says he) that Roses and Lillies
grow among Thorns?

Xenocrates by reason of his severe conversation, Laert. vit. Xen.
he advised to sacrifice to the Graces.

He used to say, Prefer labor before idleness, unless you esteem rust above
brightness.

He exhorted the young men to good life, thus; Observe the different nature of
virtue and pleasure; the momentary sweetness of the world is immediately
followed by eternal sorrow and repentance, the short pain of the other by
eternal pleasure.

He said, that it was a great matter in the education of youth, to accustom
them to take delight in good things; other ways, he affirmed pleasure to be
the bait of evil.

He affirms Philosophy to be the true help of the Soul, the rest ornaments;
that nothing is more pleasing to a sound mind, then to speak and hear truth,
then which nothing is better or more lasting.

To some, who demanded what kind of possessions were best to be provided for
Children: Those (says he) which fear neither storms, nor violence of men, nor
Jove himself.

To Demonicus, asking his advice concerning the education of his Son: The same
care (says he) that we have of Plants, we must take of our Children; The one
is Labor, the other Pleasure. But we must take heed that in this we be not too
secure, in that too vigilant.

To Thiledonus, who blamed him that he was as Studious to learn as to teach,
and asked him how long he meant to be a Disciple? as long says he, as I am not
ashamed of growing better and wiser.

Being demanded what difference there is between a learned Man and an
unlearned, the same says he, as Betwixt a Physician and a Patient.

He said, Princes had no better Possessions then the familiarities of such men
who could not ^latter, that Wisdom is as necessary to a Prince, as the Soul to
the Body. That Kingdoms would be most happy, if either Philosophers Rule, or
the Rulers were inspired with Philosophy, for nothing is more pernicious then
power and arrogance accompanied with ignorance. That Subjects ought to be such
as Princes seem to be. That a Magistrate is to be esteemed a Public not a
private good. That not a part of the Commonwealth, but the whole ought to be
principally regarded.

Being desirous to take off Timotheus Son of Conon, Plut. Sympos. 6. praefat.
Aelian. var. hist.
General of the Athenians, from sumptuous Military Feasts; he invited him into
the Academy to a plain moderate Supper, such as quiet pleasing sleeps succeed
with a good temper of body. The next day Timotheus observing the difference,
said, They who feasted with Plato were the better for it the next day; and
meeting Plato, said unto him; Your Supper, Plato, is as pleasant the next
morning as overnight, alluding to the excellent discourse, that had past at
that time.

Hence apears the truth of that Poet's saying, who being derided for acting a
Tragedy, none being present but Plato, answered, but this one person is more
then all the Athenians besides.

CHAP. XII.
His Will and Death.
THus continuing a single life to his end, not having any Heirs of his own, he
bequeathed his Estate to young Adimantus, (probably the Son of Adimantus, his
second Brother) by his will; thus recited by Laertius.

These things Plato has Bequeathed and disposed, The Eniphistidaean grounds
bordering North, on the high way from the Cephisian Temple, South on the
Heracleum of the Eniphistiades, East on Archestratus the Phrearian, West Philip
the Cholidian, this let it not be lawful for any man to sell or alienate, but
let young Adimantus be possessour thereof in as full and ample manner as is
possible. And likewise the Enerisiadaean Farm which I bought of Callimachus,
adjoining on the North to Eurymedon the Myrrinusian, on the South to
Demostratus Xypeteron, on the East to Eurymedon the Myrrinusian, on the West to
Cephissus; Three minae of Silver; a Golden Cup weighing 160. a ring of Gold,
and an earing of Gold, both together weighing four drachmes and three aboli;
Euclid the Stone-Cutter owes me three Minae, Diana I remit freely, I leave
Servants, Ticho, Bictas Apolloniades, Dionysius Goods, whereof Demetrius
keeps an Inventory. I ow no man any thing, Executors, Sosthenes, Speusippus,
Demetrius, Hegias, Eurimedon, Callimachus, Thrasippus.

If this Will be not forged, that of Apuleius is false, Dogn (...).
who averrs the Patrimony he left was a little Orchard adjoining to the
Academy, two servants, and a Cup wherein he supplicated to the Gods; Gold no
more then he wore in his ear when he was a boy, an Emblem of his Nobility.

He died in the 13t^ year of the Reign of Philip King of Macedon, Laert.
in the first of the 108. Olympiad; the 81. (according to Hermippus, Cicero,
Seneca, and others) of his age (not as Athenaeus the 82.) which number he
completed exactly, dying that very day whereon he was born; For which reason
the Magi at Athens sacrificed to him, as conceiving him more than man, who
fulfilled the most perfect number, nine multiplied into it self.

He died only of age, Epist. 1. 5^.
which Seneca ascribes to his temperance and diligence; Hermippus says, at a
Nuptial Feast; Cicero says, as he was writing; they therefore who affirm he
dyed (as Pherecydes) of lice, do him much injury; Laert.
upon his Tomb these Epitaphs.

The first.
Whose Temperance and Justice all envies,
The famed Aristocles here buried lies;
If Wisdom any with renown endued,
Here was it most, by envy not pursued.
The second.
Earth in her bosom Plato's body hides,
His Soul amongst the deathlesse Gods resides
Aristo's Son; whose fame to strangers spread,
Made them admire the sacred life he lead.
Another later.
Eagle, why art thou pearcht upon this stone,
And gaz^st thence on some Gods starry throne?
I Plato's Soul to Heaven flownrepresent,
His body buried in this Monument.
Phavorinus says, that Mithridates the Persian set up Plato's statue in the
Academy with this Inscription;

MITHRIDATES SON OF RHODOBATES, THE PERSIAN, DEDICATED THIS IMAGE OF PLATO,
MADE BY SILANION TO THE MUSES.

CHAP. XIII.
His Disciples and Friends.
THE Fame of this Scool attracted Disciples from all parts: of whom were

Speusippus an Athenian, Plato's Sisters Son, whom he said he reformed by the
example of his own life.

Xenocrates a Chalcedonian, Plato's beloved Disciple, an imitatour of his
gravity and magnanimity: Athenaeus says, he was first the only Disciple of
Aeschines, and relief of his poverty, seduced from him by Plato.

Aristotle a Stagirite, whom Plato used to call a Colt, foreseeing that he
would ungratefully oppose him, as a Colt having sucked, kicks at his Dam:
Xenocrates was slow, Aristotle quick in extremity, whence Plato said of them,
what an Ass have I, and what a horse to yoke together.

Philippus an Opuntian, who transcribed Plato's Laws in wax; to him some
ascribe Epinomis.

Hestiaeus a Perinthian.

Dion a Syracusian; whom Plato exceedingly affected, as is evident from his
Epigrams; seeing him in the height of honor, all men's eyes fixed upon his noble
actions, he advised him to take heed of that vice, which makes men care only
to please themselves; a consequent of solitude.

Amyclus (or as Aelian, Amyclas) a Heracleote. See also S^ob. lib. 13.
Erastus and Coriscus Scepsians.

Temolaus a Cyzicene.

Euaemon a Lampsacene.

Pithon, whom Aristotle calls Paron, and Heraclides Aenians.

Hippothales and Callippus, Athenians.

Demetrius of Amphipolis.

Heraclides of Pontus.

Two women, Lasthenia a Mantinean, and Axiothia a Phliasian, who went habited
like a man.

Theophrastus, as some affirm.

Orators, Hyperides, Lycurgus, Demosthenes. Lycurgus (says Philistus) was a
person of great parts, and did many remarkable things, which none could
perform, who had not been Plato's auditor. Demosthenes, when he fled from
Antipater, said to Archias, who counseled him to put himself into his hands,
upon promise to save his life; Far be it from me to choose rather to live ill,
than to die well, having heard Xenocrates and Plato dispute of the Souls
immortality.

Mnesistratus a Thasian.

To these reckoned by Laertius, add Aristides a Locrian.

Eudoxus a Gnidian, who at a great Feast made by Plato, first found out the
manner of sitting in a circular form.

Hermodorus, of whom the Proverb, Hermodorus traffiques in words. Zenob.


Heracleodorus, to whom Demosthenes writing, reprehends him, that having heard
Plato, he neglected good arts, and lived disorderly.

Athen. delp^. lib. 11:
Euphratus, who lived with Perdiccas King of Macedonia, in so great favor,
that he in a manner shared command with him.

Euagon of Lampsacum. Athen. Ibid.


Timaeus of Cyzicum. Athen. Ibid.


Chaeron of Pellene. Athen. Ibid.


Laert.
Isocrates the Orator, with whom Plato was very intimate* Praxiphanes
published a discourse they had together, in a field of Plato's, who at that
time entertained Isocrates as a Guest.

Aster, P^aedrus, Alexis, Agatho, young men, whom Plato particularly affected,
as appears by his Epigrams.

Chap. 10.
Aristonymus, Phormio, Mededimus, his familiar friends, already mentioned.

CHAP. XIV.
His Aemulatours and Detractours.
AS Plato's eminent learning gained on one side many Disciples and admirers, so
on the other side, it procured him many emulators, especially amongst his
fellow Disciples, the followers of Socrates; amongst these,

Xenophon was exceedingly disaffected toward him; they emulated each other,
and writ both upon one subject; a Symposium, Socrates his Apology, moral
commentaries: One writ of a Commonwealth, the other, the Institution of Cyrus:
which book In Logib.
Plato notes as commentitious, affirming Cyrus not to have been such a person
as is there expressed. Though both writ much concerning Socrates, yet neither
makes mention of the other, except Xenophon once of Plato, in the third of his
Commentaries.

Antisthenes being about to recite something that he had written, desired Plato
to be present; Plato demanding what he meant to recite, he answered, that to
contradict is not lawful. How come your, says Plato, to write upon that
subject? And thereupon demonstrating that he contradicted himself, Antisthenes
writ a Dialogue against him, entitled Satho.

Aristippus was at difference with him, for which reason (in Phaedone) he
covertly reproves Aristippus, that being near at Aegina when Socrates died, he
came not to him. He writ a book of the luxury of the ancients; some ascribe the
amatory Epigrams to his invention, his design in that treatise being to
detract from eminent persons, amongst the rest from Socrates his Master, and
Plato and Xenophon his fellow Disciples.

Aeschines and Plato also disagreed: some affirm, that when Plato was in
favor with Dionysius, Aeschines came thither very poor, and was despised by
Plato, but kindly entertained by Aristippus: But the Epistle of Aeschines put
forth by Allatius, expresses the contrary. The discourse which Plato relates,
betwixt Crito and Socrates in Prison, Idomeneus says, was betwixt Socrates and
Aeschines; by Plato, out of ill will to Aeschines, attributed to Crito. But of
Aeschines he makes not any mention in all his works, except twice slightly;
once in Phaedone, where he names him amongst the persons present at Socrates
his death; and again in his Apology speaking of Lysanias his Father.

Phaedo, if we credit the detractions of Athenaeus, was so much maligned by
Plato, as that he was about to frame an indictment against him, to reduce him
to that condition of servitude, out of which, by the procurement of Socrates,
he had been redeemed; but his design being discovered, he gave it over.
Besides his condisciples.

Diogenes the Cynick derided his Laws, and assertion of Ideas; concerning the
first, he asked if he were writing Laws? Plato assented. Have you not written
already a Commonwealth, says Diogenes? Yes, answered Plato. Had that
Commonwealth Laws, says Diogenes? Plato affirmed it had. Then, replied
Diogenes, what need you write new? Laert. vit. Diog.
Another time, Diogenes saying, he could see the things of the world, but not
Ideas: Plato answered, that is no wonder, for you have, and use those eyes,
which behold such things: but the mind, which only can see the other, you use
not.

Laert.
Molon, in detraction from him, said, It was not strange Dionysius should be at
Corinth, but that Plato should be at Sicily.

From these private differences, arose many scandalous imputations, forged and
spread abroad by such as envyed or maligned him: as, Seneca.
That he professed one thing, and practiced another: Laert.
that he loved inordinately Aster, Dion, Phaedrus, Alexis, Agatho, and
Archeanassa, a Curtesan of Colopho: Athen.
That he was a calumniatour, envious, proud, a gluttonous lover of Figgs:
Tzetz. Chiliad.
that he was the worst of Philosophers a parasite to Tyrants, and many other
accusations alike improbable: from these the Comic Poets and others took
liberty to abuse him; Laert.
Theopompus in Autochare. -- for one is none,
And two (as Plato holds) is hardly one.
Anaxandrides in Theseo; When Olives he (like Plato) does devour; Timon, As
Plato feignes, in framing Su.
wonders skilled; Alexis in Meropide, Aptly thou come, I walking round could
meet
(Like Plato) nothing wise; but tired my feet.
And in Anchilione, Thou speak of things thou understands not, go
To Plato, thence Nile and onyons know:
Amph in Amp hicrate, What good from hence you may expect to rise,
I can no more then Plato's good comprise;
And in Dexidemide, Plato thou nothing know, but how
To look severe and knit the brow.
Cratylus in Pseudobolymaeo, A man thou art, and have a soul, but this
With Plato not sure, but opinion is.
Alexis in Olympiodoro. My body mortal is grown dry,
My soul turned air that cannot die*
Taught Plato this Philosophy?
And in Parasito. Or thou with Plato rav'st alone.

Athe^. lib. 11.
Ephippus in Naufrago, objects to Plato and some friends of his, that corrupted
with money they detracted from many persons; that they went proudly habited,
and they took more care of their outward beauty, then the most luxurious: See
Athenaeus, lib. 11.

CHAP. XV.
His Writings.
THE writings of Plato are by way of Dialogue; of the Invention of Dialogue we
have Chap.
already spoken; now of the Nature thereof.

A Dialogue is composed of puestions and answers Philosophical or Political,
aptly expressing the Characters of those persons that are the speakers in an
elegant style; Dialectick is the art of discourse, whereby we confirm or
confute any thing by questions and answers of the disputants.

Of Platonic discourse there are two kinds, Hyphegetick and Exegetick,
subscribed thus,

Hyphegetick Theoretick. Logic. Physic. Practick. Ethick: Politic.

Exegetick Gymnastick, Majeutick* Physic. Agonistick, Endeitick. Anatreptick.

we know where there are other divisions of Dialogues; as into dramatick
Narrative mixed: but that division is more proper to Tragedy then to Philosophy.

Of Plato's Dialogues are
Physic, Timaeus.

Logic, The Politic. Cratylus. Parmenides. The Sophist.

Ethick, Apology of Socrates. Crito. Phaedo. Phaedrus. Symposium* Menexemus.
Clitophon. Epistles. Philebus. Hipparchus. The Rivalls.

Politic, The Commonwealth. The Laws. Minos. Epinomis. The Atlantic.

Maieutick, Alcibiades. Theages. Lysis. Laches.

Pirastick, Euthyphron. Menon. Ion. Charmides. Theaetetus.

Endeictick, Protagoras.

Anatreptick, Euthydemus. Hippias 1. Hippias 2. Gorgias 1. Gorgias 2.

It being much controverted (continues Laertius) whether Plato does dogmatize,
some affirming, others denying it, it will be necessary to say something
thereupon, (...) to dogmatise is to impose a Doctrine, as (...) to impose a
Law; A Doctrine is taken two ways, either ^or that which is Decreed, or the
Decree it self; That which is Decreed is a proposition, the Decree it self an
imposition. Plato expounds those things which he conceives true: Confutes
those which are false, suspends his opinion in those which are doubtful. He
asserts what he conceives true under one of these four persons, Socrates,
Timaeus an Athenian Guest, an Aelian Guest; The Guests are not, as some
conceive, Plato and Parmenides, but imagined namelesse persons, as what
Socrates, Timaeus speak, are the Decrees of Plato. Those whom he argues of
falsehood are Thrasymach^s, Callicles, Polus, Gorgias, Protagoras, Hippias,
Euthydemus, and the like.

In Argument he often used induction of both Sorts. Induction is a discourse,
which from certain truths Collects, and infers a truth like to those: Of
Induction there are two kinds, one from Contraries, another from Consequents:
From Contraries, as when he who is questioned, answers in all things contrary
to himself, as thus; My Father is either the same with yours, or not the same,
if therefore thy Father be not the same with mine, he is not my Father: and
again, if a man be not a living creature, he is stone, wood, or the like, but
he is neither stone nor wood, for he has a soul, and moves himself,
therefore he is a living creature; if a living creature, a dog and an Ox. This
kind of induction by contraries, serves not for assertion, but confutation:
Induction by consequents is twofold; one, when a singular being sought, is
concluded from a singular, the first proper to Orators, the second to
Logicians; as in the first, the question is, Whether such an one were a
murderer, it is proved from his being bloody at the same time. This induction
is Rhetorical, for Rhetoric is conversant in Singulars, not in universalls;
it inquireth not after justice, but after the several parts thereof: the other
is Dialectick, whereby Universalls are concluded from Singulars, as in this
question; Whether the Soul be immortal, and whether the living are of the
dead, which is demonstrated in his Book of the Soul, by a general Maxim, that
contraries proceed from contraries, this being general, is proved by
singulars, as, waking succeeds sleeping, the greater the lesser, and so on the
contrary. Thus he uses to confirm what he asserts.

Thrasylus says, he published his Dialogues according to the tragic
Tetralogie: His genuine Dialogues are fifty six, his Commonwealth divided
into ten, they make nine Tetralogies, reckoning his Commonwealth one Book, his
Laws another. The first Tetralogie has a common subject, declaring what is
the proper life of a Philosopher: every Book has a twofold title; one from
the principal person, the other from the subject.

The first. Euthyphron; or of Piety: Pirastick. Socrates his Apology: Ethick.
Crito, or of that which is to be done: Ethick. Phaedo, or of the soul: Ethick.

The second. Cratylus; or, of right naming: Logic. Theaetetus; or, of Science:
Pirastick. The Sophist; or, of Ens: Logic. The Politic; or, of a Kingdom:
Logic.

The third. Parmenides; or, of Idaea's: Logic. Philebus; or, of Pleasure:
Ethick. The Symposium; or, of Good^Ethick. Phaedrus; or of Love: Ethick.

The fourth. Alcibiades 1. or, of human Nature: Majeutick. Alcibiades 2. or, of
Prayer: Majeutick. Hipparchus; or, the Covetous: Ethick. The Rivalls; or, of
Philosophy: Ethick.

The fifth Theages; or of Philosophy: Majeutick. Charmides; or, of Temperance:
Pirastick. Laches; or, of Fortitude: Majeutick. Lysis; or, of Friendship:
Majeutick.

The sixth Euthydemus; or, the Litigious: Anatreptick. Protagoras; or, the
Sophist: Endeictick. Gorgias; or, of Rhetoric: A^atreptick. Menon; or, of
Virtue: Pirastick.

The seventh Hippias first; or, of Honest: Anatreptick. Hippias second; or, of
Fal^^: Anatreptick. Io; or of Ilias: Pirastick. Menexenus; or, the funeral
Oration: Ethick.

The eight Clitophon; or the Exhortation: Moral. The Commonwealth; or, of
Just: Politic. Timaeus; or, of Nature: Physic. Critias; or, the Atlantic:
Ethick.

The ninth Minos; or, of Law: Politic. Laws; or, of Legislation: Politic.
Epinomis; or, the Nocturnall convention; or, the Philosophers Politic.
Epistles thirteen, Ethick, in the inscriptions whereof he uses (...). Cleon
(...). to Aristodemus one; to Architas two; to Dionysius four; to Hermias,
Erastus, and Coriscus one; to Leodamas one; to Dion one; to Dions friends two.
Thus Thrasilaus.

Others, of whom is Aristophanes the Grammarian, reduce his Dialogues to
Trilogies, placing in

The first The Commonwealth. Timaeus. Critias.

The second The Sophister. The Politic. Cratylus.

The third Laws. Minos. Epinomis.

The fourth Theaetetus. Euthyphron. Apology.

The fifth. Crito. Phaedo. Epistles. The rest single without order.

Some, as we said, begin with Alcibiades major, others from Theages, others
from Euthyphron, others from Clitiphon, others from Timaeus, others from
Phaedrus (which they say was the first Dialogue he wrote, as the subject it
self seems to confirm, which savours of youth; and therefore Dicearchus
condemns it as too light: to which censure Cicero agrees, as conceiving, he
ascribes too great a power to Love) others begin with Theaetetus, many with
his Apology.

He mentions not himself in all his writings, except once in his Phaedo, and
another time in his Apology for Socrates. At the recital of his Phaedo, all,
but Aristotle rose, and went away. The efficacy of that Dialogue (which treats
of the immortality of the Soul) is evident from Cleombrotus of Ambracia, who,
as soon as he had read it, was so disaffected to life, that he threw himself
from a high wall into the Sea; Cicer. Tusc. quaest. 2.
upon whom thus Callimachus, Epigr.
Cleombrotus cries out, farewell this light,
And headlong throws himself int'endlesse night:
Not that he ought had done, deserving death,
But Plato read, and weary grew of breath.


The Dialogues generally noted as spurious (not to say any thing of his
Epinomis, though some ascribe it to Philippus the Opuntian) are these, Midon,
or the Horse-courser. Erixias, or Erasistratus. Alcyon. Acephali, or the
Sisyphi. Axiochus. Phaeaces. Demodochus. Chelidon. The seventh, Epimenides.


Of these Alcion is ascribed by Phavorinus to Leon.

His style, Aristotle says, is betwixt Prose and Verse. He uses variety of
names, that his work may not easily be understood by the unlearned. He
conceives wisdom properly to be of intellectual things, Knowledge of real
Beings conversant about God, and the soul separate from the body. Properly, he
calls Philosophy Wisdom, being the appetition of divine Knowledge; but,
commonly he calls all skill knowledge, as an Artificer, a wise man. He
likewise used the same names in diverse significations; (...), which properly
signifies Evil, he uses for Simple, as Euripides in his Lycimnius of
Hercules, (...).

The same word Plato sometimes takes for honest, sometimes for little. He
likewise uses (...) names to signify the same thing: Idaea he uses both for
species and genus; Exemplar, both principle and cause. Sometimes he uses
contrary expressions to signify the same thing; Sensible he calls a being
and no being; a being, as having been produced; no being, in respect of its
continual mutation. Idaea, neither moveable nor permanent, the same both one
and many. The like he uses often in other things.

The method of his discourse is threefold: first, to declare what that is
which is taught; then for what reason it is asserted, whether as a principal
cause, or as a comparison, and whether to defend the Tenent, or oppugn the
contrary. Thirdly, whether it be rightly said.

The marks, which he usually affixed to his writtings, are these.

(...) denotes Platonic words and figures.

(...), Doctrines and opinions proper to Plato;

(...), Choice expressions.

(...), Corrections.

(...), Things superfluous.

(...), Double signification or use.

(...), Philosophical institution.

(...), agreement of opinions.

(...), Improbation. Hitherto Laertius.

There are two Epistles under Plato's name, besides those in his works, already
mentioned, one in Laertius his life of Architas.

Plato to Architas, (...).
THe Commentaries which came from you, we received with extraordinary content,
infinitely admiring the writer, who appears to us a person worthy of those
ancient predecessors; for those men are said to be Myraeans of those Trojans,
which were banished in the time of Laomedon, good men, as Tradition speaks
them. Those Commentaries of mine, concerning which you write, are not yet
polished; however as they are, I have sent them to you, in the keeping of them
we agree both, so as I n^ed not give you any directions. Farewell.


Another published by Leo Allatius amongst the Socratick Epistles.

I had not any of those things to send to Syracuse which Archytas desired to
receive by you; as soon as possible I will send to you. Philosophy has wrought
in me I know not whether good or bad, a hatred of conversing with many persons,
justly, I think, since they err in all kind of folly as well in private as
public affairs; but if unjustly, yet know I can hardly live and breath
otherwise. For this reason I have fled out of the City, as out of a Den of wild
Beasts, living not far from the Ephestiades, and the places thereabouts. I now
see, that Timon hated not men, he could not affect Beasts, therefore lived ^
alone by himself, perhaps not without danger. Take this as you please; my
resolution is to live far from the City, now and for ever hereafter, as long as
God shall grant me life.

In Poesy he writ,

Dithyrambs.

An Epick Poem,

Four Tragedies, all which (as we said) he burned.
The Atlantic story, of which thus Plutarch; Solon begun the Atlantic story
(which he had learnt of the Priests of Sais, very proper for the Athenians) but
gave it over by reason of his old age, and the largeness of the work. Plato
took the same argument, as a wast piece of fertile ground fallen to him by
hereditary right; He manured it, refined it, enclosed it with large Walls,
Porches and Galleries, such as never any Fable, or Poem had before; but because
he undertook it late, he was prevented by Death. The more things written
delight, the more their not being perfected is For as the Athenian City left
the Temple of Jupiter; so Plato's Wisdom, amongst many ex^^llent writings, left
the Atlantic argument alone imperfect.

Epigrams, of which these are extant in Laertius, and the Anthologie.

Upon one named After.
La^rt. Anthol. 3. 6. 27.
The Stars, my Star, thou view'st; Heaven I would be,
That I with thousand eyes might gaze on Thee.
Upon his Death.
Laert.
A Phosphor amongst the living late were thou,
But shin'st among the dead a Hesper now.
Epitaph on Dion, engraved on his Tomb at Siracuse.
Laert. Anthol. 4. 33. 26.
Old Hecuba the Trojan Matron's years
Were interwoven by the Fates with Tears;
But thee with blooming hopes my Dion decked,
Gods did a Trophy of their power erect.
Thy honored relics in their Country rest,
Ah Dion! whose love rages in my breast.
On Alexis.
Laert. Anthol. 3. 33. 44.
Fair is Alexis, I no sooner said,
When every one his eyes that way conveyed:
My soul (as when some dog a bone we show,
Who snatcheth it) lost we not Phaedrus so?
On Archaeanassa.
Laert.
To Archae'nassa, on whose furrowed brow
Love sits in triumph, I my service vow;
If her declining Graces shine so bright,
What flames felt you* who saw her noon of light?
On Agathon.
My Soul, when I kissed Agathon, did start
Up to my lip, just ready to depart.
To Xantippe.
Laer^.
An Apple I (Love's emblem) at the throw,
Thou in exchange thy Virgin-zone bestow.
If thou refuse my suite, yet read in this,
How short thy years, how frail thy Beauty is.
I cast the apple, loving those love thee,
Anthol.
Xantippe yield. for soon both old will be.
Herod. lib. 6.
On the Eretrians vanquished by the Persians.
Laert.
We in Eubaea born Eretrians are
Buried in Susa from our Country far.
Venus and the Muses.
Laert.
Virgins (said Venus to the Muses) pay
Homage to us, or, Love shall wound your Hearts:
The Muses answered, take these toys away,
Our Breasts are proof against his childish darts.
Fortune exchanged.
Laert. Anthol. 84. 1.
One finding Gold, in change, the halter quits,
Missing his Gold, 'tother the halter knits.
On Sappho.
Anth. 1. 67. 13.
He, who believes the Muses Nine, mistakes,
For Lesbian Sappho ten their number makes.
Time.
Anth. 1. 1^.
Time all things bring to pass, a change creates
In Names, in Forms, in Nations and in S^ates.
Death.
Anthol. 3. 22. 3.
That is a Plough-man's grave, a Sailor's this;
To Sea and Land alike Death common is.
On one Shipwrack'd.
Anth. ^. 22. 6.
The cruel Sea, which took my life away,
Forbore to strip me of my last array:
From this a covetous man did not refrain,
Acting a crime so great for so small gain;
But let him wear it to the shades, and there
Before great Pluto in my clothes appear.
Another.
Anth. 3. 22. 7.
Safely (O Saylors) press the Land, and wave,
Yet know, ye pass a Shipwrack'd persons grave.
On the Statue of Venus.
Anth. 4. 12. 8.
Paphian Cythera, swimming cross the Main,
To Guidas came her Statue there to see,
And from on high, surveying round the plain
Where could Praxiteles me spy? (says she)
He saw not what is forbidden mortal Eyes,
'Twas Mars's Steel that Venus did incize.
Another.
Anth. 4. 1^. 9.
Not carved by Steel, or Praxitele's famed hand:
Thus naked before the Judges did thou stand.
Love sleeping.
Anth. 4. 12. 19
Within the Covert of a shady Grove,
We saw the little red-check'd God of Love.
He had nor Row nor Quiver, those among
The neighboring Trees upon a bough were hung:
Upon a Bank of tender Rose-buds laid
He, (smiling) slept; Bees with their noise invade
His rest, and on his lips their honey made.
Pan Piping.
Anth. 4. 12. ^4.
Dwell awful Silence on the shady Hills
Among the bleating flocks, and purling rills,
When Pan the Reed does to his lip apply,
Inspiring it with sacred Harmony,
Hydriads, and Hamadryads at that sound
In a well ordered measure beat the ground.
On the Image of a Satyr in a Fountain and Love sleeping.
Anth. 4. 12. 96.
A skillful hand this Satyr made so near
To life, that only Breath is wanting here:
I am attendant to the Nymphs; before
I filled out purple wine, now water power*
Who ere thou art come nigh, tread softly, lest
You waken Love out of his pleasing rest.
Another.
Anth. 4. 12. 97.
On horned Lyaeus I attend,
And power the streams these Nayads lend,
Whose noise Lov's slumber does befriend.
Another.
Anth. 4. 1^. 102.
This Satyr Diodorus did not make,
But charm asleep; if pricked he will awake.
On a Seal.
Anth. 4. 1^. ^
Five Oxen grazing in a flowery Mead,
A Jasper seal done to the life does hold,
The little herd away long since had fled,
We'rt not enclosed within ^ pale of Gold.
THE DOCTRINE OF PLATO delivered by ALCINOVS.
CHAP. I.
Of PHITOSOPHY, and how a Philosopher must be qualified.
Such a Summary as this may be given of the Doctrine of Plato. Philosophy is
the desire of Wisdom, or solution of the soul from the body, and a conversion
to those things, which are true and perceptible by Intellect. Wisdom, (...), is
the Science of things Divine and Humane. A Philosopher is he who takes
denomination from Philosophy, as a Musician from Music. He who is to be a
Philosopher, must be thus qualified; First, he must have a natural capacity of
all such Learning as is able to fit and bring him to the knowledge of that
essence which is perceptible by Intellect, not of that which is in continual
fluxion or mutation. Then he must have a natural affection to Truth, and an
aversion from receiving falsehood, and besides this, temperate in a manner by
Nature; for those parts which use to be transported with passions, he must have
reduced to obedience by Nature. For whosoever has once embraced those
disciplines which are conversant in consideration of such things as truly
exist, and has addicted all his study thereunto, little valueth corporeal
pleasure. Moreover a Philosopher must have a liberal mind, for the estimation
of mean things is contrary to a man who intended to contemplate the truth of
things. Likewise he must naturally love Justice, for he must be studious of
Truth, Temperance and Liberality. He must also have an acute apprehension, and
a good memory, for these inform a Philosopher, those gifts of Nature, if
improved by Discipline and Education, make a man perfect in Virtue, but
neglected are the cause of the worst ills. These Plato uses to call by the
same names with the Virtues, Temperance, Fortitude and Justice.

CHAP. II.
That Contemplation is to be preferred before Action.
WHereas Life is twofold, Contemplative and Active, the chief Office of the
Contemplative consists in the knowledge of truth, as of the Active, in the
practice of those things which are dictated by Reason. Hence the Contemplative
life is first, after which as necessary follows the Active. That it is so,
may easily be proved thus. Contemplation is an Office of the intellect in the
understanding of Intelligibles: Action is an operation of the rational Soul,
performed by meditation and service of the body. For the Soul, when it
contemplateth the Divinity and the notions thereof, is said to be best
affected. This affection is called (...), Wisdom, which is nothing else but an
assimilation to the Deity. This therefore ought to be esteemed the first and
principal, as being most expetible and proper to man; for there are no
impediments that can hinder it from being within our power, and it is cause of
our proposed end. But Active life, and the practice thereof, chiefly making use
of the mediation of the body, are many times obstructed; Wherefore those things
which the Contemplative life considers in order to the reformation of the
manners of men, a Philosopher, as often as necessity requires, shall transferr
to Action. Then shall a good man apply himself to the administration of Civil
Affairs, when he sees them ill managed by others. He must look upon the
leading of an Army, administration of Justice and Embassies, as things
necessary. The institution of Laws, ordering the Commonwealth, the compressure
of Seditions, education of youth in Discipline, are the chiefest, and, among
those things which relate to Action, of greatest consequence. Hence is it
manifest, that a Philosopher must not only be perseverant in Contemplation,
but also cherish and increase it, sometimes giving himself to Action as an
attendant upon Contemplation.

CHAP III.
The three parts of Philosophy.
THe study of a Philosopher seems according to Plato to be conversant chiefly
in three things, in the Contemplation and knowledge of things, in the Practice
of Virtue, and in Disputation. The Science of things that are, is called
Theoretick, of those which pertain to Action, Practick; the disputative part,
Dialectick.

Dialectick is divided into Division, Definition, Induction and Syllogism;
Syllogism into the Apodeictick, which concerns necessary ratiocination; and
Rhetorical, which concerns Enthymeme, called an imperfect ratiocination; and
lastly into Sophismes. This the Philosopher must look upon, not as the chiefest
but a necessary part.

Of Practick Philosophy, one part is conversant about Manners, another orders
Families, the last takes care of a Commonwealth. The first called Ethick, the
second, Oeconomick, the third, Politic.

Of Theoretick Philosophy, one part enquires into things immutable and divine,
and the first causes of things; this is called Theology; another the motion of
the stars, the revolution and restitution of Celestial Bodies, and the
constitution of the world. This is called Physic. That whereby we enquire
Geometrically, and those other disciplines which are called (...), is termed
Mathematick.

Philosophy being thus divided, we must first according to Plato speak of the
Dialectick part, and in that, first of the Iudiciarie.

CHAP. IV.
DIALECTICK.
Of the Judiciary part.
WHereas there is something that judges, something which is judged, it is
necessary also that there be something which is made of both these, properly
called Judgment. This Judgment may not unfitly be termed Judiciary, but more
commonly that which judges. This is twofold; one, from which; another by which
judgment is made. That is intellect; this the natural Organ accommodated for
judgment; primarily of true things; secondarily of false; neither is it any
thing but natural reason. To explain this more fully, of things which are, a
Philosopher who judges the things themselves, may be called a Judge; reason
likewise is a Judge, by which truth is judged, which even now we called an
Organ.

Reason is twofold, one incomprehensible and true; the other is never deceived
in the knowledge of those things which are. The first is in the power of God,
not of man, the second in that of man also. This likewise is twofold, the first
Science, and scientifick reason; the second Opinion. The first has certitude,
and stability, as being conversant in things certain and stable. The second,
similitude of truth and opinion, as being conversant in things subject to
mutation. Of science in Intelligibles, and opinion in sensibles, the principles
are Intellection and Sense.

Sense is a passion of the soul by the mediation of the body, first, declaring
a passive faculty; When through the Organs of sense, the species of things are
impressed in the soul, so, as they are not defaced by time, but remain firm and
lasting, the conservation thereof is called Memory.

Opinion is the conjunction of memory and sense; for, when some object
occurreth, which can first move the sense, thereby sense is effected in us, and
by sense memory. Then again is the same thing objected to our sense, we join
the precedent with the consequent sense, and now say within our selves,
Socrates, a Horse, Fire, and the like: This is termed opinion, when we join
the precedent memory with the late sense; when these agree within themselves,
it is a true opinion, if they disagree, a false; for, if a man, having the
species of Socrates in his memory, meet with Plato, and think, by reason of
some likeness betwixt them, he has met Socrates again, and afterward join
the sense of Plato, which he took, as it were, from Socrates, with the memory
which he preserved of Socrates, there will arise a false opinion.

That wherein sense and memory are formed, Plato compares to a tablet of wax,
but when the soul by cogitation reforming these things, which are conceived in
opinion by memory and sense, sooketh upon these as things from which the other
are derived: Plato sometimes calls this a picture and fantasy. Cogitation
he calls the souls discourse within her self: Speech, that which ^loweth
from the Cogitation through the mouth by voice. Intellection is an operation of
the Intellect, contemplating first Intelligibles. It is twofold, one of the
soul, beholding Intelligibles before she comes into the body; the other of the
same, after she is immersed in the body: The first is properly called
Intellection; the other, whilst she is in the body, is termed natural
knowledge, which is nothing but an intellection of the soul consined to the
body. When we say, Intellection is the principle of Science, we mean not this
latter, but the other, which is competible to the soul in her separate state,
and, as we said, is then called Intellection, now natural Knowledge. The same
Plato terms simple Knowledge, the wing of the soul; sometimes Reminiscence.

Of these simple Sciences consists Reason, which is born with us, the
efficient of natural Science; and as reason is twofold, Scientifick, and
opinionative, so Intellection and Sense. It is likewise necessary that they
have their objects, which are Intelligibles and Sensibles: And for as much as of
Intelligibles, some are Primary, as Idaeas, others Secondary, as the Species,
that are in matter, and cannot be separated from it. Intellection likewise,
must be twofold, one of Primaries, the other of S^condaries. Again, forasmuch
as in Sensibles, some are Primary, as qualities, color, whiteness, others by
accident, as white colored, and that which is concrete, as fire: in the same
manner is Sense, first, of Primaries, second, of Secondaries. Intellection
judges primary Intelligibles, not without Scientifick knowledge, by a certain
comprehension without discourse. Secondaries the same scientifick reason
judges, but not without Intellection. Sensibles, as well Primary as Secondary
sense, judges, but not without opinionative reason. That which is concrete,
the same reason judges, but not without sense. And since the Intelligible
world is the Primary Intelligible, the sensible something concrete, the first
Intellection judges with reason, that is, not without reason: The other
opinionative reason not without sense, whereas there is both contemplation and
action; right reason discerns not in the same manner those which are subject
to contemplation, and those which are subject to action: In contemplation it
considers what is true, what false; in things that belong to action, what is
proper, what improper, what that is which is done. For, having an innate
knowledge of that which is good and honest, by using reason, and applying it to
those natural notions, as to certain rules, we judge whether every thing be
good or bad.

CHAP. V.
The Elements and Office of Dialectick.
OF Dialectick, the first and chiefest Element according to Plato, is, first,
to consider the essence of every thing; next, the accidents thereof. What a
thing is, it considers, either from its superiors, by division and definition,
or contrariwise by Analysis. Accidents which adhere to substances, are
considered, either from those things which are contained by induction, or from
those which do contain by Syllogism.

Hence the parts of Dialectick are these, Division, Definition, Analysis,
Induction, Syllogism.

Of Divisions, one is a distribution of the Genus into Species, and of the
whole into parts; as when we divide the Soul into the rational part, and the
irrational; and the latter, into the concupiscible and the irascible. Another
is of a world into diverse significations, when the same may be taken several
ways. A third of accidents, according to their subjects; as when we say of
good, some belong to the soul, some to the body, some are external. The fourth
of subjects, according to their accidents; as of men, some are good, some ill,
some indifferent. Division of the Genus into its Species, is first to be used,
when we examine the essence of a thing, this cannot be done but by definitions.

Definition is made by Division in this manner, we must take the Genus of the
thing to be defined, as that of man, living creature; that we must divide by
the next differences, descending to its species, as rational, and irrational,
mortal, and immortal. Thus by adding the first difference to the Genus, is
made the definition of man.

Of Analysis there are three kinds, one by which we ascend from Sensibles to
primary Intelligibles, another whereby we ascend by demonstrates and
subdemonstrates, to indemonstrable immediate propositions. The last, which from
supposition proceeds to those principles which are taken without supposition.

The first kind is thus, as if from that Beauty which is in the body, we should
proceed to that of the mind, from that to another conversant in the offices of
life, thence to that of Laws, and so at last to the vast ocean of Beauty, that
by these steps, as it were, we may arrive at the sight of the supreme Beauty.

The second kind of Analysis is thus; We must suppose that which we seek, and
consider those which are precedent, demonstrating them by progression, from
inferiors to superiors, until we arrive at that which is first and generally
granted: From which, beginning anew, we return synthetically to that which was
sought. As for example, I enquire whether the Soul be immortal, and supposing
it to be so, I enquire whether it be always moved. This being demonstrated, I
again enquire, whether that which is always moved, is moved by its self,
which being again demonstrated, we examine, whether that which is moved by its
self, be the principal of motion. Lastly, whether a principal is ingenerate;
this, as most certain, is admitted by all. That which is ingenerate, is also
incorruptible; whence, as from a thing most certain, we collect this
demonstration. If a Principle be ingenerate and incorruptible, that which is
moved by its self is the principle of motion; but the soul is moved by its
self, therefore the soul is incorruptible, ingenerate, and immortal.

The third kind of Analysis upon supposition is this; He who enquireth after a
thing, first, supposes that thing, then observes what will follow upon that
supposition. If a reason for the supposition be required, assuming another
supposition, he enquireth, whether that which was first supposed, follow again
upon another supposition: This he always observes; until he come at last to
that principle, which is not taken upon supposition.

Induction is every method by reason, which proceeds either from like to
like, or from Singulars to Universalls: It is of great efficacy to excite
natural notions.

CHAP. VI.
Of Propositions and Argumentations.
OF that speech which we call a Proposition, there are two kinds, Affirmation
and Negation; Affirmation, as Socrates walks; Negation, as Socrates walks
not.

Of Affirmative and Negative Propositions, some are Universal, others
Particular: A particular affirmative is thus, Some pleasure is good; a
particular negative is, some pleasure is not good. An universal affirmative,
all dishonest things are ill; an universal negative, no dishonest thing is
good.

Of Propositions, some are Categoricall, some Hypotheticall: the Categoricall
are simple, as every just thing is good: Hypotheticall import consequence or
repugnance.

Syllogismes are used by Plato, either to consute or demonstrate; to consute,
what is false by interrogation, to demonstrate, what is true by declaration.
Syllogism is a speech, wherein somethings being laid down, another thing
besides those which are laid down, is necessarily inferred from them.

Of Syllogismes some are Categoricall, some Hypotheticall, some Mixed:
Categoricall are those whose sumptions and conclusions are simple propositions.
Hypotheticall are those which consist of Hypotheticall Propositions: Mixed,
which conclude both.

Plato uses demonstrative arguments in those Dialogues, wherein he explaineth
his own doctrine; Probable against Sophists and young men; Latigious against
those who are properly called Eristick, as Eut^ydemus and Hippias.

Of Categoricall Syllogismes there are three figures; the first is, that
wherein the common extreme is first the praedicate, then the subject. The
second, when the common extreme is praedicate in both: the third, wherein the
common extreme is subject in both. Extremes are the parts of a Proposition, as
in this, A man is a living creature, man and living creature are the extremes.
Plato often argues in the first, second, and third figures; in the first, as
in Alcibiade; Just things are honest,
Honest things are good,
Therefore just things are good.
In the second, as in Parmenide; as, That which has no parts is neither
straight nor crooked,
But whatsoever has figure is either straight or crooked,
Therefore, whatsoever has not parts, has not figure.
In the third thus, in the same book, Whatsoever has figure is qualitative,
Whatsoever has figure is finite,
Therefore whatsoever is qualitative is finite.


Likewise by Hypotheticall Syllogism Plato often disputes, chiefly in
Parmenide thus, If one has not parts, it has neither beginning, end, nor
middle,
But if it have neither beginning, end, nor middle, it has no bound, and if no
bound, no figure,
Therefore if one has no parts, it has no figure.


In the Second Hypotheticall figure, ordinarily called the third, wherein the
common extreme is subject in both, he argues thus, If one has not parts, it
is neither straight nor crooked,
If it has a figure, it is either straight or crooked,
Therefore if it has no parts, it has no figure.


In the Third figure by some called the second, wherein the common extreme
twice precedes the other two, he thus argues, in Phaedone,

If having the Knowledge of Equality we forget it not, we know, but if we
forget it, we have recourse to Reminiscence, etc.

Mixed Syllogismes which conclude by consequence, he uses thus;

If one is whole and finite, that is, having beginning, middle and end; it has
figure also; But the Antecedent is true,
Therefore the Consequent.


Of those also which overthrow by consequence, the differences may be gathered
out of Plato.

Thus when a man has diligently understood the faculties of the mind, the
various differences of men, the several kinds of reasoning which may be
accommodated to this or that, and to what persons such and such reasons are to
be used, he, meeting with an opportunity suiting with his purpose, will become
a perfect Orator.

The reasons of Sophismes and captious arguments are, if we observe narrowly,
expressed by Plato in Euthydemo, for there is declared which are in words,
which in things, and how they are to be solved.

The ten Praedicaments are touched by Plato in Parmenide, and in his other
Dialogues; the place of Etymologies is fully set down in Cratylo. To conclude,
he was singularly admirable for division and definition, wherein the greatest
force of Dialectick consists.

The Sum of that which he faith in Cratylo, is this; He enquireth whether
Names are by the power and reason of Nature, or by imposition. He concludes
that the rectitude of names is by a certain imposition, not temerarious or
casual, but seeming to follow the nature of the things themselves; for
rectitude of names is nothing but an imposition consonant to the nature of the
thing: Hence every imposition of names is not sufficient for rectitude, neither
the nature nor first found of the voice, but that which is composed of both; so
as every name is conveniently and properly applied to the thing. For any name
applied to any thing will not signify rightly, as if we should impose the
name of horse upon man. To speak is a kind of Action; Not he that speaks any
way speaks rightly, but he who speaks so as the nature of the thing
requires. And for as much as expression of names is a part of speaking, as
Noun is a part of Speech, to name rightly, or not rightly, cannot be done by
any imposition of names, but by a natural affinity of the name with the thing
it self. So that he is a right imposer of names, who can express the Nature of
the things in their names; for a name is an Instrument of the thing, not every
inconsiderate name, but that which agrees with its nature. By this benefit we
communicate things to one another, whence it follows, that it is nothing else
but an instrument accommodated to the teaching and discerning of a thing, as a
weavers shuttle to his Web. It belongs therefore to a Dialectick to use
names aright; for as a Weaver uses a shuttle rightly, knowing the proper use
thereof after it has been made by the Carpenter; so the Dialectick rightly
uses that name which another has made. And as to make a Helm, is the effice
of a Shipwright, but to use it rightly of a Pilot; so he who frames names,
shall impose them rightly, if he do it as if a Dialectick were present, who
understands the nature of those things which are signified by the names. Thus
much for Dialectick.

CAAP. VII.
Of THEORETICK Philosophy.
WE come next to Theoretick Philosophy, whereof one part is Theologick, another
Physic, a third Metaphysick. The end of Theology is the knowledge of primary
Causes: Of Physic, to understand the nature of the Universe, what kind of
creature man is, what place he holds in the world, whether there be a divine
Providence over all things, to which there are other Gods subordinate, how men
are in respect of them. The end of Mathematick is, to know the nature of a
superficies and a solid, and to consider the motion and revolution of
celestial bodies, the contemplation whereof must first be proposed in brief.
Thus Plato uses to confirm the acuteness of the mind, for it sharpeneth the
understanding, and renders it more ready toward the contemplation of divine
things. That which considers Numbers, being likewise a part of Mathematics,
conferreth not a little to the understanding of things that are; It frees us
from the error and ignorance which attend sensible things, and conduces to
the right knowledge of the essence of things: It likewise renders a man expert
in military affairs, especially toward the ordering of an Army by the science
of Tacticks. Geometry also conferteth much toward the understanding of good it
self, if a man pursue it not only for mechanical dimension, but that he may
by the helps thereof ascend to things which are not, busying himself about
those which are in continual generation and motion. Stereometry likewise is
exceeding useful, for after the second accretion follows this contemplation,
which holds the third room. Astronomy also is useful as a fourth discipline,
whereby we consider the motions of Heaven and the Stars, and the author of
night and day, months and years. Thus by a familiar kind of way, finding out
him who made all these, and by these disciplines, as from certain rudiments or
elements proceeding to things more sublime. Likewise Music is to be learnt,
which relates to hearing; for, as the eyes are created for Astronomy, so are
the ears for Harmony: and as when we apply our selves to Astronomy, we are led
from visible things, to the divine invisible ^ffence; so when we receive the
Harmony of voice in at our ears, from audible things, we ascend by degrees to
those which are perceived by Intellect, unless we pursue Mathematical
disciplines to this end, the contemplation thereof will be imperfect,
unprofitable, and of no value. We must therefore presently proceed from those
things which are perceived by the eyes and ears, to those which reason only
discerns; for, Mathematick is only a preface to divine things. They who
addict themselves to Arithmetic and Geometry, desire to arrive at the
knowledge of that which is, which knowledge they obtain no otherwise then as by
a dream, but really they cannot attain it, because they know not the principles
themselves, nor those things which are compounded of the principles:
nevertheless, they conduce to those things which we mentioned; wherefore Plato
will not have such disciplines to be called Sciences. Dialectick method
proceeds in such manner, that by Geometrical Hypotheses, it ascends to first
principles, which are not taken upon Hypotheses. For this reason he calls
Dialectick a Science; but, Mathematick, neither opinion, because it is more
perspicuous then sensible things; nor a Science, because it is more obscure
then first Intelligibles: But, the opinion of Bodies, the science of Primaries,
the contemplation of Mathematics.

He likewise asserteth Faith and Imagination: Faith, of things subject to
sense; Imagination of Images and Species.

Because Dialectick is more efficacious then Mathematick, as being conversant
about divine eternal things, therefore it is put before all Mathematics, as a
wall and fortification of the rest.

CHAP. VIII.
Of first matter.
WE must next give a brief account of Principles, and those things which
belong to Theology, beginning at the first, and from thence descending to the
creation of the world, and contemplation thereof, whereby at last we come to
the creation and nature of man.

To begin with matter; this he calls the receptacle, nurse, mother, place,
and subject of all Images, affirming that it is touched without sense, and
comprehended by an adulterate kind of reason. The property thereof is to
undergo the generation of all things, and to cherish them like a Nurse, and to
admit all forms, being of her own nature expert of all form, quality, and
specie^: These things are imprinted and formed in her as in a Table, and she
admits their figures, not having of her self any figure or quality. For,
she could not be fit to receive the impressions of several forms, unless she
were wholly void of all quality, and of those forms which she is about to
receive. They who make sweet Unguents of Oil, make choice of that oil which
has the least sent; they who would imprint any figures in wax, first smooth
and polish the matter, defacing all former figures. It is requisite that matter
capable of all things, if it must receive all forms, must not have the nature
of any one of them, but must be subjected to all forms, without any quality
or figure; and being such, it is neither a body nor incorporeall, but a body
potentially, as Brass is potentially a Statue, because then it becomes a
Statue, when it puts on the form thereof.

CHAP. IX.
Of Ideas.
WHereas matter is a Principle, Plato likewise introduces other principles
besides matter. One as an exemplar, Idaeas; another Paternall, God, the Father
and Author of all things. Idaea, as to God, is the notion of God, as to us, the
primary Intelligible, as to matter, a manner, as to this sensible world an
Exemplar, as to it self, Essence. For whatsoever is made with understanding,
must necessarily be referred to something, as if something be made from
another, as my picture from me, the exemplar thereof must be presupposed, and
if there be nothing eternal, every Artist conceives it first within himself,
then transferreth the forms thereof into matter.

They define Idaea an eternal exemplar of things which are according to
Nature; for, the greater part of Platonists will not allow an Idaea to be of
things that are made by Art, as of a Shield, or Lute, nor of things which are
praeternaturall, as of a Feavour, or unnatural Choler; nor of singulars, as of
Socrates or Plato; nor of vile abject things, as of silth or strawes; nor of
relatives, as of greater and longer: For Idaeas are the eternal notions of
God, perfect in themselves.

That there are Idaeas, they prove thus: Whether God be Intellect or something
Intelligent, he must have his Intelligibles, and those eternal and immovable;
if so, there are Idaeas. For, if matter it self be in it self void of
measure, it is necessary that it receive measure from some superior, that is
wholly remote from matter: But the Antecedent is true, therefore the
consequent; and if so, there are Idaeas, certain measures void of matter.
Again, if the world were not made by chance, it must only be made of something,
but by something, and not only so, but after the likeness of something; but,
that after whose likeness it was made, what is it but an Idaea? whence it
follows, that there are Ideas. Again, if intellect differ from true opinion,
that which is intelligible differs from that which is opinionable; and if so,
there are intelligibles distinct from opinionables, wherefore there are first
Intelligibles, as well as first Sensibles, whence we conclude there are Idaeas.

CHAP. X.
Of God.
WE come next to speak of the third principle, which Plato, though he think it
almost ineffable, conceives may be expressed in this manner. If there are
intelligibles, and those neither sensibles, nor coherent with sensibles; but
adherent to first Intelligibles, then are there first simple Intelligibles, as
there are first sensibles; the Antecedent is true, therefore the consequent.
But men subject to perturbation of sense, when they would contemplate something
intelligible, presently fall upon the thought of something sensible, whereby at
the same time they imagine magnitude, or figure, or color, and therefore
cannot understand this sincerely: But the Gods being void of corporeal mixtion
understand purely and sincerely. Now because the Intellect is better then the
Soul, and that Intellect which is always in act, and at once understands all
things, is better then that Intellect which is in power, and of these, that is
most excellent which is the cause of the other, and superior to all; This can
be nothing else but God, whom we call the first, as being the Cause that the
Intellect of the Word always acts. He, being himself immovable, acts upon
the Intellect of the World, as the Sun upon the Eye, when it turn eth toward
him. And as that which is desired moves the Appetite it self remaining
immovable; so does this Intellect move the Intellect of all Heaven. Now this
first Intellect being most fair, must have the most fair Intelligible; but
nothing is fairer then it self, therefore it always understands it self, and
its own notions, which Act is called Operation.

Moreover, God is first, eternal ineffable, perfect in himself; that is,
needing none, and ever perfect, that is, absolute in all times, and every way
perfect, that is, absolute in every part, Divinity, Essence, Truth, Harmony,
good. Neither do we so name these, to distinguish one from the other, but
rather by them all to understand one. He is said to be Good, because he
bestows his benefits upon all according to their several capacities, and so
is the cause of all goods. Fair, because he is in his essence both more and
equal. Truth because, he is the principle of all truth, as the Sun of all
light. And Father, as being cause of all things, and adorning the mind of
Heaven and Soul of the World after his own exemplar and notions. For according
to his own will he filled all things with himself, exciting the Soul of the
World, and converting it to himself, for he is cause of that Intellect, which
being adorned by the Father, adorneth also the Nature of all this World. He is
likewise ineffable, and as we said, can only be perceived by the mind, for he
is neither genus nor species, nor difference, neither can any accident be
applied to him. He is not ill, for that it were impiety to affirm; nor good,
for so he should be termed if he were meanly or highly participant of
goodness. Nor difference, for that cannot be made according to the notion of
him, nor qualited, for he is not made that which he is by quality, nor
perfected thereby. Nor void of quality, for he is not deprived of any quality
that appertains to him. Nor part of any thing, nor as a whole constituted of
parts; nor as the same or diverse, for nothing can happen to him whereby he may
be distinguished from others; Neither does he move, or is he moved.

Hence the first apprehension of him is by abstraction from these things, as
we understand a point by abstraction from sensibles, considering first a
superficies: then a line, then a point. The second is by Analogy in this
manner. As the Sun is to sight and visible things, himself not being sight, yet
affording the one to see the other to be seen, so is the first Intellect to
that Intellect, which is in our Soul, and to those things which it
understands. For, it self is not the Intellect, yet it perfecteth in these
the Act of Intellection; to those it affords that they are understood,
enlightening that truth which is in them. The third way to understand him is
thus: when a man beholds that Beauty which is in Bodies, he proceeds to
that which is in the Soul, then to that which is in Offices and Laws: Lastly,
to the vast Ocean of Beauty, after which, he considers that which is good it
self, amiable it self, expetible it self, which shines like a light, and
meets the Soul, that which ascends unto it by these degrees. By this he
comprehends God himself through reason of that excellence, which consists
in adoration of him. He considers God void of parts, for nothing was before
him a part, and that of which something consists is precedent to that whereof
it is a part, for a superficies is before a body, and a line before a
superficies. Moreover God not having many parts, can neither be locally moved,
nor altered by qualities. For if he be altered, it must be done by himself, or
some other; if by some other, that other must be of greater power then he; if
by himself, it must be either to better or to worse, both which are absurd.

From all these it follows that God is incorporeal, which may likewise be
proved thus. If God were a body, he should consist of matter and form; for
every body consists of matter, and its form joins to that matter, which is
made like unto the Idaea's, and in an ineffable manner participant of them; But
that should consist of matter and form is absurd; for then he could not be
either simple or a Principle; therefore he is incorporeall. Again, if he be a
body, he consists of matter, and consequently is either fire or air, or
earth, or water, or something made out of these; but none of these is principle
by it self; besides, he must then be later then matter, as consisting of it,
which being absurd, it is necessary that God be incorporeall. Moreover, if he
were a body, it would follow that he must be generable, corruptible, mutable,
which to affirm of God were intolerable.

CHAP. XI.
Of Qualities.
THat Qualities are incorporeall, may be proved thus: every body is a Subject,
quality is not a Subject but an accident, therefore quality is not a body.
Again, no body is in a subject; every quality is in a Subject, therefore
quality is not a body. Again, quality is contrary to quality, but no body as no
body is contrary to a body; therefore qualities are not bodies. To omit, that
it is most agreeable to reason, that as matter is void of quality, so quality
should be void of matter, and if quality be void of matter, it must likewise be
void of corporeity, for if qualities were bodies, two or three bodies might be
together in the same place, which is absurd.

Qualities being incorporeal, the maker of them must be incorporeall also;
moreover there can be no efficients, but in corporeals, for bodies naturally
suffer and are in mutation, not continuing always in manner nor persevering in
the same state. For whenever they seem to effect any thing, we shall find
that they suffer it long before. Whence as there is something which wholly
suffers, so must there be something which wholly acts; but such only is
incorporeall.

Thus much concerning principles as far they relate to Theology; we proceed
next to Physical contemplations.

CHAP XII.
Of the Causes, Generation, Elements, and Order of the World.
FOrasmuch as of sensible and singular things there must of necessity be some
examplars, viz. Idea's, of which are Sciences and Definitions (for besides all
particular men, we conceive a man in our mind, and besides all particular
horses a horse, and likewise besides all living creatures a living creature
immortal and unbegotten: as from one seal are made many prints, and of one
man there may be many Pictures, of all which, the Idaea it self is cause that
they are such as it self is) it is necessary that this Universe, the fairest
Fabric of Gods making, be so made by God, that in the making thereof, he
looked upon an Idaea as its exemplar, whilst by a wonderful providence and
most excellent design God applied himself to the building of this frame,
because he was good.

God therefore made it of all matter, which being before the generation of
Heaven, disorderly scattered; he from a deformed confusion reduced to
beautiful order, and adorned every way the parts thereof with sit numbers and
figures, until at last he so distinguished them as now they are, Fire and
Earth to Air and Water, of which there were then only the footsteps, and a
certain aptitude to admit the power of Elements, and so without any reason or
order, they justled matter, and were justled again by matter.

Thus God framed the World of four entire Elements, of whole Fire and Earth,
Water and Air, omitting no power or part of any of them. For he says, it must
be corporeal and generated, and subject to touch and sight; but without Fire
and Earth nothing can be touched or seen; Wherefore justly he framed it of Fire
and Earth, and because it was requisite, there should be some chain to unite
these, there is a Divine chain, which according to the proportion of reason
makes one of it self, and those things which are united to it, and the World
could not be plain (for then one medium would have served) but sphaericall,
therefore there was need of two mediums to the constitution thereof. Betwixt
Fire and Earth by the prescription of this reason is interposed Air and Water,
that as Fire is to Air, so is Air to Water, and as Air is to Water, so is Water
to Earth; and again, as Earth is to Water, so is Water to Air, and as Water is
to Air, so is Air to Fire.

There being nothing remaining beyond the World, God made the World one,
conformable to this Idaea, which is one. He likewise made it such, as that is
incapable of sickness or age. For, besides that nothing can befall it whereby
it may be corrupted, it is so sufficient to it self, that it has not need of
any exterior thing. He bestowed upon it a Sphaericall figure, as being the
fairest, the most capacious and aptest to motion, and because it needs not
hearing or sight, or the rest of the senses, he gave it not any Organs of
sense. He denied all kinds of motion to be competible to it, except the
circular, which is proper to the mind and to Wisdom.

CHAP XIII.
Of the convenience of figures with the Elements and World.
THe world thus consists of two parts, a Soul and a Body; this visible and
corruptible, that neither subject to sight nor touch: The power and
constitution of each is different, the body consists of Fire, Earth, Water,
and Air; which four, the maker of the Universe (there being until then
nothing more confused then the Elements) formed in a Pyramid, a Cube, an
Octaedron, and an Icosaedron; but chiefly in a Dodecaedron. Matter, as far as
it put on the figure of a Pyramid, became Fire, and mounted upward: For, that
figure is the most apt to cut and to divide, as consisting of fewest triangles,
and therefore is the rarest of all figures. As far as it is an Octaedron, it
took the quality of Air: Where it took that of an Icosaedron, it became
Water; The figure of a Cube Earth, as being the most solid and staple of all
the Elements. The figure of a Dodecaedron, he used in the fabric of the
Universe. Superficies come nigher the nature of Principles then all these, for
they are before solids. Of its nature, the two Parents (as it were) are two
Triangles, most fair and rectangular; one a Scalenum, the other an Isosceles; a
Scalenum is a triangle having one right angle, the other of two thirds, the
last of one third. A Scalenum therefore is the element of a Pyramid, and an
Octaedron, and an Icosaedron. A Pyramid consists of four triangles, having
all sides equal to one another, each whereof is divided as we said, into six
scalenous triangles. The Octaedors consist of eight like sides, whereof each is
divided into six Scalenums. The Icosaeders of twenty in the same manner; but
the element of a Cube is an Isosceles triangle, for four such triangles
concurring make a square, and six squares a Cube. God made use of a Dodecaedron
in the construction of the Universe, whence there are twelve figures of living
creatures in the Zodiac, whereof each is divided into thirty parts. Likewise
in a Dodecaedron, which consists of twelve Pentagones, if each be divided
into five triangles, there are in every one six triangles, so that in the whole
Dodecaedron, there will be 360 triangles, as many as there are d^grees in the
Zodiac.

When matter was put into those figures by God, first it was moved rudely
without order, until at last he reduced it to order, each being conjoined to
one another, and composed in due proportion: Neither are these distinct in
place, but are in perpetual motion, which they give likewise into matter. For,
being straightened by the compass of the world, and agitated by mutual
justlings, they are driven, the rare always into the region of the solid,
whence nothing is left vacuous, nothing void of body. The inequality which
remains amongst them causes convulsion, for matter is agitated amongst them,
and they reciprocally by matter.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Soul of the World, the Spears and Stars.
FRom Bodies he allows that we collect the powers of the Soul, for seeing
that we discern all things by the Soul, he justly placed the principles of all
things therein, that whatsoever should occur, we might contemplate it by that
which is of kin and neighbor unto it, and attribute an essence thereunto
consonant to the functions. Then therefore he called one substance intelligible
and indivisible; he placed another divisible amongst bodies, to signify that
the knowledge as well of the one as of the other may be had by Intellect. And
knowing that in things intelligible and sensible, there is identity and
diversity, he fitly composed the Soul out of all these. For, either the like is
known by the like, as the Pythagoreans hold, or, as Heraclitus the Naturalist,
unlike always by unlike.

That he would that the World should be generate, we must not so understand, as
if there shall be any time wherein the world is not, but in as much as it
always perishes in generation, and declares, that there is some more
excellent and principal cause of its essence.

The soul of the world which was from all eternity, was not made by God, but
only adorned by him, in which respect he is sometimes said to have made it, for
that he exciteth it, and converteth the mind thereof, as out of a profound
sleep unto himself, that beholding his intelligibles and affecting his notions,
it should from thence receive Species and form; whence it is manifest, that the
World was endued by God, both with a Soul and mind. For, intending it to be the
best, he must have made it animate and intelligent, since an animate thing is
more excellent then an inanimate, and an intelligent then an unintelligent;
perhaps the mind also could not subsist without a Soul.

This Soul, being diffused from the Center of the world to the extremes,
compre^endeth the whole body of the World, so as it is extended throughout the
Universe, and in that manner joyneth and conserveth the whole. The external
preside over the internal, for they are not divided, but these are divided
into seven Circles; from the first distributed according to duple and triple
Intervalls. That which is comprehended by the indivisible sphere, is
correspondent to it, that which is divided to the other. For the motion of
Heaven which comprehends all things, being not uncertain, is one and
ordinate, but that of the things within it, is changeable, varied by rising and
setting, whence called Planetary. The outermost sphere moves to the right hand
from East to West, the innermost contrariwise, to the left hand from West to
East, meeting the World.

God framed also the Stars and constellations; some fixed for the Ornament of
Heaven and might, very many in number. The Erratick are seven, serving for
number and time, and the illumination of all things; for time is an intervall
of the motion of the World as an image of eternity, which is the measure of the
state of the eternal World. The Planets are not of equal power, the Sun is
the leader of all, who illuminateth and shows all things to the eye. Next the
Moon, which in respect of her power has the second place. The rest of the
Planets, each according to their several proportions. The Moon makes the
measure of a Month, in that space completing its circle, and overtaking the
Sun. The Sun measures the Year, for running through the circle of the Zodiac,
he compleateth the seasons of the year. Of the other stars each has its
proper revolution, with which all men are not acquainted but only the Learned.
By all those revolutions the absolute number of time is completed, when coming
all to the same point, they are in such order, as if we should imagine a right
line to be drawn from the sphere of fixed stars to the Earth; the Centers of
them all would be seen in that line.

There being seven Orbs in the Planetary sphere, the maker of the World,
framed in them seven conspicuous bodies of matter for the most part fiery, and
inserted them into the spears belonging to the other Erratick Circle. The Moon
he placed in that Circle which is next the Earth, the Sun in the second, the
Morning Star, and the sacred Star of Mercury, in that Orb which is equal in
swiftness with the Sun. The rest higher, each in his proper sphere. That of
Saturn the slowest of all, he placed in that Orb which is next to the sixed
stars. Second to this is that which they call the sphere of Jupiter, next that
of Mars; the eighth which is the Supreme power includes all. These are all
living intelligent Creatures, and Gods endued with a sphericall figure.

CAAP. XV.
Of Demons and Elements.
THere are other Demons also which we may call Intelligent Gods, in each of
the Elements partly visible, partly invisible, in the ether, fire, air and
water, that there be not any part of the World void of Soul, or of an animate
creature more excellent then humane nature. Below these are all earthly
sublunary things; God is maker of the World, of all Gods and Demons. This
Universe by his Divine Will shall not be dissolved. Over the rest his Sons
preside, who by his command and example order whatsoever they do. By these
lo^s, nocturnall visions, dreams, Oracles, and whatsoever men refer to
divination is artificially wrought.

The Earth is fixed in the midst of all, round about the Axletree which passes
through the midst of the World. It is the observer of night and day, the most
ancient of all Gods in Heaven. Next the Soul of the World it affords us most
nutriture; about it the Heavens move, and it self is a kind of Star: It
remains in its proper place, which by reason of its even weight is the
Center; the ether ext^riour is divided into the sphere of fixed Stars, and
that of Planets. Next to these is the Air; in the midst the Earth with its
humidity.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the younger Gods makers of men.
AFter that all these were framed, there remained three kinds of living
Creatures which were to be mortal, Volatile, Aquatile, and Terrestrial; the
generation whereof he committed to his Son, left if he himself had begotten
them, they should have been immortal as well as the rest. They borrowing some
little parts from first matter for a certain time, formed mortal living
Creatures, and because of Mankind, as being next to the Gods, both the Father
of all things, and his Sons likewise have a particular care, the Maker of all
things sent down himself their Souls into the earth equal in number to the
Stars, and having imposed each one his proper Star as a vehiculum, like a
Lawgiver, he pronounced decrees unto them, that he himself might be
inculpable, which was that there should arise mortal affections from the body,
first senses, next pleasure, then grief, and fear, and anger, which those
souls that should overcome, and not suffer themselves to be transported by
them, should justly be accounted Victors, and at the last return to their
proper Star, though they which should be transported by injustice, should in
the second generation undergo the lives of women, wherein if they ceased not
from their wickedness, they should at last transmigrate into the Nature of
brute Beasts, the end of these Labors shall then be, when they have overcome
the innate affections of the body, and then return to their proper habit.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Body, and parts of man, and Powers of the Soul.
THe Gods first formed man of Earth, Fire, Air, and Water, borrowing some parts
from matter, (to be restored in their due time) which they so connected to one
another by secret ties, as that of all these they framed one body. The most
excellent part of the soul that was sent down from Heaven, they placed in the
Head, for which as a manured Field they prepared the Brain. About the face they
disposed Organs proper for sense; Marrow they made of smooth straight
triangles, of which the Elements were formed, that it should be the Origin of
prolifick seed. Benes they formed of Marrow and Earth, the Earth moistened, and
often dipped in Water and Fire. Flesh is compounded of salt and sharp, as of a
kind of ferment. Marrow they enclosed with bones, bones with sinews instead of
chains, that by these inflexions the knitting of the joints might be plyant.
Over these as a cover is extended the Skin, partly white, partly black, for
beauty and use. Of these likewise consist the internal bowels, and the belly,
and the intestines, every where rolled about it. And from the mouth above the
aspera arteria, and the oesophagus, of which one comes down to the stomach,
the other to the Lungs. Meat is digested in the belly by spirit and heat, and
thence distributed to the whole body according to their several constitutions.
The two veins passing along the spine of the Back, meet and cross at the
head, where they spread into many parts.

Thus when the Gods had made man, and given him a soul as the Mistress of his
body, they placed the principal part of that soul to which Reason
appertains, in the head. Whence is derived marrow and sinews, and by the
different affection of this, the mind likewise is altered. Moreover they gave
him senses, as the attendants of Reason, and the power of judging and
contemplating with Reason. Those parts of the soul, which are moved by meaner
affections, they seated in lower places; the irascible part in the heart, the
concupiscible about the belly, and the parts next to the Navell, of which
hereafter.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of sight.
AFter that the Gods had placed the eyes (conduits of light) in the face, they
included in them a fiery light, which being smooth and in some manner thick,
they conceived of kin to diurnall light. This breaks forth every where at the
Eyes, but chiefly through the Eye Balls, as being there most pure and clear.
This agreeing with the external light, as like with like affords the sense
of sight, whence in the night, when the light vanishes and is obscured, this
ray of ours no longer mingleth with the immediate air; but, on the contrary,
withdrawing it self inwards, smooths and diffuses the motions that are in us,
and so brings on sleep, whereby the eyelids are shut. If it bring much rest,
the sleep is little disturbed with dreams, but if there remain any motions
behind, we are troubled with many illusions. In this manner fantasies, whether
true or false, arise. Of the same Nature are images, which we see in glasses,
or other smooth pellucid bodies, which exist only by reflection. For, as the
glass is concave or unequal, or oblong, the object is differently represented
to the beholder. The light being reflected to other parts, those which are
dispersed in unequal meet in the concave, for in some, the right and left sides
seem quite inverted, in others alike; in others, those which are upwards seem
downwards, and on the contrary, those which are downwards, upwards.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the rest of the Senses.
HEaring is given for the perception of voice, it arises from a motion made
about the head, and sets in the liver. Voice is that which passes through
the ears, brain, and blood to the Soul. A sharp voice is that which is moved
swiftly, deep which slowly, great which much, small which little.

Next follows the sense proper to the Nostrills, perceptible of odor. Odor
is an affection which passes from the veins of the Nostrills to the parts of
the Navell. The Species thereof have no name, except the two that are most
common, pleasant, and unpleasant, commonly called sweet and stinking. All Odor
is more thick then Air, more thin then Water; for Odor is properly said to be
of those things which have not yet received perfect mutation, but consist of a
communion of Air and Water, as smoke and mists. For, by the resolution of these
into one another, the sense of smelling is made.

Taste was made by the Gods to be the judge of different savours. Hence are
veins extended to the Heart, by whcih several ^avours are examined. These
Veins by dilating or contracting themselves severally according to the Sapors
presented to them, discern their differences. The differences of Sapours are
seven; sweet, sharp, sour, picqueant, salt, acid, bitter; the Nature of sweet
Sapour is contrary to all the rest, for by its power it sootheth and pleases
the moisture of the tongue, whereas of the rest. some disturb and ^dispell it,
as acute Sapors, some heat, and fly upwards, as the hot; others being
abstersive, dissolve it, as the bitter; others are by degrees purgative and
abstersive, as the salt. Of these some contract the passages; they which do it
more roughly, are called acid, they which more gently, austere.

The sense of touching was formed by the Gods to discern hot and cold, soft and
hard, light and heavy, smooth and rough, and to judge the differences of each
of these; Yielding bodies, we call those which yield to the touch, resisting
those which yield not; this proceeds from the bases of bodies, those which
have large bases are firm and solid, these which have narrow bases are
yielding, soft, and easily changed. Rough is that which is uneven and hard,
smooth that which is plain and thick: As warm and cold qualities are most
opposite, so they proceed from the most different causes. That which cutteth by
the acuteness and roughness of its parts, begets a hot affection, that
which is more thick, in penetration, a cold, whilst the more rare are expelled,
and the more dense compelled to penetrate into their room. Thence arises a
concussion and trepidation, and (an affection which is from hence begotten in
bodies,) rigor.

CHAP. XX.
Of Heavy and Light.
HEavy and light ought not to be defined by higher or lower place, nothing is
high or low; for Heaven being absolutely round, and its convexe extremity even,
we cannot term any thing higher or lower; yet may we call that heavy, which is
hardly drawn to a place different from its Nature, light which easily; or,
heavy is that which consists of most parts, light of fewest.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Respiration.
WE breath after this manner. The external Air compasses us round about, and
passes in at our mouth, nostrills, and invisible Pores of the body, where
being warmed, it flows back again to the external Air, by that part out of
which it flowed, it again thrusts the external Air to the interior. Thus
there is an unintermitted succession of inspiration and expiration.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Causes of Diseases.
OF Diseases Plato alleges many causes. The first is defect or excess of the
Elements, and a change into places which agree not with their Nature. The
second a preposterous generation of homogeneall parts, as when of flesh is made
blood, or choler, or phlegm; for all these are nothing but colliquation, or
putrefaction. ^legm is a new coll^quation of flesh; sweat and tears, are a kind
of Serum of phlegm. Phlegm intercepted in the outward parts, begets Scurse and
Leprosy, in the inward being mingled with Melancholy, it causes the
falling sickness. Sharp, and salt phlegm engender those affections which
consist in rigor, for all bodies that are inflamed with choler must suffer
that. A world of various diseases are engendered by choler and phlegm. As
concerning feavours; Plato conceives that a continual feavour proceeds from
excess of fire, a quotidian from excess of air, a tertian from excess of
water, a quartan from excess of Earth. It remains that we here begin to
speak of the Soul, though not without some danger, of repeating the same things.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the three principal powers of the Soul.
THE Gods, the makers of mortal Creatures, having received from the first God
the Soul of Man immortal, added unto it two mortal parts; yet left the
immortal divine part might be infected with mortal extravagances, they seated
as Prince of all in the tower, as it were of the body, the Head, in figure
resembling the Universe. The rest of the body they appointed as a vehiculum to
serve this. To each mortal part they assigned its proper habitation, placing
the irascible in the heart, the concupiscible in the midst betwixt the Navell
and the Diaphragme, binding it there as a furious savage Beast. They framed the
Lungs in respect of the heart, soft, bloodlesse, hollow, and spungy, that the
heart being something heated with anger, might thereby be refrigerated and
assuaged; the Liver to excite and allay the concupiscible part, having both
sweetness and bitterness, as likewise for the clearing of divinations which
are given by dreams: for as much as in it by reason of its smoothness, shining
and brightness, the power which proceeds from the mind does shine forth. The
Spleen was made for the benefit of the Liver, to purge and cleanse it; so that
those corruptions, which by some diseases, are contracted about the Liver,
retire thither.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of the distinction of the parts of the Soul.
THat the Soul and parts thereof according to their proper faculties are
threefold; every part appointed by reason their several places, is manifest
from hence. Those things which are separated by Nature, are diverse; passionate
and reasonable are separate by nature; this being conversant in Intelligibles,
that in things sad or joyful, to omit the passive part which is common likewise
to bruit Beasts. Now these two being distinct by Nature, must likewise be
distinguished by place, because for the most part they disagree, and are
repugnant to one another; but nothing can be repugnant to it self, neither can
those things which are contrary to one another consist together in the same. In
Medea anger seems to contest thus with reason; I know what I intend is ill,
But anger overrules my will.


In Laius, when he ravished Chrysippus, concupiscence contested with Reason;
for so he says; Men to this crime the Gods confine,
To know the ill that they decline.


That the rational power is different from the Passive, is evident from this,
that they ordered by several means, one by discipline, the other by habitual
practice.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Immortality of the Soul.
THat the Soul is immortal Plato proves by these Arguments. The Soul to every
thing, wherein it is, conferreth life, as being naturally innate in her self,
but that which conferreth life to others never admits death, but what is
such is immortal.

The Soul being immortal, is likewise incorruptible, for it is an incorporeall
essence which cannot be changed substantially, and is only perceptible by the
Intellect, not by the eyes, and is uniform. Hence it must be simple, neither
can be at any time dissolved or corrupted. The body is contrary, for it is
subject to sight and other senses, and as it is compounded, so shall it again
be dissolved, and it is multiform. When the Soul adhereth to those things which
are preceptible by Intellect, it acquieseeth; Now to that by whose presence she
is disturbed, she cannot possibly be like, wherefore she is more like to those
things which are perceptible by Intellect; but what is such is by nature
incorruptible and perishable.

Again, the Soul naturally does preside over the body, not the body over the
Soul, but that which by nature rules and commands is of kin to Divinity,
wherefore the Soul being next unto God, must be immortal, not subject to
corruption.

Again, Contraries which have no medium, not by themselves, but by some
accident are so ordered by Nature, that they may be mutually made of one
another. But that which men call life is contrary to that which they call
death; as therefore Death is a separation of the Soul from the body; so islife
a conjunction of the Soul with the body, praeexistent to the Body. But if she
be praeexistent, and shall subsist after the body, it follows that she be
sempiternall, for there cannot any thing be imagined whereby she may be
corrupted.

Again, if learning be Reminiscence, the Soul must be immortal, but that it is
reminiscence we prove thus: Learning cannot otherwise consist then by
remembrance of those things we formerly know. For, if from Singulars we
understand Universalls, how could we discourse by singulars which are infinite?
or how from a few perceive Universalls? we should therefore necessarily be
deceived, as if we judged that only to be a living Creature which breaths; or
how could the notions themselves have the reason of principles. By reminiscence
therefore, from some few which we have conceived in our mind, we understand the
rest, and from some occurrent particulars we remember those which we knew long
before, but were then given over to oblivion, when the Soul first descended
into the Body.

Again, if the Soul be not corrupted by its own proper ill, neither can it be
destroyed by that or any other, nor simply by any ill, and being such, shall
remain uncorrupted.

Again, that which is moved in it self, as being the principle of motion in
those things which are moved, is always moved; that which is such is
immortal; but the Soul is moved of it self, that which is moved of it self is
the principle of all motion and generation; and a principle is expert of
generation and corruption, wherefore the Souls of men and of the Universe it
self are such, for both partake of the same mistion. He affirms the Soul to
be moveable in her self, because it has an innate life, always operating by
its power.

That rational Souls are immortal, may clearly be asserted out of Plato; but
whether the irrational be such seems doubtful; yet is it probable that
being guided only by Fantasy, not endued with reason or judgment, neither do
they contemplate any thing, or discern, or collect from it, nor can they
discern ills, but generally understand nothing, nor are of the same nature with
those Souls which have Intellect and Reason, but are capable of dying and
being corrupted. For as much as they are immortal, it follows that they are
put into bodies, being planted into the formed Nature of Embrio's, and
transmigrate into several bodies as well humane as others, either according to
some certain numbers which they expect, or by the will of the Gods, or for
intemperance of life, or for love of the Body. For the Body and Soul have a
kind of affinity, as Fire and Brimstone.

Moreover the Souls of the Gods have a dijudicative faculty, called Gnostick,
and impulsive to some action, called Parastatick, which faculties being
likewise in humane Souls, become changed as soon as they come into the body,
the assistent into the concupiscible, the impulsive into the Irascible.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Fate and Free Will.
Concerning Fate Plato held thus. All things are in fate, yet all things are
not decreed by Fate. For Fate, though it be like a Law, yet it uses not to
speak in this manner, that this man shall do thus, and to that man, that shall
befall (which were to proceed into infinite, there being an infinite generation
of men, and infinite accidents happening daily to them; besides that, this
would take away our free will, our praise or dispraise, and whatsoever is of
that kind) but rather thus; Whatsoever Soul chooses such a life, and does such
things, these shall follow, the Soul therefore is free, and it is left within
its power to do or not to do, without any compulsion or necessity. But that
which follows the action is performed by Fate. As from Paris's ravishing of
Helena, (which it is within his power to do or not to do) shall follow that the
Grecians contend with the Trojans about Helena. Thus Apollo foretold Laius; If
thou beget a Son, that Son shall kill thee.

In the Oracle are comprehended both Laius and the begetting of a Son, that
which shall follow upon the begetting of the Son depends on Plato.

That which may be done is of a middle kind betwixt true and false, and being
so indefinite by Nature: that which is in our power, is carried on as it were
unto it. That which is done by our election, is presently either true or false;
that which is in power, is different from that which is said to be in habit and
act. That which is in power declares an aptitude in that thing, wherein the
habit is not yet perfect. So a boy may be said to be a Grammarian, a Musician,
a Carpenter in power. He is in habit of one or more of these when he has
acquired that habit. He is said to be in act, when he operateth according to
that acquired habit. That which we call possible to be done is none of these.
Indeterminate is that which is in our power, and to which part soever it
inclines, will be true or false.

CHAP. XXVII.
ETHICK.
Of the chief Good, and of Virtues.
WE must next give a short account of Plato's Ethics. That which is worthy of
all honor, and is the Supreme good, he conceived not easy to be found, and
if found, not safe to be declared. For this reason, he communicated the
contemplation of the chief good to very few, and those of his most intimate
acquaintance, of whom his judgment made choice for this purpose. But our good,
if we examine his books dillgently, we shall find he placed in the knowledge of
the first good, which may rightly be called God, and the first mind. For all
things which men call good, he conceives to be called good in this respect,
for as much as they derive something from that good, as all sweet and hot things
are termed such from some participation of the first sweet, and first hot. Of
those things which are in us, only the mind and reason have a similitude of the
first good. Wherefore he calls our good, Fair, Venerable, Amiable,
Proportionate, and lastly Beatitude. Of those which are commonly called good,
as health, beauty, strength, there is none good, unless it be employed toward
the practice of Virtue. For being separated from Virtue, they are like matter
only, and to those who make ill use of them only ill. Yet these Plato sometimes
calls mortal goods. Beatitude he reckons not amongst humane goods, but
amongst the divine and immortal. Whence he asserteth that the souls of true
Philosophers are replenished with vast admirable goods, and after the
dissolution of their mortal body, are admitted to the table of the Gods, and
with them walk over and survey the field of Truth, because they did see they
used the utmost endeavors of their Souls to know it, and esteemed it the most
precious of all things, by the benefit whereof they illustrated and excited
their mind as a lost or blinded sight, preferring the conservation thereof
before many corporeal eyes. Foolish men are like those who lead all their life
in some Cave under ground, where they never saw the light of the Sun, but only
some empty thin shadows of such bodies as are with us upon the Earth, which
seeing, they think they see true bodies. As these, if ever they should be
brought out of darkness into the clear light, would questionless despise all
things which they saw before, and themselves much more, as having been
absolutely deceived; So they who rise up out of the darkness of this life to
those things which are divine and fair, in all likelihood will contemn what
before they most esteemed, and love more vehemently this contemplation. Thus it
appears, that only what is good is honest, and that Virtue suffices to
Felicity,

Moreover, that good and fair consist in knowledge of the first good, he
declares in whole volumes. As concerning those which are good by
participation, he speaks thus in his first Book of Laws. Good is twofold,
Humane and Divine, etc. If anything be disjoined from the first good, and void
of the essence thereof, that is called good by the foolish, which in Euthydemo,
he affirms to be a greater ill to the Possessor.

That he conceives the Virtues to be eligible in themsel^es, is manifest, in
as much as he affirms that only to be good which is honest, which he
demonstrateth in many Dialogues, particuly in those of the Commonwealth.

Hence he conceives that man to be most happy and blessed, who has attained
the Science we mentioned; yet not in respect of the honors which attend such a
person, nor of any other reward; for though he be unknown to all men, and such
things, as are commonly accounted Ills, as, dishonor, banishment and death
happen unto him; he is notwithstanding happy. On the contrary, a man who wants
this knowledge, though he possess all things commonly esteemed good, riches,
power, health, strength, and Beauty, he is nothing the more happy.

He asserteth an ultimate end, conformable to all these which is to be made
like unto God, as far as Humanity is capable of being such. This he expounds
variously, sometimes as in Theaeteto) he affirms our resemblance to God to
consist in being prudent, just, and holy; wherefore we must endeavor to fly
with all possible celerity from hence to those. This flight is the resemblance
to God, as much as is possible: The similitude consists in Prudence, Justice,
and Sanctity; sometimes in Justice only, as in his last Book of the
Commonwealth. For a man is never deserted by God, whilst he endeavors to be
just, and by the very act of Virtue, as much as man is capable of, he is
rendered like unto God. In Phaedone he asserteth, that this resemblance to God
is acquired by Temperance and Justice, thus. Are not they blessed and happy,
and from hence shall go into the best place, who have practiced the popular
civil Virtue which they call Temperance and Justice? Again, sometimes he
affirmed, that the end of life is to be like unto God, sometimes to follow God,
as when he says, God indeed according to the old saying, containing the
beginning, midale and end of all things, etc. Sometimes he joyneth both
together, as when he says, The Soul following God, and being rendered like unto
him, etc. The principle of Utility is good it self; but this is said of God,
therefore the end conformable to the principle, is to become like unto God, to
the Celestial, or rather supercelestiall God, who has not Virtue, but is more
excellent then all Virtue. Wherefore it is rightly said, that (...); misery, is
a perversity of the Genius, (...), Beatitude is a good habit of the Genius.

This similitude to God we shall obtain, if we enjoy convenient nature; in our
manner, education and sense, according to Law, and chiefly by reason, and
discipline, and institution of wisdom, withdrawing our selves as much as
possible from humane affairs, and being conversant in those things only which
are understood by contemplation: the way to prepare, and, as it were, to
cleanse the Demon that is in us, is to initiate our selves into higher
disciplines, which is done by Music, Arithmetic, Astronomy and Geometry, not
without some respect of the body by Gymnastick, whereby it is made more ready
for the actions both of War and Peace.

CHAP. XXVIII.
The definition and kinds of Virtue.
Virtue being divine, is the perfect and best affection of the Soul, which
adorneth a man, and renders him more excellent and ready, as well for speech
as action, whether he do it alone or with others.

Of the Virtues, some are placed in the rational part, some in the
irrational. For whereas the Nature of the rational part is one, that of the
irascible another, that of the concupiscible another, the perfection of these
must likewise be different. That of the rational is Prudence, of the
irascible, Fortitude, of the concupiscible, Temperance.

Prudence is the Science of things, Good, Bad, and betwixt both.

Temperance is an apt moderation of desires and appetites; when when we call
Temperance a moderation and obedience, we mean only this, that it is a faculty
causing all appetites to be subjected unto it, in decent order, and submisse
obedience to be commanded by nature. This is the rational part.

Fortitude is a lawful observation of a command difficult, or not difficult,
that is, it is a faculty which keeps a lawful precept.

Justices is an agreement amongst all these, which causes that the three parts
of the Soul agree with one another, and that each be worthily conversant in
those things which are proper, and belong unto it.

Thus it is a common entire perfection of these three Virtues, Prudence,
Fortitude and Temperance, in such manner that reason commands, and the rest
of the parts, each according to its several property, are restrained by
Reason, and obey it.

Hence it follows, that the Virtues are mutally consequent to one another;
Fortitude being the conservation of a lawful precept, is likewise conservative
of right reason. Right reason proceeds from Prudence; Prudence cohereth with
Fortitude, for it is the knowledge of good things, but no man can discern that
which is good, if he be distracted by fear, or involved in the like troubles.
In like manner, neither can any man be wise, and intemperate, for then he is
overcome by affections. If a man do something contrary to reason, Plato
affirms he does through ignorance and imprudence, so that can be prudent that
is intemperate or fearful. Whence it follows, that the perfect Virtues
cohere to one another, and are inseparable.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Virtues, Vices, and their differences.
THe gifts of Nature and progress in them are called Virtues also, by reason of
their similitude with the perfect Virtues, assuming the same name. In this
sense we call all soldiers stout, and sometimes call imprudent and rash
persons stout, when we speak not of the perfect Virtues, for the perfect
neither increase nor decrease; but Vices are intended and remitted. One man is
more imprudent and more unjust then another, neither do all the vices follow
one another, for they are certain contraries which are not competible to the
same. Such is fury to Cowardice, and prodigality to covetousness, nor can
there be any man at once possessed of all Vices, no more then a body tormented
by all diseases.

Moreover, there is a mean affection which inclines not plainly either to Vice
or Virtue; for it is not necessary that all men must be good or bad; they are
such, who have arrived at the height of these; for it is not easy to pass
suddenly from Virtue to Vice, because betwixt extremes there is a great
intervall and distance.

Of Virtues some are principal, others concomitant; principal are those which
are in the rational part of the Soul, and by which the other Virtues are
perfected. Concomitant are those which are in the other part which are subject
to Affections. These act honest things according to Reason, not that which is
in them, for they have none, but that which they receive from Prudence, which
is confirmed in them by custom and exercise.

Now for as much as neither science nor art consists in any part of the soul,
but in the rational, those virtues which are in the other part, that is
subject to affections, cannot be taught, because they are neither Arts nor
Sciences, neither have they a peculiar Doctrine. Prudence is a Science, which
prescribes unto every one what is proper to him, as a Pilot, or Master of a
Ship, to inferior ignorant Sailors. The like in a common Soldier and a
General.

For as much as Ills are intended and remitted, offenses cannot be equal, but
some must be greater, others lesser, for which reason, they, who make Laws,
punish some more gently, other more severely. And though Virtues are certain
Heights, as being perfect, and like unto that which is right, yet in another
respect they are called mediocrities, because all or the most of them are
placed betwixt two Vices, whereof one sins in excess, the other in defect;
as on the one side of Liberality is Covetousness, on the other Prodigality.
For in affections we recede from the mean, when we relinquish that which is
placed in Virtue, either by excess or defect. But neither he, who beholding
his Parents wronged is nothing moved thereat, nor he who is incensed at the
smallest matters void of passion or moderate, but the quite contrary. He who at
the death of his Parents grieveth not, is void of passion; He who destroys
himself with grieving, is overpassionate and immoderate; he who grieveth
moderately, is moderately passionate. In like manner, he, who fears upon all
occasions, and more then needs, is timorous; he who fears nothing is rash; He
only is stout that can keep a mean betwixt fear and rashness; the like in all
the rest. And for as much as that which is mean in affections is likewise best,
and mediocrity is nothing but a mean betwixt excess and defect, there are
these Virtues termed Mediocrities, because in humane perturbations and passions
they affect us a middle kind of way.

CHAP. XXX.
That Virtue is voluntary, Vice involuntary.
Virtue being chiefly of those things which are in our power, not compulsive
(for it could not deserve praise, if it came either by nature or divine decree)
it follows, that Virtue is voluntary, begotten by a servent, generous, and
firm impulsion.

From this, that Virtue is voluntary, it follows that Vice is involuntary.
For, who, in the most excellent part of himself, would ever voluntarily choose
that which is the greatest of all Ills? When a man is carried on to Vice, he
first inclines to it, not as if it were ill, but good, and if he fall into
ill, doubtless, he is deceived with thinking, that this way by a lesser ill,
he may arrive at a greater good, and goes in this manner unwillingly to it.
For, it is not possible, a man should pursue ill as it is ill, without any hope
of good, or, fear of a greater ill. All ill things therefore, which an ill man
does, are involuntary; for, injustice being involuntary, to act unjustly is so
much more involuntary, as the action of Vice is beyond the idle habit thereof.
Yet, though wicked actions are involuntary, the wicked nevertheless ought to
be punished, and that not after one manner; but, according to the variety of
hurt which they do to those they wrong. That which is involuntary consists in
ignorance of perturbations, all which may be diverted, either by reason, or
civil custom, or diligence.

CHAP. XXXI.
Of Love and Friendship.
FRiendship, properly so termed, is made by a mutual reciprocal benevolence.
This is, when either is as much concerned for the happiness of the other, as
of his own, which equality is preserved only by similitude of manners: For, the
like is friend to its like, if they be both moderate; but, the intemperate
cannot agree, either with themselves, or the moderate.

There are other things which are thought friendships, but are are not such, in
which there appears some show of virtue. Of these, is the natural goodwill
of Parents to their Children, and of Kindred one to another, as also that which
is called civil and sociable: These are not always accompanied with mutual
benevolence. Likewise, the amatory art is a kind of friendship. That which is
honest is proper to a generous soul, dishonest, to a perverse; mean, to one
meanly affected. For, as the habit of the rational soul is threefold, right,
dishonest, and mean; so many different kinds are there of love, which appears
most clearly in the difference of the ends they propose unto themselves. The
dishonest aims only at corporeal pleasure, and therefore is absolutely
brutish. The honest considers the mind only, as far as virtue appears in
it. The mean desires both the beauty of the soul and of the body; of which
love, he who is worthy, is mean likewise; that is, neither absolutely honest
nor dishonest. Hence that love which aims only at the body, ought to be
termed a Demon (rather then a Deity, which never descends to an human body)
transmitting divine things to men, and human to God.

Of the three kinds of love, that which is proper to a good man, being remote
from vicious affections, is artificial, whence it is placed in the rational
part of the soul. The contemplations thereof are these, to discern who is
worthy of love, and to contract friendship with him, and enjoy it: This
discernment is made from his aims or desires, whether they are generous, and
directed to a good end, or violent and servent. The contraction, or acquisition
of friendship, is made, not by wanton excessive praise, but rather by
reprehension, showing him, that it is not convenient he should live in that
manner he does; when he enjoys the love of him whom he affects, he must
always exhort him to those things, by exercise whereof, he may arrive at
perfect habit. Their end is that of lover and beloved, they may at last become
friends.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of Passions.
IN justice is so great an ill, that it is better to suffer wrong then to do
wrong; for one belongs to a wicked man, the other to a weak man: both are
dishonest, but to do wrong is worse, by how much it is more dishonest. It is as
expedient that a wicked man be punished, as that a sick man should be cured by
a Physician; for all chastisement is a kind of medicine for an offending Soul.

Since the greater part of Virtues are conversant about passions, it is
necessary that we define passion. Passion is an irrational motion of the Soul,
arising out of some good or ill; it is called an irrational motion, because
neither judgments nor opinions are passions; but motions of the irrational
parts of the Soul. For in the irrational part of the Soul, there are motions,
which though they are done by us, are yet nothing the more in our power. They
are often done therefore contrary to our inclination and will; for sometimes it
falls out, that though we know things to be neither pleasing nor unpleasing,
expetible nor avoidable, yet we are drawn by them, which could never be if such
passions were the same with Judgment. For we reject judgment when we
disapprove it whether it ought to be so or otherwise. In the definition is
added, arising from some good or some ill, because of that which is mean or
indifferent betwixt these, no passion is ever excited in us. All passions arise
from that which seems good or ill. If we see good present, we rejoice, if
future, we desire. On the conrrary, if ill be present, we grieve, if imminent,
we fear.

The simple affections, and, as it were, elements of the rest are two; Pleasure
and Grief; the rest consist of these. Neither are fear and desire to be numbered
among the principal passions, for he who fears, is not wholly deprived of
pleasure, nor can a man live the least moment, who despaireth to be freed or
eased of some ill. But it is more conversant in grief and sorrow, and therefore
he, who fears, sorroweth. But he who desires, like all those who desire or
expect something, is delighted; insomuch as he is not absolutely confident; and
has not a firm hope he is grieved. And if desire and fear are not principal
passions, it will doubtless follow, that none of the other affections are
simple; as anger, love, emulation and the like; for in these, Pleasure and
Grief are manifest, as consisting of them.

Moreover of Passions, some are rough, others mild, the mild are those, which
are naturally in men, and if kept within their bounds, are necessary and proper
to man, if they exceed, vicious. Such are Pleasure, Grief, Anger, Pity,
Modesty; for it is proper to man to delight in those things which are according
to Nature, and to be grieved at their contraries. Anger is necessary to repel
and punish an injury. Mercy agrees with Humanity. Modesty teaches us to
decline sordid things. Other passions are rough, and praeternaturall, arising
from some depraved or perverse custom. Such are excessive laughter, joy in the
misfortunes of others, hatred of Mankind. These, whether intense or remiss,
after what manner soever they are, are always erroneous, and admit not any
laudable mediocrity.

As concerning Pleasure and Grief, Plato writes thus. These passions are
excited in us by Nature. Grief and sorrow happen to those who are moved
contrary to Nature; Pleasure to those who are restored to the proper
constitution of their Nature. For he conceives the natural state of man to
consist in a mean betwixt Pleasure and Grief, not moved by either, in which
state we live longest. He asserteth several kinds of Pleasure, whereof some
relate to the Body, others to the Soul. Again, of Pleasures some are mixed with
grief, some are pure. Again, some proceed from the remembrance of things past,
others from hope of things to come. Again, some are dishonest, as being
intemperate and unjust; others moderate, and joined with good, as joy for good
things, and the Pleasure that follows Virtue. Now because most Pleasures are
naturally dishonest, he thinks it not to be disputed whether Pleasure can be
simply and absolutely a good, that being to be accounted poor and of no value,
which is raised out of another, and has not a principal primary essence. For
Pleasure cohereth even with its contrary Grief, and is joined with it, which
could not be, if one were simply good, the other simply ill.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of the forms of Commonwealths.
OF the forms of Commonwealth, some are supposed only, and conceived by
abstract from the rest. These he delivers in his book of a Commonwealth,
wherein he describes the first concordant, the second discordant, enquiring
which of these is the most excellent, and how they may be constituted. He also
divides a Commonwealth like the Soul into three parts, Keepers, Defenders, and
Artisicers. The office of the first is to Counsel, to advise, to command; of
the second, to defend the Commonwealth, upon occasion, by arms, which
answers to the irascible power; To the last belong Arts and other services.
He will have Princes to be Philosophers, and to contemplate the first good,
affirming that so only they shall govern rightly. For Mankind can never be
freed from ill, unless either Philosophers govern, or they who govern be
inspired with Philosophy after a divine manner. A Commonwealth is then governed
best, and according to Justice, when each part of the City performs its
proper Office. So that the Princes give Laws to the People; the Defenders obey
them, and sight for them, the rest willingly submit to their Superiors.

Of a Commonwealth he asserteth five kinds, the first, Aristocracy, when the
best rule; the second, Timocracy, when the ambitious; the third Democracy, when
the people; the fourth, Oligarchy, when a few; the last, Tyranny, which is the
worst of all.

He describes likewise other supposed forms of Commonwealth, as that in his
Book of Laws; and, that which reformeth others, in his Epistles, which he uses
for those Cities that in his Books of Laws he says are sick. These have a
distinct place, and select men out of every age, as according to the diversity
of their nature and place, they require different institution, education and
arms. The Maritime people are to study Navigation and Seasight; the Island
fighting on foot; those in mountanous Countries to use light armor, those on
the shore heavy. Some of these to exercise fighting on horseback. In this City
he allows not a Community of women. Thus is Politic a Verue conversant both
in Action and Contemplation; the end whereof is to constitute a City, good,
happy, and convenient to it self. It considers a great many things, amongst the
rest, whether War be to be waged or not.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Of a Sophist.
HItherto we have spoken of a Philosopher, from whom a Sophist differs; In
Manners, because he teaches young men for gain, and desires rather to seem
then to be good. In matter, for a Philosopher is conversant in those things
which always are, and continually remain in the same manner; but a Sophist in
that which is not, for which reason he seeks darkness, that he may not be
known to be what he is. To things that are, that which is not, is not opposed
as contrary, for it neither existeth, nor is participant of any essence, nor
can be understood. So that if any man endeavor to express it in words, or
comprehend it by thought; he is deceived, because he puts together things
contrary and repugnant. Yet that which is not, as far as it is spoken, is not a
pure negation of that which is, but implies a relation to another, which in
some manner is joined to Ens. So that unless we assume something from that
which is to that which is not, it cannot be distinguished from other things,
but thus, as many kinds as they are of Ens, so many are there of Non-Ens,
because that which is not an Ens is a Non-Ens.

Thus much may serve for an introduction into Plato's Philosophy: Some things
perhaps are said orderly, others dispersedly, or confusedly; yet is all so laid
down, that by those which we have delivered, the rest of his Assertions may be
found out and contemplated.

After so serious a Discourse, it will not be amiss to give the Reader a
Poetical entertainment upon the same Subject, being A PLATONIC DISCOURSE,
Written in Italian by JOHN PICUS Earl of MIRANDULA, In explication of a Sonnet
by HIERONIMO BENIVIENI.
The first PART.
Sect. I.
IT is a principle of the Platonists, That every created thing has a threefold
being; Causal, Formal, Participated. In the Sun there is no heat, that being
but an elementary quality, not of Celestial nature: yet is the Sun the cause
and Fountain of all hear. Fire is hot by nature, and its proper form: Wood is
not hot of its self, yet is capable of receiving that quality by Fire. Thus
has heat its Causall being in the Sun, its Formal in the Fire, its
Participated in the Fuel. The most noble and perfect of these is the Causal:
and therefore Platonists assert, That all excellencies are in God after this
manner of being; That in God is nothing, but from him all things; That
Intellect is not in him, but that he is the original spring of every Intellect.
Such is Plotinus's meaning, when he affirms, Ennead. 6. lib. 7. 37.
God neither understands nor knows; that is to say, after a formal way, As
Dionysius Areopagita, God is neither an Intellectual nor Intelligent nature,
but unspeakably exalted above all Intellect and Knowledge.

Sect. II.
PLatonists distinguish Creatures into three degrees. The first comprehends the
corporeal and visible; as Heaven, Elements, and all compounded of them: The
last the invisible, incorporeal, absolutely free from bodies, which properly
are called Intellectual (by Divines, Angelical) Natures. Betwixt these is a
middle nature, which though incorporeall, invisible, immortal, yet moves
bodies, as being obliged to that Office; called, the rational Soul; inferior
to Angels, superior to Bodies; subject to those, regent of these: Above which
is God himself, author and principle of every Creature, in whom Divinity has
a casual being; from whom, proceeding to Angels, it has a formal being, and
thence is derived into the rational Soul by participation of their luster:
below which, no nature can assume the Title of Divine.

Sect. III.
THat the first of these three Natures cannot be multiplied, who is but one,
the principle and cause of all other Divinity, is evidently proved by
Platonists, Peripateticks, and our Divines. About the second ( viz.) The
Angelick and Intellectual, Platonists disagree. Some (as Proclus, Hermias,
Syrianus, and many others) betwixt God and the rational Soul place a great
number of creatures; part of these they call (...), Intelligible, part
intellectual; which terms, Plato sometimes confounds, as in his Phaedo.
Plotinus, Porphyrius, and generally the most refined Platonists, betwixt God
and the Soul of the World, assign only one Creature, which they call the Son
of God, because immediately produced by him. The first opinion complies most
with Dionysius Areopagita, and Christian Divines, who assert the number of
Angels to be in a manner infinite. The second is the more Philosophic, best
suiting with Aristotle and Plato, whose sense we only purpose to express; and
therefore will decline the first path (though that only be the right) to pursue
the latter.

Sect. IV.
WE therefore, according to the opinion of Plotinus, confirmed not only by the
best Platonists, but, even by Aristotle, and all the Arabians, especially
Avicenna, affirm, That God from eternity produced a creature of incorporeall
and intellectual nature, as perfect as is possible for a created being, beyond
which, he produced nothing; for, of the most perfect cause, the effect must be
most perfect, and the most perfect can be but one; for, of two or more, it is
not possible but one should be more or less perfect than the rest, otherwise
they would not be two, but the same. This reason for our opinion I rather
choose, then that which Avicen alleges, founded upon this principle, That from
one cause, as one, can proceed but one effect. We conclude therefore, that no
creature but this first mind proceeds immediately from God: for, of all other
effects issuing from this mind, and all other second causes, God is only the
mediate efficient. This by Plato, Hermes, and Zoroaster, is called the Daughter
of God, the Mind, Wisdom, Divine Reason, by some interpreted the Word; not
meaning (with our Divines) the Son of God, he not being a creature, but one
essence coequall with the Creator.

Sect. V.
ALL understanding agents have in themselves the form of that which they design
to effect: as an Architect has in his mind a figure of the building he
undertakes, which as his pattern he exactly strives to imitate: This Platonists
call the Idea or Exemplar, believing it more perfect, then that which is made
after it: and this manner of Being, Ideal, or Intelligible, the other Material
and Sensible: So that when a Man builds a house, they affirm there are two, one
Intellectual in the Workmans mind; the other sensible, which he makes in
Stone, Wood, or the like; expressing in that matter the form he has conceived:
to this Dante alludes.

^None any work can frame,
Unless himself become the same.
Hereupon they say, though God produced only one creature, yet he produced all,
because in it he produced the Ideas and forms of all, and that in their most
perfect being, that is the Ideal, for which reason they call this Mind, the
Intelligible World.

Sect. VI.
AFter the pattern of that Mind they affirm this sensible World was made, and
the exemplar being the most perfect of all created things, it must follow that
this Image thereof be as perfect as its nature will bear. And since animate
things are more perfect then the inanimate; and of those the rational then the
irrational, we must grant, this World has a Soul perfect above all others.
This is the first rational Soul, which, though incorporeall, and immateriall,
is destined to the function of governing and moving corporeal Nature: not free
from the body as that mind whence from Eternity it was derived, as was the mind
from God. Hence Platonists argue the World is eternal; its soul being such,
and not capable of being without a body, that also must be from eternity; as
likewise the motion of the Heavens, because the Soul cannot be without moving.

Sect. VII.
THe ancient Ethnic Theologians, who cast Poetical vails over the face of
their mysteries, express these three natures by other names. Coelum they call
God himself; he produced the first Mind, Saturn: Saturn the Soul of the World,
Jupiter. Coelum imples Priority, and excellence, as in the Firmament, the first
Heaven. Saturn signifies Intellectual nature, wholly employed in
contemplation; Jupiter active life, consisting in moving and governing all
subordinate to it. The properties of the two latter agree with their Planets:
Saturn makes Men Contemplative, Jupiter Imperious. The Speculative busied about
things above them; the Practick beneath them.

Sect. VIII.
WHich three names are promiscuously used upon these grounds: In God we
understand first his Excellence, which as Cause, he has above all his effects;
for this he is called Coelus. Secondly, the production of those effects, which
denotes conversion toward inferiors; in this respect he is sometimes called
Jupiter, but with an addition, Optimus, Maximus. The first Angelick nature has
more names, as more diversity. Every creature consists of Power and Act: the
first, Plato in Philebo, calls Infinite: the second, Finite: all imperfections
in the Mind are by reason of the first; all perfections, from the latter. Her
operations are threefold. About Superiors, the contemplation of God; about the
knowledge of herself; about inferiors, the production and care of this
sensible World: these three proceed from Act. By Power she descends to make
inferior things; but in either respect is firm within her self. In the two
first, because contemplative, she is called Saturn: in the third, Jupiter, a
name principally applied to her power, as that part from whence is derived the
act of Production of things. For the same reason is the soul of the World, as
she contemplates her self or superiors, termed Saturn; as she is employed in
ordering worldly things, Jupiter: and since the government of the World belongs
properly to her; the contemplation to the Mind; therefore is the one absolutely
called Jupiter, the other Saturn.

Sect. IX.
THis World therefore (as all other creatures) consists of a Soul and Body:
the Body is all that we behold, compounded of the four Elements. These have
their casual being in the Heavens, (which consist not of them, as sublunary
things; for then it would follow that these inferior parts were made before
the Celestial, the Elements in themselves being simple, by concourse causing
such things as are compounded of them:) Their formal being from the Moon down
to the Earth: Their participate and imperfect under the Earth, evident in the
Fire, Air, and Water, experience daily finds there; evinced by natural
Philosophers: to which the ancient Theologians aenigmatically allude by their
four infernal Rivers, Acheron, Cocytus, Styx, and Phlegeton.

We may divide the body of the World into three parts: Celestial, Mundane,
Infernal: The ground why the Poets ^eign the Kingdom of Saturn to be shared
betwixt his three Sons, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto: implying only the
threefold variation of this corporeal World; which as long as it remains
under Saturn, that is, in its Ideal Intellectual being, is one and undivided;
and so more firm and potent: but falling into the hands of his Sons, that is,
changed to this material Being, and by them divided into three parts, according
to the triple existence of bodies, is more infirm and less potent,
degenerating from a spiritual to a corporeal estate. The first part, the
heavenly, they attribute to Jupiter; the last and lowest to Pluto; the middle
to Neptune. And because in this principality is all generation and corruption,
the Theologians express it by the Ocean, ebbing or flowing continually: by
Neptune understanding the Power or deity that presides over Generation. Yet we
must not imagine these to be different souls, distinctly informing these three
parts: the World her self being one, can have but one Soul; which as it
animates the subterraneall parts, is called Pluto; the sublunary Neptune; the
celestial, Jupiter. Thus Plato in Philebo averrs by Jove is understood a
regal soul, meaning the principal part of the World which governs the other.
This opinion, though only my ow^^, I suppose is more true then the expositions
of the Grecians.

Sect. X.
NExt that of the World, Platonists assign many other rational souls. The eight
principal are those of the heavenly Spheres; which according to their opinion
exceeded not that number; consisting of the seven Planets, and the starry Orb.
These are the nine Muses of the Poets: Calliope (the universal soul of the
World) is first, the other eight are distributed to their several Spheres.

Sect. XI.
PLato asserts, In ^imaco.
That the Author of the World made the mundane, and all other rational souls,
in one Cup, and of the same Elements; the universal soul being most perfect,
ours least: whose parts we may observe by this division: Man, the chain that
ties the World together, is placed in the midst: and as all mediums participate
of their extremes, his parts correspond with the whole World; thence called
Microcosmus. In the World is first Corporeal Nature, eternal in the Heavens;
corruptible in the Elements, and their compounds, as Stones, Metals, etc. Then
Plants. The third degree is of Beasts. The fourth rational souls. The fifth
Angelical minds. Above these is God, their origin. In man are likewise two
bodies; one eternal, the Platonists Vehiculum coeleste, immediately informed
by the rational soul: The other corruptible, subject to sight, consisting of
the Elements: Then the vegetative faculty, by which generated and nourished.
The third part is Sensitive and motive. The fourth Rational; by the Latin
Peripateticks believed the last and most noble part of the Soul: yet, above
that is the Intellectual and Angelick; the most excellent part whereof, we
call the Souls Union, immediately joining it to God, in a manner resembling
him; as in the other Angels, Beasts, and Plants. About th^se Platonists differ,
Pro^lus and Porphyrius only allow the rational part to be Immortal*
Zenocrates and Speusippus the sensitive also; Numenius and Plotinus the whole
Soul.

Sect. XII.
IDeas have their casual being in God, their formal in the first Mind, their
participated in the rational Soul. In God they are not, but produced by him in
the Angelick nature, through this communicated to the Soul, by whom
illuminated, when she reflects on her intellectual parts, she receives the
true forms of things, Ideas. Thus differ the Souls of Men from the Celestial:
these in their bodily functions recede not from the Intellectual, at once
contemplating and governing. Bodies ascend to them, they descend not. Those
employed in corporeal office are deprived of contemplation, borrowing science
from sense, to this wholly inclined, full of errors: Their only means of
release from this bondage, is, the amatory life; which by sensible beauties,
exciting in the soul a remembrance of the Intellectual, raises her from this
terrene life, to the eternal; by the flame of love refined into an Angel.

The Second PART.
Sect. I.
THE apprehensive faculties of the Soul are employed about truth and falsehood;
assenting to one, dissenting from the other. The first is affirmation, the
second negation. The desiderative converse in good and ill, inclining to this,
declining to that. The first is Love, the second Hate. Love is distinguished by
its objects; if of riches, termed covetousness; of honor, ambition; of
heavenly things, piety; of equals, friendship: these we exclude, and admit no
other signification, but, the desire to possess what in it self, or, at least
in our esteem, is fair: of a different nature from the love of God to his
Creatures, who comprehending all, cannot desire or want the beauty and
perfections of another: and from that of friends which must be reciprocal. We
therefore with Plato define it, *(...)* The desire of beauty. Desire is an
inclination to real or apparent good. As there are diverse kinds of good, so of
desire. Love is a species of desire, Beauty of good. Desire is Natural or
Knowing. All creatures have a particular perfection by participation of the
divine goodness. This is their end, including that degree of felicity whereof
they are capable, to which center they tend. This desire we call Natural; a
great testimony of Divine Providence, by which they are unwittingly (as an
Arrow by the Archer) directed to their mark. With this, all Creatures desire.
God, as being the Original good imprinted and participated in every
particular. This is in every Nature, as more or less capable; addressed to
ends more or less noble; yet, is the ultimate end of all the same, to enjoy
God, as far as they may: Thus as the Psalmist, Every thing worships and
praises God; like suppliants, turning and offering themselves up to him, says
Theodoret.

Sect. II.
THe other Species of Desire is employed only about things known, given by
Nature, that to every apprehensive faculty, there might be a desiderative; to
embrace what it judges good, to refuse what it esteems evil; in its own
nature inclined to good: None ever desires to be miserable; but, the
apprehensive Virtue many times mistaking Evil for Good, it often falls out that
the desiderative (in its self blind) desires evil. This in some sense may be
said voluntary, for none can force it; in another sense, not voluntary,
deceived by the judgment of its Companion. This is Plato's meaning, when he
says, In Timaeo (...).
No man sins willingly.

Sect. III.
IT is the Property of every desiderative Virtue, that He who desires,
possesses in part the thing he desires, in part not: for, if he were wholly
deprived of its Possession, he would never desire it: this is verified two
ways. First, nothing is desired unless it be known; and to know a thing is in
some part to possess it. So Aristotle, De Anima, 3. 9.
The Soul is all, because it knows all. And in the Psalmist God says, All
things are mine, I know them. Secondly, there is always some convenience and
resemblance betwixt the desirer and desired: Every thing delights and preserves
it self by that, which by natural affinity is most conformable to it; by its
contrary is grieved and consumed. Love is not betwixt things unlike; Repugnance
of two opposite natures is natural hate. Hate is a repugnance with knowledge.
Hence it follows, that the nature of the desired, is in some manner in the
desirer; otherwise, there would be no similitude betwixt them: yet imperfectly;
else it were vain for it to seek what it entirely possesses.

Sect. IV.
AS desire generally follows knowledge, so several knowing are annexed to
several desiring Powers: We distinguish the knowing into three degrees; Sense,
Reason, Intellect; attended by three desiderative Virtues, Appetite, Election,
Will* Appetite is in Bruits, Election in Men, Will in Angels. The sense knows
only corporeal things, the Appetite only desires such; the Angelick Intellect
is wholly intent on Contemplation of spiritual Conceptions, not inclining to
Material Things, but when divested of matter, and spiritualized, their Will is
only fed with intemporall spiritual Good. Rational Nature is the Mean betwixt
these Extremes; sometimes descending to Sense, sometimes elevated to Intellect;
by its own Election complying with the desires of which she pleases. Thus it
appears, that corporeal Objects are desired, either by Sensual Appetite, or
Election of Reason inclining to Sense: Incorporeall by Angelick Will, or, the
Election of Reason, elevated to Intellectual Height.

Sect. V.
BEauty in general, is a Harmony resulting from several things,
proportionably concurring to constitute a third: In respect of which
temperament, and mixture of various Natures, agreeing in the composition of
one, every Creature is Fair; and in this sense no simple being is Beautiful,
not God himself; this Beauty begins after him, arising from contrariety,
without which is no composition; it being the union of contraries, a friendly
enmity, a disagreeing concord; whence Empedocles makes discord and concord the
principles of all things; by the first, understanding the variety of the
Natures compounding; by the second, their Union: adding, that in God only there
is no Discord, He not being the Union of several Natures; but, a pure
uncompounded Unity. In these compositions the Union necessarily predominates
over the contrariety, otherwise the Fabric would be dissolved. Thus in the
fictions of Poets, Venus loves Mars: this Beauty cannot subsist without
contrariety; she curbs and moderates him, this temperament allaies the strife
betwixt these contraries. And in Astrology, Venus is placed next Mars, to
check his destructive influence; as Jupiter next Saturn, to abate his
malignancy. If Mars were always subject to Venus (the contrariety of
principles to their due temper) nothing would ever be dissolved.

Sect. VI.
THis is Beauty in the largest sense, the same with Harmony; whence God is said
to have framed the World with musical harmonious temperament. But Harmony
properly implies a melodious agreement of Voices; and Beauty in a restrict
acception relates to a proportionable concord in visible things, as Harmony in
audible. The desire of this Beauty is Love; arising only from one knowing
faculty, the Sight; and that gaye Plotonius, (En^ead. 3. lib. 5. 3.) occasion
to deprive (...) Love, from (...) Sight. Here the Platonist may object; If Love
be only of visible things, how can it be applied to Ideas, invisible natures?
We answer, Sight is twofold, corporeal and spiritual; the first is that of
Sense, the other the Intellectual faculty, by which we agree with Angels; this
Platonists call Sight, the corporeal being only an Image of this. So
Aristotle, Intellect is that to the Soul which sight is to the Body: Hence is
Minerva (Wisdom) by Homer called (...), Bright-ey'd. With this sight Moses,
Saint Paul, and other Saints, beheld the face of God: this Divines call
Intellectual, ^^tuitive cognition, the Be^tificall vision, the Reward of the
Righteous.

Sect. VII.
AS Sight, so Beauty (it^object) is twofold (the two Venus^^ celebrated by
Plato, [Sympos.] and our Poet) Sensible, called Vulgar Venus. Intellectual in
Ideas (which are the object of the Intellect, as color of sight) named
Celestial Venus, Love also is twofold, Vulgar, and Celestial* for as Plato
says Sympos:
There must necessarily be as many Loves as Venus's.

Sect. VIII.
VEnus then is Beauty, whereof Love is generated: properly his Mother, because
Beauty is the cause of Love, not as productive principle of this act, to Love,
but as its object: the Soul, being the efficient cause of it as of all his
acts; Beauty the material: For in Philosophy the efficient is assimilated to
the Father, the material to the Mother.

Sect. IX.
Celestial Love is an Intellectual desire of Ideall Beauty: Ideas, (as we
said before) are the Patterns of things in God* as in their Fountain; in the
Angelick Mind, Essential; in the Soul by Participation, which with the
Substance partakes of the Ideas and Beauty of the first Mind: Hence it follows,
that Love of Celestial Beauty in the Soul, is not Celestial Love perfectly,
but the nearest Image of it. Its truest being is with the desire of Ideal
Beauty in the first Mind, which God immediately adorns with Ideas.

Sect. X.
LOve (says Plato) was begot on Penia, by Porus (the Son of Metis) in Jupiters
Orchard, being drunk with Nectar, when the Gods met to celebrate Venus Birth.
Nature in it self inform, when it receives form from God is the Angelick Mind;
this form is Ideas, the first Beauty; which in this descent from their divine
Fountain, mixing with a different nature, become imperfect. The first mind, by
its opacousness eclipsing their luster, desires, that Beauty which they have
lost; this desire is love* begot when Porus the affluence of Ideas mixeth with
Penia the indigence of that inform nature we termed Jupiter (1. 8.) in whose
Garden the Ideas are planted, with those the first Mind adorned, was by the
Ancients named Paradise; to which contemplative life and eternal felicity
Zoroastres inviting us, says, seek, Seek Paradis^: our Divines transfer it to
the Coelum Empyraeum, the seat of the happy Souls, whose blessedness consists
in contemplation and perfection of the Intellect, according to Plato. This Love
begot on Venus birthday, that is, when the Ideal Beauty, though imperfectly,
is infused into the Angelick Mind; Venus yet as a Child, not grown to
perfection. All the Gods assembled at this Feast, that is their Ideas, (as by
Saturn we understand both the Planet and his Idea) an expression borrowed from
Parmenides. These Gods then are those Ideas that precede Venus (She is the
beauty and Grace resulting from their variety*) Invited to a Banquet of Nectar
and Ambrosia: those whom God feasts with Nectar and Ambrosia are eternal
beings, the rest not; These Idea's of the Angelick Mind are the first eternals;
Porus was drunk with Nectar, this Ideal affluence filled with Eternity; other
Idea's were not admitted to the Feast, nor endued with Immortality.

Orpheus upon the same grounds says, Love was born before all other Gods, in
the bosom of Chaos: Because Nature full of indistinct imperfect forms (the Mind
replenished with confused Ideas) desires their perfection.

Sect. XI.
THe Angelick Mind desires to make these Idea's perfect; which can only be
done by means opposite to the causes of their imperfection, these are Recession
from their Principle, and mixtion with a contrary Nature: Their Remedy,
separation from the unlike Nature, and return and conjunction (as far as
possible) with God. Love, the desire of this Beauty, excites the Mind to
conversion and reunion with him. Every thing is more perfect as nearer its
Principle; This is the first Circle. The Angelick Mind, proceeding from the
Union of God, by revolution of intrinsecall knowledge returns to him. Which
with the Ancients is Venus adulta, grown to perfection. Every Nature that may
have this conversion, is a Circle; such alone are the Intellectual and
Rational, and therefore only capable of felicity, the obtaining their first
Principle, their ultimate end and highest good. This is peculiar to Immortal
Substances, for the Material (as both Platonists and Peripateticks grant) have
not this reflection upon themselves, or their Principle. These, (the Angelick
Mind and Rational Soul) are the two intelligible Circles; answerable to which
in the corporeal World are two more; the tenth Heaven immovable, image of the
first Circle; the Celestial Bodies, that are moveable, image of the second.
The first Plato mentions no^, as wholly different and irrepresentable by
corporeal Nature: of the second in Timaeo he says, That all the Cir^les of
this visible Heaven (by him distinguished into the fixed sphere and seven
Planets) represent as many Circles in the Rational Soul.

Some attribute the name of Circle to God; by the ancient Theologists called
Coelus; being a Sphere which comprehends all; as the outmost Heaven includes
the World.

In one respect this agrees with God, in another not; the property of beginning
from a point and returning to it, is repugnant to him; who has no beginning*
but is himself that indivisible point from which all Circles begin, and to
which they return: And in this sense it is likewise inconsistent with material
things, they have a beginning, but cannot return to it.

In many other Properties it agrees with God; He is the most perfect of beings;
this of figures; neither admit addition: The last Sphere is the place of all
bodies, God of all Spirits: the Soul (say Platonists) is not in the Body, but
the body is in the Soul, the Soul in the Mind, the Mind in God, the outmost
Place; who is therefore named by the Cabalists (...).

Sect. XII.
THe three Graces are Handmaids to Venus, Thalid, Euphrosyne, Aglaia; Viridity,
Gladness, Splendor; properties attending Ideal Beauty. Thalia, is the
permanence of every thing in its entire being; thus is Youth called green, Man
being then in his perfect state; which decaies as his years increase, into his
last dissolution. Venus, is proportion, uniting all things. Viridity, the
duration of it; In the Ideall World, where is the first Venus, is also the
first Viridity; for no Intelligible Nature recedes from its being by growing
old. It communicates this property to sensible things as far as they are
capable of this Venus, that is, as long as their due proportion continues. The
two other properties of Ideal Beauty are Illustration of the Intellect, Aglaia,
Repletion of the will with desire and joy, Euphrosyne.

Of the Graces one is painted looking toward us; The continuation of our being
is no reflex act. The other two with their faces from us, seeming to return;
the operations of the Intellect and Will are reflexive; What comes from God to
us, returns from us to God.

Sect. XIII.
VEnus is said to be born of the Sea; Matter, the Inform Nature whereof every
Creature is compounded, is represented by Water, continually flowing, easily
receptable of any form. This being first ^n the Angelick Mind, Angels are
many times expressed by Water, as in the Psalms, The Waters above the Heavens
praise God continually, so interpreted by Origin; and some Platonists expound
the Ocean (styled by Homer Father of Gods and Men) this Angelick Mind,
Principle and Fountain of all other Creatures; Gemistius, Neptune; as Commander
of all Waters, of all Minds Angelical and Humane. This is that living
Fountain, whereof he that drinks shall never thirst: These are the Waters
whereon ( David says) God has founded the World.

Sect. XIV.
POrus (the Affluence of Ideas proceeding from God) is styled by Plato the Son
of Metis (Counsel,) in Imitation of the Scripture: whence our Savior by
Dionysius Areop. is termed the Angel of Counsel, that is, the Messenger of God
the Father; so Avicen calls the first Cause conciliative, the Mind not having
Ideas from it self but from God, by whose Counsel she receives Knowledge and
Art to frame this visible World.

Sect. XV.
LOve, Sympos.
according to Plato, is Youngest and Oldest of the Gods; They, as all other
things, have a twofold Being, Ideal and Natural. The first God in his
Natural Being was Love, who dispensed theirs to all the rest, the last in his
Ideal. Love was born in the Descent of the Ideas into the Angelick Mind, which
could not be perfect till they, its Essence, were made so, by loves conversion
to God. The Angelick Mind owing its natural being to Love, the other Gods who
succeeded this Mind, necessarily are younger then He in their natural Being,
though they precede him in their Ideal, as not born till these Ideas, though
imperfectly, were joined to the informed Nature.

Sect. XVI.
THe Kingdom of Necessity is said to be before that of Love. Plat. Sympos.
Every Creature consists of two Natures, Material, the imperfect, (which we
here understand by Necessity) and Formal, the occasion of perfection. That
whereof it most partakes is said to be predominant, and the Creature to be
subject to it. Hence is Necessity (matter) supposed to reign when the Ideas
were imperfect, and all imperfections to happen during that time; all
perfections after Love began his reign; for, when the Mind was by him
converted to God; that which before was imperfect in her, was perfected.

Sect. XVII.
Plat. Sympos.
VEnus is said to commend Fate. The order and concatenation of causes and
effects in this sensible World, called Fate, depends on the order of the
Intelligible World, Providence. Hence Platonists place Providence (the ordering
of Ideas) in the first Mind, depending upon God, its ultimate end, to which it
leads all other things. Thus Venus, being the order of those Ideas, whereon
Fate, the Worlds order, depends, commands it.

Fate is divided into three parts, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos: That which is
one in Providence, indivisible in Eternity, when it comes into Time and Fate is
divisible, into Past, Present, and Future. Others apply Atropos to the fixed
Sphere, Clotho to the seven Planets, Lachesis to sublunary things.

Temporal corporeal things only are subjected to Fate; the Rational Soul
being incorporeall, predominates over it; but, is subjected to Providence, to
serve which is true liberty. By whom the Will (obeying its Laws) is led to the
Acquisition of her desired end. And as often as she endeavors to loose her
self from this Servitude, of Free she becomes a Servant and Slave to Fate, of
whom before she was the Mistress. To deviate from the Laws of Providence, is,
to forsake Reason, to follow Sense and Irrational Appetite, which being
corporeal, are under Fate; he that serves these, is much more a servant then
those he serves.

Sect. XVIII.
AS from God Ideas descend into the Angelick Mind, by which the Love of
Intellectual Beauty is begot in her, called Divine Love; so the same Ideas
descend from the Angelick Mind into the Rational Soul, so much the more
imperfect in her, as she wants of Angelical Perfection: From these springs
Human Love. Plato discourses of the first, Plotinus of the latter* who by the
same Argument, whereby he proves Ideas not accidental, but substantial in the
Angelick Mind, evinceth likewise the specificall Reasons, the Ideas in the
Soul, to be substantial, terming the Soul Venus, as having a specious splendid
Love, in respect of these specificall Reasons.

Sect. XIX.
VUlgar Love is the Appetite of sensible Beauty, through corporeal sight. The
cause of this Beauty is the visible Heaven by its moving power. As our motive
faculty consists in Muscles and Nerves (the Instruments of its Operation,) so
the motive faculty of Heaven is fitted with a Body proper for circular
sempiternall motion: Through which Body the Soul (as a Painter with his Pencill
changes this inferior matter into various Forms. Thus vulgar Venus (the
beauty of material forms) has her casual being from the moving power of the
Heavens, her formal from color, enlightened by the visible Sun as Ideas by the
invisible; her participate in the Figure and just order of parts communicated
to sight by mediation of light and color, by whose Interest only it procures
love.

Sect. XX.
AS when the Ideas descend into the Mind, there arises a desire of enjoying
that, from whence this Ideall Beauty comes; so when the species of sensible
Beauty flow into the Eye, there springs a twofold Appetite of Union with that,
whence this Beauty is derived; one Sensual, the other Rational; the
principles of Bestiall and Human Love. If We follow Sense, We Judge the Body
wherein We behold this Beauty, to be its Fountain; whence proceeds a desire of
Coition, the most intimate union with it: This is the Love of irrational
Creatures. But Reason knows, that the Body is so far from being its Original,
that it is destructive to it, and the more it is severed from the Body, the
more it enjoyes its own Nature and Dignity: We must not fix with the species of
Sense in the Body, but refine that species from all relics of corporeal
infection.

And because Man may be understood by the Rational Soul, either considered
apart, or, in its union to the Body; in the first sense, human Love is the
Image of the Celestial; in the second, Desire of sensible Beauty; this being
by the Soul abstracted from matter, and (as much as its nature will allow) made
Intellectual. The greater part of men reach no higher than this; others more
perfect, remembering that more perfect Beauty which the Soul (before immersed in
the Body) beheld, are inflamed with an incredible desire of reviewing it, in
pursuit whereof, they separate themselves as much as possible from the Body, of
which the Soul (returning to its first dignity) becomes absolute Mistress.
This is the Image of Celestial Love, by which man arises from one perfection
to another, till his Soul (wholly united to the Intellect) is made an Angel.
Purged from material dross, and transformed into spiritual flame by this
Divine Power, he mounts up to the Intelligible Heaven, and happily rests in his
Fathers bosom.

Sect. XXI.
VUlgar Love is only in Souls immerst in Matter, and overcome by it, or at
least hindered by perturbations and passions. Angelick Love is in the Intellect,
eternal as it. Yet but inferred, the greater part turning from the Intellect
to sensible things, and corporeal cares. But so perfect are these Celestial
Souls, that they can discharge both Functions, rule the Body; yet not be taken
off from Contemplation of Superiors: These the Poets signify by Ianus with
two faces, one looking forward upon Sensible things, the other on intelligible:
less perfect Souls have but one face, and when they turn that to the Body,
cannot see the Intellect, being deprived of their contemplation; when to the
Intellect, cannot see the Body, neglecting the Care thereof. Hence those Souls
that must forsake the Intellect, to apply themselves to Corporeal Government,
are by Divine Providence confined to caduque, corruptible Bodies, loosed from
which* they may in a short time, if they fail not themselves, return to their
Intellectual felicity. Other Souls not hindered from Speculation, are tied to
eternal incorruptible Bodies.

Celestial Souls then (designed by Ianus, as the Principles of Time, motion
intervening) behold the Ideal Beauty in the Intellect, to love it perpetually;
and inferior sensible things, not to desire their Beauty; but, to communicate
this other to them. Our Souls before united to the Body, are in like manner
doublefac'd; but, are then as it were, cleft asunder, retaining but one; which
as they turn to either object, Sensual or Intellectual, is deprived of the
other.

Thus is vulgar love inconsistent with the Celestial; and many ravished at the
sight of Intellectual Beauty, become blind to sensible; implied by
Callimachus, Hymn. 5. in the Fable of Tyresias, who viewing Pallas naked, lost
his sight; yet by her was made a Prophet, closing the eyes of his Body, she
opened those of his Mind, by which he beheld both the Present and Future. The
Ghost of Achilles which inspired Homer with all Intellectual Contemplations in
Poetry, deprived him of corporeal sight.

Though Celestial Love lives eternally in the Intellect of every Soul; yet,
only those few make use of it, who declining the Care of the Body, can with
Saint Paul say, Whether in the Body, or out of the Body they know not. To which
state a Man sometimes arrives; but, continues there but a while, as we see in
Ecstasies.

Sect. XXII.
THus in our Soul (naturally indifferent to sensible or intelligible Beauty)
there may be three Loves; one in the Intellect, Angelical; the second Human;
the third Sensual: the two latter are conversant about the same object,
Corporeal Beauty; the sensual fixes its Intention wholly in it; the human
separates it from matter. The greater part of mankind go no further then these
two; but they whose understandings are purified by Philosophy, knowing sensible
Beauty to be but the Image of another more perfect, leave it, and desire to see
the Celestial, of which they have already a Taste in their Remembrance, if they
persevere in this Mental Elevation, they finally obtain it; and recover that,
which though in them from the beginning, yet they were not sensible of, being
diverted by other Objects.

The Sonnet.
I.
LOve, (whose hand guides my Hearts strict Reins
Nor, though he govern it, disdains
To feed the fire with pious care
Which first himself enkindled there)
Commands my backward Soul to tell
What Flames within her Bosom dwell;
Fear would persuade her to decline
The charge of such a high design;
But all her weak reluctance fails,
Against greater Force no Force avails.
Love to advance her flight will lend
Those wings by which he did descend
Into my Heart, where he to rest
For ever, long since built his Nest:
I what from thence he dictates write,
And draw him thus by his own Light.
II.
LOve, flowing from the sacred spring
Of uncreated Good, I sing:
When born; how Heaven he moves; the soul
Informs; and does the World controwl;
How closely lurking in the heart,
With his sharp weapons subtle art
From heavy earth he Man unites,
Enforcing him to reach the skies.
How kindled, how he flames, how burns;
By what laws guided now he turns
To Heaven, now to the Earth descends,
Now rests 'twixt both, to neither bends.
Apollo, Thee I invocate,
Bowing beneath so great a weight.
Love, guide me through this dark design,
And imp my shorter wings with thine.
III.
WHen from true Heaven the sacred Sun
Into the Angelick Mind did run,
And with enliv'ned Leaves adorn,
Bestowing form on his firstborn;
Enflamed by innate Desires,
She to her chiefest good aspires;
By which reversion her rich Breast
With various Figures is impressed;
And by this love exalted, turns
Into the Sun for whom she burns.
This flame, raised by the Light that shined
From Heaven into the Angelick Mind,
Is eldest Loves religious Ray,
By Wealth and Want begot that Day,
When Heaven brought forth the Queen, whose Hand
The Cyprian Scepter does Command.
IV.
THis born in amorous Cypris arms,
The Sun of her bright Beauty warms.
From this our first desire accrues,
Which in new fetters caught, pursues
The honorable path that guides
Where our eternal good resides.
By this the fire, through whose fair beams
Life from above to Mankind streams,
Is kindled in our hearts, which glow
Dying, yet dying greater grow;
By this the immortal Fountain flows,
Which all Heaven forms below, bestows;
By this descends that shower of light
Which upwards does our minds invite;
By this the Eternal Sun inspires
And souls with sacred luster fires.
V.
AS God does to the Mind dispense
Its Being, Life, Intelligence,
So does the Mind the soul acquaint
How't understand, to move, to paint;
She thus prepared, the Sun that shines
In the Eternal Breast designs,
And here what she includes diffuses,
Exciting every thing that uses
Motion and sense (beneath her state)
To live, to know, to operate.
Inferior Venus hence took Birth;
Who shines in heaven, but lives on earth,
And over the world her shadow spreads:
The elder in the Suns Glass reads
Her Face, through the confused skreen
Of a dark shade obscurely seen;
She Luster from the Sun receives,
And to the Other Luster gives;
Celestial Love on this depends,
The younger, vulgar Love attends.
VI.
Formed by the eternal Look of God,
From the Suns most sublime abode,
The Soul descends into Man's Heart,
Imprinting there with wondrous Art
What worth she borrowed of her star,
And brought in her Celestial Carre;
As well as humane Matter yields,
She thus her curious Mansion builds;
Yet all those fames from the divine
Impression differently decline:
The Sun, who is figu'rd here, his Beams
Into another Bosom streams;
In whose agreeing soul he stays,
And guilds it with its virtuous Rays,
The heart in which Affection's bred,
Is thus by pleasing Error fed.
VII.
THe heart where pleasing Error raigns,
This object as her Child maintains,
By the fair light that in her shines
(A rare Celestial Gift,) refines;
And by degrees at last does bring
To her first splendours sacred spring,
From this divine Look, one Sun passes
Through three refulgent Burning-glasses,
Kindling all Beauty, which the Spirit,
The Body, and the Mind inherit.
These rich spoils, by the eye first caught,
Are to the Souls next Handmaid brought,
Who there resides: She to the breast
Sends them; reformed, but not expressed:
The heart, from Matter Beauty takes,
Of many one Conception makes;
And what were meant by Natures Laws,
Distinct, She in one Picture draws*
VIII.
THe heart by Love allured to see
Within her self her Progeny;
This, like the Suns reflecting Rays
Upon the Waters face, survaies;
Yet some divine, though clouded light
Seems here to twinckle, and invite
The pious Soul, a Beauty more
Sublime, and perfect to adore.
Who sees no longer his dim shade
Upon the earths vast Globe displayed,
But certain Luster, of the true
Suns truest Image, now in view.
The Soul thus entering in the Mind,
There such uncertainty does find,
That she to clearer Light applies
Her aims, and near the first Sun flies:
She by his splendor beauteous grows,
By loving whom all Beauty flows
Upon the Mind, Soul, World, and All
Included in this spacious Ball.
IX.
BUt hold! Love stops the forward Course
That me beyond my scope would force.
Great Power! if any Soul appears
Who not alone the blossoms wears,
But of the rich Fruit is possessed,
Lend him thy Light, deny the rest.
The Third PART.
TO treat of both Loves belongs to different Scienences; Vulgar Love to
Natural or Moral Philosophy; Divine, to Theology or Metaphysics. Solomon
discourses excellently of the first in Ecclesiastes, as a Natural
Philosopher, in his Proverbs as a Moral: Of the second in his Canticles,
esteemed the most Divine of all the Songs in Scripture.

S^anza I.
The chief order established by Divine Wisdom in created things, is, that every
inferior Nature be immediately governed by the superior; whom whilst it
obeys, it is guarded from all ill, and lead without any obstruction to its
determinate felicity; but, if through too much affection to its own liberty,
and desire to prefer the licentious life before the profitable, it rebel from
the superior Nature, it falls into a double inconvenience. First, like a Ship
given over by the Pilot, it lights sometimes on one Rock, sometimes on another,
without hope of reaching the Port. Secondly, it loses the command it had over
the Natures subjected to it, as it has deprived its superior of his.
Irrational Nature is ruled by another, un^it for its Imperfection to rule any.
God by his ineffable Excellence provides for every thing, himself needs not
the providence of any other* Betwixt the two extremes, God and Bruits, are
Angels and Rational Souls, governing others, and governed by others. The
first Hierarchy of Angels immediately illuminated by God, enlighten the next
under them; the last (by Platonists termed Demons, by the Hebrews (...), as
Guardians of Men) are set over us as We over Irrationalls. So Psalm 8. Whilst
the Angels continued subject to the Divine Power, they retained their
Authority over other Creatures; but when Luciser and his Companions, through
inordinate love of their own Excellence, aspired to be equal with God, and to
be conserved, as He, by their own strength, they fell from Glory to extreme
Misery; and when they lost the Privilege they had over others, seeing us freed
from their Empire, enviovsly every hour insidiate our good. The same order is
in the l^sser World, our Soul: the inferior faculties are directed by the
superior, whom following they err not. The imaginative corrects the mistakes
of outward sense; Reason is illuminated by the Intellect, nor do we at any time
miscarry, but when the Imaginative will not give credit to Reason, or Reason
confident of it self, resists the Intellect. In the desiderative the Appetite
is governed by the Rational, the Rational by the Intellectual, which our
Poet implies, saying, [Love whose hand guides my hearts strict reins.]

The cognoscitive powers are seated in the Head, the desiderative in the Heart:
In every well ordered Soul, the Appetite is governed by Intellectual Love;
employed by the Metaphor of Reins, borrowed from Plato in his Phaedrus.

[Love to advance my flight, will lend
The wings by which he did ascend
Into my heart -- ]
When any superior virtue is said to descend, we imply not, that it leaves its
own height to come down to us, but draws us up to it self; its descending to
us, is our ascending to it; otherwise such conjuction would be the imperfection
of the virtue, not the perfection of him who receives it.

II.
[Love ^lowing from the sacred Spring
Of uncreated good -- ]
From the Fountain of divine goodness into our Souls, in which that influx is
terminated.

[When born, etc.] The order, participation, conversion of Ideas, see Part 2.
Sect.

[ -- how Heaven he moves, the Soul
Informs, and does the World control.]
Of these three properties, Love is not the efficient: God produces the Ideas
in the Angelick Mind, the Mind illustrates the Soul with Ideal Beauty; Heaven
is moved by its proper Soul: But, without Love, these principles do not
operate: He is cause of the Minds conversion to God, and of the Souls to the
Mind; without which, the Ideas would not descend into the one, nor the
Specific reasons into the other: the Soul not illuminated by these, could not
elicite this sensible form out of matter, by the motion of Heaven.

III.
WHen the first emanation from God (the plenty of Ideas) descended into the
Angelick Mind, she, desiring their perfection, reverts to God, obtaining of
him what she covets; which the more fully she possesses, the more fervently
she loves. This desire, (Celestial Love,) born of the obscure Mind and Ideas,
is explained in this Stanza: [ -- true Heaven -- ]

God who includes all created beings, as Heaven all sensible, lib. 2. Sect.
Only Spiritual things, according to Platonists, are true and real, the rest
but shadows and images of these.

[ -- the sacred Sun] The light of Ideas streaming from God.

[ -- enlivened leaves -- ] The Metaphore of Leaves relates to the Orchard of
Jupiter, where these Ideas were planted 2. 10. Enlivened, as having in
themselves the principle of their operation, Intellection, the noblest life, as
the Psalmist, Give me understanding, and I shall live. So the Cabalist to the
second Sephirah, which is Wisdom, attributes the name of Life.

[ -- adorn bestowing form -- ] To adorn denotes no more then accidental
perfection, but Ideas are the Substance of the Mind, and therefore he adds,
bestowing form; which though they come to her from without, she receives not as
accidents, but as her first intrinsecall act: which our Author implies, terming
her desires innate.

[And by this love exalted, turns
Into the Sun, for whom she burns.]
Love transformes the Lover into the thing loved.

[ -- Wealth and Want -- ] Porus and Penia, 2. 10.

IV.
The properties of Celestial Love are in this Stanza discovered.

[ -- in new fetters caught -- ] The Soul being oppressed by the Body, her desire
of Intellectual Beauty sleeps; but, awakened by Love, is by the sensible
Beauty of the body, led at last to their Fountain, God.

[ -- which glow
Dying, yet glowing greater grow.]
Motion and Operation are the signs of life, their privation of death: in him
who applies himself to the Intellectual part, the rational and the sensitive
fail; by the Rational he is Man, by the Intellectual communicates with
Angels: As Man he dies, revived an Angel. Thus the Heart dies in the flames of
Intellectual Love; yet, consumes not, but by this death grows greater,
receives a new and more sublime life. See in Plato the Fables of Alcestes and
Orpheus.

V.
This Stanza is a description of sensible Beauty.

[The elder in the Suns glass reads
Her face, through the confused skreen
Of a dark shade obscurely seen.]
Sensible light is the act and efficacy of Corporeal, spiritual light of
Intelligible Beauty. Ideas in their descent into the inform Angelick Mind,
were as colors and figures in the Night: As he who by Moonlight sees some
fair object, desires to view and enjoy it more fully in the day; so the Mind,
weakly beholding in her self the Ideal Beauty dim and opacous (whch our Author
calls the skreen of a dark shade) by reason of the Night of her imperfection,
turns like the Moon) to the eternal Sun, to perfect her Beauty by him; to whom
addressing her self, she becomes Intelligible light; clearing the Beauty of
Celestial Venus* and rendering it visible to the eye of the first Mind.

In sensible Beauty we consider first the object in it self, the same at
Midnight as at Moon: Secondly, the light, in a manner the Soul thereof: the
Author supposes, that as the first part of sensible Beauty (corporeal forms)
proceeds from the first part of Intellectual Beauty (Ideal forms) so sensible
light flows from the intelligible, descending upon Ideas.

VI. VII. VIII.
Corporeal Beauty implies, first, the material disposition of the Body,
consisting of quantity in the proportion and distance of parts, of quality in
figure and color: Secondly, a certain quality which cannot be expressed by any
term better then Gracefulness,, shining in all that is fair: This is properly
Venus, Beauty, which kindles the fire of Love in Mankind: They who affirm it
results from the disposition of the Body, the sight, figure, and color of
features, are easily confuted by experience. We s^e many persons exact, and
unaccustomable in every part, destitute of this grace and comeliness; others
less perfect in those particular conditions, excellently graceful and comely;
Thus Catullus, Many think Quintia beau^ious, fair, and tall,
And s^reight she is, apart I grant her all:
But altogether beauteous I deny;
For, not one grace does that large shape supply.


He grants her perfection of quality, figure, and quantity; yet not allows her
handsome, as wanting this Grace. This then must by consequence be ascribed to
the Soul, which when perfect and lucid, transfuseth even into the Body some
Beams of its Splendor. When Moses came from the divine Vision in the Mount,
his face did shine so exceedingly, that the people could not behold it unless
veiled. Porphyrius relates, that when Plotinus his soul was elevated by divine
Contemplation, an extraordinary brightness appeared in his looks; plotinus
himself averres, that there was never any beautiful Person wicked, that this
Gracefulness in the Body, is a certain sign of perfection in the Soul,
Proverbs 17. 24. Wisdom shines in the countenance of the Wise.

From material beauty we ascend to the first Fountain by six Degrees: the
Soul through the sight represents to her self the Beauty of some particular
person, inclines to it, is pleased with it, and while she rests here, is in the
first, the most imperfect material degree. 2. She reforms by her imagination
the Image she has received, making it more perfect as more spiritual; and
separating it from Matter, brings it a little nearer Ideal Beauty. 3. By the
light of the agent Intellect abstracting this Form from all singularity, she
considers the universal Nature of Corporeal Beauty by it self: This is the
highest degree the Soul can reach whilst she goes no further then Sense. 4.
Reflecting upon her own Operation, the knowledge of universal Beauty, and
considering that every thing founded in matter is particular, she concludes
this universality proceeds not from the outward Object, but her Intrinsecal
Power: and reasons thus: If in the dim Glass of Material Phantasmes this
Beauty is represented by virtue of my Light, it follows, that beholding it in
the clear Mirror of my substance divested of those Clouds, it will appear more
perspicuous: thus turning into her self, she finds the Image of Ideal Beauty
communicated to her by the Intellect, the Object of Celestial Love. 5. She
ascends from this Idea in her self, to the place where Celestial Venus is, in
her proper form; Who in fullness of her beauty not being comprehensible, by any
particular Intellect, she, as much as in her lies, endeavors to be united to
the first Mind, the chiefest of Creatures, and general Habitation of Ideal
Beauty, obtaining this, she terminates, and sixeth her journey: this is the
sixth and last degree: They are all implied in the 6, 7, and 8 Stanza's.

[Form'd by the Eternal look, etc.] Platonists affirm some Souls are of the
nature of Saturn, others of Jupiter, or some other Planet; meaning, one Soul
has more Conformity in its Nature with the Soul of the Heaven of Saturn, then
with that of Jupiter, and so on the contrary; of which there can be no internal
Cause assigned; the External is God, who (as Plato in his Tim^eus) Sows and
scatters Souls, some in the Moon, others in other Planets and Stars, the
Instruments of Time.

Many imagine the Rational Soul descending from her Star, in her Vehiculum
Coeleste, of her self forms the Body, to which by that Medium she is united:
Our Author upon these grounds supposes, that into the Vehiculum of the Soul,
by her endued with Power to form the Body, is infused from her Star a
particular formative virtue, distinct according to that Star; thus the aspect
of one is Saturnine, of another Joviall, etc. in their looks we read the
nature of their Souls.

But because inferior matter is not ever obedient to the Stamp, the virtue of
the Soul is not always equally expressed in the visible Effigies: hence it
happens that two of the same Nature are unlike; like; the matter whereof the
one consists, being less disposed to receive that Figure then the other; what
in that is complete is in this imperfect; our Author infers, that the figures
of two Bodies being formed by virtue of the same Star, this Conformity begets
Love.

[From the Suns most sulime aboad] The Tropic of Cancer: by which Souls
according to Platonists descend, ascending by Capricorn. Cancer is the House of
the Moon, who predominates over the vital parts, Capricorn of Saturn presiding
over Contemplation.

[The Heart in which affection's bred
Is thus by pleasing Error fed.]
Frequently, if not always, the Lover believes that which he loves more
beauteous then it is, he beholds it in the Image his Soul has formed of it; so
much fairer as more separate from Matter, the Principle of Deformity; besides,
the Soul is more Indulgent in her Affection to this Species, considering it is
her own Child produced in her Imagination.

[ -- one Sun passes
Through three re^ulgent Burning-glasses.]
One Light flowing from God, beautifies the Angelick, the Rational Nature, and
the Sensible World.

[ -- the Souls next Handmaid -- ] The Imaginative [ -- to the Breast]

The Breast and Heart here taken for the Soul because her nearest Lodging; the
Fountain of Life and Heat.

[ -- reformed but not expressed.] Reformed by the Imagination form the deformity
of Matter; yet not reduced to perfect Immateriality, without which true Beauty
is not Expressed.

SPVSIPPVS.


SPEVSIPPVS.
CHAP. I.
His Life.
L^ert.
SPEUSIPPUS was an Athenian, born at Myrrhinus [which belonged to the
Pandionian Tribe] his Father named Eurymedon, his Mother Po^one, Sister to
Plato.

Apul. dogm. Plat.
He was brought up in the domestic documents of his Uncle Plato, Plut. de
adulat. and amici. discrim.
who (as he used to say) reformed Speusippus's life, after the pattern of his
own.

Chio. Epist. ad Matri^.
Plato had four Kins-women, Daughters of his Neeces; the eldest of these he
married to Speusippus, with a small portion, thirty Minae, which Dionysius had
sent him: To this sum Chio, glad of the occasion, added a Talent, which
Speusippus earnestly refused, until at last he was overcome by the just
importunities of the other to receive it, alleging that he gave it not as
money, but as kindness* that such gifts were to be entertained, for they
increased honor, the rest were dishonorable; that he ought to accept of the
good will, though he despised the money. The rest of those Virgins were Married
richly to Athenians, only Speusippus, who best deserved, was poor. With these
arguments Speusippus was induced to accept of Chio's gift; whereat Chio much
congratulated his own good fortune, as having laid hold of an occasion, such,
as perhaps, says he, I shall not meet again in all my life.

When Dion came to Athens, Plut. vit. Dion*
Speusippus was continually in company with him, more then any other friend
there, by Plato's advice, to soften and divert Dion's humor, with a facile
companion, such as he knew Speusippus to be; and that withal, he knew
discreetly how to observe time and place in his mirth: whence Timon (in Sillis)
calls him, a good Ieaster.

The last time that Plato, upon the importunity of Dionysius, went to Sicily,
Speusippus accompanied him. Whilst they lived at Syracuse, Speusippus kept
more company with the Citizens then Plato did, and insinuating more into their
minds, at first they were afraid to speak freely to him, mistrusting him to be
one of Dionysius's spies: But within a while they began to con^ide in him, and
all agreed in this, to pray Dion to come to them, and not to take care for
ships, men, or horses, but to hire a ship for his own passage; for the
Sicilians desired no more, then that he would lend them his name and person
against the Tyrant.

Speusippus at his return to Athens, persuaded Dion to war against Dionysius,
and deliver Sicily from the bondage of Tyranny, assuring him the Country would
receive him gladly. Dion upon this information received such encouragement,
that he began secretly to levy men: The Philosophers much advanced his
design. When he went to Sicily, he bestowed a Countryhouse, which he had
purchased since his coming to Athens, upon Speusippus.

CHAP. II.
His profession of Philosophy.
Laert.
PLato dying in the first year of the 108th Olympiad, Theophilus being Archon,
Speusippus succeeded him in the School of the Academy, Laert.
whom he followed also in his Doctrine.

He first, as Theodorus affirms, looked into the community and mutual
assistance of Mathematical Disciplines, as Plato did into that of the
Philosophical.

Laert.
He first, according to Cenaeus, declared those things, which Isocrates
conceived not to be divulged, the same perhaps which Epist. ad. At. 2. 1.
Cicero calls the (...) of Isocrates.

Stob. Phys. 1. 1.
He affirmed, that the mind was not the same, either with Good or One; but of
a peculiar nature proper to it self.

Laert.
He set up in the School which Plato had built the Images of the Graces.

He exacted money of his Disciples, contrary to the custom of Plato.

The two Women who were Plato's Auditors, Lasthenia the Mantinean, and Axiothea
the Phliasian, heard Speusippus likewise.

Having continued Master of the School eight years, he at last, by reason of
his infirm disposition, much debilitated by the Palsy, sent to Xenocrates,
desiring him to come and take from him the government of the School, which
Xenocrates did.

CHAP. III.
His wrrtings.
HE wrote ^aert. Suid.
many things, chiefly in Philosophy, Commentaries and Dialogues, of which were
Aristippus the Cyrenaick. Of Riches 1. Of Pleasure 1. Of Justice 1. Of
Philosophy 1. Of Friendship 1. Of the Gods 1. The Philosopher 1. To Cephalus 1.
Cephalus 1. Clinomachus, or Lysias 1. The Citizen 1. Of the Soul 1. To Gryllus
1. Aristippus 1. The confutation of Arts 1. Commentary Dialogues. Artificial
1. Dialogues of likeness in things 10. Divisions and arguments to things like.
Of the genus's and species of Examples. To Amartyrus. Encomium of Plato.
Epistles to Dion, Dionysius, Philip. Of Law. The Mathematician. Mandrobulus.
Lysias. De^^n^tions, of all these writings the only extant Orders of
Commentaries. Verses.


Lae^^.
Phavorinus, in the second of his Commentaries, says, that Aristotle paid
three Talents for his Books.

CHAP. IV.
His Death.
HE was (as Laert.
Timotheus says) very infirm of body, Laert.
insomuch that he was fain to be carried up and down the Academy in a kind of
a running chair: Riding in this manner, he one day met Diogenes, whom saluting,
he said, Joy be with you: But, not with you, answered Diogenes, who can endure
to live being in that condition. At length he dyed willingly through grief, as
Laertius affirms, who elsewhere citing Plutarch in the lives of Lysander and
Scylla, says, he dyed of the Phthiriasis; but there is no such thing extant in
Plutarch.

Laert.
Though he followed Plato in his opinions; yet, he did not imitate his temper,
for he was austeer, choleric, and had not so great command over his pleasures.
In anger he threw a Dog into a Well, and indulging to pleasure, he went to the
marriage of Cassander in Macedonia: He was also so great a Lover of money, that
some Poems which he had written, not very good, he sung publicly for gain: for
which vices, Dionysius writing to him, thus derides him: And we may learn
Philosophy from our Arcadian she-Scholler. Plato took no money of his Scholars,
you exact it whether they are willing or not. Deipn. lib.
Athenaeus cites the same Epistle, after he had reproached him for avarice and
voluptuousness, he objects his collections of money from many persons; his love
to Lasthenia, the Sardian Curtezan; after all this adding, Why do you accuse us
of avarice, who your self omit not any sordid way of gain? Did not you after
Hermias's debt was satisfied, make collections in his name amongst his friends,
to your own use?

To a rich man in love with a deformed person; What need you her, Laert.
says he, for ten Talents you may have a handsomer.

To him Simonides wrote Histories, wherein he related the actions of Dion and
Bion.

There was another Speusippus, a Physician of Alexandria.

XENOCRATES.
CHAP. I.
His Country, Parents, living with Plato.
Laert.
XEnocrates was of Chalcedon, Son of Suid.
Agatho, or Agathenor. From the years of his life 82. which in all probability
ended when Polemo succeeded in the School, the first year of the 116. Olympiad,
it may be gathered that he was born in the fourth year of the 95. Olympiad. He
heard Plato from his Childhood. He was dull of apprehension, whence Plato
comparing him with Aristotle, said, one needs a spur, the other a bridle; what
an ass and what an horse have I to yoke together! He was severe, and had a sad
look, for which reason Plato often said to him, Xenocrates, sacrifice to the
Graces, which was an usual phrase to me^ancholy people. Aelian. 14. 9.
Another time Plato sharply reprehended the roughness of his disposition,
which he took quietly, and unmoved; saying to one that instigated him to reply
in his own defense, No, this is an advantage to me.

Laert.
He accompanied Plato in his voyage to Sicily, Ath. Deipn.
where at a drinking Feast, with Dionysius, being honored with a wreath of
Gold, instead of a Garland of flowers, which were bestowed upon the guests upon
such occasions, when he went away, he put it upon the Statue of Mercury, where
they used to leave their ordinary Garments.

Laert.
When Dionysius fell out with Plato, and threatened to find one that should cut
off his head, Xenocrates made answer, not before he has cut off this, showing
his own.

Va^* hist. 3. 19.
Aelian says, that Xenocrates having taken a journey into his own Country,
Aristotle with his Disciples came to Plato. S^eusippus was at that time sick,
and therefore could not be with Plato. Plato being fourscore years old, (which
falls upon the fourth year of the 107. Olympiad, the year before his death) his
memory through age much decayed, Aristotle fell upon him with subtle
sophistical questions, whereupon Plato gave over walking in public, and
retired with his friends to his own house. At the end of the three months
Xenocrates returning from his travel, finds Aristotle walking where he had left
Plato, and seeing that he and his friends when they went out of the School went
not to Plato, but to some other part of the City, he asked one there present,
what was become of Plato, thinking he had been sick, the other answered, he is
not sick, but Aristotle has molested him, and driven him out of the School, so
that now he teaches Philosophy in his own Garden. Xenocrates hearing this,
went immediately to Plato, whom he found discoursing to his Disciples, persons
of great worth and eminence. As soon as he had ended his discourse, he saluted
Xenocrates, as he used, very kindly, and Xenocrates him. When the company was
dismissed, Xenocrates, without speaking a word of it to Plato, getting his
friends together, after he had chid Speusippus for permitting Aristotle to
possess the School, made a head against Aristotle, and opposed him with his
utmost force, until at last he reinstated him in the School. Thus Aelian. But
this story, which he acknowledges to have taken up on no better authority then
vulgar report, disagrees with many circumstances of Aristotle's life, supported
by far more credible Testimonies.

CHAP. II.
His Profession of Philosophy.
AFter Speusippus had held the School eight years, finding himself not able to
continue that charge any longer, he sent to Xenocrates entreating him to take
it upon him, which Xenocrates did, Laert.
in the second year of the 110. Olympiad, Lysimachides being Archon, not
without emulation and dissension with the Peripat^ticks, for Laert. vit. Arist.
Aristotle, at his return out of Macedonia, finding Xenocrates possessed of the
Academy, instituted a School, in opposition to him, in the Lycaeum, saying,
Silent to be now most disgraceful were,
And see Xenocrates possess the Chair.


Laert. vit. Arist.
Some affirm, that Alexander falling out with Aristotle, to vex him, sent a
present to Xenocrates Laert. vit. Xen.
of 50. Talents, where of Xenocrates took but 3000. Atticks, and sent back the
rest, saying, that he needed it most that was to maintain so many. Or, as
Ethic. Sermon. 37.
Stobaeus relates it, having entertained the Messenger, after his usual
fashion, go and tell Alexander, says he, that after the rate I live, I shall
not need 50. Talents in all my life. Stob. Eth. Sermon. 77.
The money being brought back to Alexander, he asked, if Xenocrates had not any
friend, adding that as for his own friends, the wealth of Darius was too little
for them.

Stob. Ec. ^hys. 1. 3.
He asserted Unity and Duality to be Gods; the first as it were Masculine, in
the nature of a Father, reigning in Heaven, whom he called also Jupiter, the
Odd, and the M^^de. The other, as it were Female, and the Mother, commanding
all things under Heaven. This he called the Mind of the Universe. He likewise
asserts Heaven to be divine, and the fiery stars to be Olympian Gods, the rest
sublunary invisible Deities, which permeate through the elements of matter,
whereof that which passes through the air is called Juno, that which through
the water Neptune, that which through the earth Ceres. This the Stoics
borrowed from him, as he the former from Plato.

Laert.
He continued Master of the School twenty five years, until the first year of
the hundred and sixth Olympiad; then his Disciple Polemo succeeded him, During
that time, he lived very retired in the Academy^ and if at any time he went
into the City, all the trades men and other people thronged to see him.

CHAP. III.
His Virtues and Apophthegmes.
Laert. Vai. Max. 4. 3.
AMongst his other Virtues; he was very remarkable for his Continence, of which
there is this instance: Phryne, a famous Athenian Curtezan, having laid a wager
with some young men his Disciples, that he could not resist her enticements,
stole privately into his bed: The next morning being questioned and ^aught at
by his Disciples, she said, The wager they laid was of a man, not of a stone.
To this end he used to mortify himself by incision, and cauterising of his
flesh.

Val. Max. 2. 10. Cic. pro. Balbo. Laert.
His wisdom and Sanctity was much reverenced by the Athenians; for being to
give his testimony, and to swear, as the custom was, that he spoke nothing but
truth, the Judges all rose up, and cried out, that he should not swear,
indulging that to his sincerity, which they did not allow to one another.

Laert.
Being sent with others to Philip on an Embassy, the rest received gifts from
him, and went to treat in private with him; Xenocrates did neither, and for
that part was not invited by him: The Ambassadors returning to Athens, said,
that Xenocrates went along with them to no purpose: whereupon the Athenians
were ready to impose a mulct upon him; but when they understood by him, that
they were at that time to consider chiefly concerning the Commonwealth, Philip
having corrupted the rest with gifts, and that he would not accept any, they
bestowed double honors upon him. Philip said afterward, that of those who
came to him, only Xenocrates would not take any gifts.

Being sent in the time of the Lan^ack war (which was about the second year of
the 104th Olympiad) Ambassador to Antipater, about the redemption of some
Athenian Prisoners, Antipater invited him to sit down to supper, whereto he
answered in the words of Ulysses in Homer, O Circe, what man is there that is
good,
Before his friends are freed can think of food?


Antipater was so pleased with the ingenious application of these Verses, that
he caused the Prisoners immediately to be set at liberty.

Ael. var. hist. 30. 3. Laert.
His clemency, says Aelian, extended not only to men, but, often to
irrational creatures, as once, when a Sparrow, pursued by a Hawk, flew to his
bosom, he took it, much pleased, and hid it till the enemy were out of sight;
and when he thought it was out of fear and danger, opening his bosom, he let
it go, saying, that he had not betrayed a supplyant.

Laert.
Bion deriding him, he refused to make any answer in his own defense; for, a
Tragedy, says he, being mocked by a Comedy, needs not a reply.

To one, who though he had neither learned Music, Geometry, nor Astronomy;
yet, desired to be his Disciple: Away, says he, you have not the handles of
Philosophy. Some affirm he said, I teach not to card wool.

Antipater coming to Athens met and saluted him; which salute he returned not,
until he had made an end of the discourse he was about.

Laert. Stob. Eth. 126.
He was nothing proud; he assigned a particular business to every part of the
day, a great part thereof to meditation, one part to silence.

Stob. Ser. 39.
Whenever he pierced a vessel of Wine, it was sower'd before he spent it,
and the broaths that were made for him were often thrown away the next day;
whence proverbially was used, the Cheese of Xenocrates, of things that last
well, and are not easily consumed.

Val. Max. 7. 2.
Holding his peace at some detractive discourse, they asked him why he spoke
not? Because, says he, I have sometimes repented of speaking, but never of
holding my peace.

Yet, this man, says Laertius, because he could not pay the sine imposed upon
Aliens, the Athenians sold: Demetrius Phaleveus bought him, contenting both
parties, the Athenians with their Tribute, Xenocrates with his liberty.

CHAP. IV.
His Writings.
(...).
HE left many Writings, Verses, Exhortations, and Orations, their Titles these,
Of Nature 6 Books. Of Wisdom 6. Of Riches 1. Arias 1. Of Indefinite 1. Of a
Child 1. Of Continence 1. Of Profitable 1. Of Free 1. Of Death 1. which some
conceive to be the same with that which is extant amongst the spurious
Platonic Dialogues, under the title of Axiochus. Of Voluntary 1. Of Friendship
2. Of equity 1. Of Contrary 2. Of Beatitude 2. Of writing 1. Of Memory 1. Of
False 1. Callicles 1. Of Prudence 2. Oeconomick 1. Of Temperance 1. Of the
power of Law 1. Of a Commonwealth 1. Of Sancti^y 1. That virtue may be taught
1. O^ E^s 1. Of Fate 1. Of passions 1. Of Lives 1. Of concord 1. Of Disciples
2. Of Justice 1. Of Virtue 2. Of species 1. Of Pleasure 2. Of Life 1. Of
Fortitude 1. Of One 1. Of Idaeas 1. Of Art 1. Of Gods 2. Of the Soul 2. Of
Science 1. Politic 1. Of Scientificks 1. Of Philosophy 1. Of Parmenides
opinions 1. Archidemus, or of Justice 1. Of Good 1. Of things which pertain to
Intellect 8. Solutions concerning Speech 1. Physical auscultation 6. A summary
1. Of Genus's and Species 1. Pythagorean assertions 1. Solutions 2. Divisions
8. Positions 3. Of Dialectick 14, and 15, and 16. Of Disciplines, concerning
distinctions 9. Concerning Ra^iocination 9. Concerning Intelligence 4. Of
Disciplines 6. Concerning Intelligence 2. Of Geometry 5. Commentaries 1.
Contraries 1. Of Numbers 1. Theory of Arithmetic 1. Of Intervalls 1.
Astrologick 6. Elements, to Alexander concerning a Kingdom 4. To Arybas To
Hephaestion. Of Geometry 2. Verses 345.


CHAP. V.
His Death.
HE died in the 82 year of his age by a fall in the night into a Basin, Laert.
(wherein he was drowned) probably in the first year of the 116. Olympiad, for
in that year Polemo his Successor took upon him the School.

Laertius says, there were six more of this name, but mentions only five. One,
very ancient, skillful in Tacticks; another of the same City and Family with
this Philosopher, Author of the Oration upon the death of Arsinoe; the fourth,
says he, a Philosopher, who writ in Elegiack verse, but not happily, perhaps
the same, who, Suidas says, was nothing inferior to this Xenocrates for
Continence; the fist a Statuary, the ^ixt, a writer of Songs, as Aristoxenus
affirm.

POLEMO.
Laert.
POLEMO was an Athenian of OEa [a Town belonging to the Oenian Tribe,] his
Father Philostratus (who according to Laert:
Antigonus Carystius) was a Citizen of great account, and kept a Chariot and
horses.

Polemo in his youth was very intemperate, Laert.
and dissolute; he frequently took a sum of money, and hid it in a private
corner of some street, to supply his extravagances upon occasion. Even in the
Academy were found three oboli, which he had hid under a Pillar, upon the same
account. This wildness caused discontent betwixt him and his wife, who,
thinking her self not well used by him, accused him (...).

6. 9.
Neither did he delight (says Valerius Maximus,) in Luxury only, but even in
the infamy thereof. On a time, coming from a Feast, not after the setting but
rising of the Sun; and seeing the door of Xenocrates the Philosopher open, full
of Wine, smelling sweet of unguents, crowned with Garlands, richly attired, he
rushed into his School, which was filled with a crowd of learned persons. Nor
contented with so rude an intrusion, he ^ate down also, intending to make sport
at his excellent ^loquence and prudent precepts. Hereupon all were offended as
the affront deserved, only Xenocrates, continuing the same Countenance and
gesture, fell from the discourse in which he was, and began to speak of modesty
and temperance, with the gravity of whose discourse, Polemo being reduced to
repentance, first took his Garland off from his head, and flung it on the
ground; soon after he withdrew his arm within his Cloak; Next he laid aside
the cheerfulness of that look which he had formerly, when he affected
feasting; lastly, he wholly divested himself of Luxury, and being thus cured
by the wholesome Medicine of one discourse, he, from an infamous Prodigal became
a most excellent Philosopher, being Laert.
from that time forward so addicted to study, that he surpassed all the rest,
and succeeded Xenocrates in the government of the School, which he began in the
first year of the 116. Olympiad.

After he began to study Philosophy, he had such a constant behavior, that he
retained always the same Countenance, and kept the same tone in all his
speech, whereby Crantor was taken with him. A mad dog having bit him by the
Knee, he alone of all the Company seemed to be unconcerned in it, and a tumult
happening thereupon in the City, he asked without any disturbance, what was the
matter? In the Theaters also, he was nothing moved. When Nicostratus the Poet,
surnamed Clytemnestra, recited something to him and Crates, Crates was much
taken therewith, but he made no more show then as if he had heard nothing, and
was altogether such as Melanthius the Painter in his Books of Picture^hath
described him, for hesaith in his actions was expressed a stubbornness and
hardness.

Polemo used to say, we ought to exercise our selves in things, not in
Dialectick Disciplines, lest, satisfying our selves with the taste and
meditation of the superficial parts of Science, we become admired for subtlety
in discourse, but contradict our selves in the practice of our life.

He was facete and ingenious, shunning that which Aristophanes imputes to
Euripides, sowernesse and harshnesse. He taught, not sitting, but, walking. The
Athenians much honored him for his great Integrity, he took great delight in
Solitude, whence for the most part he dwelt in a Garden, about which his
Disciples built themselves little lodges, near to his School. He was a studious
imitatour of Xe^ocrates (who, Aristippus says, much loved him) always
remembering his innocence, severity and gravity, to which, like a Dorick
measure, he conformed his own steps.

Antigonus Carystius says, Ath. Deipn. lib. 2.
that from the thirtieth year of his age to his death he drunk nothing but
water.

He held that the World is God.

He much affected Sophocles, Stob. Phys. 1. 3.
chiefly in those places where (to use the phrase of the Comic Poet) a
Molossian dog seems to have written together with him. And whereas Phrynicus
says, he was

Not sweet, nor flat, but gently smooth; he said, that Homer was an Epick
Sop^ocles, Sophocles a Tragic Homer.

He died very old of a consumption, and left behind him many writings. Laertius
has this Epigram upon him; Were thou not told, that Polemo lies here,
On whom slow sickness (man's worst passion) preyed?
No, it is the robe of flesh he used to wear,
Which ere to Heaven he mounted down he laid.


Of his Disciples are remembered Crates, Zeno the Stoic, and Arcesilaus.

CRATES.
CRATES was a Thriasian, Son of Antigenes; he was an Auditor of Polemo, Laert.
and loved by him; He succeeded him in the government of his School. They both
profited so much by one another, that living they only followed the same
institutes, but even to their last ends were alike, and being dead, were buried
in the same Sepulcher. Upon which occasion Antagoras writ thus upon them both,
Who ere thou art, say ere thou passest by,
Crates and Polemo here buried lie;
Both for their mutual love no less admired,
Then for their eloquence, by which inspired,
O the wisdom they professed, the age was proud,
Yet gladly to their sacred precepts bowed.


Hence Arcesilaus, when he went from Theophrastus, and applied himself to them,
said, they were Gods, or certain relics of the golden age.

They were nothing popular, but what Dionysiodorus an ancient Musician was wont
to say, may be applied to these, when he boasted; that none had ever heard him
sing, as they had Ismenius, nor had ever seen him in a Ship, or at the
Fountains.

Antigonus says, that, he sojourned at Crantors, when he and Arcesilaus lived
most friendly, and that Arcesilaus dwelt with Crantor, Polemo with Crates,
together with Lysic^es, who was one of the Citizens, and truly, Polemo, as is
before mentioned, loved Crates, Crantor, Arcesilaus. But Crates dying, as
Apollodorus in the third of his Chronicle, left Books which he had written,
partly of Philosophy, partly of Comedy; Orations suited for public pleading,
or Embassy.

He had many eminent disciples, of whom was Arcesilaus, and Bi^n the
Boristhenite, afterward called a Theodorean from that Sect.

There were ten of this name. The First an ancient Comic Poet.

The Second, an Orator of the Family of Isocrates.

The Third, an Ingeneer, that went along with Alexander in his expeditions.

The Fourth, a Cynick.

The Fifth, a Peripatetick.

The Sixth, this Academick.

The Seventh, a Grammarian.

The Eighth, writ of Geometry.

The Ninth, an Epigrammatick Poet.

The Tenth, of Tarsis, an Academick Philosopher.

CRANTOR.
CRantor was of Soli, Laert.
much admired in his own Country. He came to Athens where he heard Xenocrates,
and studied with Poleomo.

He writ Commentaries, 3000. Verses, whereof some ascribe part to Arcesilaus.

Being asked how he came to be taken with Polemo, but answered, from the tone
of his speech^, never exalted nor depressed.

Falling sick, he went to the Temple of Aesculapius, and walked there; where
many resorted to him from several parts, not thinking he stayed in respect of
his sickness, but that he meant to erect a School in that place; amongst the
rest came Arcesilaus, whom, though he loved him very much, he recommended to
Polemo, whom he himself after his recovery heard also, and was extremely taken
with him.

He bequeathed his estate, amounting to 12. Talents to Arcesilaus, who asking
him where he would be buried, he answered,

In Earth's kind bosom happy it is to lie.

He is said to have written Poems, and to have deposited them, sealed up in his
own Country, in the Temple of Minerva; of him thus Theaetetus, Pleasing to men,
but to the Muses more.
Crantor too soon of life was dispossessed,
Earth his cold body we to thee restore
That in thy arms he peacefully may rest.


Crantor above all admired Homer and Euripides, saying, it was hard in proper
language to speak at once tragically and passionately, and quoted this verse
out of his Bellerophon.

Alas, yet why alas,
Through such fate mortals pass.
Antagoras the Poet alleges these verses, as written by him.

Read' (...), etc. as Callimachus hymn* 1. 'Ev (...). One doubtless imitating
the other, which both the interpreters not observing, have str^ngely rendered
this place.
My Soul's in doubt, for doubtless is his race,
Whether I love first of all Gods shall place,
Which drew from Erebus their old descent,
And Night beyond the Oceans vast extent;
Or whether to bright Venus, or to Earth,
Thou owe thy double form and sacred birth.
He was very ingenious in imposing apt names.

He said of an ill Poet, that his verses were full of moths; and of
T^eophrastus, that his Theses were written in a shell.

He wrote a Treatise concerning Grief, which was generally much admired, as
Cicero and Laertius attest.

He died before Polemo and Crates of the dropsy.

ARCESILAVS.
CHAP. I.
His Country, Parents, Teachers.
ARcesilaus (whom Cicero calls Arcesilas) was a Pitanean of Aeolis; his Father,
according to Apollo^orus, in the third of his Chronologicks, named Seuthus, or
as others Scythus. He was the youngest of four brethren, two by the same
Father, only the other by the same Mother; the eldest was named Pylades: of
those who had the same Father, the eldest was Maereas, Guardian to his Brother
Arcesilaus.

He was born by computation from his death (which was in the fourth year of the
Aldobrandinus his edition reads the 1^0.
hundred thirty and fourth Olympiad, the seventy fifth of his age) in the first
year of the hundred and sixteenth Olympiad.

He first heard Autolychus the Mathematician, his Countryman, before he came to
Athens, with whom he traveled to Sardis.

Next he heard Xanthus an Athenian, a Master of Music.

He heard also Hippo^icus the Geometrician, who, excepting his skill in that
Art, was otherwise a gaping dull fellow, for which Arcesilaus deriding him,
said, Geometry flew into his mouth as he gaped. Of Hipponicus falling mad, he
took so great care, that he brought him to his own house, and kept him there
until he were quite cured.

He likewise, by the compulsion of his Brother, studied Rhetoric, and being by
nature vehement in discourse, and of indefatigable industry, he addicted
himself likewise to Poetry. There is an Epigram of his extant upon Attalus, to
this effect; For arms and horses often has been the name
Of Pergamus through Pisa spread by fame:
But, now shall (if a mortal may divine)
To future times with greater glory shine.


There is another Epigram of his upon Menodorus ^ son of Eudemus.

Far hence is Thyatire, far phrygian earth,
Whence Menodore thou did derive thy birth.
But down to Acheron unpierc'd by day,
From any place thou knew'st the ready way.
To thee this T^mb Eudemus dedicates,
Whom Love has wealthy made, though poor the Fates.
Although his Brother Maereas would have had him prof^ssed Rhetoric, yet was
he naturally more inclined to Philosophy; to which end, he first became a
hearer of Theophrastus, in which time Crantor being much taken with him, spoke
that verse of Euripides to him, out of his Andromeda: Maid, if I save thee,
will thou thankful be? He answered in the following verse, Stranger, for wife
or slave accept of me. From thence forward they lived in intimate friendship,
wherea^ Theophrastus troubled, said, He had lost a youth of extraordinary wit,
and quickness of apprehension.

He emulated Pyrrho as some affirm, and studied Dialectick* and the Eretriack
Philosophy, whence Aristo said of him, Pyrrho behind, Plato before,
And in the middle Diodore.
And Timon, Next leaden Menedemus he pursues,
And Pyrrho does, or Diodorus choose.
And soon after makes him say thus; I Will swim to Pyrrho, and crook'd Diodore.

He was a great admirer of Plato; whose Books he had.

CHAP. II.
Upon what occasion he constituted the middle Academy.
Laert.
CRates dying, Arcesilaus took upon him the government of the School, which was
yielded to him by Socratides. Being possessed of that place, he altered the
Doctrine and manner of Teaching, which had been observed by Plato and his
successors, upon this occasion.

Plato and his followers down to Arcesilaus, held, (as was said) That there are
two kinds of things, some perceptible by Sense, others perceptible only by
Intellect: Aca^. qu^st. lib. 1.
That from the latter arises Science, from the former Opinion: That the Mind
only sees that which always is simple, and in the same manner, and such as it
is; that is, Ideas. But, that the Senses are all dull and slow, neither can
they perceive those things which seem subjected to Sense, because either they
are so little, that they cannot fall beneath sense, or so movable and
transient; that not one of them is constant or the same; but, all are in
continual lapse and fluxion. Hence they called all this part of things
Opi^^onable, affirming that Science is no where, but, in the notions and
reasons of the mind.

(...). Acad. quaest. 4.
Yet, did they profess against those, who said, the Academy took away all
sense; for, they affirmed not, that there was no such thing as color, or taste,
or sapor, or sound; but; only maintained, there was no proper mark of true and
certain in the senses, there being no such any where.

Plut. cont. ^olot.
Hence they allowed, that we make use of the senses in actions, from the reason
that appears our of them; but, to trust them as absolutely true and
infallible, they allowed not.

Thus held the Academicks down to Poleme, Cic. Acad. quaest. 1.
of whom Arcesilaus and Zen^ were constant Auditors; but Zeno being older then
Arcesilaus, and a very subtle disputant, endeavored to correct his doctrine,
not that, as Theophrastus says, he did enervate virtue; but, on the contrary,
he placed all things that are reckoned among the good, in virtue only: and this
he called honest, as being simple, sole, one good: Of the rest, though neither
good nor evil, he held, that some were according to Nature, others contrary to
Nature, others Mediate: Those which are according to Nature, he held to be
worthy estimation, the contrary contrary; the neuter he left betwixt both, in
which he placed no value. Of those which were eligible, some were of more
estimation, some of less; those which were of more he called preserred, those
of less rejected. And as in these, he did not change so much the things
themselves as the words, so betwixt a rectitude and a sin, an office and a
praeterossice: he placed some things mediate, holding that Rectitudes consisted
only in good actions, sins in evil; but, offices either performed or omitted,
he conceived mediate things. And whereas the Philosophers of the old Academy
did not hold all Virtue to consist in Reason, but some virtues to be perfected
by nature or custom* Zeno on the contrary placed all Virtue in Reason; and
whereas the Academicks held, as we said [in the life of Plato,] that all those
virtues may be separated, Zeno maintained that could not be, averring, that not
only the use of virtue (as the Academicks held) but the habit thereof was
excellent in it self, neither had any one virtue, who did not always make use
of it. And whereas the Academicks took not away passion from man, affirming
that we are subject to compassion, desire, fear, and joy by nature; but, only
contracted them, and reduced them within narrower limits; Zeno affirmed, that
from all these, as from so many diseases, a wise man must be free. And whereas
they held, that all passions were natural and irrational, and placed in one
part of the Soul Concupiscence, in the other Reason: Neither did Zeno herein
agree with them, for he asserted, that passions are voluntary, that opinions
are taken up by judgment, that immoderate intemperance is the Mother of all
passion. Thus much for Ethics.

Cic. ibid.
As for Physic, He did not allow that fifth nature besides the four Elements,
of which the Academicks held Sense and Mind to be effected; for, He asserted
Fire to be that nature which begets every thing, both Mind and Sense. He
likewise dissented from them, in that he held, nothing can be made by a thing
which has no body, (of which nature, Xenocrates, and the old Academicks
thought the soul to be) and that whatsoever made any thing, or was it self
made, must of necessity be a Body*

Cic. ibid.
He likewise asserted many things in the third part of Philosophy, wherein He
asserted some things new of the Senses themselves, which he conceived to be
joined by a certain extrinsecall impulsion, which he called Fantasy. To these
fantasies received by the Senses, He added Assent of the mind, which he held
to be placed in us, and voluntary. He^ did not allow all fantasies to be
faithful and worthy ^redit^ but, only those which have a proper declaration of
those things which they seem, which fantasy when it is seen, is called
comprehensible, when received and approved, he calls it comprehension. That
which was comprehended by sense, he calls Sense, and, if it were so
comprehended, that it could not be pulled away by reason, Science, if
otherwise, Ignorance, of which kind was opinion, infirm, and common to false
or unknown things. Betwixt Science and Ignorance he placed that comprehension
we mentioned, not reckoning it among the good nor the bad* ^ut affirming that
only was to be credited, whence he likewise attributed faith to the Senses, for
as much as he conceived the comprehension made by the Senses to be true and
faithful, not that it comprehended all things that are in being; but that it
omits nothing that can fall beneath it, as also, because nature has given it
as a rule of Science and principle of it self, whence notions are afterward
imprinted in the mind, from which not only principles, but certain larger
ways toward the invention of reason, are found out. Error, temerity,
ignorance, opination, suspicion, and in a word, whatsoever is not of firm and
constant assent, he took away from Virtue and Wisdom. In these things
consists almost all the change and dissension of Zeno from the old Academicks.

Zeno thus maintaining many things contrary to Plato, as that the Soul is
mortal, and that there is no other World but this, which is subject to Sense,
Arcesilaus perceiving this Doctrine to spread and take much, prudently
concealed the doctrine of the Academy, lest the mysteries of Plato being
divulged and made too common, should become despicable: and therefore (says
Contra Academic. ^ib.
St. Augustine) he thought it fitter to unteach the man that was not well
taught, then to teach those, whom by experience he found not to be docile
enough.

Cic. Acad. quaest. 1.
Hereupon Arcesilaus undertook to oppose and contest with Zeno, not out of any
pertinacity or desire of glory, but led thereunto by that obscurity of things,
which had brought Socrates to a confession of his own ignorance; as likewise
Democritus, Anaxagoras, Empedocle^, and almost all the ancient Philosophers,
who affirmed, That nothing could be understood, nothing perceived, nothing
known: That the senses are narrow, our minds weak, our lives short, and truth
(as Democritus says) drowned in an abyss. That all things are held by opinion
and institution, nothing left to Truth: and finally, That all things are
involved in darkness.

Cic. ibid.
Thus Arcesilaus denied there is any thing that can be known, not so much as
that which Socrates reserved, [ that he knew nothing] conceiving all things to
be hid in such darkness, that there is nothing which can be seen or
understood. For these reasons we ought not to profess or affirm any thing, or
to approve any thing by assent; but, always to restrain and withhold our
hastiness from error, which then proves great, when it approves a thing
false or unknown. Neither is there any thing more vile, then by assent and
approbation to prevent knowledge and perception.

Cic. ibid.
He did, as was agreeable to this tenent, dispute against all assertions and
doctrines; and having found, that in the same thing the reasons of two opinions
directly opposite, were of equal weight, he thence inferred, that we ought to
withold our assents ( Eusebius.
(...)) from both: [This Laertius means, when he says, that he took away
propositions, by reason of the repugnance of speech, and was the first that
taught to argue on both sides.] Eusebius. praepar. Evang.
And that neither the senses nor reason are to be credited. He therefore
praised that Apophthegm of Hesiod; The Gods all knowledge have concealed from
men.

But this Contra A^adem. lib. 3.
Saint Augustine affirms was only done, to conceal mysteriously the meaning of
Pla^o; but, they nevertheless had and held his doctrines and decrees, which
they used to unfold to those who lived with them till they were old.

He likewise, as Laertius says, first al^er'd the manner of disputing which
Plato delivered, and made it more litigious by question and answer, of which,
thus De ^inib. l. 2.
Cicero: Socrates used to find out by question and answer, the opinions of
those with whom he discoursed, that, if there were occasion, he might say
something upon that which they answered: This custom not retained by his
successors, was taken up by Arcesilaus, who instituted, that they who would
learn of him should not question him; but, themselves tell him what they
thought, which when they had done, he disputed against it; but, his Auditors
were to maintain their own opinion as much as they could possibly. This course
took Arcesilaus, contrary to all other Philosophers, amongst whom, he that
would learn held his peace; which courle, says Cicero, is at this time held in
the ^Academy, where he that will learn, speaks in this manner, Pleasure seems
to be the chief good, whereupon in a long Oration it is disputed against it,
whereby may easily be understood, that they who say, a thing seems to me to
be so, are not really of that opinion, but desire to hear the contrary
maintained.

This School constituted by Arcesilaus, was called the second Academy, in
relation to its descent from Plato; or, the middle Academy, in respect of the
new one which was afterward set up by Carneades; though Acad. quaest. ^.
Cicero seems to make no distinction between this and that, but calls this
the new Academy: But, though it is likely, that it was not at first so called;
yet, upon the introduction of a newer, it was afterward more generally known
by the title of the middle, or, second Academy.

These Academicks differ from the Scepticks, in as much, as, though they
affirmed that nothing can be comprehended; yet they took not away true or false
from things: On the contrary, they held that some Fantasies were true, others
false; but the Scep^icks hold that they are both indifferent; alike defensible
by reason. The Academicks assert some things to be wholly improbable, some more
probable then others, and that a wise man* when any of these occur, Eusebius.
praep. evang. lib. 1^.
may answer yes, or no, following the probability, provided that he withold
from assenting. But the Scepticks hold all things to be alike indifferent, not
admitting Judgment, nor allowing that either our senses or opinions can
perceive true or false, and therefore no faith is to be given to them, but we
ought to persist firm and unmovable without opinion, not saying of any thing
that it is, any more then that it is not.

CHAP. III.
His Virtues and Apopthegms.
Laer^.
HE preferred Homer above all Writers, of whom he constantly read some piece
before he went to bed, and as soon as he rose in the morning. When he went to
read any thing in him, he said, he went to his Mistress.

^indar also he said was proper to raise the voice, and give us supply of words.

He was sententious and succinct in speech, often using expressions of
doubtful meaning. He used to reprehend and chide sharply, and freely, whence
Timon says of him, When thou chidst young men, think thou once were young.

In this kind, Laertius instances his sayings to a young man, speaking
confidently, etc. to an immodest young man, etc.

Emo a Chian, who though very deformed, thought himself very handsome, asking
him as he put on a rich Cloak, whether he thought a wise man might not love,
Arcesilaus answered, do you mean if he be as handsome and as fine as you?

To an effeminate person, who upbraiding him as it were of pride, spoke this
verse, Shall we demand, great Sir, or silent be? He immediately answered,
Woman, why speak thou these harsh words to me?

Being troubled with the talk of an inconsiderable mean person, he said, The
Sons of slaves intemperately speak.

Of another, who talked impertinently, and loudly, he said, he had a peevish
nurse. For some he would make no answer at all.

To an Usurer, who said there was something he knew not, he answered in these
verses out of Sophocles's OEnomaus, The course of storms hid from the bird does
lie,
Until the time that she must lay draw nigh.


To a Dialectick Philosopher of Alexinus's School, who was not able to say any
thing worthy Alexinus, he related what Philoxenus did to a maker of Bricks, who
overhearing him sing his verses false, trod upon his bricks and broke them,
saying, as you spoil mine, so I yours.

He was angry at those who learned not the liberal Sciences in due time.

In dispute, he used this word, I say, and will not such a one, (naming the
person) assent to this, which many of his Disciples affected to imitate, as
also his manner of speaking and gesture.

He was most acute in answering appositely, and converting his discourse to the
present subject, and fitting it for every time.

He was very efficacious in persuasion? whence many Disciples resorted to him,
though sometimes he sharply touched them, which they took patiently.

He was very good, and much excited hope in his Auditors.

As to the necessaries of life, he was very liberal and communicative, ready
to do good, and much endeavoring to conceal it, avoiding all that kind of
vainglory. Visiting C^esibius, who was sick, and perceiving him to be poor, he
privately put a purse under his pillow, which when he found, this, says he, is
the sport of Arcesilaus. Another time he sent him 1000. drachms. Quom. discern.
(...). ab. amic.
Plutarch relates this as done to Apelles the Chian Painter, whom Arcesilaus
besides many other testimonies of kindness coming to visit as he lay sick, and
perceiving how poor he was, departed, and returning soon after, bringing twenty
drachmes with him, then sitting close to Apelles's bed side, Here is nothing
says he, besides Empedo^le's four Elements,

Fire, Water, Earth, and Ether mounting high, but me thinks you lie not at
your ease, and with that taking occasion to remove his pillow, he conveyed the
purse privately under it, which when the old woman that tended him found, and
wondering, showed to Apelles, he laughing, said, This is one of Arcesilaus's
thefts.

La^rt.
He recommended Archias, an Arcadian to Eumenes King of Pergamus, by whom he
was exalted to great dignity.

He was very liberal and free from covetousness, as appeared by his Utensills
of silver, and vying with Archecrates and Callicrates. He had many vessels of
gold, which he lent unto many upon occasion of feasting. These silver vessels
a certain man borrowed to entertain his friends withal; Arcesilaus knowing him
to be poor, would never send for them back: Others report he lent them to him
on purpose, and when he brought them back, because he was poor, he freely
bestowed them on him.

He had a fair estate at Pitane, from which Pylades his brother continually
supplied him. Eumenes also, son of Phileterus gave him many large presents,
whence to him only of all Kings he applied himself.

When Antigonus was much followed, and many persons thronged to his house, he
forbore, declining his acquaintance. He was intimate with Hierocles, the
Governor of Munichia and Pireum, and constantly, on holidaies, went thither to
visit him: Hierocles often entreated him to visit Antigonus, but he refused,
and went along with him as far as the door, and there parted with him. After
Antigonus's fight at Sea, many writing consolatory Epistles to him, Arcesilaus
was silent. Being sent by his Country on an Embassy to Antigonus at Demetrias,
he returned frustrate of his design.

He lived the greatest part of his time in the Academy, avoiding to meddle with
public business; but sometimes went to the Pireum, as we said, out of love to
Hierocles; for which some reproved him.

He was very magnificent (indeed a second Aristippus) in the entertainment of
his friends. He openly professed love to Theodote and Phileta, Curtezans of
Elis, for which being reprehended, he rehearsed the Chria's of Aristippus. He
was very amarous, and much affected the company of young men, whence Aristo of
Chios, a Stoic, called him a corrupter of youth, temerarious, and impudent. Of
those whom he affected are mentioned Demetrius and Leochares; Demochares son of
Laches, and Pythocles son of Bugerus, much affected him.

For these things he was much inveighed against at the house of Hieronimus the
Peripatetick, who had invited his friends to celebrate the birth day of
Alcyoneus, son of Antigonus, for the keeping of which Feast, Antigonus sent
yearly much money. At this Feast Arcesilaus would not dispute amidst the cups;
and when Aridelus propounded a question to him, requiring that he would say
something to it, he answered, it is the best property of a Philosopher to know
the seasons of all things.

But, he was so free from pride, that he counseled his Disciples to go and
hear other Masters; and when a certain Chian youth of his School declared, that
he was not pleased with what he said so much as with the discourses of
Hieronimus, he took him by the hand and led him to the Philosopher, desiring
him to cherish him according to his quality.

To one that asked why men went from other Sects to the Epicureans, but never
from the Epicureans to other Sects: Because, says he, of men, some are made
Eunuchs, but of Eunuchs never any are made men.

Stob* Ser. 143.
He said, where there are many medicines, and many Physicians, there are most
diseases; and where there are many Laws, there is most iniquity.

Stob. Ser. ^ 12.
He advised to shun Dialectick, because it turns all things upside down.

Stob. Ser. 212.
He compared Logicians to Gamsters that play at Dice, who take delight whilst
they are cosen'd.

Stob. Ser. 235.
He affirmed, that poverty is rugged as Ithaca, but good to bring up a child,
in that it enureth to frugality and abstinence, and is generally a good School
of virtue.

CHAP. IV.
His death.
Laert.
WHen he drew nigh the end of his life, he bequeathed all his estate to his
brother Pylades; to which end, Moereas not knowing it, he sent him first to
Chios, and from thence sent for him back again to Athens. He sent three Copies
of his Will, one to Amphicritus at Eretria, an other to some friends of his at
Athens, the third to Thaumasias his near kinsman, to be kept by them; with the
last he sent this Letter.

Arcesilaus to Thaumasias, health.
I Gave Diogenes my Will to bring to you, for being often sick and infirm of
body, I thought fit to make my Will, lest if any sudden accident should befall
me, I should depart this life with some in^urie done to you, whom I have found
so bountiful toward me. I desire that you, the most faithful of all my
friends, will take it into your custody. Approve your self just to that
extraordinary trust which I have reposed in you, that it may appear I have made
a right choice.


He died, as Hermippus says, in a kind of phrenzy, after he had drunk much
Wine, 75 years old, in the fourth year of the 134th Olympiad, as may be
conjectured from the succession of Lacydes, in the School which began at that
time. The Athenians buried him with such solemnity as never any was before.

He took not any women into the house with him, neither had he any children. He
flourished according to Apollodorus in the 120. Olympiad.

There were three more of this name, one an ancient Comic Poet, the second an
Elegiack Poet, the third a Statuary.

LACYDES.
LAcydes succeeded Arcesilaus; Laert:
he was a Cyrenean, (his Father named Alexander) a person of much gravity, and
had many Aemulators. He was from his youth much given to study, poor, but
pleasing to all company, and of a delightful conversation.

As concerning his managing his household affairs, it is reported that when he
took any thing out of the place where he kept his Provisions, he locked the
door, and threw the key in at a hole that none might steal ought from him;
which his servants observing, frequently took it, and, opening the door,
carried away what they thought good, and then put it in the same place again,
in which fact they were never discovered.

But the most pleasant part of the story, is, that (as Eusebius. pra^: evaag. lib.
14.
Numenius affirms) he was thereby persuaded to be of the opinion of the middle
Academicks; that nothing is comprehended by sense, arguing thus; why should I
think that sense can comprehend any thing certainly, when I know that my own
senses are so often deceived; for when I go abroad, I think that I see with my
eyes those things which I leave in my storehouse; when I return I find none of
them; which could not be unless our senses were fallible and uncertain.

Lacydes upon the death of Arcesilaus, being made master of the School in the
4th year of the 134. Olympiad, taught in the Academy, in the Gardens which were
made by Attalus the King, which from him were called the Lacydean Gardens.
Laertius, and, from him, Suidas, make him Institutor of the new Academy; but
erroneously. He continued this charge 26 years, at the end whereof he resigned
it, whilst he was yet alive, to Telecles and Euander, Phocians, his Disciples,
in the second year of the 141. Olympiad.

Attalus sending for him to come to him, returned him answer, that Pictures
make the best show at a distance.

Studying Geometry in his old age, one said to him, is it now time? he
answered, when, if not now?

Athenaeus says, that Lacydes and Timon Philosophers, being invited by one of
their friends to an entertainment of two days, and desirous to suit themselves
to the company, drunk very freely* Lacyd^s went away first, 11. (...)
half drunk, and perceiving Timon to (...) away too, said out of Homer.

To our great glory Hector we have slain. The next day meeting Timon again at
the same place, and seeing him, not able to take off his cups at once, make a
pause, when he put it to his mouth the second time, he said out of another
place of Homer, (...).
Those are unhappy who contest with me. Aelian likewise numbers these two
amongst the great drinkers, V^r. hist.
and perhaps not unjustly; for by excess of Wine he fell into the palsy, of
which he died in the second year of the 141. Olympiad.

He wrote Philosophicks and of Nature.

In the School, he was succeeded, as are said, by EUANDER, Euander, by his
Disciple, EGESINUS, whom Clemens Alexandrinus calls Hegesi^aus, of Pergamus,
Egesinus, by CARNEADES.

CARNEADES.


CARNEADES.
CHAP. I.
His Country, Parents, Time, Masters.
CARNEADES (successor of Egesinus) was of L^ert.
Cyrene, whence Acad. qu^^t. 4.
Cicero says, he was an acute person, as being an African. He was son of
Epicomus, or Philocomus. Apollodorus, as cited by Laertius, affirms he died
in the 162. Olympiad; but there is a mistake in the Text; for the words of
Apollodorus relate doubtless to the time of his birth, which upon that
Authority, we may affirm to have been in the first year of 162. Olympiad.
Florus (cited by Sympo^. quapot ^. 1.
Plutarch) adds, he was born on the 7th day of Tharlegion, at what time the
Carnean Festivalls were celebrated at Cyrene, whence perhaps he took his name.

This time falling after the Callippical period, we shall compute it according
to Do^tr. (...)* p.
Petavius his method, which although it be not exempt from question, yet is
better then that of Scaliger, whose method is not reconcilable to Ptolomy's
observations.

The fourth of the 164. Olympiad, was Of the Julian period 4585. Epoche of the
Callippick period 4383. Which subducted, there remains 202. Subduct two
perionods more 152. remains 50.

The year propounded therefore is the 50th of the third period. The Neomenia of
He^atombaeon, June 26. which is the 177th day of the Julian year; the 7th of
Thargelion (according to Petavius) at that time was the 302. of the Attick
year. To 177. add 302. Sum 479. Subduct 365 Remains 114.

The 114th day of the Julian year is the 24th of April, on which fell the 7th
of Thargelion; which, the Dominicall Letter being B. fell on Sunday,
Proleptically taken.

Laert.
He was Disciple to Egesinus the Academick, and Cic. Acad. quaest. 4.
learned Logic of Diogenes the Stoic, whence in arguing he would many* times
say, If I have concluded right, the cause is my own; if not right, Diogenes
must return the ^ina he had of me; which was the price the Dialectick
Philosophers took.

CHAP. II.
How he constituted the new Academy.
HE succeeded Egesinus in the School, and is by Cicero reckoned the fourth from
Arcesilaus, (who constituted the middle Academy, introducing a suspension of
Assent, grounded upon the uncertainty of things:) Carneades, constituted the
new Academy, maintaining the same kind of suspension, with no less eagerness;
yet upon more moderate grounds: Numen. apud. Eusebius.
for he held that the incomprehensibility of things, proceeded not from the
nature of the things themselves, as Arcesilaus maintained; for as much as every
thing really existeth in it self, and if any thing be affirmed or denied of
another, it is true or false, as to the thing it self; but the things
themselves remaining firm, we derive from them a Phantasia and similitude,
which for the most part like false messengers lie and deceive us. To all true
things there some false adjoined, and those so like, that, there is no certain
note of Judication and assent, wherefore we cannot perceive any thing to be
true.

But he was nothing less rigid as to the Academicall suspension, for Cic.
Acad. quaest. 4.
he denied that any thing could be perceived, not so much as that very maxim;
Nothing can be perceived, arguing thus. All Phantasmes are of two kinds; the
first included the perceptible, and imperceptible; the second kind, the
probable; and the improbable. Those which are contrary to sense and evidence,
pertain to the former division; against the latter we ought not to say any
thing. Wherefore there is no Fantasy followed by perception, but by
approbation many; for it were contrary to nature that nothing should be
probable.

More fully Adv. Mathem.
Sextus Empericus. Carneades, says he, did not only oppose the Stoics, but
all that went before him, as to judgment. His first and common argument against
all, is, that, by which he shows absolutely, that there is nothing from which
truth can be judged; not reason, not sense, not phantasy, nor any things, for
all these in a word deceive us. His second argument is that whereby he shows,
that although there be something that does judge, yet it cannot exist without
an affection from evidence. For an animal differs from inanimate things by
the sensitive faculty, it apprehends thereby both it self and external
things; but sense remaining immovable, impassible, and immutable, is not sense,
nor apprehends any thing, but being changed, and after some manner affected
by incursion of evidents, then it declares things. In that affection therefore
of the soul which arises from evidence, we are to seek that which judges.
This affection is declared when that appears from which it proceeds, which
affection is nothing else but phantasy. Phantasy therefore is a certain
affection in an animal, which shows both it self and some others, as when
we see any thing, our sight is affected in some manner, so, as it was not
before that act of seeing. By this alteration we apprehend two things: First,
the alteration it self, that is the phantasy. Secondly, that from which this
alteration proceeds, the things visible. The like in the rest of the senses. As
therefore light manifests it self and all things in it, so phantasy being
the chief guide of knowledge in an animal, must like unto Light, manifest
both it self, and that evident object which effects it. But because it does
not always show that which is true, but often erreth and differs from the
thing whence it proceeds, like ill messengers, it necessarily follows that
all fantasies cannot leave a judgment of truth, but only if it be true. Again,
because there is no fantasy so true, but it may be false; and of all
fantasies that seem true there are some false, which differ little from them,
that which judges must consist in common phantasy of true and false. But the
common phantasy of these comprehends not, and if it comprehends not,
neither is there any thing that judges. And if phantasy have not a judicative
power, neither can reason judge, for that is derived from phantasy, and justly:
For, that whereof it judges, ought first to appear unto it; but nothing can
appear but through sense void of reason; therefore neither sense void of
reason; nor reason it self is that which judges.

Thus disputed Carneades against all other Philosophers, to show there is not
any thing that judges. But, being demanded what judges, as to the leading of
life and acquisition of beatitude, he has recourse to probable phantasy; and
together with probable, undistracted and circumcurrent, their differences
these. Phantasy is the phantasy of something, viz. of that of which it is made,
and of that in which it is made: That of which it is made is the external
sensible object; that in which, the Man. It has two relations, one to the
object phancyed, the other to the phantasm derived from that object. From the
relation to the object it is either true or false; true, when it agrees with
the object; false, when it disagreeth: From its relation to the phantasme,
there is one which seems true, another false. That which seems true is by
the Academicks called Emphasis, and probability, and probable fantasy; that
which seems not true is called Apemphasis, improbability, and not-p^obable
phantasy. For, neither that which seems false, and is such; nor that which is
true, and seems not such, have any thing in their nature persuasive. But, of
these fantasies, that which is manifestly false, and seems not true,
limiteth the judicatory, but is not that which judges, as likewise produces
from that which is, but differs from it, such as was that of the fury
proceeding from Electra to Orestes. Of that which seems true, one kind is
tenuious, as that which is in a thing so little, as that it is not visible,
either because it takes not up room enough, or by reason of the weakness of
sight, which receives things confusedly, and not distinctly. The other is that
which has this common property with the true, that it seems to be very true.
Now of these, the tenuious, loose, remiss phantasy cannot be that which
judges; for that which cannot clearly manifest it self, nor the thing that
effected it, cannot attract us, nor invite assent; but that which seems true
and is manifest enough, that, according to Carneades, is the judge of truth.

This being that which judges, it has a great latitude, and being extended
into another species, has a more probable and vehemently effective phantasy.
Probable is taken three ways; first, for that which is true, and seems true;
secondly, for that which is false, and seems true; thirdly, for that which is
true, common to both. Whence that which judges must be that phantasy which
seems true, which the Academicks call probable. Sometimes the false
incurreth; so that it is necessary to use the common phantasy of true and
false; yet, not because that more seldom incurreth, I mean that which
imitateth the truth, we are not to give credit to that which is for the greater
part true, whereby it happens our judgment and actions are for the most part
directed.

That which first and commonly judges, Carneades held to be this. But
forasmuch as phantasy sometimes is not of one kind, but like a chain, one
depends on another, there must therefore be a second judge, which is probable
and undistracted phantasy. As he who receives the phantasy of a man,
necessarily receives the phantasy of such things as are about him, and without
him; of the things about him, as color, magnitude, figure, motion, speech,
clothing, shoes; of things without him, as air, light, day, heaven, earth,
companions, and the like. When therefore none of these fantasies seems false,
but all agree in seeming true, we credit it the more. That such a one is
Socrates we believe, because he has all those things which Socrates uses to
have, as color, magnitude, figure, gesture, cloak, in none of these
disagreeing with it self. And as some Physicians argue a man to be in a fever,
not from one symptom, as from a high pulse, or great heat, but from the
concurrence of that heat with the pulse, as also from ulcerous touch, redness,
thirst, and the like, all agreeing together. So the Academick makes a judgment
of truth, from a concurrence of fantasies, and when none of all the fantasies
that join in the concurrence retract him as false, he says, that which
incurreth is true.

That there is a credible undistracted concurrence, is manifest from Menelaus:
Having left in his ship an image of Helene which he had brought from ^roy, as
if it had been Helene her self, landing at the Island Pharos, he there met
with the true Helene, and from her attracted a true phantasy, but would not
believe that phantasy, being distracted by the other, which told him, that he
had left Helene in the Ship. Such is undistracted phantasy therefore, which
likewise seems erroneous, for as much as there are some more undistracted
then others. Of undistracted fantasies, that is most credible and perfect
which makes a judgment.

Moreover, there is a circumcurrent phantasy, the form whereof is next to be
declared. In the undistracted we only enquire whether none of those fantasies
which join in concurrence, attract us as false, but that they all seem true,
and not improbable. But in that which is made by concurse, which uses
circumcurrence, strictly examines every phantasy which is in that concurrence,
as in Assemblies, when the people take account of every particular person that
stands for the Magistracy, whether they deserve that power and right of
judging. In the place of Judgment, there is that which judges, and that by
which the judgment is made, the distance and intervall, figure, time, manner,
affection, and operation, each of which we examine strictly. That which
judges, whether the sight be dim, for if it be, it is too weak for judgment;
that which is judged, whether it be not too little; that through which, whether
the air be obscure; the distance, whether it too great; the medium, whether
confused; the place, whether too wide and vast; the time, whether too sudden;
the affection, whether not phrenetick; the operation, whether not unfit to be
admitted. For if all these be in one, that which judges is probable phantasy,
and together, probable, undistracted, and circumcurrent. Wherefore as when in
life we enquire concerning some little thing, we examine one witness; when we
enquire into something of greater consequence, we examine more; but when of a
thing most necessary, we examine each of the witnesses by the joint testimony
of all. So says Carneades, in light, inconsiderable matters, we make use of
probable phantasy, only for judgment; in things of some moment, of undistracted
phantasy; in things that concern well and happy living, circumcurrent phantasy.

And as in things of great moment they take diverse fantasies, so in different
circumstances they never follow the same; for they say, they attend only
probable phantasy in such things wherein the circumstance of time allows not
a strict examination: As for instance. The enemy pursues a man; he coming to a
Cave, takes a phantasy, that there are some enemies there lying in wait:
transported by this phantasy as probable, he shunneth and flies from the Cave,
following the probability of that phantasy, before he accuratly and diligently
examine, whether there really be any enemies in ambush in that Cave or no.
Probable phantasy is followed by circumcurrent, in those things in which time
allows a curious examination of each particular, to use judgment upon the
incurrent thing. As a man coming into a dark room, and seeing a rope rolled up,
thinking it to be a serpent, he flies away; but afterward returning, he
examines the truth, and perceiving it not to stir, begins to think it is not a
serpent; but withal considering, that serpents are sometimes frozen or nummed
with the cold, he strikes it with his staff: and having thus by circumcurrence
examined the phantasy which incurred to him, he assenteth, that the phantasy he
had taken of that body as a serpent is false. And again, as I said, when we
manifestly behold, we assent that this is true, having first overrun in our
thoughts that our senses are all entire, and that we behold this waking, not in
a dream; that the air is perspicuous, and a convenient distance from the
object. Hereby we receive a creditable phantasy, when we have time enough to
examine the particulars concerning the thing seen. It is the same in
undistracted phantasy, which they admit, when there is nothing that can retract
us, as we said of Menelaus. Hitherto Sextus.

Yet, Cic. Acad. quaest. 4.
though nothing can be perceived, a wise man may assent to that which is not
perceived; that is, he may opini^nate; but so as he knows himself to
opinionate, and that there is nothing which can be comprehended and perceived.

He asserted the ultimate end to be the enjoyment of natural principles, De
^in. lib. 2.
which, says Cicero, he maintained, not that he really thought so, but in
opposition to the Stoics.

He read the Books of the Stoics very diligently, Laert.
and disputed against them with so good success, that it gave him occasion to
say; If Chrysippus had not been, I had not been.

Clitomachus used to say of him, he could never understand what he really held;
Cic. Acad. quaest. 4.
for he would sometimes argue on one side, sometimes on the other; and by the
calumny of his wit, says Cicero, many times deride the best causes. Of the
Sorites used by him, see Sextus Empiricus.

CHAP. III.
Upon what occasion he was sent on an Embassy to Rome
Plut vit. Cat. Agel. 7. 14. Ma^r. Satur. 1. 5.
THE Athenians being fined by the Romans about 500. Talents, at the suit of the
Or^pians and Sicyonians, for destroying Oropus a City of Baeotia, sent three
Philosophers on an Embassy to the Roman Senate, to procure a mitigation of
this fine, which had been imposed upon them without hearing their defense;
Carneades the Academick, Diogenes the Stoic, and Critolaus the Peripatetick.
About the time of this Embassy there is much disagreement amongst Authors.
Agellius says, they came after the second Punick War, and makes Ennius later
then their coming; which Petavius justly conceives to be false, for as much as
Ennius died in the 585th year from the building of the City. But Cicero
affirms this Embassy to have been when P. Scipio and M. Marcellus were
Consuls, which was the 599th year. Pausanias reckons it upon the 603d year of
the City, which Casaubone approves.

Each of these Philosophers, to show his learning, made choice of several
eminent parts of the City, where they discoursed before great multitudes of
people to the admiration of all. The Eloquence of Carneades was violent and
rapid; that of Critolaus, neat and smooth, that of Diogenes modest and sober.
Carneades one day disputed copiously concerning justice before Galba and Cato,
Lactant. de Inst. lib. 51*
the greatest Orators of that time. The next day he subverted all he had said
before by contrary Arguments, and took away that Justice which he had so much
commended. This he did the better to confute those, that asserted any thing.
That dispute whereby he overthrew Justice is recorded in Cicero by L. Furius.

To these three Philosophers resorted all the studious young men, Plut.
and frequently heard and praised them. chiefly the sweetness of Carneades,
which was of greatest power and no less fame then power, attracting eminent
and benign hearers, filled the City with noise like a great wind; and it was
reported that a Grecian person qualified to admiration, attracting all, had
infused a serious affection into the young men, whereby forgetting other
divertisements and pleasures, they were carried on as it were with a kind of
madness to Philosophy. This pleased all the Romans, who gladly beheld their
Sonns instructed in Greek learning by such excellent men. Only Cato at the
first noise of Admiration of the Greek Learning, was troubled, fearing the
young men should apply themselves that way, and so prefer the glory of
eloquence before Action and Military discipline. The fame of Philosophers
increasing in the City, and C. Acilius, (whom Agellius and Macrobius call
Caecilius) an eminent person, having at his own request been the Interpreter of
their first Oration to the Senate; Cato (who was then very old) under a fair
pretense, moved, that these Philosophers might be sent out of the City, and
coming into the Senate House, blamed the Magistrates, that they had so long
suffered such Ambassadors to continue amongst them without any answer, who were
able to persuade them to any thing: wherefore he first desired that something
might be determined concerning their Embassy, that they might be sent back
again to their own Schools, and instruct the Sons of Graecians, and that the
Roman youth might, as they did before, apply themselves to the observance of
their own Laws and Magistrates. This he did not out of anger to Carneades, as
some thought, but out of an ambitious aemulation of the Greek humanity and
Literature.

CHAP. IV.
His Virtues and Apophthegmes.
HE was a person infinitely industrious, less conversant in Physic then
Ethick, Lib. 8. c. 7.
and so studious that he neglected to cut his hair and nails. Valerius Maximus
says, he was so studious, that when he lay down at meals, his thoughts were
so fixed, that he forgot to put his hand to the Table, and that Melissa, who
lived with him as a wife, was fain to put him in mind thereof, and help him.

He was so e^inent for Philosophy, that the Orators themselves would many
times break up their schools and come and hear him.

He had a great and loud-voice, whereupon the Gymnasiarch sent to him not to
speak so loud, whereto he answering, send me the measure by which I should
speak; the other wisely and appositely replied, you have a measure, your
Hearers.

He was sharply invective, and in argument almost invincible. He avoided
feasting, out of the reason we mentioned, his great studiousnesse.

One named Mentor a Bythinian, as Phavorinus says, who had endeavored to
seduce a Mistress that he kept, coming into the school, he presently jeasted at
him, in turning these words of Homer, Hither comes one oppressed with hoary
years,
Like Mentor in his voice and looks appears,
Who from the School I charge you turn away.
The other rising up, replied, He thus proclaimed, the rest did straight obey.

Being to dispute with Chrysippus, he purged himself by white Hellebore to
sharpen his wit, lest any corrupt humors in his stomach might oppress the
vigor and constancy of his mind.

He compared Dialectick to the fish Polypus, Stob. Ser. 212.
which when its claws grow long, bites them off; so Logicians, growing subtle,
confute their own assertions.

He advised men in their greatest prosperity to be mindful of a change, Plut.
de tranp. anim.
for that which is unexpected is most grievous.

He said the Sons of rich men and Kings learn nothing well but Riding, Plut de
adul. and Am. dis.
for their Masters flatter them; they who contest with them, willingly yield to
them; but a horse considers not whether a private man or a Prince, a poor man
or a rich be on his back, but if he cannot rule him, he throws his Rider.

He seemed to be extremely averse from death, Laert.
whence he often said, the same Nature which has put us together will dissolve
us; and hearing that Antipater dyed by drinking poison, he was a little animated
by his constancy in death, and said, then give me too, they asking what, Wine,
says he,

In the midst of the night he was struck blind, Laer^.
and knew not of it, but waking, bid his servant bring a light; the servant did
so, telling him he had brought one, then, said he, read you.

CHAP. V.
His Death and Writings.
HE lived according to Laertius 85. years, or according to Cicecero. 90. The
words of Lae^^.
Apollodorus that he died in the fourth year of the 162d Olympiad, which
falls upon the 626th year from the building of Rome, may easily be evinced to
be false, by the greatest part of the Circumstances of his life; particularly
from this; that Antonius in Cicero says, when he went ProConsull into Asia,
he found Carneades the Academick at Athens, who opposed all in dispute,
according to the manner of his Sect. The year of Antonius's Pro-Consulship was
the 652. year from the building of Rome. But this account as we said before, is
to be applied to the time of his birth, from which the 85th falls upon the
first year of the 184th Olympiad, the 90th upon the 2d of the 185th.

Laertius says, at his death there was a great Eclipse of the Moon, which some
interpreted to proceed from a Sympathy with his loss. Upon this Eclipse I
conceive Petavius grounded his computation of Carneades's death, when he says,
Doct. temp.
it was upon the first year of the 163. Olympiad. May 2. ^er: 2. hora. 5. 46.
at Athens. But there being a mistake of the year, there is consequently a
greater in the account of the feria and hour.

Carneades, as Cicero says, wrote four Books of Suspension of Assent. He wrote
likewise* Epistles to Ariarathes King of Cappadocia, the only monument left
behind him, extant in Laertius's time. Whatsoever else went under his name,
Laer^ius says, was written by his Disciples, of whom he had many, the most
eminent Clitomachus.

There are remembered two more of this name, one a Philosopher, Disciple to
Anaxagoras, mentioned by Suidas; the other an Epigrammatick Poet, mentioned by
Laertius.

CLITOMACHVS.
Laert.
CLITOMACHUS was a Carthaginian, son of Stephan.
Diognetus. He was first called Asdrubal, as Plutarch and Laertius affirm,
L^er^^*
and professed Philosophy in his own Country, and native Language. Being forty
years old, he went to Athens, and heard Carneades, who being much taken with
his industry, instructed and exercised him in Philosophy. With Carneades,
Cicero says, he lived until he was old, and succeeded him in the School, and
chiefly illustrated his Doctrines by his writings, the number of which books
being above four hundred, were a sufficient testimony of his Ci^. Acad. Qu. l.
4. Laert.
industry, and that he had no less of wit, then Carneades of eloquence. He was
well versed in three Sects, the Academick, Peripatetick, and Stoic.

Of his books are remembered by Cicero, one Cic. Tusc. Qu. 4.
of Consolation to his captive Countrymen, Carthage being then subdued by the
Romans; another to Cic. Acad. Qu. 4.
Caius Lucilius the Poet, wherein he explained and defended the Academick
suspension of Assent, having written before of the same things to L.
Censorinus, who was Consul with M. Manilius, the sum of which discourse was
this.

Cic. Acad. 4.
The Academicks hold there are such dissimilitudes of things, that some seem
probable, others on the contrary. But this is not ground enough to say that
some things may be perceived, others cannot, because there are many false that
are probable, but no false can be perceived and known. Those therefore
extremely err, who affirm the Academicks to take away sense; for they say
not, there is no color, sapor, or sound; but dispute, that there is not any
proper inherent note in these of true and certain: (which having expounded, he
adds) A wise man suspends assent two ways; one, when [as we know] he
absolutely refuses to assent to any thing; another, when he withholds from
answering, either in approbation or improbation of something, so that he neither
denies nor asserteth it. In the first way he assents to nothing, in the second
he will follow probability, and according as he finds it or not, answers yes or
no. He who withholdeth his assent from all things, is yet moved, and acts
something. He reserves therefore these fantasies by which we are excited to
action, and those of which being questioned, we may answer on either part, only
as of a thing that seems to us so, but without assent; neither are all such
fantasies approved, but only those which are not obstructed by any thing.

Cic. Tusc. quaest. 5.
In asserting good, he joined pleasure with honesty, as Callipho also did.

Sext. Empir. adv. Math.
He was a great enemy to Rhetoric, as Critolaus the Peripatetick, and
Charmidas were also. Arts they did not expel out of Cities, knowing them to be
very profitable to life, no more then they would drive Oeconomick out of
Houses, or Shepherds from their Flocks; but they all persecuted, and every
where ejected the art of speaking, as a most dangerous enemy.

Stob. Ser. 212.
He compared Dialectick to the Moon, which is in continual increase or
decrease.

Slob. Ser. 48.
Falling sick, he was taken with a fit of a Lethargy, out of which he no
sooner came, but he said, Love of life shall flatter me no longer; and
thereupon with his own hands ended his life.

PHILO.
Stob. Eclog. Ethic.
PHILO was of Larissa, he heard Clitomachus many years, and is named by Sextus
Empericus, as Constitutor of a fourth Academy; but Cicero affirms, he
dissallowed the distinction of Academies, and wrote expressly to prove the
first and the new Academy to be both one. Cicer.
Whilst he lived, the Academy wanted not a Patron. Plut. vit. Cic.
The Romans admired him, as Plutarch affirms, above all Clitomachus's
Scholars, for his excellent discourse, and loved him for the sweetness of his
disposition. Cicero no sooner went out of the first schools and rudiments of
learning, but he became an auditor of Philo, as he acknowledges himself.

Amongst other excellent things (says Eclog. Ethic.
Stobaeus) he gave this Division of Philosophy. He compared Philosophy to a
Physician: As the office of a Physician is first to persuade the sick person to
permit himself to be cured; next to confute the reasons of his adversary: So
is it of a Philosopher, both which consist in exhortation. Exhortation is a
discourse inciting to virtue; whereof one part explaineth its great use, the
other refelleth adversaries, or such as any way calumniate Philosophy. The
comparison holds in a second manner, thus: As the part of a Physician, after he
has persuaded the Patient to admit of cure, is, to apply the means thereof, as
well to remove the causes of the disease, as to induce and settle health; so is
it in this Science. After exhortation, he endeavors to apply the cure, by
removing false opinions wherewith the soul is infected, and by substituting
true. In the second place therefore it treats of good and evil, for the sake
of which the exhortation was made. Thirdly, the comparison holds thus: As all
Medicines refer to one end, health; so all Philosophy to Beatitude. That part
which treats of ends is joined with another which treats of life. For as in
Medicine, it is not sufficient to restore health, unless it likewise deliver
rules by which it may be preserved; so in life, some precepts are required for
conservation of the end: And this part also is twofold; private, or common: One
considers the affairs of particular persons, as, whether a wise man should
manage a Commonwealth, whether he may live with Princes, whether he may
marry: The other considers the business of all in general; as, what
Commonwealth is best, how Magistrates are to be chosen. This common part is
called Politic, and is treated of distinctly by it self, as being of greatest
latitude. Now is fall were wise men, there would be no need of more places, for
the more subtle divisions would emerge from the precedent. But because there
must likewise be a care of the middle sort of men, who cannot apply themselves
to long disputations, either through want of time, or diversion of business,
there must not be omitted a treating of precepts, which delivers short rules
concerning the use of each.

As to the Stoicall judicatory, Sex. Emp. Pyrrh. Hyp. 1. 33.
comprehensive phantasy, he held all things to be incomprehensible; as to the
nature of the things themselves, comprehensible. Thus he took away the
comprehensive phantasy asserted by Zeno.

He held that to be a good connex; Sex. Emp. Pyrrh. Hyp. 2. 11.
which begins from true and ends in false, as (if it be day, and I
dispute) this, If it is day, I dispute: According to which tenet there may be
true axioms three ways, a false only one way: For, when it begins from
true, and ends in true, it is true; as, If it is day, it is light: And when
it begins from false, and ends in false, it is true; as, If the earth
flies, the earth has wings. Likewise if it begins from false and ends in
true, it is true; as, If the earth flies, it is earth. That which is false, is
that which begins from true, and ends in false; as, If it is day, it is
night; for, the antecedent, it is day, is true; but the consequent, it is
night, is false.

He appointed, Tusc. Qu. l. 2.
that the precepts of Orators should be delivered at one time, those of
Philosophers at another.

ANTIOCHVS.
Plut. vit* Cicer.
ANTIOCHUS was an Ascalonite, Cic. Ac. qu. 1.
brother of Aristus, Disciple of Philo. He lived with L. Acad. Qu. 4.
Lucullus, the Quaestor and General; he was also a great friend to cio. de
Leg. lib. 2.
Atticus, whom he invited to the Academy. He is named by Sextus Empericus, as
Constitutor of a fifth Academy: For, as Vit. Cicer.
Plutarch says, he fell off from the Sect of Carneades, either moved by the
evidence of sense, or, as some thought, by ambition, and dissension with the
Disciples of Clitomachus and Philo. So that with some little alteration, he
made use of the Doctrines of the Stoics; and Cic. Acad. Quaest. 4.
though he were called an Academick, he had been, but for some alterations, an
absolute Stoic; Sext. Empir. Pyrrh. Hypot. 1. 33.
whence it was said of him, He taught the Stoicall Philosophy in the Academy;
for he manifested, that the Doctrines of the Stoics were in ^lato. In his old
age, says Acad. Quaest. 4.
Cicero, he betook himself to the old Academicks, forsaking the new, Cic. de
finib. lib. 5.
and diligently enquiring into the opinion of the Ancients, Acad. Quaest. 4.
endeavored to follow Aristotle and Xenocrates, Cic. de not. Deor. l. 1.
professing, that the Stoics and Peripateticks agreed in the thing, and
differed only in words. To which effect Cicero mentions a Book which he sent to
Balbus: He wrote also Cic. Acad. Quaest. 4.
another against his Master Philo, entitled Sosus. Flut. vit. Cicer.
Cicero being at Athens heard him, and was much taken with the eloquence and
volubility of his discourse, ( Cic. Acad. Quaest. 4.
declaring him to be the most polite and acute of all Philosophers in his time)
^lut.
but not with the new Doctrine which he introduced.

Thus far there is a continued series of the Academick Philosophers.

FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY.

The Sixth Part, Containing the Peripatetick Philosophers.



LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and Tho* Dring. An. Dom. 1656.

ARISTOTELES.


ARISTOTELES.
CHAP. I.
His Country, Parents, and time of his Birth.
UPon the death of Plato his Disciples separated themselves into two Sects. The
first continued in the same school, where he taught, the Academy; the other
possessed the Lyceum. The first was known by the general name of Academicks,
or Am^n^n. Sub. finem^comme^^. in pr^am. Porphyr.
Peripateticks of the Academy; the the other by the general name of
Peripateticks, or more particularly, Peripateticks of the Lyceum. Of the first
we have discoursed already; we come now to the other, of which Aristotle was
the Head.

Laert.
Aristotle was born at Stagira, a City of Thrace, according to Polymn.
Herodotus, Lib. 4. and ^.
Thucydides, Eliac.
Pausanias and Suidas, by others placed in Macedonia, to take from him the
imputation of a Barbarian. It was seated upon Strymon a River which parts those
two Countries, having a Haven called (...), and a little Island of the same
name belonging to it. This place, to which Aristotle owed his birth, he
afterward requited with extraordinary Gratitude.

Laert. ^m^^n.
His Father was named Nicomachus, descended from Nicomachus Son of Machaon
(whose skill in Medicine is celebrated by Homer) Son of Aes^ulapius, from whom
Nicomachus, Aristotle's Father, derived not only his Pedigree, but his art
also, for he was a Physician. Suidas says, he wrote six Books of Medicine, and
one of Physic. De compos. medicam.
Galen alleges a Plaster of one Nicomachus; either this or the elder. This
Nicomachus ( Bassus.
whom some affirm to have been grandson to Hipp^crates the Physician) lived in
the time of Amyntas King of Macedonia, (Father of Philip) a Prince (as Iustine
witnesses) eminent for all Royal Virtues. To him Nicomachus was not only
Physician, but friend and favorite. Chilia ^.
Tzetzes forgot these relations of Aristotle (as Nunnesius observes) when he
affirmed that he was called an Aesculapian figuratively, in respect of his
skill in Medicine, though it be true also that he did profess that Art.

His Mother Laertius and Suidas name Phaestias, Epist. ^d Ammaum.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, and Ammonius, Phaestis. Vit. Arist. if he were the
Author.
Ammonius says, she also was descended from Aesculapius, alleging in
testimony thereof this Epigram, His Mother Phaesis, Sire Nicomachus,
Descended both from Aesculapius.


But Dionysius Halicarnassaeus says, she was daughter a Chalcidian, one of the
Colony which was sent from Chalcis to Stagira. Her Picture, Aristotle, in piety
to her memory, caused to be made by Protogenes an eminent Painter of that time,
which Picture Lib. 35. cap. 9.
Pliny reckons amongst the choicest pieces of that Master.

Aristotle (as Suidas affirms) had a Brother named Arimnestus, and Sister
Arimneste. His Brother died before him, without issue, as appears by his will.

Aristotle was born, according to the testimonies of Laert.
Apollodorus, Epist. ad Ammaeum.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus and others, in the first year of the 99t^ Olimpiad,
at what time Diotrephes was Archon at Athens, 44. years after the Birth of
Plato, as Deipn. lib.
Athenaeus accounts, more justly then Ammonius and Suidas, who reckon but 42.
before the birth of Demosthenes, three years. Lib. 17. cap. 21.
Agellius affirms, he was born the seventh year after the recovery of the City
of Rome from the Gauls by Camillus; Nuns. in vit. Aristot. repeated by
Schottus in vit. compar at. Arist. and demosth.
but because (as Plutarch says) it is hard to find out on what year the City
was taken, it will be hard also to find upon what year it was recovered. The
recovery was seven months after its taking, but, in the following year, for it
was taken in July, recovered in February. If therefore as Valerius Flaccus,
Agellius, and Cassius Hemina account, the taking of the City was in the 363d
year from the building thereof, it was recovered in the 364th. Thus Aristotle
was born in the first year of the 99th Olympiad, the 370th from the building of
Rome.

But, if a Livy affirms, the taking of Rome was in the 365th year from the
building thereof, and its recovery in the 366th, Aristotle according to that
account must have been born in the third year of the 99th Olympiad, in the 372d
year from the building of the City. Again, if the City were taken, in the 364th
year after the building thereof, and recovered in the 365th year, as Varro,
Pliny, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus account, whom Scaliger follows, Aristotle
must have been born in the second year of the 99th Olympiad, the 371. from the
building of the City, reckoning always ten months for a year, and not casting
them off, as Pliny and others seem to do, and beginning immediately the next
year, which months being reckoned, the account will agree with ours; hitherto
Nunnesius.

CHAP. II.
His first Education and Studies.
Ammon.
N Icomachus and Phaestis the Parents of Aristotle being both dead, he was
brought up by Proxenus an Atarnean, during which time being yet very young, he
learned the Liberal Sciences, as appears, says Ammonius, from those
writings of his which partly concern Poetry, partly the Poets themselves, as
likewise from his Homericall questions, and several Books of the Art of
Rhetoric.

Ammon.
In gratitude for this care taken by Proxenus in his education, Aristotle
afterward, not only bred up in like manner Nica^or, the Son of Proxenus, in
all kinds of Learning, but adopted him his Son, and with his Estate bequeathed
his Daughter to him. Laert. in Testa^, Arist.
He likewise caused the Statues of Proxenus and his wife, to be made and set up
in honor of them, as is manifest by his Will.

Deipn. lib. 8.
Athenaeus (citing an Epistle of Epicure) and Var. hist. 5. 9.
Aelian relate, that having consumed the inheritance left by his Father in
prodigality and luxury; he betook himself to the Wars, wherein having ill
success, he professed Medicine, and by chance, coming into Plato's School, and
hearing their disputes, being of a wit far beyond the rest, he addicted himself
to Philosophy, and became famous therein. But this agrees not well with the
circumstances of his story, as related by Authors of greater credit and less
prejudice.

CHAP. III.
How he heard Plato.
Ammon.
HAving attained the age of 17. years, he went (in obedience to the Pythian
Oracle, which advised him to addict himself to Philosophy) to Athens, Laertius
says (out of Apollodorus) that he was then but seventeen years old, in which
year* Nausigenes was Archon; Dionysius Halicar^assaeus says, it was the year
following, at what time Polyzelus was Archon, perhaps it was upon Nausigenes's
going out of his Office, whom Polyzelus succeeded. But Laert.
Eumenus is much mistaken, who says, he was thirty years old when he came
first to Plato, perhaps (as Nunnesius conjectures) because he had read in
Plato, that Dialectick ought not to be studied till the thirtieth year. And no
less err Ammonius, (if he be Author of that Life) and Olympiodorus, who
affirm, that Aristotle coming to Athens in the seventeenth year of his age,
heard Socrates three years, whereas Socrates was put to death when Laches was
Archon, thirty two years before Nausigenes, under whom Aristotle was seventeen
years old.

Being recommended to Plato, he became his Disciple, and so continued twenty
years, as an Epistle of his to Philip (cited by the old Interpreter of his
life) did testify.

Plato much loved him, and admired his acuteness of apprehension, and
diligence in study; for which ( De mundi aternit.
Philoponus says) Plato used to call him the Mind of the School; and when
Vet. Interp.
he was not at his Lectures, he would say, The Intellect is not here, or, as
Rhodiginus, The Philosopher of truth is absent. And comparing his acuteness
with the dullness of Xenocrates, Plato was wont to say, Laert.
What an horse, and what an ass have I to yoke together: Xenocrates needs a
spur, Aristotle a bit.

Ammon.
Whilst he lived with Plato, he was extremely studious, and given to reading,
insomuch that Plato called his house, the house of the great Reader, and would
often say, Interp.
Let us go to the great Readers house. This may be confirmed by that great
number of ancient Authors which are cited in his works. And though Vit. Epic.
Laertius (either in his own, or Carneades's words) says, that Aristotle has
thrust in as many sentences of old Authors in his writings, as both Zeno and
Chrysippus; yet, every one that is acquainted with the writings of Aristotle,
knows how judiciously and concisely he gives an account of their opinions,
not for ostentation, but disquisition.

Some report there was a great enmity betwixt Plato and Aristotle, Aelian. 3.
19.
which first arose from Plato's dislike of his manner of habit: For, Aristotle
wore rich garments, and rich shoes, and contrary to Plato's rule, cut his hair
short, and wore rings. He had likewise (say they) a scornful derision in his
look, and tenacious contradiction in his discourse, which Plato not approving,
preferred before him Xenocrates, Speusippus, Amyclas, and others, to whom he
communicated his Doctrine and many favors; but repudiated Aristotle, who
thereupon, Laert.
whilst Plato was yet alive, set up a School in opposition to him, in the
Lyceum: at which ingratitude, ^lato much troubled, said, Aristotle kicks at us
as young Colis at the damme that foaled them, when they have sucked their sill,
and Aelian. var. hist. 4. 9. Helladius, apud photium, in biblioth.
for that reason, usually called Aristotle the Colt.

Aelian.
They add, that Xenocrates being gone into his Country, and Speusippus not
well, Aristotle came into Plato's School with some of his followers, and
circumvented him with fallacious arguments, whereupon Plato retired to his own
house, and there taught privately, leaving Aristotle in possession of the
School, which he kept, till Xenocrates returning, ejected him, and reinstated
Plato. The chief author of this report seems to have been Aristoxenus, cited
by Fraep. E^ang. lib. 15.
Eusebius, who as In Aristoxeno.
Suidas observes, as soon as Aristotle was dead, cast many aspersions upon him,
out of a malicious revenge, because Aristotle preferred Theophrastus before him
in the succession of the School, notwithstanding that Aristoxenus had gained a
great name and credit among the Disciples.

But as Ammonius argues; it is not likely that Aristotle, if he would, could
have ejected Plato out of the School, or have obtained license to erect a new
one in opposition to him; for as much as at the same time, Cha^rias and
Timotheus, Plato's kinsmen, were in great power, and Generals of the Athenian
forces. Yet, some there are who affirm this, grounding it only on Aristotle's
contradicting of Plato in many things; to which Ammonius answers, that
Aristotle does not simply contradict Plato* but those who misinterpret his
writings. For, if he do sometimes contradict Plato, what wonder? seeing that
therein he follows Plato his Author, whose saying it was, that Truth ought to
be preferred before all things; as also that saying, Socrates indeed is dear,
but Truth most dear: And elsewhere, What Socrates says, we must not so much
regard, as we ought to be solicitous concerning Truth. The same course
Aristotle took, if at any time he confuted Plato's assertion, therein obeying
him, by following the Truth, and it is observed by Licetus de piet. Aristot.
some, that he is very sparing in naming him, where he opposes his doctrine,
and that thrice he makes honorable mention of him in his Lib. 1. cap. 15.
Rhetoric, his Book of the World, (if that be his) and his Probl. 1. ^0.
Problems.

True therefore it is, (as Laert.
Apollodorus, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, but especially Aristotle himself, in
his Vet. Interp.
Epistle to Philip, affirm,) that he was a constant, sedulous hearer of Plato
twenty years, Vet. Interp.
unto the thirty seventh of his age, even until Plato died, and then was so
great an honourer of his memory, that in testimony of his extraordinary
affection, he erected an Altar to him, bearing this inscription: Ammon.
This Altar Aristotle's hand did raise
To Plato, whom the impious must not praise.


Comment. in Gorg. ^lat.
Olympiodorus speaking of the honor which Aristotle gave to his Master,
confirms it by this argument, that he writ a whole oration in commendation of
Plato, wherein he first made a relation of his life, then praised him. He adds,
that Aristotle in his Elegies to Eudemus, extolls him thus: And coming to the
famed Cecropian Town,
In sign of friendship did an Altar raise
To him, whom impious persons must not praise:
Who straying man to virtue did restore
Much by his precept, by example more.
One to the Gods so pious, good to men,
No future age must think to see again.


Athen. deipn. 8. Aelian. 9. 22. and* 5. 9.
Some affirm, that whilst he lived with Plato, he professed Medicine, and kept
a shop: but those Eusebius. prae. par. Evang.
Aristocles confutes.

CHAP. IV.
How he lived with Hermias.
Laert. Suid.
P Lato dying in the first year of the 108th Olympiad, and Speusippus his
Nephew succeeding in the School, Aristotle went to Hermias the Eunuch, King of
Atarna, a City of Mysia in Asia, who heretofore had been his fellow Disciple
under Plato, and had a particular kindness for him. Hermias received him with
great testimonies of love and respect. With him he lived three years, [ Suid.
instructing him in Philosophy,] at the end whereof, Hermias was (as Lib. 13.
Strabo says) surprised by Memnon, a Rhodian, and sent to Artaxerxes; King of
Persia, who put him to death. Pythai^ his sister, a woman of extraordinary
virtue, (whom Hermias, having no children, had designed his heir) being upon
this accident reduced to great extremities and afflictions, Aristotle, in a
pious gratitude to the memory of his friend, (as his own Eusebius. cont. Philos.
Letter to Antipater attesteth) took her to wife, and Laert.
set up the statue of Hermias in the Temple at Delphi, with this Inscription.

This man the Persian King against all right
A sacrifice to his fierce anger made,
Not like a foe by martial arms in fight;
But as a friend by show of love b^tray'd.
He wrote likewise a Hymn to Virtue, in memory of his Friend, to this effect.

Virtue, whom we all obtain
With much labor, but more gain,
For your sake to die would please,
Toil and torments were but ease.
You direct men in pursuit
Of immortal sacred fruit,
Richer far then gold refined,
Soft as sleep, as parents kind.
Great Alcides for your sake
Labors vast did undertake.
Leda's valiant twins made known
More your glories then their own;
Ajax and Achilles too
Only died for love of you;
Ah! for you Atarna's pride,
Hermias untimely died.
But his name we will revive;
That our Muse shall keep alive,
Paying hospitable Jove
Pious thanks for a friends love.
There wanted not those who cast many aspersions and calumnies upon this
Virtuous friendship: some affirmed that Hermias loved Aristotle inordinately
(an imputation not well suiting with an Eunuch) and that for this Reason, he
gave him Pythais to wife, whom Suidas and the Greek Etymologist affirm to have
been his Daughter either by Nature or Adoption, Demetrius Magnesius his Niece,
Aristippus his Concubine, so little do they agree in their relation. They add
that Aristotle was so passionately in Love with her, that he sacrificed to her
after the same manner; as the Athenians to Ceres at Eleusis. This Laertius
relates as done whilst she was alive; But Lyco first Author of this calumny,
that it was after her death. Moreover, that Aristotle in a thankful
acknowledgement of his Bounty, wrote a Paean in praise of Hermias, meaning the
Hymn last mentioned, which Deipn. lib. 1^.
Athenaeus, proves against the calumniations of Demophilus not to be a sacred
hymn or Paean, but a Scolion or Festival Song. Hence Theocritus the Chian
derides him in this Epigram.

To the slave Eunuch who Atarne swai'd
An empty tomb empty Aristotle made,
Who from the Academy did retire
To wallow in vain pleasures faithless mire.
In answer to these calumnies (first raised by Lyco, dispersed further by
Aristippus, and continued by those that malign the memory of Aristotle)
Apellieo writ certain Books, wherein he accurately confutes those who durst in
this manner impudently blaspheme (such are his words) the name of Aristotle; so
much prejudice and malice being in the accusation, as might easily argue the
falsenesse thereof.

Laert.
Upon the death of Hermias, Aristotle ( Strab. lib. 13.
and with Xenocrates) fled from Atarna to Mitylene, as Apollodorus and
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus affirm in the fourth year of the 108. Olympiad,
Eubulus being Archon.

CHAP. V.
How he lived with Philip and Alexander.
ABout this time Philip King of Macedonia, Father of Alexander, taking care for
the Education of his Son, now growing toward man's estate, and unwilling (says
Vit. Alexan^^.
Plutarch) to commit his Education to Professors of Music, or any other of the
liberal Sciences, as knowing him fit for higher designs, sent to Aristotle
the most famous and learned of Philosophers, to come and instruct him. Lib. 9.
cap. 3.
Agellius recites his Epistle, which was to this effect.

Philip to Aristotle, health.
KNow that I have a Son, I render the Gods many thanks; not so much for his
birth, as that he was born in your time, for I hope that being educated and
instructed by you, he will become worthy both of us, and the Kingdom which he
shall inherit.


Aristotle at this request of Philip, went to Macedonia to him, in the 4th year
of the 108. Olympiad, as Laert.
Apollodorus and Dio^ystus Halicarnassaeus affirm, at what time Alexander was
fifteen years old.

Ammon.
He lived there infinitely esteemed and beloved of Philip and Olympia his Wife,
Alexander's Mother, Vet. Interp.
They caused his Statue to be made and set up in honor of him. Philip had a
kindness to particular for him that he allo'wd him in manner an equal share in
the Government of the Kingdom, which interest, Ammonius says, he employed to
the advantage as well of private persons, as of the public, as appears
(says the Latin Interpreter of his life) by his Epistles to Philip. Vit.
Alexand.
Plutarch affirm^s, that Philip as a recompense to Aristotle, reedified the
Town where he was born, Stagira, which he had before laid wast. He likewise
assigned him a School and study, near Mieza a Town of Macedonia not far from
thence, where, unto this day (says Plu^arch) they show the stony seats and
shady walks of Aristotle.

Plut.
He instructed Alexander in the deepest parts of Learning, not only in Ethick
and Politics, but his most reserved and solid Doctrines called Acroatick and
Epoptick; never communicated to the Vulgar.

That he taught him likewise the Art of Medicine, Plutarch argues, for as much
as Alexander was not only exceedingly delighted with the Theory thereof, but
practiced it successfully upon many of his friends, to whom he prescribed
Receipts and diets, as appears, says he, by his Epistle.

Plut.
Perceiving Alexander to be much taken with Homer's Iliads, as conceiving, and
calling it the best^^stitution of military Virtue, he took much pains in
correcting and restoring the text, and then gave it to Alexander, which copy
^he infinitely prised.

He writ a Book to Alexander, entitled; Of a Kingdom, mentioned by Laertius
and Ammonius, wherein he instructed him how to rule.

Vet. Interp.
So much did he incline the mind of Alexander to do good^, that he used to say,
if any day passed wherein he had not conferred some benefit, I have not reigned
to day.

Plut. vit. Alex.
Alexander so much affected him, that he professed he admired and loved him no
less then his Father, because his Father, he said, only gave him being, but
Aristotle well-being.

The love which Philip and Alexander bore him was so great, that Theocritus the
Chian cast the same aspersion upon it, as he did on his friendship with Hermias.

In the first year of the 111th Olympiad; Pythodorus being Archon, Philip dyed,
and was succeeded by his Son Alexander, whose active spirit, soon after his
coming to the Crown, designed an expedition against the King of Persia.
Hereupon Aristotle having now lived with Alexander eight years, (though Justine
says but five, which some interpret of the time before Philips death, but not
without some violence, for that was above seven) preferring the quiet of a
Contemplative life before the troubles of War, took leave of him, returned to
Athens, leaving in his room Callisthenes an Olynthian, his Kinsman (Son of his
Cozen Hero) and Disciple; Laert.
whom before his departure observing to speak with too much liberty and
obstinacy to the King, he reproved in these words, Son, if thou thus employ thy
tongue,
Thy thread of life cannot be long.
And so it came to pass not long after upon this occasion. Hermolaus Son of
Sopolis, a youth of a noble Family that studied Philosophy under Callisthenes,
hunting the Wild Bore with Alexander, prevented the King by casting his dart
first at him, for which he was by the Kings command punished with many stripes.
Troubled at the ignominy thereof, he conspired with Sostratus, Antipater, and
some other companions of his to murder Alexander* which treason being
discovered by Epimenes one of the Conspirators, they were all put to death.
Aristobulus and Ptolemaeus Son of Lagus affirms they accused Callisthenes, as
him who instigated them to this attempt. Hereupon Callisthenes was put into an
iron Cage, and so carried up and down in a miserable fordid condition, and at
last, as Laertius relates (though others otherwise) thrown to Lions and
devoured.

CHAP. VI.
His School and manner of Teaching.
THus Aristotle having lived eight years with Alexander, returned to Athens, as
Laert.
Apollodorus and Epist. ad A^^m.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus affirm, in the second year of the hundred and
eleventh Olympiad, Pythodorus being Archon, where he found Xenocrates teaching
in the Academy, which place was resigned unto him by Speusippus, in the fourth
year of the hundred and ninth Olympiad.

Hence it appears, that Laert.
Hermippus erreth, in affirming, that Xenocrates took upon him the School of
Plato, at what time Aristotle was sent by the Athenians on an Embassy to
Philip. For as Discuss. Perip.
Patricius has observed, it can no way agree in time, it being certain, as
Laertius attests, that Speusippus succeeded Plato in the School in the first
year of the hundred and eight Olympiad, immediately upon Plato's death, and
continued therein eight years, that is, to the end of the hundred and ninth
Olympiad; in the second year of which Olympiad, Aristotle, as we said, went to
Philip, not on an Embassy, but upon his invitation to educate Alexander.

Neither is the Author of Aristotle's life less mistaken, who says, that upon
the death of Speusippus, the Athenians sent to Aristotle, and that both of
them, Aristotle and Xenocrates, took upon them Plato's School, Xenocrates in
the Academy, Aristotle in the Lyceum. But this error is easily detected by the
same computation; for at the time of Spe^sippus's death, Aristotle was with
Alexander, nor did he leave him until six years after, all which time
Xenocrates professed Philosophy in the Academy.

Laert.
The Academy being prepossessed by Xenocrates, Aristotle made choice of the
Lyceum, ( Suid.
a place in the suburbs of Athens, built by Pericles for the exercising of
Soldiers.) Here he taught and discoursed of Philosophy, to such as came to
him, walking constantly every day till the hour of anointing, which the Greeks
usually did before meals, whence he and his followers are called (...), from
walking Peripateticks. Others say, he was called Per^pa^et^ck from walking with
Alexander, newly recovered of a sickness, in which manner he used to discourse
of Philosophy with him.

Laert.
The number of his auditors increasing very much, he gave over walking, and
taught sitting, saying, Now to be silent most disgraceful were,
And see Xenocrates possess the chair.
Though Cicero and Quintilian affirm, he used this verse against Isocrates, in
emulation of whom, he taught Rhetoric to his Disciples every morning. Laert.
So many Disciples resorted to him, that he made Laws in his School, as
Xenocrates did in the A^ademy, creating Archons that ruled ten days.

Agell. lib. 21. cap. 5.
The discourse and doctrine which he delivered to his Disciples was of two
kinds. One he called Exoterick, the other Acroatick. Exoterick were those which
conduced to Rhetoric, meditation, nice disputes, and the knowledge of civil
things. Acroatick those in which more remote and subtle Philosophy was
handled, and such things as pertain to the contemplation of nature, and
Dialectick disceptations. Acroatick Discipline he taught in the Lyceum in the
morning, not admitting every one to come and hear them, but those only, of
whose wit and principles of Learning, and diligence in study, he had before
made trial. His Exoterick Lectures were in the afternoon and evenings; these
he communicated to all young men without any distinction, calling the latter
his evening walk, the former, his morning walk.

CHAP. VII.
His Philosophy.
IN Philosophy (says Vit. Ar.
Ammonius) he seems to have done more then Man, for there is not any part of
Philosophy whereof he treated, but he does it most accurately, and many things
he himself (such was his sagacity and acuteness) finding out, completed and
finished.

Ammon. v^. Ar.
In Logic it was his invention, that he separated the precepts of Disputation
from the things themselves of which we dispute, and taught the manner and
reason of disputation. For they who went before, though they could demonstrate,
yet they knew not how to make a demonstration; as they who cannot make shoes,
but only wear them. Alexander Aphrodisaeus affirms, that he first reduced
Syllogismes to Mood and Figure. Philoponus, that he invented all Dialectick
Method, whence Theodorus calls him, both inventer and perfecter of Logic,
which he indeed in a manner challenges (but modestly) to himself, in the last
Chapter of his Elenchs, affirming nothing had been done in that kind before,
but what the Eristicks and Sophists taught. As for the Categories, the
invention whereof some ascribe to the Pythagoreans, it is much more probable
that they were wholly his own; for those books entitled (...), under the name
of Archytas, from which some conceive Aristotle to have borrowed much, the
particulars whereof are instanced by Dissertat. Peripat.
Patricius, The^istius affirms, to have been written, not by the Pythagorean
(neither has Laertius made mention of any writings of his, for the
Pythagoreans at that time wrote but little, the first that wrote any thing
being Philolaus) but by some Pe^ipatetick, who thought his work might pass
with greater credit, if published in the name of so ancient a Philosopher.

In Physic the ^ift essence, whereof celestial bodies consist, distinct from
the four Elements, is generally ascribed to his invention, only Simplicius
cites the authority of Xenocrates, in his book of the life of Plato, that
Plato constituted five simple bodies, Heaven, and the four Elements asserting
they differ no less in nature then in figure, for which reason he assigned the
figure of a Dodecaedron to Heaven, differing from the figure of the four
Elements. But these, as the learned Nunnesius observes, seem to be rather
Symbolicall, and Pythagoricall, then the true meaning of Plato. For Plato in
his Timaeus expressly averrs, that the Heavens are of their own nature
dissolute, but by the divine Will, are kept together, as it were, by a Tie from
being dissolved. Xenarchus, a Philosopher, wrote against the fifth Essence,
introduced by Aristotle, whom Alexander Aphrodisaeus exactly answers.
Theodorus calls Aristotle, the Perfecter of Physic, adding, ^that only his
writings upon that subject were approved by following ages, who rejected
whatsoever others had written in the same kind, as appears by their loss.
What Epicure and others have objected against him as a fault, that he enquired
with such diligence into the minute, and meanest things of nature, is a
sufficient testimony of his excellence and exactness in this study.

Vet. Interpr.
In Ethick, whereas Polyaenus placed Felicity in external goods, Plato in
those of the soul only, Aristotle placed it chiefly in the soul; but affirmed
it to be de^^led and straigh^ned if it want exterior goods, properly using
these terms. For those things which are de^iled have the same beauty within,
but their superficies only is hidden; and those which are straightned have the
same real magnitude.

Ammon.
In Metaphysick, which he calls First-Philosophy, and Wisdom, and (as the
more ancient Philosophers before him) Theology, Ammon.
though there be not any invention of his extant, yet, he perfectly went
through all the parts thereof. For he was not only acquainted, as some falsely
imagine, with terrestrial things, and those which belong to this World; but
even with those things which are above this World, as may appear from the eight
book of his Physic, where he says, that the first cause is not subject to
motion, neither in it self, nor by accident, in which words he declares, that
God is not a body, nor any way passible. And in his 12th book of Wisdom, or
Metaphysics, he discourses accurately of God and Intelligences, in a
rational clear way, not in^olv'd in Fables, or Pythagoricall Symbols; but,
founding his assertion upon reason and demonstration, as much as the subject,
and human reason allows. Dissert. ^eripat.
Patricius labors much to prove that whatsoever he had in this kind excellent,
he borrowed from Hermes Trismegistus. But ( In the life of Plato. cap.
as we have already said,) Mr. Casaubon has fully evin^'d that Book to have
been imposed upon the World by some later writer.

What is added by the ancient Latin Interpreter concerning Aristotle's
sentence of that visuall Hexagonall Pyramid, (which Nunncus in Vit. Arist.
a learned person has observed to be chosen as a middle way betwixt the
sentence of those who made the optic penicill a pyramid of a quadratick base,
and those who made it of a Conick figure,) is very obs^ure, and hardly admits
of an Interpretation worthy so great an Author.

CHAP. VIII.
His correspondence with Alexander.
WHilst Aristotle taught Philosophy at Athens, his Disciple Alexander was
employed in an Expedition to Asia against Darius King of Persia, incited
thereunto by the principles of Honor, which were infused into him by
Aristotle, particularly from the Presidents of Achilles, Ajax, and other Heroes
celebrated by Homer, whose Iliads Aristotle had so c^refully recomm^nded unto
him. He began this expedition in the third year of the 11th Olympiad, at which
time Ctesicles was Archon at Athens, immediately after the departure of
Aristotle, who (it is probable) came only for this reason from him, as
preferring a quiet and studious life before the troubles of War.

The first thing that Alexander did, was to visit the Tomb of Achilles in the
Sigaeum, at the sight whereof he broke forth into these words; O fortunate
young man, that had a Homer to celebrate thy praise ^ for had it not been for
his Iliads, adds In Licin.
Cicero, in the same Tomb where Achilles's his body lay, his name also would
have been buried. He took with him the Iliads of Homer, corrected by Aristotle,
and made it his constant companion, insomuch that he put it every night with
his dagger, under his pillow. And in a Victory over Darius, having taken a
Casket of Unguents of extraordinary value amongst the spoils of Darius, beset
with Pearls and precious stones, (as Lib. 29.
Pliny describes it,) his friends telling him how many uses it might be put to,
because Unguents did not become a Soldier; Yes, says he, it shall serve to
keep the Books of Homer, that the most precious work may be kept in the richest
case; hence was this correct copy called, as Plutarch says, (...).

Whilst he was in Asia, engaged in the Wars against Darius, in the midst of
his continual Victories and business, hearing that Aristotle had published
his Acroatick books of natural Philosophy, he sent this Letter to him;

Agell. 20. 5. ^lut. vit. Alex.
Alexander to Aristotle, Health.
YOu have not done well in publishing your Acroatick discourses, for wherein
shall we excel others, if this Learning, wheri^ we have been instituted, be
made common to all? As for me, I had rather excel others in knowledge then in
power. Farewell.


To which Aristotle returned this answer.

Agel. 20. 5. Epist. Grac.
Aristotle to Alexander, health.
YOu wrote to me concerning my Acroatick Discourses, that they ought not to
have been communicated; but kept secret. Know, that they are made public, and
not public, for none but they who have heard us can understand them. Farewell.


Thus, notwithstanding Alexander were busied in the Wars, yet he forgot not
his Master Aristotle, but kept a friendly correspondence with him. So constant
was he in his love to Learning, and particularly so much enflamed (as Lib. 8.
16.
Pliny says) with a curious desire of understanding the natures of living
Creatures, that he sent thousands of men, throughout all Asia and Greece to
procure all kinds of living Creatures, birds, beasts and fishes, at an
excessive charge; Lib. 9.
Athenaeus says, 800. Talents, which according to De ^sse. lib. 2. 19.
Budaeus's account is 840000* crowns: these men he sent with what they took to
Aristotle, that he might not be ignorant of any thing that any Nation afforded;
by which information, he composed, as Pliny affirms, 50. excellent Volumes,
of Li^ing Creatures, of which ten are only left, unless we put into the same
number, those Books of his which have some near relation to this subject; as Of
the going of living Creatures, 1. Of the parts of living Creatures and their
causes, 4. Of the Generation of living Creatures, 5. If this were done by
Alexander, as Pliny and Athenaeus attest (though Lib. 4. 19.
Aelian ascribe it to Philip) it must necessarily have been whilst he was in
his Asiatick expedition. For Aristotle, as has been already proved, staid but
a very short time with him after the death of his Father.

Aristotle made the same use of this correspondence with Alexander, as he had
done of the Interest he before had with Philip, the advantage not only of
particular person, but of whole Cities.

This City of Stagira, the place of his Birth, did acknowledge, which, at the
suit of Aristotle, Alexander caused to be reedified, and repeopled, and
restored to its former state, having before by Philip been laid level with the
ground, For, though Plutarch relate this as done in the time of Philip,
Laertius, Ammonius, Dion, Chrysostom, Aelian, and others hold* that it was
done by Alexander, to which Valerius Maximus adds, that it was not long before
Aristotle's death. In memory of which Benefit, the people of Stagira used to
celebrate a yearly Festival, which they called the Aristotelean Feast, naming
the month in which it fell Stagirites.

Ammon.
Erestus likewise, the Country of Theop^rastus, which Alexander determined to
punish very severely; by the mediation of Aristotle was pardoned.

That he benefited many particular persons is evident, says Ammonius, from his
Epistles to the King, yet extant, wherein he recommends several persons to him.

Hence it is manifest, that the Author of his life is mistaken, when he
affirms, that in Alexanders Asiatick expedition, Aristotle accompanied him to
the Brachmanes, where he writ that noble piece of the Laws and institutions of
255 Cities. That likewise he traveled over all Persia with Alexander, where
during the War, Alexander died, and Aristotle returned into his own Country.
This relation agrees not with the other circumstances of Aristotle's life.
Alexander died in the fourth year of the hundred and thirteenth Olympiad, two
years before Aristotle's departure from Athens.

But as it is apparent, that this mistake proceeded only from ignorance (yet
that so great, that Disser^. Peripat. 1. 1.
Patricius argues from thence, neither Ammonius not Philoponus to be the
Authors of his life) so are there some other errors, which no less manifestly
appear to have proceeded from malice, raised, it is likely, by the Authors of
the other scandalls and imputations, wherewith they sought to blast his memory.

Laert.
Some affirm, that Alexander upon the treason of Callisthenes, took a great
displeasure against Aristotle, for having recommended him to him. For though at
first, writing to Criterus, Attalus, and Alcetas, immediately upon this
accident, he sent them word, that the youths had confessed, the plot proceeded
only from themselves, not by the instigation of any other. Plut. vi^^ Alex.^
Yet afterward, in an Epistle to Antipater, he imputes the same crime to
Callisthenes, not without this sharp reflection upon Aristotle: The youths,
says he, were stoned to death by the Macedonians; but, as for the Sophist, I
will punish him my self, and those who sent him, and those who entertain in
their Cities such as are Traitors to me. Hereupon they interpret the bounty of
Alexander to Xenocrates, and favor to Anaximenes, as not proceeding from the
magnificence of his disposition, Laert.
but from the displeasure he had conceived against Aristotle, whom he
endeavored to vex, by obliging his adversaries and aemulators.

Upon this supposed displeasure was grounded another report, that Plut. Alex:
Aristotle conspiring with Cassander against Alexander, sent him, by Antipater,
some of the water of Styx, wherewith he poisoned Alexander. But the Relators
hereof differ not a little amongst themselves: Diodorus Siculus and Suidas
affirm, that Alexander was poisoned by Cassander son of Antipater; Arianus by
Iolla his younger son: Porphyrius says, that nothing but the horn of an Ass,
such as the Asses of Scythia had, would contain the poison: Iustine and
Pausanias, the hoof of a Horse; Pliny and Arrian of a Mule; Plutarch and
Zonaras, of an Ass. They differ no less about the place whence the water was
fetched. Neither indeed can it be expected there should be a better harmony
amongst the Relators of this Fable, when there is so great dissension, and
variety of relations, concerning the occasion and manner of his death. But the
most creditable is that of Ephippus ( D^ipn. 10. 11.
cited by Athenaeus) Lib. 3. cap. 21.
Orosius, Lib. 12.
Iustine, and others, who averr, that Alexander died of a Fever, caused by
excess of drinking.

CHAP. IX.
Upon what occasion he left Athens, and went to Chalcis.
Laert.
TWelve years Aristo^le professed Philosophy in the Lyceum, not molested by
any; for though his eminence in Learning procured him many Aemulators and
enemies, yet, the favor he had with Alexander, whilst he lived, awed them so
much, that they durst not make any discovery of the ill will they bore him. No
sooner was Alexander dead (according to Di^nysius Halicarnassaeus) but some of
them conspired against his life. To which end, Eurymedon, a Priest, or
(according to Pha^orinus) Demophilus, accused him of impiety; that he
introduced some Philosophical assertions, contrary to the Religion of the
Athenians; that he celebrated Hermias as a God, with a hymn, and had caused
his statue to be set up in the Delphian Temple, with an honorable inscription.
Some affirm hereupon he made an Oration in defense of himself, at the Court of
Areopa^us, wherein he openly pronounced this verse, made out of two in Odyss. ^.
Homer.

Pears upon pears, and figs on figs grow here; By (...), ( figs on figs)
reflecting upon the multitude of Sycop^a^ts which sprung up every day in the
City. Hence Phavor^nus says, he was the first Philosopher that pleaded for
himself, and there was an Oration to that purpose went about many years after
under his name. But, of the truth hereof, Athenaeus makes question.

Laert.
Others affirm, that Aristotle perceiving the conspiracy that was against his
life, stole privately out of Athens, and went to Chalcis, where he spent the
rest of his days, returning to his friends, who demanded the reason of his
going, this answer, Aelian. va^. hist.
We left Athens, that we might not give the Athenians occasion to commit again
the same wickedness Origin. contr: Celsum li^. ^.
they committed against Socrates, that they mi^ht not be guilty of a double
crime against Philosophy. To Antipater he wrote the forementioned verse, Pears
upon pears, and figs on figs grow here; Giving him to understand how dangerous
it was for him to live in Athens, since the Athenians were wholly addicted to
Sycophantisme and calumny. This departure of Aristotle from Athens, Dionysius
Halicarn^ssaeus places in the second year of the hundred and fourteenth
Olympiad, Apollodorus a year latter, perhaps less rightly.

Agell. 13. 6.
Being near sixty two years of age, very sickly, and without hope of living
much longer, the whole company of his followers came to him, and besought him
to make choice of a Successor, whom after his death they might look upon as the
perfecter of those studies whereinto he had brought them. There were at that
time many excellent Scholars in his School, but especially two, Theophrastus
and Menedemus, or rather as Patricius reads, Eudemus. These excelled the rest
in Wit and Learning. The first was of Lesbos, Eudemus of Rhodes. Aristotle
answered them, he would do as they requested, when he saw it convenient. Soon
after, the same persons being present who had made this request to him, he
complained, the wine which he then drank did not agree with his health, but was
unwholesome and harsh; and therefore desired they would send for other sorts,
both R^odian and Lesbian, saying, he would make use of that which he should
find best for him. They go, seek, find, bring. Aristotle first calls for the
Rhodian, tastes it, a strong wine, says he, and pleasant: then calls for the
Lesbian, which having tasted, both, says he, are good, but (...), the Lesbian
is the sweeter; whereby every one understood that his choice was not of the
wine, but of his successor, which was Theophrastus of Lesbos, a man of
extraordinary sweetness in discourse and conversation: Whence not long after,
as soon as Aristotle was dead, all his Disciples applied themselves to
Theophrastus.

CHAP. X.
His Apophthegms.
Laert.
OF his Apophthegmes are remembered these.

Being demanded what a man got by lying, he answered, not to be believed when
he spoke truth.

Being reproved for giving money to a wicked man: I, says he, gave it
compassionating, not (...), the condition; but, (...): or as Stobaeus, not to
the man, but to humanity.

He used this saying frequently amongst his disciples and friends, the eye
rec^ives light from the air, the soul from learning.

Inveighing against the Athenians, he said, They had invented two things, Corn
and Law; but made use only of one, the Corn.

He said, The root of learning is bitter, the fruit sweet.

Being demanded what grows old soonest, he answered, a Benefit.

Being demanded what is Hope, he answered, a waking Dream.

Diogenes the Cynick offered him a fig: Aristotle (...) that Diogenes had
prepared some sharp saying, in case he should have refused it, took the fig,
telling Diogenes, he had lost both his figg and his conceit. Then throwing it
up into the air, and catching it, as boys use to do, O worthy Dioge^es, said
he, and restored it.

He said, to Learning three things are requisite, Nature, Institution, Exercise.

Being told, that one had reviled him: When I am absent, said he, let him beat
me too.

He said, Beauty was a better recommendation then any Letter. Others ascribe
this to Diogenes, adding, that Ar^stotle called beauty, the gift of a specious
^orm.

He called Socrates a short-lived Tyranny; Plato, Natures Prerogative;
Theophrastus silent ^raud; Theocri^us, specious hurt; Meant per haps of that
Carn^ades wh^ was Disciple to Anaxago^as.
Carneades, a guardlesse Kingdom.

Being demanded what difference there is betwixt the learned and unlearned, he
answered, as much as between the living and the dead.

He said, Learning in prosperity is an ornament, in adversity a refuge.

He said, they who educated children well, are more to be honored, then they
who beget them; for these only gave them life, others well-living.

To one, boasting of the greatness of his Country: That, says he, is ^ot to
be considered, but whether a man deserve to be of a great Country.

He said, Friends are one soul in two bodies.

He said, some men lived so sparingly as if they were to live always, others
so prodigally, as if they were to die to morrow.

To one that asked why we love the company of those that are fair; That, says
he, is a question for a blind man to ask.

Being asked what he had gotten by Philosophy, he answered, to do those things
voluntar^ly, which others do for fear of the Law.

Being demanded how Disciples should profit most; he answered, if they follow
those that are before them, and stay not for those behind them.

To a foolish talker, who after a long Discourse said to him, I am afraid I
have been tedious to you; not at all, answered he, for I did not mind you.

Being asked how we should behave our selves toward our Friends, he answered,
as we would have them do toward us.

He said, Justice is the virtue of giving to every one according to his desert.

He said, Learning was the best provision against old age.

He used, as Phavorinus relate^ in the second of his Commentaries, to say
frequently, he who has many friends has none; which is ^^^^wise extant in the
seventh book of his Ethics.

(...) said, Stob. ser. 28.
when things happen not as we would, we must will as they happen.

Seeing a youth very self-conceited, Ser. 45.
and withal ignorant; young man, says he, I wish I were what you think your
self, and my enemies what you are.

Seeing a young man proud of a fine Cloak, Ibid.
why boast you, says he, of a Sheeps Fleece?

He said, Ser. 46.
they who demonstrate plain things, light a candle to see the Sun.

Being reviled by an impudent person; Thou, Ser. 101.
says he, who art versed to bear all things, speak them with delight, I who
am not used to speak them, take no delight in hearing them.

Being demanded why he who taught others to speak, Ser. 128.
himself held his tongue, a whetstone, says he, cannot cut, yet it sets an
edge upon swords.

Being asked who can keep a secret, Ibid.
He, says he, that can hold a glowing coal in his mouth.

Seeing a young man very neatly dressed, Ser. 161.
are you not ashamed, says he, when Nature made you a man, to make your self a
woman.

A handsome young man, Ibid.
much courted, said to him, If I were hated of the Citizens as you are, I would
hang my self; And I, replied he, would hang my self if I were loved by them as
you are.

Being demanded how a man should come to be rich, Sermon.
he answered; by being poor in desire.

It repented him of three things; Ser. 305.
that he had ever committed a secret to a Woman; that he had rid when he might
have gone a foot; that he had lived one day not having his Will made.

CHAP. XI.
His will and Death.
FRom that speech of Aristotle last mentioned, may be gathered how careful he
was to make his Will, but more from the exact form thereof which was thus:

Laert.
BE all well; but if it happen otherwise, thus Aristotle makes his Will Be
Antipater my sole Executor during the Minority of Nicanor. Let Aristomenes,
Timarchus, Hipparchus, Dioteles, (and if he please, and have leisure)
Theophrastus, be Guardians of the children and of Herpylis, and all that I
leave. I will that my Daughter, as soon as she shall be marriageable be given
Nicanor, for Wife. If any thing happen otherwise (which God forbid) before she
be married, or, after she be married before she has any Children, let Nicanor
have the ordering of my Son, and the disposal of all other things, for his
reputation and mine. Let therefore Nicanor take care of the Maid Pythais, and
my Son Nicomachus, and order their Estates according to their condition, as a
Father and a Brother. If in the mean time any thing shall happen to Nicanor
(which God forbid) either before my Daughter be married, or, if married, before
she has any Children, if he make any Will, as he appoints, so let it be.
Otherwise, if Theophrastus approve of it, let him marry the Maid, and have the
same power, that Nicanor should have had. Otherwise let the Estates as well of
the Maid as the Boy be disposed with the joint consent of the Guardians, and
Antipater, as they shall think fit. Let likewise the Executors of Nicanor take
care to remember us and Herpylis, since that she has been faithful to me,
and, if she will take a husband, that such a one be given unto her as may be no
disparagement unto us. Let them give her out of my Estate, besides what is
already mentioned, a Talent of Silver, three Maidservants, if she so please,
and the handmaid which she has, and the boy Pyrrhaeus. And moreover, if she
will dwell at Chalcis, let her have that habitation which joyneth to the
Garden, if at Stagira, our Patrimoniall seat; which, howsoever Herpylis shall
choose, let the Executors furnish it, as they shall think convenient and proper
for Herpylis. Let likewise Nicanor take charge of the Boy Mirmax, that he may
be restored honorably, as becomes us, unto his own, with all his goods which
we delivered to our Trust. Let likewise Ambracis be a free woman, and have
bestowed upon her, at her marriage, fifty Drachmes, and the Girl which she
has. I will likewise that to Thales, be given, besides the Handmaid he has
bought, a thousand Drachmes, and another Handmaid. Likewise to Simo, besides
that money which he has already received to buy a Servant; let another Servant
be bought, or the like Sum be given again, wherewith he may purchase one. As
soon as my Daughter shall be married, let Tycho, Philo, Olympias and his Son be
free men Of those boys which served me, let none be sold, but let my Heirs
make use of their service, and when they come to age, as they deserve let them
be manumitted. Let the Executors take care to those Statues of Nicanor, and his
Mother, and Proxenus, which I gave order for to Gryllius, as soon as they are
perfected, be set up Let likewise the Statue of Arimnestus be set up, that this
monument may remain of him; since he died without Children. I will likewise
that the Statue of my Mother be consecrated to Ceres in the Nemaean Temple, or
where else shall be thought fitting. Wheresoever my Body is buried by the
Executors, thither let the bones of ^ythais, according as she desired, be
brought, and laid with mine. Let likewise Nicanor, if he continue well in
health, dedicate at Stagira, to Jupiter Soter, and Minerva Sotira, Statues of
Beasts, of stone, of four cubits, in performance of the vow which we vowed for
him.

He died at Chalcis, in the third year of the 114th Olympiad, Philocles being
Archon, in the 63. the great Climactericall year, of his age (not as Laert.
Eumelus, 70. years old) as appears by the computation of Apollodorus and
Dionysius Halicarn^ssaeus; thus, y. He came to Athens at 18. Heard Plato 20.
Lived with Hermias 3. With Philip and Alexander 8. Taught in the Lyceum 12.
Lived at Chalcis 2. in all 63. The manner of his life is variously related,
Lib. 1.
Strabo, H^sychius Illustris, and from him Suidas relate, that he drunk
Hemlock, either being condemned thereunto by the Athenians, as Socrates was* or
to prevent their Judgment.

Paraen. ad gent
Iustine Martyr, Stelieut. 1.
Gregory Nazianzene, Ant. lect. 19. 8.
Coelius Rhodoginus, the Greek Etymologist, Nonnus, and others follow the
common report, that a question was proposed to him of the wonderful nature of
Euripus, an arm of the Sea, coming into Chalcis (as Lucian averr^) which ebbeth
and flows seven times in 24. hours. Not being able to resolve it, he died of
shame and anxiety. Some affirm that as he sat on the bank, having considered
long upon it, he at last threw himself headlong into the River, saying, si^ce
Aristotle could not take Euripus, Euripus take thou Aristotle.

But the Authors of greatest credit, Laert.
Apollodorus, Epist. ad Amm.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, De die. na^ali*
Ce^sori^us, Laer ius and others affirm, that he died of a pain in his stomach,
caused by over-watching, and excess of study. For Laertius affirms he was a
most indefatigable student, and when he went to bed, he held a brazen ball in
his hand, that when he fell asleep, the noise of it falling into a Basin set
under it for that purpose, might awake him, which Alexan^er his Disciple
imitated. To this pain of the stomach he was very subject, and sometimes
assuaged it by applying a bottle of hot oil to his Breast. Notwithst^nding
this natural infirmity of his stomach, says Censorinus, and the frequent
indisposition of a sickly constitution, he preserved himself a Long time
through his Virtue and Temperance, for it is much more strange that he attained
the a^e of 63. years, then that he lived no longer.

The Author of the book de Pomo, affirms, that when he was dying, he said to
his Disciples standing about him, it was not without reason that Homer said,
the Gods came down to earth to relieve mankind. Antiq. lect. ^8. 31.
Coelius Rhod^ginus adds from the same Author, that when he felt the pangs of
death to come upon him, weeping between grief and hope, he often repeated
these words, Thou Cause of Causes, have mercy on me: And his Disciples, when
they saw he was departing, said, He who receives the souls of Philosophers,
may ^e take thine likewise, and lay it up in his own Treasury, as the soul o^ a
right and perfect man, as we have known thee to be. Of this, there is no
testimony more ancient, then that of the Author of the book de Pomo, who (as
Patricius clearly observes from his writings) was a Christian.

Vet. I^^erp.
The Stagirites fetched his body from Chalcis to Stagira, where they buried it
with much solemnity, building a magnificent Tomb for him, and erecting an
Altar to his memory.

CHAP. XII.
His Person and Virtues.
Laert.
AS concerning his person, he was slender, having little eyes, and a small
voice. When he was young, Laertius and Plutarch affirm, he had a great
hesitation in his speech. Aelian. var. hist.
He went in a rich habit, and wore rings: his beard was shaven, his hair cut
short; he had a high nose, if we credit the head put up by Fulvius Ursinus,
found at Rome, at the bottom of the Quirinall hill. He was of a sickly
constitution, troubled with a natural weakness of stomach, and frequent
indispositions, which he over-mastered by his Temperance.

Saint Hierome affirms, he was the Prince of Philosophers, an absolute
Prodigy, and great miracle in nature, into whom seems to have been infused
whatsoever mankind is capable of.

He was extremely pious toward God and Man, upon which subject, Fortunius
Licetus has lately written two books.

Eusebius, Cassiodorus, and others affirm, that many persons, eminent for
sanctity, especially followers of School-learning, have, through the means of
Aristotle's Philosophy, been carried on to Inspection into the highest doctrines
of true Faith; as, that there is one God, etc.

As concerning his gratitude to men, besides those instances already mentioned
to Pro^enus and his son, to Hermias and his sister, to his Master Plato, to
his own Mother, Brother, and Country, and infinite others; many Philosophers,
whose opinion he takes occasion to allege, he mentions with their due praise:
of which were his Master Plato (of whom we have already spoken) whom, as we
have said, he sometimes mentioned honorably, and sometimes concealeth his
name, where he prefers his own opinion. Amongst others, of whom he makes
honorable mention, are observed Democritus, in his first book de Generatione;
Diogenes Apolloniates in the same book, Anaxag^ras, in the first of his
Metaphysics.

For that he was very moderate, the Interpreter of his life confirms,
instancing in his book of Ca^egorems, where he says, We ought not to de^ermine
any thing hastily, but to consider often, and to doubt o^ every thing, is not
unusefull. And again, in his book of Good, We mu^^ remember, being men, not
only that we are happy, but that we ought to be able to prove it by firm
reason. And again, in his Ethics to Nicomachus: Man is our friend, Truth our
friend; but above all, we ought to honor Truth. And in his Meteorologicks: As
concerning th^se, we doub^ of some of them, others we touch superficially. And
in the same, not once or twice, but infinite times, Men do happen upon the same
opinions, therefore we ought not to be proud of our own wisdom, in any thing
whereof we conceive our selves to be ^he Inventors.

The common report therefore (grounded upon no authority) that he collected the
books of the ancient Philosophers, and having taken out of them what he
intended to confute, burnt them, is manifestly false; for any one that reads
Cicero, will find, they were most of them extant in his time.

CHAP. XIII.
His Wives and Children.
HE had two wives, the first Pythais, sister to Hermias, the Eunuch, Tyrant of
Atarna, and his adopted heir. Of the scandals that were cast upon him by this
marriage, Aristotle fully acquits himself in his Epistles to An ipater, where
he professes, that he married her only out of the good will which he bore unto
Hermias, and out of a compassion, for the great misfortunes that had happened
to her Brother; adding, that she was a woman endowed with extraordinary
modesty, and all other virtues.

His second wife was named Herpylis, a woman of Stagira, whom Apellico (cited
by Eusebius) and (per^aps from him) ^u^das affirm, he married after the death
of Pythais: With her he lived to his end, as Hermippus, cited by Athenaeus, and
^imothaeus, by Laertius affirm. Timaeus, a professed calumniator of Aristotle,
says, she was his Concubine, and that Aristo^le lived with her, following the
counsel of Hesiod in his Georgi^ks; from which calumny, Hesiod is fully
vindicated by Proclus.

By Herpylis he had one son, as Enseb. praepar. Evang.
Apellico affirms, whom he named after his own Father Nicomachus: To him he
dedicated his great Moralls, which De ^in. l. 5.
Cicero thinks to have been written by Nicomachus himself: For I see not,
says he, why the son might not be like the Father.

Eusebius.
This Nicomachus was a disciple of Theophrastus, and much beloved by him; under
whom he profited exceedingly in Philosophy, and arrived at much eminence
therein. Suidas says, he writ eight Books of Physic, four of Ethick. Cicero
compares him both with his Tutor and Father. Aristocles cited by Eusebius
affirms he was bred up an Orphan, by Theophrastus, afterward died young in
the Wars, which relation agrees not with Aristotle's Will, nor with Suidas or
Cicero, who averr that he writ Books, out of which Laertius brings a citation,
in Eudoxo.

He had a Daughter also called Pythais, who as Sextus Empericus affirms, was
thrice married. First to Nicanor the Stagirite, friend to Aristotle. Secondly,
to Procles, who derived his pedigree from Demaratus King of Lacedemonia. By him
she had two Sons, Procles, and Demaratus, who studied Philosophy under
Theophrastus. Her last husband was Metrodorus, Disciple of Chrysippus the
Gnidian, Master of Erastratus. By him she had a son named, after her Father,
Aristotle. Of this Aristotle there is mention in the Will of Theophrastus,
where he is called the Son of Midias, not Metrodorus. Suidas affirms, he died
before his Grandfather.

CHAP. XIV.
His Disciples and Friends.
THe Disciples of Aristotle were so many and so eminent, that Nicander of
Alexandria, wrote an express Book upon that subject, which, had it been
extant, would doubtless have given us an exact account of them, whereas now we
must rest satisfied with an imperfect Catalogue.

To omit the three Princes that were his Disciple, Hermias, Alexander (of whom
already) and Antip^ter, Successor to Alexanander in Macedonia (who amongst
other things wrote two books of Epistles, in one whereof he related the death
of Aristotle) in the first place is mentioned,

Theophrastus of Eressus a City of Leshos, the most eloquent of his Disciples.
Him he appointed to succced him in the School.

Phanias of Eressus also. He wrote many Books often cited by Athenaeus; amongst
the rest, Ammonius cites his Categories, Analyticks, and of Interpretation.

Eudemus of Rhodes, esteemed by Aristotle in the second place next to
Theophrastus. His life was written by Damias, as Simplicius affirms, who often
mentions him. He wrote Analyticks, and a Geometrical History (both cited by
Simplicius) and some other Histories cited by Laertius, wherein he said the
Magi were of opinion, that men should rise again after death. He survived
Aristotle.

Eudemus of Cyprus, who died in Sicily where he took Dion's part, as appears
from Plutarch. Aristotle in honor of him, called his Dialogue of the Soul
after his name.

Pasicrates, Brother of Eudemus the Rhodian. To him some ascribe the first
lesser Book of Metaphysics, as Philoponus affirms.

Theodectes; To him Arist^^le dedicated some Books of Rhetoric, mentioned by
Valerius Maximus, which he afterward retracted. Patricius conceives he was
rather a companion then a Disciple of Aristotle, because he mentions him seven
times in his Rhetoric, which he is never observed to have done of any Disciple.

Clearchus, of Soli. He wrote many Books often cited by Athe^aeus.

Dicaearchus, Son of Phidias of M^ssena in Sicily, a Philosopher, Orator and
Geometri^ian, as Sui^as affirms. He is cited by Cicero, mentioned often by
Plutarch amongst the best Philop^ers.

Arisloxenus, Son of M^esias a Musician of Tarentum in Italy, who going to
Ma^tinia there studied Philosophy and Music. He heard his Father; and Lamprus
an Erythraean, and Xenopholus a Pythagorean, and last of all Aristo^le, whom
after his death he calumniated and wronged much, because he had left
Theophrastus his successor in the School, whereas himimself was in great
esteem amongst the Dis^iples. Thus Suidas.

Nicanor, mentioned in his Will.

Philo, who wrote against one Sophocles, who caused the Philosophers to be
voted out of Attica.

Plato, In Platone.
the younger, mentioned by Laerti^s and Phil^p^nus.

Socrates In Socrate.
a Bithynian, mentioned by La^r^ius.

M^ason, a Phocian, mentioned by Aelian as one of hose who assisted Aristotle
in the ejection of Pla^o out of the Academy, Galen likewise mentions him as
Author of some m^dicinall writings ascribed to Aristotle.

Phrasidemus, a Phocian, mentioned by Laertius as a Peripatetick Philosopher.
It is likely he was a Dis^iple of A^^st^^le, for he was contemporary with
Theop^rastus.

Palaephatus, of Abydas, an Historian much beloved of Aristotle.

Callisthenes an Olynthian, Aristotle's Sisters Son, of whom already.

Hipparchus, a Stagirite; of kin to Aristotle. He wrote, as Suidas affirms,
o^ the distinctions of Sexes amongst the Gods, of marriage, and the like.

Leo^, a Byzantine, a Peripatetick Philosopher and Sophist. Some a^fir^ he was
a Dis^iple of Aristo^les. He was so excessively fat, that coming to Athens,
upon an Embassy, the people laughed at him; to whom he said, do you laugh to see
me thus fat, I have a wife a great deal (...)* yet, when we agree, one bed will
hold us both, but when we disagree, not the whole house. The people suspecting
him of con^ederacy with (...), upon a (...) of his, came in a tumult to his
house, whereupon fearing to be stoned, he strangled himself.

Aeschrion of Mitylene, a heroic Poet, loved much by Aristotle, as Suidas
says.

Callippus an Athenian, who also heard Plato.

Satyrus, whose books of lives and characters are cited by Athenaeus.

Hieronimus the Rhodia^, eminent in Philosophy. That he was Aristotle's
disciple is acknowledged by Athenaeus.

Heraclides of Pontus, a great Philologist.

To these add of less note, Echecratides a Methymnaean, and Adrastus a
Macedonian, both mentioned by Stephanus. Euxithius, mentioned by Plutarch:
Clitus a Milesian: Menon the Historian; Di^teles and Timarchus.

CHAP. XV.
His Detractours.
AS the friends and followers of Aristotle were more in number then those of
any other Philosopher, so were also his detractours, of whom having already had
occasion to make some mention, we shall not need to give any further account
then this of Aristotle's, alleged by Prepar. Evang. lib. 15.
Eusebius.

How then is it possible, that what Epicure relates of Aristotle can be true,
that when he was a young man, he wasted prodigally all the means his father
left him, whereby he was necessitated to betake himself to the Wars; but
therein being unfortunate, he set up an Apothecaries shop, and Plato keeping
open School, amongst the rest admitted him?

And who will credit Timaeus the Tauromenite, who writes, that being come to
riper years, he shut up his poor shop, and gave over his mercenary profession?

Who can be persuaded to believe what Aristoxenus the Musician says in the
life of Plato, that when he was from home, some strangers rose up, and set up a
School in opposition to him? which words some interpret of Aristotle, but
erroneously; for Aristoxenus always commends Aristotle; [yet Suidas, as we
said, averrs the contrary.]

Who does not esteem the Commentaries of Alexinus ridiculous? for he brings
in Alexander as a youth talking with his Father Philip, sleghting the
instructions of Aristotle, but approving those of Nicagoras, surnamed Hermes.

E^bulides manifestly falsifies in the book he wrote against Aristo^le: For
first, he brings in some dull Poems as written by others, upon his marriage
and affinity with Hermias: then he says, that he injured Philip, that he was
not present with Plato at his death, and that he corrupted his writings.

As for the accusation of Demochares against Philosophers, it is not worth the
mention; for he asperseth not only Aristotle, but all the rest; and whosoever
looks upon his calumnies, will say they are trivial; for he affirms, that
some Letters of Aristotle's, against the City of Athens were intercepted and
discovered; that he betrayed his own Country Stagira to the Macedonians; that
when Olynthus was taken, he informed Philip upon the sale and ransom of the
goods and prisoners, which were the most wealthy of the Olynthians.

No less foolishly does Cephisodorus, disciple of Isocrates, calumniate him as
an effeminate person, and a glutton, with many other aspersions of the same
kind.

But of all, the most foolish is that of Lyco, who professed himself a
Pythagorean, for he says, that Aristotle sacrificed to his w^fe after she was
dead, as the Athenians to Ceres; and that using to bath himself in warm oil,
he afterward sold it; and that when he went to Chalcis, those who bought his
goods, found in one bark 75 brass pots. Indeed near so many were the first
calumniators of Aristotle, from whom sprung up others, some in the same age,
others little after, all Sophists, Litigious persons, and Orators; of whose
names and books no more remains then of their bodies.

As for those who flourished after these, some repeat only what these had said
before, and therefore we need not take any notice of them; much less of those,
who not lighting upon those books, have framed some inventions of their own,
such as they, who affirm, he had 300 pots, for there was not any Author of that
time who made mention thereof, but Lyco, and he says, there were found only 75
pots.

And not only from computation of time, and from the persons who assert these
calumnies, may any man perceive all they say to be but false, but also from
this, that not any two of them lay the same thing to his charge, but every one
has a particular calumny different from the rest. But, if any one of these had
been true, Aristotle should have heard of it, not only once from them, but a
thousand times.

It is manifest therefore, the same thing befell Aristotle which happened to
many others, that as well for the respect and friendship he had with Princes,
as for the excellency of his Dissertations, the envy of the Sophists of that
age persecuted him. But such as are ingenious ought not to mind calumni^tors,
but those who have praised and imitated him, whom they will find to fall
nothing short of the others, either for number or worth. Hitherto Aristocles.

CAP. XVI.
His writings.
LAertius has given a large Catalogue of his Writings, as a testimony of his
excellency in all kinds of learning. Their Titles, as reduced to their several
heads by Patricius, are these.

LOGIC.
THe Sophist 1. Of Sciences 1. Sophistick distinctions 4. Of Eristick 2.
Eristick solutions 4. Of Genus and Species 1. Of Proprium 1. Epichirematick
Commentaries 1. Instances 1. Of those which are said many ways, as according
to the propositum 1. For Science 1. Distinctions 17. Diaereticks 1. Of
interrogation and answer 2. Propositions 1. Eristick Propositions 4.
Syllogismes 1. First Analyticks 9. Second Analyticks 2. Of Problems 1.
Methodicks 8. Terms Antetopical 7. Syllogismes 2. Syllogistick and Terms. 1.
Ante-Topicks 1. Topics to Terms 1. Diaeretick 1. Definitions 13
Argumentations 2. Propositions 1. Epichiretick Theses 25. Methodick 1. Of
Speech 1. Categories 1. Of Interpretation 1. In all 123.
PHYSIC.
OF the Soul 1. Of suffering and being passive 1. Of Elements 3. Of motion 1.
Theses of the Soul 1. Of Nature 3. Physic 1. Of Animals 9. Anatomy 7.
Anatomick selections 1. Of compound Animals 1. Upon not Generating 1. Of Plants
2. Physiognomick 1. Signs of Tempest. 1. Physics by Elements 38. Perspective
Problems 2. Of Stone 1. In all, 75.
ETHICK.
OF Justice 4. Of Philosophy 3. Politic 2. Of Riches 1. Of Nobility 1. Of
Pleasure 1. Alexander; or, os Colonies 1. Of a Kingdom 1. Of Education 1. Of
Good 3. Oeconomick 1. Of friendship 1. Propositions concerning Virtue 3. Of the
passions of anger 1. Ethics 4. Of the Better 1. Of Elegible and Accident 1. Of
Pleasure 1. Of Voluntary 1. Of Fair 1. Ami^able Theses, 2. Politics 2. Laws
4. Constitutive Law 1. Politic Auscultation 8. Of Just 2. Of Consultation 1.
Jurisdictions 1. Passions 1. Governments of Cities 158. Proper Democracies,
Oligarchicks. Aristocraticks. Tyrannicks. In all 217.
METAPHYSICK.
OF Contraries 1. Of Principle 1. Of Idaea 1. In all 3.
MATHEMATICK.
Mathematics 1. Of Magnitude 1 Of Unity 1. Astronomick 1. Optic 1. Of Music
1. Mechanics 1. In all 7.
PHILOLOGICK.
OF Poets 3. Gryllus, of Rhetoric Works of Rhetorical art 2. Collection of the
Theodectick art, 1 Rhetorical Enthymemes 1. Homericall Difficulties 6.
Poeticks 1. Comparisons 1. The Olympionicae 1. Phythionick Music. Pythick 1.
Pythionick Elenchs 1. The Dyonysiack Victories 1. Of Tragedies 1. Poems, 3. So
Hermias, to Democritus, Elegies. In all 27.
UNCERTAIN, or EXTRAORDINARY.
NErinthus 1. Menexenus 1. Erotick 1. Symposium 1. Protreptick 1. Of prayer 1.
Collection of arts 12. Art 1. Another art 1. Collection. 2. Of fabulous living
creatures 1. Medicine 2. Memorialls 1. Encyclicks 2. Inordinate 12. Expounded
by their Genus 14. Doctrines 1. Proverbs 1. In all 46.
EPISTLES.
TO Philip and Alexander 4. To Antipater 9. To Mentor 1. To Aristo 1. To
Olympias 1. To Hephaestion 1. To Themistagoras 1. To Philoxenus 1. In all 19.
AGAINST THE ANCIENT PHILOSOPHERS.
OVt of Plato's Laws 2. Out of Plato's Commonwealth 2. Out of Timaeus and
Archytas their writings 1. Problems out of Democritus 2. Against Melissus 1.
Against Alcmaeon 1. Against Gorgias 1. Against Xenophanes 1. Against Zeno 1. Of
the Philosophy of Archytas 3. Of the Philosophy of Sp^usipppus and Xenocrates
1. In all 19.
The Sum of all these Books, excepting the Epistles, is 513. Laertius reckons
them to be, near 400. perhaps accounting the several Books that are upon the
same subject for one. But of these the greatest part is lost, and of many that
are extant, the Titles altered; of the extant there are only these:

LOGIC.
CAtegories 1. Of Interpretation 1. First Analyticks 2. Second Analyticks 2.
Topics 8. Elenchs 1.
PHYSIC.
OF natural Auscultation 8. Of Heaven 4. Of Generation and Corruption 2. Of
Meteors 4. Of the World 1. Suspected. Of the Soul 3* Of Sense and Sensibles 1.
Of memory and Reminiscence 1. Of sleep and waking 1. Of Dream 1. Divination by
dreams 1. Of the motion of living Creatures 1. Of the length and shortness of
life 1. Of youth and age, life and death 1. Of Respiration 1. Of the going of
Animals 1. Of Breath 1. Of the generation of Animals 5. Of the parts of Animals
4. The History of Animals 10. Of Colors 1 Of Physiognomy 1. Sp^rious 2
ETHICK.
EThick, to Nicomachus 10. Great Ethick 2. Ethick to Eudemus 7. Of virtues 1.
Oeconomick 2. Poli^ick 8.
METAPHYSICK.
MEtaphysick 14. Of the abstruse part of Divine Wisdom according to the
Ae^yptians, translated out of Arabic; but suspected to be spurious 14.
MATHEMATICS.
MAthematick 2. Mechanic 1. Of insecable lines 1.
PHILOLOGICK.
Rhetoric 3. Rhetoric to Alexander 1. Poetic 1.
EXTRAORDINARY.
PRoblems 38. Wonders 1. Of Zenophanes; Zeno and Gorgias 1.
Besides these, there are many other Books ^ited for his, under these Titles.
Magic, Laert. Prooem. Epitome of Orators, Laert. Aris^p. Of Beans, Laert.
Pythag. Of Mixtion, Aristot. de sensu. cap. 3. Of Sapors, Arist. de sensu cap.
4. Physical History, Arist. de incess Animal. cap. 2. Of Nutriment, Arist. de
Somno, cap. 3. Selection of Contraries, Arist. Metaph. lib. 3. cap. 2. Division
of Contraries, Arist. Metaph. lib. 10. cap. 3. Of Opposites, Simplic. in cap.
de Opposite. Comm. 8. Collection of Pythagorick Opinions; Simplic. in lib. 2. de
Coelo. Com. 4. Of Idea's, Alexand. in lib. 1. Metaphy^. Comm. 59. where he
cites the fourth Book, though Laertius, but one, as if there were no more. Of
Enunciation, Alexand. in lib. 4. Metaphys. Com. 25. and 44. Of Affirmation,
Alexand. in lib. 4. M^^aphys. Com. 62. Of Platonic assertions, Plut. contra
Colo^. Eudemas, Plut. Consol. ad Apollon. Of Drunkenness, Plut. Symposiac. 3.
Athenaeus cites the tenth book hereof. Animal, or of Fishes, Athen. De^p^. 7.
Of living Creatures* and of things pertaining to living Crea^^res, At^en. Of
the manners of living Creatures, Athen. Of Pheasants, Athen. Of Consanguinity,
Athen. Of wonderful luxury, Athen. Apology, Athen. Histories, Athen. Barbarous
Jurisdictions. Of Audibles, Porphyr. Comm. in Ptol. M^^s. Proclus in Timaeum
Plat. The Cohabitant, P^oclus. Proaem. in Repub. Platon. (...), Macrob.
Saturnal. lib. 1. Of Nature. Clem. Alexandrin. Strom. lib. 6.
We shall not add the Pepl^s cited by Nicephorus, and the Chriae by Stobaeus,
under his name, since it is manifest they belong not to the same Aristotle, as
(...) has evinced.

These Books Aristotle gave to Theophrastus, when he made him his successor in
the School, as Strab^ affirms; adding, that Aristotle was the first, we know
of, that made a Library, which the Egyptian Kings learned of him to do.
Theophrastus bequeathed all his books to Nelius a Scepsian, who carried them to
S^epsis, and dying, left them to his heirs, men of no Learning, who only kept
them confusedly locked up: And when they understood what care was taken by the
A^^alick Kings (in whose jurisdiction Scepsis was) to make a Library in
Pergamus, they (...) them in a hole under ground [where they continued about
130 years,] by which means they received some injury by the wet and worms. At
last, some that were descended from Aristo^l^ and Theophrastus, sold them to
Apellico a Te^an, [who, according to Athenaeus, was made free of the City of
Athens, a person very rich, who, besides many other Libraries, bought this of
Aristotle, being himself a lover of Peripatetick Philosophy,] for a great
sum of money. This Apellico was more a lover of Books, then of Learning, so
that, because they had received some injury, he caused them to be transcribed,
supplying the defects not rightly, and by that means put them forth full of
faults. The ancient Peripateticks that succeeded Theophrastus, wanting Books,
as having but very few, and those Exoterick, could not treat exactly upon any
part of Philosophy. They that lived latter, after that these books were
published, had much greater helps to Philosophy, and the imitation of
Aristotle, although by reason of the infinite faults, they were forced to say
many things by guess. Hereunto Rome conduced not a little; for, (soon after
the death of Apellico; Sylla taking Athens, in the fourth year of the 173
Olympiad, seized upon his Library, and causing it to be carried to Rome,
Tyrannio, a Grammarian, a person studious of Aristotle, ob^ained leave of the
Library Keeper to be permitted the use of them) the Booksellers not having
good writers, and not comparing well the Copies, it occasioned many faults, as
well in those Books that were at Rome, as in those transcribed and sold into
Alexandria, Plutarch adds, that from this Tyrannio, Andronicus the Rhodian had
them, who first made them public, setting forth those volumes, which, says
he, we have.

Thus Strabo and Plutarch; Athenaeus says, that Nelius sold them to Ptolemaeus
Ph^ladelphius, by whom they were translated to Alexandria, where how long they
lay hid is uncertain, which Library was afterward burned by Julius Caesar.

CHAP. XVII.
His Commentatours.
NO sooner were the writings of Aristotle communicated to the world, but they
were entertained with general approbation, which some expressed, by employing
themselves in Commenting upon them, whose example was ^ollowed by many in all
following ages. To omit Pasicrates the Rhodian, brother of Eudemus, who wrote,
as Galen affirms, upon the book of Categories, we shall name in the first
place,

Andronicus the Rhodian; who first published Aristotle's writings, put f^rth a
Paraphrase or Comment upon the greatest part of them.

Next, his Disciple Boethus, a Sidonian, took much pains in the exposition of
Aristotle, whence he is often mentioned honorably by Ammonius and Simplicius.

Aristo a Coan, Disciple also to Andronicus, as Geogr. lib. 14.
Strabo affirms* living in the time of Nicias, Tyrant of Coos, is reckoned by
Simplicius amongst the old Commentatours upon Aristotle's Categories.

Nicolaus Damascenus, who lived in the time of Augustus, by whom much loved, is
cited by Simplicius and Averroes, as an Expositor of Aristotle.

A^henodorus of Tarsis, a Stoic, who lived also under Augustus, as Plutarch
affirms, is cited by Simplicius, as having written upon Aristotle's Categories;
but, rather by way of confutation then interpretation, as did likewise
Alexander Aegeus Nero's Tutor, mentioned Simplicius; Cornutus, who lived at the
same time; cited by Porphyrius and Simplicius; Lucius and Nicostratus a
Macedoman, who lived under Antonius.

Sotion of Alexandria, and Achacius, seem to have written upon the Categories,
being often cited by Simplicius upon that subject.

Taurus the Ber^^^an, a Platonic Philosopher, living under Antonius, wrote
first concerning the difference between the Doctrines of Plato and Aristotle.

Adrastus the Aphrodisaean, wrote a Comment on Aristotle's Cagories, and of his
Physics, and a Book concerning the Method of his Philosophy.

Aspasius, wrote a Comment on all Aristotle's Works, taking particular care to
restore the Text, to which end he is often quoted by Simplicius and Boethius.
There is a Comment upon some books of the Ethics extant under his name.

Herminus, somewhat later, seems to have written upon all, or the greatest part
of Aristotle's works, cited by all the Greek Commentatours that are extant, and
by Boethius.

Alexander the Aphrodisaean, who lived under Antonius and Severus, wrote upon
the Analyticks, Topics and Elenchs, whence styled by the latter Interpreters,
(...) the Expositor.

Galen, who lived at the same time, wrote three Books upon Aristotle of
Interpretation, four Books upon the first of the first Analytick, four upon the
second of the first, six upon the first of the second Analytick, five upon the
second.

Suid.
Atticus a Platonic Philosopher, besides seven Books wherein he proved Plato
and Aristotle to be of the same Sect, contrary to the assertion of Taurus, he
wrote also a Dialogue upon the Categories extant, seven Books upon the
Categories cited by Simplicius, a Comment upon the Book of Interpretation,
cited by Boethius. Not to mention what he wrote upon Aristotle de Anima, since
it appears from Suidas, that it was rather by way of opposition then
exposition, which Grae. affec. l. 12.
Theodoret likewise confirms.

Iamblicus of Chalcis in Coelosyria, Master to Julian the Emperor, wrote in an
abstruse way upon the Book of Categories.

Dexippus, by some thought to be son of Iamblicus, wrote a Dialogue on the
Categories, extant.

Maximus a Byzantine, Disciple of Iamblicus, wrote Commentaries on the
Categories, and other Books of Aristotle, as Simplicus and Suidas affirm.

Plutarch the younger Son of Nestorius flourishing under Valentinian the first,
Gratian and Theodosius the first, according to Suidas and Philoponus, wrote
Commentaries upon some Books of Aristotle.

Syrianus, surnamed the great, of Alexandria, a Philosopher, who flourished
under Arcadius, Honorius, Theodosius the second, and Valentini^n the second,
wrote Commentaries upon Aristotle's Books of Nature, of Motion, of Heaven, and
upon the Categories, cited by Simplicius and Philoponus. Likewise upon the 2d.
5. and 6. Book of Metaphysics, which are extant.

Olympiodorus, an Alexandrian, who derived himself from Ammon^us Saccus, and
was contemporary to Plutarch and Syrianus, wrote upon Aristotle's Meteors,
extant. He was later then that Olympiodorus, who writ upon Plato.

Themistius, living, according to Suidas, under Julian and Iovinian, wrote a
Paraphrase upon Aristotle's Physic, 8. Books; a Paraphrase on the Analyticks,
2. Books; upon his Books of the Soul, 7. Books. Of the scope and title of the
Book of Categories, one Book.

Proclus, Disciple of Syrianus, wrote two Books concerning Motions, wherein he
made an abstract of Aristotle's second Book of Motion. That he wrote also upon
his book of Heaven, and the Elements may be conjectured from the frequent
citations of Simplicius.

Marinus, who succeeded Proclus in the School, seems to have written something
upon Aristotle's Book of the Soul, being often cited upon that subject by
Philoponus.

Ammonius Hermaeus wrote upon Aristotle's Categories, and upon his Book of
Interpretation, both which are extant; as likewise upon his Books of the Soul,
cited by Philoponus.

Damascius, a Platonic Philosopher, Disciple to Ammonius, besides what he
wrote in confutation of Aristotle concerning Time, epitomized the four first,
and the eight Book of his Physic, and the first Book of Heaven. To these add

Ph^loponus and Simplicius, and Asclepius, Disciples to Ammonius. Johannes
Damascenus, whose compendium of Aristotle's Logic and P^ysick are extant; he
lived about the year 770.

Eustathius wrote upon some of the Nicomachian Ethics; and Eustratius upon his
book concerning Demonstration.

Michael Psellus, about the year 800. and Michael Ephesius, upon the parva
naturalia.

Magentinus upon the Categories and the book of Interpretation.

Nicephorus Blemmydes, (under Johannes duca,) upon the Logic and Physic.

Georgius Plachymerius and Theodorus Metochita lived about the year 1080. and
wrote Epitoms extant.

Of Arabic Commentatours were Avicenna and Averroes; about the year 1216.

The later writers it will be unnecessary to mention, there being a Catalogue of
them annexed to Aristotle's works of the Paris Edition.

ARISTOTLE'S EPISTLES. Epist Graecan*

To Philip 1
THey who undertake a Command for the good of their Subjects, not preferred
there unto either by Fortune or Nature; trust not in their own power, which
they know subject to chance, but grow great in Virtue, whereby they order the
Commonwealth wisely. For there is nothing amongst men so firm, and solid, but
the rapid motion of the Sun changes it ere the Evening. Nature, if we enquire
into the truth, varieth all lives, interweaving them like the Action of a
Tragedy with misfortunes. Men, like flowers, have a set time wherein they
flourish and excel others. Wherefore behave not your self toward Greece
tyrannically or loosely, for one argues petulance, the other temerity. Wise
Princes ought not to be admired for their Government, but Governance; so that
though Fortune change, they shall have the same praise. As for the rest, do all
things well, preferring the health of your Soul, by Philosophy, that of your
body by exercise.

To Philip 2.
MOst Philosophers assert beneficence to be something equal to God. To speak
the truth, the whole life of Mankind is comprised in conferring and returning
Benefits, So as, some bestow, others receive, others return. Hence is it just
to commiserate all that are in adversity, for pity is the sign of a mild
Soul* sternness of a rude, it being dishonest and impious to neglect virtue in
misfortunes. For this I commend our disciple Theophrastus, who says, we never
repent of doing good, it brings forth good fruit the prayers and praises of the
obliged. Wise men therefore must study to oblige many, thinking that, beside
the praise, there may some advantage accrue from hence in the change of
Affairs, and if not all, at least some one of those to whom he has done good,
may be in a capacity to requite him. For this reason, endeavor to be ready in
doing good, but give not way to your passions, for that is kingly and civil,
this barbarous and odious. As you see occasion, practice and neglect not this
useful advise.

To Philip. 3.
THE most excellent Princes, whose honor touches the Stars, have conferred
most benefits, and not accommodating their sway only to the present, but
considering the instability of Fortune, have treasured up good deeds as useful
in either condition. In prosperity it procures them Honor, for Honor is
proper to Virtue, in advers^ty Relief, for friends, are much better tried in
bad fortune then in good. The sight of benevolent persons is like to that of
Land to men in a storm. All Fortune apt to desert us, is the true scope which
they propose to themselves who war, on do unjustly, or comply dishonestly, only
the clearness of Virtuous persons is not unacquainted with the instability of
Fortune, but, by reason, sustaining all accidents, and being, as Plato says,
above them, they are never disordered. Take heed therefore of the rapid motion
of things; look upon them as a Circle which reverts into it self; cast up the
accounts of life, for chance imposes many things upon life, and makes our
inclinations follow it. Pardon those that offend ignorantly; be ready to
acquit those that do good. This if you perform not once, but continually, your
Court will be secure from all danger. This, considering the greatness of the
things, I have said is but little, but, considering the person to whom I write,
All.

To Alexander. 4.
I Am in doubt how to begin, for upon whatsoever I reflect, all seems great and
wonderful, nor fit to be forgotten, but proper for remembrance, and
exhortation, not to be defaced by Time. Good precepts and exhortations of
Masters have Eternity for their Spectator. Endeavor to make use of your power,
not to oppress, but to oblige others, then which nothing can be greater in
Man's life. Mortal Nature, which often yields and is overcome by Fate,
obtains eternal memory by the greatness of such works. Consider this well;
you are not unreasonable as some are, who think good advice ridiculous. Your
descent is honorable, your Kingdom hereditary, your Learning sound, your
glory admirable; and as much as you exceed others in the Goods of Fortune, so
ought you to be excellent amongst the good in Virtue. In fine, do that which is
profitable, and finish what you design.

To Theophrastus 5.
A Sudden Injury is better then a slow benefit, for the remembrance and harm
of that lasts but a little while, but this grows old, as if it hated to build
a work to perpetuity, and many times deferring what we intend to bestow upon
another, he meets with a calm elsewhere which allaies the tempest of his mind.
Wherefore I say, mutual society ought not only to do no wrong, but, if any be
received, to be ready to forgive it; for perhaps to do no wrong is above the
power of Man. As for him who has erred, to make use of reproof, is the
property of a good well-seated Judgment.

THE DOCTRINE OF ARISTOTLE.
THE First PART.
CHAP. I.
Of Philosophy in general, and particularly of DIALECTICK.
THE Philosophy of Aristotle is well known, many abstracts thereof have been
published, many are read daly in Universities by public Professors; yet, will
it be requisite to our design, to give, a short account thereof, that it may
appear wherein the doctrine and method of the Peripateticks is different from
that of the Academicks and Stoics.

^aert.
Philosophy, according to Aristotle, is twofold, Practick and Theorelick. To
the Practick belongs Ethick and Politic; this, concerning the well ordering of
a City, that of a House. To the Theoretick belongs Physic and Logic; but
Logic is not properly a part thereof, but a most expedient I^strument.

Of Logic he asserted two ends, probable and true; for each he makes use of
two faculties, Dialectick and Rhetoric for the probable; Analytick and
Philosophy for the true, omitting nothing toward Invention, Judgment, and Use.
For Invention, his Topics and Methodicks afford a plentiful supply, out of
which may be taken problems for probable arguments. For Judgment, his first and
second Analyticks: in the first, propositions are examined; in the second, he
treats exactly of their composition, and the ^orm of Syllogism. To Use belongs
his Agonisticks, and his Books concerning Interrogation, and his Eristicks, and
his Sophistick Elenchs, and of Syllogismes, and the like. Hitherto Laertius.

Of his Logic we have only these books remaining, Of Categories, of
Interrogation, Analyticks, Topics, and So^histick Elenchs.

The first considers simple terms: The second Propositions: The rest
Syllogismes, Demonstrative, Dialectick, and Sophistick. The Categories are
placed first by the general consent of all Interpreters, neither is it to be
doubted, but that the rest are disposed according to the genuine method of
Aristotle. For, in the beginning of his Lib. 1. cap. 2.
Analyticks, he says, We must speak of Syllogism before we come to speak of
Demonstration, because Syllogism is the more general. And in his Cap. ^.
Elenchs, Of Didascalick and demonstrative Syllogismes, we have spoken already
in the Analyticks, of the Dialectick and Pirastick in the book immediately
preceding these: We come not to speak of the Agonistick and Eristick.

CHAP. II.
Of Terms.
Categ. cap. 1.
Terms are of three kinds, Homonymous, Synonymous, and Paronymous.
Homonymous, whose name only is common, their essence diverse: Synonymous, whose
name and definition are common to either: Paronymous have denomination from the
same thing, but differ in case or termination.

Synonymous, (or Univocall) terms, are reduced to ten general heads, called
Categories.

1. Cap. 5.
Substance, of two kinds: First, which is most properly substance, is neither
praedicated of, nor inherent in a subject. Second substances are species and
genus's, which subsist in the first. The properties of first-substances are, 1.
Neither to be in, nor praedicated of a subject. 2. To be all substances
equally. 3. To signify this particular thing. 4. To have no contrary. 5. To
admit no degrees of more or less. 6. To be susceptible of contraries.

2. Cap. 6.
Quantity, of two kinds; Discrete, as Number; Continuous, as a Line. Their
properties, 1. To have no contraries. 2. To admit no degrees of more or less.
3. To denominate things equal or unequal.

3. Cap. 7.
Relatives, whose whole being is in some manner affected toward one another;
their properties, 1. To have contraries, as Father and Son. 2. To admit degrees
of more and less, as in kindred. 3. To follow one another mutually. 4. To be
naturally together.

Cap. 8.
4. Quality, from which things are denominated qualited: it has four kinds:
1. Habit and disposition. 2. Natural power and impotence. 3. Passible
qualities and passions. 4. Form and figure. The properties, 1. To have
contraries, as black and white. 2. To admit intension or remission. 3. To
denominate things, like or unlike.

Cap 9.
5. Action. 6. Passion. Their properties are, to admit contraries, to admit
degrees of intension and remission.

7. When. 8. Where. 9. Position. 10. Habit. These admit not contraries, nor
degrees of intension or remission.

Of those which cannot be reduced to any certain Category, are 1. Opposites. 2.
Precedents. 3. Coaequals. 4. Motion. 5. Possession.

Cap. 10.
Of Opposites there are four kinds, Relatives, Contraries, extremes in the
same kind, as black and white: Privatives, as privation and habit, light and
darkness: Contradictories, which affirm and deny, as learned, not learned.

CHAP. III.
Of Proposition.
De Interpret cap. 1.
VOice is a sign of the notions of the mind; as, in the mind are two kinds
of Intellection, one simple, expert of truth and falsitie, the other either
true or false: So in voice, some is simple, some complexe.

Cap. 2.
A noun is a voice signifying according to institution, whereof no part is
significant by it self.

Cap. 3.
A Verb is a voice implying time, whereof no part is significant by it self.

Cap. 4.
A Speech, (...), is a voice signifying according to institution, whose parts
are significant separate.

Of Speech, the enunciative only (called proposition) belongs to Philosophy,
the precatory and imperative, to Rhetoric, Poetry, etc.

Cap. 5. etc.
Propositions are divided four ways; into simple and complex; into
affirmative and negative; into universal, particular, indefinite and singular;
into pure and modall; the modall is either necessary, possible, contingent, or
impossible.

Cap. 12.
Propositions have three accidents, opposition, consectation, conversion.

Opposition is either contradictory of a particular to an universal; or
contrary, of an universal to an universal; or subcontrary, of a particular
negative to a particular affirmative.

Consectation, ((...)) or aequipollence, is the consideration of those
affections of a proposition, in respect whereof, two propositions signify
together the same thing, and are together true or false.

Conversion is a transposition of the terms, preserving the affirmation,
negation, and verity of the proposition: it is either absolute, which reserves
the same quantity, but alters the quality; or partial, which reserves not the
same quantity.

CHAP. IV.
Of Syllogism.
Analy^. pri^r. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Syllogism is a speech, in which some things being laid down, another
necessarily follows. Perfect Syllogism is that which requires no other to
show its power, clearness, and efficacy. Imperfect requires another to that
purpose, by conversion, or transposition of the propositions.

Cap. 4.
The matter of Syllogism is three terms, the form is the right disposition of
the matter, according to figure and mood.

Figure is an apt disposition of the medium with the extremes, apt for
concluding aright. Mood is a disposition of propositions, according to quantity
and quality. There are three figures.

The first, when the medium is first subject, then praedicate. It has nine
moods, 4. useful, 5. useless and illegitimate: of the useful, two are
universal, two particular.

The first.
Every A is B. Every C is A. Therefore every C is B.
The second.
No A is B. Every C is A. Therefore no C is B.
The third.
Every A is B Some C is A. Therefore some C is B.
The fourth.
No A is B. Some C is A. Therefore some C is B.
Cap. 5.
In the second figure, the medium is praedicated of both the extremes. It has
16 Moods, 4 true, 12 false and illegitimate. Of the true, two are universal,
two particular.

The first.
No M is N. Every O is N. Therefore no O is M.
The second.
Every M is N. No O is N. Therefore no O is M.
The third.
No M is N. Some O is N. Therefore some O is not M.
The fourth.
Every M is N. Some O is not N. Therefore some O is not M.
Cap. 6.
In the third figure, the medium is subjected to both extremes. It has 16
Moods, 10 false and illegitimate; 6. legitimate, which conclude particularly.

The first.
Every P is R. Every P is S. Therefore some S is R.
The second.
No P is R. Every P is S. Therefore some S is not R.
The third.
Some P is R. Every P is S. Therefore some S is R.
The fourth.
Every P is R. Some P is S. Therefore some S is R.
The fifth.
Some P is not R. Every P is S. Therefore some S is not R.
The sixth.
No P is R. Some P is S. Therefore some S is not R.
Cap. 23.
Every Syllogism ought to be framed in one of these three Figures; but those
of the second and third being imperfect, ought to be reduced to the first,
which is the most absolute and perfect.

Anal. Prior. lib. 2. cap. 22. etc.
There are six other forms of argument, Conversion of Terms, Induction,
Example, abduction, Instance, Enthymem. All these have their effi^^cy from the
power of Syllogism, and are reducible to Syllogism.

As concerning the invention, power, and conversion of Syllogism, he is exact
and curious to admiration.

CHAP. V
Of Apodeictick (or demonstrative) Syllogism.
Analyt. pos^er. lib* 1. cap. 1.
ALL discursive knowledge is made by a praenotion of the things themselves
whereof we discourse; for ratiocination is not concerning things unknown.
Demonstration is a discursive knowledge, and therefore requires three
praecognitions. First, that the subject is, and what it is in a rude confused
manner. Secondly, what the praedicate is, and what it signifies. Thirdly, that
the principles are true.

Cap. 2.
To know is to understand that a thing is, that this is cause thereof, and that
it cannot be otherwise. Demonstration is a scientifick Syllogism.
Demonstrative Science is from true, first, immediate, more known, causes of the
conclusion. First, as having none precedent, and being adaequate to, and
convertible with the effect. Immediate or consectaneous, as having no term
betwixt to join them. More known, as being praensises to the conclusion, not
to be demonstrated by any thing.

Cap. 4.
Demonstrative Science is of a thing necessary, whence the demonstration it
self consists of necessary propositions; which necessity requires explication
of that which is praedicated, of all by it self, and which is universal.

Of all, is that which is attributed to every one and at all times, as a living
creature to man.

By it self, as being of essence, proper, competible perse, and competible to
it self, for it self.

An universal attribute is that which is in every one by it self, in as much
as it is it self.

Cap. 8.
Demonstration is of conclusions of eternal truth, for they are universal
propositions; whence it follows, that neither demonstration nor Science are
of perishable things; neither are definitions of such, which are the principles
of demonstration.

That there is demonstration, it is not necessary to have recourse to Plato's
Idaeas, separate from singulars; it is enough that there are common natures
which are in singulars, and are praedicated of them.

Cap. 11.
It is one thing to know that a thing is so, another to know why it is so.
Hence there are two kinds of demonstration, (...), and (...), the first is the
true and most perfect, of which hitherto.

Cap. 13.
The other kind of demonstration, viz. (...), is more imperfect; it is made
two ways in the same Science: First, when the cause is demonstrated by the
effect thus, Stars which do not twinkle are nearest to the earth; but, the
Planets do not twinkle, therefore they are nearest to the earth. Secondly, when
the effect is proved by a cause remote, and not reciprocal, or by an effect of
the remote cause; as this, Every thing that breaths is a living creature; but
no Wall breaths, therefore no Wall is a living creature.

To know (...), is proper to subalternat principle Sciences, as Geometry and
Arithmetic, which contemplate the first proper causes; to know (...), is of
the subalternate and inferior, as Optic and Music.

Cap. 14.
Of all figures, the first is most accommodate to knowledge, for that only
concludes with an universal affirmative, and therefore in that only is a
demonstrative (...).

Cap. 15. etc.
Thus far concerning Science; the opposite to Science is Ignorance, which is
twofold: One of pure negation, as when a boy or ignorant fellow knows not
that the Sun is greater then the Earth, because he is ignorant of Astrology.
The other, of depraved disposition, as when an Astrologer or ignorant Optic
believes, that things are as they seem: this is error, which erroneous
ignorance is in false propositions, or in a Syllogism through a false medium.

Defect of sense causes ignorance of pure negation, for if any sense be
wanting, it is necessary, that some science of sensibles be likewise wanting;
for, we learn all things either by induction or demonstration. Induction is
made of singulars perceived by sense. Demonstration is of universals, which are
declared by induction; wherefore the beginning of Science is from singulars,
which are sensibles. Hence it is impossible for a man born blind to have the
Science of colors. Yet no science is next and immediately from sense, for
sense is of singulars, which are here and now; but science and demonstration is
of universals, which are every where and ever, not subject to sense. Yet, sense
conduces to science and demonstration, for as much as an universal is
collected from particulars, known by sense.

CHAP. VI.
Of Dialectick Syllogism.
Topic. lib. 1. cap. 1.
DIalectick Syllogism is that which concludes from probables; probables are
those things which appear such to all, or to most, or only to the wise and most
eminent.

Cap. 3.
Dialectick is a conjecturall Art, as Rhetoric and Medicine; therefore (like
those) it attaineth not always its end; it is enough for a Dialectick, that he
omit nothing of his Art for concluding probably.

Cap. 4.
All disputation is of things controverted, either by Problem or proposition. A
Problem questions both parts, as, a living Creature, is it the genus of man or
not? A proposition questions but one part, as, Is not living creature the genus
of man? Every proposition and problem is either genus, (under which is
contained the difference) definition, proprium, or accident.

Cap. 5. etc.
Definition is a speech, signifying what a thing is. Proprium is that which
declares, not what a thing is, but is in it only, and reciprocal with it.
Genus is that which is praedicated, in quid, of many that differ specifically.
Accident is that which is neither definition, nor genus, nor proprium, and may
be, or not be, in its subject.

Cap. 10.
Dialectick proposition is a probable interrogation, received by all or many,
or the most excellent, yet so as it is not wholly alienate from the common
opinion.

Cap. 11.
Dialectick problem is threefold; practick or Moral, pertaining to election or
repulse; Theoretick, pertaining to Science, neutrall, which conduces to the
rest, viz. Logic.

Thesis is a paradoxall sentence of some eminent Philosopher, contrary to the
vulgar opinion.

Cap. 12.
Dialectick Arguments is twofold; Induction and Syllogism.

Cap. 13. etc.
Arguments are gained by four instruments, 1. Choice of propositions. 2.
Distinction of Aequivoques. 3. Invention of differences. 4. Consideration of
Similitudes.

Problems are either universal or particular; the same places which confirm or
confute one, confirm or confute the other. From proprium, genus, and definition
is immediately and simply made Demonstration, but not from Accident, because
that is external, not necessarily and intimately inhaerent in the Subject. We
shall not here say any thing of the multitude of places he has invented, which
are more necessary to those that will learn the Art, then suitable to this
abridgement.

The Disputant must first find out a place (or medium) secondly, dispose and
question it within himself; thirdly, propose it to his adversary.

In disputation against the learned, Syllogism is to be used, against the
vulgar induction.

Lib. 8. Cap. 4.
The office of the opponent is to compel his respondent to this incredible and
absurd consequent from his Thesis; of the Respondent to take care, that nothing
absurd be collected from his Thesis.

CHAP. VII.
Of Sophistick Syllogism.
Sophist. elench cap. 1.
AN Elench is a Syllogism which contradicts the conclusion asserted by the
respondent. Of Elenchs some are true, some false; that proper to a Sophos,
whose office is to pursue and defend truth, and to discover and confute
falsehood; this to a Sophist, who from seeming wisdom acquireth gain, and had
rather seem then be.

Cap. 1.
A Sophist has five ends, whereto he endeavors to reduce his adversary; the
first is Elench, or redargution, Cap. 3.
of which there are two kinds; one in the word, the other out of the word.

Sophisms in the word, are six. 1. By Homonymie, as that Ill is good, for (...)
are good, but Ills are (...). The fallacy consists in the word (...), which
signifies sometimes necessarily inevitable, sometimes beneficial.

2. By Amphibolie, as (...); which signifies either that the Enemies would take
me, or that I would take the Enemies.

3. By composition, as (...), that he who sits can walk, which is true in a
divided sense, not in a compounded.

4. By Division; as five are two and three, therefore even and odd.

5. By accent, which is not so easily done in Logic as in Poetry.

6. By figure of the word, when things which are not the same, are interpreted
in the same manner as a male for a female.

Cap. 4.
Sophisms out of the word are seven. 1. From accident, when that which is
demanded is equally competent to the thing, and to the accident; for whereas
many things are competent to the same, it is not necessary that they be all in
the subject and praedicate, as, if Coriscus differs from a man, he differs from
himself, for he is a man.

2. From that which is simply, or (...), when that which is said in part is
taken as of all, as, if that which is not, is imaginative, that which is not,
is.

3. From ignorance of the Elench, when not understanding the true Nature of a
contradiction, they think that to be an absolute contradiction which is none,
omitting either the same respect in the thing, or the same respect of the same
thing; or the simplicity, or the time. To this all Sophismes may be reduced.

4. Of the consequent; when we allow those to be true reciprocal consequences
which are not such, as, it is yellow, therefore it is honey, and the contrary,
it is not yellow, therefore it is not honey.

5. Of petition of the principle, neither by requiring that to be granted,
which was to be proved, or proving the same by the same, the terms only
changed; as the Soul is immortal because it is not subject to death.

6. Of a not-cause as a Cause, as when that is taken to be the cause of the
thing or conclusion, which is cause of neither; as Arms disturb peace,
therefore they are to be taken away.

7. Of Plurality of Interrogations as one, when many things are asked in one;
as Justice and Impiety, are they Virtues or not?

Hitherto of Elenchs; the four other Ends whereto a Sophist endeavors to
reduce his adversary, are, Falsitie, Paradox, Soloecism, and Tautologie.

Sophismes are solved either by distinction or negation.

Thus much may serve for a slight view of his Logic, whereof we have but few
Books left, in respect of the many which he wrote upon that part of Philosophy.

THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I.
Of PHYSIC.
NOt to question the Method of Aristotle's Books of Physic, much less their
titles (as some, to make them better agree with Laertius's Catalogue, have
done) and least of all their Authority, with Patricius; we shall take them in
that order which is generally received; according to which, next Logic is
placed Physic.

Metaphys. 5. 1.
Physic is a science concerning that substance which has the principle of
motion and rest within it self.

The Physical Books of Aristotle, that are extant, treat of these nine
general heads. Of the principles of natural things; of the Common affections
of natural things; of Heaven; of Elements; of the action and passion of
Elements; of Exhalation; of Plants; of Animals; of the Soul.

CHAP. II.
Of the Principles of Natural Bodies.
Physic lib. 1. cap. 3. 4.
THe Principles of natural Bodies are not one, as Parmenides and Melissus
held; nor Homoiomeria's, as Anaxagoras; nor Atoms, as Leucippus and
Democritus; nor sensible Elements, as Thales, Anaximander, Anaximenes,
Empedocles; nor numbers, or figures, as the Pythagoreans; nor Idaea's, as Plato.

Cap. 5.
That the Principles of things are Contrary (privately opposite) was the joint
opinion of the Ancients, and is manifest in Reason. For Principles are those
which neither are mutually of one another, nor of others, but of them are all
things. Such are first contraries; as being first, they are not of any other;
as contrary, not of another.

Cap. 6.
Hence it follows, that being contrary they must be more then one, but not
infinite; for then natural things would not be comprensible by Reason: yet
more then two; for of contraries only nothing would be produced, but that they
would rather destroy one another.

Cap. 7.
There are therefore three Principles of natural bodies; two contrary;
privation and form, and one common subject of both, Matter. The constitutive
Principles are matter and form; of privation, bodies consist not, but
accidentally, as it is competent to Matter.

Cap. 8.
Things are made of that which is Ens potentially, Materia prima, not of that
which is Ens actually, nor of that which is nonens potentially, which is pure
nothing. Cap. 9.
Matter is neither generated nor corrupted. It is the first insite subject of
every thing, whereof it is framed primarily, in it self and not by accident,
and into which it at last resolves. To treat of form in general is proper to
Metaphysics.

CHAP. III.
Of Nature and the Causes of Natural bodies.
Phys. lib. 2. cap. 1.
OF Beings, some are by Nature, as Plants, others from other causes; those have
in themselves the principle of their motion; these have not. Nature is a
Principle and Cause of the motion and rest of that thing wherein it is,
primarily, by it self; and not by accident. Material substances have nature;
Natural properties are according to Nature; Nature is twofold, Matter and Form,
but Form is most Nature, because it is in act.

Cap. 3.
Of Causes are four kinds; the Material, of which a thing is made; the Formal,
by which a thing is made, or reason of its essence; The efficient, whence is
the first principle of its mutation or rest as a Father; the Final, for which
end it is made; as health is to walking. Causes are immediate or remote,
principal or accidental; actual or potentiall; particular or universal.

Cap. 4. etc.
Fortune and Chance are Causes of many effects; Fortune is an accidental Cause
in those things which are done by election for some end; Chance is larger; an
accidental cause in things which are done for some end at least that of
Nature. They are both efficient.

Cap. 8.
Nature acts for some end; not temerariously, or casually; for those things
which are done by nature, are always or for the most part done in the same
manner, yet sometimes she is frustrated of her end, as in Monsters, which she
intends not.

Cap. 9.
Necessity is twofold; absolute, which is from Matter, conditional, which is
from the end or form; both kinds are in natural things.

CHAP. IV.
Of the affections of natural Bodies, Motion, Place, Time.
Physic. lib. 3. cap. 2.
MOtion is of a thing which is not such, but may be such, the way or act by
which it becomes such, as curing of a body which is not in health, but may be
in health, is the way and act by which it is brought to health. Neither is it
absurd, that the same thing should be both in act and power, as to different
respects; for the thing moved, as water in warming is in act, as to the heat
which it has, in power, as to the greater heat which it is capable of.

Cap. 7.
Infinite is that which is pertransible without end, such an infinite in act
there is not: not amongst simple bodies, for the elements are confined to
certain number and place; neither amongst mixed bodies, for they consist of the
elements which are finite. But, there are things infinite potentially; as, in
addition, Number which may be augmented infinitely; in division, Magnitude,
which may be divided infinitely; in time, and continued succession of
generation.

Lib. 4. cap. 3.
The properties of place are, that it contains the thing placed; that it is
equal to, and separable from the thing placed; that the place and thing placed
are together; that it has upwards or downwards, and the like differences; that
every Physical body tends naturally to its proper place, and there rests.

Place is the immediate immovable superficies of a continent body. Those things
which are contained by another body are in place; but those which have not any
other body above or beyond them are not properly in place. Bodies rest in their
natural places, because they tend thither as a part torn off from the whole.

Cap. 8.
Vacuum is place void of body: such a vacuum there is not in nature, for that
would destroy all motion, seeing that in vacuum there is neither upwards nor
downwards, backwards nor forwards. Nor would there be any reason, why motion
should be to one part more then to another. Moreover it would follow, that it
were impossible for one body to make another to recede, if the triple
dimension, which bodies divide, were vacuous. Neither is the motion of rare
bodies upwards caused by vacuity, for that motion is as natural to light
bodies, as to move downwards is to heavy.

Cap. 10. 11.
Time is the number of motion by before and after. Those two parts of time are
conjoined by ((...)) the present, as the parts of a line are by a point. Time
is the measure of rest as well as of motion; for the same measure which serves
for the privation, serves for the habit. All motion and mutation is in time;
for in every motion there is a swiftness or slownesse, which is defined by
time. The Heavens, Earth, Sea, and other sensibles, are in time, for they are
movable.

Cap. 14.
Time being a numerate number, exists not without a numerant, which is the
Soul. The measure of time and other things, is that which measures the first,
and most equal motion; this is the motion of the primum mobile, for the first
in every kind is the measure of the rest.

CHAP. V.
Of the kinds and properties of Motion.
Phys. lib. 5. cap. 2.
MOtion appertains to three Categories, to Quantity, accretion and diminution;
to Quality, alteration; to Where, lecall motion.

Rest is a privation of motion in a body, when, where, and how it is apt for
motion.

Lib. 6. cap. 1.
As all Magnitude is primarily, and perse, continuous and divisible into
infinite, so is all motion, by reason of magnitude, and time it self. For
whatsoever is not composed of indivisibles, is divisible into infinite; but no
continuous thing is composed of indivisible things, for it is quantitative,
whereas indivisibles having no extremes or parts, can neither be conjoined by
continuous nor contiguous motion.

Cap. 2.
Yet it follows not, that if there be infinite magnitude, there can be no
motion, for it is not infinite in act, but in power, as are likewise time and
motion.

Cap. 3.
Neither is there any motion in the instant, (...), for nothing is moved or
rests, but in time.

Cap. 4.
Motion therefore is divisible, as well in respect to the time wherein it is
made, as in respect to the thing wherein it inheres; as both these are always
divisible, so may motion it self be divided according to these.

Cap. 5.
Whatsoever is changed, as soon as it is changed, must necessarily be in the
(next) term to which, for it leaves the state or form in which it was, and
assumeth that to which it tends: yet though in motion, there is a first
motion of perfection, wherein we may truly say, the mutation is made, yet there
is no first motion of inception.

Cap. 6.
Whatsoever is moved in any whole time, is necessarily moved in every part of
that time.

Cap. 7.
All motion is finite, for it is in time, which is finite.

Whatsoever is thus proper to motion, is to be applied also to rest and
quiescence.

CHAP. V.
Of the first Mover.
Lib. 7. cap. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7.
WHatsoever is moved must necessarily be moved by another, either external or
internal. But lest this progression be into infinite, we must of necessity at
last come to one first mover, which is not moved by another. This first mover,
the cause and origin of all motion, is immovable, one, eternal, and
indivisible, void of all quantity.

Lib. 8. cap. 6.
Immovable, for whatsoever things are moved, are either immediately moved by a
first immovable mover, or by some other which is likewise moved by another,
until at last we come to some first mover, for nothing can move it self,
unless there be a first mover: but of infinites there is no first.

Cap. 6.
One, for he is most perfect, as being Author of the most perfect and most
simple motion, that of the primum mobile. Besides, the best in every kind is
one; for good is simple, ill multiplicious.

Cap. 7.
Eternal, for motion it self is eternal, as appear* thus: The mover and the
movable must either be from eternity, or have had beginning in some time; if
they began at any time, it must have been by motion, and consequently before
the first motion there was another, by which the mover and movable began, which
were absurd. Again, if they were eternal, yet without motion, it must be
either by reason of the inaptitude of the movable, or of its remoteness from
the mover. But neither could the movable be made more apt, or brought nigher to
the mover, except by motion, whence would follow, that there was a motion
before the first motion. Again, Time, the measure of motion is eternal,
therefore motion it self is such. That Time is eternal (besides that it is
the general agreement of Philosophers) is thus proved; it cannot be conceived
without (...), the instant, which is intermediate betwixt the past and future,
both the end of one, and the beginning of the other* but, if time had a
beginning, this (...) would have been only a beginning, not end; if time should
have an end, this instant would be only an end, not a beginning, both which are
repugnant to the nature of a moment.

Lib. 8. cap. 10.
Indivisible, void of quantity, the proof whereof is grounded upon three
Theoremes: 1. That no finite mover can move in infinite time; therefore the
first mover is infinite. 2. That there cannot be infinite power in finite
quantity; therefore the first mover is incorporeall. 3. That there cannot be
finite power in that which is infinite; therefore the first mover is infinite
in power. Hence may be collected, that it is impossible the first mover should
be divisible, corporeal, or affected with quantity; for if he had any, it
would either be infinite, of which kind actual there is none; or finite,
wherein could not consist his infinite power.

CHAP. VI.
Of Heaven.
HAving treated of the principles, causes, and affections of ^aturall bodies in
general, he proceeds next to particulars.

De Coelo lib. 1. cap. 1.
The World is perfect, because it consists of bodies which are perfect, and
comprehends all perfection, it self not being comprehended by any other.

Cap. 2.
Of Bodies, some are simple, others compounded of the simple. All natural
bodies are movable locally per^se. There is a twofold local motion, simple,
which is competible to simple bodies; and mixed, which to the mixed. Hence it
follows, that there are so many kinds of simple bodies, as variations of
simple motion; for of one simple body, there is one proper motion. Simple
local motion is twofold: circular, about the center, and right: the right is
either upwards from the center, or downwards to the center, and both these
either simply, or (...). This fourfold variation of right motion, evinceth
that there are four simple bodies called Elements; circular motion must be
proper to some other fifth essence, different from the constitutions of the
other four simple bodies, more divine and precedent to all the rest: This is
Heaven.

Cap. 3.
Heaven has neither gravity nor levity; this is manifest from its motion which
is circular, not from the center which is proper to light things, nor to the
center, as is proper to heavy, but about the center.

Heaven is void of generation and corruption, and consequently of accretion,
diminution, and alteration, for it has no contrary; it is therefore the first
body, not to be consumed by time and age.

Cap. 5, 7.
No body can be infinite, therefore the world it self is not infinite; neither
is there any body beyond it infinite, not intelligible or mathematical.

Cap. ^.
There is but one world, for if there were more, the Earth of one would move to
the Earth of the other (as being of one kind) and ascend out of its proper
place.

Cap. 12.
The world is eternal; whatsoever is eternal is ingenerate and incorruptible.
Plato therefore erred, in affirming the world to be generated, but
incorruptible. If he meant that as it was generated, it is by nature
corruptible, yet, shall never be actually dissolved, because of the eternal
cause of its conservation, God, he erreth also, for then there would be
something that should be always, and yet could not be always.

Lib. 2. cap. 1.
Heaven is void of labor ((...)) for it has no contrary to retard its motion.

Cap. 2.
Heaven has the threefold difference of position, upwards and downwards,
backwards, right and left; for these are proper to all animate things which
have the principle of motion within themselves. The right side of Heaven is the
East, for from thence begins its motion; the left side the West; and
consequently the Artick pole is lowermost, the Antartick uppermost; forwards
our Hemisphear, backwards the other.

Cap. 3.
Heaven naturally moves circularly, but this circular motion is not uniform
throughout all Heaven, for there are other Orbs which move contrary to the
primum mobile; that there may be a vicissitude in sublunary things, and
generation and corruption.

Cap. 4.
Heaven is Sphaericall, for to the first body the first figure is most proper.
If it were quadrangular, triangular, or the like; the angles would sometimes
leave a space without a body, and occupate another space without a body. The
motion of Heaven is circular, as being the measure of all others, therefore
most compendious and swiftest.

Cap. 6.
The motion of the primum mobile is aequable and uniform, for it has neither
beginning, middle nor end; the primum mobile and first mover being eternal
both, and subject to no variation.

Cap. 7.
Stars are of the same body with that wherein they are carried, but more
thick and compact; they produce warmth and light in inferior things through
frication of the Air by their motion, for swift motion fires wood, and melts
lead; yet the spheres themselves are not heated, but the Air only, and that
chiefly by the sphere of the Sun, which by his accession toward us increases
the heat, his beams falling more directly, and with double force upon us.

Cap. 8.
The Stars being infixed in the Heavens are moved not by themselves with a
proper motion, as fishes in the water, and Birds in the Air, but according to
the motion of their Orbs. Otherwise those in the eight Sphere would not be
always aequidistant from one another; neither would the stars have always the
same side turned toward us, as we see the Moon has.

Cap. 10.
The primum mobile is carried about with the swiftest motion; the seven Orbs
of Planets under it, as they are nearer to it, are carried so much the more
swiftly about by the motion thereof; and as they are further distant, more
slowly. Whence by how much the nigher they are to the primum mobile, so much
the slower is their proper motion, because it is contrary to that of the primum
mobile, as being from East to West.

Cap. 11.
The Stars are round, for that figure is most unapt for selfmotion: we see
the Moon is round by her orbicular sections; therefore the other Stars are so
likewise, for the reason is the same in all.

Cap. 13. 14.
The Center of Heaven is the Earth, round, seated immovable in the midst;
which together with the Sea makes up one Globe.

CHAP. VII.
Of Elements.
De Coelo. lib. 3. cap 3.
THe Element of Bodies is a simple Body, into which other Bodies are divided,
in which it is either actually or potentially; as in flesh, wood, and the like;
there is fire and earth potentially, for into these they are segregated; but
actually they are not; for then should the flesh and wood be segregated.

Whereas every natural Body has a proper motion; motions are partly simple,
partly mixed; the mixed proper to mixed bodies, the simple to simple; it is
manifest that there are simple bodies, for there are simple motions; the
circular proper to Heaven, the right to the Elements.

Cap. 5.
The Elements are not eternal; for they are dissolved with reciprocal
mutations, and perish, and are mutually generated of one another.

Lib. 4. cap. 1.
The motive qualities of the Elements are gravity and levity. Heavy is that
which is apt to be carried downwards to the Center or midst of Heaven; light is
that which is apt to be carried upwards toward the extremities of Heaven.
These are either simple or comparative. Simply heavy is that which is below
all, as the Earth; Simply light is that which is above, as all the fire;
Comparatively heavy and light are those in which are both these; above some,
below others; as Air and Water. From these have mixed things, gravity and
levity; the heavy are carried downwards; to a definite medium; the light
upwards to a definite extreme, for nothing tends to infinite. Whence it
follows that two Elements are extremely contrary, simply heavy, and simply
light, Fire and Earth; which tend to contrary places. Betwixt these are two
means, participating of the nature of each extreme, Air and Water. Those
Elements which are highest and lightest are most perfect, and have the nature
of forms in respect of the inferior, because these are contained by those; to
be contained, is the property of matter, to contain, of form.

Cap. 5.
Hence it follows that there are four kinds of particular second matter,
differing by the accidental differences of heat, cold, humidity, siccity,
levity and gravity, (simple and comparative) though there be but one common
matter of them all; for they are made mutually of one another. The mean
Elements are heavy in their proper places; for Earth being taken away, Water
tending downwards, succeeds in its room; Air descends into the place of Water,
but not contrariwise; for Water ascends not into its place of Air, unless by
force. In the extreme it is otherwise; for the Air being taken away, the fire
will not descend into its place, nor the Earth ascend into the place of Water
or Air; for Fire is not heavy, nor Earth light, in their natural place;
because they are extreme Elements.

Cap. 6.
Figure conduces to the swiftness or slownesse of motion either upwards or
downwards, but is not simply, and in it self the cause of motion; so an acute
figure cuts the medium swiftly, a broad obtuse figure slowly. Hence a thin
plate of Lead or Iron will swim on water, because it comprehends much of the
subjected body, which it cannot easily divide or penetrate.

CHAP. VIII.
Of generation, Corruption, Alteration, Augmentation and Diminution.
De gener. and corrup. lib. 1. cap. 3.
THere is a perpetual succession of generation, as well simple as accidental,
which proceeds from two causes, Efficient, the first mover, and the Heavens,
always moving, and allwaies moved, and Material, the first matter, of which,
being non-ens actually, ens potentially, all things generable and corruptible
consist. This is incorruptible in its self, susceptible of all forms, whereby
the corruption of one natural substance, becomes the generation of another,
whatsoever matter remains upon the corruption, being assumed toward the
generation of another.

Generation and Corruption are twofold, simple, of a substance, (...), of an
accident, generation of the less noble substance is called generation, (...)
in respect of the more noble, as that of Earth in respect of fire.

Corruption always succeeds generation, because the term, to which of
corruption ( viz. non-ens) is the term from which of generation; and the
term, to which of generation ( viz. ens in act) is the term from which of
corruption. The matter of that which is generated, and that which is corrupted
is the same, for as much as they are, or may be made reciprocally of one
another, as Air, of Water, water of Air; but differenly disposed.

Cap. 4.
Alteration and generation are different mutations; in alteration the subject
remains entire, the affections only are changed, as of sick sound; in
generation the whole is changed, not any sensible subject remaining. Alteration
is a mutation according to quality; augmentation and diminution, according to
quantity; local motion according to place.

Cap. 5.
Augmentation and diminution differ from other mutations; first, in the object,
generation and corruption concerns substances; alteration, quality, lation,
place, augmentation and diminution, quantity. Again, in the manner, that which
is generated, or corrupted, or altered, not necessarily changes place, but
that which augments or diminishes, in some manner changes place, for it is
bigger or lesser.

Augmentation is an addition to praeexistent quantity; diminution a detraction.
Whatsoever is augmented or decreased, is augmented or decreased according to
every part thereof, by reception of something throughout all parts; decretion
on the contrary. The animate body increases, but not the aliment, for the
living creature remains, the aliment is converted into the substance of the
living creature. Hereupon that which is augmented is like unto that which is
altered, for both of these remain. All parts of a living creature are
augmented; the similar first, as bones and flesh; then the dissimilar, as
consisting of the others.

Augmentation is made by accession of something according to form, not
according to matter; for by it the whole is augmented, and made more such.
Accession of parts, according to matter, is not augmentation, for by materials
only (destitute of that form, which the parts to be augmented have) the whole
living creatures cannot increase. Aliment therefore, whereby the living
creature is augmented, must be the same potentially which the things augmented
is in act. At first, it is contrary, and dissimilar, being in power the part of
a living creature, in act something else: at last it becomes assimilate to
the living creature, taking the form of a part (by aggeneration) through the
digestive power of the animate body, which changes the aliment into its own
substance.

For this reason augmentation presupposes nutrition. Nutrition is, when the
aliment as substance is converted into the substance of the living creature.
Augmentation, when the same aliment as quantitative, is added to the quantity
of the living creature. Hence a living creature as long as it is sound is
always nourished, but not always augmented. As that which is added is
potentially quantitative flesh, so it can augment flesh; as it is potentially
flesh only, so it nourishes; which when it can only do (as when so much wine
is poured into water that it turns all into water) then there is a diminution
of the quantity, but the form remains.

CHAP. IX.
Of Action and Passion.
De gener. and corrupt. lib. 1. cap. 6.
COntact is of several kinds, Mathematical, by contiguity; Physical, when
the extremes of several bodies meet, and mutually act and suffer; virtuall, by
power and metaphorical.

Cap. 7.
The mutual action and passion of Physical contact is betwixt things, partly
unlike as to their form, partly like as to their genus (for they are
contraries) matter; each endeavoring to reduce the patient to his own
likeness, as fire, wood.

Every Physical agent in acting, suffers from the patient, for both the agent
and patient are active, endued with forms elementary, susceptible of
contraries. But as the first mover is immovable, so is the first agent
impassible.

Cap. 9.
Every things acts, as it is such, actually; suffers, as it is such,
potentially. The conditions of action and passion are five: 1. What the agent
is in act, the patient is in power. 2. The patient is such according to each
part. 3. That which is more disposed suffers more, and so on the contrary. 4.
Every patient is continuous, and not actually divided. 5. The agent must
necessarily touch the patient, either immediately or mediately.

CHAP. X.
Of Mixtion and Temperament.
De gener. and corrupt. lib. 1. cap. 10.
MIxtion is not generation, for the matter is not mixed with the form; nor
alteration, for the quality is not mixed with the subject; nor augmentation,
for aliment, the matter of augmentation, is not mixed with, but converted into
the animate body. Conjunction of small bodies is not true mixtion, but
coacervation, for those bodies remain actually the same according to their
forms, not composing one third according to every part. Things which have not
the same matter are not mixed, because they cannot be active and passive
rec^procally.

Those things which are properly said to be mixed must have one common matter,
they must mutually act upon, and suffer one from another, they must be easily
divisible; yet so, as that one be not excessive in respect of the other, for
then it is not mixtion, but mutation into the more predominant, as a drop of
wine into a great quantity of water.

De gener. and corrupt. lib. 2. cap. ^.
The principles and differences of Elements (sensible tactile bodies) are
tactile qualities, in as much as by such qualities, sensible bodies, as such,
are constituted and differ. Of tactile qualities there are seven orders, hot,
cold, moist, dry, heavy, light, hard, soft, viscous, arid, rugged, smooth,
thick, thin. From the two first orders, are derived the differences of
Elements, for by heat and cold, humidity and siccity they act and suffer, and
are mutually changed by alterative passions. Of these first qualities two are
active, heat and cold, two passive, humidity and siccity. Heat is that which
congregates homogeneous things; cold that which congregates heterogeneous
things; humid that which is not easily contained in its own bounds, dry the
contrary.

Cap. 3.
As there are four Elements, there must be four conjunctions of the primary
qualities, from each of which the Elements are severally collected. The first
conjunction is of hot and dry, whence proceeds fire; the second of hot and
moist, whence Air; the third of moist and cold, whence Water; the fourth of
cold and dry, whence Earth. In each of these one quality is praedominant; Earth
is more dry then cold, water more cold then moist, Air more moist then hot,
Fire more hot then dry.

All these Elements may be mutually transmutated into one another; the
Symbolicall which agree in one primary quality are more easily transmutated
into one another then the asymbolical, because it is less difficult to change
one then many. This transmutation is not a generation, but a kind of
alteration, whence it is manifest one Element cannot be the principle of
another.

Cap. 7.
Mixtion, whereby the Elements concur to the composition of a mixed body, is
made by coacervation, as Emped^cles held, but after such a manner that their
contrary qualities remain in the mixed; not potentially only, nor simply
actually in their height, but in a mean kind of way, their extremities being
reduced to some temper. From this contemperation come mixed bodies, differing
according to the various proportion of the temperament; and as they are
compounded of the Elements, so they resolve into the same.

All these mixed bodies consist of all the Elements; of Earth, Cap. 8.
for every things participates of the nature of that thing wherein it is
produced; of water, because every mixed thing must be concrete and terminated;
which properties Water best affords to Earth; of Air and Fire, because every
perfect mixed body is made by temperament of contraries, such is Air to Earth,
Fire to Water. Again, the nature of all mixed bodies as well animate as
inanimate, as to mixture, is the same, but that the animate consist of all the
Element, is manifest in that they are nourished by them.

Cap. 9.
The causes and common principles of mixed bodies are three; material, fomall,
efficient. The Material is the power to be and not to be, by which elementary
things are generated and corrupted. The formal is the reason of the essence of
every thing; Cap. 10.
the universal efficient is the circular motion of Heaven, not only as being
eternal, continual and before generation, but chiefly because it brings
nigh to us, and carries far from us that which has the generative power of
all things, that is, the Sun, and the other Stars, which by their accession and
recession are the causes of generation and corruption.

Cap. 11.
All these are so disposed according to the order of Nature, that because no
natural being can be permanent in the same individual state, they may be at
lest preserved by a continual succession of many individuum's of the same
species. Whence the natural cause of generation is only conservation of the
species.

CHAP. XI.
Of imperfect mixed bodies.
Meteor. lib. 1^ cap. 1.
Mixed bodies are twofold, imperfect and perfect: Meteors are imperfect mixed
bodies produced according to Nature, but after a less orderly and constant
manner. Cap. 2.
The general matter thereof are the Elements; the efficient, the celestial
bodies which act upon inferiors by a kind of coherence. Cap. 3.
Heaven is highest; next Heaven the Element of fire; next fire, air, under air,
water and earth. Clouds are not generated in the sphere of fire, nor in the
region of the air, partly by reason of the heat which is there, partly because
of the motion of the Heavens which carries along with it the element of fire,
and the upper region of the air, by which motion heat is produced in inferior
bodies; for the air being carried along by the Heaven, is heated by that
motion, and by the proximity of the Sun and of the Element of fire.

Cap. 4.
Flames that appear in the upper part of the air are made thus; The Sun by his
warmth extracteth a kind of breath out of the Earth, which, if hot and dry, is
called exhalation, and if hot and moist, vapor. Exhalation ascends higher, as
being higher, and being got into the upper region of the air, is there
enkindled by the motion of the air, and proximity of the fire. Hence come those
they call firebrarnds, goats, falling-starres and the like. Cap. 5.
Hence are also Phasmes, such as are called gulses, chasmes, bloody colors,
and the like; the exhalation being variously colored by reflection of the
light, but chiefly seeming purple, which color arises from the mixture of
fire and white.

Cap. 6, 7.
The efficient cause of Comets are the Sun and stars; the material an
exhalation, hot, dry, condensed, and combustible; so as it burns not much, nor
is soon extinguished. It is called a Comet, or airy star, when it is a like
on every side; a pogoneia or bearded star, when it has a long train. That it
consists of fire is manifest, because at the same time, there is commonly great
wind and drought. It appears seldom, and then single, and beyond the
Tropicks, because stars, especially the Sun, dissipate the matter whereof it
consists.

Cap. 8.
The Galaxie is not the light of many stars together, as Anaxagoras held, but
an exhalation hot and dry, kindled by the motion of many great stars, which
are in that part where the Galaxie appears.

Cap. 9.
We come next to those meteors which are in the middle and lower region of the
air. When the Sun and other Stars draw up vapors out of waterish places,
into the middle region of the air, they are there kept so long, until they are
condensed by the cold of that place into drops of water, which if they come
down very small, are called misling, if greater, rain. This thick vapor, which
is seen suspended in the air and changes from air to water, is a Cloud. Mist
is the superfluity of a cloud, condensed into water.

Cap. 10.
Vapor attracted by a small heat not much above the earth, and descending more
condensed by the nocturnall cold, becomes either dew or frost: Frost when it
congealeth before it resolves into water; Dew, when it turns into water, so as
the warmth cannot dry it up, nor the cold freez it.

Cap. 11.
Snow is a congealed cloud; rain, dew, frost, and snow differ almost only in
bigness and smalnesse.

Cap. 12.
Hail, though it be of the same nature as ice, yet is seldom produced in
winter, as being caused by Antiperistasis.

Cap. 13.
As the air above the earth condensed, becomes vapor, and vapor by cold
becomes water, so does it also in the caverns and receptacles of the earth,
by a continual mutation; first it turns into little drops, then those little
into greater. Hence comes all springs, and heads of rivers, abundantly flowing
out at one part of the earth. Hence great Rivers and Fountains commonly flow
from great hills, which have greatest caverns.

Cap. 14.
The parts of the earth are in continual mutation, sometimes humid, sometimes
dry, sometimes fertile, sometimes desert, by new eruptions or defections of
rivers, or access or recesse of the sea, according to certain periods of time.
Thus have the parts of the earth their youth and age, as well as plants and
living creatures, by the heat and conversion of the Sun. Time and the World are
eternal; but Nilus and Tanais were not always, for those places whence they
first issued, were once dry grounds.

Lib. 2. cap. 2.
The proper place of water is the concave superficies of the air: This place
the Sea, compassing the earth, possesses; for the swift and more rare water is
drawn upwards by the heat of the Sun; the salt, more thick and terrene setleth
downwards. For this reason all waters tend to the sea, as to their proper
place* yet, hereby the Sea is not enlarged, for the sun draws out of it, by
reason of its expansion, as great a quantity of water, as it receives from
rivers. Cap. 3.
The sea is, as the world, eternal, the saltness thereof proceeds from
admixtion of some terrene, adust, exhalation. From the top of the Sea is drawn
up a fresh vapor; from the bottom, heated by the Sun, an exhalation, which
passes through the Sea, and comes up with the vapor; but falling back into
the Sea, brings that saltness with it, as water passed often through ashes.

Cap. 4.
Winds are produced by the Sun and Stars, of a hot, dry exhalation, which
ascending, is driven down again by the coldness of the middle region of the
air, and by reason of the lightness of its nature, cannot go directly to the
bottom, but is carried by the air up and down. We call it a hot and dry
exhalation, as being more dry then humid. Wind is weakest in the beginning,
but gains strength, by taking along with it other light exhalations, which it
meets with by the way.

Cap. 5.
Winds are laid by heat and cold, excessive heat consumes the exhalations, as
soon as it comes out of the earth; excessive cold binds up the pores of the
earth, so as it cannot pass.

Cap. 8.
Earthquake is a trembling of the earth, caused by an exhalation hot and dry,
enclosed in the bowels of the earth, which striving to get forth, as its
nature requires, and not able, by reason of the solidity of the earth, to
pass, makes the earth shake, forcing a way through it, and bearing down
whatsoever opposes it. The more hot this included spirit is, the more vehement.

Of the same nature is lightning, thunder, and the like. Thunder is when an
exhalation enclosed in a thick cold cloud, rolleth it up and down, and at last
breaks through it with more or less noise, according to the thickness of
the cloud. By this eruption it acquireth a rare kind of heat and light, which
is lightning, subsequent to the noise of the eruption; yet, seen before the
other is heard, by reason of the quickness of the sight beyond the hearing.

Cap. 9.
As of dry exhalations, the rare and dispersed produce thunder and lightning;
so of the great and condensed is made (...), and thunderbolts.

Lib. 3. cap. 1.
Of lucid Meteors appearing in the clouds, are Haloes, Rainbowes, Parelies, and
Streaks: All these are caused by refraction, but differ according to the
objects from which they are reflected. A Halo appears about some star, when
there happens a cloud to be, the middle part whereof, by reason of its
rarity, being dissipated, the rest of the parts about, by reflection, represent
the color of the star. Rainbow is a refraction of the Suns beam upon a humid
cloud, ready to dissolve into rain. In like manner are caused Parelies and
Streaks.

Cap. 7.
There are likewise imperfect mixed bodies, under, or within the earth, and
these also of two kinds; some caused by exhalation, called Mineralls; others by
vapor, called Metalls, fusile or ductile.

CHAP. XII.
Of perfect mixed bodies.
Meteor. lib. 4. cap. 1.
THe common affections of perfect mixed bodies, are those which proceed from the
primary qualities of the Elements, whereof two are active, heat and cold, two
passive, humidity, and siccity. The natural effect of these is Generation,
when heat and cold overcome the matter; otherwise it is inquination and
inconcoction. The opposite to simple generation is Putre^action; every thing
unless violently dissolved putrifieth. Hence those things that putrify,
become first humid, then dry; for the external heat expels the internal,
and at last consumes it. All things therefore putrify except fire, for
putrefaction is the corruption of the natural heat in every humid body, by the
external. For this reason, things are less subject to putrify in cold or in
motion, and the hotter or greater they are, as a part of the sea may putrify,
the whole cannot.

Out of putrid things are bred living creatures; for the natural, heat whilst
it is separating, endeavors as much as possible, that what is taken asunder
and segregated by corruption, may gather together in some small parts, which
afterward, by help of the Sun, receive life. Thus are worms, beetles, gnats,
and other insects bred.

Cap. 2.
Concoction is the effect of heat, inconcoction of cold. Concoction is a
perfection caused by natural heat of the opposite passive qualities, which are
mixed with the matter, as being passive. The end of concoction in some things
is mutation of the essence, as when food is converted into flesh or blood; in
others only a mutation according to quantity or quality, as in fruits that
ripen. Inconcoction is an imperfection in the opposite passive qualities,
proceeding from defect of heat.

Concoction is threefold, (...). Inconcoction is also threefold, (...).

Cap. 3.
(...) is the concoction of that Element which is in fruits; it is perfect,
when the seeds that are within the fruit are capable of producing their like,
hereto is opposite (...), the inconcoction of fruits not able through want of
heat to overcome the humidity.

(...) is a concoction of an humid interminate by external humidity and heat*
Hereto is opposite (...), the inconcoction of a humid interminate, caused by
defect of external humidity and heat.

(...) is a concoction by dry and external heat, yet not excessive, for then
it were adustion: to this is opposed (...), an incoction caused through defect
of heat and fire, or excess of humidity in the subject.

Cap. 4.
As concerning the two passive qualities; things are humid and dry, either
actually, or potentially. Those things which are mixed of humid and dry, are
terminate, for these qualities mutually terminate one another, whence bodies
consist not without earth and water, this humid, that dry. And for this reason
Animals can only live in Earth and Water, which are their matter.

The first affections of terminate bodies are hardness and softness; hard is
that which yields not to the touch, soft the contrary. Both these are such,
either absolutely, or relatively. They are made such by concretion, which is a
kind of exiccation.

Cap. 6.
Exiccation is of things that are water, or of the Nature of water, or have
water in them, either naturally insite, or adventitious. It is done principally
by heat, accidentally by cold. Humectation (its contrary) is the concretion of
a vapor into water, or liquefaction of a solid body, as Metal. Concretion is,
when the humidity being removed, the dry is reduced together and condensed,
either by cold, as in generation of stones, or by heat, as in segregation of
salt from water. To concretion is opposite, resolution, which is effected by
its contraries. Those things which are condensed by heat only, are resolved by
cold only, and so on the contrary.

Cap. 8.
Besides these principal affections, there are others secondary, chiefly
competent to homogeneous bodies, some passive, some active.

Of passive qualities in mixed bodies, there are 18. differences, Concretile,
Eliquabile, Mollisicable, Humectable, Flexible, Frangible, Impressible,
Formable, Compressible, Tractile, Ductile, Fissile, Sectile, Unctious, Friable,
Condensable, Combustible, exhalable, and their contraries. From these are thus
denominated, homiomerious mixed bodies, as Metalls, Gold, Brass, Silver, Stone
and the like; and whatsoever is made out of these; as likewise similar parts in
Animals and in Plants, as flesh and bone, whereof some are more cold, which
consist most of water, others more hot, which most of earth and air.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Plants and Animals.
AT the end of his meteors he proposes to speak of Similar parts; as Blood,
and the like; what they are, and to what end, their matter and reason, but
especially whence they have their motion; next to proceed to dissimilar parts,
and lastly to speak of those which consist thereof, as men, Plants, and the
like. Hence Patricius conjectures that his Books of the parts of living
Creatures did immediately succeed those of the Meteors, wherein he treats (as
he proposes) of Similar parts unto the tenth Chapter, of the second Book, and
from thence of the dissimilar. But to reduce his Books of living Creatures to
this method is the less certain, for as much as many of these (besides those
which treated particularly of Anatomy) have been lost, of which perhaps were
some which might better have cleared the series, for in the Books themselves
concerning Animals, there is nothing to ground it upon.

For the same reason, it is uncertain where his Books of Plants ought to have
been placed, which are lost. Perhaps they might precede those of Animals; for
he asserts that Plants have souls, (contrary to the Stoics) endued with
vegetative power; that they live even though cut asunder, as insects, whereby
two or more are made of one; that the substance they receive by aliment and the
ambient air is sufficient for the preservation of their natural heat.

As concerning Animals, we have, Of their Going, one Book. Of their History,
ten Books. Of their parts, four Books; Of their Generation, five Books. So
exquisitely has he treated upon this subject, as cannot well be expressed by
an abridgement, and therefore we shall omit it; the rather because little or
nothing was done herein by the Academicks or Stoics, a collation with whom is
the principal design of this summary.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Soul.
De anima lib. 1. cap. 1.
THe knowledge of the Soul conduces much to all Truth, and especially to
Physic, for the Soul is as it were the principle of animate things. Animate
things differ from inanimate chiefly by motion and sense.

Cap. 2.
Whence the ancient Philosophers defined the Soul by these; Democritus the
Pythagoreans, Anaxagoras by motion; Empedocles and Plato by knowledge; others
by both; others by incorporeity, or a rare body; Thales something that moves;
Diogenes, air; Heraclitus, exhalation, an immortal substance; Hippo* water;
Critias, blood.

Cap. 3.
The soul does not move it self, as Democritus held, for whatsoever is moved,
is moved by another. Again, if the soul were moved perse, it would be in place,
and it were capable of being moved violently, and it would be of the same
nature with the body, and might return into the body after the separation.
Neither is the soul moved by it self, but from its objects; for if it were
moved essentially, it might recede from its essence. The soul therefore is not
moved perse, but by accident only, according to the motion of the body.

Cap. 4.
The soul is not Harmony, (a proportionate mixture of contraries) for then
there must be more souls in the same body, according to the different
constitution of its parts. But though we commonly say, the soul grieveth,
hops, fears, etc. we are not to understand that the soul is moved, but only
that these are from the soul in the body, that is moved; some by local motion
of the Organs, others by alteration of them. To say, the soul is angry is no
more proper then to say she builds; for it is the man that is angry by the
soul, otherwise the soul were liable to age, decay, and infirmity, as well as
the organs of the body.

Cap. 5.
Neither is the soul a rare body, consisting of elements, for then it would
understand nothing more then the elements themselves; neither is there a soul
diffused through all things, as Thales held, for we see there are many things
inanimate.

Some from the different functions of the soul argue, that there are more souls
then one in man, or that the soul is divisible, the supreme intellectual part
placed in the head, the irascible in the heart, concupiscible in the liver: But
this is false, for the Intellect is not confined to any part of the body, as
not being corporeal, nor organicall, but immateriall and immortal.

Lib. 2. Cap. ^
The soul is the first intelechie of a natural organicall body, having life
potentially. First, Entelechie.] Entelechie is twofold, the first is the
principle of operation, as Science; the second, the Act it self. Of a
Natural,] Laert.
not of an artificial body, as a Tower or Ship. Organicall body,] that is,
endued with instruments for operation, as the eye for seeing, the ear for
hearing; even plants have simple Organs. Having life potentially,] as it were
in it self, for potentially is less then actually; actually, as in him that
wakes; potentially, as in him that is asleep.

The soul is otherwise defined, that by which we first live, feel, and
understand; whence appears, there are three faculties of the soul, nutritive,
sensitive, intellective; the inferior comprehended by the superior
potentially, as a triangle by a quadrangle.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Nutritive faculty.
Cap. 4.
THe first and most common faculty of the Soul is the Nutritive; by which life
is in all things, the acts and operation thereof are to be generated, and to
take nourishment.

Nutriment is received either toward Nutrition or augmentation. Nutrition is
the operation of the Nutritive faculty conducing to the substance it self of
the animate being. Augmentation is the operation of the Nutritive faculty,
whereby the animate body increases to perfect Magnitude. In nutrition are
considered, the Soul nourishing, the body nourished, and the food by which the
nourishment is made; hereto is required a Natural heat, which is in all living
creatures. The aliment is both contrary, or unlike, and like, to the body
nourished: as it is undigested, we say nourishment is by the contrary; as
altered by digestion, like is nourished by its like.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Sensitive Faculty.
Cap. 5.
THE Sensitive faculty of the Soul is that by which sense is primarily in
Animals. Sense is a mutation in the Organ caused by some sensible Object. It is
not sensible of it self, nor of its Organ, not of any interior thing. To
reduce it to act, is requisite some external sensible object, for sense cannot
move it self being a passive power, as that which is combustible cannot burn it
self.

Cap. 6.
Of sensible Objects there are three kinds; proper, which is perceived by one
sense, without error, as color in respect of sight. Common; which is not
proper to any one, but perceived by all. Accidental; which, as such, does not
affect the sense.

Sense is either External or Internal, the external are five, Seeing,
Hearing, Smelling, Touching, Tasting.

Cap. 7.
The object of Seeing is Color, and some thing without a name that glisters in
the dark, as the scales of fish, glowworms and the like. Color is the motive
of that which is actually perspicuous; nothing therefore is visible, without
light. Perspicuous is that which is visible, not by it self, but by some other
color or light, as Air, Water, Glass. Light is the act of a perspicuous
thing, as it is perspicuous. It is not fire, not a body, for then two bodies
would be in the same place.

To sight and all other senses is requisite a medium and convenient distance.
The object first affects the medium, then the organ.

Cap. 8.
The object of hearing is sound. Sound is made by collision of two bodies,
hard, smooth, and hollow, in a medium, as air or water, swiftly and vehemently
before the medium be dissipated.

Echo is a reflex sound, when the air, gathered together and forced into a
vessel, or some place which hinders its diffusion and progress, reverts as
a base against a wall. Sound is always reflected, though not always
perceptibly, as light also, otherwise all places would be dark, which were not
directly opposite to the Sun, or some lucid body.

Sound is made by that which moves the air; and continually stirs it, till
it arive at the organ, wherein there is an insite, connaturall, animate,
immovable air, which being moved by the external air, yields the sense of
hearing. Hence it comes that we can hear under water, for the water cannot
get into this air, because of the winding narrow passages of the ear: If it do
get in, or the membrance which contains this air be otherwise broken, it
causes deafness.

Voice is the impulsion of air attracted by respiration, and forced against the
vocal artery by the soul, which is in the lungs, with some intent of
signification. Voice therefore is not proper to all animals, but to such only
as have blood and breath. Fishes therefore have not voice.

Cap. 9.
The object of smelling is Odor. This sense is not so perfect in men as in
other creatures, whence men perceive not odors, unless with delight or
dislike, when they are so strong, as to excite one of these. This defect
proceeds from the organ of smelling, which in us is more obtuse. The medium
of smelling is air and water, for fishes smell. Hence all living creatures
smell not after the same manner; they which breath smell by drawing in the air,
the rest not so, because of the different accommodation of the Organ. Those
therefore which smell by drawing in the air, cannot smell under water. Odor
consists chiefly in dry, as sapor in humid. The organ of smelling is dry
potentially, as the object is actually.

Cap. 10.
The object of Taste is sapor. Whatsoever is gustable is tactible, and humid,
either actually, or at least potentially. Dry things are subject to taste as
they are potentially humid, and melt as salt. The taste perceives that which is
gustable, and that which is ingustable, as the sight darkness, the hearing
silence; for every sense perceives the presence and absence of its object.
That which is potable is perceived by the touch, as humid by the taste, as
having sapor. The tongue tastes not that which is dry, because the organ of taste
must be such potentially, as the object is actually; but, without humidity
nothing is gustable. The kinds of sapors are sweet and bitter; to sweet are
referred unctious, to bitter salt. The mean are sharp, piccant, acid, acute;
gustable is that which moves the taste, and reduces it to act.

Cap. 11.
The objects of Touch are the primary qualities, organ is that part which is
potentially that which the object is in act; for that which is like cannot
suffer from its like. We feel not things of equal heat, cold, hardness, or
softness. The flesh is the medium; the first sensory is something more
internal. Herein touch and taste differ from the other senses, whose objects
are at greater distance. Touch perceives things tactile and not tactile.

Cap. 12.
All these senses receive sensible species without matter, as wax the
impression of a seal without the gold. The organ or sensory is that in which
the sensitive faculty primarily exists; a vehement object destroys the organ.

Lib. 3. Cap. 1.
That there are no more external senses then these five, is manifest, in that
there are no more in perfect animals; neither is there any need of a sixth sense
to perceive common objects, which every sense discernes by accident, as motion
figure.

The act of the object, and the act of the sense it self, as Sonation and
Audition, are really the same, differ only intentionally. This act is generally
in the sensitive, not in the object.

De Sensu. cap. 6.
Sensible qualities are finite, as being bounded by extremes and their
contraries, but divisible by accident into infinite, according to the division
of their continuous subject.

Ibid.
In sensibles, some are potentially sensible, as a part joined to the whole;
others actually, as the whole it self, or a part separated from the whole. But
of separate parts some are so little, that sense cannot actually perceive them,
by reason of their want of due magnitude.

Ibid.
Sounds and odors are successively generated in the medium, and by degrees
deduced to the organ; but light is produced in an instant in the medium, not
carried through it by local motion.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Common sense.
Lib. 3. cap. 2.
EVery external sense perceives the differences of its own object, as sight
judges of black and white; but the differences of diverse objects cannot be
perceived by the same sense; there is therefore a common sense, which judges
the actions of external sense, and the differences of all sensible objects.
The judgment being of a sensible object, must be done by sense, and by one
sense only; for, if there were more, one would object one object apart, the
other another, and consequently could not judge between them. For, that which
judges must have knowledge of all that whereof it judges, which no exterior
sense can afford, as being consined to its proper object.

Common sense judges contrary or different sensibles in the same instant, for
it discerns togther sweet and black, bitter and sweet. Hence it is like the
center of a circle, which in diverse respects is called one and many. It is
one; as all the external senses are united in it; many, as it is the fountain
and judge of them.

De anima, lib. 3. cap. 3.
Sense differs from Intellect; for sense is in all living creatures, intellect
in few. Sense erreth not about its proper object, but is always true;
intellect often erreth by false opinions and habits.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Phantasy and Cogitation.
Cap. ^.
FRom Sense is derived Phantasy and Cogitation. Phantasy differs from sense and
intellect, though it exist not without a previous knowledge of sense, as
neither does cogitation, which is in action of the Intellect, comprehending
science, opinion, and prudence.

The act of Phantasy differs from Cogitation, for we phansy things false and at
our own pleasure; but, we think only what is true, and like unto truth, and
that not as we please our selves, but as the thing seems. Moreover, when we
think that things are ill or good, we are moved with fear, joy, hope; but when
we phansy only without application of judgment, we are not moved no more then
we are frighted at a picture.

Phantasy is not properly Sense, phantasy acts in him that sleeps, sense
does not. Sense was with us from our birth, phantasy not. Sense is in all
animals, phantasy is not. Sense is true, phantasy often false. Sense is only of
things present, phantasy of the absent likewise.

Phantasy is not Science or Intellect, for that is always of things true and
real, phantasy often is of things false. Phantasy is not opinion, for opinion
is followed by faith, phantasy is not.

Phantasy is a motion in animals from sense in act, by which motion they are
variously affected, and conceive things sometimes true, and sometimes false.
The error of phantasy arises from the error of the senses: Phantasy
therefore is of near affinity with sense; for though it be not sense, yet it
exists not without sense, or in things that have no sense. It is derived (...)
from light, for sight the most excellent of senses cannot act without light.

Many things are done by Animals according to fantasy, either because they
have not Intellect as Beasts, or that intellect is obscured in them.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Memory and Reminiscence.
Lib. de Memor. and Rem. cap. 1.
FRom Phantasy proceeds Memory, which is of things past, as sense is of the
present, opinion of the future. Sense and Intellection are necessarily previous
to memory. Hence those Animals only which have sense of time, remember, as
horses and dogs; yet memory is not without phantasm, even not that memory which
is of Intelligible things, for he that remembers, is sensible that he first
saw, heard, or learned what he remembers. Memory therefore is reducible per se
to fantasy, as being of Phantasmes, to intellect only by accident. Hence in
the same part of the Soul, wherein Fantasy exists, resideth likewise memory;
for if it were placed only in the intellectual faculty, it would not be
competent to Beasts, which we see it is.

Memory is made by impression of some image by the sense upon the Soul. Hence
they who retain not the image and figure of sense, either by continual motion,
or excessive humidity, as children, or drought, as old men, remember not. To
memory therefore is required a moderate temperature of the brain; yet more
inclined to dry.

Cap. 2.
Reminiscence is not a resumption or assumption of memory, but differs
specifically from both these, for Beasts have not Reminiscence though they have
memory, Reminiscence being made by discourse and diligent disquisition,
collecting one thing from another by a continued series and order, until at
last we call that to mind which we had forgotten.

CHAP. XX.
Of Sleep and Waking.
Lib. de Some. and Vigil. cap. 1.
TO Sense belongs Sleep and Waking; for those animate things which want
sense, neither sleep nor wake, as Plants. Sleep is an immobility, and band as
it were of sense; waking is a solution and remission of sense.

Cap. 2.
The chief seat of sleep is the common sense, which being bound up by sleep,
all the exterior senses, whereof this is the common Center, are bound up
likewise and restrained, for the rest and health of the Animal; which is the
end of waking also.

Cap. 3.
Every impotence of sense is not sleep, but only that which is caused by
evaporation of the Aliment. Hence we are most subject to sleep after meat; for
then much humid vapor ascends, which first makes the head heavy by
consistence there, then descends and repells the heat, whereby is induced
sleep. That sleep is made in this manner, is evident from all soporiferous
things, as poppy, which causes heaviness in the head by sending up vapors.
Labor produces sleep, by dispersing the humors, whence produces vapor.
Drunken men and Children are subject to sleep much, melancholy persons little,
for they are so cold within, that the vapor exhaleth not, especially they
being of a dry constitution. Sleep therefore is a recession of the heat inward
with a natural kind of circumobsistence.

CHAP. XXI.
Of Dreams.
Lib de insom.
DReaming is an affection of the sensory part, in as much as it is fantastic.
A Dream is an apparition or phantasme seen in sleep.

After the functions of the external senses, there remain their motions and
similitudes induced by their objects into their Organs. These occurring in
sleep cause dreams, but not at all times, nor at every age, for their species
show not themselves but upon cessation of the humors. Hence Dreams are not
immediately after sleep, nor in infants soon after their birth, for then there
is too great commotion by reason of the alimentary heat. As therefore in
troubled water no image appears, or if any, much distorted, but when it is
calm, the image is rendered clearly; so when there is a tumult and agitation of
the humors, there are no images presented, or those dreadful, such as are the
Dreams of melancholy and sick persons; but when the blood passes smoothly,
and the humors are settled, we have pure and pleasing Dreams; A Dream therefore
is a phantasm caused by motion of sensibles already perceived by sense,
occurring to Animals in sleep.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Intellective Faculty.
De Anim. lib. 3. cap. 4.
THe third faculty of the Soul is the Intellective, proper to man. Intellect is
that part of the Soul whereby it knows and understands. It is twofold,
Patient and Agent. Patient Intellect is that by which Intellect becomes all
things, for Intel^ection is like sense; Sense is by passion from a sensible
object, intellect from an intellectual. The properties of patient Intellect
are these; it is void of corruptive passion; it is apt for reception of
species; it is that species potentially; it is not mixed with the body; it has
no corporeal Organs; it is the place of species.

Cap. 5.
That there is also an agent Intellect is manifest; for in whatsoever kind,
there is something that is potentially all of that kind, there is something
likewise which is the efficient cause of all in that kind; this is the agent
Intellect, a cognoscitive power which enlightneth phantasms and the patient
Intellect. The properties thereof are, that it is separable from the body,
immortal and eternal; that it is not mixed with the body; that it is void of
passion; that it is ever in act; but the patient Intellect is mortal, which is
the cause of Forgetfulness.

Cap. 6.
The action of the Intellect is twofold, one, Intellection of indivisibles, in
which is neither truth nor falsehood, as all simple apprehensions; the other
complex, when we compound and unite notions by affirmation or negation. This is
always either true or false, the other neither. The simple is precedent to the
complex.

Cap. 8.
Intellect in act is either Practick or Theoretick. As a sensible object
reduces the sensible faculty from power to act, so does an intellectual
object the intellectual faculty; and as the operation of sense is threefold,
simple apprehension, judgment if it be good or ill, and lastly, appetition or
aversion according to that perception: So likewise is the operation of the
practick intellect threefold: First, it is moved by phanta^mes, as sense is by
external sensibles. Secondly, it judges the object to be good or ill, by
affirmation or negation. Thirdly, it moves the will to pursue or shun it,
whence it is called practick. This practick intellect is moved as well when the
sensible object is absent, as when it is present, only excited by the phantasy.
The object of the Theoretick Intellect, is, true or false; of the practick,
good or ill.

Ibid.
The rational soul in some manner is every thing; for that which actually
knows, is in some manner the same with the thing known.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Motive faculty.
Cap. 9.
BEsides the nutritive, sensitive, and intellective faculties, there is also a
motive faculty in animate creatures. That it is not the same with the nutritive
is manifest, in as much as it proceeds from imagination and apprehension, which
plants have not, neither have they organs fit for motion, which nature would
have given them if they had this power. That it is not the same with the
sensitive, appears, in that some animals which have sense have not the power,
as Zoophytes, which have not the organs fit for this motion. Neither is it the
same with the Theoretick Intellect, for that judges not as to action; but
progressive motion is the action of an animal flying ill, or pursuing good.

Cap. 10.
The principles of local motion in animals, are the practick Intellect (under
which is comprehended phantasy) and appetite. These two direct and impell the
motive faculty to action; intellect and phantasy by directing what is to be
shunned, what to be embraced, appetite by shunning or embracing it. Appetite is
the chief principle thereof, for that may move without intellect, as in beasts,
and many times in men, who desert their reason to follow their pleasure: But
intellect never moves without appetite, that is, will; for appetite is the
principle of all motion, honest and dishonest, intellect only of honest motion.

In man, appetite is twofold; Will, which follows the judgment of reason;
and sensual appetite, irascible or concupiscible, which follows sense and
phantasy.

In the motion of animals, three things are considered: First, that which
moves, and that is twofold; the appetible object, which moves the appetite
as a final cause, not as an efficient; and the appetite it self, which being
moved by the appetible object, moves the animal. Secondly, by what it moves,
which is the heart of the animal, by which instrument the appetible object
moves it. Thirdly, that which is moved, the animal it self, perfect.

Cap. 11.
Insects are moved locally, as perfect animals are, and consequently by the
same principles, appetite and phantasy; but this phantasy is imperfect,
diffused through the whole body, as appears by their uncertain motion, only
toward present occurrent objects. That they have appetite is manifest, in as
much as they are sensible of pain and pleasure.

Beasts have sensitive fantasy only; rational creatures, deliberative, which
compares many things conducing to some foreknown end, and chooses the most
expedient. Yet sometimes the sensitive appetite in man overswayeth the
rational, but by the order of nature, the will, which is the rational, ought,
as being the superior to it, to oversway the sensitive. Thus there are three
motions, one of the will commanding, another of the sensitive appetite
resisting, and a third of the body obeying. But when the sensitive overruleth,
there are only two motions, for the will resists not, but is deceived.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Life and Death.
De vit. and Mort. cap. 23.
GEneration and dissolution are common to all living Creatures, though all are
not produced and dissolved in the same manner.

Cap. 24.
The generation of a living Creature is the first conjunction of the nutritive
Soul with the natural heat.

Life is the permanence of that Soul with the said heat.

Youth is the increase of the first refrigerative part, age the decrease
thereof, (...), the constant and perfect life which is betwixt both.

As long as an animate Creature lives, it has natural heat within it self,
and as soon as that fails, dies. The principle of this heat is in the heart.
If it be extinguished in any other part, the Animal may live, but if in the
heart, it cannot.

This heat is extinguished two ways; first by consumption, when it fails of
it self; secondly, by extinction, from some contrary, as in violent death; the
cause is the same in both, defect of aliment, which in the living Creature is
its vital moisture, as fire wanting refrigeration, grows more violent, and
soon consumes the humidity, which being gone, it self must of necessity go
out.

Refrigeration therefore is necessary to the conservation of the natural heat.
Plants are refrigerated by the ambient air, and by aliment: their natural heat
is extinguished by excessive cold, and dried up by excessive heat. Animals
which live in the air, or in the water, are refrigerated by the air or water,
some by breathing, others without.

Cap. 23, 24.
Death, according to the extinction of natural heat, is twofold, violent or
natural; violent, when the cause is extrinsecall; natural, when the principle
thereof is in the animate Creature. For that part whereon life depends (the
Lungs) is so ordered by nature that its cannot perform its office for ever.
Death therefore comes from defect of heat, when through want of refrigeration
the radical humidity is consumed and dried up. Refrigeration fails
naturally, when by progress of time the lungs in Creat^res that have breath,
the gils in fishes grow so hard, that they are unapt for motion.

Cap. 23.
Old men die easily, as having but little natural heat, and without pain,
because his dissolution comes not from any violent affection.

Lib. de l^n. and brerit. cap. 4
The lives of living Creatures, as well of the same, as of diverse species
differ in length; the longest life, most commonly, is that of some Plants, as
the Palm and Cypress; that of Creatures which have blood rather then the
bloodlesse; that of terrestrial creatures rather then the aquatile; that of
those which have great bodies, as of Elephants, rather then those of little.

Cap. ^.
The causes of long life are first the quantity and quality of the vital
moisture, if it be much and fat, not easily dried up nor congealed. Secondly,
natural hear, which suffers not that humor to be congealed. Thirdly, a due
proportion betwixt this heat and that moisture. Fourthly, fewness of
excrements, for excrements are contrary to Nature, and sometimes corrupt nature
it self, sometimes a part.

Salacious creatures, or laborious grow soon old by reason of exiccation. For
the same reason men are shorter lived then women, but more active.

In hot Countries, animate creatures are larger, and live longer then in cold.
Those animals which have little or no blood, either are not at all produced in
the Northern parts, or soon dye.

Both Plants and Animals, ^f they take not aliment, die, for the natural heat,
when the aliment fails, consumes the matter it self, wherein it is, the
vital moisture.

Aquatile creatures are shorter lived then the terrestrial, and the bloodlesse
then those that have blood, because their humidity is more waterish, and
consequently more apt to be congealed and corrupted.

Cap. 6.
Plants live long, as having less of waterish moisture, which therefore is not
so apt to be congealed. The largeness of the upper parts, as well in Plants as
Animals, is a sign of long life, because it argues much natural heat. The
upper part of a Plant is the root, not the boughs.

THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. I.
ETHICK.
WE come next to the Moral part of Philosophy, including Ethick, OEconomick
and Politic. Of the first, we have ten Books of Aristotle's, written to (his
Son) Nicomachus, two Books called his Great Ethick; one of Virtues Of
OEconemick, two Books; of* Politic eight. We shall not have recourse to these
for an account of his Doctrine in this kind, being furnished by Stobaeus with a
summary of what he and the rest of the Peripateticks asserted in Morality.

Ethick ( Eclog. Ethic.
says he) is so called, (...), from Custom; for those things, the principles
and seeds whereof we receive from Nature, are to be perfected by Custom and
right institution. Hence Ethick pertains only to living Creatures, and
particularly to man, for the rest acquire Custom, not by Reason, but Necessity,
man by Reason.

Of the Soul, one part is Rational, the other Irrational; the rational part
is Iudicative, the irrational Appetitive; of the rational, that which is
Theoretick, conversant in divine things, is called Science; that which is
Practick, conversant in humane Actions, is called Counsel. Of the latter, one
part is concupiscible, another irascible.

In like manner Virtue is twofold, rational and irrational, consisting in
Theory and practice. Ethick Virtue consists not in Science, but in election
of Goods.

Virtue is perfected by three things; Nature, Custom and Reason. For man
differing from other Creatures both in body and mind, as being a species placed
between divine essences and irrational Creatures, has some affinity to both;
in what is rational, and agrees with the Soul, he is allied to the Divinity;
in what is irrational, proper to the body, he agrees with the irrational.
Both these desire perfection by Reason; and first, he desires to be, for this
is naturally insite in him. Hence he affects things that are according to his
Nature, and is averse from things contrary to his nature. He endeavors to
preserve health, pleasure, life, these being according to nature, expetible in
themselves and good. On the contrary, he shunneth sickness, pain, and death,
as being repugnant to nature, and therefore ill, and to be avoided. We love our
own bodies, we love our own souls, their parts, their faculties, their acts:
the principle of appetite, office, and virtue is a providentiall care of these.
If error did not happen concerning things expetible and avoidable, but that we
lived continually participant of good, and vold of ill, we should not enquire
in these for a true election. But being in things expetible and avoidable,
through ignorance often deceived, sometimes rejecting the good, sometimes
admitting the ill for good, we necessarily have recourse to constancy of
Judgment, which having obtained convenient to nature, we call it, from the
excellency of its function, Virtue, admiring and honoring it above all things.
For actions, and those which are called Offices, proceed from election of
things according to nature, and rejection of things* repugnant to nature.
Herein consist right actions and sins; even on these depends almost the
whole reason of Election; as we shall briefly demonstrate.

That Children are expetible to parents, not only for use of benefit, but also
in themselves, is most evident. There is no man so cruel and savage, who does
not rather desire his children after his death should live happily and well,
then otherwise: By this affection dying persons make Wills, providing even for
the unborn, choosing Tutors and Guardians to assist them. And as Children are
loved for themselves, so likewise we love Parents, Brethren, Wife, Kindred,
Acquaintance, Countrymen, for themselves, as having some interest in them by
nature. For, man is a sociable communicative creature; and though of
Friendships, some are more remote then others, it is nothing to the purpo^e,
for all friendship is for its own sake, and not for use only. And if friendship
with Countrymen be expetible in it self, it will likewise be expetible in it
self with all men; for all those who benefit others, are so affected toward
them, that they do most actions for the office sake. Who will not free any man
from a wild beast, if he be in his power? Who will not direct a man that is
out of his way? Who will not relieve a man that is ready to starve, or direct a
man in a desert to a spring? Who desires not to be well spoken of after death?
Who abhorrs not these speeches as unnatural?

When I am dead, let earth be mixed with fire,
I care not, so I now have my desire.
It is manifest therefore, that we have a natural goodwill and friendship
toward all mankind, as being a thing expetible in it self, and consonant to
reason.

The race of Gods and Men is one,
From Nature both alike begun.
Love of all mankind being thus common to us, much more evidently it is
expetible in it self toward those, whom conversation has made our friends. A
Friend, Friendship, and Goodwill are expetible in themselves.

In like manner praise is expetible in it self; for we contract society with
those who praise us: And if praise, glory likewise, which is nothing but the
praise of many persons.

Now seeing that external Goods are expetible in themselves, much more are the
goods of the soul and body expetible in themselves. For, if man be expetible in
himself, the parts of man must likewise be expetible in himselves. The parts
of man in general are Soul and Body; the body therefore is expetible in it
self. Why should the body of another person be dear to us, and not our own?
Or, why should our body be dear to us, and not the parts and functions thereof?
Health therefore, strength, beauty, swiftness, sound sense, and the rest, are
expetible in themselves; for none of ordinary capacity would choose to be
deformed or maimed, though no inconvenience would happen thereupon; so that
deformity, even without any inconvenience, seems justly avoidable. And if
deformity be avoidable in it self, beauty is expetible, not for use only, but
in it self. For, that beauty pleases, is manifest, in as much as all have a
natural inclination (besides that of conversation) to such as are beautiful,
and endeavor to confer benefits on them, so as it seems to procure
benevolence. In this respect therefore, beauty is judged expetible in it self,
deformity avoidable in it self. It is the same in health and sickness,
strength and weakness, activity and heaviness, sense and privation of sense.

And if Corporeal goods are expetible in themselves, and their contrary evils
avoidable, the parts and virtues of the soul must necessarily be expetible
also. For, virtue, beginning, as we said, from the body, and external goods,
and reflecting upon it self, and considering how much more near relation it
has to the soul, contracteth a nearer affinity with it. So that the virtues of
the soul are much to be preferred before those of the body, which is easily
collected from what has been said. For, if corporeal health be expetible in
it self, much more is Temperance, which freeth us from the fury of the
passions. And if corporeal strength ought to be numbered amongst goods, much
more ought magnanimity, by which the soul is strengthened. And if* corporeal
Beauty be expetible in it self, much more is that of the soul, Justice.

In like manner is it with the virtues. For, there are three kinds of Goods,
which though different, have some kind of analogy. That which in the body is
called Health, in the soul is called Temperance, and in externals, Riches. What
in the body is Strength, in the soul is Magnanimity, in externals, Power. What
in the body is Vigor of Sense, in the soul is Prudence, in externals,
Felicity. What in the body is Beauty, in the soul is Justice, in externals,
Friendship.

There are three kinds of Goods expetible in themselves, those concerning the
soul, those concerning the body, and the external* but, especially those of
the soul, for the soul is more excellent then the body.

Yet though corporeal and external virtues be inferior to those of the soul,
they are not to be neglected, partly, as being expetible in themselves; partly,
as conducing to civil, sociable, and contemplative life, for life is defined
by civil, sociable, and contemplative actions; Virtue (according to this Sect)
not being a lover of it self, but communicative and civil. For when we say,
virtue is nearest allied to it self, the desire of the knowledge of truth
necessarily follows it, so as wise men may rightly part with their life, and
fools rightly preserve theirs; since that to those who are perfect, it is an
equal thing to depart this life or not.

The excellency of virtue is much increased by corporeal and external goods;
yet, the end cannot any way be completed by them. The function therefore of
virtue is Beatitude, by successful actions. Corporeal and external goods
are said to be efficient of beatitude, for as much as they confer something
thereto, not that they complete it, for Beatitude is life. Life consists of
actions, but those can neither be reckoned amongst actions nor functions.

Hereupon comes in Beneficence, grace, humanity, love of Children and Brethren,
of our Country, Parents, Benevolence, of Kinsfolk, Friendship, Equality, and
the whole company of Virtues; which who neglect, manifestly sin, as to
expetible goods, and avoidable evils; and also in the acquisition and use of
Goods, they sin in election, by judgment; in acquisition, by the manners in
use, by ignorance. In election they sin, as desiring that which is not good, or
preferring the lesser good, as most prefer Pleasant before P^ofitable,
profitable before Honest. In acquisition, as not considering whence, nor in
what manner, nor how far it ought to be acquired: In use, for as much as all
use being referred either to it self or some other, in the former they observe
no moderation, in the latter no decency.

In these things, though the wicked sin, yet do the just behave themselves
uprightly, following virtue as their leader.

In all virtues, there is Judgment, Election, and A^tion; there is no Virtue
without these; Prudence has the first place, the rest follow.

Virtue is called the best affection, which may be collected from Induction.
The Virtue of a shoemaker is that by which he knows how to make shoes, and of
an Archit^ct, that by which he knows how to build a handsome house. Virtue
therefore is the best of Affections.

Of Virtue there are two principles as it were, Reason and Passion, which
sometimes agree, sometimes disagree; for Pleasure or grief, when Reason gets the
Mastery, it is called Temperance; when passion, Intemperance; The Harmony and
Concord of both is Virtue, one rightly commanding, the other obeying.

Expetible is that which attracteth the appetite to it self, avoidadable that
which repelleth it, reason consenting thereto. Expe^ible and good were by the
Ancients esteemed the same, for they affirmed Good to be that which all desire.

Of Goods, they say some are expetible for themselves, some, for others; the
first are either honest or necessary. Honest are the Virtues and their
functions; necessary Life, and those things which pertain unto it, as the body
with its parts and uses, and those which are called external goods, as riches,
peace, glory, Liberty, friendship, for each of these conferreth to the use of
Virtue.

Beatitude consists of Good and successful actions; wherefore it is wholly
good, as playing upon pipes is wholly Artificial; for the use of the matter
does not take away the goodness from Beatitude; as the use of Instruments
takes not away from the Art of Medicine. Such things as are made use of
toward this perfection, are not to be reckoned as parts; for they; without
which the action cannot be, are not rightly parts thereof; for parts conduce to
the whole, the rest conduce to the end.

Good is divided into honest, profitable and pleasant; these are the scopes of
all actions. Beatitude consists of all these. It is the use of perfect Virtue,
in perfect life, with prosperous success; and the function of perfect life
according to Virtue; and the use of Virtue according to nature without any
impediment.

Though some assert, that the End, is to be happy, and Beatitude the scope, as,
Riches are Good, and to be rich that which is behovefull; yet is it better to
follow the Ancients, who assert the End to be that for whose sake all things
are, it self not being for the sake of any other; or the ultimate of things
expetible; or Life according to Virtue, in corporeal and external goods,
either in all or the most principal.

This being the greatest Good, uses the Ministry of the rest; for as those
things which conferr hereunto are to be esteemed Goods, so those things which
resist it are Indifferents, for every good action does not effect Beatitude.

They assert Beatitude to be the use of perfect Virtue, as holding some Virtues
to be perfect, others imperfect. The perfect are Justice and Integrity; the
imperfect are Ingenuity and Progression. The perfect agrees with the perfect,
so as the end thereof is the function of that Virtue, whereof no part is
wanting.

They added perfect life, to show that Beatitude is in men of full age, for a
young man is imperfect, and so is his life. Beatitude therefore is in perfect
time, the longest that is appointed for us by the Gods. As one Verse makes not
a Poem; nor one step a dance, nor one swallow a Summer; so neither does a short
time confer Beatitude, for Beatitude is perfect, and requires a perfect Man
and Time.

They added successful Function of Virtue, because the Goods of Nature are
necessarily requisite to Beatitude; for a good man may exercise Virtue in
misery, but cannot be happy. For as Virtue is the only efficient of honest
actions, so is Beatitude of honest, good, and excellent. Neither does it abide
amongst ill or unhappy things, but enjoys the Good, nor is deprived of the
contemplation of good, or the conveniences of life.

Beatitude being the most pleasant and fairest of things, increases like an
Art by the multitude of its Instruments. It is not the same in God and Man,
neither is it equal amongst good men, for it may sometimes be taken away by
oppression of miseries. Hence it is to be doubted whether a man may be termed
happy as long as he is alive, considering the uncertainty of Fortune, whence
Solon said, Consider the end of a long life, whether it be happy.

Those who sleep are not participant of Beatitude, but after some manner, as
the function of the Soul is capable of awaking.

Lastly, they added, Nature, because every waking of good men is not the use of
perfect Virtue, but only that which is according to Nature, that is free from
madness, for madness as well as sleep depriveth men of use, and of this
Reason, and makes them like Brutes.

As Beatitude is said to be the use of Virtue, so is misery of Vice, yet not
so, that as this suffices to misery, so that does to Beatitude.

Life is made four and unpleasant to the Good by excessive adversity, to the
ill even in prosperity, because they sin more, nor can rightly be termed happy.

Having asserted Beatitude to be the chief Good, it follows that we expound
how many ways it is taken.

Good is understood three ways. First, for that which is the cause of
preservation to all beings; next for that which is predicated of every good
thing; Lastly, for that which is expetible in it self. The first is God; the
second the Genus of Goods; the third, the end, to which all are referred,
Beatitude.

That which is expetible in it self, is said three ways, either that for
which something is done; or, for which all things are done; or, some part of
these.

Again, of these, some are final, some efficient: final, are the actions
proceeding, according to virtue; efficient, the materials of expetible things.

Of goods, some are honorable, some laudable, some faculties, some profitable.
Honorable, as God, our Prince, Parent: Laudable, as Riches, Empire, Liberty:
Profitable, the efficient, as Health.

Again, of things good and expetible, some are expetible in themselves, some
for others; in themselves, as the honorable, laudable, and faculties; for
others, as the Profitable, which effect and conserve other things.

Again, of things good in themselves, some are ends, others, not ends: Ends, as
Justice, Virtue, Health, and whatsoever consists of these; Not ends, as
Ingenuity, Memory, Learning.

Again, of Goods, some are wholly perfect, others not; of the first are Virtue
and Prudence, which benefit all; of the latter, Riches and Power, which require
to be used by a good man. The same things whereof a good man makes right use,
a wicked man abuses, as the same which a good Musician uses well, he who is
ignorant of Music uses amiss. Whosoever makes ill use of any thing is hurt
thereby; as, a good horse, which is a help to him that knows how to ride,
hurts the unskilful rider.

Again, of Goods, some are in the soul, some in the body, some external: In
the soul are ingenuity, art, virtue, wisdom, prudence, pleasure; in the body,
health, soundness of sense, beauty, strength, soundness of limbs, and all
parts, with their faculties and functions. External are riches, glory,
nobility, power, friend^* kindred, country. The goods of the soul are either
conferred by nature, as Wit and Memory; or acquired by diligence, as the
Liberal Sciences; or fall into perfection, as Prudence, Justice, and lastly,
Wisdom.

Again, of Goods, some may be both obtained and lost, as Riches; some obtained,
but not lost, as Felicity and Immortality; some lost, but not obtained, as
Sense and Life; some neither obtained nor lost, as Nobility.

Again, of Goods, some are only expetible in themselves, as Pleasure and
Indolence; some efficient only, as Riches; some both efficient and expetible in
themselves, as Virtue, Friends, Health.

Goods are divided more ways then these, as not belonging all to one Genus,
but to all the ten Categories.

These things laid down, we come next to speak more accurately concerning
Virtue, which they place in both parts of the soul: In the rational part,
Integrity, Prudence, Wisdom, Memory, and the like: In the irrational part,
Temperance, Justice, Fortitude, and other virtues. These (say they) may be
extinguished by excess, which they prove by testimony of the senses, as things
obscure by manifest. For, as by excess or defect of exercise, health is
corrupted, but by moderate exercise is preserved: In like manner is it in
Temperance, Fortitude, and other virtues. For, as we do call him who fears
the Thunder, mad, not valiant; so on the contrary, he who fears shadows is a
coward; but, he is valiant, who neither fears all things, nor nothing. These
things increase or extinguish virtue; being moderate, they increase courage;
being too great, or too little, they extinguish it. In like manner are all
other virtues extinguished by excess or defect, increased by mediocrity.

Neither is virtue only limited by these, but by pleasure and grief likewise,
in as much as for pleasure we commit wickedness, and for grief shun good. To
explain this more fully, they un^old the nature of the soul, wherein are seen
three things, passions, faculties, habits: Passions, as, anger, fear, hate,
love, emulation, pity, and the like; to which is subsequent pleasure, or
grief. Faculties, by which we make use of passions, and are angry, do emulate,
and the like. Habits are those from which the functions of these proceeds
rightly, or otherwise. If any man be so disposed, that he is angry upon any
occasion, he has the habit of anger; if so, as to be angry upon no occasion,
he has the habit of stupidity, both which are blamable. The laudable habit is
that of meekness, by which we are angry in due time and place. Virtues
therefore are habits, by which the functions of passions become laudable.

All virtue consists in action; all action is continuous. Whatsoever things
are continuous, like magnitude, have excess, defect, and mediocrity, either in
relation to one another, or to us. The mean, relating to us, is in all the
best, (this is not quantitative, but qualitative, and therefore is perfect;
whereas the extremes, excess and defect, being contrary, are repugnant to one
another, and to the mean. But, the mean is to both extremes as equality is to
inequality, greater then the least, less then the greatest.) Virtue therefore
is a deliberative habit, consisting in mediocrity, relating to our selves.

Theophrastus having laid down some qualities, (following his Master)
endeavors to conclude from each of them: The examples he alleges are
these; Temperance, Intemperance, Stupidity, Meekness, Wrath, Indolence,
Fortitude, Boldness, Timidity, Justi^e, Liberality, Prodigality, Avarice,
Magnanimity, Pusillanimity, Arrogance, Magnificence, Ostentation. For of these
habits, some are ill, through excess or defect, others good through
mediocrity. He is not temperate who desires nothing, nor he who desires all
things; one like a stone, desires not even natural expetibles; the other,
through excessive desire, becomes intemperate. He only is temperate, who
desires honest things with reason, in due time and measure. He is not meek who
is angry upon all occasions, nor he who is angry upon none; but, he who is
endued with the mean habit. He is not valiant who fears nothing, not God
himself; nor he who fears all things, even his own shadow. Nor just, who
either assumeth or derogateth too much from himself, but who observes
equality. He is not liberal who gives away all, nor he who gives nothing;
nor magnanimous, who esteems himself worthy all great things, nor he who
esteems himself worthy none; but he who observes a decorum. He is not
magnificent who is splendid every where, nor he who no where; but who observes
due time and place.

Thus the Genus of virtues is placed in Mediocrity, and mutually consequent in
it self; yet, not alike in all, for prudence is consequent to the rest in its
own proper nature; the rest are consequent to it by accession, for he who is
just, must necessarily be wise, but not on the contrary.

Of passions and appetites, some are good, some bad, some mean; the good are
friendship, benevolenee, indignation, shame, confidence, compassion; the bad,
envy, malevolence, contumely; the mean, grief, fear, anger, pleasure, desire.

Every passion is conversant in pleasure and grief, for which reason, the
virtues depend upon them; but, love of money, love of pleasure, love-melancholy,
and the like, are habits distinct from vices.

Of Love, one kind is of Friendship, another of Conjunction, the third of
both. The first is good, the second bad* the third mean.

Of Friendship there are four kinds: Sodality, Affinity, Hospitality, Erotick:
whether that of Beneficence, and that of Admiration be to be added to these, is
doubtful. The first is derived from conversation; the second from nature; the
third from cohabitation; the fourth from affection; the fifth from good will;
the last from some faculty. Of all these, there are in general three ends,
honest, profitable, and pleasant: All persons that are studious of friendship
aim at one or more of these ends. The first friendship is that, which every man
has to himself; the next, to his parent; the rest, to his friends and
neighbors. Whence excess in the first, and defect in the rest ought to be
avoided; that being esteemed self-love, this reservednesse.

(...) is taken three ways, for a profitable benefit, or for the profitable
return of a benefit, or for the remembrance of a benefit. It is placed likewise
in the face and speech, whence a man is termed gracious, (...), or (...).

A good man must lead a life conjoined with virtue, whether according to the
necessity of the times, he execute the office of a Magistrate, or cohabit with
Princes, or impose Laws, or govern some other part of the Commonwealth. If he
be not busied in any of these, he must addict himself to a popular life, either
by contemplation, or action, or (which is between both) Instruction. For though
he ought to follow the action and contemplation of excellent things; yet if the
time will not allow him to use both, he may make choice of one, and prefer
the contemplative life, yet not neglecting the Commonwealth. He shall
therefore marry* to the end he may have issue, and addict himself to chaste
love, and as occasion requires, drink wine freely, and finally mantain his
life by due observance of Virtue, and be ready to resign it, if there be a
necessity, taking care to be buried in his own Country, according to the rites
thereof.

Thus there are three kinds of life, the Active and Contemplative, and that
which consists of both. As the voluptuous is esteemed beneath the dignity of a
man, so is the contemplative preferred before the rest. A good man shall addict
himself to the Government of the Commonwealth, by choice, not chance; for the
active life is conversant in civil affairs. That life is best which is led
according to Virtue and Nature; the next is that which is a mean condition, as
to both; these are both expetible. But the life which is conjoined with Vice is
to be avoided. A happy life differs from a Good in this. The happy is always
consonant to Nature, the good sometimes repugnant to Nature. To the first,
Virtue only is not requis^te; to the other, it is requisite. A mean life is
that which is placed in mediocrity, not destitute of offices. Rectitudes in
life are according to Virtue, sins according to Vice; Offices in the mean kind
of life.

To these things thus declared we must add, that Virtue is a habit desiring
mean pleasures and griefs, pursuing that which is honest, as it is honest; Vice
is the opposite hereto.

Wisdom is the Science of the first Causes.

Prudence, a habit examining and acting good things, as they are good.

Fortitude, a habit betwixt boldness and Fear.

Meekness is a mean betwixt wrath and stupidity.

Liberality is the mean betwixt Prodigal^y and Penuriousnesse.

Magnanimity is the mean betwixt Arrogance and Pusillanimity.

For the text doubtless is defective, and thus to be supplied. (...)* See
^rist. Nicom. 4. 2. and M^g. mor. 1. 28.
Magnificence is the mean betwixt ostentation and sordidness.

Indignation is the mean betwixt envy and malevolence.

Gravity is the mean betwixt assentation and contradiction.

Modesty is the mean betwixt impudence and Bashfulnesse.

Urbanity is the mean betwixt Scurrility and Rusticity.

But Arist. otherwise, placing Friendship betwixt Arrogation and Derogation.
Friendship is the mean betwixt dotage and enmity.

Truth is the mean betwixt detraction and boasting.

Justice is the mean betwixt excess and defect.

There are other Virtues, part ranked by themselves, part under the former. As
under Justice are, (...), under Temperance (...), defined thus.

(...), is a habit of worshpping the Gods and Demons, a mean betwixt Atheism
and (...)

(...), a habit of observing right toward the Gods and the dead, a mean
betwixt (...), and something that wants a name.

(...), a habit of doing well voluntarily for their own sakes; a mean betwixt
(...), and something that wants a name.

(...), a habit, rendering men grateful in Society, a mean betwixt (...), and
something that wants a name.

(...), a habit avoiding injustice in Contracts; a mean betwixt (...), and
something that wants a name, which pertains to extreme right.

(...), a habit of observing order, a mean between (...), and something that
wants a name.

(...), a habit liberally content with the present, a mean betwixt (...) and
(...).

(...), a habit of sustaining grievous things unconquered, a mean betwixt
(...), and (...)*.

(...), a habit performing excellent things indefatigably* a mean betwixt
(...), and* (...).

Lastly, Frobity is a virtue consisting of all the rest; it is perfect, as well
because it renders good things honest and profitable. as, for that it desires
honest things, for their own sake.

CHAP. II.
OECONOMICK.
HAving thus explained the Virtues and the chief Heads of Ethick, it remains
that we speak of OEconomick and Politic, for as much as Man is by Nature a
Civil Creature. The first Commonwealth is the lawful congression of man and
woman, for procreation of children, and society of life. This is called (...),
a Family, it is the ground and beginning of a City. A Family seems to be a
little City, for marriage being contracted, and children growing up one under
another, and joined one to another, there is deduced another family, and so a
third, and a fourth. Of these is constituted Neighborhood and a City, for many
Neighbourhoods make us up a City. Th^s as a Family has in it the seeds of a
City, so likewise of a Commonwealth, for in a Family there are the prints of
Monarchy, an Aristo^racy, and a Democracy. The Society between Parents and
children represents a Monarchy; that betwixt man and woman an Aristocracy, as
being contracted for issue, mutual comfort and assistance. To these is added a
servant, appointed to be such by nature, able for service; but not to live of
himself, requirin^ therefore a Master to govern him. Of all these reduced to a
community, is constituted a Family.

The government of a Family is by nature given to Men, for the counsel of
Women is weaker, Children are not yet arived to it, Servants never can. The
whole ordering therefore of a family depends upon the Man; the whole prudence
of Economy therefore is in Man: This is partly Paternall, partly Nuptial,
partly Herile, partly Acquisitive. For, as an Army requires Provision, a City,
Merchandise, Art, Instruments; so a Family Necessaries, as well for common life
as convenience. Of these the Master of the Family takes the first care, how
honestly to increase his revenues, and moderate his expenses. He, as being the
head of the Family, ought to be skillful in many things, as in Agriculture,
Grasing, Metals, whereby he may advantage himself without doing injury to
others. Of Acquisition there are two kinds, one better then the other; that by
Nature, this by Art.

CHAP. III.
POLITIC.
THus much concerning Oeconomick; we come next to speak in short of Politic.

First then, Cities are constituted as well for the natural propensity of man
to society, as for utility. A City is the most perfect society. A Citizen is he
who is concerned in the Magistracy. A City is a complete number of such
persons, which proceeds so far, as that it be not disagreeing within it
self, nor contemptible, but may conveniently provide for life, and defend it
self against enemies.

Oeconomicall prudence is one kind, Legislative another, Politic a third,
Military a fourth.

A City is governed either by one man, or some few, or all; and each of these
either rightly, or unjustly: Rightly, when the Princes respect the common good;
unjustly, when they consider their own private interest. The right are
Monarchy, Aristocracy, Democracy: the unjust, Tyranny, Oligarchy, Ochlocracy.
There is also a mixed Government, consisting of the good kinds. And whereas a
Commonwealth is often changed into better or worse; that is best which is
guided according to Virtue; that worst, which according to Vice.

They who command, or advise, or judge in Democracy, are taken out of all,
either by suffrage, or lot: In Oligarchy, out of the Richer; in Aristocracy,
out of the Best.

Sedition in Cities is either according to Reason or Interest; the first, when
equals are reduced to unequal extremities; the second, for honor, power, or
gain.

Commonwealths are overthrown either by force or fraud. They last longest
which respect the public utility.

Courts of Judicature, Processes, Pleas, and Magistracies, are ordered
according to the forms of every Commonwealth. The most general commands are
Priesthood, Generalship, Admiralty, (...), whereof some relate to Citi^s,
others to Havens and Traffic.

The office of a Commonwealths-man is to reform a Commonwealth; which is much
harder then to erect one; and to divide the common people into two parts, one
for necessary offices; the other for convenient: Mechanics, Husbandmen, and
Merchants are for the necessary sort, continually serving the Commonwealth; but
Soldiers and Counselors, who are servants for virtue, and perform noble
things, are the more excellent.

Old men are most proper to be Counselors, and also Priests, to perform the
sacred rites; young men for War. This order is exceeding ancient, first
constituted by the Egyptians, who, amongst other things excellently disposed,
appointed the Temples of the Gods to be built in the highest places, and the
lands of private persons to be disposed, partly at the confines of the Country,
partly near the City, whereby both parts of the Country should meet in Tribute
and Tax. They likewise well ordered the institution of Sodalities, and a
public care for the education of children, and that those who are too young or
too old should not marry, to prevent their having weak children. Likewise, that
nothing mixed be taken away, nothing perfect exposed, abortion not procured.
Thus much of Politic.

THE FOVRTH PART.
CHAP. I.
Of METAPHYSICK.
THE fourth and last part of Philosophy, which treats of Ens in general, is
by Aristotle termed sometimes, First, Philosophy, sometimes Wisdom, sometimes
Theology, by his followers and Interpreters called Metaphysick, from the order
thereof, as Alexander Aphrodisaeus and Philoponus affirm, being placed after
Physic, as treating of a less known, and more noble object.

Upon this subject, there are fourteen books of Aristotle extant, which, says
Alexander Aphrodisaeus, by the method of the discourse and style, are easily
evinced to be his.

Metaphys. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Metaphysick considers Ens as it is Ens, and the primary cause thereof. Lib.
4. cap. 2.
Ens is Analogous, praedicated primarily of substance, which is one essence; of
Accidents, not simply, but in regard of their common attribution to substance.
Ens thus being one analogically, the science thereof is one likewise; but it
treats chiefly of substance, because that is the first essence upon which the
rest depend, and from which they are denominated.

CHAP. II.
Of the first Principle.
THe first most common axiom, Cap. 3.
or complex principle, is this* It is impossible that the same thing should be
and not be in the same, and according to the same respect.

To this principle, Cap. 4. 5.
all demonstrations and opinions are reduced. It is it self indemonstrable, as
being the first; otherwise there would be an infinite progression in
demonstration, and consequently no demonstration. There is nothing more known
by which it may be proved, no greater absurdity then the denial of it, that an
adversary can be reduced to.

With the first negative principle, Cap. 7.
the first affirmative has a near affinity. It is necessary that every thing
be predicated affirmatively or negatively of another. It is not true in matter
of a future contingent determinately, but only indeterminately. This
affirmative principle therefore is not absolutely the first, yet is it true,
neither can there be a medium betwixt contradictory propositions, no more then
betwixt even and uneven numbers: Every proposition either affirms or denies,
therefore every proposition is either true or false; between these there is no
medium.

CHAP. III.
Of Substance and Accident.
Lib. 6. c. 2.
OF Ens in general there are three divisions, first, by accident and per se;
secondly, Potentiall and active; thirdly, intentionall and real.

Of Ens by accident there is no Science, for it is in a manner nonens, it has
no cause per se; it is not generated or corrupted per se; it is not always,
nor for the most part, not necessary, whereas Science is of things contrary to
these.

Lib. 7. c. 1.
Ens per se is divided into ten Categories. The first is substance, and the
first Ens, and consequently the first Category, for it is predicated in quids
of the first subject, whereas Accidents are predicated in quale or quantum.
Again, substance only is Ens per se, accidents are Ens as they are affections
of substance. Substance is the first Ens, by Reason or definition, because
accidents are defined by Substance. By knowledge, because the knowledge of
accidents, depends on the knowledge of substance. By time, for there is some
substance without accident, as God and Intelligences, but there is no accident
without a substance. Likewise material substances are precedent in Time, at
least to some accidents, which arrive unto them after they have some time
generated. And lastly, by Nature, for the subject is, by Nature, before that
which inhereth in it. Hence this part of Physic treats only of substance.

Cap. 3.
Subject or substance is threefold; matter, form, compositum. The two latter
are more Ens then matter, though matter be truly substance, as being the first
and last subject which remains, though all the affections of a body be taken
away. This is first matter, which in it self is neither complete substance nor
quantitative, nor in any other Category. Neither is it first substance, for
that is separable, and may exist by its own power without others. That is
likewise a determinate, perfect, singular substance; but matter cannot be
separated from form, neither is it singular or determinable.

Cap. 4.
Form is that which the thing it self is said to be, per se, (...), the being
of a thing what it was, the whole common nature and essence of a thing,
answerable to the definition. Compound sensible substances have a proper
definition; but ens by accident, consisting of subject and accident, has not,
though it may be by accident described and explained. Even Categoricall
accidents being one per se, and of one nature, have a quiddity and definition,
not simply as substances, but after their own manner.

Cap. 8.
Matter and form are not properly generated, but the whole Compositum, whereto
Ideas [separate substances,] confer nothing, neither as efficient, nor
exemplary Causes.

Cap. 10.
The common substantial, or formal parts of the thing defined, are to be put
into the definition of the whole; but the material parts of the Individuum it
self, must not.

CHAP. IV.
Of Power and Act.
Lib. 9. c. 1.
NExt Substance we come to Power and Act. Power is either active or passive:
Active power is the principle of changing other things, or acting on another,
in as much as it is another. Passive power is in a manner the same with active,
for the motion of passion and action is really the same, neither can one be
without the other, though simply they are diverse, being in different subjects,
passive in the Patient, active in the Agent.

Cap. 2.
Of powers, some are void of Reason, as the power of warming; some rational,
as Arts: The rational are of contraries, as Medicine is of health and sick;
the irrational of one only, as heat produces heat.

Cap. 3.
The power (contrary to the Megarick Philosophers, followers of Zeno) remains;
although not reduced to act; for we call a man Architect, though he be not
actually employed in building. Again, Animals have sense, even when they are
not in act. Thirdly, it were impossible any thing could be which were not
actually. Possible is that whose power, if it were reduced to act, would not
imply any impossibility.

Cap. 4.
They are mistaken, who think there is any thing possible which shall never
actually be, or that there are powers whose acts are impossible; for hence it
would follow, that all things should be possible, nothing impossible. Possible
is that which does or may follow from some power; if it never follows, or
comes out of that power, it is impossible. That which is possible therefore,
must at some time or other be in act.

Cap. 5.
Of powers there are three kinds, some natural, as Senses; some acquired by
custom, as playing on a Pipes; some by discipline, as Arts. The two last
require previous operations, the natural do not. Natural and irrational
powers are necessarily reduced to act, when the Agent and Patient are at a due
distance, and there is nothing betwixt to hinder them. The rational powers are
not so, for they are free to act or not to act as they please.

Cap. 6.
Act is, when the thing that was in power is otherwise then when it was in
power.

Cap. 8.
All act is before power, and before all nature which is contained under power,
by reason, ^ssence, and time. By reason, because power is defined by act. By
time, because though power be temporal before act in the same numericall
object, for a man may first be learned before he actually be such; yet, in
different things of the same species, act is ever before power in time; for
nothing can be made or reduced from power, unless by an agent actually
existent.

Lastly, act is before power in essence; first, because it is later in
generation, for generation begins from the imperfect state of a thing, and
proceeds to the perfect. Now all generation proceeds from power to act.
Secondly, act is the end of power; but the end, as it is later in generation,
so is it more perfect by nature, and first in intention.

CHAP. V.
Of True and False.
Lib. 6. c. 2.
THe first division of Ens is into intentionall and real. Lib. 9. c. 10.
The intentionall is either true or false. The intellect asserteth truly, if
its judgment be conformable to the thing; falsely, if not conformable, for
there is composition and division in the things themselves, as well as in the
intellect. Whence if the intellect compound things by affirmation, as they are
really compounded, or divide them by negation, as they are really divided, it
asserteth truly, otherwise falsely. True and false are in the simple
apprehension of things, but simply, not enunciatively, so as that truth is
nothing, but a simple perception of the object; falsehood a non-perception or
ignorance thereof, though ignorance be not properly falsity. Whence simple
apprehension may be true in it self, false it cannot be, for falsity requires
composition.

Complex truth and falsehood may be of the same separate substances.

He cannot be deceived in the knowledge of things immovable, whosoever has
once conceived them immutable; for either he will judge always truth, or
always err, because things immovable are always in the same manner. The
vicissitude and deception, and true and false judgment, is only in things
contingent and mutable.

CHAP. VI.
Of one, the same, and diverse.
Cap. 2.
ONe is an affection of Ens, not a substance as Pythagoras and Plato affirmed,
but a Categoreme, predicated of every thing as it is Ens. To one is opposite
many; by privative opposition, and therefore one is manifested by many, as
indivisible by divisible, the privation by the habit. For divisible is more
known to sense then indivisible, and multitude then unity. To one are referred
the same, equal, like; to many, di^ers, ^^equall, unlike.

Cap. 3.
Things are d^verse, either by Genus or species; by genus those which have not
the same matter, nor a mutual generation; or whereof one pertaines to
corruptible substance, the other to incorruptible. By species, those which have
the same genus. Genus is that wherein those things that are diverse are said to
be the same according to substance.

CHAP. VII.
Of immortal, eternal and immovable substances.
Lib. 12. (...) 14. cap. 6.
SUbstance is threefold; two kinds natural, whereof one is corruptible, as
Animal, the other sempiternall, as Heaven. The third is immovable.

That there is a perpetual immovable substance, is proved thus. Substances
are first Ens, therefore if all substances are corruptible, all things likewise
must be corruptible, which is false; for there is an eternal local motion,
circular, proper to Heaven, which it is not possible should have had a
beginning, or shall have a dissolution, no more then time. If therefore Time be
eternal as motion, there must necessarily be some incorruptible and eternal
substance, not only that wherein that eternal motion exists, the Heaven it
self; but one substance, which so moves, that though it remain its self
moveable, yet it moves others from eternity to eternity, not having only the
power of moving, but being continually in the act of motion. For Plato and the
rest, who conceived God to have done nothing for a great while, err, because
that power were frustraneous which were not reduced to act. Besides, motion
would not have been eternal, unless the moving substance were not only
eternal, and in perpetual actual motition; but such likewise, that it could
not but it must move allwaies, as being a pure act void of power.

Hence the substances which cause eternal motion are void of matter, for they
move from an eternal act, and are void of all power.

In things that sometimes are, sometimes are not, power is precedent to act; but
simply and absolutely act is precedent to power. For, neither things natural
nor artificial are reduced from power to act, but by something that actually
exists. Now if the same thing always return by a circular motion, it
necessarily follows, that there is something eternal which remains ever the
same, and operateth in the same manner. Such an eternal first moving substance
is the first Heaven. The vicissitude of Generation and corruption is not caused
by the first Heaven, for that moves always in the same manner, but by the
inferior Orbs, especially the Sun, which by his accession brings life, by
his recession death to all things mortal.

Thus is the first Heaven eternal, for it is moved with eternal motion;
besides which there is something which always moves, and is never moved it
self, and is eternal, and substance, and act.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Gods.
Cap. 7.
THis first mover, moves in the same manner as things appetible and
intelligible, that is, it so moves others, as it self remains immovable.
The motion of the first Agent, as it is the first efficient cause, consists
in that influence thereof, whereby it concurreth effectively with the inferior
Intelligences in moving its own orb. Wherefore the efficience of the first
mover is an application of the powers of the inferior movers to their proper
works, wherein he concurreth with them actively, and independently. Thus the
Intelligences move the Heavens, not for the generation of inferior things (for
the end must be more noble then the means) but for that chief and amiable good,
whereunto they endeavor to be like, as their ultimate end.

The first mover is void of mutation, an ens, wholly and simply necessary, and
consequently the principle of all. Upon this first principle depend Heaven and
nature, because without him, their ultimate end and first efficient, nothing
can be, or be operated.

This first mover, God, enjoys the most perfect life, perpetual and most
pleasant, which absolute felicity is proper to him; for as much as he
understands and contemplateth himself with infinite delight. For, as we are
happy in contemplation that lasts but a little while, so is God most happy, in
the infinite and most perfect contemplation of himself, who is of all things
most admirable.

God is an eternal living being, the best of beings, an immovable substance,
separate from sensible things, void of corporeal quantity, without parts and
indivisible; for such must that principle or substance be which moves in
infinite time. Nothing finite has infinite power. All magnitude must be either
finite or infinite. Finite magnitude cannot move in infinite time; infinite
magnitude there is not, as we proved in the Physic.

God is impossible, not subject to alteration; the first local motion* which
is the circular, not being competible to God, because he is immovable, it
follows that other motions that induce passion or alteration, and are later
then local motion cannot likewise be competent to him.

CHAP. IX.
Of Intelligences.
Cap. 8.
BEsides this first Substance the mover of the first Heaven, th^re must
likewise be other substances separate from matter, eternal and immovable,
president over the motions of the inferior orbs; so that after what number
and order those orbs are disposed, according to the same are these eternal
moving, and immovable substances ordered.

From the number of the motions may be collected the number of the Spears, and
consequently of the substances moving, which according to Aristotle are 47.

Heaven is numerically one; because the first mover is one. It is an ancient
Tradition that these first substances that move the Heavens are Gods. This
opinion is truly divine; but what is added, that they had the shape of men, or
some other Animal, was only invented for persuasion of the common people, for
use of Laws, and the convenience of Life. Thus much may serve for a short view
of his Metaphysics.

THEOPHRASTVS.
CHAP. I.
His Country, Parents, Masters.
THEOPHRASTUS succeeded Aristotle, he was born at Erestus, (as De exil.
Plutarch, Laertius, and others affirm) a Sea-town of Les^os, seated upon a
hill, as Lib. 13.
Strabo describes it, distant from Sigrium 18 Stadia.

His Father was named Melantes, as Laert.
Athenodorus affirms, according to Suid.
others, Leo, by profession a Fuller. Theophrastus was first called Tyrtamus.
He heard Leucippus in his own Country, afterward went to Plato, and lastly
became an auditor of Aristotle, who changing the roughness of his name, called
him, as Suidas says, first Euphrastus, afterward Theophrastus, from the
divine eloquence of his speech, wherein (as Cicero, Fr^s. Lib. 1.
Pliny, Laertius, Lib. 13.
Strabo, and others aver) he excelled all the rest of his Disciples.

Laert.
He was likewise so quick of apprehension, that what Plato had said of
Aristotle and Xenocrates, Aristotle applied to him and Callisthenes.
Theophrastus was acute to admiration, ready to apprehend every thing that he
taught; Callisthenes was dull: so that one needed a bridle, the other a spur.

CHAP. II.
His Profession of Philosophy, and Disciples.
ARistotle retiring to Chal^is, in the 2d year of the 114th Olympiad, Laert.
Suid.
being importuned by his Disciples to appoint a successor, made choice of
Theophrastus (as has been already related in the life of Aristotle) who
thereupon undertook the government of the School, and, Aristotle dying, lived
in his Garden, ^Demetrius Phalerius cohabiting with him. This time wherein
Theophrastus flourished, is reckoned by Lib. 15. c. 1.
Pliny to be about the 440th year from the building of Rome; Plin. 19. 2.
390 years, as Exercit. Plinian. page 350.
Salmasius rightly reads, before that time wherein Pliny wrote.

Athen. lib. 1.
says, he went at certain hours to the School, neatly dressed, and there
sitting down, discoursed in such manner, that he omitted no gesture suitable to
the argument whereupon he treated, so that once to express a Glutton, he
licked his lips.

Laert. (...) deipn.
In the fourth year of the 118th Olympiad, Xenippus being Archon, Sophocles,
son of Amphiclides, procured a Law to be made, forbidding all Philosophers to
keep public Schools, unless such only, as the Senate and people should think
fit to license; if any did otherwise, he should be put to death. By this
decree, says Athenaeus, he banished all the Philosophers out of the City,
amongst the rest Theophrastus, who the year following returned, when as Philo,
a Disciple of Aristotle, accused Sophocles for having done contrary to Law:
Whereupon the Athenians reversed the decree, ^ined Sophocles five Talents, and
called home the Philosophers; by which means, Theophrastus returning, was
reinstated in the School.

Laertius says, there came to hear him 2000 Disciples; Suidas says (if there
be no mistake in the number) 4470. of whom were Strato, his Successor,
Demetrius Phalereus, Nichomachus son of Aristotle, whom Aristippus says, he
much affected; Erasistratus the Physician, as some affirm, and Menander the
Comic Poet.

CHAP. III.
His Virtues and Apophthegmes.
Laert.
HE was exceeding learned and studious, as Pamphila affirms.

Laert.
He was very liberal in conferring benefits, and a great cherisher of learning.

Athen. lib. 5.
He made collections of money for the conventions of Philosophers, not for
luxury, but for temperance, and learned discourses.

Plut. adv. Colot.
He twice freed his Country, being under the oppression of Tyrants.

Laert.
Cassander son of Antipa^er much esteemed him, and Ptolomy the first wrote
Letters to him.

Laert.
He was so much honored by the Athenians, that Agnonides accusing him of
Impiety, very hardly escaped from being fined himself.

Laert.
Of his Apophthegmes are remembered these. He said, it is more safe trusting to
an unbridled horse, then intemperate speech.

Laert.
To a young man at a Feast silent; If you hold your peace, says he, because
you are foolish, then you are wise; but, if you are wise, you do foolishly in
holding your peace.

Laert. Stob.
He used to say, of all things that are spent, time is the most precious.

Plut. vit. Demost.
Being demanded, as Aristo says, what he thought of Demosthenes; he answered,
he is worthy of this City; of Demades; he is above the City.

Sy^p. lib. 2.
To Philip Son of Cassander he said, I wonder your eyes do not make music, the
pipe of your nose coming so directly upon them.

Plut. de. Anar.
To prove that riches are not to be loved and admired he instanced Callias, a
rich Athenian, and Ismenias a Theban; these says he, use the same things, as
Socrates and Epaminondas.

Plut. de frat. amor.
He said we must not love strangers, to the end we may make trial of them, but
make trial of them to the end we may love them.

Plut. de sanit. tuend.
He said the Soul paid a dear rent for her habitation in the body.

Stob.
He said Falsehood raised from Calumny and Envy, endures a little while, but
soon perishes.

Stob. Ser. 101.
Seeing a young man blush, be of good comfort says he, that is the complexion
of Virtue.

Ser. 121.
He used to say, stand in awe of thy self, and thou shall not be ashamed before
other.

Ser. 136.
He said the good need but few Laws, for things are not accommodated to Laws,
but, Laws to things.

Ser. 139.
The envious are more unhappy then others in this respect, that they are
troubled not only at their misfortunes, but also at the good fortunes of others.

Ser. 141.
Being demanded what preserved humane life, he said, beneficence, reward, and
punishment.

Ser. 162.
He said, Honors are to be acquired, not by conversation and favor, but by
action.

Ser. 185.
Being demanded what Love is, he answered, the passion of an idle soul.

Ser. 193.
He said a woman ought not to be seen her self, nor behold others richly
attired, for both are inticements to dishonesty.

Ser. 297.
He said, Love is an excessive desire of something irrational, the entrance
thereof easy, the disingagement difficult.

CHAP. IV.
His Will and Death.
Laert
His Will is thus delivered by Laertius.

BE all well; but if any thing happen otherwise, thus we give order. All those
goods which belong to the House, I bequeath to Melantes and Pancreon Sons of
Leo; Those which are set apart for Hipparchus, I will be thus disposed. First,
that the study and Ornaments belonging thereunto be perfected, and if any thing
may be added more to beautify them, that it be done. Next, that the statue of
Aristotle be set up in the Temple, and the other Donaries which were before in
the Temple. Moreover that the little walk which is near the School be built
new, not worse then it was before, and that the Maps of the World be placed in
the lower Walk. That an Altar likewise be built, wanting nothing of perfection
and splendour. I will that the statue of Nicomachus as big as the life be
finished; it is in Praxitele's hands; let him go on with it. Let it be placed
wheresoever they shall think good, who have the disposal of the rest, and are
named in my Will. Thus much for the Temple and Donaries. My Land at Stagira I
bequeath to Callinus, all my Books to Neleus. The Garden and Walk, and all the
houses belonging to the Garden I bequeath to my Friends hereafter named, that
they may exercise themselves and study Philosophy therein, for men cannot
always be abroad. But with condition, that they do not alienate it, nor
pretend any propriety thereto, but esteem it a thing sacred in common
possession, making use of all things therein as becomes just and loving
Friends. The persons to whom I will that this be in common, are, Hipparchus,
Neleus, Strato, Callinus, Demotimus, Demaratus, Callisthenes, Melantes,
Pancreon, and Nicippus. Let also Aristotle, son of Midias and Pythias, if he
desire to study Philosophy, partake likewise of the same privilege, and let
the most ancient of the Overseers take great care of him, that he be instructed
as well as is possible in Philosophy. Let us be buried in that part of the
Garden, which they shall think most convenient, not erecting a Monument, or any
thing that is sumptuous over our Graves. Thus let all things be ordered
according as is said; the Temple, Monument, Garden, and walk repaired; let
Pompylus, who dwells in them, take charge of them, and of other things as he
did heretofore, for whose pains therein, let the Possessors thereof consider
him. As for Pompylus and Threpta, who have been long since manumitted, and done
us good service, if there be any thing which we have bestowed upon them, or
they themselves have required, as also the 2000 Drachmes which I appointed to
be given to them and Hipparchus, let them firmly possess it all, as I have
often expressed to Melantes, and Pancreon, who assented thereunto. Moreover I
bestow on them Somatales and the Girl. Of my servants, I manumit Molon, and
Cimon, and Parmenon; as for Manes and Callias, when they shall have lived four
years in the Gardens, discharging their Office unblamably, I will they be set
at liberty. Of the Domestic Vtensills, let the Oversee^ bestow on Pompylus as
many as they think fit, and sell the rest. To Demotimus I give Cario, to
Neleus, Donax; let Eubius be sold. Let Hipparchus give to Callinus 3000
drachms. And for M^lantes and Fancreon, if we did not look upon Hipparchus, as
having heretofore been very beneficial to us, and now quite shipwrack'd in his
Fortunes, we should have appointed him a joint-estate with Melantes and
Pancreon. But because I conceive it were not easy for them to be joined in the
ordering of one Family with him, and that it would be more to their advantage
to receive something certain from Hipparchus, for these reasons, let Hipparchus
give to each of them, Melantes and ^ancreon, a Talent. Let him likewise duly
furnish the Overseers with all charges necessary for the performance of the
forementioned works; which done, let Hipparchus be free and discharged from all
debts and Covenants to me. If any benefit come to Hipparchus from Chalcis on my
behalf, let him wholly enjoy it as his own. Be these the Overseers of those
things contained in my Will; Hipparchus, Neleus, Strabo, Callinus, Demotimus,
Callisthenes, Ctesarchus.

Copies of the Will of Theophrastus, signed with his Ring, are kept; the first
by Heg^sias son of Hipparchus. witnesses; Callippus a Pelanean; Philomelus, an
Euonymean; Lysander an Hybaean; Philion, an Alopecian. The second Olympiodorus
has attested by the same persons. The third is in the hands of Adimantus,
delivered to his son Androsthenes. Witnesses, Aimnestus, son of Cleobulus;
Lysistratus son of Phidion, a Thasian; Strato, son of Arcesilaus, a Lampsacene;
Thesippus, son of Thesippus, of the Potters street; Dioscorides, son of
Dionysius, an Epicephisian. Thus (says Laertius) was his Will.

He died old, having lived eighty five years, Laert.
his spirits being wasted, as Suidas affirms, with continual writing; and,
upon the marriage of one of his Disciples, giving himself some intermission
and rest, it occasioned his end.

As he lay upon his deathbed, Tuscul. lib. 4.
Cicero says, He blamed Nature for giving Hearts and Crows so long life that
could do no good thereby, and to Man, who could do most good, so short; whereas
if man had been allowed longer time, his life might have been adorned with the
perfection of arts and learning. Thus he complained, that as soon as he came
within the view of these, he was taken away.

His Disciples came to him, Laert.
and asked him if he had any thing to say to them; Nothing; says he, but that
the life of man loses many pleasures only for glory. When we begin to live,
then we die; nothing is more unprofitable then the desire of glory. But be
happy, and either give over study, for it is very laborious, or go
perseverantly through it, for it is of great glory. The vanity of life is much
greater then the benefit thereof. But, I have not time to advise you what to
do; do you consider at leisure what is best for you: In saying which words he
expired. The whole people of Athens followed his body on foot to the grave.

CHAP. V.
His writings.
HE left many Writings, whereof, says Laer^ius, because they are full of all
kind of learning, I thought good to give this Catalogue.

First Analyticks 3. Latter Analyticks 7. Of the Analysis of Syllogisms, 1.
Epitome of Analyticks 1. Places of Deduction 2. Agonisticks, concerning the
Theory of Eristick arguments. Of the Senses 1. To Anaxagoras 1. Of Anaxagoras
1. Of Anaximenes 1. Of Archelaus 1. Of salt, nitre, allom 1. Of Combustibles;
or, as the other Edition, of things that may be petrified 2. Of indivisible
lines 1. Of Auscultation 2. Of Winds 1. The differences of Virtue 1. Of a
Kingdom 1. Of the Discipline of a King 1. Of Lives 3. Of old age 1. Of the
Astrology of Democritus 1. Of sublime things 1. Of Apparitions 1. Of humor,
color, flesh 1. Of the Description of the world 1. Of Man 1. A collection of
the Doctrines of Diogenes 1. Of Definitions 3. Erotick 1. Another of Love 1. Of
Felicity 1. Of Species 2. Of the Epilepsie 1. Of Divine inspiration 1. Of
Empedocles 1. Epichirems 18. Instances 3. Of Voluntary 1. Epitome of Plato's
Commonwealth 2. Of the diversity of voice in Creatures of the same kind 1. Of
Subitaneous apparitions 1. Of biting and blows 1. Of Animals that are said to
have wisdom 7. Of those which dwell in dry places 1. Of those which change
color 1. Of those which dwell in caves 1. Of Animals 7. Of Pleasure according
to Aristotle 1. Of Pleasure, another, 1. Theses 24. Of hot and cold 1. Of
dizzinesse and dimnesse 1. Of Sweat 1. Of Affirmation and Negation 1.
Callisthenes, or of Grief 1. Of Labors 1. Of Motion 3. Of Stones 1. Of
Pestilence 1. Of Fainting 1. Megarick 1. Of Melancholy 1. Of Metals 1. Of Honey
1. Of the collections of Metrodorus 1. Sublime discourses 2. Of Drunkenness 1.
Of Laws alphabetically 24. Epitome of Laws 10. To Definitions 1. Of Odors 1.
Of Wine and Oil. First propositions, 18. Legislative 3. Politics 6. Politic
according to several occasions 4. Politic Customs 4. Of the best
Commonwealth 1. Collection of Problems 5. Of Proverbs 1. Of Congelation and
Liquefaction 1. Of Fire 2. Of Winds 1. Of the Palsy 1. Of Suffocation 1. Of
Madness 1. Of Passions 1. Of Signs 1. Soph^smes 2. Of the solution of
Syllogism^ 1. Topics 2. Of punishment 2. Of Hair 1. Of Tyranny 1. Of Water 3.
Of sleep and dreams 1. Of friendship 3. Of Ambition 2. Of Nature 3. Of Physic
17. Of the Epitome of Physics, 2. Physics 8. To Natural Philosophers, 1. Of
Natural Histories 10. Of Natural Causes 8. Of Chyles 5. Of false Pleasure 1.
Of the Soul 1. Thesis Of undoubted Faith 1. Of simple dubitations 1. Harmonicks
1. Of Virtue, 1. Occasions or Contradictions 1. Of Sentence 1. Of Ridiculous 1.
Meridians 2. Divisions 2. Of Differences 1. Of Injuries 1. Of Calumny 1. Of
praise 1. Of Experience 1. Epistles 3. Of casual Animals 1. Of Selection 1.
Encomiums of the Gods 1. Of Festivals 1. Of Prosperity 1. Of Enthymemes 1. Of
inventions 2. Moral disputes 1. Moral descriptions 1. Of Tumult 1. Of History
1. Of the judgment of Syllo gismes 1. Of flattery 1. Of the Sea 1. To
Cassander, of a Kingdom 1. Of Comedy 1. Of Meteors 1. Of Speech 1. Collection
of words 1. Solutions 1. Of Music 3. Of Meteors 1. Megacles 1. Of Laws 1. Of
things contrary to Law 1. A Collection of the Doctrines of Xenocrates 1.
Confabulations 1. Of an Oath 1. Rhetorical Precepts 1. Of riches 1. Of Poesy 1.
Problems, Politic, Ethick, Physic, Erotick 1. Proverbs 1. Collection of
Problems 1. Of Physical Pr^blems 1. Of Example 1. Of Proposition and Narration
1. Of Poesy, another, 1. Of the wise men 1. Of Advice 1. Of Soloecismes 1. Of
the Art of Rhetoric 1. Of Rhetorical Arts, 71 kinds. Of Hypocrisy 1.
Aristotelick, or Theophrastick Commentaries 6. Natural Sentences 16. Epitome
of Physics 1. Of Gratitude 1. Ethick-Characters Of Falsehood and Truth 1. Of
the History of Divinity 6. Of the Gods 3. Geometrical Histories 4. Epitome of
Aristotle, concerning Animals 6. Epichirems 2. Thes^s 3. Of a Kingdom 2. Of
Causes 1. Of Democritus 1. Of Calumny 1. Of Generation 1. Of the Prudence and
Manners of Animals 1. Of Motion 2. Of Sight 4. To definitions 2. Of being Given
1. Of Greater and Lesser 1. Of Music 1. Of the divine Beatitude 1. To those of
the Academy 1. Protreptick 1. How a City may be best inhabited 1. Commentaries
1. Of the fiery ebullition in Sicily 1. Of Things granted 1. Of the ways of
Knowing 1. Of the Lying Argument 3. Ante-Topick 1. To Aeschylus 1. Astrological
History 6. Arithmeticall Histories of Increase 1. Acicharus 1. Of Judicial
Orations 1. Epistles concerning Astycreon to Phanias and Nicanor. Of Piety 1.
Euias 1. Of opportunities 2. Of seasonable discourses 1. Of the Institution of
Children 1. Another, different 1. Of Institution, or, of Virtues, or, of
Temperance 1. Protreptick 1. Of numbers 1. Definitions of syllogistick speech
1. Of Heaven 1. Politic 2. Of Nature 1. Of Fruits and Animals.
All which, says Laertius, amount to 1182. Divisions. These Books, as
Theophrastus had ordered in his Will, were delivered to Neleus. What afterward
became of them, has been related in the life of Aristotle

STRATO.
CHAP. I.
His Life.
STrato was successor to Theophrastus. Laert.
He was of Cicer. Laert. Suid.
Lampsacum, his Father Laert. Suid.
Arcesilaus, or, as some, Suid.
Arcesius, mentioned in his Will. Laert.
He was a person of great worth, eminent says Laertius, in all kinds of
Philosophy, but especially in that which is called Physic, the most ancient
and solid part, Cic. de fini^^. 5.
wherein he introduced many things new, Plut. adv. Not. Colot.
dissenting not only from Plato, but from his Master Aristotle. Cic. de. Not.
deor.
From his excellency herein he was called the Natural Philosopher: Cic. de.
Not. ^ cor. 1. Laert.
He prescribed all divine power to Nature. Cic. de finib. ^.
Ethick he touched but little. Laert.
He took upon him the government of the School, according to Apollodorus, in
the [third year of the] 123 Olympiad, and continued therein 18. years. He
instructed Ptolomy the son of Philadelphus, who bestowed 80 Talents upon him.

CHAP. II.
His Will and Death.
His Will, says Laerthus, was to this effect.
THus I order, against the time that I shall die. All those things which are in
my house I bequeath to Lampyrion and Arcesilaus. Out of the money which I have
at Athens, let my Executors first defray the charges of my Funeral, and the
solemn rites after my enterrement, doing nothing superfluously, nor niggardly.
The Executors of these things I appoint in my Will be these; Olympicus,
Aristides, Mnesigenes, Hippocrates, Epicrates, Gorgylus, Diocles, Lyco,
Athanes. I leave the School to Lyco, for the rest are either too old, or
otherwise employed. All the rest shall do well if they confirm this choice that
I have made. I bequeath likewise all my Books unto him, except those which are
written by our own hand, besides all Vtensills, Carpets, and Cups for Feasting.
Let the Executors give 500. Drachmes to Epicrates and one of the servants,
which Arcesilaus shall think good. Let Lampyrion and Arcesilaus discharge all
the debts, which Daippus undertook for Hiraeus. Let nothing be owing either to
Lampyrion or to the heirs of Lampyrion, but let him be discharged of all, and
the Executors bestow on him 500. Drachmes, and one of the servants, as
Arcesilaus shall think good; that having taken much pains with us, he may have
sufficient for food and raiment. I ma^^mit Diophantus, and Diocles, and Abus. I
give Simmias to Arcesilaus. I manumit Dromo. When Arcesilaus shall come, let
Hiraeus with Olympicus and Epicrates, and the rest of the Executors cast up the
Accounts of the charges of my Funeral and other things; whatsoever is over and
above, let Arcesilaus take it of Olympicus, not pressing him upon the day of
payment. Let Arcesilaus discharge the Covenants which Strato made with
Olympicus, and Aminias, which are in the hands of Philocrates Son of Tisamenus.
As for my Tomb, let it be ordered as Arcesilaus, and Olympicus, and Lyco shall
think good.

This was his Will, preserved by Aristo the Chia^. He was of so thin and low a
constitution, that he felt not any pain at his death.

Of this name Laertius reckons eight.

The first a Disciple of Isocrates.

The second, this Philosopher.

The third a Physician, Disciple of Erasistratus.

The Fourth an Historian, who wrote the Wars of Philip and Persaeus with the
Romans.

The fifth, is wanting.

The sixth, an Epigrammatick Poet.

The seventh, an ancient Physician.

The eighth, a Peripatetick, who lived at Alexand^^a.

CHAP. III.
His Writings.
SUidas says, he wrote many Books: Laertius gives this Catalogue of them.

Of a Kingdom 3. Of Justice 3. Of Good 3. Of God 3. Of Principles 3. Of Lives.
Of Felicity. Of Philosophy. Of Fortitude. Of Vacuum. Of Heaven. Of Breath. Of
humane Nature. Of the generation of Animals. Of mixtion. Of Sleep. Of Dreams.
Of Sight. Of Sense. Of Pleasure. Of Colors. Of Diseases. Of Judgments. Of
Faculties. Of Metallic Machines: Of Hunger and Offuscation. Of Light and
Heavy. Of divine inspiration. Of Time. Of Aliment and augmentation. Of
uncertain Animals. Of fabulous Animals. Of Causes. Solutions of Questions.
Proems of Places. Of Accident. Of More and less. Of Unjust. Of Priority and
Posteriority. Of Priority of Genus. Of Proprium. Of Future. Confutations of
Inventions. Commentaries, which are suspected. Epistles; beginning thus, Strato
to Arsinoe, Health:
LYCO.
CHAP. I.
His Life.
STrato, says Laertius was succeeded by Lyco, Son of Astyanax of Troas, an
eloquent person, and excellent for the education of Children. He heard also
Panthaedus the Dialectick.

He said, that as Horses need both bridle spur, so in Children there must
joined both modesty and ambition. Of his florid expression is alleged this
instance. Of a poor Maid he said, (...) A maid is a heavy burden to her Parent
when she outruns the flowery season of her youth for want of ^ dower. Whence
Antigonus said of him, that as the fragrancy and pleasantness of an excellent
apple will not admit Transplantation; so whatsoever he said was to be heard
only from himself. For this sweetness of discourse some added the letter ^ to
his name, calling him (...), which implies sweetness: so De exsulio.
Plutarch.

In style he was very different from himself.

Upon those who were sorry they had not learned when time was, and wished it
might be recalled, he jested thus. He said, that they who endeavored to make
amends by a late penitence for their past negligence, were conscious of the
impossibility of their wishes; and of those that sought to bring it to pass,
he said, they had lost all reason, in applying the nature of a straight line to
a crooked ruler, or beholding their face in troubled water, or a confused
mirror.

He said, that to the wreath of public games in the Forum, many aspired; to
the Olympic, few or none.

He many times by his Counsel much advantaged the Athenians.

In his garments he affected neatness so much, that, as Hermippus says, he
wore an upper garment very precious and fine.

He was very expert in all exercises, active and well made for a Wrestler,
being thin-ear'd and well set, as Antigonus Caryslius affirms: Whence in his
own Country he practiced the Elean Games, and played at Ball.

He was intimate with Eumenus and Attalus beyond all men, who supplied him with
many things. Antiochus also would have had him lived with him, but could not
get him.

He was so great an enemy to Hieronymus the Peripatetick, that upon a solemn
day (of which already in the life of Arcesilaus) he only forbore to come to him.

He compared Orators to Frogs; these, says he, croak in the water, those by
the water of an houre-glasse.

He was Master of the School forty years, succeeding Strato in the hundred
twenty seventh Olympiad; as he had given order by his Will.

CHAP. II.
His Will and Death.
Laertius produces a Will of his to this effect.

THVS I dispose of my estate, if I shall not recover of this sickness. All
that is in my house I bequeath to the Brethren, Astyanax and Lyco, out of which
is to be paid whatsoever I owe at Athens to any man, as also the charges of my
Funeral and Exequies. What is in the City and Aegina, I bestow upon Lyco,
because he is of our name, and has lived long with us, to our great content,
as one that deserved the place of a Son. The Peripatum I leave to those friends
that will make use of it, as Bulo, Callinus, Aristo, Amphio, Lyco, Pytho,
Aristomachus, Heraclius, Lycomedes, Lyco my Kinsman. Let them put him in that
place who they conceive will persevere in it, and discharge it best, which let
the rest of my friends confirm for my sake and the places. My Funeral and the
burning of my Body be so ordered by Bulo and Callinus, that it be not prodigal
nor niggardly. Out of my ^state at Aegina, let Lyco after my death give to the
young men as much Oil as shall serve their turns, that hereby the memory of
me and him that honors me may be justly preserved. Let them set up my For
VVrast^ling and other Exercises.
Statue, and choose a fit place for the setting up of it, wherein let
Diophantus and Heraclides, son of Demetrius assist them. Out of my Rents in the
City, let Lyco pay all that I have named after his departure; in the next place
let Bu^o and Callinus and the expenses of my funeral be discharged. Let that
household stuff be taken away which I have left as common betwixt them. Let
likewise the Physicians Pasithemis and Midas be honored and rewarded for their
care of me, and for their skill. To the son of Callinus I leave a couple of
Thericlean Pots, and to his Wife, a couple of Goblets, and a fine Carpet, and a
shaggy Carpet, and a Coverlet, and two Couch beds, the best that are left, that
we may not seem unmindfull of their due respect toward us. As for those that
served me, I order thus: Demetrius, who has been long a Free man, I forgive
the price of his redemption; and bestow upon him five Minae, and a Cloak and a
Coat; and, as having undergone many labors with me, let him be decently
supplied with necessaries. Crito, the Chalcidonian, I forgive the price of his
redemption, and bestow further on him four Minae Micrus also I manumit, whom
let Lyco bring up, and six years hence let him instruct him. In like manner I
manumit Chares, whom let Lyco also bring up; I give him two Minae, and my
books, that have been published: The rest that have not been published, let
them be given to Callinus, and let him take diligent care for the publishing of
them. To Syrus the Freeman I give four Minae, and Menodora, and if he owe me
any thing, I forgive it him. To Hilara I give five Minae, a shaggy C^verlet,
two Couch-beds, a Carpet, and which bed he shall choose. I manumit likewise the
Mother of Micrus, and Noemones, and Dion, and Theon, and Euphranor, and
Hermias; as also Agatho, after he has served two years more; as also Ophelio
and Possidonius, the bearers of my Litter, after they have served four years
more, I will that they be set at liberty. I give moreover to Demetrius, Crito,
and Syrus, to each a Bed and Coverlet, such as Lyco shall think sit. This I
bestow on them, for as much as they have expressed themselves faithful in the
performance of such things as were committed to their charge. As for my
burial, whether Lyco will have it here or at home, let it be as he will; for I
persuade my self, he will do what is fitting no less then if I had done it my
self. When he shall have faithfully performed these things, let the bequests
of my Will remain firm. Witnesses, Callinus, an Hermione^n, Aristo, the Chian,
Euphronius, a Poeaniean.

Thus, says Laertius, having wisely managed all things appertaining to
Learning and Humanity, his prudence and diligence extended even to the making
of his Will; so that in that respect also he deserves studiously to be
imitated.

He died 74 years old of the Gout.

There were four of this name.

The first, a Pythagor^an, mentioned in the life of Aristotle.

The second, this Peripatetick.

The third, an Epick Poet.

The fourth, an Epigrammatick Poet.

ARISTO.
ARisto succeeded Lyco. He was of the Island Strab. lib. 1^.
Ceos, famous for a Law, that whosoever exceeded 60. years of age should be put
to death, that there might be no want of Provision for those that were more
serviceable. In former time says Strabo, it had four Cities, now there remain
but two, Iulis and Carthaea, into which the rest were transferred Poecessa into
Carthaea, Caressus into Iulis. In Iulis Aristo was born. He was an Auditor of
Lyco, and succeeded him in the Government of the Peripatetick School, as
Cicero, Plutarch, and Clemens Alexandrinus affirm.

He was a great imitator of Bion the Boristenite. Cicero says, he was neat
and elegant. He wrote a Treatise of Nilus, cited by Strabo, and Amatory
Similies, frequently cited by Athenaeus.

In the second Book of his Athen. d^ip. 10.
Amatory Similies, he says, that Polemo the Academick advised to provide such
entertainment at Feasts, as should be pleasant not only at the present, but
also on the morrow.

Athen. deipn. ^ 12.
In the same Book of his Amatory Similies, of an Athenian well in years, named
Dorus, who would be thought handsome, he applied the words of Ulysses to Dolo,
Rich presents sure may lead away,
And thy too easy Soul betray.


Deipn. lib. 15.
In the second of his Amatory Similies, he says, the ancients first bound
their heads, conceiving it good against the pain caused by the vapors of the
wine; afterward for more ornament they used Garlands.

Laertius upon the testimony of Panaetius and Sosicrates affirms, that all
the writings ascribed to Aristo of Chios the Stoic (except the Epistles)
belong to Aristo the Peripatetick, their Titles, these, Protrepticks 2. Of
Zeno's Doctrine: Scholastic Dialogues 6. Of Wisdom, Dissertations 7. Erotick
Dissertations. Commentaries upon vainglory. Commentaries 15. Memorialls 3.
Chrya's 11. Against Orators. Against Alexinus's oppositions. To the Dialecticks
3. To Cleanthes, Epistles 4.


CRITOLAUS.
CRitolaus was, according to Plutarch, of Phaselis, an eminent Sea-Town of
Lycia; described by Lib. 16.
Strabo to have three Havens, and a Lake belonging to it. He was an Auditor of
Aristo, and succeeded him in the School, as Cicero, Plutarch, and Clemens
Alexandrinus affirm.

He went to Rome on an Embassy from the Athenians in the 534th year, from the
building of the City, which falls upon 2d year of the 140th Olympiad.

Sext. Emper.
He condemned Rhetoric, as being used rather as an Artifice, then an Art.

DIODORUS.
DIodorus was Disciple to Crito aus, and succeeded him in the School, as is
manifest from Clemens Alexandrinus, who adds, that in his assertion concerning
our chief end, he joined Indolence with honesty. He is mentioned by Cicero; how
long he taught, or who succeeded him is unknown. Thus far we have an
unintermitted account of the Peripatetick School.

FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY.

The Seventh Part, Containing the Cynick Philosophers.



LONDON. Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and Thomas Dring: An. Dom. 1656.

ANTISTHENES


ANTISTHENES.
CHAP. I.
His Life.
THe Cynicks are derived from Antisthenes; Disciple of Socrates, who, being
most pleased with those discourses of his Master, which treated of Tolerance
and Laboriousnesse, instituted this Sect. Laert.
He was born at Athens, his Father an Athenian named Antisthenes also; his
Mother a Thracian, or, as Plutarch, a Phrygian, in whose defense, to those who
reproached him that she was a Forreigner, he answered Cibele the Mother of the
Gods was a Phrygian. He likewise derided the Athenians for boasting of their
being Natives, saying, they were nothing more noble then snailes and Locusts.
Laert. vi^. Soc^.
Neither did Socrates the less esteem him; but on the contrary, hearing that
he had behaved himself valiantly at the Fight at Tanagra, he said of him, I
knew two Parents both Athenians could not beget so excellent a Person. He first
heard Gorgias the Orator, whence his Dialogues are written in a Rhetorical
style, consisting chiefly in verity and exhortation. Hermippus says, at the
Istmian meeting, he used to make Orations in praise and dispraise of the
Athenians, Thebans and Lacedaemonians, before all the assembly; But seeing many
of the Citizens come thither he refrained.

Next he applied himself to Socrates, and profited so much under him, that he
counseled his Scholars, to become his fellow-di^ciples under that Master. He
lived in the Piraeum, and went every day 40. Stadia, to hear Socrates.

He affected even whilst he was Disciple to Socrates to go in poor habit, and
Laert. Aelian.
once having turned the torn part of his garment outermost, Socrates spying it,
said, I see vainglory through a hole; or, as Aelian, do you use this
ostentation before us also?

Laert.
Upon the death of Socrates he was the occasion of banishment to Anytus, and of
death to Melitus; for Melitus meeting with some young men of Pontus, invited to
Athens by the same of Socrates, he brought them to Anytus, telling them he was
wiset then Socrates, whereupon the standers by in indignation, turned them both
ou^ of the City; of which already in the life of Socrates.

CHAP. II.
His institution of a Sect.
Laert.
S. Ocrates being dead, of whom he learned tolerance and apathy, he made choice
of Cynosarges, a Gymnasium at Athens just without the gates, as of the fittest
place in which he might discourse of Philosophy. Suid.
It was so called upon this occasion. Didymus the Athenian sacrificing in his
own house, a white dog that was by, snatched the Victim, and running away with
it, laid it down in another place; Didymus much troubled thereat, consulted the
Oracle, which enjoined him to erect a Temple in that place where the Dog had
laid down the Victim, and to dedicate it to Hercules, which was called
Cynosarges, (...), The Temple of the white Dog. Laert.
Hence Antisthenes and his follo^ers were called Cynicks, and, by those that
disapproved their institution, Dogs; Antisthenes himself being termed (...),
the sincere Dog.

He first doubled his old fordid Cloak, and wore it alone [without a Coat] as
Diocles affirms; he carried likewise a staff and fatchell. Neanthes says,
he first used a single Cloak. Sosicrates in the third of his Successions,
says, Diodorus the Aspendian wore a long beard, and carried a staff and
Wallet.

Laert.
His assertions were these, that Virtue may be acquired by teaching; that those
persons are noble, who are Virtuous; That Virtue was selfsufficient to
Felicity, not needing any thing but a Socratick Courage; That Virtue consists
in Actions, not requiring many words nor much learning, and is self-sufficient
to wisdom, for all other things have a reference thereto; That insamy is good
and equal to labor, and that a wise man ought not to govern the Commonwealth
according to the Laws in force, but according to Virtue; That a wise man, to
have issue, may make choice of beautiful women, and love, for a wise man only
knows what ought to be loved.

Diocles adds these; That nothing is new to a wise man; That a good man
deserves love, that virtuous persons are friends; that we ought to get
assistance in War, valiant and just; that virtue is an Armor never can be
taken from us; That it is better with some few good men to oppose all the
wicked, then with many wicked men to contend with few good; Observe your
Enemies, for they first find out your faults; Esteem a just man more then a
neighbor; The same virtue belongs to man and to woman; those things are good
which are honest, ill which are dishonest; All things esteem strange; Wisdom is
the safest fortification, for (...) neither fall away, nor can be betrayed; In
these inexpugnable things we ought to build Forts, by meditation.

Lib. 9. c 5.
Agellius says, he esteemed Pleasure the greatest ill, whence he used to say,
I had rather be mad, then be addicted to pleasure.

Laert. vit. Menedem.
As to the opinion of the Cynicks in general (not esteeming them, says
Laertius, a mere form and institution of life, but a true Sect of Philosophy)
they were these.

They took away, with Aristo the Chian, Dialectick and Physic, and only
admitted Ethick; whence, what some said of Socrates, Diocles applied to
Diogenes, affirming he used the same expressions, that we ought to enquire,
What good and ill
Our ^ouses fill.


They likewise reject the liberal Sciences, whence Antisthenes said, those who
have acquired Temperance, ought not to study any learning, left by other things
they be diverted. Geometry likewise, Music, and the like, they wholly took
away. Whence Diogenes, to one that showed him a Watch, It is an excellent
invention, says he, against supping too late. And to one that entertained him
with Music; Wisdom the greatest Cities does protect;
But Music cannot one poor house direct.


They likewise, as the Stoics, affirmed to be happy to live according to
Virtue, as Antisthenes, in his Hercules; for there is a kind of affinity
betwixt these two Sects, whence the Stoics asserted Cynisme to be the nearest
way to Virtue, and so lived Zeno the Cittiean.

Their diet was slender, their food only such as might satisfy Nature, their
Cloakes sordid; they despised riches, glory, and nobility: Some of them fed
only on herbs and cold water, living under such shelters as they could find,
or in Tubbs, as Diogenes did, who affirmed, it was proper to the Gods to want
nothing, and that those who stand in need of fewest things, come nearest to the
Gods.

They held also, according to Antisthenes in his Hercules, that Virtue may be
acquired by Learning, and that it cannot be lost; that a wise man deserves to
be loved, and never sins, and is a friend to such as are like him, and
trusts nothing to Fortune.

They took away with Aristo the Chian, all things between Virtue and Vice.

CHAP. III.
His Apophthegmes.
OF his Apophthegmes are remembered these. Laert.


He proved Labor to be good, by the examples of Hercules and Cyrus, one a
Grecian, the other a Barbarian.

He first defined Speech thus, Speech is that which declares that which is or
was.

To a young man of Pontus that came to be his Disciple, and asked him what he
must bring with him, he answered, (...), a new Book, a new pen, and a new
tablet, where the word (...) is equivocall, and signifies (divided (...)) Wit.

To one, demanding what kind of Wife he should take; If a fair one, says he,
she will be common; if foul, a torment.

Hearing that Plato spoke ill of him; it is King-like, says he, to do well,
and be ill spoken of.

Being initiated into the Orphick solemnities, the Priest telling him, that
they who were initiated into those rites, were made partakers of many excellent
things in the next world: Why then, says he, do you not die?

To one that reproached him that both his Parents were not free, Neither, says
he, were they both wrastlers, and yet I am a wrastler.

Being demanded why he had few Disciples, I beat them away, says he, with a
silver staff.

Being demanded why he rebuked his Disciples so sharply; So, says he, do
Physicians the sick.

Seeing an Adulterer running away, Unhappy man, says he, how much danger might
you have escaped for one half penny.

He said according to Hecaton, It is better to fall among Crows then
flatterers; for those only devour the dead, these the living.

Being demanded what was most happy for man, he answered, To die in prosperity.

To a friend, complaining he had lost his notes; You should have writ them in
your mind, says he, and not in your book.

As rust consumes iron, so envy, says he, consumes the envious man.

Those who would never die, says he, must live piously and justly.

He said, Cities were then perishing, when they could not distinguish the good
from the bad.

Being commended by some wicked men; Laert. Stob.
I am troubled, says he, to think what ill I have done.

He said, the cohabitation of concording Brethren is firmer then any wall.

He said, we ought to carry such provision along with us, as if we should
happen to be shipwra^k'd, we might swim away with.

To those who reproached him for conversing with wicked persons; So do
Physicians with the sick, says he, yet are not sick themselves.

He said, It is absurd to separate corn from the weeds, and in way to reject
the unserviceable person; (...), in a Commonwealth, not to extirpa^e the
wicked.

Being demanded what he had gained by Philosophy, he answered, that I can
converse with myself.

At a Feast, to one that said to him, (...); he replied, Do you then pipe.

Diogenes demanding a Coat, he bad him double his Cloak.

Being demanded what learning is most necessary; That, says he, which
unlearneth ill.

He advised those who were provoked by revilings, to bear it with greater
Fortitude, then if stones were cast at them.

He derided Plato, as being proud, and seeing at a show a horse going loftily,
turning to Plato, Me thinks, says he, you would have acted the part of this
horse very well. This he said, because Plato at the same time had commended the
horse.

Another time visiting Plato, as he lay sick, and looking into the basin
whereinto he had vomited, I see here, says he, the choler, but not the pride.

He advised the Athenians to love Asses as well as Horses, which they
conceiving absurd; and yet, says he, you choose those for Generals, who know
nothing, but how to stretch out the hand.

To one that said to him, many praise thee; Why, says he, what ill have I done?

To one that demanded (as Phanias says) what he should do to be a good and an
honest man: if you learn, says he, of knowing persons, that the vices which
you have are to be avoided.

To one that praised a life full of delicacies; Let the sons of my enemies,
says he, live delicatly.

To a young man, who desired his statue might be made handsomer then himself;
Tell me, says he, if the brass it self could speak, what you think it would
boast of; the other answered, of its handsome figure: Are you not ashamed then,
replies he, to be proud of the same that an inanimate creature would be?

A young man of Pontus promised to supply him, as soon as his ship came home
laden with saltfish; hereupon he took him to a meal-woman, and filling his
satchell departed; she calling to him for money: This young man, says he, will
pay you as soon as his ship comes home.

When at any time he saw a woman richly dressed, he went to her house, and bad
her husband bring out his horse and arms, that if he were so provided, he
might allow her those freedoms, being better able to justify the injuries it
occasioned; otherwise, that he should take off her rich habit.

He said, Stob. Ser. 1.
Neither a feast is pleasant without company, nor riches without Virtue.

He said, Stob. Ser. 38.
Those pleasures which come not in at the door, must not go out by the door,
but by incision or purging with Hellebor, or by Ser. 44.
starving, so to punish those sur^eits which we have incurred for a short
pleasure.

He said, Ser. 50.
Whosoever seareth others is a slave, though he know it not himself.

He said, Ser. 53.
No covetous man can be a good man, or a King, or a freeman.

Being demanded what a feast is, Ser. 87.
he answered, The occasion of surfeits.

He said, Ser. 117.
We ought to aim at such pleasures as follow labor, not at those which go
before labor.

He said, Ser. 148.
Common Executioners are better then Tyrants; those p^t only guilty men to
death, Tyrants, the innocent.

He said, Ser. 171.
We ought to wish our enemies all good things but Fortitude, for that they
possess would fall into the hands of the Victor, not the Owner.

Him that contradicts, he said, Ser. 212.
he said, we must not again contradict, but instruct; for a madman is not
cured by another growing mad also.

He said, Plut. rep. Stoic. Plut. vit. Lyc.
A man should always have in readiness his wits or a rope.

Seeing the Thebans much exalted with their success at the Luctrian sight, he
said, They were like boys that triumph when they have beaten the. Masters.

To some that commended a Piper; Plut. vit. Per.
But, says he, he is an ill man, for else he would never have been so good a
Piper.

CHAP. IV.
His Writings.
OF his Books says Laertius, there are ten Tomes.

The first contains these.
Of speech, or of Characters. Ajax, of the speech of Ajax. Ulysses, or of
Ulysses. An apology for Orestes. Of Lawyers. Isographe, or Desias, or
Isocrates. Against Isocrates' s (...).
The second Tome.
Of the Nature of Animals. Of Procreation of children, or of Marriage, Brotick.
Of Sophists, Physiognomick. Of Justice and Fortitude Protreptick 1, 2, 3, Of
Theognis.
The third Tome.
Of Good. Of Fortitude. Of Law, or of Policy. Of Law, or of Fair and Just. Of
Freedom and Servitude. Of Faith. Of a Guardian, or of Trusting. Of Victory,
Oeconomick.
The fourth Tome,
Cyrus. Hercules the Greater, or of Strength.
The fifth Tome.
Cyrus, or of a Kingdom. Aspasia.
The sixth Tome.
Truth. Of Dissertation, Anti-logick. Sathon, of Contradiction 3. Of
Dialectick.
The seventh Tome.
Of Discipline, or of names, 5. Of dying. Of Life and Death. Of things after
death. Of the use of names, or Eristick. Of Interrogation and answer. Of
Opinion and Science 4. Of Nature 2. Interrogation concerning Nature 2.
Opinions, or the Eristick. Problems concerning Learning
The eighth Tome.
Of Music. Of Interpreters. Of Homer. Of Injustice and impiety. Of Chalcas. Of
the spy. Of Pleasure.
The ninth Tome.
Of the Odysseis. Of Minerva's wand, or of Telemachus, Helena, and Penelope. Of
Proteus The Cyclops, or of Ulysses. Of the use of Wine, or of Drunkenesse, or
of the Cyclops. Of Circe. Of Amphiaraus. Of Ulysses and Penelope. Of the Dog.
The tenth Tome.
Hercules, or Midas. Hercules, or of Prudence, or of strength. The Master, or
Lover. The Masters, or spies. Menexenus, or of Ruling. Alcibiades. Archelaus,
or of a Kingdom.
These says Laertius, were his writings, the great number whereof Timon
derides, calling him an ingenious Trifler.

There is also among the Socratick Epistles one under his name to this effect.

Antisthenes to Aristippus.
IT is not the part of a Philosopher to live with Tyrants, and to wast time at
Sicilian Feasts, but rather to be content with a little in his own Country; but
you esteem it the greatest excellence of a Virtuous person, to be able to
acquire much wealth, and to have powerful friends. Riches are not good;
neither if they were in themselves good, are they such, being thus obtained,
nor can a multitude of unlearned persons, especially Tyrants, be true friends.
Wherefore I would co^nsell you to leave Syracuse and Sicily; but if, as some
report, you are in love with Pleasure, and aim at such things, as beseem not
wise persons, go to Anticyra and cure your self by drinking Hellebore, for that
is much better for you then the Wine of Dionysius; this causes madness, that
asswageth it. So that as health and discretion differ from sickness and ^olly,
so much shall you be better then you are in these things which you now enjoy
Farewell.


The Answer to this Epistle, see in the life of Aristippus.

CHAP. V.
His Death.
HE died says Laertius of sickness. As he lay on his deathbed, Diogenes came
to him and asked him if he wanted a friend. Another time he came to him with a
dagger; Antisthenes crying out, who will free me from this pain, he showed him
the dagger, saying, This shall, Antisthenes replied, I say from my pain, not
from my life; for he bore his sickness somewhat impatiently through love of
life.

Theopompus commends him above all the Disciples of Socrates, as being of such
acute and sweet discourse, that he could lead any man to what he would.

There were three more of this name, one a Heraclitean Philosopher; the second
of Ephesus, the third of Rhodes a Historian.

DIOGENES.
CHAP. I.
His Country, Parents, Time, Banishment.
Laert.
DIOGENES was of Sinopis, a City of Pontus, his Father named Icesius, or, as
others, Icetes; by profession a mony-changer.

He was born (as appears by computation from his death, which was in the 90t
year of his age, in the first year of the 114t Olympiad, Hegesias being Archon)
about the third year of the 91st Olympiad. Suidas says, he was first called
Cleon.

Diocles says, his Father trading publicly in exchange of money, was
surprised, coining false money, and thereupon fled: But Eubulides says,
Diogenes himself did it, and fled together with his Father; even Diogenes in
his Podalus, acknowledges as much. Some affirm, that being made overseer, he
was persuaded by the workmen to go to Delphi, or Delus, the Country of Apollo,
to enquire of the Oracle if he should do that whereto he was advised, (...),
which is of ambiguous signification, implying, to alter the course of life, and
to coin false money. The Oracle assented: Diogenes not understanding it in the
Civil sense, betook himself to coining, and being taken in the act, was
banished, or, as others say, fled for fear. Some affirm, he adulterated the
money he received from his Father, for which the Father was cast in prison, and
there dyed; the Son fled, and coming to Delphi, enquired of the Oracle by what
means he should become eminent, whereupon he received that answer.

Aelian. var. Hist. 13. 28.
When he left his Country, one of his servants followed him, named Manes, who
not enduring his conversation ran away from him; some persuaded Diogenes to
enquire after him, who answered, Were it not a shame, since Manes does not need
Diogenes, that Diogenes should need Manes. The fellow wandering up and down came
at last to Delphi, where he was torn in pieces by dogs.

DIOGENES.



CHAP. II.
How he lived at Athens.
COming to Athens, says Laertius, he applied himself to Antisthenes,
following the Cynicall Philosophy instituted by him. Aelian. var. Hist. 10. 16.
Antisthenes having invited many to hear him, and but few coming, at last in
anger would not suffer any to come to him, and therefore bad Diogenes be gone
also. Diogenes continuing to come frequently, he chid and threatened him, and at
last struck him with his staff: Diogenes would not go back, but persisting
still in his desire of hearing him, said, Strike if you will, here is my head,
you cannot ^inde a staff hard enough to drive me from you, until you have
instructed me. Antisthenes overcome with his perseverance, admitted him, and
made him his intimate friend. From that time forward he heard him.

Some affirm, says Laertius, he first wore a double Cloak, upon which he used
to lie [at night:] He likewise carried a wallet, wherein was his meat. He made
use of all places for all things, dining, sleeping and discoursing in any
place, insomuch that pointing to Jupiter's walk, and the Pompaeum, two public
places at Athens, he said, the Athenians built them for his dwelling. Falling
once sick, he walked with a staff, which afterward he continually used, as
likewise a wallet, not in the City, but when he traveled. He wrote to one to
build him a little house, which the other not doing so soon as he required, he
made use of a Tub in the Metroum to live in, as he declares in his Epistles.
In Summer he used to roll in the burning Sand, in Winter, to embrace statues
covered with Snow, accustoming himself continually to sufferance. Plut*
A Lacedaemonian seeing him in this posture in the depth of Winter, asked him
if he were not a cold; Diogenes said, he was not: What you do then, replied the
other, is no great matter.

At first he used to beg, of which there are many instances: He one time begged
of a man thus, If you have given to others, give also to me? if to none, begin
with me?

Laert.
Another time he begged of a Statue, whereof being demanded the reason, That I
may the better, says he, bear a refusal.

He requested something of a covetous person, who delaying to give; Man, says
he, I ask you (...), not (...), food, not a grave.

He requested something of a person very obdurate, who answered yes, if you can
persuade me to it; Nay, replied he, if I were able to persuade you to any
thing, it should have been to have hanged your self.

Of a Prodigal he begged a Mina; the other asked why he begged a Mina of him,
and of others but an Obolus: Because, says he, I hope to receive of others
again; but whether I shall ever have any more of you, the Gods know.

Being reproached that Plato begged not, but he begged: Yes, says he, he
beggeth too; but,

Close in your ear,
Lest others hear.
Aelian. var. Hist. 4. 27.
Having received some little money from Dionysius the Carysian, he said, The
Gods afford thee thy desire,
A man and house --
Alluding to his effeminacy.

Laert.
For this reason he said, the imprecations of Tragedians concurred in him, for
he was without any City, without a house, deprived of his Country, a beggar, a
vagabond, having his livelihood only from day to day. And yet, adds Var. hist.
3. 29.
Aelian, he was more pleased with this condition, then Alexander with the
command of the whole world, when having conquered the Indians, he returned to
Babylon.

Laert.
Seeing a Mouse, as Theophrastus says, running up and down, he thence took
occasion of comfort, considering it a creature that looked not for lodging, and
was not displeased with darkness, nor nice, as to diet.

He walked in the snow barefoot, and tried to eat raw flesh, but could not.

He said, he imitated singing-Masters, who raise their voice too high, thereby
to teach others the just tone.

The Athenians loved him much, for a youth having bored holes in his Tubbe,
they punished him, and gave Diogenes a new one.

He used to perform the offices of Ceres and Venus in public, arguing thus; if
it be not absurd to dine, it is not absurd to dine even in the marketplace;
but, it is not absurd to dine, therefore it is not absurd to dine even in the
marketplace.

Laert. It is explained by Plutarch, de rep. Stoic.
(...) in the public Forum; I would, says he, I could as easily satisfy my
hunger.

Laert.
As he dined in the Forum, some that were present called him Dog; Nay, says
he, you are Dogs that stand about me when I am at dinner.

Being reproached for feeding in the open Forum; In the Forum, says he, I grew
hungry,

Being reproached that he drunk in a victualling house; And in a Barbers shop,
says he, I am shaved.

He lived without any servant; Being demanded by one whether he would have a
maidservant, or a man, he said* neither; who then, answered the other, shall
carry you out to your grave when you die? Diogenes replied, he that wants a
house?

CAHP. II.
How he lived at Corinth.
Laert.
IN his old age he took a voyage to Aegina, but was by the way taken by some
pirates, the name of whose captain was Scirpalus. They carried him to Creet,
and there exposed him to sale, they asked him what he could do, he answered, he
could command men, and to the Crier, he said, if any man want a Master let him
buy me. Offering to sit down, they would not suffer him, (it being the custom
of such as were to be sold for slaves, to leap up and down) it is no matter for
that, says he, Fishes are sold which way soever they lie, adding, he wondered
that men being to buy a pot or vessel, examine it curiously on the inside, but
if a man, they are satisfied with his look and outside. Pointing to a
Corinthian richly attired that passed by, named Xeniades, sell me says he, to
that man, for he wants, a Master. To Xeniades as soon as he had bought him, he
said, Be sure you do as I command you, he answered in the common proverbial
verse. The springs of Rivers upwards run.

Diogenes reply'd^, if being sick you had bought a Physician would you obey his
advice, or would you say as before, The springs of Rivers upwards run.

His friends, according to Cleomenes, offered to redeem him, but he told them
they were fools, for Lions were not slaves to their Keepers, but the Keepers to
the Lions, for the property of servitude is to fear, and men fear Beasts.

Laert.
Xeniades having bought him, carried him to Corinth, Laert.
asking him what he could do, he answered, he knew how to command free persons.
Xeniades wondering at his answer, set him at Liberty, and delivered his Sons to
his charge, saying, take then my Children and command them. Gell.
He put the Government of his family also into his hands, p Lan^.
which he acquitted himself of excellently well in every thing, in so much that
Xeniades said, he had brought a Good Genius into his House.

He did not suffer the young men that were under his charge, to exercise
themselves as Wrastlers, but only till they were warm, and for their health
sake. He taught them many sayings of Poets by heart, and some of his own, and
that they might more easily remember the full sum of Learning, he made a brief
Collection thereof. He taught them at home to minister, using thin diet, and
drinking water, to go negligently in habit, shaven, without coats, without
shoes, and silent, looking upon themselves as they went. He brought them up
likewise to Hunting. On the other side, they took great care of Diogenes, and
recommended him to their Parents.

Plut. vit. Alex.
When Alexander was upon expedition against the Persian, many Philosophers came
to salute him, the same duty he expected from Diogenes, who was at that time at
the Craneum, a Gymnasium in Corinth, where he lived idly, not minding
Alexander. Alexander therefore went and found him out sitting in the Sun, he
rose a little to look upon the great crowd of people that came along with
Alexander, who saluting him, asked Diognes what he would desire of him, he
answered, that you would stand aside a little from betwixt me and the Sun.
Hereat Alexander was so surprised, and so much admired his high mind, that his
Attendants in returning, laughing thereat, but I, says he, were I not
Alexander, would choose to be Diogenes.

CHAP. IV.
His Philosophy.
Laert.
ANd concerning Opinions, he said, there is a twofold Exercitation, one
spiritual, the other corporeal; If in the first of these we employ our selves
constantly, frequent fantasies will occur, which facilitate the performance
of Virtue; the one cannot be without the other, a good habit and strengh being
necessary both in respect of the soul and the body.

That Virtue is easily acquired by exercitation he argued, in as much as in the
Mechanic Arts and others, that Artists by practice quickly arrive at an
extraordinary readiness therein, and Wrastlers and Musicians excel one
another according to the continual pames they take therein one more then
another, and if they should have taken the same pains about their souls, it
would not have been unprofitably and imperfectly employed.

He said nothing in life can be rightly done without exercitation, and that
exercitation could master any thing, for whereas men should choose Natural
Labors, whereby they might live happily; they on the contrary make choice of
the unprofitable, and through their own folly, are in continual misery. For
even the contempt of Pleasure, if we accustom our selves thereto will be most
pleasant; and as they, who inure themselves to a voluptuous life cannot be
taken off it without much trouble and grief; so they who exercise themselves in
a contrary manner with as great ease contemn even the pleasures themselves.

He ascribed not so much to Law as to Nature; He affirmed that he followed the
same course of life with Hercules, preferring nothing before Liberty.

He asserted that all things belong to the wise, arguing thus; all things
belong to the Gods, the Gods are friends to wise persons; all things are common
amongst friends; therefore all things belong to the wise.

As concerning Law, he held that without it a Commonwealth could not be
ordered, for, says he, without a City there cannot be any profit of Civil
things; a City is a Civil thing; of Law without a City there is no profit,
therefore Law is Civil.

He derided Nobility, glory, and the like, saying, they were the Ornaments, or
veiles of wickedness, and that only a right Commonwealth ought to be honored.

He held that there ought to be a Community of women, conceiving marriage to be
nothing, and that every man and woman might enjoy one another as they pleased
themselves, and consequently that all Children should be in common.

He held that it was not unlawful to take any thing out of a Temple, or to
feed upon living Creatures, neither was it impious to eat man's flesh, as
appeared by the practice of other Nations, adding that all things are in all
and by all; in bread there is flesh, in flesh bread; the remainders of flesh
and bread being insinuated by occult passages into other bodies, and
evaporating in like manner. This Laertius cites out of a Tragedy of his named
Thyestes, if says he, that Tragedy belong to him, and not rather to Philiscus,
or Pasiphon.

Music, Geometry, Astronomy and the like he rejected as unprofitable and
unnecessary.

CHAP. V.
His Apophthegms.
Laert.
HE was very acute says Laertius in deriding others. He said Euclides school
was not (...), but (...), not a School, but Anger, for the Dialecticks affected
Litigious dispute. He said Plato's school was not (...), but (...), not an
exercitation, but Consumption.

He said, when he looked upon Pilots, Physicians and Philosophers, Man was the
wisest of all Creatures; but when he looked upon Interpreters of Dreams,
Prophets or persons puffed up with wealth or honors, nothing is more foolish
then man.

He said that he often sound it convenient in life to have ready an answer or
a rope.

At a great Feast, seeing Plato eat Olives; Why, says he, you being a wise
man, and going to Sicily for such entertainments, did you not enjoy them: He
answered, by the Gods Diogenes, I fed upon Olives there likewise as well as
upon other things. Diogenes replied, why then needed you to have gone to
Syracuse, were there no Olives at that time in Attica? This Phavorinus ascribes
to Aristippus, adding, that as he was eating figs, he met him, and said,
taste: the other taking and eating; I bad you, says he, taste, and not devour.

In the presence of some friends of Plato sent to him by Dionysius, Diogenes
trod under foot Plato's robe, saying, I tread under foot Plato's pride: But
Diogenes, answered Plato, how proud are you your self, when you think you
contemn pride? Sotion relates this as said to the Cynick by Plato.

St^b. Ser. 133
Diogenes sent to Plato for wine and figgs, he sent him a large vessel of wine
and figs; whereupon Diogenes, as you, says he, being demanded how much 2. and
2. are, answer 20. so you neither grant what I request, nor answer what I
demand; thus censuring his verbosity.

Being demanded in what part of Greece he had seen good men; Men, says he, no
where, but good boys at Lacedaemon.

Making a serious discourse, and perceiving that no man came to hear him, he
began to sing, whereat a great many gathered together, whom he reproached for
coming to trifles, being so backward to serious things.

He said, men contested in undermining or kicking, but none about goodness.

He wondered at Grammarians, who enquiring after the misfortunes of Ulysses,
forgot their own; and at Musicians, who whilst they tune their instruments,
have discordant affections in their souls; and at the Mathematicians, that
gazing upon the Sun and Moon, neglected what was just at their feet; and at
Stob. 296.
Orators, who studied to speak just things, and neglected to act them; and
lastly at covetous persons, for dispraising money, which they loved above all
things.

He reprehended those, who though they commended just men for thinking
themselves to be above money, yet esteemed the rich happy.

He was angry at those, who when they sacrificed to the Gods for their health,
feasted at the same time contrary to their health.

He wondered at Servants, who seeing their Masters eat excessively, did not
take away their meat.

He praised those, who being about to marry, would not marry; who being about
to go sea, would not go to sea; who being about to undertake some public
office, would not undertake it; and who being about to bring up children,
forbore to bring them up; and who could compose themselves to live with great
men, yet never went to them.

He said, when we stretch out our hand to our friend, we should never clutch
our fist.

One bringing him into a new house, and forbidding him to spit, he spat in his
face, saying, he could not find a worse place. Some ascribe this to Aristippus.

Crying out upon a time, Men come hither, a great many flocked about him, whom
he fell upon with his stick, and beat them, saying, I called men, not varlets.
This Hecaton in his Chr^ae relates.

Alexander said, if he had not been born Alexander, he would have desired to
have been born Diogenes.

He said, they were not maimed who were dumb and blind, but they who had not a
wallet.

Going once half shaven to a feast of young men, as Metrocles relates, they
beat him, whereupon he took their names, and setting them down in a parchment
roll, he wore it at his breast, whereby being known, they were reviled and
beaten.

He said, he was the Dog of the praised, but none of the praisers durst go a
hunting with him.

To one saying, at the Pythian Games I overcame men; No, says he, I the men,
you the slaves.

To those who said to him, you are now old, take your ease; what, says he, if
I were to run a race, should I give over when I were almost at the end, or
rather contest with greater courage?

Finding Demosthenes the Orator at dinner in a common victualling house, who
ashamed, would have stolen away; nay, says he, you are now the more popular.
Aelian relates it thus, Diogenes being at dinner in a common victualling house,
and seeing Demosthenes pass by, invited him in, Demosthenes refusing; do you
think it, says Diogenes, a disparagement to dine here, when your Master dines
here every day? meaning the common people, to whom Orators are but servants.

To some strangers who were desirous to see Demosthenes, pointing to him with
his middle finger; this, says he, is he that leads the Athenians.

In reproof to one who had thrown away his bread, and was ashamed to take it
up again, he tied a string about the neck of a bottle, and dragged it after him
through the Ceramick.

He said, most men were mad Praeter digitum, all but the finger; if any man
should walk pointing with his middle finger, he will be thought mad; if his
forefinger, not so.

He said, the most precious things were sold cheapest, and so on the contrary;
for a Statue will cost 3000 pieces of silver, a peck of wheat, two pieces of
brass.

To one, who came to him to study Philosophy, he gave a fish, and bid him
follow him, the other ashamed, threw it away and departed: not long after,
meeting the same person, he laughing, said, The friendship betwixt you and me
was broke off by a Fish. Diocl^s relates it thus; One saying to him, command me
Diogenes, he gave him a penny worth of cheese to bring after him; the other
refusing to carry it, our friendship, says he, a pennyworth of cheese has
dissolved.

Seeing a boy drink water in the hollow of his hand, he took his little cup out
of his wallet and threw it away, saying, The boy out-went him in srugality. He
threw away his dish also, seeing a Boy that had broken his, supping up his
broth in the same manner.

Seeing a woman prostrate her self unhandsomely in prayer, and desirous to
reprove her superstition, as Zoilus the Pergaean reports, came to her, and
said, Are you not ashamed, woman, that God who stands behind you (for all
things are full of him) should see you in this undecent posture.

He said, such as beat others ought to be consecrated to Aesculapius, the God
of Surgery.

He said, against Fortune we must oppose courage; against Nature, Law, against
Passion, Reason.

In the Craneum, Alexander standing by him, as the Sun shone, said to him, ask
of me what thou will; he answered, Do not stand between me and the Sun.

One reading a long tedious discourse, and coming at last near a blank leaf at
the end of the book, Be of good courage friends, says he, I see land.

To one, proving by the horned Syllogism that he had horns, he feeling of his
forehead, but I, says he, feel none. In like manner another maintaining there
was no such thing as motion, he rose up and walked. To one disputing concerning
Meteors, How long is it, says he, since you came from heaven?

A wicked man having written over the door of his house, Let no ill thing enter
here: Which way then, says he, must the Master come in?

He anointed his feet with sweet Unguents, saying, the scent went from the
crown of his head into the air; but from his feet to his nostrills.

To some Athenians, that persuaded him to be initiated into some Religious
Mysteries, alleging, that such as were initiated had the chiefest places in
the other World: It is ridiculous, says he, if Agesilaus and Epaminondas live
there amongst bogges, and the common people that are initiated live in the
blessed Islands. Or as Plutarch, hearing these verses of Socrates:

-- Thrice happy they
Who do these Mysteries survey;
They only after death are bless,
All miseries pursue the rest;
What, says he, shall Patoecion the thie^e be in better condition (because he
was initiated) then Epaminondas.

Mice coming to him as he was at dinner; See, says he, Diogenes also
maintains Parasites.

Aelian. var. hist. 14. ^3.
Diogenes being present at a discourse of Plato's* would not mind it, whereat
Plato angry, said, Thou dog, why mind'st thou not: Diogenes unmoved,
answered, Yet I never return to the place where I was sold, as dogs do,
alluding to Pl^to's voyage to Sicily.

Returning from a Bath, one asked him, if there were many men there; he said,
no: The other asking if there were much company; he said, there was.

Plato defining Man a two-footed Animal without wings, and this definition
being approved, Diogenes took a Cock, and plucking off all its feathers, turned
it into Plato's School, saying, This is Plato's Man* whereupon to the
definition was added, having broad nails.

To one demanding at what time he should dine, if thou art rich, says he, when
thou will, if poor, when thou can.

At Megara, seeing their sheep with thick fleeces, and their children almost
naked; It is better, says he, to be the sheep of a Megaraean, then his son.

To one, who hitting him with the end of a long pole, bad him him take heed,
Why, says he, do you mean to hit me again?

He said, the Orators were the servants of the multitude; Crowns, the biles
of glory.

Stab. Ser. 4.
He lighted a candle at noon, saying, I look for a man.

He stood in the rain without any shelter, some that were present pitying him;
Plato, who was there likewise, said, if you will show your selves pitiful to
him, go away, reflecting upon his vainglory.

One giving him a box on the ear, O Hercules, says he, I knew not that I
should have walked with a Helmet.

Medias giving him many blows with his fist, saying, there are 3000 drachmes
[alluding to the fines imposed upon such outrages] ready counted for you upon
the table: The next day he got a Caes^us, and beat him with it, saying, There
are three thousand drachmes ready counted for you.

Lysias an Apothecary asking him, if he thought there were many Gods: How,
says he, can I think otherwise, when I take you to be their enemy. Others
ascribe this to Theodorus.

Seeing one that had besprinkled himself with water: O unhappy man, says he,
do thou not know, that the errors of life are no more to be washed away by
water, then errors in grammar.

He rebuked those who complained of Fortune, saying, They did not request what
was good, but that which seemed good to them.

Of those, who are terrified with dreams, he said: You never are concerned for
the things you do waking, but what you fancy in your sleep you make your
greatest business.

Et Plut. (...) curiositate.
At the Olympic Games the Crier proclaiming Dioxippus has overcome men; he
slaves, says he, but I men.

Alexander sending an Epistle to Antipater at Athens, by one whose name was
Athlias, Diogenes being present said, Athlias from Athlias, by Athlias to
Athlias, alluding to the name, which implies misery.

Perdiccas threatening him with death unless he would come to him; that is no
great matter, says he, for a Cantharides or spider may do as much; you should
rather have threatened, that you would have lived well without me.

He often said the Gods had given to men an easy life, but that it was hidden
from those who used choice diet, unguents and the like; whence to one whose
servant put on his clothes, you will not be truly happy, says he, until he
wipe your nose also, that is, when you have lost the use of your hands.

Seeing some that had the charge of the things belonging to the Temple, leading
a man to Prison, who had stolen a Cup out of the Treasury, the great thieves,
says he, lead Prisoner the lesser.

To a young man that throwing stones at a Gibbet, well done, says he, you will
be sure to hit the mark.

To some young men that coming about him, said, take heed you do not bite us:
fear not boys, said he, Diogenes eat not Beetes [for so he termed effeminate
persons.]

To one feasting, clothed in a Lions skin, do not says he, defile virtues
Livery.

To one extolling the happiness of Callis^henes, in that living with Alexander
he had plenty of all things; nay, says he, he is not happy, for he dines and
suppes when Alexander pleases.

When he wanted money, he said, he went to redemand, not borrow it of his
friends.

Seeing a young man going along with some great persons to a Feast, he took him
from them, and carried him to his own friends, bidding them to look to him
better.

To one neatly dressed, who had asked him some question, I cannot answer you,
says he, unless* I knew whether you were a man or a woman.

Vit. Athenae.
Of a young man playing at Cattabus in a Bath, by how much the better, says
he, so much the worse.

At a Feast one threw a bone to him as to a dog, which he like a dog took up,
and lifting his leg (...),

Orators, and all such as sought glory by speaking, he called (...), thrice
men, instead of (...), thrice wretched.

He called an unlearned rich man a sheep with a golden Fleece.

Seeing written upon the Gates of a Prodigall's house, TO BE SOLD; I knew,
says he, being so overcharged with wine, it would vomit up the owner.

To a young man professing himself much displeased at the many persons that
courted him, let him see, says he, that you are displeased by casting off your
effeminacy.

Of a foul Bath, where, says he, shall they be washed that wash here?

A big fellow that played on the harp, though by all others discommended for
playing ill, he praised, being asked why, because, says he, being an able
fellow, he chooses rather to play on the harp then to steal.

A certain harper who played so ill, that the company always went away and left
him, he saluted thus, Good morrow cock, the other asking why, because, says
he, your Music makes every one rise.

Seeing a young man doing something; which though it were ordinary, he conceived
to be unseemly, he filled his bosom with beans, and in that manner walked
through the people, to whom gazing upon him, I wonder, says he, you look at
one and not a^ him.

Hegesias desiring him to lend him some of his writings, you are a fool, says
he, Hegesias, who eat figgs not painted but real; yet neglec^ true
exercitation, and seek after the written.

Seeing one that had won the Victory at the Olympic Exercises feeding sheep;
you have made have, says he, good man, from the Olympic Exercises to the
Nemaean, the word alluding to feeding of sheep.

Being demanded how it comes to pass that Wrastlers are for the most part
stupid fellows, he answered, because they are made chiefly of the skins of Oxen
and swine.

To a Tyrant, demanding of him what brass was best, he answered that whereof,
the Statues of Harmodius and Aristogiton were made. This others ascribe to
Plato.

Being asked how Dionysius uses his friends, as vessels, says he, emptying
the full, and throwing away the empty.

A young man newly married, having written upon his house, the Son of Jupiter,
Hercules, Callinicus dwells here let nothing ill enter, he added, Assistance
after a defeat, implying it was too late, he being already married.

He said Covetousness is the Metropolis of all evil.

Seeing one, that had wasted all his means, eating Olives, if you had used to
dine so, said he, you would not have supped so.

He said, Good men are the Images of the Gods, love is the business of idle
persons.

Being asked what is the most miserable thing in life, he said, an old man in
want.

Et. Stob. ser. 65
Being demanded, the bitings of what beasts were most dangerous, Of Wild
Beasts, says he, a Detractor, of Tame, a Flatterer.

Beholding a picture of two Centaures very ill painted, he said, which of
these is Chiron; the jest consists in the Greek word, which signifies
worse, and was also the name of a Centaur, tutor to Achilles.

He said, the discourse of flatterers is a rope of honey. He called the belly
the Charybdis of life.

Hearing that Didymo, an Adulterer, was taken; he deserves, says he; to be put
out of his name (meaning emasculated)

Stob. Ser. 55.
Being asked why gold looks pale; because, says he, many lie in wait for it.

Seeing a woman carried in a Litter; that is not, says he, a fit cage for such
a Beast.

Seeing a Servant that had run away from his Master, sitting upon the brink of
a well: Young man, says he, take heed you do not fall in: alluding to the
punishment of fugitive servants.

Seeing one that used to steal garments in the bath, he said, (...), Do you
come for unguents, or for another garment?

Seeing some women hanged upon an Olive Tree; I would, says he, all trees bore
the same fruit.

Seeing a thief that used to rob Tombs, he spoke to him in that verse of
Homer, -- What now of men the best,
Come thou to plunder the deceas't?


Seeing a handsome youth all alone asleep, he awaked him, saying in the words
of Homer, Awake, (...)

To one that feasted sumptuously, he said that verse of Homer. Son, thou have
but a little time to live.

Plato discoursing concerning Idaeas, and naming (...), and (...), as if he
should say, Tabletty and Cuppeity, he said, I see Plato, the table and the cup,
but not the tableity and cuppeity. Plato answered, it is true indeed, you have
eyes by which the table and cup are seen; but not an Intellect, by which
tableity and cuppeity are seen.

Being demanded what he thought Socrates; he answered, mad. Being demanded at
what time a man should marry; a young man, says he, not yet; an old man not at
all.

To one that asked, what he should give him to let him strike him, he answered,
a Helmet.

Stob. Ser. 161
To a young man dressing himself neatly if this, says he, be for the sake of
men, you are unhappy; if for women, you are unjust.

Seeing a young man blush; take courage, says he, that is the color of Virtue.

Hearing two men plead against one another, he condemned both, saying, one had
stolen, and the other had not lost.

Being demanded what wine he thought most pleasant, he answered, that which is
drunk at another cost.

To one that said, many deride thee; he answered, but I am not derided: as
conceiving, says Vit. Fab. Max.
Plutarch, those only to be derided, who are troubled at such things.

To one who said, Life is an ill thing: Life, says he, is not an ill thing,
but an ill life is an ill thing*

Stob. Ser. 39.
As he was dining upon Olives, they caused Tart to be set before him, which he
threw away, saying, Stranger, when Kings approach, withdraw. The words of
Laius's Officers to Oedipus.

Being asked what kind of dog he was, he answered, When he was hungry, a
Spaniel, when his belly was full, a Mastiffe; one of those which many commend,
but d^re not take abroad with them a hunting.

Being demanded whether wise men might eat dainties; all things, says he, as
well as others.

Stob Ser. 77.
Being demanded why men gave to Beggars; and not to Philosophers; because,
says he, they are afraid they may be lame or blind, but are not afraid they
may be Philosophers.

To one that reproached him as having counterfeited money; indeed, says he,
there was a time when I was such a one as you are; but the time will never come
that you will be as I am.

Coming to Mindus, and seeing the Gates very large, the City small; Mindinians,
says he, shut your Gates, left your City run out at them.

Seeing a thief that was taken stealing purple, he applied that verse of Homer
to him, The purple death, and potent fate have seized.

To Craterus, who invited him to come to him, he returned answer, I had rather
lick salt at Athens, then enjoy the greatest delicacies with Craterus.

Meeting Anaximenes the Orator, who was very fat; Give us, says he, some of
your flesh, it will ease you, and help us.

The same Anaximenes being in the midst of a discourse, Diogenes showing a
piece of salt-fish, diverted the attention of his Auditors; whereat Anaximenes
growing angry, See, says he, a hard pennyworth of salt-fish has broke off
Anaximenes's discourse.

Some ascribe this to him. Plato seeing him wash herbs, came and whispered thus
to him, If you had followed Dionysius, you would not have needed to wash herbs;
to whom he returned this answer in his ear, if you had washed herbs, you needed
not to have followed Dionyfius.

To one that said to him, many laugh at you and Asses perhaps at them, says
he; but they care not for Asses, nor I for them.

Seeing a young man studying Philosophy: Well done, says he, you will teach
those, who love your outward beauty, to admire your soul.

To one that admired the multitude of votive offerings in Samothracia, given by
such as had escaped shipwreck: There would have been far more, says he, if
those who perished had presented theirs. Others ascribe this to Diagoras the
Melian.

To a young man going to a feast, he said, You will come back Chiron: (alluding
to the word which implies worse) the young man came to him the next day,
saying, I went and returned not Chiron: No, says he, not Chiron, but Eurylion.

Returning from Lacedaemon to Athens, to one that asked him, from whence he
came, and whither he went: From men, says he, to women.

Returning from the Olympic Games, to one that asked if there were much people
there; Much people, says he, but few men.

He compared Prodigalls to fig trees growing on a precipice, whose fruit men
taste not, but crows and vultures devour.

Phryne the Curtezan, having set up a golden Statue of Venus at Delphi, he wrote
on it, From the iatemperance of the Grecians.

Alexander coming to him, and saying, I am Alexander the great King: And I,
says he, am Diogenes the Dog.

Being asked why he was called Dog: I fawn on those that give, says he, I
bark at those that will not give, and I bite the wicked.

As he was gathering figgs, the keeper of the Orchard spying him, told him, it
is not long since a man was hanged upon that Tree: And for that reasou, says
he, I will cleanse it.

Ael. 12. 58.
Observing Dioxippus the Olympic victor, to cast many glances upon a Curtezan:
See, says he, a common Woman leads the martial Ramm by the neck.

To two infamous persons stealing away from him: Fear not, says he, dogs eat
not thistles.

To one that asked him concerning a youth taken in adultery, whence he was; he
answered, of Tegea, Tegea ( a City of Arcadia) whereto he alluded, is a public
Brothell.

Seeing one, that in former times had been an ill Wrastler, profess Medicine;
What is the matter, says he, have you a design to cast those down that have
thrown you?

Seeing the Son of a common woman throw stones amongst a crowd: ^ake heed,
says he, you do not hit your Father.

To a youth, showing him a sword, given him by one that loved him, he said,
(...).

To some that extolled one who had bestowed something on him: But you do not
praise me, says he, who deserved to receive it.

To one that redemanded an old Cloak of him, if you gave it me, says he, I
must keep it, if you lent it me, I must make use of it.

To a suppositi tious person that said to him, you have gold in your Cloak,
Yes, says he, and for that reason I lay it The jest consists in the
allusion betwixt those two Greek words. (...)
under me when I go to sleep.

Being demanded what he had gained by Philosophy, if nothing else says he, at
least this, to be preapred for all fortunes.

Being demanded of what Country he was, he answered, a Citizen of the World.

To one that sacrificed, praying he might have a child, you pray for a child,
says he, but never trouble your self what kind of child it may prove.

At an ordinary, being demanded money, he answered the Master in that verse of
Homer,

Ask others, but from Hector hold thy hand.

Et Stob. ser.
He said the Mistresses of Kings were Queens; for the Kings did whatsoever they
would have them.

The Athenians having decreed to style Alexander Bacchus, and make me, says
he, Serapts.

To one reproaching him for living in filthy places, the Sun, says he, visits
Kennells, yet is not defiled.

Being at supper in the Temple, they brought him course bread, he threw it
away, saying, nothing but what is pure must come within a Temple.

To one that said, why do you, who know nothing, profess Philosophy? he
answered, though I should but pretend to study Philosophy, yet that were a
profession thereof.

To one that recommended his Son to him, saying, he was very ingenious, and
exceeding well educated, he answered, why then does he need me?

Those who speak good things, but do them not, differ nothing from a Lute, for
that neither hears nor has sense.

He went to the Theater, as all the people were going out, being asked why he
did so, This, says he, is that I study all my life time.

Seeing an effeminate young man, are you not ashamed, says he, to use your
self worse then Nature has done? she has made you a man, but you will force
your self to be a woman.

Stob. ser. 104.
Seeing an ignorant man tuning a Lute, are you not ashamed, says he, to try to
make a Lute sound harmoniously, and yet suffer your life to be so full of
discord.

To one that said he was unfit for Philosophy, why do you live, says he, if
you care not for living honestly.

To one who despised his own Father, are you not ashamed, says he, to despise
him who is the cause you are so proud?

Hearing a handsome youth speak foolishly, are you not ashamed, says he, to
draw a leaden dagger out of an ivory sheath.

Being reproached for accepting a Cloak from Antipater, he answered in those
words of Homer,

The gifts of Gods must not be thrown away.

One that hit him with a pole, and then bid him take heed, he struck with his
staff, and said, and take you heed.

To one that sued to a Curtezan, What mean you wretch says he, to sue for that
which is much better to miss.

To one that smelled sweet of Unguents, take heed, says he, this perfume make
not your life stink.

He said, Slaves serve their Masters, but wicked men their passions.

Being demanded why slaves are called (...) Footmen, because says he, they
have feet like men, but such minds, as you that ask the question.

Seeing an unskilful Archer going to shoot, he sat down at the mark, lest,
says he, he should hit me.

He said lovers are unhappy in pleasure.

Being demanded whether death be ill, how, says he, can that be ill, whereof
when it comes we have no sense.

Alexander coming to him, and saying, do you not fear me? what says he, are
you good or ill, he answered good: who, replies Diogenes, fears that which is
good?

He said, Learning is a regulation to young men, a comfort to old men, wealth
to poor men, and an Ornament to rich men.

To Didymo an Adulterer curing a maids eye, take heed, says he, least in
curing the eye, you hurt not the ball, [the word (...), signifying both the
eye-ball and Virginity.]

To one that said his friends lay in wait for him, what then is to be done,
says he, if friends and enemies must be used alike.

Being demanded what is best amongst men, he answered, freedom of speech.

Coming into a school, and seeing there many statues of the Muses, but few
Auditors, by the help of the Gods, Master, says he, you have many Auditors.

To one that asked him how he might order himself best, St^b. Eth. ser. 1.
by reprehending, says he, those things in your self which you blame in
others.

He gave good counsel to a person very dissolute, Ser.
being demanded what he was doing, he answered, washing an Aethiop.

He went backwards into the School of the Stoics, Ser. 3^^.
whereat some laughing, are you not ashamed, says he, to do that in the whole
course of your life, for which you deride me in walking.

He said, Ibid.
men provide for their living, but not for their well living.

He said, Ser. 37, 84.
it was a shame to see Wrastlers and Singing-Masters observe temperate diet,
and moderate their pleasures, one for exercise, the other for his voice, and
yet no man would do so much for Virtue's sake.

He said, Ser. 45.
Pride, like a shepherd, drives men whither it pleases.

Seeing the high walls of Megara, Ser. 48.
he said, Unhappy people, mind not the height of your walls, but the height of
their courages who are to stand on the walls.

He compared covetous men to such as have the dropsy, Ser. 53.
those are full of money, yet desire more; these of water, yet thirst after
more: Passions grow more intense by enjoyment of what they desire.

Seeing a man make love to old rich widows: Ser. 53.
This love, says he, is not blind, but toothlesse.

Being demanded what beasts were the worst: Ser. 54.
in the field, says he, Bears and Lions, in the City, Usurers and Sycophants.

He compared flattery to an empty tomb, Ser. 64.
on which Friendship was inscribed.

Blaming Antisthenes for being too remiss in discourse, Ser. 66.
in regard that when he spoke loudest he could hardly be heard, and calling
himself the Trumpet of reproof: Antisthenes replied, he was like a Be, that
makes no great noise, yet stings sharply.

He said, Ibid.
reproof is the good of others.

A certain Athenian asking him why he lived not with the Lacedaemonians, Ibid.
whom he praised so much: Physicians, says he, though they study health,
converse with the sick.

He said, Ibid.
other dogs bark at their enemies, I, my friends, that I may preserve them.

He asked Plato if he were writing Laws: Ibid.
Plato affirmed he was. Did you not write a Commonwealth before, said
Diogenes? I did, answers Plato. And had not that Commonwealth Laws* says he?
The other answering it had: To what end, replied Diogenes, do you write new
Laws?

He said, Ser. 6^.
To give Physic to a dead body, or advise an old man, is the same thing?

To a bald man that reviled him, Ser. 71.
I will not return your reproaches, says he, yet cannot but commend your hair,
for leaving so bad a head.

To an Informer that fell out with him; I am glad, Ibid.
says he, of the enmity betwixt us, for you hurt not your foes, but your
friends.

To one that reviled him; Ser. 72.
No man, says he, will believe you when you speak ill of me, no more then they
would me, if I should speak well of you.

Alexander sent him a dish full of bones, Ser. 71.
with this message, It was meat for dogs; he answered, Yea, but not sit for a
King to send.

He said, Ibid.
it was the same fault to give to them that deserved nothing, as not to give to
them that do.

He said, Ser. 87.
As houses, where there is plenty of meat, are full of mice, so the bodies of
such as eat much are full of diseases.

At a Feast, Ser. 88.
one giving him a great cup full of wine, he threw it away; for which being
blamed, If I had drunk it, says he, not only the wine would have been lost,
but I also.

Being demanded what was hardest, Ser. 105.
he answered, To know our selves, for we construe most things according to our
own partiality.

He said, Ser. 117.
Medea was a wise woman, not a Witch, who by labor and exercise corroborated
the bodies of effeminate persons, whence arose the fable, that she could renew
age.

To one that professed himself a Philosopher, Ser. 126.
but argued litigiously, he said, Why do you spoil the best part of
Philosophy, yet would be thought a Philosopher?

Questioning one of those young men that followed him, Ser. 133.
he was silent; whereupon Diogenes, Do you not think, says he, it bebelongs to
the same man to know when to speak, and when to hold his peace?

Being demanded how a man should live under the authority of superiors; Ser.
149. and 153.
as we do by fire, says he, not too near, lest it burn, not too far off, lest
we freez.

Seeing some women talking privately together: Ser. 183.
Behold, says he, the Asp borrowes poison from the Viper.

Being demanded what was the heaviest burden the earth bears, Ser. 210.
he answered, an ignorant man.

An Astrologer in the Forum discoursing to the people, Ser. 211.
and showing them in a tablet the erratick Stars: No, says Diogenes, it is
not the Stars that err, but these, pointing to the people.

Being demanded what men are the most noble: Ser. 216.
They, says he, who contemn wealth, glory, and pleasure, and over-master the
contraries to these, poverty, ignominy, pain, death.

Seeing the servants of Anaximenes carrying many goods, Ser. 230.
he demanded to whom they belonged; they answered, to Anaximenes. Is he not
ashamed, replied Diogenes, to have so much household stuff, and yet not be
master of himself.

He said, Ser. 233.
Virtue dwells neither in a rich City, nor a private House.

He said, Ser. 235.
Poverty is a selfe-taught help to Philosophy, for what Philosophy endeavors
to persuade by words, poverty enforces in practice.

To a wicked man reproaching him for his poverty; Ibid.
I never knew, says he, any man punished for poverty, but many for wickedness.

He called Poverty a selfe-instructing virtue. Ibid.


To one that reproached him with poverty: Ser. 23^.
What mean you, says he; poverty never made a Tyrant, riches many.

Alexander seeing him asleep in his Tubb, Ser. 148.
said, O Tubb full of wisdom: The Philosopher rising up, answered, Great King,
One drop of Fortune's better far
Then Tubbs repleat with wisdom are.
To whom a stander by replied, One drop of Wisdom Fortune's Seas excells;
In unwise souls misfortune ever dwells.


Seeing an old woman painted, Ser. 270.
if this he for the living, you are deceived, says he, if for the dead, make
have to them.

To one bewailing his own misfortune, Ser. 271.
as that he should not die in his own Country, be of comfort, says he* the way
to the next World is alike in every place.

Having a great pain in his shoulder which troubled him much, Ael. var. hist.
10, 11.
one said to him in derision, why do thou not die Diogenes, and free thy self
from this misery, he answered, it is sit they should live who know how to order
their life, for you who know not what to do or say, it is a convenient time to
die.

He used to say, Plut. de ^xul.
Aristotle dineth when Philip pleases, but Diogenes when it pleases Diogenes.

At Cori^th, Plut. quom. ger. Resp.
seeing Dionysius the younger, who was deposed from the Kingdom of Sicily, This
is a life, says he, you deserve not, you merit rather not to live here freely
and without fear, but at home in perpetual imprisonment.

To some who commended Plato, Pl. de virt. Moral.
he said, what has he done worthy commendation, having professed Philosophy
so long, yet never moved any to grief.

To one demanding how he might take the greatest revenge upon his Enemy, Pl. de
and. Poet.
he answered, by being good and virtuous your self.

In commending his Master Antisthenes, Macrob. Sat. 7. 3.
he would say of him, of rich he made me poor, and instead of a fair house,
made me live in a Tubb.

CHAP. VI.
His Writings.
OF the Writings ascribed to him are these, Dialogues. Ichthyas The Geay. The
Leopard. The Athenian people. Policy. Ethick art. Of Riches. Erotick.
Theodorus. Hypsias. Aristarchus Of Death. Epistles. Tragedies 7. Helena.
Thyestes. Hercules. Achilles. Medea. Chrysippus. OEdipus.
Sosicrates and Satyrus affirm that none of these were written by Diogenes; the
Tragedies Satyrus ascribes to Philischus of Aegina. Sotion affirms these only
to have been written by Diogenes.

Of Virtue. Of Good. Erotick. The poor. The Tolerant. The Leopard, Cassander.
Cephalio. Philiscus. Aristarchus. Sisiphus. Ganymede. Chria's, and Epistles.
CHAP. VII.
His Death.
HE died, as Demetrius says, at Corinth about 90. years old, the same day that
Alexander died at Babylon, Laert.
which according to Aelian was the seventh of Thargelion in the first year of
114t^ Olympiad.

The manner of his death is variously related. Eubulus says, he lived to his
end with Xeniades, and was buried by his Sons. As he lay sick, Xeniades asked
him how he would be buried, he answered, with his face downwards; Xeniades
demanding the reason, because, says he, all things will be turned upside-down,
alluding, says Laertius, to the greatness of the Macedonians, who not long
before were a poor inconsiderable people. Some report that being near death, he
gave order that his body should be left unburied, that the wild Beasts might
partake of him, or be thrown into a ditch, and a little dust be cast over it,
or thrown upon a dunghill, that he might benefit his Brethren.

Aelian ar. hist. 8. 14.
says, that being sick to death, he threw himself down from a bridge which was
near the Gymnasium, and ordered the Keeper of the Palaestra to take his body
and throw it into the River Ilissus.

Others affirm he died of a surfeit of raw flesh, others that he stopped his own
breath, others, that cutting a Cuttle-fish, in pieces to throw it to dogs, it
bit asunder a Nerve in his foot, whereof he died.

Others affirm he died as he was going to the Olympic Games: being taken with
a Fever, he lay down by the way, and would not suffer his friends to carry
him, but sitting under the shade of the next tree, spoke thus to them; This
night I shall be a Victor or vanquished, if I overcome the Fever, I will come
to the Games, if not, I must go to the other World, and drive it away by death.

Antisthenes says, his Friends were of opinion he stopped his own breath, for
coming as they constantly used to visit him in the Cranaeum where he lived,
they found him covered; they did not imagine it was sleep, by reason of his
great wakefulnesse; but immediately putting back his Cloak perceived he was
dead. Hereupon there arose a contention amongst them who should bury him; they
fell from words to blows, but the Magistrates and great ones of the City came
themselves and buried him, by the gate which leads to Isthmus. Over the
Sepulcher they placed a Column, and upon it a Dog cut out of Parian stone.
Afterward his own Countrymen honored him with many brazen Statues, bearing
this Inscription; Time does the strongest Brass decay
Diogenes, thou never can die,
Who to content the ready way
To following Ages did descry.


Laertius reckons five of this name, the first of Apollonia, a natural
Philosopher.

The second a Sicionian. The third this. The fourth a Stoic of Seleucia. The
fifth of Tarsis.
MONIMUS.
Laert.
MOnimus was a Syracusian, Disciple to Diogenes, he was first servant to a
Mony-changer, to whom Xeniades who bought Diogenes, often coming, he was so
taken with the worth and Virtue of the person, that he counterfeited himself
mad, and threw all the money from off the Table, whereupon his Master turning
him away, he betook himself to Diogenes. He followed likewise Crates the
Cynick, and others of that Sect, which confirmed his Master in the opinion that
he was mad. He was a person eloquent and learned, mentioned by Menander in his
Hippocomus, of so great constancy, that he contemned all glory for virtues
sake. He wrote some things, which at first appearance seemed Ludicrous, but
contained deep serious sense; as of Appetites, two Books, and a Protreptick.

ONESICRITUS.
Laert.
Onesicritus was of Aegina, or according to Demetrius an Astypalaean; he had
two Sons. He sent the younger named Androsthenes to Athens, who hearing
Diogenes would not depart thence. Hereupon he sent the elder, named Philiscus,
who stayed there likewise for the same reason. Lastly, the Father himself
went, and was so much taken with Diogenes, that he became a sedulous Auditor of
him, as his two sons were.

He was esteemed amongst the most eminent Disciples of Diogenes; Laertius
compares him with Xenophon; one fought under Cyrus, the other under Alexander:
One wrote the institution of Cyrus, the other, the praise of Alexander: Their
styles also were very like.

CRATES.
Crates was a Theban, Laert.
Son of Ascandas: He was likewise reckoned amongst the most eminent of
Diogenes's Disciples; yet Hippobotus says, he was not a Disciple of Diogenes,
but of Bryso the Achaean.

He flourished about the 113th Olympiad. Antisthenes, in his successions,
says, that being at a Tragedy where Telephus was represented, carrying a
Basket in a sordid condition, he betook himself to the Cynicall Philosophy,
and selling all his estate, (for he was very rich, having gotten together above
two hundred talents) he distributed it amongst the Citizens, and was so
constant a Professor of this Philosophy, that Philemon, the Comic Poet, takes
notice thereof in these words, By him in Summer a thick Coat was worn,
In Wintertime ( so temperate) a torn.


Diocles says, Diogenes persuaded him to part with his estate, and to throw
all the money he had left into the Sea: and that the house of Crates was from
Alexander, that of Hipparchia his Wife, from Philip. Some of his near friends
that came to him to dissuade him from this course of life, he beat away, for he
was of a resolute spirit.

Demetrius the Magnesian says, he deposited some money in the hands of a
Banquier, with this condition, that if his sons betook themselves to any
Civil employment, it should be repaid again; but, if to Philosophy, it should
be distributed amongst the people, for as much as a Philosopher stands in need
of nothing.

Eratosthenes relates, that having a son named Pasicles, by his Wife
Hipparchia, as soon as he arrived at man's estate, he brought him to the house of
a young maid that was his slave, saying, This is a hereditary matrimony to you:
but those who commit adultery, are, according to the Tragedians punished with
banishment or death; Those who keep Concubines were, according to the
Comedians, by luxury and drunkenness, transported to madness.

Pasicles, the Disciple to Euclid, was his brother.

He said, it is not possible to find a man without a fault, for, in every
Pomgranat there is at least one grain corrupt.

Having displeased Nicodromus a Lutinist, he beat him black and blew; whereupon
he pasted a piece of paper on his forehead, wherein was written, Nicodromus did
this.

He was exceedingly invective against common women.

He reproved Demetreus Phalerius for sending bread and wine to him, saying, I
wish the fountains also produced bread; intimating that he lived with water.

The Athenian Magistrates blamed him for wearing a long robe; I will show you
Theophrastus, says he, in the same attire; which they not believing, he
brought them to a Barbers shop, where he was sitting to be trimmed.

At Thebes, being beaten by the Master of the Gymnasium; or, as others, at
Corinth by Euthicrates, he laughed, saying, He by the foot him drew,
And over the threshold threw.


Zeno in his Chrias says, he sowed a sheep-skinn upon his cloak, to appear the
more deformed. He was of a very unhandsome look, and whilst he discoursed,
laughed.

He used to lift up his hands and say, Be of good courage, Grecians, both for
the eyes and all other parts, for you shall soon see these deriders surprised
by sickness, and proclaiming you happy, blame their own slothfulness.

He said, we ought so long to study Philosophy, until the leaders of the Army
seem to be Horse-drivers.

He said, they who lived with flatterers were forsaken persons, living like
sheep amidst wolves, not with those who wished them well.

Perceiving he drew nigh to death, he looked upon himself, saying, -- And do
thou go, old friend,
To the next world, thou whom old age does bend.
For he was crooked through age.


To Alexander, asking whether he would that his Country should be restored or
not: To what end, says he, seeing there will come perhaps another Alexander,
and depopulate it. He said, contempt of glory and want were his Country, which
were not subject to Fortune; and that he was Countryman to Diogenes, not
fearing any body.

Coming into the Forum, Sub. Ser. 37.
where he beheld some buying, others selling: These, says he, think themselves
happy in employments contrary to one another; but I think my self happy, in
having nothing to do either way.

To a young man, Ser. 6^.
followed by a great many Parasites: Young man, says he, I am sorry to see you
so much alone.

He said, Ser. 77.
we ought not to accept gifts from all men, for virtue ought not to be
maintained by vice.

Seeing at Delphi a golden Image of Phryne the Curtezan, Ser. 87.
he cried out, This is a Trophy of the Grecian intemperance.

Seeing a young man highly fed and fat: Unhappy youth, says he, Ibid.
do not ^ortifie your prison.

He said, Ser. 237.
He gained glory, not by his riches, but his poverty.

To one, Ibid.
demanding what he should get by Philosophy: You will learn, says he, to open
your purse easily, and to give readily, not as you do now, turaing away,
delaying and trembling, as if you had the palsy.

He said, Ibid.
Men know not how much a Wallet, a measure of Lupines, and security of mind is
worth.

The Epistles of Crates are extant, wherein, says Laertius, he writes
excellent Philosophy, in style resembling Plato. He wrote Tragedies likewise,
full of deep Philosophy.

He died old, and was buried in Baeotia.

METROCLES.
Laert.
METROCLES was Disciple of Crates, Brother to Hipparchia. He first heard
Theophrastus the Peripatetick, etc. afterward applied himself to Crates, and
became an eminent Philosopher.

He burnt, as Hecaton says, his writings, saying, These are the dreams of
wild fantastic youth.

He burnt likewise the dictates of his Master Theophrastus. Vulcan come hither,
Venus needs thy aid.

He said, Of things, some are purchased by money, as Houses; some by time and
diligence, as Learning: Riches is hurtful, if not rightly applied.

He died old: he strangled himself.

Of his Disciples are remembered Theombrotus and Cloemenes. Demetrius of
Alexandria was Auditor of Theombrotus: Timarchus of Alexandria, and Echicles of
Ephesus were Disciples of Cleomenes. Echicles heard also Theombrotus, from whom
came Menedemus; of whom hereafter. Amongst these was also Menippus, of Sinopis.

HIPPARCHIA.
HIpparchia was likewise taken with the Discourses of those Cynicks, she was
Sister to Metrocles; they were both Maronites. She fell in love with Crates, as
well for his discourse as manner of life, from which none of her Suitors by
their Wealth, Nobility or Beauty, could divert her, but that she would bestow
her self upon Crates, threatening her Parents, if they would not suffer her to
marry him, she would kill her self. Hereupon her Parents went to Crates,
desiring him to dissuade her from this resolution which he endeavored but not
prevailing went away, and brought all the little furniture of his house and
showed her, this says he, is your husband, that the furniture of your house,
consider upon it, for you cannot be mine unless you follow the same course of
life. She immediately took him, and went up and down with him, and in public,
(...), and went along with him to Feasts.

At a Feast of Lysimachus she met Theodorus the Atheist, with whom she argued
thus; If that, which if Theodorus do be not unjustly done, neither is it
unjustly done if Hipparchia do the same; But Theodorus if he strike himself
does not unjustly; therefore Hipparchia does not unjustly if she strike
Theodorus; Theodorus answered nothing, only plucked her by the Coat, which she
wore not like a woman, but after the manner of the Cynicks, whereat Hipparchia
was nothing moved, whereupon he said, Her Web and Loome
She left at home.


I did says she, Theodorus, and I think have not erred in choosing to bestow
that time which I should have spent in weaving on Philosophy.

Much more says Laertius is ascribed to her.

MENIPPVS.
MEnippus was a Cynick, a Phoenician by birth, Servant by condition, as
Achaicus affirms. Diocles says, his Father was of Pontus called Bato. Menippus
for acquisition of riches wentto Thebes and was made free of that City. He
wrote nothing serious, all his books being full of mirth, not unlike the
writings of Meleager. Hermippus says, he was named Hemerodanista, the daily
Usurer, for he put out money to Merchants upon Interest, and took pawns; at last
being cheated of all his goods, he hanged himself.

Some say the Books that are ascribed to him were writ by Dionysius and
Zopyrus, Colophonians, which being ludicrous, they gave to him as a person
disposed that way; they are reckoned, thirteen.

Naenia's. Testaments. Epistles, in the persons of the Gods. Two natural
Philosophers, Mathematicians and Grammarians. Of Epicure.
Laertius reckons six of this name; the first wrote the Lydian story, and
epitomized Xanthus.

The second this. The third a Sophist, of Caria. The fourth a Graver. The fifth
and sixth Painters, both mentioned by Apollodorus.
MENEDEMVS.
MEnedemus was Disciple of Colotes, of Lampsacum; he proceeded as Hippobotus
relates, to so great extravagance that he went up and down in the habit of the
Furies, declaring he was come from the World below to take notice of such as
offended, and that he was to return thither to give an account of them.

He went thus attired, a dark Gown to his heels, girt with a purple girdle,
upon his head an Arcadian hat, on which were woven the twelve signs, tragic
buskins, a long beard, in his hand an ashen staff. Hithertherto of the Cynicks.

FINIS.
THE HISTORY OF PHILOSOPHY.

The Eighth Part, Containing the Stoic Philosophers.



LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and Tho: Dring. An. Dom. 1656.

ZENON* ^^


ZENO.
CHAP. I.
His Country, Parents, and first Studies.
THE Sect of Stoics had its original from the Cynicks, Zeno was the Author
thereof, who having first been a Scholar of Crates, and afterward a hearer of
other Philosophers, at last instituted this new Sect. Laert.
He was born at Cittium, a Greek Sea-Town in the Isle of Cyprus, Strab. lib.
with a locked Haven, inhabited by Phoenicians, Suid.
whence he sometimes was termed the Phoenician. His Father was called Mnaseas,
by some Demeas, a Merchant, whence was objected to Zeno, the obscurity of his
Birth and Country, as being Cic. de fin.
a stranger; and of mean Parentage, whereof he was so far from being ashamed,
that P lut. de rep. Stoic.
he refused to be made a Citizen of Athens, as conceiving it an undervaluing of
his own Country; in so much as Laert.
when he contributed to a Bath in Athens, and his name was inscribed upon a
Pillar with the Title of Philosopher, he desired they would add a Cittiean.

Laert.
Zeno (as Hecaton and Apollonius Tyrius relate,) enquiring of the Oracle what
course he should take to lead the best kind of life, was answered, that he
should converse with the dead, whereupon he addicted himself to the reading of
ancient Authors.

Laert.
Herein he was not a little furthered by his Father, who, as Demetrius says,
trading frequently to Athens, brought him as yet but very young, many
Socraticall Books, which excited in him a great affection to learning.

Laert.
Being now 17. (or as Persaeus 22) years old, he took a voyage to Athens,
carried thither as well by his particular inclination to Philosophy, as by his
business, which was to fell some Purple that he had brought out of Phoenicia.
He took along with him a hundred Talents, and having sold his Merchandise,
applied himself to Philosophy, yet continued to lend his money out to Merchants
upon interest, so to improve his stock.

Some affirm his Ship was cast away in the Piraeum, which news being brought
him to Athens, he seemed nothing at all moved, but only said, Thou do well
Fortune; Plut. de util. cap. ex inimic.
to drive me into a Gown, or as Seneca, Fortune commands me to study Philosophy
more earnestly.

Laer.
Others say, that being troubled at the loss of his Ship, he went up to the
City of Athens, and sitting in a Booksellers shop, read a piece of Xenophon's
Commentaries, where with being much pleased, he asked the Bookseller where,
such men lived, Crates by chance passing by, the Bookseller pointed to him,
saying, follow that man; which he did, and from that time forward, became a
Disciple of Crates.

CHAP. II.
Of his Masters.
ZEno thus changing the course of his life, applied himself to Crates, Laert.
being apt to Philosophy, but more modest then suited with the Cynicall Sect.
Which Crates to remedy, gave him a pot full of pottage to carry through the
Ceramick, and perceiving him to hide it, as ashamed, with his Coat, he struck
the pot with his stick and broke it. Zeno running away, all wet, what, said he,
are you running away little Phoenician, no body hurt you? He made a little
hollow cover of a pot, in which he carried the money of his Master Crates, that
it might be in readiness when he went to buy meat. Thus he lived a while
with Crates, during which time he writ his Book of the Commonwealth, whence
some jeasting, said, it was written under the Dog's tail.

At last deserting, Crates he applied himself to Laert.
Stilpo the Megarick Philosopher. Apollonius Tyrius says, that taking hold of
his Cloak to pluck him away from Stilpo, he said, O Crates, the handles by
which the Philosophers are to be taken hold of, are their ears; Lead me by
those your way, or else though you constrain my body to be with you, my mind
will be with Stilpo. With Stilpo he remained ten years.

From Stilpo he went to Xenocrates, being so well satisfied with the
instruction of these two Masters, that he said, he made a very good voyage when
he was shipwrack'd, though others apply it to his living with Crates.

Laert.
He afterward applied himself to Diodorus Cronus, as Hippo^otus avers, under
whom he studied Dial^ctick, to which Science he was so much addicted, that
Laert.
when a certain Philosopher of that Sect had informed him of seven species of
Dialectick, in that sallacy which is called the Mower, he asked him what he was
to give him for his reward, the Philosopher demanded a hundred pieces of
Silver, Zeno (so much was he affected to Learning) gave him two hundred.

Laert. Suid.
Lastly, notwithstanding, that he had made a great progress in Philosophy, he
heard Polemon, whose Doctrine was against Pride; whereupon Polemon told him,
Zeno, I am not ignorant, that you lie in ambush, and come slily into my Garden
(as the Phoenicians use) to steal away Learning.

CHAP. III.
His School and institution of a Sect.
HAving been long a hearer of others, he at last thought fit to communicate the
Learning which he had received and improved. To this Laert.
end he made choice of the (...) the painted walk, so named from the pictures
of Polygnotus, otherwise called Pisianactia. Here he constantly walked and
discoursed, resolving to settle there, and make the place as full of
tranquillity as it had been before of trouble: For, in the time of the thirty
Tyrants, near 1400 Citizens were there put to death.

Hither resorted a great many Disciples to him, who were at first called
Zenonians, as Epicure affirms, from their Master; afterward from the place
where he taught, Stoics, as Eratosthenes in his eight Book of ancient Comedy;
adding, that not long before, some Poets that lived there were called Stoics
also, upon which occasion the name was very well known.

He was subtle in disquisition and dispute.

He disputed earnestly with Philo the Dialectick, and exercised himself
together with him: so that Zeno the younger admired him no less, then his
Master Diodorus.

He first seems (says Laertius) to have set a bound to the loosnesse and
extravagance of propositions: But, of this more, when we come to speak of his
Philosophy, which by reason of its largeness, we remit to the end of his life.

CHAP. IV.
What honors were conferred upon him.
ZENO by the Philosophy which he taught, and the practice of his life
conformable to that doctrine, gained so high an estimation amongst the
Athenians, that Laert.
they deposited the keys of the City in his hands, as the only person fit to
be entrusted with their liberties. His name was likewise much honored by his
own Countrymen, as well those at Cyprus, as those who lived at Sidon.

Amongst those who honored and favored Zeno, was Antigonus Gonotus King of
Macedonia, a Prince no less eminent for his Virtue then his Greatness, much
esteemed him, and, as often as he went to Athens, heard him. He sent many times
to invite him to come to him, amongst the rest, one Letter to this effect,
alleged by Apollonius Tyrius.

King Antigonus to Zeno the Philosopher, health.
I Think that I exceed you in Fortune and Glory; but, in Learning and
Discipline, and that perfect felicity which you have attained, I am exceeded by
you: Wherefore I thought it expedient to write to you, that you will come to
me, assuring my self you will not deny it. Use all means therefore to come to
us, and know, you are not to instruct me only, but all the Macedonians. For, he
who teaches the King of Macedonia, and guides him to Virtue, it is evident,
that he does likewise instruct all his Subjects in Virtue. For such as is the
Prince, such for the most part are those who live under his Government.


Zeno answered thus:

To King Antigonus Zeno, health.
I Much esteem your earnest desire of Learning, in that you aim at Philosophy,
not popular, which perverteth manners, but that true discipline which
conferreth profit, avoiding that generally commended pleasure which effeminates
the souls of some young men. It is manifest, that you are inclined to
Generosity, not only by nature, but by choice. A generous nature, with
indifferent exercise, assisted by a Master, may easily attain to perfect
Virtue. But, I am very infirm of body by reason of my age, for I am fourscore
years old, and therefore not able to come to you. Yet, I will send you some of
my con-Disciples, who, in those things that concern the Soul, are nothing
inferior to me; in those of the Body are much superior to me, of whom, if you
make use, you will want nothing conducing to perfect Beatitude.


Thus Zeno absolutely refused to go to Antigonus, but sent him his Disciple
Persaeus son of Demetrius, a Cittiean (who flourished in the 130th Olympiad,
Zeno being then very old) and Philonides a Theban, both mentioned by Epicurus
in his Epistle to Aristobulus, as having been with Antigonus.

CHAP. V.
His Apophthegmes.
OF his Apophthegmes are remembered these: Of a man very finely dressed, stepping
lightly over a Kennell; He does not care for the dirt, Laert.
says he, because he cannot see his face in it.

A certain Cynick came to him to borrow Oil, saying, he had none left: Zeno
denied him, and as he was going away; Now, says he, consider, which of us two
are the more impudent.

Cremonides, Laert.
whom he much affected, and Cleanthes sitting down beside him, he arose;
whereat Cleanthes wondering, I have heard good Physicians say, says he, that
the best remedy for tum^urs is rest.

Two sitting by him at a Feast, he that was next him hit the other with his
foot: Zeno hit him that was next him with his knee, and turning him to him,
What then think you, says he, that you have done to him that sits below you.

To one that loved the company of boys, Neither have those Masters, says he,
any wit, who converse^l^ies with the boys, nor the boys themselves.

He said that elegant speeches were like Alexandrian silver, fair to the eye,
and figured like money, but not a whit of the more value. Speeches which are
otherwise, he likened to Attick Tetradrachmes, which had a rough stamp, but,
were of greater value.

Aristo his Disciple discoursing many things foolishly, some petulantly, others
confidently, It cannot be, says he, but your Father was drunk when you were
begot: whereupon himself being very concise of speech, he called him the
^alker.

To a great eater, Laert. Athen. deipn.
who left nothing for those that eat with him, he caused a great fish to be set
before him, and immediately to be taken away; the other looking upon him, What,
said he, do you think your companions suffer every day, seeing that you cannot
suffer my greediness once?

A young man, Laert.
who questioned something more curiously then suited with his age, he brought
to a Glass, and bad him look in it, and then asked him, whether he thought
that question agreed with that face.

To one that said, he disliked many things of Antisthenes writing, he brought
his Chria of Sophocles, and asked him, if there were any thing therein
excellent: The other answered, he knew not: Are you not ashamed then (replied
Zeno) if Antisthe^es have said any thing ill, you select and remember that: but
if any thing excellent, you are so far from remembering, as not to minile it?

To one that said, the speeches of Philosophers were short You say very true,
says he, so should t^eir very syllables be, as much as is possible.

One saying of Polemon, that he proposed some things, and said others: He
frowning, said, What rate do you set upon things that are given?

He said, that a Disputant should have the voice and lungs of a Comedian, but
not the loudness.

To those that speak well, he said, we should allow a place to hear, as to
skillful Artificers to see; on the other side, the hearer must so attend to
what is spoken, that he take no time to censure.

To a young man that spoke much; your ears, says he, are fallen into your
tongue.

To a handsome youth who said, that he thought that in his opinion, a wise man
ought not to love: Nothing, says he, will be more unhappy to you that are
handsome.

He said, that most Philosophers are in many things fools, in trivial and
vulgar things ingnorant.

He pronounced that of Capecia, who when one of his Disciples began to grow
high, beating him, he said, Right is not placed in great, but great in right.

To a young man discoursing with much confidence; Young man, says he, I should
be loath to tell you my thoughts.

A youth of Rhodes handsome and rich, but refractory to him, not enduring, he
bad him first fit in a dirty seat, that he might dirt his Gown, next placed him
amongst the beggars, that he might converse with them and their rags, until
at last the young man went away.

He said, that nothing is more unseemly then pride, especially in young men.

He said, that we must not only commit to memory speeches and words, as those
who make ready some dish of meat, but apply it, and make use of it in our minds.

He said, that young men must use all modesty in their walking, in their
behavior, and in their garments; often repeating those verses of Euripides
concerning Capaneus, He was not pust up with his store,
Nor thought himself above the poor.


He said, nothing was more alienate from the comprehension of Sciences then
Poetry: and, that we need nothing more then Time.

Being asked who is a friend, he answered, My other self.

Having taken his servant in a theft, he beat him; the fellow said, it was his
destiny to steal, and to be beaten, said he.

He said, that Beauty is the sweetness of the voice; or, according to some, he
called it, the flower of Beauty.

Seeing the servant of one of his companions black and blew with stripes; I
see, says he, the fruits of your anger.

To one that smelt sweet of ointments; Who is it, says he, that smells so
esseminately.

To Dionysius surnamed (...) the retractor, who asked him, why he corrected all
but himself; because, says he, I do not believe you.

To a young man who spoke too freely, for this reason, says he, we have two
ears and but one tongue, that we should hear much and speak little.

He was invited to a Feast with other Philosophers by the Ambassadors of
Antigonus (according to Laertius of Ptolomy) and whilst of the rest every one
amidst their cups made ostentation of their Learning, Laert. Stob. sermon. 126.
he alone sat silent, whereupon the Ambassadors asking him what they should
say of him to Antigonus; That which you see, says he, for of all things, it is
hardest to contain speech.

Being demanded how he behaved himself when reviled, he said, as an Ambassador
dismissed without answer.

He changed the Verses of Hesiod, thus;

Who good advice obeyes, of men is best,
Next, he who ponders all in his own breast.
For that man (says he) is better who can obey good advice, and make good use
thereof, then he who finds out al things of himself; for the latter has only
understanding, but the other practice also.

Being demanded how it came to pass that being very austere, Laer. Athen.
Deipn.
he notwithstanding was very cheerful, and merry at a Feast, he answered,
Lupins, though in themselves bitter, being sleep'd, grow sweet.

He said it was better to slip with the foot then with the tongue. He said,
that to do well is no small matter, to begin well depended on a small moment.

This some ascribe to Socrates.

One of the young men in the Academy speaking of foolish studies, Stob. ser. 33.
If you do not dip your tongue in your mind, says Zeno, you will speak many
other foolish things.

He accused many, Stob. ser. 38.
saying, when they might take pleasure in labor, they would rather go to the
Cooks shop for it.

He said, Stob. ser. 39. citing Mulonius. Stob. ser. 52.
that we should no affect delicacy of diet, not even in sickness.

Being demanded by one of his friends, what course he should take to do no
wrong, Imagine, replied he, that I am always with you.

Being demanded whether a man that does wrong, Stob. ser. 52.
may conceal it from God, no, says he, nor he who thinks it.

To some that excused their prodigality, Stob. ser. 7. 74.
saying, that they had plenty, out of which they did it; will you excuse a
Cook, says he, that should oversalt his meat because he has store of salt.

He said that of his Disciples, some were (...), Stob. ser. 133.
lovers of Knowledge, others, (...), lovers of speaking.

He compared the Arts of Dialectick to just measures filled, not with Wheat or
any thing of value, Stob. ser. 212.
but with chafe and straw.

He said, Stob. ser. 217.
we ought not to enquire, whether men belonged to great Cities, but whether
they deserved a great City.

Seeing a friend of his too much taken up with the business of his Land, Stob.
ser. 222.
unless you lose your Land, says he, it will lose you.

He said, Stob. ser. 297.
a man must live not only to eat and drink, but to use this life for the
obtaining of a happy life.

Antigonus being full of wine, Aelian, var. hist. 9. 26.
went to visit him, and kissing and embracing him as a drunken man, bad him
demand, whatsoever he would, swearing that he would give it him; Zeno answered,
(...), at once reproving his vice, and taking care of his health.

Stretching out the fingers of his right hand, he said, such is fantasy, then
contracting them a little, Cic. Acad. quast. 4.
such is assent; then closing them quite, and shutting his fist, such is
comprehension; then putting to it his left hand and shutting it close and hard,
such (says he) is science, of which none is capable but a wise man.

CHAP. VI.
His Death.
ZEno having continued according to Laert.
Apollonius Master of his School fifty eight years, and attained to the ninety
eighth of his age, by the computation of Laertius and De long^v. the numericall
l^tter in Suid^s is corrupt.
Lucian (for that he lived but seventy two years, as some affirm upon the
testimony of Laert.
Persaeus, seems to be a mistake, seeing that his Letter to Antigonus was
written in his 80^^ year) Laert.
in all which time he was never molested by any sickness, died upon this
occasion. Going out of the School, he fell and broke his finger, whereupon
striking the Ground with his hand, he said, as Nio^e in the Tragedy, I come,
why do you call me? or as others, why do you drive me? and going out, Laert.
some say, he immediately strangled himself; Suid.
others, that by little and little he famished himself.

Laert.
When the news of his death came to Antig^nus, he broke forth into these words,
What a spectacle have I lost! and being demanded why he so much admired him,
because, said he, though I best owed many great things upon him, he was never
therewith exalted nor dejected. He sent immediately Thraso on Embassy to the
Athenians, requesting, that they would build him a Tomb in the Ceramick, which
the Athenians performed, honoring him with this Decree.

A DECREE.
ARrhenides being Archon, the Tribe of Acamantis having the first place in the
Phrytanae^^m, the tenth day of Maimacterion, the three and twentieth of the
sitting of the Phrytanaeum, the Congregation of Presidents decreed thus, Hippo
Son of Cratistoteles a Xympetean, and the rest of the Presidents, Thraso Son of
Thraso, an Anacaean; declared;

Whereas Zeno Son of Mnaseas a Cittiean, has professed Philosophy many years
in this City, and in all other things performed the office of a good man,
encouraging those young men, who applied themselves to him, to Virtue and
Temperance, leading himself a life suitable to the Doctrine which he professed,
a Pattern to the best to imitate; The People have thought fit (good Fortune go
along with it) to do honor to Zeno Son of Mnaseas the Cittiean, and to crown
him with a Crown of Gold according to the Law, in reward of his Virtue and
Temperance, and to build a Tomb for him publicly in the Ceramick. For, the
making of which Crown, and building of the Tomb, the People shall make choice
of five men of the Athenians to take charge thereof. This Decree the Scribe of
the People shall write upon two Pillars, one whereof shall be placed in the
Academy, the other in the Lyceum. The charge of the Pillars, he who is Overseer
of the Public works shall undertake to defray, by way of rate, that all may
know, the Athenian People honor good men both alive and dead. To take care of
the building are appointed, Thraso an Anacaean, Philocles, a Pyrean, Phaedrus,
an Anaphistian, Medon, an Acarnean, Micythus a Sympalletean.

The Athenians caused likewise his Satue in Brass to be set up, as did also
the Cittieans his Countrymen. Antipater the Sidonian bestowed this Epitaph upon
him.

Here Zeno lies, who tall Olympus s^al'd,
Not heaping Pelion on Ossa's head,
Nor by Herculean labors so prevailed,
But found out Virtue's path which thither led.
Another Epigram was written upon him by Xenodotus the Stoic, disciple of
Diogenes.

Zeno thy years to hoary age were spent;
Not with vain riches, but with self-content:
A stout and constant Sect derived from thee
The Mother of nought-dreading liberty:
Phoenicia, whence thou issuedst who can slight?
Thence Cadmus too, who first taught Greece to write.
CHAP. VII.
His Person and Virtues.
AS concerning his Person, Laert.
Timotheus says, he was wryneck'd: Apollonius Tyrius, that he was lean, tall,
and of a swarthy complexion, whence styled by some (as Chrysippus) the
Egyptian sprigge. Laert.
His look was sad, grave, severe and frowning; his constitution not strong, for
which reason Persaeus says, he forbore to feast much. His ordinary diet
consisted in raw food, especially Figgs, both new and dried, bread and honey
which he eat moderately, and a little sweet Wine.

His continence was such, Laert.
that when Persaeus, who cohabited with him, brought a she-Minstrell to him, he
immediately sent her back.

Notwithstanding his severity, Laert.
he was very complaisant, and often feasted with King Antigonus, and meeting
him sometimes drunk, went along with him to Aristocles the Musician, to nightly
banquets and plays.

Popular oftentation he avoided by sitting in the lowest place, Laert.
whereby he freed himself from the troublesome importunity of the other part.

He never walked with more than two or three at once: Cl^anthes says, Laert.
he many times gave money to people that they would not trouble him, and throng
about him. Being on a certain time encompassed by a great crowd, he showed them
a wooden ball on the top of the cloister, which formerly belonged to an Altar:
This, says he, was once placed in the niddle; but, because it is troublesome,
it is now laid aside: I desire you would in like manner withdraw your selves,
that you may be less troublesome.

He was so free from being corrupted by gifts, that Laert.
Democharis son of Laches, desiring him to let him know what business he would
have to Antigonus, promising to write about it, and assuring him, that
Antigonus would furnish him with whatsoever he desired; he turned away from
him, and would never after converse with him.

He was so humble, Laert.
that he conversed with mean and ragged persons, whence Timon;

And for companions gets of servants store,
Of all men the most empty and most poor.
He was most patient and frugall in his household expenses, something enclining
to the sordidnesse of the Barbarians. Laertius mentions one servant that he
had, Seneca averrs he had none.

Whenever he reprehended any, Laert.
it was covertly and afar off, as may appear by many of his Apophthegms.

His habit was very mean, Laert.
whence it was said of him, Him nor the Winters rigid frost or rain,
The scorching Sun or sharp disease can pain:
Not like the common sort of people he;
But, day and night bent on Philosophy.


The Comic Poets unwittingly, intending to discommend him, praise him, as
Philemon, in his Comedy of Philosophers, He Water drinks, then Broth and Herbs
does eat*
To live, his Scholars teaching, without meat.


This some ascribe to Posidippus.

His virtues were so eminent, that they grew at last into a Proverb, More
continent then Zeno the Philosopher, whence Possidippus; -- He ere ten days
were spent,
Zeno in Continence out-went.


Indeed he excelled all men in this kind of Virtue, and in Gravity, and, by
Jove (adds Laertius) in Felicity likewise.

CHAP. VIII.
His Writings.
HE wrote many Books, wherein (faith Laertius) he so discoursed, as no Stoic
after him: their Titles are these: Of Commonwealth, Laert.
written whilst he was an auditor of Crates, and (as De vit. Alex Orat. 1.
Plutarch says) much applauded, the scope whereof was this, That we should not
live in several Cities and Towns by distinct Laws; but, that we should own
all men as our Countrymen and fellow-Cittisens: that there should be one
manner of life and one order, as of one flock which grazeth by equal right in
one pasture.

Of Appetite; or, Of human Nature. Of Passions. Of Office. Of Law. Of the
Discipline of the Grecians. Of sight. Of the Universe. Of signs. Pythagor^cks.
Universalls. Of words. Homericall Problems 5. Of hearing Poetry. The Art.
Solutions. Confutations. Memorialls. The Moralls of Crates.
Laert.
Some, amongst whom is Casius a Sceptian, reprehended many things in the
writings of Zeno: First, that in the beginning of his Commonwealth, he
affirms the liberal Sciences to be of no use.

Again, that all wicked men are enemies among themselves, and slaves and
strangers, as well Fathers to their Children, as Brethren to Brethren. Again,
that only good men are Citisens, and Friends, and Kindred, and Children, as he
affirms in his Book of the Commonwealth. So that according to the Stoics,
Parents should be enemies to their Children, because they are not wise.

That in his Commonwealth he would have Women to be in common.

That no Temples, Courts of Judicature, nor public Schools, should be built
in a Commonwealth.

That Money is not necessary, neither for exchange nor traffic.

That Women should go in the same habit as men.

CHAP. IX.
His Disciples.
ZENO (says Laertius) had many Disciples; the most eminent these:

PERSAEUS Son of Demetrius, Laert.
a Cittiean; some affirm he was Zeno's Scholar, others that he was one of the
servants which were sent by Antigonus to Zeno to transcribe his writings; Athen:
whence Bion seeing this inscription on his Statue, PERSEAEUS OF ZENO A
CITTIEAN said, the Graver mistook, for instead of (...) he should have put
(...), a servant.

Afterward he returned to Antigonus King of Macedonia; Antigonus to make a
trial of him caused a false report to be brought him, that his lands were
spoiled by the Enemy; whereat appearing troubled, Do you not see, says
Antigonus, that riches are not to be reckoned amongst indifferent things?

Antigonus so much favored him, that he preferred him to the government of
Acrocorinthus; on which Fort depended not only Corinth, but all Peloponnesus;
in this charge he was unfortunate; for the Castle was taken by the cunning of
Aratus a Sicyonian ( Deipn.
Athenaeus says, whilst Perfaeus was feasting) who turned out Persaeus,
whereupon afterward to one that maintained only a wise man is a Governor:
and I says he, was once of the same mind, being so taught by Zeno, but now am
of another opinion; the Sicyonian young man (meaning Aratus) has taught me
otherwise; Thus Plutarch; But Pausanias says, that Aratus upon taking of the
Fort, amongst others put Persaeus the Governor to death.

He said, C^.
that those were esteemed Gods who had invented some things very useful to
humane life.

He wrote these Books; Of a Kingdom; The Lacedaemonian Commonwealth; of
marriage; of impiety; Thyestes; Of Love, Protrepticks, Exercitations; Chryas,
4. Commentaries; against Plato's Laws 7. Athen. Deipn.
Symposiack Dialogues.

ARISTO Son of Miltiades, a Chian, surnamed the Siren: when Zeno fell into a
long sickness, he left him, and went (as Diocles says) to Polemo: He was also
a follower of Persaeus, whom he flattered much, because of his favor with
Antigonus; for he was much given to pleasure even unto his end; Thus revolting
from his Master Zeno, he asserted,

That the end consists in those mean things which are betwixt virtue and vice,
that is, in indifference; not to be moved on either side, nor to imagine the
least difference to be in these things, but that they are all alike; For a wise
man is like a good Player, who whether he personate Agamemnon or Thersides,
Cic. Acad. quast. 4.
will act either part very well: Thus he took away the dignity which Zeno held
to be in these mean things betwixt virtue and vice; Cic. de finib. 4.
holding that there is no difference in them.

He took away Physic and Logic, affirming that one is above us, the other
appertains nothing to us; Ethick only appertains to us; he compared
Dialectick reason to cobwebs, which though they seem artificial, yet are of no
use.

He introduced not on any virtues as Zeno, nor one called by several names as
the Megarick Philosophers, but affirmed they have a quodammodotative relation
to one another.

Professing these tene^s, and disputing in Cunosarges, he came to be called
Author of a Sect; whence Milciades and Diphilus were called Aristonians.

He was very persuasive, and wrought much upon the common people, whence Timon
in Sillis,

One of Aristo's smooth persuasive race.

He defended eagerly this Paradox of the Stoics, that a wise man does not
opinionate, but know, which Persaeus opposing, caused of two like twins, first,
one to give a depositum to him, then the other to come and redemand it, and by
his doubting, if it were the same person, convinced him.

He inveighed against Arcesilaus, [ Laert: vit. Arces.
calling him a corrupter of youth.] On a time, seeing a Monster like a Bull,
but of both sexes, he said, Alas! here is an argument for Arcesilaus against
energy. To an Academick who said, he comprehended nothing, Do you not see
(says he) him who sits next you? which he denying,

Who struck you blind, says he, or took your light away?

He wrote these Treatises, Protrepticks 2. of Zeno's Doctrine Scholastic
Dialogues 6. of Wisdom dissertations 7. Erotick dissertations: Commentaries
upon vainglory: Commentaries 15. Memorialls 3. Chrias 11. against Orators:
against Alexinus his oppositions: to the Dialecticks 3. to Cleanthes Epistles
4. But Panaetius and Sosicrates affirm the Epistles only to be his, the rest to
be Aristo's the Peripatetick.

The Sun striking hot upon his head (which was bald) occasioned his death.
There was another of the same name, a Juliite, a Peripatetick; another an
Athenian, a Musician; a fourth a Tragic Poet; a fifth an Alaean, who writ the
Rhetorical art; a sixth of Alexandria, a Peripatetick.

ERILLUS (or as Cicero, Laert.
Herillus) was a Carthaginian: when he was a boy, he was loved and courted by
many, which Zeno, by causing him to be shaved, diverted.

He held, that the end is science, which is to live so, as to refer all things
to Science, joined with life: That Science is a habit susceptive of fantasies,
falling under reason.

Yet, sometimes he said, there is no end; but, that the end it self is changed
by the things, and those which are joined to the things, as Brass, of which
the Statues of Alexander or Socrates is made.

That (...) the end, and (...) differ; one is objected to unwise persons as
well as wise, the other to wise only.

Those things which are betwixt virtue and vice are indifferents.

His Books are written in a short style, consisting of few words, but very
efficacious, wherein is contained what he held contrary to Zeno.

His writings these, of Exercitation, of Passion, of Suspicion, the Lawgiver,
Majeutick, Antipheron, the Master, the Preparative, the Directive, Hermes,
Medea, Dialogues, moral Theses.

His Disciples were called Herilians, named by Cicero as a particular Sect
amongst the Socraticks.

DIONYSIUS, son of Theophantus, Laert.
an Heracleot, from the change of his opinion surnamed (...), the retractor. He
was from the beginning studiously addicted to learning, and writ Poems of all
kinds; then betook himself to Aratus, being much pleased with him. Of
Philosophers he first heard, as Diocles affirms, Heraclides his countryman;
then Alexinus, and Menedemus; after these Zeno.

Revolting from Zeno, he addicted himself to the Cyrenaeans; he went to common
houses, and addicted himself to other pleasures.

He asserted the end to be pleasure, and that by reason of his own
purblindnesse; for being much grieved thereat, he durst not affirm grief to be
one of the indifferents.

He died eighty years old, starved.

His writings are thus entitled, Of apathy 2. of riches and favor and
punishment, of the use of men, of good fortune, of the Kings of the ancients,
of things that are praised, of the customs of the Barbarians.

SPHAERUS was of Bosphorus, he first heard Zeno, then Cleanthes, and having
made a sufficient progress in learning, went to Alexandria to Ptolomy
Philopater, where there arising a dispute, whether a wise man does opinionate,
and Sphaerus maintaining that he does not, the King commanded some Quinces,
Athenaeus says Birds, of wax to be set before him, wherewith Sphaerus being
cosen'd, the King cried out, that he assented to a false phantasy: Sphaerus
presently answered, that he assented not that they were quinces, but that it
was probable they were quinces: but comprehensive fantasy differs from
probable; Athen.
for that is never false, but in probable matters sometimes a thing falls out
otherwise than we imagined.

Laert.
Mnesistratus accusing him, that he denied Ptolomy to be King, he answered,
that he thought Ptolomy, or such a one was King.

His writings are these: Of the world, of the seed of Elements, of fortune, of
leasts, against atoms and apparitions, of the organs of sense, upon Heraclitus
five dissertations; of moral description, of office, of appetite, of passions
2. dissertations of a Kingdom; of the Lacedemonian Commonwealth, of Lycurgus
and Socrates 3. of Law, of Divination, Erotick Dialogues, of the Eretriack
Philosophers, of things like, of definitions, of habit, of contraries 3. of
reason, of riches, of glory, of death, of the art of Dialectick 2. of
categorems, of ambiguities, Epistles.

CLEANTHES, whom Zeno compared to writing tables, that are so hard, they will
not easily admit an impression; but having once received it, keep it long. He
succeeded Zeno, of him therefore apart.

Philon, a Theban.

Callippus, a Corinthian.

Possidonius, an Alexandrian.

Athenodorus of Soli; there were two more of the same name, Stoics.

Zeno, a S^donian.

Last in the Catalogue of his Disciples must be remembered an Eretrian youth
(mentioned by Ethic. Sermon. 198.
Stobaeus) who heard Zeno till he came to be a man; then returning to Eretria,
his Father asked him what he had learned all that time, he answered, he would
shortly let him see, and did so; for, not long after his Father in anger did
beat him, which he took quietly, saying, This I have learned, to bear with the
anger of a Father, and not to oppose it.

In the life of Zeno (for as much as he is author of that Sect) it will be
requisite to give account of the Doctrine of the Stoics in general; wherein,
if the terms seem harshly rendered, it will easily be forgiven by those, who
consider, the Stoics were no less particular in their words, then in their
doctrines.

THE DOCTRINE OF THE STOICS.
The First PART.
CHAP. I.
Of PHILOSOPHY in general, and particularly of DIALECTICK.
Plut. de plac. Phil. 1. 1.
WISDOM is the Science of things divine and humane; Philosophy is the
exercitation of convenient Art: Convenient is only and supreme virtue. Of
Virtues in the most general sense there are three kinds, Natural, Moral,
Rational; for which cause Philosophy likewise has three parts, Physic,
Ethick, Logic: Physic, when we enquire concerning the World, and the things
in the world: Ethick is employed about humane life: Logic is that part which
concerns reason, which is also called Dialectick. Laert.
Thus Zeno the Cittiean first divided it in his book of Speech, and Chrysippus
in his first book of Speech, and in his first of Physics; and Apollodorus
Ephillus in his first book of Introductions into Doctrines; and Eudromus in his
moral Institutions; and Diogenes the Babylonian, and Possidonius. These parts
Apollodorus calls Places; C^rysippus and Eudromus species, others genus's.

That Logic is a part of Philosophy distinct from the rest, (wherein all the
Stoics agree) is proved by two arguments^ the first this: Ammonius in Categ.
Every thing which uses another; if that which the thing using, uses, be
neither part nor particle, nor part of part of any other, it must be part or
particle of the thing using; as medicine uses the art of prescribing diet,
which art being neither part nor particle of any other, is consequently a part
or particle of Medicine; of part, as to the cure, of particle, as to the
practice.

Philop. in lib. 1. Anal. prior.
Philosophy; is conversant about Logic; Logic therefore is either a part or
particle of Philosophy; but, a particle it is not, for it is not a part either
of the Contemplative or the Active. That which is a particle of any thing,
ought to have the same matter and scope, with that whereof it is a part: Logic
has neither of these common with Active Philosophy; the matter whereof is
humane things, and moderation of Appetite, the common scope, what in them is to
be embraced or shunned: but, the matter of Logic is propositions, the scope,
to demonstrate by a composure of propositions, that which necessarily falls out
upon the collection. Neither is Logic a part of the Contemplative, the matter
whereof is things divine, the end, contemplation of them: now, if it be not a
part, either of the Contemplative or the Active, it is not a particle of
Philosophy, but equally separate from both these, and consequently it must be a
part of it.

Ammonius in Categor.
The second Argument is thus. No Art frames its own Instruments, if therefore
Philosophy make Logic, it is not its Instrument, but part thereof.

Sext. Empir. adv. Log. 1.
Philosophy, is by some compared to a field which produces all manner of
fruit; Physic to the soil and tall trees, Ethick to to the mature pleasant
fruit, Logic to the strong fence. Others liken it to an Egg; Ethick to the
yolk, which some affirm to be the Chicken; Physic to the white, which is the
nourishment of the Chicken; Logic to the outside or shell, Possidonius,
(because the parts of Philosophy are inseparable from one another, but plants
are distinct from the fruits, as walls from hedges) chooses rather to compare
Philosophy to a living creature, Physic to blood and flesh, Logic, to bones
and nerves, Ethick to the soul. (Thus Sextus Empiricus, by whom, perhaps,
Laertius is to be corrected, who says, They likened Ethick to the Flesh,
Physic to the Soul) Lastly, they compare Philosophy to a City, well fortified
and governed according to Reason.

Laert.
Some affirm, that none of these parts are distinct from the rest, but, all
intermingled with one another, for which reason, they deliver them confusedly.
The greater part place Logic first, Ethick next, Physic last; because the
mind ought first to be fortified for the keeping of those things which are
committed to it; so, as it be not easily expugnable. The Dialectick place is a
fortification for the mind. Secondly, to describe the contemplation of
manners, that they may be reformed, which is safely undertaken, when the
Logical power is first laid down. Lastly, to induce the contemplation of
Nature, for that is more divine, and requires a more profound attention. This
method De plac. Phil.
Pittarch affirms to have been observed by Chrysippus, adding that of Physic,
the last part, is that which treats of God; for which reason they call the
precepts of Religion (...) It seems therefore, that there is some mistake in
Laertius, who of those who place Logic first, Physic next, and Ethick next,
and Ethick last, cites Zeno in his Book of Speech, and Chrysippus, and
Archedemus, and Eadromus. But Diogenes the Ptolemaean (continues he) begins
with Ethick: Apollodorus puts Ethick in the second place; Panaetius and
Possidonius begin with Physic, as Phanias, companion of Possidonius affirms,
in his first of Possidonius's dissertations.

Laert.
Of Logic, Cleanthes assigns six parts, Dialectick, Rhetoric, Ethick,
Politic, Physic, Theologick: Some affirm, these are not parts of Logic, but
of Philosophy it self: so Zeno of Tursis. The Logical part is by some divided
into two Sciences, Rhetoric and Dialectick; some add the definitive part, some
divide the definitive part into that which concerns invention of truth (by
which the differences of Fantasies are directed) and that which concerns
knowledge of truth; for things are comprehended by notions.

Laert.
Rhetoric is the science of well speaking, by dilating upon the thing
comprehended. Dialectick is the science of well speaking, (that is true and
consentaneous) or well disputing by question and answer. It is defined by
Possidonius, the science of true, false, and neuter.

Laert.
Rhetoric is of three kinds, deliberative, judicial, demonstrative: The parts
of Rhetoric are Invention, Style, Disposition, Pronunciation: Rhetorical
Speech is divided into Proem, Narration, Confutation, Epilogue.

Laert.
Dialectick is necessary, and a virtue within its species, containing other
virtues; (...), a Science whereby we are taught when to assent, and when not;
(...), a firm reason, whereby we resist appearances, and are not led away by
them: (...), a fortitude of reason, which keeps us from being transported with
the adverse opinion: (...), a habit directing fantasies to right reason.

Laert.
Dialectick is a Science or certain comprehension, or a habit, not erring by
reason in reception of fantasies; but, without Dialectick, a wise man cannot
be infallible in reason; for by this, we discern the true, false, and probable,
and distinguish the ambiguous.

CHAP. II.
Of the Instruments and rules of Judgment.
Laert.
IN the first place, they put the discourse concerning fantasies and sense, as
a Judicatory, whereby the truth of things is discerned.

Cic. Acad. 1.
The Senses (according to Zeno, who made many alterations in Dialectick, and
asserted many things of the Senses that were wholly new) are joined by a
certain kind of extrinsecall impulsion, termed Phantasy. To these fantasies
received by the senses, is added an assention of the mind, which is placed in
us voluntary. The fantasy, when seen, is comprehensible; when received and
approved, comprehension, and, if so comprehended, as that it cannot be plucked
away by reason, Science.

Galen. hist. phil.
Judgment is a perspection which discerns a thing.

Sen. Empir. adv. log.
That which judges is taken two ways: 1. By which we say, somethings are,
others are not, these are true, those are false. 2. Of Essence only; and this
is understood three ways, commonly, properly, and most properly. Commonly, for
every measure of comprehension, in which sense, even those things which judge
naturally, have this appellation, as sight, hearing, taste. Properly, for every
artificial measure of comprehension; thus a cubit, a balance, a ruler, a pair
of compasses, are called things that judge; but sight, and hearing, and the
other common instruments of sense, are not. Most properly, for every measure of
comprehension of a thing, uncertain, and not evident. In which sense, those
things which belong to the actions of life, are not said to be things judging,
but the logical only, and those which dogmaticall Philosophers allege for the
invention of truth.

The Logical is subdivided into that from which, that by which, and the
application or habitude. From which, the man; by which, the sense: the third is
the application of fantasy or sight. For as in the Staticks, there are three
things which judge, the weigher, the balance, and position of the balance:
The weigher is the judge from which, the balance the judge by which, the
position of the balance, as it were a habitude. And again, as to discern right
or oblique things is required, an Artificer, a Ruler, and the application
thereof; in like manner in Philosophy are required those three things mentioned
to the discernment of true and false: the man from whom the judgment is made,
is like the weigher or artificer; to the balance and ruler answer sense and
cogitation, by which the judgment is made; to the habitude of the forenamed
instruments, the application of phantasy, by which a man comes to judge.

Laert.
The Judge of truth, they affirm to be comprehensive phantasy, that is,
proceeding from that which is: so Chrysippus in the 12th of his Physics, and
Antipator, and Apollodorus. But Boethus holds many judicatories, the mind, and
sense, and appetite, and science; from whom Chrysippus dissenting in his first
Book of Reason, affirms the Judicatories to be Sense and Anticipation.
Anticipation is a natural notion of Universalls. Others of the more ancient
Stoics (as Possidonius says in his Book of Judgments) assert right reason to
be the Judicatory.

CHAP. III.
Of Sense.
St. Aug. Civil. dci. 8. 7.
DIalectick is derived from corporeal senses; for, from thence, the soul
conceives notions ((...)) of those things which are explained by definition,
and from thence is propagated and connexed the whole reason of Learning and
Teaching.

Laert.
Sense is a spirit, proceeding from the supreme part of the Soul, and
permeating to the Organs.

Origin contra. Cells. lib. 7.
Whatsoever things are comprehended, are manifestly comprehended by sense; all
conceptions of the mind depend upon sense.

Cic. Acad. qu^st. 1.
Comprehension made by the senses is true and faithful, (according to Zeno)
for as much as nature has given it as a rule for science, and principle of her
self.

Cic. Acad. qu^st. 4.
Nothing is more clear then this (...) evidence; there cannot be any speech
more perspicuous.

Sext. Empir. pyrrh. hyp. 2. 8.
Of Sensibles and Intelligibles, some are true, but, not directly sensible;
but, by relation to those things which are next, as falling under Intelligence.

CHAP. IV.
Of Phantasy.
In the first place (says Laert.
Diocles the Magnesian) they put the reason concerning Fantasy and Sense, as
a judgment, whereby the truth of things is discerned. It is fantasy as to its
genus, and likewise in as much as the reason of assent, comprehension, and
intelligence (which is more excellent then the rest) consists not without
Phantasy; for phantasy goes first, then the mind endued with elocution,
declares by words what it suffers from the phantasy.

Plut. plac. Phil. 4. 12.
Phantasy is so called from (...), light; for as light shows it self, and
with it self all those things which are contained within it; so phantasy
shows it self, and that which makes it.

Sext. Empir. Pyrrh. hyp. lib. 2.
Phantasy is an impression in the Soul: Cleanthes adds, an impression by
depression and eminence, as that impression, which is made in Wax by a Seal.

Chrysippus conceives this to be absurd; for 1. says he, When the soul first
apprehends a triangle and a square, it will follow, that the same body, at the
same time, must have in it self several figures, which is absurd. Again,
whereas many fantasies are together consistent in us, the Soul must have
diverse figures, which is worse then the former: He therefore conceived, that
Zeno used the word Impression, for Alteration, meaning thus: Fantasy is an
alteration of the Soul, whereby it is no longer absurd, that the same body
(many several fantasies being at the same time consistent in us) should
receive several alterations. For, as the air receiving at once innumerable
different percussions, has presently many alterations; so the supreme part of
the soul, receiving various fantasies, does something which has proportion
and conformity thereto.

Some object that this exposition is not right; because, though every phantasy
is an impression and alteration in the Soul; yet, every impression or
alteration of the Soul is not phantasy: as when the finger smarts or itches,
and the hand is rubbed, there is then an impression and alteration in the soul;
but it is not phantasy, because it is not in the supreme part of the soul.

They answer, That in saying, an impression in the Soul, is employed as in the
Soul as fully, as if we should say, phantasy is an impression in the Soul as in
the Soul; as when we say, the white in the eye, we imply, as in the eye; that
is, the white is in a certain part of the eye, which all men have so by nature.
So when we say, Phantasy is an impression in the Soul, we imply the impression
to be made in the supreme part thereof.

Others more elegantly answer, that the word Soul is taken two ways, either
for the whole, or for the principal part: when we say, man consists of soul
and body; or, that death is a separation of the soul from the body, we mean
properly the supreme part, wherein properly consists the motion and goods of
the Soul. When Ze^o therefore calls Phantasy an impression in the Soul, he is
not to be understood of the whole Soul, but, of part thereof; as if he should
say, Phantasy is an alteration of the supreme part of the Soul.

To this interpretation, some object thus: Appetition, Assention, and
Comprehension are alterations in the supreme part of the soul; but, these
differ from phantasy, that being a certain kind of persuasion and affection,
whereas this is more operation then appetition, therefore the definition is not
good, being competible to many other things.

They answer by recourse to (...) ( impliances) that a definition is understood
to be in all. As he who says, Love is an application of the Soul toward
procurement of Friendship, implies amongst young people; so when we say, that
phantasy is an alteration in the supreme part of the soul, we imply by
persuasion; for, alteration is not made by operation.

Laert.
Of Fantasies there are many kinds, some are sensible, others not-sensible.
Sensible are those which are received through one or more of the senses:
Not-sensible are those which are received through the mind, as of
incorporealls, and other things comprehended by reason. The sensible formed
from things that are, are made with concession and assent. There are also
apparitions of fantasies, proceeding from things which are.

Again, some are rational, others irrational; rational, those of reasonable
creatures; irrational, those of unreasonable. The rational are intelligence,
the irrational have no name.

Again, some are artificial, others in-artificiall; for, an Image is
considered by an Artist one way, by him that is not an artist another way.

Sext. Empir. Pyrrh. hyp. lib. 2.
Again, some are probable, some improbable: The probable are those which make
an easy motion in the soul; as, It is now day, I discourse, and the like. The
Improbable are of a contrary nature, averting us from assent; as, it is day,
the Sun is not above the earth; if it is dark, it is day. Both probable and
improbable are those, which, by relation to other things, are sometimes such,
as in doubtful speeches, neither probable nor improbable are such, as these,
The stairs are even, the stairs are odd.

Of probable and improbable Fantasies, some are true, some are false, some are
neither true nor false. True are those, whose predication is true, as, It is
day, it is light: False, whose predication is false; Both true and false, as
happened to Orestes in his madness, meeting Electra; that he met something, it
was true, for it was Electra; but, that it was a fury, was false. Neither true
nor false are those which are taken from the Genus; for the Genus is not such
as the Species in all respects: as, of men, some are Grecians, some are
Barbarous; but, man in general is not Grecian, for then all men must be
Grecians, neither barbarous, for the same reason.

Of true Fantasies, some are comprehensive, others are not-comprehensive.
Not-comprehensive are those which happen through sickness, or perturbation of
mind; many being troubled with frenzy or melancholy, attract a true phantasy
which is not comprehensive, even from that which extrinsecally occurrs
casually, for which reason, they neither assert it often, nor assent unto it.
Comprehensive fantasy is that which is impressed and signed by that which is,
and conformable to that which is, so as it cannot be of that which is not.

To comprehensive fantasy three conditions are requisite* 1. That it arise
from that which is; for many fantasies arise from that which is not, as in mad
men. 2. That it be conformable to that which is; for some fantasies are from
that which is, but represents the similitude of that which is not: as Orestes
derived a fantasy from that which was, viz. from Electra, but not according
to that which was; for he thought her to be one of the furies. Comprehensive
fantasy must be conformable to that which is, and so impressed and signed, as
that it may imprint artificially all the properties of the thing phancied, as
Gravers touch all the parts of those things which they imitate, and the
impression made by a Seal on Wax exactly and perfectly bears all its
characters. Lastly, that it be without impediment; for sometimes comprehensive
fantasy is not creditable, by reason of outward circumstances; as when
Hercules brought Alcestis taken out of the Earth, to Admetus, Admetus drew from
Alcestis a comprehensive fantasy, but did not credit it; for, he considered,
that she was dead, and therefore could not rise again, but, that sometimes
Spirits appear in the shape of the deceased.

Plut. plac. Phil. 4. 12.
Phantasy, Phantaston, Phantasticon, and Phantasme, according to Chrysippus,
differ thus: Phantasy is a passion made in the Soul, which shows it self,
and that which made it; as, when with our eyes we see white, it is a passion
engendered by sight in the Soul, and we may call this a passion, because the
object thereof is a white thing which moves us: the like of smelling and
touching.

Phantaston is that which makes fantasy; as the white and the cold, and
whatsoever is able to move the Soul, that is phantaston.

Phantasticon is a frustaneous attraction, a passion in the Soul proceeding
from nothing; as in those who sight with shadows, or extend their hands in
vain: for, to phantasy is objected phantaston, but phantasticon has no object.

Phantasme is that, to which we are attracted by that frustraneous attraction,
which happens in melancholy, or mad persons; as Orestes in the Tragedy, when he
says,

Bring hither, Mother, I implore,
These snakie bloody Maids no more,
Whose very looks wound me all over.
This he says in his madness, for he saw nothing: wherefore Electra answers
him,

Ah quiet in thy bed (unhappy) lie:
Thou see not what thou think before thy eye.
CHAP. V.
Of True and Truth.
St. Aug. contra Acad. lib. 2.
TRUE (according to Zeno) is that which is impressed in the mind from that
whence it is, in such manner, as it cannot be from that which is not: or, as
others, Sext. Empir. Pyrrh. hyp. 2. 8.
True is that which is, and is opposed to something: False is that which is
not; yet, is opposed to something also.

Truth and true differ three ways, by Essence, by Constitution, by Power. By
Essence, for truth is a body; but, true is incorporeall, for it is a dicible
(...), and therefore incorporeall. On the contrary, Truth is a body, as being
the enunciative Science of all true things. All Science is in some measure the
supreme part of the Soul, which supreme part is a body: therefore truth in
general is corporeal.

By Constitution; True is conceived to be something uniforme and simple by
nature; as, It is day, I discourse. Truth, as being a Science, consists of
many things, by a kind of conservation. Wherefore as a People is one thing, a
Citizen another; a People is a multitude consisting of many Citizens; but, a
Citizen is no more then one. In the same manner differs truth from true.
Truth resembles a People, true a Citizen; for, truth consists of many
things collected, true is simple.

By Power; for true does not absolutely adhere to truth: A fool, a child, a
madman, may speak something true, but, cannot have the Science of that which
is true. Truth considers things with Science, insomuch that he who has it is
wise; for, he has the Science of true things, and is never deceived, nor
lies, although he speak false, because it proceeds not from an ill, but,
good affection.

CHAP. VI.
Of Comprehension.
Cic. Acad. quaest. 1.
COmprehension ((...)) was first used in this sense by Zeno, by a metaphor
taken from things apprehended by the hand; Cicer. Acad. quaest 4.
which allusion he expressed by action. For, showing his hand with the fingers
stretched forth, he said, such was Phantasy: then bending them a little, said,
such was Assent; then compressing them, and clutching his fist, such was
Comprehension.

Galen. Hist. phil.
Comprehension is a firm and true knowledge, non-comprehension the contrary;
for some things we only think that we see, hear, or feel, as in dreams and
frenzies; other things we not only think, but, truly do see, or hear, or feel.
These latter, all (but the Academicks and Scepticks) conceive to fall under
firm knowledge, the other, which we imagine in dreams or frenzy are false.

Sext. Empir. adv. Geom. cap. 19.
Whatsoever is understood, is comprehended by the mind, one of these two
ways, either by evident incursion (which Laertius calls by sense) or by
transition from evidence (Laertius, collection by demonstration) of which
latter there are three kinds, by Assimilation, by Composition, by Analogy.

By incurrent evidence is understood white and black, sweet and sour.

By Transition, from evidents: by Assimilation is understood Socrates by his
Picture: by Composition, as of a horse and a man is made a Centaure; for
putting together the limbs proper to both species, we comprehend by phantasy
that which was neither horse nor man, but a Centaur compounded of both.

By Analogy, things are understood two ways; either by augmentation; or, when
from common ordinary men, we by augmentation phansy a Cyclops, who not like

Men that with Cares gifts are fed:
But, some tall hill erects his head.
Or by Diminution, as a Pigmey. Laert.
Likewise the Center of the earth is understood by analogy from lesser Globes.

To these kinds add, Laert.
Comprehension by transference, as eyes in the breast; by contrariety, as
death; by transference, as dicibles and place; by privation, as a man without
hands; just and good are understood naturally.

CHAP. VII.
Of Assent.
Cic. Acad. qu^^st. 4.
THese things being enough known, which we have already explained, let us now
speak a little of Assent, and approbation, termed (...), not that is not a
large place, but the grounds thereof have been already laid: For when we
explained the power that was in the senses, we likewise declared, that many
things were comprehended and perceived by the senses, which cannot be done
without Assent. Moreover, seeing that betwixt an inanimate and an animate
being, the greatest difference is, that the inanimate does nothing, the animate
does something, we must either take away sense from it, or allow it assent,
which is within our power. When we will not have a thing either to perceive or
assent, we in a manner take away the soul from it; for as it is necessary,
that the scale of balance which is laden should tend downwards; so is it that
the soul should yield to things that are perspicuous.

Cic. lib. d. Fato.
Although assent cannot be made unless it be moved by Fantasy, yet when
that phantasy has an immediate cause, it has not (according to Chrysippus)
this principal reason, not that it can be made without any extrinsecall
excitation (for it is necessary that assent be moved by fantasy) but it
returns to its Cylinder and Cone, which move not by impulsion, then of their
own nature, the Cylinder seems to roll, and the Cone to turn round. As
therefore he who thrust the Cylinder gave it the beginning of motion, but did
not give it volubility; so the objected phantasy imprinteth, and as it were
seals in the soul its species, yet the assent is in our power, and that (as
we said in a Cylinder) extrinsecally impelled, the motion is continued by its
own power and nature.

Agell. 19. 9. and from him St. August. Civit. dei. 9. 4.
Fantasies, wherewith the mind of man is presently affected, are not voluntary
or in our own power, but infer themselves by a kind of violence, approbations
((...)) by which these fantasies are known and judged, are voluntary, and
made according to our arbitrament. So as upon any dreadful noise from heaven,
or by the fall of any thing, or sudden news of some danger or the like; it is
necessary that the mind of a wise man be a little moved, and contracted, and
appalled, not through opnion perceived of any ill, but certain rapid and
inconsiderate motions, which praevert the office of the mind and reason. But
presently the same wise man approves not (...), those dreadful fantasies,
that is, (...). but rejects and refuses them, nor is there any thing in these
which seems to him dreadful. Thus differs the souls of wise and unwise men:
The unwise, when fantasies appear cruel and difficult at the first impulsion
of the mind, think them to be truly such as they appear, and receiving them
as if they were justly to be feared, approve them by their assent, (...), (this
word the Stoics use upon this occasion:) But a wise man suddenly changing
color and countenance, (...), assents not, but retains the state and vigor
of his judgment, which he always had of these fantasies, as nothing
dreadful, but terrifying only with a false show, and vain fear.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Notions.
Cic. Acad. 1.
FRom Sense, the rule of Science, Notions are imprinted in the Soul, by which,
not only principles, but larger ways to reason are found out.

Plut. de plac. Phil. 4. 11.
A man when he is born, has the supreme part of his Soul, like unto clean
paper, upon which every notion is inscribed. The first manner of inscription is
by the Senses; as for example: They who perceive a thing that is white, after
it is taken away, retain the memory thereof; but, when they have conceived many
remembrances of one species, then they say, they have experience, for
experience is a multitude of similitudes.

Of Notions, some are natural, which are in such manner as we we have said,
and without Art: Others gained by learning and industry: These are properly
called Notions, the other Anticipations. The reason for which we are called
rational, is said to be perfected by anticipations in the first seven years.

Intelligence is the phantasme of the intellect of a rational creature; for
phantasm, when it lights upon a rational Soul, is then called (...),
Intelligence, a word taken from the Intellect. For, to other Creatures there
happen not phantasmes, to the Gods only and to us these are incident. Those
which belong to us, are Phantasmes, as to their genus, Notions, as to their
species; as denaries and staters, when paid for transportation, are called
Naula.

Arrian. 1. 22.
Common notions are planted in all men, (in which they all agree together) one
is not repugnant to another; for, who holds not, that good is profitable, and
ought to be chosen with utmost endeavors? Who holds not, that what is just, is
fair and well-beseeming? Whence then proceed contentions and differences? to
wit, from the application of first notions to singular things.

Simp. in Epict.
These Notions, and whatsoever is of this kind, which right reason conformeth
in us, being long examined, are true, and suitable to the natures of things.

CHAP. IX.
Of Science and Opinion;
Cicer. Acad. qu^st. 1.
THat which is comprehended by Sense, Zeno called Sense, and if so
comprehended, as not to be plucked away by reason, Science, otherwise
Ignorance; from which proceeds Opinion, which is weak and common, to the
false and unknown.

Sext. Emp. adv. Logic. 1.
These three are joined together, Science, Opinion, and Comprehension, which
borders upon the other two. Science is a firm, stable, immutable comprehension
with reason: Opinion, an infirm, weak, assent: Comprehension, which comes
between both, is an assent to comprehensive phantasy. Comprehensive phantasy is
true, in such manner, that it cannot be false. Therefore Science is in wise men
only, Opinion in fools, Comprehension is common to both, as being that by
which truth is judged; Cicer. Acad. quaest. 1.
and is for this reason reckoned by Zeno, neither amongst the right ((...)) nor
amongst the bad ((...)) but betwixt science and ignorance, affirming, that this
only is to be credited.

CHAP. X.
Of Voice, Speech, and Words.
Sext. Emp. adv. L^g. cap. de vero.
These three are joined to one another; that which is signified, that which
signifies, and the contingent. That which signifies is the voice, as Dion:
That which is signified, is the thing it self declared by the voice; it is
that which we apprehend, and is present in our cogitation. The contingent is
the outward subject, as, Dion himself.

Laert.
Dialectick being conversant about that which signifies, and that which is
signified, Laert.
is divided into two places: one, of Significats; the other of Voice. The place
of significats is divided into fantasies, and subsistents on fantasy,
dicibles, axioms, etc.

In the other place, concerning Voice, is declared literal Voice, the parts of
speech, the nature of Solaecisms and Barbarisms, Poems, Ambiguities, Song,
Music, and (according to some) definitions and divisions.

Laert.
The fantasies of the mind precede speech, ( Of these therefore we have
already treated) then the mind endued with the faculty of speaking, declares
by speech what it receives from the fantasy; For this reason, Laert.
the consideration of Dialectick, by the joint consent of all, seems as if it
ought to be first taken from the place of voice.

Laert.
Voice is air percussed, the proper sensible object of hearing, (as Diogenes
the Babylonian, in his Art of Voice.) The voice of a living sensitive creature,
is air percussed with appetite; the voice of man is articulate, proceeding
from the mind: at his four teenth year it is perfected.

Speech (as Laert.
Diogenes says) is a literate voice; as, It is day. Word is a significative
voice, proceeding from the mind. Language is a speech according to the variety
of Nations, whereof each uses its peculiar dialect; as the Attick says,
(...), the Ionick (...) Voice and Speech differ, in that voice is a sound, but
speech articulate only. Speech and Word differ; for word is always
significative; but, speech sometimes signifies nothing, as Blitri, which is no
word. To speak and to pronounce differ: voices are pronounced, but things only
are spoken: Sext. Emp. adv. Leg. cap. de vero.
for, to speak is to pronounce a significant voice of a thing that is said.

Varro de ling. lat. lib. 5.
Hence Chrysippus says, that he who begins to speak and pronounce words,
before he can put them in their right place, does not speak, but thinks that
he speaks; as, the Image of a man is not a man: so in Crows, Dawes, and
Children, when they first begin to speak, the words which they say are not
words. He only speaks, who knows to put a word in the right place.

They (particularly Cicero.
Zeno) Dionys. Halic.
took much pains in the invention and expli^ation of words, Hieronym.
wherein they distinguished very subtlely. Hence Cicero calls the Stoics
Architects of words. Ammonius, the Grammarians, followers of the Stoics.

Laert.
The Elemen^s of speech are the 24 Letters. Letter is taken three ways: First,
for the character of figure which is formed. Secondly, for the element or
power: Thirdly, for the name, as A. Of the Elements, seven are Vowels (...) six
Mutes, (...)

Laert.
Of speech there are five parts, as Diogenes says in his Book of Voice, and
Chrysippus ( Dionys. Halic.
at first they reckoned but four, separating the Articles from the
Conjunctions, afterward the latter Stoics, dividing the Appellatives from the
Nounes, made them five) Noun, Appellation, Verb, Conjunction, Article.
(Antipater in his Book of Speech added the medium) Appellation (as Diogenes
says) is a part of speech signifying a common quality; as, Man, Horse. Noune a
part of speech denoting a proper quality; as Diogenes, Socrates. Verb (as
Diogenes says) a part of speech signifying a thing, which is predicated of one
or more things, incomposed; or, as some say, an Element of speech without
cases, whereby the parts of speech are connected; as, I write, I speak.
Conjunction is a part of speech without cases, conjoyning the parts of speech.
Article is an element of speech, having cases; distinguishing the kinds and
numbers of Nounes; as, (...)

S. August^ de Dialect. cap. 6.
Every word, by reason of that which it signifies, calls four necessary
things into question, its origin, power, declination, ordination.

As concerning the first, which the Greeks call (...), they conceived, that
names were given by nature: the first pronounced voices, imitating the things
themselves, from which the names were afterward imposed, by which reason, they
derive Etymologies, conceiving that there is not any word, for which there
cannot be given a certain reason. They therefore studiously enquired whence
words are deduced, much pains was taken, first, by Zeno, then by Cleanthes,
afterward by Chrysippus, to give a reason of commentitious fables, and to
explain the causes of words, why they are called so and so.

This beginning is to be sought, until we arrive so far, as that the thing
agree in some similitude with the sound of the word, as when we say, tinkling
of brass, the neighing of horses, the bleating of sheep, the gingling of
chains: These words by their sound, express the things which are signified by
them.

But, for as much as there are things which found not, in these the similitude
of touching has the same power: As, they touch the sense smoothly or harshly,
the smoothness or harshnesse of letters in like manner touch the hearing, and
thereby occasioneth their names. As when we say smooth, it sounds smoothly: so,
who will not judge harshnesse to be harsh by the very word? It is smooth to the
ear when we say pleasure; harsh, when we say crux, a cross: the things
themselves make good the sound of the words. Honey, as sweetly as the thing it
self affects our taste, so sweetly does the name touch our hearing: Sour, as
harsh in both. Wool and Briars, as the words are to the hearing, the things are
to the touch. These are conceived to be the infancy, as it were, of words, when
the sense of the thing concords with the sense of the sound.

From hence proceeded the license of naming, according to the similitude of the
things among themselves: as when, for example, crux, a cross, is therefore so
called, because the harshnesse of the word concords with the harshnesse of the
pain which the cross affects. But, Crura, thighs, are so called, not from
harshnesse of pain; but, because in length and hardness, they are, in respect
of the other limbs, like unto the wood of a cross. Hence it comes to abuse,
that the name usurped, not of a like thing, but, as it were near: for what
likeness is there between the signification of little and minute, when as that
may be little, which not only is nothing minute, but is somewhat grown; yet, by
reason of a certain neernesse, we say minute for little. But, this abuse of the
word is in the power of the speaker; for, he may use the word little, and not
minute. This example belongs to that which we will show, when we call that a
fish pond which has no fish in it, nor any thing like a fish: It is
denominated from fishes, by reason of the water, wherein fishes live. So the
word is used by translation, not from similitude, but a certain kind of
vicinity. And if any one should say, that men in swimming resemble fishes, and
that from thence a fish pond is so named, it were foolish to refuse it, since
that neither is repugnant to the nature of the thing, and both are occult. But,
this is to the purpose, which we cannot dilucidate by one example, how much the
origin of the word, which is taken from vicinity, differs from that which is
derived from similitude.

From hence there is a progression to the contrary. Lucus is thought to be so
named, quod minime luceat; and bellum, quod res bella non sit; and soedus, quod
res foeda non sit. But, if we derive p^rcus, as some do, a soeditate, it
returns to that vicinity, when that which is made, is named from that by which
it is made.

For this vicinity is very large, and divided into many parts, either by
efficience, as this word procus a foeditate; from which likewise foedus: or by
effect, as puteus, so named, because the effect thereof is potatio: or by that
it contains, as urbs ab orb, because in a place which they liked, they first
made a track about it with a plough, as Virgil says of Aeneas, -- Urbem
designat Aratro. Or by that which is contained, as if horreum were derived from
hordeum; or by abuse, as hordeum for wheat, or the whole from a part, as mucro,
which is the point for the whole sword; or a part from the whole; as capillus
quasi capitis pilus. What need we go any further? whatsoever else can be
reckoned, we may see the origin of the word contained, either in the similitude
betwixt things and sounds, or in the similitude betwixt things themselves, or
in vicinity, or contrariety, which origin we cannot pursue beyond similitude.

But this we cannot do always, for there are innumerable words, the reasons of
which ly^hid. To the infancy, or rather stock and seed of such words, beyond
which, no origin is to be sought, neither if a man do enquire can he find
any, they proceed in this manner: The syllables, in which v has the place of
consonant, as in these words, venture, vafer, velum, vinum, vomis, vulnus, have
a thick, and as it were, a strong sound, which the very custom of speaking
confirms, when from some words we take them away, lest they should burden the
ear; for which reason we say amasti, rather then amavisti, and abiit, not
abi^it, and innumerable of the same kind. Therefore when we say Vis, the sound
of the word having, as we said, a kind of force, suiteth with the thing which
it signifies. Now from this vicinity, by that which they affect, that is,
because they are violent, vincula seem to be named, and vimen, quo aliquid
vinciatur. Thence vites, because they claspe about those things by which they
grow. Hence also by similitude, Terence calls a crooked old man vietum. Hence
the Earth, worn into winding paths by the feet of passengers, is called via;
but if via be so named, quasi vi pedum trita, the origin returns to the
vicinity: But let us suppose it derived from the similitude it has with vitis,
or vimen, that is, from its winding, one asks me why it is called via? I
answer, from the windings and crookedness thereof, which the ancients called
vietum; thence the rounds of a wheel vietos. He demands, how vietum comes to
signify winding? I answer, from the similitude of vitis, a Vine: He requires
whence vitis is so named? I say, because it does vincere those things which it
comprehends. He questions whence vincere is derived? We say, a vi: He asks,
whence vis? We give this reason, because the word in its robust and forcible
sound agrees to the thing which it signifies. He has nothing more to demand.

Galen. de decret. Hipp. and Plat. lib. 2.
In like manner, in this word Ego, as Chrysippus observes, in pronouncing the
first syllable, we depresse the under-lip, as if it were to point to our
selves, then by motion of the beard we point to our own breasts: of which
Agell. 10. 5.
Nigidius has given more instances, in his Grammatical Commentaries.

The second question concerning words, is of their power, (...), of
significants; whence Laert.
Chrysippus divided Dialectick into two parts, (...), of significants and
significats. Here they enquire, how many ways every thing may be said, and how
many ways a thing said may signify.

Here is examined the ambiguity of words: Laert.
Ambiguity (or amphiboly) is a word signifying two or more things, naturally,
and properly, according to the language of the Nation, in such manner, that
many senses may be collected from the same words, as (...), which one way
signifies, the pot fell thrice, another way, the she-minstrell fell.

Agell. 9. 12.
Every word (according to Chrysippus) is by nature ambiguous, for the same may
be taken two or more ways: D. August. de dialect.
Neither is that any thing to the purpose which Hortensius calumniates in
Cicero, thus, They affirm that they hear ambiguities acutely, explain them
clearly. The same persons hold, that every word is ambiguous; how then can they
explain the ambiguous by the ambiguous, that were to bring a candle not lighted
into the dark. This is ingeniously and subtlely said, but like that of Scaevola
to Antonius, you seem to the wise to speak acutely, to fools truly: for what
else does Hortensius in that place, but by his ingenuity and facetiousnesse, as
an intoxicating cup, bring darkness upon the unlearned. For, when they say,
every word is ambiguous, it is understood of single words. Ambiguities are
explained by disputation; no man disputes by single words, none therefore
explaineth ambiguous words by ambiguous words. And yet seeing that every word
is ambiguous, no man can explain the ambiguity of words, except by words, but
those conjoined and not ambiguous. As when we say, every Soldier has two
feet, it does not follow, that a whole Regiment of Soldiers that have two
feet, should have in all but two feet. So when I say, every word is ambiguous,
I do not say, a sentence, nor a disputation, although they are woven of words.
Every ambiguous word therefore may be explained by inambiguous disputation.

The third question is concerning Declination, (...) and (...) Agell. 2. 25.
Some follow Analogy, others Anomaly: Analogy is a like declination of like,
in Latin proportio. Anomaly is an inequality, following the customs of
declinations. Varr^. de ling. lat.
Chrysippus wrote six books (...), showing, that like things are noted with
unlike words, and unlike things with like words.

The last question is concerning Ordination, (...) Dionys. Ha^^carn. de compos.
verb.
Upon this subject Chrysippus wrote two books ( Laertius reckons more) whose
scope is not Rhetorical, but Dialectick, as will easily appear to the Reader:
Of the Syntax of Axioms: of true and false Axioms: of possible and
impossible: of contingent, and transient, and ambiguous, and the like, which
confer nothing to single speech, or pleasure, or grace to elocution.

Laert.
There are five excellencies of speech, Propriety, Perspicuity, Succinctnesse,
Decorum, Elegance. Propriety is a proper phrase, according to Art, not after
the common expression.

Perspicuity is, when that which is intended is delivered clearly.

Succinctnesse is, when that only is comprised which is necessary to the thing.

Decorum, is a conformity to the thing.

Elegance is an avoiding of vulgar phrase.

Laert.
Amongst the faults of speech is Barbarism, a phrase not in use with the best
persons; and Sol^ecisme, a speech incoherently framed.

CHAP. XI.
Of Definition and Division.
Laert.
DEfinition (according to Antipater in his book of Definitions) is speech by
Analysis pronounced adaequately; or (as Chrysippus in his book of Definitions)
an answer to this Question, what a thing is.

Sext. Empi^. adv. Log.
Those definitions are vicious which include any of those things which are not
in the things defined, or not in all, or not in some; so as if we should say, A
man is a rational creature, or, a mortal grammatical creature; seeing that
no man is immortal, and some men are not Grammarians, the definition is faulty.

Cicer. Topic.
We must therefore, when we take those things which are common to the things we
would define, and others prosecute them so far, until it becomes proper, so as
not to be transferrible to any other thing; as this. An inheritance is riches,
add which by the death of some person falls to another, it is not yet a
definition, for riches may be held many other ways, as well as by Inheritance;
add one word, by right of Law; now the thing will seem disjoined from
community; so that the definition is thus explained. Inheritance is riches,
which by the death of some person falls to another by right of law: It is not
yet enough, therefore add, neither bequeathed by will, nor detained by
possession, and it is perfect.

Cic. Topic.
Of definition there are two kinds; one of things which are; the other of
things which are understood. Those things which are, we call such as may be
seen or touched, as a field, house, a wall, and the like. On the other side, we
say those things are not, which cannot be touched or shown, as possession,
gardianship, nation, kindred, which have not any body, yet there is some
conformity in the understanding which we call notionall, whereby in
argumentation they may be explained by definition. This latter kind is rather
called Description, a speech, which by the exterior figure of the things
brings us to the things themselves, or a Definition simply expressing the
power of a definition.

Cic. Topic.
Again, of definitions, some are of partitions, others of divisions. Of
partitions, when the thing proposed is torn (as it were) into pieces, as if we
should say the Civil Law is that which consists in Laws, Senators, things
judged, the authority of Lawyers, Edicts of Magistrates, manners and Equity.

The definition of divisions comprehends all species which are under the
genus defined, thus. Abalienation is of that thing which is in our power, or a
deliverance of it into the power of another, or a concession by Law, amongst
whom those things may be done by civil right.

Laert.
Division is a section of the genus into its immediate species; as, of living
creatures, some are rational, some irrational. Sext. Empir. adv. Math. 10. 2.
This therefore is an ill division, of men, some are Grecians, some Egyptians,
some Persians, some Indians; for the next species are not disparate, but
opposite, we must therefore say thus; Of men, some are Grecians, some
Barbarians, and again, by subdivision of Barbarians, some are Egyptians, some
Persians, some Indians, which likewise is in the division of things that are.
For those which are good and bad are different to us, those who are
intermediate betwixt good and bad are indifferent to us. The division therefore
ought not to be so, but rather thus: Of things that are, some are indifferent,
others different, of the different, some are good, some are ill; For this
division is like unto that which says, of men, some are Grecians, others
Barbarians; of Barbarians, some are Egyptians, some Persians, some Indians;
the other is likewise; Of men, some Graecians, some Egyptians, some Persians,
some Indians.

Hence it follows, that Sext. Empir. adv. Moral. 10.
perfect division has an universal power; for he who divides thus; Of men,
some are Grecians, others Barbarians, says as much as this, if there are any
men, they are either Grecians or Barbarians, for if there be any man, who is
neither Greek nor Barbarian, the division must necessarily be ill, the
universal false. Wherefore when we say, of things that are, some are good,
some ill, some intermediate, it is as much (according to Chrysippus) as this
universal: if there be any things that are, they are either good, or ill, or
indifferent. But this universal is false, if any thing false be subjected to
it: For, if two things be subjected, one good, the other ill; or, one good, the
other indifferent, in this expression of those things which are, one kind is
good, that is true, but this, these are good, is false, for they are not good,
for one is good, the other ill. And again, these are ill, is false, for they
are not ill, but only one of them. The like in indifferents; for, it is false
that these are indifferents, as that these are good or ill.

Laert.
There are three forms of division, anti-division, sub-division, partition.
Anti-division is a distribution of the genus into species by the contrary; as
for example, by negation, as of things that are, some are good, others not good.

Sub-division is division upon a division: as, of things that are, some are
good, others not good; of the not-good, some are ill, others indifferent.

Partition, is a distribution of the genus into places (according to Crinis) as
of goods, some belong to the Soul, others to the Body.

CHAP. XII.
Of Genus, Species, etc.
Laert.
GENUS is a comprehension of many Notions referred to one, as, a living
creature, for this includes all living creatures. Notion is a fantasy of the
mind, not any thing existent or qualitative, but, as it were, something
existent, and qualitative; as the notion of a horse, no horse being present.

Species is that which is contained under the Genus; as, under living creature
is contained man.

Most general, is that which is a Genus, but has no Genus: Most special,
that which is a Species, but has no Species.

To this place of Voice belong likewise, as we said, the consideration of Poem
and Poesy. Poem (according to Possidonius, in his introduction to Speech) is a
speech in meeter or rhithme, not prose, as (...), and (...), Poesy is a
significant Poem, with design, containing the imitation of things divine and
human.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Things.
NOtions, words, and things, as we have said, are conjoined together. From
notions we came to words, from words we come now to the things themselves: By
Notions Things are perceived. Laert.
Those are said to be Things which are dicible. Philop. in Analyt. prior.
The Stoics by a new name call things (...), Contingents, because we desire
that things might befall us, and that we might obtain them. Sext. Empir. adv.
Log.
Contigents therefore is the subject it self, beyond the notion or word, as
Dion.

Alexand. Aphrod. in Top. 4.
They comprehend all things under one common Genus, (...), somewhat; Senec.
Epist. 19.
placing this Genus above all, the reason this: In nature somethings are,
somethings are not. For, those things which are not, but only incur in the
mind, as Centaurs, Giants, and whatsoever else is formed by false cogitation,
has some image, although it has no substance. Even Negatives are in being.
Somewhat therefore is more general then Ens, which is understood only of
Corporealls.

Simplic. in Categ.
Things are subdivided into four Genus's, Subjects, and qualitatives, and
quodammodotatives in themselves, and quodammodotatives as to others. Simplic.
ibid.
Thus the Stoics treating more strictly and subtly of these things, contract
the Predicaments into a lesser number, taking some of those things which they
diminished, but with some alteration.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Subjects.
Simplic. in Categ.
THere is not any thing besides (...), Subject: The differences concerning this
are nonsubsistent.

Simplic. ibid^
Subject is twofold; one, which is called the first subject, such is matter,
expert of all qualities, which Aristotle calls a body potentially. The other,
that which is affected with quality, as Brass, and Socrates, with those things
which are in them, or praedicated by them.

CHAP. XV.
Of Qualitatives.
Dexipp. in categ. 2. 22.
QUalitatives have a subsistence, and are separate from their subjects. For
qualities (as all other accidents) are bodies, seeing that according to Zeno,
nothing can be effected by that which is incorporeall, nor can that which is
incorporeall effect any thing; whatsoever effects is a body. Effective
quality therefore is a body. Matter is expert of quality, but qualities are not
expert of matter.

Simplic. in categ^
Quality is the habit of that which is qualitative. Qualitative is taken three
ways: First, for whatsoever has difference, whether it be motion or habit,
and whether hardly or easily separaable. In this sense, not only he who is
wise, but he who stretches out his hand are qualitative. The second
signification includes not motions but habits only, which they define
qualitative, that is, which has a difference endued with habit, as a wise man,
or an armed man. Of these, some are adaequate, to the measure of their
pronunciation and consideration; others not adaequate. These they omit, those
which are adaequate, equal, and permanent, they call qualitative; as, a
Grammarian, and a wise man; neither of these exceeds, or falls short of his
quality. Likewise a lover of meat, and a lover of wine, being in act such, as a
glutton, and a drunkard, because they make use of those parts which serve to
this end, are so called: so that if any man be a glutton, he is consequently a
lover of meat; but, if he be a lover of meat, he is not therefore immediately a
glutton; for, being destitute of those parts which he uses in eating, he
wants the act, but not the habit. Quality is adaequated to qualitative in
this last sense.

Bursius in dialect. Cicer. 4. 3.
All qualities are either causes, and then they are called forms; or effects,
and then they are generally called (...), habitualls, which word Antipater
extends as large, as the common accident, both of things corporeal and
incorporeall, (...), somewhat. Of habitualls there are four kinds, (...), that
is, (...), when they reside in the mind; (...), that is, (...), when they fall
from the mind into the voice; (...)* when by the motion of the mind, they are
praedicated of any thing; (...), or, (...), when they happen to subjects.

Simplic. in Categ.
Habits are only things united, but those which are conjoined by contiguity, as
a Ship; or by distance, as an Army; in these there can be no habit, nor one
thing spiritual above all, nor one reason, whereby they may come to subsist
within one habit.

It is common to quality of corporeal things to be the difference of their
substance, Ibid.
no^ taken severally, but contracted into one notion and property of the mind,
nor by time or strength reduced to form, but by its own tality, according to
which the generation of the qualitative subsists.

Power (a species of quality) is that which has and gives the faculty of
exercising many accidents, Ibid.
as prudence gives the faculty of walking prudently, and discoursing
prudently: or, according to some, Power is that which gives the faculty of
exercising many accidents, and which rules and governs the acts subjected
unto it. What Aristotle called natural Power, Ibid.
they name Aptitude.

Habits are intended and remitted, Ibid.
dispositions cannot be intended or remitted. Thus the straightness of a wand,
although it may easily be discomposed and bent, is a disposition, for
straightness cannot be intended or remitted. Likewise the virtues are
dispositions, not in respect of their firmness and constancy, but because they
cannot admit of degrees of more and less: but, Arts must either have
firmness, or not be dispositions. Thus habitude is taken in the latitude of
the species, disposition in the chief perfection of the species, and in that
which is the most it can be, whether it be easily altered (as the straightness
of a wand) or not.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Quodammodotatives.
THe third kind of things are (...), Quodammodotatives. Plotin. ^. 30.
They differ from Qualitatives, because matter is otherwise affected by habits,
otherwise by Quodammodotatives, in this or that manner. Moreover Qualitatives
are Quodammodotatives as to matter, and conversant therein; but properly,
quodammodotatives are conversant in qualitatives. Simplic. in Categ.
Again, as habitualls may be said to extend further then habits, so
quodammodotatives are larger then qualitatives: for quodammodotatives extend
even to those things which are quodammodotatives as to others, and include
them; but qualitatives consist only in those which make a difference.

Simplic. ibid.
This place Boethius conceives to have the power of habit. Habit chiefly and
universally is taken three ways: First, to be to it self, and according to it
self: Secondly, in respect to another: Thirdly, of another to it. That which
is considered as to it self, pertaines to quodammodotatives; as, armed, for it
is a habit of ones self to ones self. That which is to another, pertaines to
relation; for, a Father, or a right hand, are said, according to a habit, not
of themselves to themselves, but of them to another. But that which is of
another to us, as of an armed man, being the habit of another to us, pertaines
to habit.

To this head they reduce quantitatives and quantity, and their species, place,
time, and some species (according to Aristotle) of quality, figure and form; as
also action, passion, site, habit.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Quodammodotatives as to others.
THe last genus of things is (...), quodammodotatives as to others. Simplic, in
Cat^g.
Of these there are two kinds, Relatives, and quodammodotative-Relatives. The
Relatives are opposed and distinguished from those which are by themselves, and
absolute. The quodammodotative-relatives are opposed to those which have a
difference, as for example, Sweet and Sour, and whatsoever is of the like
kind, are relatives; but quodammodotative-relatives, are as the right side,
father, and the like; for, they have a difference, in that they are
uncharacterized by differences, according to some species. As therefore there is
one notion of those which are by themselves, and absolute, another of those
which are considered with difference: so some things are relatives; others
quodammodotative-relatives. The consequence of conjunctions in these is
contrary; for, with those which are by themselves, coexist those which have a
difference; for, those which are by themselves have some differences, as white
and black. But, those which are by themselves, coexist not with those which
have a difference. Sweet and bitter have differences, whereby they are
characterized; yet, they are not absolute, but relatives. But, those which are
quodammodotative-relatives, being contrary to those which have differences, are
likewise relatives. For, the right side, and a Father, besides that they are
quodammodotative, are likewise relatives: but, sweet and bitter being
relatives, have a difference, whereby they are contrary, being quodammodotative
relatives. Those which are quodammodotative relatives, it is impossible should
be by themselves, and absolute, or by difference; for they depend solely upon
relative habit. Relatives therefore are not by themselves, for they are not
absolute; yet, are they according to difference, because they are distinguished
by some character. To express this more clearly, Relatives are those, which by
their proper character respect another; quodammodotative-relatives are those
which use to happen to another, but not without mutation and alteration of
those things which are about them; yet, with respect of something external. If
therefore any thing with difference respect another, it is only relative, as,
habit, science, and sense: but, if it respect another, not out of inherent
difference, but in pure habit, it is quodammodotative-relative. For, a Father,
and right side, to their consistence, require some external things, for as
much as there being no mutation made in them, he is no longer a Father, his Son
being dead, and the right side is no longer so, after he is risen, in respect
of whom it was said to be such; but, sweet and bitter will not alter, unless
their power be likewise changed. If therefore quodammodotative are changed in
habit to another, although they receive no passion in themselves, it is
manifest they have their being in the habit alone, not in difference.

Laert. vit. Aristoni^.
This genus was first introduced by Aristo, Simplic. in Categ.
who defined quodammodotative relatives to be those, whose being is the same
with their quodammodotative being to one another: And so also Andronicus
defines them.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Dicibles.
TO the place concerning things and significats, belongs that concerning
Dicibles, (...), to which true and false is common. Laert.
Dicible is that which con^isteth according to rational phantasy. Sext. Empir.
adv. log.
Rational phantasy is that, by which what is comprehended by phantasy, may be
expressed by speech. Every thing that may be said, ought to be said, for from
thence is derived the denomination.

Ammon. in pro^^^ Arist. (...)*
Dicible is a mean betwixt notion and thing. Dicibles are notions, that is,
(...), but not merely and simply notions, Burs. in dial. Cic. 5. 1.
which in as much as they are the principles of science, and are intelligences,
are called (...), and (...)* but, in as much as they reside in the mind, are
called (...), and are genus's and species, in which manner, being ready for
expression, they are called dicibles, and pertain to the enunciative faculty of
the soul. For, whatsoever is said, if it be so considered as it is said of
something, they are Categorems; if so, as it breaks forth into voice, and
with voice, they are words, if retained in the mind, ready to break forth,
they are dicibles. Dicible therefore is a word, and yet signifies not a word,
but that which is understood in the word, and is contained in the mind.

Laert.
Of Dicibles there are two kinds, the defective, and the perfect. The defective
are those which an imperfect enunciation, not completing the sentence, but
requiring something to follow; as writes, for we ask, who? To this kind
belongs Categorems, which are praedicated of other things.

The perfect are such as have a perfect enunciation: Of these there are two
kinds: The first peculiarly called perfect, which though they complete the
sentence, yet, signify neither true nor false. Of these there are many kinds,
as Interrogation, percontation, imperative, adjurative, optative, imprecative,
or execrative, substitutive, hypotheticall, compellative, like to, or
transcending an axiom, and dubitative.

Interrogation is that which is a perfect sentence, but requires an answer,
as, Is it day? for this is neither true nor false; so that it is day, is an
axiom, is it day? an interrogation.

Percontation is a thing for which we cannot answer significantly, as in
Interrogation, yes: but as thus, he dwells in such a place.

Imperative is a thing, in speaking whereof, we command, as, Go thou to the
Inachian stood.
Ammom, in lib. (...).
Adjurative, as witness thou Earth.


Optative, which he we speak wishing, as, Great Jove who do in Ida reign,
The Victory let Ajax gain.


Imprecative, or execrative, as, As on the ground this wine I pour,
So may the Earth his blood devour.


Substitutive, or expositive, as, let this be a right line.

Hypotheticall, as, supposing the Earth to be the Center of the Globe of the
Sun.

Compellative is a thing in speaking which we call another, Laert.
as, Atrides, Agamemnon, King of men.

Like to, or transcending an axiom, is that which has an axiomaticall manner
of speaking; but because it superabounds in some particle or affection, it is
not ranked amongst axioms, as, How beauteous is thy Virgin-Train!
How like to Priam's Son, that swain!


Dubitative is a thing different from an axiom, which, whosover speaks, makes
a doubt, as,

Then are not life and grief of kin? all these are neither true nor false.

The other kind of perfect dicibles which complete the Sentence* affirms or
denies, and is either true or false. It is called axtom.

CHAP. XIX
Of Categoremes.
Laert.
CAtegoreme is that which is praedicated of another, or a thing construed with
one or more, or (as Apollodorus) a defective dicible, construed with the right
case, to make an axiom.

Ammon. in Arist. (...).
Whatsoever is praedicated of another, is praedicated of the name of the case;
and both these are either perfect, as that which is praedicated, and together
with the subject sufficient to make an Axiom. Or they are de^ective, and
require some addition, to make thereof a perfect praedicate.

If that which is praedicated of a name, make an axiom, it is a Categorem, or
(...), a congruity, as walke^h, for example, Socrates walks.

But if it be predicated of the case, (whereby transitions are made from one
person to another, wherein it is necessary, that some oblique case, be likewise
pronounced with the right, they are called (...), as an addition to the (...),
(or as Lib. 3.
Priscian renders it, less then congruities) as, Cicero saved his Country.

Again, if that which is praedicated of some nown, require a case of some other
nown to be added to make up the axiom, so as the construction be made of two
oblique cases, they are (...), incongruities, or, according to Ammonius, less
then (...), as, it pleases me to come to thee; whether the nounes only or the
words require it.

Laert,
Again, of Categoremes, there are four kinds, right, supine, neuter, and
reciprocally active and passive. Right are those which have a motion tending to
another, and are construed with one of the oblique cases, for the making of a
Categorem, as hears, sees, discourses.

Supine are those which are considered from habit to an agent, and is construed
with a passive particle, as, I am heard, I am seen.

Neuter, as those which are neither way, as, to be wise, to walk.

Reciprocally, active and passive are those, which seem supines but are not,
for they are acts, as (...), for therein is included (...).

The right (or nominative) case, is so called by the Stoics, whom the
Grammarians follow, because it falls directly from the notion which is in the
mind. Oblique cases are the Genitive, Dative and Accusative.

CHAP. XX.
Of simple Axioms.
Laert.
AXiom is that which is either true or false, or a thing perfect by it self,
negative, or affirmative, as far as it extends; or, (according to Chrysippus,
in his dialectick definitions) Axiom is that which affirms or denies as far
as it extends; as, Dion walks. It is called Axiom (...), because assent is
either given to it or not: for he who says, it is day, assenteth thereunto. If
it be day, the axiom is true, if it be not, false.

Laert.
Of Axioms, the first and most proper difference is of the simple and not
simple (thus divided by Chrysippus, and Archidemus and Athenodorus, and
Antipater, and Crinis.)

Laert, Sext. Empir adv. Log. cap de ver^.
Simple axioms are those which consist neither of one axiom twice taken, nor of
different axioms, neither by one or more conjunctions; as, It is day, it is at
night, Socrates disputes. Laert.
Of simple axioms there are many kinds, Apophatick, or negative, arnetick, or
universally negative; steretick, or privative; categorick, or praedicative;
categoreutick, or indicative; indefinit and mediate.

Laert. ^pul. (...).
N^gative axioms are those, in which a negative particle is proposed; as, If
this is, that is not. But if the negation be of the latter part of the Axiom,
the other part not being negative, then the axiom is not negative, but
praeicative; as, It happens to some pleasure not to be good. This therefore
declares what happens to the thing, and therefore is praedicative. Boes. in
Ci^^ Top.
A species of negative axiom, is the supernegative, when, between the parts
connected and copulated by two affirmations, a praeposition with a negation is
interposed, and that very negation denied; as, If it is day, it is not light.
Of the same kind are all those, wherein negation is proposed to negation; as,
It is not both day, and not light.

Laert.
Uni^ersally negative axioms are those, which consist of an universal negative
particle, and a Categorem; as, no man walks.

Laert.
Privative are those which consist of a privative particle, and an axiom in
power, as, he is inhuman.

Laert.
Praedicative are those, which consist of a right ca^e and a Categorem; as,
Dien walks.

Laert.
Indicative, or S^xt. Empi^.
definitive is that which consists of a demonstrative right case, and a
Categorem; as, this man walks.

Laert. Sext. Empir.
Indefinit is that, which consists of one or more indefinit particles; as, a
certain man walks, he is moved.

Sext. Empit.
Intermediate are of this kind, a man si^teth, or a man walks; a certain man
walks is indefinite, for it determines no single person; that man sits is
definite, Socrates sits is intermediate; for it is not indefinite, because
it determines the species, nor definite, because it is not pronounced with
demonstration, but it is intermediate betwixt both.

Sext. Emp.
An indefinite axiom, as, some one sits, is true, when the thing definite is
true; as, he sits; but, if none of the singulars do sit, the indefinite
axiom is not true, that some one sits.

CHAP. XXI.
Of not-simple Axioms.
Laert. Sext* Emp. adv. Log. de vero.
NOt-simple axioms are those, which are in a manner double, consisting of one
axiom diversified, or of axioms: of one axiom dversified; as, if it be day, it
is day: of axioms, as, if it be day, it is light.

Sext. Emp. adv. Log. cap. de vero.
In not-simple axioms, that which immediately follows the conjunction if, or
whereas, is called the Antecedent, the first, or the beginning; the rest is
called the ending, or Consequence, or second. Notwithstanding that the axiom be
pronounced by inversion; as, It is light, if it be day; for in this, the ending
or consequence, is, it is light, although it be spoken first; the antecedent,
it is day, although it be put in the second place; for it immediately follows
the conjunction if.

The Laws and rules of Consequents are these: 1. Laert.
From true follows true; as, if it be day, it follows that it is light. 2.
From false follows false; as, if this be false that it is night, this is
likewise false, it is dark. 3. From false follows true, as from this, the
Earth flies, follows, the Earth is. 4. From true does not follow false; for
from this, the Earth is, it follows not, that the earth flies.

Laert.
Of not-simple propositions there are many kinds, Connex, Adnex, Conjunct,
Causall, Declarative of the more, and Declarative of the less.

Laert.
Connex (according to Chrysippus in his Dialectick, and Diogenes in his
Dialectick Art) is that which consists of the connective conjunction, if; which
conjunction declares, that the consequent is second to the first; as, if it be
day, it is light. Of a diversified axiom, and the conjunction if, consists
this connex, If it be day, it is day, these are properly right axioms. Of
different axioms, and the conjunction whereas, this, if it is day, it is light.
Philop. in Anal. prior.
Connex axioms are called also tropicall, because they turn from the antecedent
to the consequent.

The rules of connex axioms are these: Laert.
That is a true connex, wherein the contrary of the consequent is repugnant to
the antecedent, as, if it is day, it is light; for, that it is not light, the
contrary to the consequent, is repugnant to, it is day, the antecedent. A false
connex is that wherein the contrary to the consequent is not repugnant to the
Antecedent; as this, if it is day, Dion walks; for, that Dion walks not, is
not repugnant to, it is day.

Laert.
Adnex (which some reckon as a species of the connex) according to Crinis, in
his Dialectick, is an axiom connected by the conjunction whereas, beginning
with an axiom, and ending with an axiom; as, whereas it is day, it is light,
the conjunction shows, that the second is a consequent of the first, and that
the first is subsistent.

The rules of adnex axioms are these: Laert.
That is a true adnex, which begins from true, ends in that which is
consequent; as, whereas it is day, the Sun is over the earth. False is that,
which begins from false, or ends not consequently; as, whereas it is day,
Dion walks, if this be said when it is not day.

Laert.
A conjunct axiom is that, which is knit together by Conjunctions copulative;
as, it is both day, and it is light. The rules thereof are these: That is a
right conjunction wherein all things are true; as it is day, and it is light.
That is false, which has something false. An axiom which has neither
conjunction nor disjunction, is to be taken in the sense of the speaker; for
conjunction is sometimes taken for disjunction; as, to me, and my heir.

A disjunct axiom is that which is disjoined, Laert.
by a disjunctive conjunction; as, either it is day, or it is night. This
conjunction shows, that one of the axioms is false.

All things that are disjoined, Agell. 16. 8.
are repugnant to one another, and their opposites likewise are repugnant. Of
all things that are disjoined, one must be true, the rest false, otherwise
nothing at all is true, or all, or more then one are true, either those which
are disjunct, will not be repugnant, or those which are opposite to them will
not be contrary to one another, then the disjunct will be false, and is called
(...), as this is, in which the opposites are not contrary; either thou
runnest, or walk, or stand, for they are repugnant to one another, but
their opposites are not repugnant, because not to walk, and not to stand, and
not to run, are not contrary in themselves; for, those things are said to be
contrary, which cannot be true together. But you may at the same time neither
walk, nor run, nor stand. Every disjunction therefore is not only true, but
necessary; for if of contraries there could be a false conjunction, no
disjunction could be true.

A Causall axiom is that which is connected by this conjunction, because, as
because it is day, it is light; for the first is, as it were cause of the
second. The rules thereof are these: A causall conjunction is true, when
beginning from true, it ends in the consequent, and cannot have the
antecedent for its consequent; as because it is day, it is light: but this
axiom, it is light, does not follow from the other, it is day.

A false causall is that which either begins from false, or ends in that
which is not consequent, or whose antecedent may be the consequent, as, because
it is night, Dion walks.

An Axiom declarative of the morel, is that which is construed with this
conjunction, more, as it is more day then night. Declarative of the less, is
contrary to the former, as, it is less day then night.

CHAP. XXII.
Of contrary Axioms.
COntrary Axioms are those which are repugnant to one another, Laert.
according to truth and falsehood, whereof one affirms, the other denies,
as, it is day, it is not day. Only Negatives are contrary, (...), and opposite,
and repugnant, for only in contraries one proposition is true, the other
false. The other three kinds of contraries alleged by Arist^tle, are
pronounced without a conjunction. Whatsoever is pronounced without a
conjunction, is neither true nor false, for true and false belongs to axiom.
Axiom is a speech which consists in the conjunction of some thing, whereas of
Aristotle's other three kinds of contraries, none are conjunct but simple, as
black and white, double and single, sight and blindness.

Adverse are (as likewise defined by Aristotle) those which in the same kind
are most distant. Nothing that is pronounced by negation is adverse, ((...)) to
another, for then the adverse to Virtue will be not Virtue, and to Vice not
Vice, and under not Virtue will be included many other things beside vice,
even, a stone, a horse, and whatsover is beside Virtue; under not vice, will be
found Virtue and all other things. Thus all things would be adverse to one, and
the same the adverse to Virtue and Vice. Moreover if Virtue were not adverse to
Vice, but to not-vice, the intermediate will be adverse both to good and bad,
which is absurd.

The rules of contraries are these. 1. Simplic.
Contrariety is principally in acts, habits, and the like. 2. Categorems and
qualitatives are called as it were contrary. Prudently and imprudently in some
manner lead to things contrary, but contraries absolutely are in things: and
prudence is so immediately contrary to imprudence, not this to that:

Contraries are either distunctive or sul disjunctive, disjunctive as when we
say, it is either day or night. Sul disjunctive are of two kinds, either in
whole, betwixt universalls, as every living creature either does or suffers,
no living Creature either does or suffers; or in part, betwixt particulars;
as he either sits or walks; he neither sits nor walks.

The rules of contraries are these; of Disjunctives one being asserted, the
other is necessarily taken away; one being taken away, the other is necessarily
asserted.

Of subdisjunctives in whole, both cannot be true, both may be false; both
cannot be affirmative, both cannot be negative.

Of subdisjunctives in part, both may be true, because they are taken in part.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Possible and Impossible, Necessary and Unnecessary, Probable, Paradoxall
and Reasonable axioms.
Laert.
MOreover of axioms some are possible, others impossible; some necessary,
others not unnecessary. A possible Axiom is that which is susceptible of a true
praedication, without obstruction from those things, which, though external,
are yet contingent with the thing it self; as Diocles lives. Impossible is that
which can never be susceptible of truth, externalls oppugning it, as, the Earth
flies. Necessary is that which is so true, as that it cannot any way receive a
false praedication, or, may receive it, but those things which are
extrinsecall, will not permit that it be true, as Virtue profits.
Not-necessary is that which may be either true or false, exterior things not
obstructing it, as Dion walks.

Simplic. in lib. Arist. de opposite.
These future repugnants and their parts are according to the same manner, as
the present and the past. For, if it be true that the thing either shall be or
shall not be, it must be either true or false, because futures are determined
according to these; as, if a Navy is built to morrow, it is true to say that it
shall be built, but if it be not, it is false to say that it shall be built,
because it will not be, therefore it will either be or not be, and consequently
one of the two is false.

Concerning possibles and necessaries, there is great difference betwixt
Diodorus and Chrysippus. Johan* Grammat. in Arist. de opposite.
Diodorus holds that only to be possible which either is, or will hereafter
be. That which neither is, not ever shall be is impossible. As for me to be at
Corinth is possible, if I ever were there, or ever shall be there, but if I
never was there, nor ever shall be there, it is impossible. That a Boy shall be
a Grammarian is not possible, unless hereafter he come to be one.

Cic. de fa^.
On the contrary, Chrysippus held, that those things which neither are nor ever
shall be, are yet possible to be, as, to break a gemme, though it never come to
be broken. Alexand. Aphrod in anal* prior.
Moreover that from possibles an impossible may follow, as in this Axiom, which
is a true connex: If Dion be dead, He (pointing to Dion) is dead: The
antecedent, if Dion be dead is possible, because it may at some time be true
that he shall be dead; but this Axiom, he is dead, is impossible: for Dion
being dead, the Axiom likewise is abolished, that he is dead, seeing he is no
longer that man, capable of being demonstrated by the pronoune, He, for, he, is
a demonstration of a living creature. If therefore Dion being not yet dead,
this word, He, may be said of him, being dead, it cannot be said, he is dead.
So that in this place, he is dead, is impossible. For it were not impossible,
if, some time after the death of Dion, of whom it was before praedicated in the
connex whilst he lived, it might be again praedicated, he is dead; but because
that cannot be, it is impossible, that, he is dead, should be praedicated of
him.

To conclude, Epictet. 11. 19.
some held with Diodorus, that whatsoever is past, is true of necessity. That
to impossible there follows not a possible, and that what cannot be done,
neither is nor shall be true. Others (as Cleanthes and Antipater) that
something is possible that neither is nor shall be; that to possible follows
not impossible, and that which is past, is not true of necessity. Others, that
something is possible which is not true; that whatsoever is past, is true of
necessity, and that to possible follows also impossible.

Furthermore of Axioms, some are Laert.
probable, some paradoxall, some reasonable. A probable Axiom is that which
persuades us by a specious show to assent unto it; as, whatsoever brings
forth another is a mother; which is falfe, for the hen is not the mother of the
egg.

Laert.
Paradoxall Axioms are those which seem true only to the wise, Cic. Parad.
contrary to the opinon of all others. Epictet. 1. 25
These are likewise in other Arts, besides Philosophy; for what is stranger
then to prick the eyes for the recovery of sight? If we say this to one
ignorant of Surgery, will he not laugh at it? It is not therefore strange,
that such things as are true in Philosophy should seem paradoxes to the
unlearned.

Laert.
A reasonable Axiom, is that which has many conditions requisite to the truth
thereof, as, I shall live to morrow.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Reciprocal Axioms.
HItherto of the contrariety and repugnance of Axioms. Now of their consent and
agreement, whereby one follows and is correspondent to another, either
according to truth or falsehood, by (...), reciprocation.

Of Reciprocation there are three kinds: the first (...), perversion, a
migration into false; the second (...), conversion, a migration into true; the
third (...), equipollence, into the same.

CHAP. XXV.
Of Signs.
TO the place of Axioms appertain likewise Signs. Sext. Emp. hypot. 2. 1.
Sign is an axiom antecedent, in a true connex, and having power to detect the
consequent.

Sext. adv. log. c^p. de signo.
Sign is taken two ways: Commonly, for whatsoever falls under any sense,
and signifies something that proceeds from it: and Properly, for that which
declares a thing, which is not manifest.

Things which are certain require no sign, Sext. Empir. ibid. and Pyr^h. hyp.
2. 10.
for they are comprehended of themselves; neither those which are wholly
uncertain, for they can no way be comprehended; Galen. Hist. Philos.
but, those only, which are uncertain in time, or by nature, may be
comprehended by signs, but not by the same. Things that are uncertain in time,
are comprehended by commemorative signs; things uncertain by nature, are
comprehended by demonstrative.

Of signs therefore, some are demonstrative, others communicative. A
communicative sign is that which is so near to the thing, that together with
the sign the thing it self appears, into the knowledge whereof the sign
brings us, as smoke, which when we see, we know it proceeds from fire. A
demonstrative sign is that, which not being observed before with an evident
sign, leads us by that to the knowledge of the thing; as when a female has
milk, we presently know that she has brought forth.

CHAP. XXVI.
Of Reasons or Arguments.
DIalectick is the discipline of speech, concluded by reason. Reason, (...),
sometimes called also Argument, and Interrogation, is, according to Laert.
Crinis, that which consists of one or more sumptions, and an assumption, and
an inference; as, If it be day, it is light.
But it is day:
Therefore it is light.
Sumption. Assumption. Inserence.


The Reason of the Stoics differs from the Syllogismes of Aristotle in three
respects: Alexand. Aphrod. in anal. prior.
First, a Syllogism, according to Aristotle, cannot have less then two
propositions, a reason may have but one; as, Thou live, theresore thou
breathest: which kind Antipater calls (...). Secondly, in Syllogismes,
something besides that which is granted in the premises; but in Reasons, the
conclusion may be the same with both, or either of the sumptions. The first are
called (...), as, If it is day, it is day.
But it is day:
Therefore it is day.


Alex. Aphrod. in anal. pr.
The second are called (...), as, It is either day, or not day.
But, it is not day,
Therefore it is not day.


Alex. Aphrod. in anal. prior.
Lastly, in Syllogismes, the conclusion must necessarily follow, by reason of
the premises, whereas there are three kinds of reasons which have not this
property: The first, (...), already mentioned: The second (...), not
methodically conclusive reasons; as The first is greater then the second.
The second is greater then the third:
Therefore the first is greater then the third.


This concludes necessarily, but not Syllogistically, unless this proposition
be put in the first place: What is greater then another, is greater also then
that which is less then that other. Of the same kind is that Theorem in the
first of Euclid's Elements, This line is equal to that, therefore this line is
likewise equal to that, which is true indeed; but to conclude syllogistically,
requires this universal proposition, Those which are equal to a third, are
equal to one another.

The third kind of reasons, from which Syllogism differs by this property,
are Alex. Aphod. in anal prior. and in Topic. 1.
(...), redundant reasons, and those of two kinds: The first are such as have a
superfluous sumption; as, Every just thing is honest,
Every honest thing is good,
Every good thing is expetible in it self;
Therefore every just thing is good.


The second are those in which the proper conclusion is not inferred, but
something consequent, or accident, as that argument of Epicure: Whatsoever is
dissolved has not sense,
Whatsoever has not sense pertains not to us:
Therefore death pertains not to us.


Whereas to conclude syllogistically, we should say, Therefore whatsoever is
dissolved pertains to us.

In a reason or argument, the sumption (...), and the assumption Not (...), as
the learned Bursius has observed, dia^. Cic. 6. 2.
(...), (termed by Aristotle (...)), are axioms received by consent of the
adversary, for construction of that which is called Inference (...) (by
Aristotle (...), conclusion) because it is inferred from the rest.

Galen. de D^^ctrina Hippo^^. and Plat. lib. 2.
Of sumption and assumption according to Chrysippus, there are four
differences: The first Scientifick: The second Exercitative, or (as Aristotle
calls it) Dialectick: The third Probable and Rhetorical: The fourth Sophistick.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of conclusive Reasons.
Laert. Sext. Empir.
OF Reasons there are two kinds, conclusive, and not-conclusive. Conclusive
reasons are those, in which the Sumptions being granted, from the concession
thereof, the Inference seems to follow.

Conclusive reasons, in respect of their matter, are of two kinds, true and
false. True are those, which from true sumptions collect a true inference.
Not-true the contrary.

The Laws and rules of true and false reasons, are these: 1. Truth is
consequent to truth: as, If it is day, it is light. 2. False is consequent to
false: as, If it be false that it is night, it is likewise false that it is
dark. 3. False is consequent to true: as, Earth, if it flies is earth. 4. False
is not consequent to true: for, because it is earth, it is not therefore
consequent that it flies.

Again, of true reasons, some are demonstrati^e, others not-demonstrative. A
demonstrative reason is that, which by things that are certain, or perspicuous,
collecteth that which is uncertain and less perspicuous: as, If sweat issue
through the skin, we may understand pores; but sweat issues through the skin,
therefore we may understand pores.

Not-demonstrative are contrary: as, If it is day, it is light; but it is day,
therefore it is light. Herein the inference, it is light, is certain.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Of Syllogistick Conclusive Reasons, or Syllogisms.
COnclusive reasons, as to their from likewise, are of two kinds;
Syllogistically conclusive, and not Syllogistically conclusive. Laert.
Syllogistically-conclusive Reasons (or Syllogismes) are those which either
cannot be more concluded, or whereof one or more of the sumptions are reduced
to those which cannot be concluded again; as, if Dion walks, he is moved.

Syllogismes (by which the Stoics understand only the tropicall, or
hypotheticall,) are of three kinds, connex, disjunct, conjunct.

Simplic. in Epictet.
A connex Syllogism is, when two are so connected in themselves, that one is
the antecedent, the other the consequent, in such manner, as, if the antecedent
be asserted, the consequent follows, and the consequent being taken away, the
antecedent is likewise taken away, as, if it be day, it is not night, this
antecedent is true, therefore it follows, it is night. This kind of
Syllogism pertains to the first and second moods. In the first it is called
from Position of the antecedent, to Position of the consequent; in the second,
from negation of the antecedent, to negation of the consequent. The Laws
concerning the truth, or falsehood of these Syllogismes are the same with those
of connex axioms.

Of connex Syllogismes there are two kinds; connex in themselves, as, if it is
light, it is ligh^, but it is light, therefore it is light; and connex by
others; as, if it is day, it is light, but it is day, therefore it is light.

A conjunct Syllogism, is, Cic. Topic. 1.
when we deny something conjunct, and to these add another negation, and of
these take the first, that what remains be taken away, as, Cic. ibid.
it cannot be that a Legacy is money, and money not a Legacy; but a Legacy is
money, therefore money is a Legacy.

Simpl^c.
A disjunct Syllogism is that in which there cannot be more then one thing
true, or, that in which if one be, the other is not, or, if one be not, the
other is, as, It is either day or night, but it not night, therefore it is day;
for one being asserted, the other is taken away, and so on the contrary. Sext.
Hypotyp. Pyrrh. cap. 14.
The evidence of this Syllogism Chrysippus conceives to be so great, that even
dogs have knowledge thereof. For coming to a place where there are three ways,
if by the sent they find that the Beast has not gone in two of them, they run
directly to the third without senting, as if they argued thus, the Beast went
either this way, or that way, or that way, but neither this way nor that way,
therefore that way: The Laws of disjunct Syllogismes are the same as those of
disjunct Axioms.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of Moods.
Laert.
SYllogistick, conclusive Reasons are disposed into Moods. Of Moods there are
two kinds, the first simple, properly called a Mood, (...), defined a kind of
figure of the Reason, as thus, If the first is, the second is,
But the first is,
Therefore the second is.


(It is observable by the way, that the Stoics for letters used numbers.) The
other compounded, called (...), as being consistent of both reason and Mood,
as, If Plato lives, Plato breaths,
But the first,
Therefore the second.


This is used in a long Syntax, that it be not necessary to speak a long
assumption, or a long inference, but they abbreviate them thus, but the first,
therefore the second.

Of Moods or Tropes there are two kinds, one of indemonstrables, so termed, not
that they cannot be demonstrated, but because they conclude so evidently, that
they need not be repr^ved; the other of demonstrables.

Of Indemonstrable Moods, there are (according to Chrysippus) five, according
to Cic Topic. Martian C^p^l.
others more or less.

The first, wherein every reason consists of a connex, and an antecedent from
which begins the connex, and the consequent is inferred, as, If the first,
then the second,
But the first,
Therefore the second.


The second indemonstrable is, which, by the consequent of the connex, and the
contrary of the consequent, has a conclusion contrary to the antecedent, as,
If it is day, it is light,
But it is night,
Therefore, it is not day.


The third is, that which by a negative complication, and one of those which
are in the complication, inferrs the contrary to that which remains, as, Plato
is not both dead and alive,
But Plato is dead,
Therefore Plato is not alive.


The fourth is that which by a disjunctive, and one of those which is in the
disjunctive, concludes the contrary to that which remains, as, Either it is
the first or second,
But it is the first,
Therefore it is not the second.


The fifth is that wherein the whole reason is connected by a disjunctive, and
one of those which are in the disjunctive of the contrary, infers the rest,
as, Either it is night, or it is day,
But it is not night.
Therefore it is day.


CHAP. XXXI.
Of not-Syllogistick-conclusive Reasons.
Laert.
REasons not-syllogistically-conclusive (which are likewise especially called
(as their genus) conclusive in opposition to Syllogismes) are those which
conclude not by way of Syllogism, as, It is false, that it is both night and
day,
But it is day,
Therefore it is not night.


And this of Chrysippus.

Whatsoever is good is laudable,
Whatsoever is laudable is honest,
Therefore whatsoever is good is honest.
These not-syllogistick, or categorick-conclusives, are frequently used by the
Stoics (as by Zeno in Cicero) but immethodically, not reduced to Mood and
figure. Those they applied only to tropicall reasons^ as in which consists
the sole way and order of inference. The Categoricall are not Syllogi^ines,
because in them something is ever omitted, and therefore they are (...),
immethodically conclusive; as in that argument of Chrysippus last mentioned,
two assumptions, and an inference are omitted, for it ought to be thus, If it
be good, it is laudable,
But it is good,
Therefore it is laudable.
And again, If it be laudable, it is honest,
But it is laudable,
Therefore it is honest.


Hence are derived those reasons which are called (...), and (...), adjic^ent
and adject, consisting of propositions continually assumed without conclusions.
Adject are those whose conclusion is omitted; Adjicient, those whose
d^monstrative proposition is omitted, as, The first of every second,
The second of every third,
The third of every fourth,
Therefore the first of every ^ourth.


In this adject, the conclusion is omitted, which is, therefore the first of
every third

CHAP. XXXI.
Of not-conclusive Reasons.
Laert.
NOt-conclusive Reasons are those, whose opposite to the inference is repugnant
to the connection of the sumptions: Sext. Empir. adv. Logic.
They are of four kinds. 1. By incoherence. 2. By redundance. 3. By being in an
ill figure. 4. By defect.

By incoherence, when the propositions have no conjunction or communion with
one another, nor with the inference, as, If it is day, it is light,
But corn is sold,
Therefore it is light.


For neither, it is day, has any communion with, Corn is sold. nor both of
them together, with, it is light; but each depends upon something else.

By redundance, when something is assumed to the proposition extrinsecall and
superfluous, as, If it is day, it is light,
But it is day, and Virtue profits,
Therefore it is light.


For Virtue profits is superfluously assumed with the other proposition, the
inference depending upon the other two.

By being in an ill figure, as, this is a right figure, If the first, the
second,
But the first is,
Therefore the second.
But this, If the first, the second,
But not the second, --
Is not conclusive, not that in this figure, there cannot be reason which may
collect truth from truth, for that it may do as thus, If there are four, six
are eight,
But three are not four,
Therefore six are not eight.


But because there may be some ill reasons in it, as this, If it be day, it is
light,
But it is not day,
Therefore it is not light.


By defect, when there want one of the collective propositions, as, Riches are
either ill or good,
But riches are not good;
Therefore they are ill.


For in the disjunct there wants this, or indifferent, so that to be perfect
the sumption should be thus, Riches are ill, or good, or indifferent.

CHAP. XXXII.
Of fallacious Reasons or Sophismes.
BY Dialectick are discerned true and false reasons: the latter are Sophismes,
proper to Sophists, who dispute for vainglory, or gain; as true reasons are to
Logicians, whose end is only to find out truth.

Of fallacious reasons there are many kinds; the Quiescent reason, or Sorites,
the Lying, the Inexplicable, the Sluggish, the Dominative, the Veiled, Electra,
the Horned, the Crocodilite, the Reciprocal, the Nullity, the Defective, the
Mower, the Bald, the Occult, the Negative.

Suid.
Sorites, named from (...), a heap, is, Vlpian. 48. ad Sabin.
when from things evidently true, by short mutations, the dispute is brought to
things evidently false: Laert. though the example be falsely applied, as
Bursius and Casaubon have observed.
as, Are not two few? are not three so likewise? and four, and so on to ten?
But, two are a few, therefore ten. Laert. in Chrysip.
It is called also (...), the quiescent reason, Cic. Acad. qu^st. 4.
because the way to withstand it is by stopping, and witholding the assent.

The lying reason, (...), is a captious argument, not to be dissolved. Of this,
see the life of Eubulides.

Agel. 9. 15.
The inexplicable reason, (...), so called, from the intricate nature thereof,
not to be dissolved, wherefore it seems to be the same with the lying, and
perhaps the genus to most of those which follow.

The sluggish reason, (...), is manifested by this example: Cicer* de ^at^,
If it be decreed that you shall recover of this sickness, you shall recover
whether you take Physic or not. Again, if it be decreed you shall not recover,
you shall not recover, whether you take Physic or not: Therefore it is to no
purpose to take Physic. This argument is justly termed fluggish, faith Cicero,
because by the same reason, all action may be taken away from life.

The Dominative reason, (...); of this already in the life of Diodorus.

The veiled reason, (...): Of this, and Electra, and the Horned reason, (...),
in the life of Eubulides.

The Crocodilite, so named from this Egyptian fable: ^oxop^t. in Apthe.
A woman sitting by the side of Nilus, a Crocodile snatched away her child,
promising to restore him, if she would answer truly to what he asked; which
was, Whether he mean^ to restore him or not. She answered, Not to restore him,
and challenged his promise, as having said the truth. He replied, that if he
should let her have him, she had not told true.

The reciprocal reasons, (...), such was that of Agell. 5. 10.
Protagoras the Sophist, against Euathlus, a rich young man, his disciple, who
promised him a great sum of money for teaching him, whereof half he paid in
hand, the other half was to be paid the first that he should plead before the
Judges, and carry the cause. Having learned long, and attained a great
perfection in Rhetoric, he forbore to pl^ad in publi^k^, that he might defraud
Protagoras. Protagoras sues him, and the cause coming to hearing, begins thus:
Know, foolish young man, that which way soever the Cause goes, whether for thee
or against thee, thou must pay what I demand. If against thee, it will be given
me by judgment; if for thee, thou must pay it according to our agreement.
E^athlus answers: I might have been intrapped by your subtlety, if I did not
plead my self, but had employed some other to plead for me. Now I r^ioyce
doubly in the victory, that I shall be too hard for you, not only in cause, but
in argument. Know therefore, my most wise Master, that which way soever the
cause go, either with me, or against me, I will not pay what you demand. If it
go with me, the judgment will acquit me; if against me, you are to have nothing
by our agreement. The Judges not able to determine it, dismissed them both.

Oay^.
The nullity, (...), used by Ulysses, who called himself (...), no body, when
he hurt Polypheme, whence it came to be so named.

The defective reason, (...), mentioned by Laertius in Zenone: The mower,
(...), by Lucian: The bald, (...), by Laertius in Eubulide: The occult, (...),
by Laertius in Eubulide: The negative, (...), by Laertius in Chrysippo, and by
Epictetus. But of these enough.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Of Method.
THere are two kinds of disputation: Cic. Off^^. 2.
One, when the truth it self is subtlely polished in the dispute: The other,
when every expression is accommodated to the vulgar opinion; for, we must use
popular and usual words, when we speak of popular opinions, which Panaetius in
the like manner has done.

Cic. de ^in. 3.
The first way was peculiar to the Stoics, short, acute, and spinous, called
likewise Logic, most worthy of Philosophy; for this uses definitions,
divisions, and the lights which they afford, as likewise similitudes,
dissimilitudes, and the nice acute distinction of them.

The vulgar way of dispute is likewise twofold: One by continued oration: The
other by question and answer; the first called Senec. ^pist. 14. 90.
Analytick, or Cic. de sin. 2.
Rhetorical; the other Senec. Ep. 14. 90.
Topic, or Cic. de sin. 2.
Dialecticall. Cic. ibid.
Though the first be delightful, yet the latter is more commodious, when we
insist on particulars, and understand what every man grants, what every man
denies, what we would have concluded from concessions, and brought to an end.
For, when a (...) is (...) ^n like (...) it beats many things along with it;
yet we can hold nothing, we cannot stop the ^apid (...) Cic. de not. deor. 2.
The other^ concluding as Zeno used, more shortly and narrowly, (...)
reprehension. As a River in its course, cannot at all, or very ^^rdly be
corrupted, but water shut up, (...): So by (...), the faults of the oppo^^ are
carried quite away; in (...) speech, they are not easily defend^^ (...) (...)*

But each of these methods has a several use, the (...) proper for exposition
of A^s and Sci^nces, the oth^^ for (...)

THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. I.
ETHICK, and the parts thereof.
Laert,
THE Moral part of Philosophy is divided into these places; Of appetite, Of
good and ill; Of passions, Of Virtue, of the End; Of the first aestimation, of
Actions, Offices, exhortations and dehortations.

Thus distinguishes Chrysippus, Archidemus, Zeno of Tarsis, Apollodorus,
Diogenes (the Babylonians) Antipater* and Possidonius. But Zeno the Cittiean,
and Cleanthes, as being more ancient, were less accurate in their manner of
treating upon these things.

CHAP. II.
Of Appetite.
THE consideration of Ethick, begins properly from Appetite. Stob. eclog.
Ethic.
Appetite is moved by Fantasy of an Office, for it is the impulsion of the
soul to something.

Appetite in rational and irrational Creatures is different; (...) is not
rational appetite, but a species of rational appetite. Rational appetite is
defined an impulsion of the intellect to the doing of something. (...) is a
species of practick appetite, being an impulsion of the Intellect to something
future. Hence appetite is taken four ways, for rational and irrational
inclination, and for rational and irrational aversion. To these may be added
the habit of Appetition, which is likewise called appetite, the Origin of all
appetitive acts.

Of practick appetite there are many species, of which are 1. (...), a
Designation. 2. (...), an appetite before appetite. 3. (...), an action before
action. 4. (...), an appetite to something now existent. 5. (...), a will by
ratiocination, 6. (...) a Will before Will. 7. (...), an appetite joined with
reason. 8. (...), a spontaneous Will.


CHAP. III.
Of first natural Appetite.
Laert.
THe first appetite of a living creature is to preserve it self, this being
from the beginning proper to it by nature, as Chrysippus in his first Book of
Ends, who affirms that the care of our selves, and consciousnesse thereof, is
the first property of all living Creatures. For, Nature producing a living
Creature, intended either to alienate it from it self, or to commend unto its
own care; but the first is not likely; it follows therefore, that Nature
commends to every thing the preservation of it self, whereby it repulseth
whatsoever is hurtful, and pursues what is convenient.

Cic. de sin. 3.
As soon therefore as a living Creature comes into the World, it is
conciliated to it self; commended to the con^ervation of it self and its own
state, and to the election of such things as may preserve its state, but
alienated from destruction, and from all such things as may destroy it. This is
manifest in as much as before the accession of pleasure or grief, young
creatures desire those things which conduce to their welfare, and refuse the
contrary, which would not be, if they did not love their own state, and fear
destruction. Neither could they desire any thing without having some sense of
themselves, whereby they love themselves, and what belongs to them. Hence it is
manifest, that the principle of this love is derived from themselves.

Laert.
Whereas some must hold the first appetite of a living creature to be that of
pleasure, that is false. Cic. sin 3.
The greater part of Stoics conceive that Pleasure is not to be placed amongst
the natural principles of love to our selves, for if nature had so ordered it,
many dishonest things would have followed. Laert.
Pleasure is an after-accession, when as Nature enquiring by it self into it
self, receives those things which are agreeable to its constitution, after
which manner living creatures are exhilarated, and plants sprout forth. Nature
has thus far made no difference betwixt plants and living creatures, that
whereas plants are ordered without appetite or sense, there is in living
creatures, something according to the nature of plants: But, there being over
and above in living creatures, an innate appetite, whereby they go to those
things that are proper for them, the natural part in them is governed by the
appetitive.

Cic. ^in. 3.
That we naturally love those things which are first proposed unto us by
nature, may be argued from hence, in that there is no man, if both were put to
his choice, but had rather have all his limbs able and sound, rather then
useless and imperfect. These comprehensions we conceive fit to be acquired for
their own sake, because they have in themselves something, as it were, complex,
including Truth. This is discernable in young ones, whom we see delighted,
though it nothing concerns them, if they themselves find out any thing by
reason. Even the Arts we conceive to be assumed for themselves, as well because
in these there is something worthy assumption, as because they consist of
knowledge, and contain somethings constituted by reason and power.

CHAP. IV.
Of Appetites consequent to the first.
Cic. de ^in. 3.
THus according to the first innate principles of Nature, those things which
are according to nature being expetible in themselves, their contraries
avoidable in themselves, the first office is to conserve it self in the state
of nature, the next, to obtain those things which are according to nature.

Here begins good to be first understood, for it is the first conciliation
of man to things according to nature. This Good, as soon as man receives
intelligence or notion thereof, and sees the order and concord of Offices, he
esteems far above those things which he formerly loved, and by rational
knowledge collecteth, that herein is placed the chief good of man, laudable and
expetible in it self. To this chief good, which consists in homologie or
convenience, all honest actions having reference, honesty it self, which is
reckoned amongst the good, though it rise afterward, is notwithstanding alone
expetible in its own power and dignity. But, of those which are the first
objects of nature, none is expetible in it self.

Now whereas offices proceed from the first natural objects, they must
necessarily be referred to the same; so as all Offices tend to the fulfilling
of the first natural appetites; yet, not so, as if therein consisted the
ultimate good. Honest action is in the first conciliation of nature, for it is
consequent, and arises as we said afterward; yet, it is according to nature,
and much more allective then all that go before it.

And seeing that all offices proceed from the first natural appetites, even
wisdom it self must be derived from thence likewise. But as it often happens,
that he who is recommended to another, more esteems him to whom he is
recommended, then the person which recommended him: so it is not strange, that
we being recommended to wisdom by the first natural appetite, afterward more
esteem that wisdom, then those things whereby we arrived at it. And as our
limbs are given to us for a certain reason of living, so the appetition of the
soul is given, not for every kind of life, but for one certain form of living;
so likewise reason and perfect reason. For, as action is proper to a Player,
motion to a Dancer; yet, not any, but one certain kind: so the life that is to
be acted, is in one certain kind, not in any, which kind we call convenient
and consentaneous. Wisdom is not like the art of a Pilot, or a Physician; but
rather to that Action we mentioned, and to Dancing, that the extreme, that is,
the effection of the Art be in the Art it self, and not extrinsecall. There is
another similitude betwixt Wisdom and these Arts, for in them are those things
which are done rightly; yet, are not all the parts whereof they consist
contained therein. Things done rightly, or Rectitudes, contain all numbers of
virtue; for, only wisdom is wholly converted into it self, which is not in
other Arts. But, improperly is the Art of a Pilot and a Physician, compared
with the ultimate of Wisdom: For, wisdom includes Fortitude and Justice, and
judges all things that happen to man to be below it, which happen^th not in
other Arts: but, none can hold these virtues which we last mentioned, unless
he affirm, there is nothing that is different, but honest and dishonest.

CHAP. V.
Of Good and III.
HItherto of Appetites, we come next to their Objects. Stob.
Things (according to Zeno) are whatsoever participate of Essence. Of things,
some are good, some ill, some indifferent.

Cic. de sin. 3.
Good is several ways defined by the Stoics* but their definitions tend all
to one end. Sext. Empir. ^yrrh. 3. 20.
Good is profit, or that which differs not from profit. Profit is virtue, and
virtuous action, not different from profit is ^ virtuous man, and a friend. For
virtue being a quodammodotative Hegemonick, and virtuous action being an
operation according to virtue, is plainly profit. A virtuous man and a friend
is not different from profit; for profit is a part of Virtuous, as being the
Hegemoniack thereof. Now the wholes are neither the same with their parts, for
a man is not a hand, nor different from their parts, for they subsist not
without parts; wherefore the whole is not different from its parts, and
consequently, a virtuous man being the whole, in respect of his Hegemoniack,
which is profit, is not different from profit.

Good is by some defined that which is expetible in it self; by others, that
which assisteth to felicity, or compleateth it: by Cic. de finib. 3.
Diogenes, that which is absolute by nature; [or, Laer^
that which is perfect, according to the nature of a rational creature.] The
consequent thereof is a beneficient motion, or state absolute in nature.

Whereas things are known, either by use, or conjunction, or similitude, or
collation, by this fourth kind is the knowledge of good; for when from those
things which are according to nature, the mind ascends by collation of
reason, then it attaineth the notion of good.

Cic^de finib. 3.
Good is known and named, not by accession, increase, or comparison with other
things, but by its proper power. For as Honey, though it be most sweet, yet, in
its proper kind of taste, not comparative to any other, we perceive it to be
sweet: So this good of which we speak, is that which is most to be esteemed,
but that estimation consists in the kind, not the magnitude. For, estimation
being neither amongst the good nor ill, whatsoever you apply it to, it will
remain in its kind. Different therefore is the proper estimation of virtue,
which consists in the kind, not in increase.

Laert. Stob.
To Good belongs all virtue, as Prudence, Justice, Temperance, Fortitude, and
whatsoever participates of those, as virtuous actions and persons. Laert.
Accessions hereto are joy, cheerfulness, and the like.

Laert. Stob.
Ills are the contrary vices, as Imprudence, Injustice, Intemperance,
Pusillanimity, and whatsoever participates of vice, as vicious actions and
persons. Laert.
The accessions hereunto are discontent, affliction, and the like.

Stob:
Of Goods, some, as we have said, are Virtues, others not-vertues, as, Joy,
Hope, and the like. In like manner of Ills, some are Vices, as those already
mentioned; others not-vices, as Grief and Fear.

Again, Stob.
of Goods, some are continual in all the virtuous, and at all times; such is
all virtue, sound sense, wise appetition, and the like. Others are
intermissive, as joy, hope, and prudent counsel, which are not in all the
wise, nor at all times.

In like manner of Ills, some are continual in all, and always in the
imprudent, as all vice, and imprudent sense, and imprudent appetite: Others
intermissive, as grief, fear, and imprudent answer, which are not always in
the wicked, nor at all times.

Laert. Stob. Sext. Empir. Pyrth. hypot. 3. 21.
Again, of Good there are three kinds: The first from which profit comes, as
from its first cause, such is virtue: The second, by which profit comes, as
virtue, and virtuous action: The third that which may profit, as virtue, and
virtuous actions, and a virtuous man, and a friend, and the Gods, and good
Demons. Sext. Empir.
Thus the second signification includes the first, and the third, both the
first and second.

Laert. Stob.
In like manner of Ills, there are three kinds: First, that from which hurt
originally proceeds, as vice: Secondly, that by which hurt comes, as
vicious actions: Lastly, and most largely, whatsoever is able ^o hurt.

Laert. Stob. Sext. Empir. Pyrrh. hyp. 3. 23.
Again, of Goods, some are in the Soul, as virtue, and virtuous actions: some
without the Soul, as a true friend, a good Country, and the like: some neither
within nor without the soul: as good and virtuous men.

Laert. Stob.
In like manner of Ills, some are within the Soul, as vices, and vicious
actions; some without the Soul, as, imprudent friends, enemies, and the like;
some neither within nor without the Soul, as wicked men, and all that
participate of vice.

Laert. Stob.
Of goods within the Soul, some are habits, some affections, some neither
habits nor affections. The virtues themselves are affections, their studies
habits, nor affections, their acts neither habits nor affections.

Laert. Stob.
In like manner of Ills, some are affections, as vices; some habits only, as
infirmities of mind, and the like; some neither habits nor affections, as
vicious actions.

Laert. Stob. Cic. de finib. 3.
Again, of Goods, some are final, some efficient, some both final and
efficient. A friend, and the benefits arising from him, are efficient goods.
Fortitude, magnanimity, liberty, delectation, joy, tranquillity, and all
virtuous actions are final goods. Both efficient and final (as all virtues)
as they perfect felicity, they are efficient, as they constitute it as parts
thereof, final.

Laert. Stob.
In like manner of Ills, some are final, some efficient, some both. A friend,
and the damages incurred by him, are efficient. Fear, baseness, servitude,
stupidity, frowardness, grief, and all vicious actions, are final:
participant of (are vices) as they procure misfortune they are efficient, as
they constitute it as parts thereof, final.

Stob.
Again, of goods, some are expetible in themselves, not desired for the sake of
any other: Others are preparatory to some other, called effectively expetible.
The expetible in themselves are (according to Diogenes) of two kinds: 1.
Ultimately expetible, as Beatitude. 2. Those which have in them the cause of
being expetible, as every good has.

Again, of goods some are necessary to Bea^titude, as all Virtues and their
Acts, others not-necessary, as Joy, delectation, and study. In like manner of
Ills, some are necessary to Infelicity, as all the Vices and their Acts, others
not-necessary thereunto, as, all passions and infirmities of the soul, and the
like.

Stob.
Again, of goods, some consist in motion, as Joy ^ delectation and the like;
some in affection, as quiet imperturbation; Of those which consist in
affection, some are likewise in habit, as the Virtues; others in affection only
as the former. Neither consist the Virtues only in habits, but other Acts
likewise, changed by a Virtuous man, in a manner, into Virtue. Of these goods
which are in habit, are those we call studies, as love of Learning, and the
like. For these arts by their affinity with Virtue lead directly to our chief
end.

Again, Stob.
of goods some are absolute, as Science, others relative, as honor,
be^evolence, friendship, and the like.

Stob.
Science is a certain infallible comprehension by reason. It is taken three
ways. First, for a System of Sciences conjoined together in a good man;
Secondly, for a System of artificial Sciences, having a certainty. Lastly, for
a demonstrative infallible habit of fantasies by reason.

Stob.
Friendship, is a community of life and consent of studies. The kinds thereof
are six.

1. (...) a friendship amongst known persons. 2. (...), amongst Familiars. 3.
(...), amongst those of the same age. 4. (...), toward strangers. 5. (...),
amongst kindred. 6. (...), from Love.
Laert. Stob.
Again of goods, some are simple, as knowledge, others mixed, as, (...), a good
use of Children conformable to nature, (...), a good use of old age conformable
to nature, (...), a good use of life conformable to Nature.

Exemption from grief, (...), and conservation of order, (...) are the same
with, as the mind is with prudence, and communion with goodness; yet are
otherwise referred, which is observable likewise in the other Virtues. Hence
are the same distinctions appliable to ill.

Laert. Stob.
Every good is beneficial, opportune, conducible, useful, commendable, fair,
helpful, eligible, just.

Beneficial, (...), as conferring that whereby we receive benefit.

Opportune, (...), as comprising that whereof we stand in need.

Conducible, (...), as, resolving into it self the means, as the gain acquired
by traffic exceeds the charge.

Useful, (...), as conducing to our profit.

Commendable, (...), from the use.

Fair, (...), as proportioned to the necessities of the receiver.

Helpful, (...), as it relieves us.

Eligible, (...), as being in reason to be preferred.

Just, (...), as being conformable to Law.

Stob.
On the contrary, every ill is unbeneficiall, importune, inconducible,
unusefull, uncommendable, foul, un^elpful, avoidable, and unjust.

Laert.
Perfect good, is called (...), fair, because it is absolute in all numbers
required of Nature, and perfectly proportionate.

Laert.
Of fair, (or honest) there are four species, Just, valiant, temperate,
knowing; in these are honest actions consummated.

Laert.
Likewise of (...), foul (or dishonest) are four species, unjust, cowardly,
dissolute, foolish.

Laert*
Honest, is called (...), fair, first, because it renders those who are endued
therewith worthy of praise; Secondly, because it is most suitable to its proper
work; Thirdly, because it is an ornament; we say, a wise man is only good and
fair.

Laert.
Only that which is good is fair or honest: so Hecato in his third Book of
Good; and Chrysipp^s of Fair. This is Virtue, and what participates thereof,
which is all one, as to say, that, whatsoever is good is honest likewise, and
reciprocally whatsoever is honest is good.

Cic. de sin. 3.
That what is honest only is good, is proved thus. Whatsoever is good is
laudable, whatsoever is laudable is honest; therefore whatsoever is good is
honest. Again, there is no good which is not expetible, nothing expetible which
is not pleasant and amiable, therefore approveable, therefore laudable,
therefore honest. Again, no man can glory in a life that is miserable or not
happy, therefore to glory is proper to the happy, but to glory relates only
to that which is honest, therefore honest life is happy. And as he who is
laudable, has some eminent mark of renown and glory, for which he is justly
styled happy, the same may be said of the life of such a man, whence if a happy
life consist in honesty, only that which is honest is to be esteemed good.
Moreover, what man can be termed constant, firm, magnanimous, unless we grant
that pain is not an ill? For, he who reckons death amongst the Ills cannot
but fear it; so no man in any thing can neglect and contemn that which he
accounts ill. This being granted, the next assumption is this, he who is
magnanimous and valiant, despises, as if they were nothing, all things that
can arrive to man, whence it follows, that nothing is ill which is not
dishonest, and this sublime, excellent magnanimous person, accounting all
humane things below him, confideth in himself and his own life past and future,
knowing that no ill can happen to a wise man. Whereby we see that what is
honest only is good, which is to live happily and honestly.

Cie. ibid.
On the other side, nothing is good, but what is honest; for, who is, or ever
was so fervently covetous, and of such disordinate affections, that the same
things, for the attainment whereof he would perpetrate any wickedness, he had
not much attained unto (setting aside all punishment) without all that wicked
means? What advantage or fruit do we aim at, in desiring to know those things
which are hidden from us, how they are moved, and by what causes agitated in
heaven? Who is so savage, so obdurate to natural studies, that he abhorres
things worthy knowledge, receives them without pleasure or some benefit, and
values them at nothing? Who is there, that when he hears of the actions,
speeches, counsels of magnanimous persons, eminent in all virtue, is not
affected with any pleasure? Who is there, that being instituted in an honest
family, and ingenuously educated, is not offended at dishonesty, though it
bring no hurt to him? Who is there, that looks without trouble upon such as
live impurely and flagitiously? Who does not hate fordid, vain, light,
frivolous persons? If dishonesty were not in it self avoidable, why should
men, when they are in the dark, or in a Wilderness, abstain from any thing
that is evil; but, that the very deformity and dishonesty thereof deterrs
them? Nothing therefore is more clear, then that honest things are expetible in
themselves, and dishonest things avoidable in themselves.

Hence it follows, that what is honest, is more estimable then those mean
things which accrue by it. And when we say, that folly, temerity, injustice,
and intemperance are avoidable, in respect of those things which are consequent
to them, it contradicts not the former assertion, that what is dishonest only
is ill, because they relate not to the hurt of the body, but, to dishonest
actions which proceed from vice.

Laert.
All good is equal, and every good is highly expetible, and admits neither
increase, nor decrease. Cic. de fin. 3.
Here comes in a great controversy betwixt the Stoics and the Peripateticks,
which though Carneades affirm to be only verbal, Cicero holds to be more in
things then words.

Cic. ibid.
The Peripateticks hold, that all goods are requisite to happy life; the
Stoics, that whatsoever is worthy estimation, compre^iendeth happy life. Those
holding pain to be an ill, it follows, that a wise man cannot be happy upon
the rack. These, who account not pains among the ills, hold, that a wise man
continues happy in the midst of torments: For, if some bear those pains with
greater courage for their Country, or some lighter cause, opinion, not nature
increases or diminishes the power of the pain. Again, the Peripateticks
asserting three kinds of good, affirm a man to be so much the more happy, the
fuller he is of external corporeal goods; or, in the Stoics expression, he
who has most corporeal estimables, is most happy, for as much as by them,
Beatitude is completed. On the contrary, the Stoics hold, that those goods
which they call of nature, make not by their frequency a life more happy, or
are more expetible, or more estimable: For then wisdom being expetible, and
health expetible, both together would be more expetible then wisdom alone;
whereas either being worthy estimation, both are not more worthy of estimation
then wisdom alone. For the Stoics, who hold health to be estimable, but place
it not amongst the goods, hold likewise, that no estimation is to be preferred
before virtue. From this, the Peripateticks dissent, asserting, that an honest
action without pain, is more expetible, then the same action with pain; the
Stoics otherwise. For, as a Taper is darkened by the light of the Sun, and as
a drop of water is lost in the vastness of the Aegean Sea, and as in the
riches of Croesus the accession of one farthing, and one step in the way
between this and India; so in that end of all good which the Stoics assert,
all the estimation of corporeal things must necessarily be obscured,
overwhelmed, and perish, by the splendor and magnitude of virtue. And as
opportunity (...), is not made any thing greater by production of time, for
whatsoever is opportune has its measure; so right affection, (...), and the
good it self placed in it, that it be conformable to nature, admits no
accession of increase. For as that opportunity, to those of which we speak, are
not made greater by production of time, for which reason the Stoics conceive,
that a happy life is not more to be desired, if it be long, then if it be
short; and they use this simile: As it is the praise of a shoe to fit the foot,
neither are many shoes preferred before two, nor the greater before the less:
So in those things, whose good is confined to opportunity and convenience,
neither are the more to be preferred before the fewer, nor the longer before
the shorter. Nor do they argue acutely, who say, if long health be more to be
esteemed then short, then likewise a long use of wisdom, more then a short;
they understand not, that the estimation of health is judged by space, that of
virtue by opportunity; as if they should say likewise, a good death, or a good
labor to a woman in travel, is better long then short: So that they see not,
that some things are more esteemed for their shortness, others for their
length.

CHAP. VI.
Of Eupathies.
Cic. Tusc. q^aest. lib. 4.
AS soon as any object is presented to us, which seems good, Nature [ as we
said] drives us on to the acquisition thereof, which, being done constantly and
prudently, is called Will; imprudently and excessively, Desire.

Cic. ibid.
Moreover, while we are so moved, that we are in some good, that happens also
two ways, when the Soul is moved quietly and constantly according to reason,
this is called Joy; when vainly and excessively, Pleasure.

Cic. ibid.
In like manner, as we desire good things by nature, so by nature we decline
the ill: This declination, if done according to reason, is called Caution, if
without reason, Fear. Cic. ibid. Laert.
Caution is only in a wise man, of fear he is not capable.

Hence it appears, that there are three kinds of good affections of the
mind, called Laert.
Eupathies, or Cic.
Constancies; Joy, Caution, Will.

1. Laert.
Joy is contrary to pleasure, as being a rational elevation of the mind.

2. Caution is contrary to fear, as being a rational declination of ill.

3. Will is contrary to desire, as being a rational appetite.

These are the primarie Eupathies; and as under the primary passions are
comprehended many subordinate passions; so are there secondary Eupathies
subordinate to those.

Under Joy are 1. Delectation: 2. Cheerfulness: 3. Aequanimity.

Under Caution, 1. Respect: 2. Cleernesse.

Under Will are, 1. Benevolence: 2. Salutation: 3. Charity.

Notwithstanding that Eupathies and passions are contrary; Cic. Tusc. q^aest.
yet are there but three Eupathies, though there are four passions; for, there
is no Eupathie contrary to Grief.

CHAP. VII.
Of Passions.
Laer^.
FRom falsities proceeds a perversitie of Intellect, hence spring up several
passions, and causes of disorder.

Laert.
Zeno defines passion, a praeternaturall motion of the Soul, (or as Tusc.
quaest. 4.
Cicero renders it, a commotion of the Soul, a^erse from right reason, against
Nature.) Others more briefly, a more vehement appetite. More vehement they call
that, which recedeth from the constancy of Nature, Laert.
and is contrary to nature; wherefore all passion is an excessive stupide
desire.

Cic. ibid.
The kinds of passion arise from two opinionated goods, and two opinionated
evils, so they are four. From the good, desire and pleasure; pleasure from
present good, desire from future, from the ill, fear, and grief, fear, from the
future, grief, from the present, for these things, whose coming we fear, when
they do come, grieve us. Pleasure and desire arise from an opinion of good
things, desire is fervently transported to that which seems good, pleasure
rejoices when we have obtained what we desire. Thus Stob.
desire and fear go foremost, that to apparent good, this to apparent ill,
pleasure and grief follows; pleasure, when we attain what we desire, (...),
etc. so supply the* Text.
grief, when we incur what we fear.

C^^. ibid.
All passions arise from Judgment and Opinion, whence they are more strictly
defined, (that it may appear not only how vicious they are, but also that they
are in our power) thus;

Cic.
Grief is a fresh opinion of present ill, wherein it seems fit that the mind
be contracted and dejected, or Stob.
a contraction of the soul caused by ^pinion of present ill.

Cic.
Pleasure is a fresh opinion of present good, wherein it seems good that the
mind be exalted, or Laert.
an irrational elevation of mind to something that seems eligible.

Cic.
Fear is an opinion of imminent ill, which seems to be intolerable; or a
contraction of the soul disobedient to reason, caused by expectation of ill.

Cic.
Desire is an opinion of good to come, that if it were present, it were fit for
our use, or Stob.
an appetite disobedient to Reason, caused by the opinion of consequent good.

These four are, as Hecato says, primary passions, under each of which there
are subordinate passions, several species belonging to their proper genus.

Under Grief are these kinds,

Laert. Cic.
Envy, (...), invidentia; a grief at the prosperity of others, Cicer.
which does no hurt to him that envieth, ^lut. Cont. Stoic.
for some men desire to see their neighbors suppressed, that themselves might
be advanced above them. For if a man grieve at the prosperity of another
whereby he is dammaged, he is not properly said to envy, as that of Hector to
Agamemnon; but he who is nothing dammag'd by the prosperity of another, yet
grieveth thereat, truly envieth.

Cic.
Aemulation, (...) (not here taken for the imitation of Virtue, for that is
laudable) a grief that another man enjoys that which we desire and want, or
as Laertius, a grief for another's felicity, which we wish to our selves, and
an aemulation thereof as greater then our own.

Laert.
Jealousy, (...), obtrectation, a grief lest another enjoy what we ( Cic.
love and) possess.

Laert.
Compassion, (...) misericordia, a grief for the misery another suffers
undeservedly, Cic.
for no man compassionates the punishment of a parricide or Traitor.

Laert. Cic.
Anguish, (...), anger, an oppressive grief.

Cic. Stob.
Mourning, (...), Luctus, grief for the death of a friend that was dear to us.

Cic.
Wailing, Moeror, a grief accompanied with Tears.

Cic. Laert.
Trouble, (...), aerumna, a laborious piercing grief.

Cic.
Sorrow, Dolo^, a vexatious grief, perhaps the same which in Stobaeus is termed
(...), a grief with conflict of Spirit.

Cic.
Lamentation, (...), a grief with thoughtfulness, Laert.
proceeding from and increasing by consideration and discourse.

Cic.
Molestia, a permanent grief.

Cic.
Affliction, a grief with corporeal torment.

Ci^.
Desperation, a grief without any hope of amendment.

Laert.
(...), an urgent grief attended by difficulty.

Stob.
(...), a grief taking away the voice.

Laert.
(...), an irrational grief corroding, and hindering us from enjoying the
present.

Under Pleasure are,

Cic Laert. whence supply Stobaeus where (pleasure being omitted) these are
applied to a wrong head.
Malevolence, (...), a Pleasure at another Ill, without any good to our
selves. This has no real subsistence; for no good man was ever known to
rejoice at the harm of another.

Cic. Laert.
Delectation, (...) a pleasure affecting and soothing the mind by the Ear, and
in like manner by the eye, touch, smell or taste, which are all of one kind.

Cic.
Iactation, a boasting Pleasure, with insolent behavior.

Laert.
(...), quasi (...), an inclination of the mind to dissoluteness.

Laert.
(...), the dissolution of Virtue.

Stob.
(...), a pleasure from things not expected.

Stob.
(...), a Pleasure caused by sight, without deceit.

Under Fear, are

Laert. Stob.
Dread, (...), a fear causing (...).

Laert Stob.
Sloth, (...) Pigritia, a fear of future action, or susception of labor.

Laert. Stob.
Shame, (...), a fear of ignominy.

Laert.
(...), a fear of some unusual fantasy.

Laert.
(...), a fear with loss, or trepidation of voice.

Laert.
(...), a fear of something uncertain, or a fear of offending or falling.

Stob.
(...), a fear of Gods or Demons.

Stob.
(...), a fear of some grievous thing.

Cic.
Terror, a fear, which by striking the mind causes redness, palenesse,
trembling, or gnashing of the teeth.

Cic.
Timor, a fear of approaching ill.

Cic.
Pavor, a fear thrusting the mind out of its place.

Cic.
Examinatio, a fear consequent, and as it were companion to Pavor.

Cic.
Conturbatio, a fear, which disperseth all our thoughts.

Cic.
Formido, a permanent fear.

Stob.
The Passions subordinate to desire, are generally two, Anger and Love.

Laert. Cic.
Anger is a desire of taking revenge upon those by whom we conceive our selves
wronged.

Stob.
The species thereof are,

Laert.
(...), or as Cicero, (...) excandescentia, anger beginning.

Laert.
(...), anger increasing.

Cic. Stob.
(...), ^odium, anger inveterate.

Cic. Stob. (...) and (...) are confounded by Laertius.
(...), inimicitia, anger watching the occasion of revenge.

Stob.
(...), anger breaking forth into action.

Laert.
(...), a desire, whereby we wish ill to another, with continual progression.

Cic.
Malice, Discordia, a bitter anger, with utmost hatred, conceived in the Heart.

Laert.
(...), a desire conversant in difference of opinions.

Stob.
Love is an impulsion of good will for apparent beauty, Laert.
whereby it is distinguished from the love of the virtuous, which is a
voluntary susception of labor for true beauty. The species of Love are,

Laert. Cic.
(...), indigentia, an (inexpleble) desire, of that which we want, and being
separated from it, in vain incline to it.

Stob.
(...), desiderium, a desire to see that which is not present. They Cic.
distinguish these two thus; Desire is of those things which are said, or
praedicated of any thing which they call Categoremes, as to have riches, to
take honors; Indigence is of the things themselves, as of honors, of money.

Stob.
(...), desire of conversation of that which is absent.

Stob.
(...), desire of Pleasure.

Stob.
(...), desire of Riches.

Stob.
(...), desire of glory.

Stob.
In all these passions there is opinion. Laert. Cic.
Opinion is a weak assent. Laert.
Hence passions, (as Chrysippus in his Book of passions affirms) are
Judgments; for Avarice is an opinion, or false judgment that money is good;
drunkenness, and intemperance, are the like. Stob.
Opinion is likewise sudden from the contractive motion of an unreasonable
elation of mind, unresonable and praeternaturall, in as much as it is not
obedient to reason. For every passion is violent, wherefore oftentimes, though
we see in those that are transported by passion, the inconvenience thereof; yet
notwithstanding the same persons that condemn it, are carried away by it, as by
a headstrong horse, and therefore properly may use that saying:

Against my Judgment Nature forces me, Meaning by judgment the knowledge of
right things for man is carried beyond nature by passion, to transgress
natural reason and right.

Stob.
All those who are led by passion, are diverted from reason, but in another
manner then those who are deceived. For the deceived, as for example, They who
think Atoms to be the principles of all things, when they come to know that
they are not, change their judgment: but, those that are in passion, although
that they are taught not to grieve, or fear, or give way to any passion in the
Soul; yet, they do not put them off, but are led on by their passions, until
they come to be subject to their tyrannical sway.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Sickness and Infirmities.
Cic. Tusc. quaest. 4.
THE fountain of all passions is Intemperance, which is a total defection from
the mind, and from right reason, so averse from the prescription of reason,
that the appetites of the Soul can by no means be ruled, or contained. As
therefore Temperance allayeth appetites, and causes them to obey right reason,
and preserves the considerate judgments of the mind; so Intemperan^e, the
enemy thereto, enflameth, troubles, and enciteth the state of the Soul. Thus
griefs, and fears, and the rest of the passions, all arise from this. For, as
when the blood is corrupt, or phlegm, or choler abounds, sicknesses and
infirmities arise in the body: so the disorder of ill opinions, and their
repugnance to one another, devesteth the Soul of health, and troubles it with
diseases.

Laert. Stob. Cic.
By passions the mind becomes indisposed, and as it were sick. Sickness of
mind, (...), is an opinion and desire of that which seems greatly expetible;
but, is not such, as love of women, of wine, of money. These (...), have
likewise their contraries in the other extreme, as hatred of women, of wine, of
men.

Laert. Stob. Cic.
This sickness of mind happening with imbecility, is called (...),
infirmity. For, as in the body there are infirmities, as Gouts, Convulsions,
and the like; so are there inFirmities in the mind, as love of glory, love of
pleasure. And as in bodies, there is a propensity to some particular diseases;
so in the mind, there is a proclivity (...), or, (...), to some particular
passions, as (...), propensity to envy, (...), propensity to unmercifulness,
and the like.

Cic. Tusc. quaest. 4.
In this place, much pains has been taken by the Stoics, chiefly by
Chrysippus, to compare the sicknesses of the mind with those of the body.

Passion (for as much as opinions are inconstantly and turbulently tossed up
and down) is always in motion, and when this fervor and concitation of the
mind is inveterate, and, as it were, settled in the veins and marrow, then
arises sickness and infirmity, and those aversions which are contrary to
those infirmities and diseases. These differ only intentionally, but really are
the same, arising from desire and pleasure; for, when money is desired, and
reason not immediately applied, as a Socratick medicine, to cure that desire,
the evil spreads through the veins, and cleaves to the bowels, and
becomes sickness and infirmity, which when they grow inveterate, cannot be
plucked away. The name of this sickness is avarice. In like manner arise other
sicknesses, as, desire of glory, desire of women, (...), and the rest of
sicknesses and infirmities. Their contraries arise from fear, as, hatred of
women, (...), hatred of mankind, inhospitality, all which are infirmities of
the mind, arising from fear of those things which they fly and shun.

Infirmity of mind is defined, a vehement opinion, inherent, and wholly
implanted in us, of a thing not to be desired, as if it were exceedingly to be
desired. That which arises from aversion, is defined a vehement opinion,
inherent, and thoroughly implanted in us, of a thing that ought not to be
shunned, as if it ought to be shunned. This opinion is a judging our selves to
know what we have not.

Under Infirmity are these species, Love of money, of honor, of women, of
curious meats, and the like. Love of money, Avarice, is a vehement opinion,
inherent, and thoroughly implanted in us, as if it were exceedingly to be
desired. In the like manner are all the rest defined.

Aversions are defined thus, Inhospitality is a vehement opinion, inherent, and
thoroughly implanted in us, that guests ought to be shunned. In like manner is
defined hatred of womenkinde, such as was that of Hippolitus; and of mankind,
as that of Timon.

As some are more prone to one sickness then to another; so are some more
inclinable to fear, others, to other passions; in some is anxiety, whereby they
are anxious; in others choler, which differs from anger; for it is one thing
to be chol^rick, another to be angry, as anxiety differs from grief; for all
are not anxious who are sometimes grieved, nor are all that are anxious grieved
always: as there is a difference betwixt ebriety and ebriosity, and it is one
thing to be a lover, another to be amorous.

This propensity of several persons to several sicknesses, is called, from an
analogy to the body, Infirmity, whereby is understood a propensity to be sick:
but in good things, because some are more apt to some goods then to others, it
is styled Facility, in ill things Proclivity, implying a lapsion; in neuters it
has the former name.

As there is sickness, infirmity, and defect in the body, so in the mind.
Sickness is the corruption of the whole body. Infirmity is sickness with some
weakness. Defect is, when the parts of the body disagree with one another,
whence arises pravity, distortion, deformity of the limbs; so that those two,
sickness and infirmity, arise from the confusion and trouble of the health of
the whole body; defect is seen in perfect health. But, in the mind, sickness
is not distinguished from infirmity, but by cogitation only.

Vitiosity is a habit or affection, inconstant in it self, and often differing
in the whole course of life; so that in one by corruption of opinions, is bred
sickness and infirmity; in the other, inconstancy and repugnance. For, every
vi^e has not disagreeing parts, as of them who are not far from wisdom, that
affection is different from it self, as being unwise, but not distorted nor
depraved.

Sicknesses and infirmities are parts of vitiosity; but, whether passions are
parts thereof also, it is a question. For vices are permanent affections,
passions are moving affections, so that they cannot be parts of permanent
affections.

And as in all things the Soul resembles the Body, so in good likewise. In the
body, the chie^est are beauty, strength, health, foundnesse, agility; so
likewise in the mind. And as the good temper of the body is, when those things
whereof we consist agree well among themselves: so the health of the Soul is,
when the judgments and opinions thereof agree. This is the virtue of the Soul,
which some affirm to be Temperance; others, a Soul obedient to the precepts of
Temperance, and obsequious thereunto, not having any speciousnesse of her own.
But, whether one or other, it is only in a wiseman; yet, there is one kind of
health of the soul, which is common also to the unwise, when by the care of
Physicians, the distemper of the mind is removed.

And as there is in the body an apt figure of the limbs, together with a
sweetness of color, which is called Beauty; so in the soul, equality, and
constancy of opinions, and judgments following virtue, with a certain firmness
and stability; or, including the very power of virtue, is called Beauty.

Likewise, correspondent to the powers, nerves, and efficacity of the body, in
the same terms are named the powers of the Soul. Agility of body is called
quickness, the same commendation is ascribed to wit, in respect, that the Soul
overrunneth many things in a short time.

Only there is this difference betwixt Souls and bodies: Strong souls cannot
be assaulted by diseases, strong bodies may^ but, the offensions of bodies may
happen without any fault, those of the Soul cannot, all whose sicknesses and
passions proceed from contempt of reason, and therefore are in men only; for,
though beasts do somethings like this, yet, they fall not into passions.

Betwixt acute and obtuse persons, there is this difference, the ingenious, as
Corinthian Brass rusteth, slowly falling into sickness, and more quickly got
out of it: the dull do not so, neither does the soul of an ingenious person
fall into every sickness and passion; for, there are not many things extremely
savage and cruel, and some also have a show of humanity, as compassion,
grief, fear.

But, the infirmities and sicknesses of the mind are less easily rooted out,
then those great vices which are contrary to the virtues; for, the sicknesses
remaining, the vices may be taken away, because the sicknesses are no sooner
healed, then the vices are removed.

CHAP. IX.
Of Virtue and Vice.
Laert.
Virtue is a convenient affection of the Soul, throughout all life.

Of virtues there are three kinds: The first general, taken for any perfection
of a thing, as of a Statue: The second are Stob.
Sciences, or contemplative, which, according to Hecaton, consist in
speculation, as Prudence and Justice. Stob.
The third not-sciences, or not-contemplative, which are considered as
consequent to the speculative; as, health, strength, hope, joy, and the like.
Health is consequent to Temperance, a theoretick virtue, as strength to the
building of an Arch. They are called not-contemplative, because they require no
assent, but are by after-accession, and common even to the wicked, as health
and strength.

Vice is the contrary to virtue, for Laert. Stob.
the rational creature is perverted sometimes by the persuasion of exterior
things, sometimes by the counsel of those with whom he converseth, contrary to
nature, who gives us inclinations unperverted.

Of vices therefore there are two kinds: The first Laert.
ignorance of those things whereof virtues are the knowledge; as, imprudence,
intemperance, injustice: The second not-ignorances; as, pusillanimity,
imbecility.

Laert.
Panaetius asserteth two virtues, Theoretick and Practick: others three,
Rational, Natural, Moral. Pessidonius four; Cleanthes, Chrysippus, and
Antipater more; Apollodorus one only, Prudence.

Laert.
Of virtues, some are primary, others subordinate. The primary are four,
Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, Justice; the first conversant in offices, the
second in appetite, the third in tolerance, the fourth in distribution.

Laert.
Prudence is the Science of things that are to be done, and not to be done, and
neuter, or the knowledge of good, bad and neuter in civil life. Stob.
The Virtues subordinate to Prudence are five.

(...), Laert. Stob.
The Science of things that are to be done, how thy may be done beneficially.

(...), Stob.
The Science of comprehending things to be effected.

(...), Stob.
The Science of finding out our office.

(...), Stob.
The Science of attaining the scope in every thing.

(...), Stob.
The Science of finding out the issues of things.

Stob. by whom correct Lae^tius, who ^pplies this definition to Temperance.
Temperance, is the Science of things expetible, avoidable and neuter. Under
Temperance are these species.

(...), Stob.
the Science of time and order for the weldoing of things.

(...), Stob.
the Science of honest and dishonest motions.

(...), Stob.
the Science of avoiding just blame.

Stob.
Fortitude, is the Science of things grievous, not grievous and neuter, the
species under it these.

(...), Stob.
a Science tenacious of right reason.

(...), Stob.
a Science persisting in right judgment.

(...), Stob.
a Science whereby we trust that no ill shall happen to us.

(...), Stob. Laert.
the Science of overcoming those things which happen to the good and bad.

(...), Stob.
a Science of the Soul which renders her invincible.

(...), Stob.
the Science of going through to the attainment of that which we propose to our
selves.

Stob.
Justice is the Science of distributing to every one according to his desert;
under Justice are four subordinate virtues.

(...), Stob.
The Science of worshipping the gods.

(...), the Science of well-doing.

(...), the Science of equality in community.

(...), the Science of contracting honestly with others.

Laert.
In like manner of Vices, some are (...), others subordinate to the primary.
The primary vices are, Imprudence, Intemperante, Pusillanimity, Injustice.

Stob. (...)* so supply the Text.
Imprudence is the ignorance of things good, ill and neuter; and the ignorance
of things to be done, not to be done, and neuter.

Intemperance is the ignorance of things expetible, avoidable and neuter.

Pusillanimity is the ignorance of things grievous, not grievous and neuter.

Injustice is the ignorance of distributing to every one according to his
deserts.

Stob.
The subbordinate vices to these are correspondent to the secondary virtues,
as, (...), which are defined answerably to their opposite virtues.

Stob.
These virtues are perfect, and consist in contemplation; but, there are other
virtues, which are not arts, but faculties; consisting in exercise, as, health
of the Soul, integrity and strength thereof, and pulchritude. For, as the
health of the body is a good temperature of hot, cold, dry, and moist; so the
health of the soul is a good temperature of the doctrines in the soul. And as
the strength of the body consists in a tension of the nerves; so the strength
of the soul in a proper extension* thereof to judgment and action. And as the
beauty of the body is a symmetry of all the parts to one another, and to the
whole: so the beauty of the soul is the symmetry of the reason and parts
thereof, to the whole, and to one another.

Stob.
All those virtues which are Sciences and Arts; have common theorems, and the
same end, wherefore they are (as ^lut. repugn. Stoic.
Zeno says) inseparable, connexed to one another, as Chrysippus, Apollodorus
and Hecaton affirm. He who has one, has all (says Plut. repugn. Stoic.
Chrysippus) and he who does according to one, does according to all. He who
has virtue, is not only contemplative, but also practick of those things which
are to be done. Things which are to be done are either expetible, tolerable,
distributible, or retainable; so that whosoever does one thing wisely, does
another justly, another constantly, another temperately; and so is both wise,
magnanimous, just, and temperate.

Stob.
Notwithstanding, these virtues differ from one another by their heads: For,
the heads of prudence are, to contemplate and do well, that which is to be done
in the first place, and in the second, to contemplate what things are to be
avoided, as obstructive to that which is to be done. The proper head of
temperance is to compose our own appetites in the first place, and to consider
them; in the second, those under the subordinate virtues, as being obstructive
and divertive of appetites. The heads of Fortitude (...) the first place, to
consider all that we are to undergo; in the second, other subordinate virtues.
The heads of justice are in the first place, to consider what every one
deserves, in the second, the rest. For all virtues consider the things that
belong to all, and the subordinate to one another. Whence Panaetius says, it
is in virtue as in many Archers, who shoot at one mark distinguished by diverse
colors: every one aims at the mark, but one proposes to himself the white
line, another the black, and so of the rest. For, as these place their ultimat
end in hitting the mark, but every one proposes to himself a several manner
of hitting: so all virtues have Beatitude, which is placed conformably to
nature for their end, but several persons pursue it several ways.

Stob.
As virtues are inseparable, so are they the same substantially with the
supreme part of the soul, in which respect all virtue is said to be a body, for
the Intellect and Soul are a body, for the soul is a warm spirit innate in us.
Therefore our soul is a living creature, for it has life and sense, especially
the supreme part thereof, called the Intellect. Wherefore all virtue is a
living creature, because it is essentially the Intellect. And therefore (...),
for that expression is consequent to this assertion.

Stob.
Between virtue and vice there is no medium (contrary to the Peripateticks, who
assert a mean progression betwixt virtue and vice) for all men have a natural
appetite to good: and as a stick is either straight or crooked, so man must be
either just or unjust; but cannot be either more or less just or unjust.

Ldert.
That virtue may be learned, is asserted by Chrysippus, in his first book of
the End, and by Cleanthes, and Possidonius in his Exhortations, and Hecaton,
because men of bad are made good

Stob.
That it may be lost is likewise affirmed by C^rysippus, denied by Cleanthes.
The first ^aith, it may be lost by drunkenness or madness: the other, that it
cannot be lost, by reason of the firm comprehensions of the soul.

L^e^^
Virtue is in it self virtue, and not for hope or fear of any external thing.
It is expetible in it self, for which reason, when we do any thing amiss, we
are ashamed, as knowing that only to be good, which is honest.

Lae^^.
In virtue consists Felicity, for the end of virtue is to live convenient to
nature. Every virtue is able to make a man live convenient to nature: for, man
has natural inclinations for the finding out of Offices, for the composure of
Appetites, for tolerance and distribution. Virtue therefore is selfe-sufficient
to Beatitude, as Zeno, Chrysippus, and Hecaton assert. For if, ^aith he,
magnanimity, as conceiving all things to be below it self, is
selfe-sufficient, and that be a part of virtue, virtue it self, which
despises all things that obstruct her, must also be selfe-sufficient to
Beatitude. But Panaetius and Possidonius deny, that virtue is selfe-sufficient,
affirming, that it requires the assistance of health, strength, and
necessaries; yet, they hold, that virtue is always used, as Cleanthes affirms,
for it cannot be lost, and is always practiced by a perfect mind which is
good.

Laert
Justice is not by nature, but by prescription, as law and right reason: Thus
Chrysippus in his book of honest.

Stub.
Virtue has many attributes, it is called 1. (...), a good, because it leads
us to right life. 2. (...), because it is approved without any controversy, as
being most excellent. 3. (...), because it is worthy of much study. 4. (...),
because it may justly be praised. 5. (...), because it inviteth those who
desire it. 6. (...), because it conduces to goodness of life. 7. (...),
because it is useful. 8. (...), because it is rightly expetible. 9. (...),
because being present it profits, being absent, it it does not. 10. (...),
because it has an use that exceeds the labor. 11. (...), because it is alone
sufficient to him that has it. 12. (...), because it takes away all want. 13.
(...), because it is common in use, and extends to all the uses of life.


CHAP. X.
Of the End.
St^b.
THe end is that, for whose sake all offices are done, but it self is not done
for the sake of any: or that to which all things done conveniently in life are
referred, it self is referred to nothing.

Stob.
The end is taken three ways: First, for the final good, which consists in
rational conversation: Secondly, for the scope, which is convenient life, in
relation thereto: Lastly, for the ultimate of expetibles, unto which all the
rest are referred.

Stob.
Scope and end differ; for scope is the proposed body, which they who pursue
Beatitude aim at. Felicity is proposed as the scope, but the end is the
attainment of that felicity. If a man throw a spear or an arrow at any thing,
he must do all things that he may take his aim aright, and yet so, as to do all
things whereby he may hit: So when we say, it is the ultimate end of man to
obtain the principles of nature, we imply in like manner, he must do all things
necessary to taking aim, and all things likewise to the hitting of the mark;
but, this is the last, the chief good in life, that as to be selected,
notdesired.

Reason being given to rational creatures, for the most perfect direction, to
live according to reason, is in them to live according to nature, that being
the Artificer of Appetite. Hence Stob.
Zeno first (in his discourse of human nature) affirms, that the end is, to
live conformably, that is, to live according to one reason concordantly, as on
the contrary, savage Beasts that are always at difference, live miserably.

The followers of Zeno, Stob.
conceiving his expression not full enough, enlarged it. First, Cleanthes his
successor, added, to nature, making it up thus, The End is to live conformably
to Nature, which is to live according to virtue: for nature leads us to virtue.
Thus Cleanthes in his book of Pleasure, and Possidonius, and Hecaton in his
book of Ends.

St^^.
Chry^ippus, to make the expression of Cleanthes more clear, expounds it thus,
To live according to expert knowledge of things which happen naturally: For our
natures are parts of the Universe, our end therefore is to live conformably to
nature, which Chrysippus, in his first book of Ends, expounds, both our own
proper human nature, and likewise the common nature of the Universe. But
Cleanthes allows only common nature to be followed, and not the particular. To
live according to this knowledge, is all one, as to live according to virtue,
not doing any thing forbidden by our common Law. Right Reason, which is current
amongst all, being the very same that is in God, the Governor of all. The
virtue therefore, and beatitude of a happy man, is, when all things are ordered
according to the correspondence of a man's Genius, with the will of him who
governs the Universe.

Stob.
Diogenes defines the end, A good use of reason, in the election and refusal
of natural things, choosing those that are according to nature, and refusing
those that are repugnant to nature. So likewise Antipater.

Archidemus defines it, To live, performing completely all offices, choosing
of those things which are according to nature, the greatest and most
principal, and not to be able to transgress them.

Panaetius, to live according to the appetites given us by nature.

Possidonius, to live contemplating the truth and order of the Universe.

Ci^^de fin^ 4.
Thus by living according to nature, the Stoics understand three things:
First, to live according to the knowledge of those things which happen by
nature. This is Zeno's end, to live convenient to nature. Secondly, to live,
preserving all, or the greater part of mean offices. This exposition differs
from the former; for that is a Rectitude, proper only to a wise man, this is
the office of a progressive, not perfect person, which may likewise be to the
foolish. The third is, to live in enjoyment of all, or the greater part of
those things which are according to nature. This is not constituted in our
action, for it consists of that kind of life which enjoys virtue, and of
those things which are according to nature, and are not in our power.

Cic. de fi^^. 2.
The chief good therefore, is to live suitably to the knowledge of those
things which arrive by nature, elective of those which are according to nature,
and rejective of those which are contrary to nature. Philo. Iud mel (...).
This is to live conveniently and conformably to nature, when the soul entering
into the path of virtue, walks by the steps and guidance of right reason, and
follows God. That which in other arts is artificial, is here epigematick and
consequent.

Stob.
This end is Beatitude. Beatitude, by Zeno. is defined a good course of life,
which definition is used likewise by Cleanthes and Chrysippus, and all their
followers, who affirm Beatitude to be nothing but happy life.

Fair and good, and Virtue, and that which participates of Virtue are
equivalent terms, whence it follows that Stob.
Beatitude is all one with living according to Virtue. Cic.
And as Good, and Virtue admit no degrees of increase or diminution, neither
does the ultimate end of all good and Virtue increase or diminish. For, as they
who are drowned, are no more able to breath, though they are nearer the top of
the water then they who are in the bottom; nor a little whelp, the time of
whose sight approaches, see any more then one that is newly litter'd; so he,
who has made some little progress in Virtue, is no less in misery then he
who has made none.

CHAP. XI.
Of Indifferents.
OF things as we have said, some are good, some ill, some indifferent. Cic. dc
finib. 3.
To deny this difference of things, would be to confound all life, as Aristo
does, neither could there be any function or act of wisdom, since that, if
amongst those things which appertain to life there were no difference, no
election were requisite.

Good and ill, as we said, are these things which are honest or dishonest. Of
these hitherto. Betwixt both these, there are some things which confer
nothing to happy or unhappy life, called Indifferents. Laert.
To profit is a motion or state proceeding from Virtue; To hurt is a motion or
state proceeding from Vice; but Indifferents neither profit nor hurt, such are
life, health, pleasure, Beauty, Strength, riches, honor, Nobility, and their
contraries; death, sickness, grief, deformity, imbecility, poverty,
dishonor, meannesse and the like. Thus Hecaton in his seventh Book of Ends,
and Apollodorus in his Ethics, and Chrysippus. These therefore are not goods,
but indifferents. For, as the property of Heat is to warm, not to cool, so is
it of good to profit, not to hurt. But health and wealth do not hurt more then
they profit, therefore health and wealth are not goods. Again, that which we
may use ill as well as well, is not good; but health and wealth may be used ill
as well as well, therefore health and wealth are not goods. Yet P^ssidonus
reckons these amongst goods. But Hecaton in his 19th of Good, and Chrysippus of
Pleasure, will not allow Pleasure a good: For pleasures are dishonest, but
nothing dishonest is good.

Cic de finib. 3
Moreover, Riches, as Diogenes con ceiveth, have not only this power that they
guide to Pleasure and good health, but that they comprise them. They do not the
same in Virtue nor in other arts, whereto money may be a guide, but it cannot
contain them. Thus if Pleasure or health were good, riches likewise should be
numbered amongst the good, but if wisdom be good, it follows not that riches
likewise be good, nor that any thing which is not reckoned amongst the good,
not that which is good can be contained by any thing which is not amongst the
good. And also for this reason, because Sciences and comprehensions of things,
by which Arts are produced, move appetition; but riches are not reckoned among
the good, it ^olloweth that no Art can be contained in Riches, and much l^sse
any Virtue, for Virtue requires far more study and exercise then Art, and
compriseth the firmness, stability, and constancy of all life, which Art does
not.

Sext. Empir. Pyrrh. hyp. 3. 22. whence supply Laertius and Stob^us.
Things are said to be indifferent in three respects; First, if they move
neither appetite nor aversion, as, if the stars be of even number, or to have
even or uneven hairs on our head, to stretch out the finger this way or that
way, to take up straw and the like. Secondly, things are said to be indifferent
which move appetite and aversion equally, not one more then the other; as in
two pieces of Silver of equal value, no way different, which to him who comes
to make choice of either, are indifferent. There is an appetition to the
election of one, but not more of this then of that. The third kind of
indifferents are those which are neither good nor ill, expetible nor avoidable,
conducing neither to happiness nor unhappiness. In this sense all things are
called indifferent, which are betwixt Virtue and Vice, as health, wealth,
strength, glory, and the like; for we may be happy without these, though their
use has some relation to happiness, their abuse to unhappiness. In this
sense whatsoever we may sometimes use well, other times ill, is indifferent,
which kind appertains chiefly to Ethick.

Stob.
Again, of Indifferents some are Natural, and move appetite, as health,
strength, soundness of sense and the like; some Praeternaturall which move
avertion, as sickness, infirmity, and the like; some Neuter, which move
neither appetite nor aversion, as the constitution of the soul and body, one
capable of receiving Fantasies, the other wounds.

Stob.
Of natural and praeternaturall indifferents, some are primary, others by
participation. Primary natural Indifferents are motions or affections
convenient with reason, as health and strength. Participant are those by which
that motion or affection is communicated, as a healthful body, ^ound sense.
Stob.
Praeternaturall Indifferents are the contrary to these.

CHAP. XII.
Of Estimation.
Laert.
EStimation (...), is a certain concurrence with convenient life, which
concerns all good. Stob.
Estimation is twofold; one, a mediate power or use concurring with life
according to nature; such we call health or wealth, as far as they conduce to
life, according to nature. The other is the valuation of the Estimator, imposed
by him who is skillful in such things.

Stob.
Again, Estimation is taken three ways: First, for absolute donation:
Secondly, for return of approbation: Thirdly, as Antipater calls it, Elective,
by which, when some things are proposed, we rather choose these then those; as
health before sickness, life before death, and riches before poverty. In like
manner, disestimation is taken three ways, the terms only changed to the
contrary. Donation according to Diogenes, is a judgment, that a thing is
according to nature, or conferreth use thereto. Approbation is in in man, not
in things. Election only in the goood, not the indifferent.

Laert. Stob. Sext. Empir. Pyrrb. hyp: 3. 24.
Hence follows another distinction of indifferents, whereof some are
preserred, some rejected, some neither preferred nor rejected. Preferred are
those, which though they are indifferents, have nevertheless a sufficient
reason why they are to be had in estimation, as health, soundness of sense,
exemption from grief, glory, and the like. Rejected are those, which are not
worthy any estimation, as poverty, sickness, and the like. Neuter are those,
which are neither preferred nor rejected, as to extend or contract the finger.

These terms preferred, (...), and rejected, (...), were invented by Zeno,
upon this ground: Cic. de fin. 3.
As when we speak of the Court, no man ^aith, the King himself is preferred to
dignity, but those who are in some honor, next and second to him in rank: so
when we speak of life, we call not those things which are in the first place,
the preferred or promoted, but those which are in the second: and so likewise
in the rejected. Now forasmuch as good has the first place, it follows, that
what is preferred, is neither good nor ill. [No good is reckoned amongst the
preferred, because that has the greatest estimation; but the preferred having
the second estimation, approaches somewhat to the nature of good. It is called
preferred, not that it conduces to Beatitude, but in respect of the rejected.]
We define it thus: an Indifferent with mean estimation; for it could not be,
that nothing should be left in mean things, that is according to, or contrary
to nature, neither being left, that nothing should be placed in them, which is
sufficiently estimable, this being granted, that there is not something
preferred. Rightly therefore this distinction is made, and may more fully be
explained by this smile. As if we should suppose our ultimate end, to be so to
cast the die that it may chance right, the die that shall be so to cast as to
fall right, must have some thing preposed and preferred toward its end; and on
the other side the contrary, yet the preposition of the die, nothing conduces
to that end; to those which are preferred, relate indeed to the end, but
nothing pertain to the power and nature thereof.

Laert Stob.
Of the preferred some are in the Soul, as ingenuity, art, progression and the
like; some in the body, as life, health, strength, ability, soundness, beauty:
some external, as riches, honor, nobility and the like.

Laert. Stob.
In like manner of the rejected, some are in the Soul, as he betude, ignorance;
some in the body, as death, sickness, infirmity, maim, deformity. Some
external, as poverty, dishonor and meannesse.

Likewise of the Neuter, some are in the Soul, as imagination, assent; some in
the body, as whiteness, blackness, some external, which having no estimation
or use, are of little value.

Those which are preferred in the Soul, conduce more to living according to
Nature, and are of more worth then those of the body, or the external, as to
have a good disposition of mind, is better then to have a good disposition of
body.

Stob.
Again, of the preferred, some are preferred for themselves, as ingenuity,
countenance, state, notion, and the like; some for others, because they effect
something, as Riches, and Nobility; some both for themselves and others, as
health, strength, soundness* ability: for themselves, as being according to
Nature; for others as affording no small benefit.

Cic. de finib. 3.
As concerning Reputation, (...), Chrysippus and Diogenes affirm, that being
separated from utility, we should not so much as stretch out our finger for it.
But those who followed them, not able to withstand Carneades, affirmed
Reputation to be preferred for it self, and that it was proper for an
ingenuous man freely educated, to desire to be well spoken of by his Parents,
kindred, and good men, and that for the thing it self, not for the use thereof,
adding, that as we provide for Children, though to be born after our death; so
we must provide for future reputation after death, even for its own sake
separated from all use.

Stob.
In like manner of the rejected, some are rejected for themselves, some for
others, some both for themselves and others, which appears by the rule of
Contraries.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Actions and Offices.
OF those Actions which proceed from appetite, some are offices, some
praeter-offices, some neuter.

Laert. Cic. de ^^nib. 3.
Office is that which is preferred, and has a good reason for the doing
thereof, as being convenient to life; or, as others, Office is whatsoever
reason requires to be done, as, to honor our Brethren, Parents, Country, to
relieve our friends. Zeno first gave it this name, (...), Office, (...). It is
an action conformable to the dictates of nature, and extends even to plants,
and irrational living creatures, for offices may even be observed in those.

Praeter-office is an action, which reason requires that we do not, as, to
neglect our Parents, to contemn our Brethren, to disagree with our Friends, to
despise our Country, and the like.

Neuter are those actions which reason neither requires nor forbids, as the
taking up of a straw.

Stob.
Of Offices, some are perfect, called (...), Rectitudes, actions done according
to virtue; as, to do wisely, to do justly: Others not-rectitudes, actions which
have not a perfect office, but a mediate; as, to marry, to go an Embassy, to
discourse, and the like.

Of rectitudes, some are in things requisite, others not: Of the first kind
are, to be wise, temperate, and the like: of the second, those which are not
requisite to the being such. In like manner are praeter-offices divided.

Again, of Offices some are ordinary, as, to have a care of our selves, of our
limbs, and the like: Some extraordinary, as, to maim our selves, throw away our
goods. Accordingly is it of praeter-offices.

Again, of O^fices, some are continual, as, to live virtuously: some
intermassi^e, as, to question, answer, walk, and the like. Accordingly it is of
praeter-o^fices.

Cic de sin. 3.
Office is a mean thing, placed neither amongst the good, nor their contraries;
for, there is something in this approvable, so as a right reason may be given
for it, as done approvably. That which is so done is office. And forasmuch as
in those things which are neither virtues nor vices, there is something which
may be of use, it is not to be taken away. Again, it is manifest, that a wise
man does something in these mean things; he therefore, when he does it, judges
that it is his office so to do; but, a wiseman is never deceived in judgment,
therefore there is an office in mean things. Again, we see there is something
which we call a thing rightly done, or a Rectitude, but that is a perfect
office; therefore there is an inchoat office; as, if it be a Rectitude justly
to restore a depositum, to restore a depositum must be a simple restitution
without the additionall term, is an office.

Cic. de finib. 3.
And since it is not to be doubted, but that in mean things, some are to be
performed, others rejected, whatsoever is done in that manner, is comprehended
in common office, whence it is manifest, that all men by nature lov^ng
themselves, as well the foolish as the wise, will take those things which are
according to nature, and reject the contrary. This is therefore one common
office of the wise and unwise, conversant in mean things.

All offices proceeding from these, it is justly said, that to these are
referred all our thoughts, even the forsaking of life, or continuing in it. In
whom most things are according to nature, the office of that person is to
remain in life, in whom there are, or are foreseen to be more things contrary
to nature, his office is to forsake life, although he be happy, and of a fool
to con^tinue in life, although he be miserable; for that good, and that ^ll, as
we have often said, are things that follow afterward. The first principles of
natural appetite, fall under the judgment and election of a wise man, and is
as it were the matter subjected to wisdom. Thus the reason of continuing in
life, or forsaking it, is to be measured by all those things we mentioned. For,
neither are they who enjoy virtue, obliged to continue in life, nor they who
live without virtue to die, and it is often the office of a wise man, to part
with his life, even when he is most happy, if it may be done opportunely, which
is to live conveniently to nature. This they hold, that to live happily,
depends on opportunity; for wisdom commands, that a wise man, if it be
required, should part with his life. Wherefore vice not having power to bring a
cause of voluntary death, it is manifest, that the office even of fools, who
are likewise wretched, is to continue in life, if they are in the greater part
of those things, which we hold to be according to nature. And forasmuch as
going out of life and continuing in it be alike miserable, neither does
continuance make his life more to be avoided. We say not therefore without
cause, that they who enjoy most naturalls, should continue in life.

Hitherto it appertains to know, that the love of Parents toward their
Children is the effect of nature, from which beginning, we may track all
mankind, as proceeding from thence. First, by the figure and parts of the
body, which declare, that nature carefully provided for procreation. Neither
can these two agree, that nature orders procreation, and takes no care that
those which are procreated should be loved: For even in beasts the power of
nature may be seen, whose care when we behold in bringing up of their young, me
thinks we hear the very voice of nature her self. Wherefore as it is manifest,
that we abhor pain by nature, so it is likewise apparent, that we a^e dr^ven by
nature to love those we have begotten.

Hence arises a common natural commendation of men amongst men, that it
behooveth a man not to seem alienate from man, for this very reason, because he
is man. For, as among the parts of the body, some are made only for themselves,
as the eyes and ears; others assist toward the use of the other parts, as the
thighs and hands: so though some huge beasts are born only for themselves;
yet, that ^hell fish which is called patula prima, and the pinnoteres, so named
from keeping its shell, which shuts it self up so close, as if it taught
others to look to themselves: as also Ants, Bees, Storks, do something for the
sake of others. Much nearer is the conjunction of mankind, so that we are
inclined by nature to Conventions, Counsels, Cities.

Cic. offic. 1.
Whatsoever is produced upon the earth, is created for the use of man; but, men
are generated for men that they may profit one another. In this we ought to
follow nature our leader, and to bring forth common benefit to the public, by
mutual offices, by giving, by receiving, by arts, by endeavors, and by
faculties, to unite the society of man with man.

Cic. de sin. 3.
The world is governed by the power of God; it is as it were, a common City of
men and Gods, and each of us is a part of the world, whence it follows by
nature, that we should prefer the common benefit before our own. For as Laws
prefer the safety of the general before that of any particular; so a good and
wise man conformable to Law, not ignorant of civil office, takes more care
for the benefit of the general, then of any particular, or of his own. Nor is
he who betraies his Country more to be condemned, then he who deserts the
common benefit or safety. Whence it follows, that he is to be commended who
undergoeth death for the Commonwealth, and teaches us, that our Country is
dearer to us then our selves. And because that speech is esteemed inhuman and
wicked of those who affirm, they care not when they are dead if all the earth
were set on fire; it is certainly true, that we are likewise to provide for
those who shall hereafter be, even for their own sake. From this affection of
the soul, whence proceed Wills and commendations of dying persons, as also,
forasmuch as no man will live solitary in a desert, even with the greatest
abundance or plenty, it is easily understood, that we are born for conjunction,
congregation, or natural community, we are impelled by nature to benefit
others the most that we can. All these are offices, chiefly by teaching and
communicating the reasons of prudence, so that it is not easy to find one,
who will not communicate to some other what he knows himself. Thus we are
not only inclined to learn, but also to teach. And as it is given to Bulls by
Nature, to fight even with Lions, for their heifers with great force and
impetuosity; so they who abound in wealth, and are able to do it (as is related
of Hercules and Bacchus) are incited by nature to preserve mankind. Likewise,
when Jupiter is styled Op^imus and Maximus, Salutaris, ^hospitalis, Stator, we
hereby express that the safety of mankind is under his tuition. But we cannot
expect, if we our selves are vile, abject, and neglected amongst our selves,
that we should be dear to the immortal Gods, and loved of them. As therefore
we make use of our limbs, before that we have learnt for what cause of utility
we have them, so are we conjoined and consociated amongst our selves by Nature
to civil community, which if it were otherwise, neither would there be any
room for Justice or goodness.

Yet though there are mutual Chains betwixt man and man, man has no common
right with beasts, [ g Laert.
by reason of our dissimilitude, as both Chrysippus and Possidonius assirm] for
all other things says Chrysippus, were made for men and the Gods, but they for
community and society one with another, so that men may make use of Beasts for
their benefit without doing any wrong.

Moreover, since the nature of man is such, that there is a certain civil
right betwixt him and all mankind, he who preserves that right, is just, who
transgresses it, unjust. But as in a Theater, though it be common, that room
which a man possesses, is justly said to be his place; so this civil right in
a City and the World does not repugne to the propriety of particular persons.

In order to the conservation of all society, conjunction, and dear^^sse
betwixt man and man, emoluments and detriments (...) and (...), which benefit
or hurt must be common amongst them, and not only common but equal.
Convenients and Inconvenients, (...) and (...), must be common, but not equal.
Those which benefit or hurt, are either good or ill, and therefore must
necessarily be equal; convenient and inconvenient are ranked amongst the
preferred and rejected, and therefore cannot be equal: Emoluments and
detriments are common, but rectitudes and sins not common.

Herein Friendship is requisite, as being one of those things which benefit.
Some affirm, that a good man ought to be as much concerned for his friend as
for himself; others, that every man ought to be most concerned for himself. Yet
these latter confess, that it is contrary to Justice, whereunto we are born,
to take away any thing from another, and assume it to our selves.

Neither can friendship be contracted, nor Justice performed for private
respects and advantages, for then these advantages might overthrow and pervert
them. But neither could Justice or friendship be at all, unless they were
expetible in themselves. Justice is by Nature; it is contrary to a wise man,
not only to do an injury, but even to hurt. Neither can it be right to injure
those who are our friends, or have deserved well of us; Equity cannot be
separated from Utility; whatsoever is equal and just, is likewise honest, and
reciprocally; whatsoever is honest, is equal and just.

Cic. offi^. lib. 1. and again, lib. 3.
Panaetius, who discoursed most accurately of Offices, proposes three kinds
wherein men use to deliberate or consult of Offices. First, when they doubt,
whether that of which the question is, be honest or dishonest. Secondly,
whether it be profitable or unprofitable. Thirdly, if that which has the show
of honesty be repugnant to that which seems profitable.

Laert.
Next the Gods, we are to reverence our Parents and Brethren. Sext. Empir.
Pyrrh. hypot. 3. 25.
As concerning the burial of Parents, Chrysippus says, it ought to be done in
the most simple manner. For the body, as the Nails, teeth, or hair, thereof
nothing pertains to us, and therefore ought not to be used with any curiosity
or respect. Flesh, if it be useful, ought to be converted into aliment
(though it were a part of our own body, as the foot) as is proper to it; if
useless, put under ground, or thrown into some remote place, without more
respect then we have of our nails or hair when cut off.

Cic. de offic. lib. 3.
Concerning the Office of the Buyer, and the Seller, Diogenes the Babylonian,
and Antipatet his Disciple differ. Antipater holds that all must be laid open,
that the Buyer be not ignorant of any thing that the Seller knows; Diogenes
that the Seller as far as is appointed by civil Law, ought only to tell the
faults, and to conceal the rest, for as much as he in ^elling desires to sell
to his best advantage.

Hecaton in his sixth Book of Offices, is full of these questions, as whether a
good man in a dearth may give over housekeeping. He disputes it on both sides,
but concludes that the office is directed rather by profit then humanity.

He question^, whether if at Sea, a Ship be to be disburthen'd by the casting
out of something, we should rather cast overboard a horse of great price, or a
slave worth little. In this case, private interest leads one way, humanity
another.

If a ^ool in a shipwreck catch hold of a plank, may a wise man wrest it from
him if he can? He says, he may not, for it is injurious. What may the Master
of the Ship? May not he take his own? No; no more then h^ may throw a
Passenger out of the Ship, because it is his own, into the Sea. For until they
come to the place to which they are bound, the Ship is not the Masters, but the
Passengers.

What if two Shipwra^k'd persons light upon one plank, and both pl^^k at it,
should one give it over to the other? yes; but to him, who, it is more
expedient, should live, either for his own sake or the Commonwealth. But what
if these be alike in both? There will be no contention, but either as it were
by lot, or mication with the fingers ( giuoco della mora) one will give place
to the other.

What if a Father rob Temples, undermine the public treasury, should the Son
reveal it to the Magistrates? It were a great wickedness. On the contrary, he
ought to defend his Father, if he be called into question. But is not our
Country before all Offices? yes, but it is for the good of our Country to have
Citizens pious to their Parents.

What if a Father should aim at possession of the ^yranny, on endeavor to
betray his Country, shall the Son keep his Counsel? He shall beseech him not
to do it. If that prevail not, he shall accuse him, yea, threaten; and lastly,
if the matter shall tend to the destruction of the Country, he shall prefer
the safety of the Country before that of his Father.

If a wise man receive Counterfeit money for good, if afterward he know it to
be counterfeit money, may he pay it where he ows anything for good? Diogenes
says he may, (...) may not.

If a man sell Wine that will not last, and know it to be such, ought he to
declare it or no? Diogenes thinks he is not obliged, Antipater conceives a good
man must. These are as it were cases of Controversy amongst the Stoics.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Praeteroffices.
St^b.
As every perfect Office in a rational Creature is a Rectitude, and always
complete in all numbers; so every Praeter-office in a rational creature is a
sin. A sin is that which is done contrary to right reason, or in which something
of Of^ice is omitted by a rational Creature. ^lut. de repugn.. Stoic.
A good deed is the command of the Law. Sin the prohibition of the Law. Hence
it is that the Law forbids fools and mad men many things, but prescribes
them nothing, because they are not capable of doing any thing well.

S^^b.
All sins are impiety, as being a resisting of the will of the Gods. The Gods
love Virtue and its works; they hate vice and its works. Every sin therefore
displeases them, and consequently is impiety.

^lut. de repugn. Stoic.
All sins are equal (so Chrysippus in the first of his moral questions, and
Persieus, and Zeno) though not alike, for they flow from one fountain, as it
were of vice, and the judgment is the same in all, but by the external object
by which that judgment is made, they are rendered unlike. That they are equal
is evident from this: If there be not one truth more truth then another, nor
one falsehood more falsehood then another, neither is one deceit more deceit then
another, nor one sin more sin then another. He who is distant from Canobus a
hundred furlongs, and he who is distant but one furlong, are both alike not at
Canobus: so he who sins more, and he who less, are both alike not in the right
way.

Yet, though sins are equal, there are some differences in them, forasmuch as
some proceed from an obdurat incurable affection, others from an affection not
obdurat nor incurable. And though every lie is equally a lie, yet all men do
not lie equally; but, every sin is equally sin, for every sin consists in
lying. Thus Chrysippus, Persaeus, and Zeno: But Heraclides of Tarsis, friend to
Antipater, and Athenodor^s hold, that sins are unequal.

CHAP. XV.
Of wise or virtuous Persons. Paradoxes.
THere are (according to Zeno) two kinds of men, the wise or virtuous, and the
vicious. The wise make use of virtue through the whole course of their life,
the vicious of vice.

Sen^^.
Of the wise there are two sorts, one in perfection consummate; the other in
progression, procedent: Of the first are these following paradoxes to be
understood; Cic. in Laert.
not that the Stoics positively affirm there ever was such a one in nature
(for Quintil. lib. 12.
Zeno, Cleanthes, and Chrysippus were great and venerable persons, yet, did not
attain the height of human nature) but, that such a one might possibly be.

Laert.
A wise man is void of passion, for he cannot fall. There is another kind of
person void of passion likewise, a wicked man that is obdurate and inflexible.

Laert:
A wise man is void of pride, honor and dishonor are alike to him. There is
another kind of person void of pride, a wicked man, equally inclinable to
dishonor as to honor.

Laert. Stob.
A wise man is austere, for he neither speaks for complaisance, nor admits
any thing spoken in that kind. There is another sort of austere persons, which
resemble ^oure wine, not fit for drinking, but for medicines only.

Laert.
A wise man is sincere, for he takes care, that he be not thought better then
he is, by reason of some specious show, and withal to express whatsoever good
he has, without any Rhetorical gloss.

Laert. Plut. de repugn. Stoic. citing Chrysippus.
A wise man is not pragmaticall; for he declines the doing of any thing that is
beyond his office.

Laert. St^b
A wise man is ^^ver drunk, although he drink wine* for he never sins, but
does all things according to Virtue (...)

Laert.
A wise man is never mad, yet somtime^ strange fantasies may occur to him
through melancholy or deliration, not according to the reason of eligibles, but
praeternaturall.

(...)
A wise man is never grieved; for grief, according to Apollodorus, is an
irrational contraction of the Soul.

Laert.
A wise man is divine: for he has God with himself; but (...) wicked man is an
Atheist. An Atheist is taken two ways, for him who is an Enemy to the Gods,
and for him, who believes there are no Gods: which all wicked men do not. Stob.
A wicked man is impious, because he does all things according to Vice, as the
good according to Virtue; and he who has one vice has all. He is an Enemy to
the Gods, for emnity is the discord of life, as amity is the concord. The
wicked differs from the Gods in his course of life, and therefore is an Enemy
to them, for they account all their Enemies who are contrary to them. The
wicked are contrary to the good, God is good, therefore the wicked are Enemies
to God.

Laert.
A wise man is religious, for he is skillful in all divine rites. Religion is
the Science of divine worship. He sacrifices to the Gods, and is pure,
detesting all sin, holy and just in Divine things.

Laert.
A wise man only is a Priest, skillfull in Sacrifices, business of the Temple,
expiations, and other things proper to the Gods.

Stob.
A wise man only is a Prophet, endued with the Science of those signs which are
communicated by Gods or Demons which belong to humane life. In him therefore
are all kinds of vaticination, as well by dreams, birds, and other things.

Laert.
A wise man reverenceth and loves his Parents and Brethren, next the Gods. He
has likewise an innate love of his Children, which the vicious has not.

Laert.
A wise man ought to apply himself to some office in the Commonwealth
(according to Chrysippus) unless otherwise diverted; For he will encourage
Virtue, and suppress Vice, Stob.
especially in those Commonwealths which are far from perfection. He ought to
make Laws, instruct men, prescribe rules. To which is opposite, study of
popularity, specious deceit, prescription of things unprofitable, which are not
competible to a wise man.

Laert. Cic. de finib. 3.
A wise man ought to marry (as Zeno in his Commonwealth) that he may have
Children.

Laert.
A wise man does not opiniona'e or think; but believe or know, for he never
assents to any falsity. y s ^cb
Ignorance is an infirm assent; he thinks all firmly. There are two kinds of
opinion, one an assent to things not comprehended, the other a weak belief.
Neither of these are in a wise man, for he never assented without
comprehension, and then always firmly, for nothing is hidden from him,
otherwise he might have a false opinion. Therefore he is never diffident. Faith
is proper to a wise man, for it is a firm existimation. A Science is a firm
habit, therefore a wicked man does neither know nor believe.

Laert Cic. de finib. lib. 3.
A wise man must imitate the Cynicks: for Cynicisme is the nearest way for
virtue, as Apollodorus in his Ethick: Stob.
Others say, a wise man ought to continue in that Sect, if he have been
thereof; but if he have not, to enter into it.

Laert.
A wise man may upon occasion eat man's flesh. Of this already amongst the
Offices.

Laert. Cicer. Paradox.
A wise man only is free, the wicked are slaves; for liberty is the power of
doing according to our own judgment. Servitude is a privation of the power of
doing according to our own judgment. There is another kind of servitude which
consists in subjection, a third in being possessed and subjected, to which is
opposed vicious domination.

Laert.
A wise man only is a King: For Monarchy is a principality subordinate to none,
which only consists in the wise, as Chrysippus in his treatise, That Zeno used
words properly. For (says he) a Prince must know both good and bad, which none
of the wicked knows. Stob.
Dominion and the kinds thereof, Monarchy, Magistracy, Generalship, Admiralty,
and the like, are only proper to a wise man; therefore the wise only command,
though not actually, yet potentially.

Laert.
A wise man only is proper to be a Magistrate, Judge, and Orator; but not any
of the wicked.

Laert.
A wise man is void of sin; for he cannot fall into error.

Laert.
A wise man is innocent, and uninjurious, for he cannot hurt either himself or
others, Stob.
nor receive, nor do any injury: For, injury is a hurtful injustice, which is
not competible to a wise man, although he may be unjustly assaulted: for he
having within himself all good and virtue, is not capable of vice or harm.

Laert. Stob.
A wise man is not merciful, nor pardons any, remitting nothing of the
punishments inflicted by Law, as knowing them to be proportioned to, not
exceeding the offense, and that whosoever sins, sins out of his own
wickedness. A wise man therefore is not benign, for he who is benign,
mitigates the rigor of Justice, and conceives the punishments inflicted by Law
to be greater then they ought: But, a wise man knows the Law to be good, or a
right reason, commanding what is to be done, and what not.

(...)
A wise man nothing wonders at those things which seem Paradoxall, as Charon's
Cave, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, and hot springs, and ebullitions of
fire.

Laert.
A wise man will not live in a desert, for he is communicative by nature, and
practick, and will undertake exercise to strengthen his body.

Laert.
A wise man will pray, requesting good things of the Gods, as Possidonius
affirms, in his first of Offices, and Hecaton in his thirteenth of Paradoxes.

Laert. Stob.
A wise man only is a friend: Friendship is only amongst the wise, for in them
only is an unanimity as to things that concern life and community, so as our
friends may make use of them as freely, as we our selves. Unanimity is the
Science of common good. A friend is expetible in himself. Plenty of friends is
a good: but, amongst the wicked, there is no friendship; for friendship being
real and not feigned, it is impossible it should consist without faith and
constancy. But, in the wicked, there is infidelity, and inconstancy, and
hostility, and therefore not friendship, but some external connexions, whereby
necessity or opinion ties them together.

Laert.
A wise man does all things well, as we say, all Pipes play the Ismenian tune
well. Stob.
He does all things wisely, temperately, prudently, modestly, and according to
the other virtues, throughout the whole course of his life. A wicked man does
all amiss, sinning in the whole course of his life, inconstant by nature,
often grieved by his own ill actions, wretched and troubled, for as much as he
is vexed at the thing done, so much is he angry at himself for being the
Author of it.

La^^t. Cic. Tuse. qu^st. 4.
A wise man lo^eth ( Cic. de ^in. 3.
(^vertuously) those, whose beauty express their inward virtue. Thus Zeno,
Chrysippus, and Apollodorus affirm. For love is an impulsion of benevolence,
raised from beauty, which love is not of conjunction, but of friendship. For
this reason, Zeno, though he were in love with Thrasonides, a young woman that
was in his power, yet, suppressed his affection because she was averse from
him. This Chrysippus calls the love of friendship, it is no way discommendable,
for beauty is the flower of virtue.

Laert.
A wise man upon ^^casion will die voluntarily for his Country and friends; or,
in case he seized by some excessive pain, loss of his senses, or incurable
diseases.

Stob.
A wise man is (...), for he compasses that which is proposed; (...), for he
is every way augmented; (...), for he has attained the just height of wisdom;
(...), for he is invincible, and insuperable. The wicked are the contrary.

Stob.
A wise man profits the wise, and is mutually profited by all the wise,
though not friends or acquaintance, for betwixt them there is a concord and
community of goods, and he who benefiteth another, benefiteth likewise
himself. A wicked man neither conferreth nor receives benefits; for one is to
move toward virtue, the other is to be moved toward virtue.

Stob.
A wise man is a good O^conomist, skillful to 'acquire wealth. Oeconomist is a
habit active, and contemplative in the business of a family, Economy is the
ordering of expenses, works, and possessions; the Science of acquisition is a
reason whereby wealth is attained, which some account in indifferents, others
in good. But no wicked man is a good Oeconomist, since only a wise man knows
from whence, how, and how far gain may be a ^quired.

Stob.
A wise man only is perfect, for he wants no virtue; a wicked man is
imperfect, for he has no virtue. Therefore the wise are always happy, the
wicked miserable; which happiness, according to Chrysippus, differs nothing
from that of God, nor is l^sse expetible. The wicked partake of no good,
because virtue and that which partakes thereof is good, and those things which
are convenient and requisite are proper only to the wise, as the contraries to
the wicked.

Stob.
A wise man is only rich; for good is true riches, and ill true poverty: a
wicked man is poor, not having the means to become rich.

Stob.
A wise man is only obedient; the wicked can neither obey nor command.

Stob.
A wise man only is honorable; for honor is the reward of virtue, the wicked
wanting this, are justly dishonorable.

Stob.
A wise man only is ingenuous and noble, according to some of the Stoics; but,
others deny it, referring these not to nature, but institution only, according
to the proverb, Custom is a second Nature. So that ingenuity is an habit of
nature or institution apt to virtue; Nobility is a habit of descent or
institution, apt to virtue.

Stob.
A wise man is pleasing, p^rswasive, opportune, and sincere; for he is expert
in every thing, affable in conversation, and helpful to the public: The
wicked are the contrary.

Stob.
A wise man is the best Physician, for he has considered his constitution, and
those things which are requisite for his health.

Stob,
A wise man may lawfully part with his life, the wicked cannot, because in
their life they never acquire virtue, nor eschew vice. But life and death are
limited by offices, and their contraries.

Stob.
A wise man will accept of Empire, and ^ohabit with Princes; but not unless he
porceive it may be done without danger, and to much advantage.

Stob.
A wise man never lies; for he who speaks a falsehood is not properly said to
lie, unless it be with intent to deceive. A lie may be used many ways without
assent, as in War against enemies, or in the like necessity.

Stob.
A wise man neither deceives, nor is deceived, for he never sins, he uses
not his sight, hearing, or any other sense ill. He is not suspicious, nor
repents, for both these are proper to fallacious assent. He can no way be
changed or err, or opinionate.

Stob.
A wise man only (though not all wise men) is happy in Children, in old age, in
death.

Stob.
A wise man does nothing contrary to his appetite, for all such things are done
with a privation, and nothing adverse unforeseen happens to him. Stob.
But in the primitive time, there was some wise man that did not desire or will
any thing, because that those things which were then present, were not
sufficient to be required by him.

Stob.
A wise man is meek, for meekness is a habit whereby things are done meekly,
not breaking forth into Anger.

Stob.
A wise man is peaceful and modest. Modesty is the Science of decent motion;
tranquillity the order of natural motions. The contrary to these are seen in
the wicked.

Stob.
A wise man is free from all Calumny; he calumniates none, and is not
calumniated by any; for Calumny is a lying imputation of fained friends, to
which the wise are not liable, for they are true friends; the wicked are, for
they are feigned.

Stob.
A wise man delayeth (...) bing, for delay is an omission of Office through
slothfulness, of which Hesiod, Nothing defer a year, a month, a day,
He fights aginst himself that does delay.


Stob.
A wise man can only incite, and be incited to Virtue, a fool cannot, for he
neglects praecepts, and goes no further then the words, not proceeding to
Action. A wicked man is not desirous to hear or learn, as not being capable by
reason of his imprudence of what is rightly said; whence it follows, that he
can neither be incited nor incite to Virtue. He that is capable to be incited,
or to incite, must be prepared by Philosophy, which is not competible to a
wicked man, for he who diligently hears Philosopher, is not prepared to
Philosophy, but ^e who expresses their doctrine in their life and actions.
This no wicked man can do, for he is prepossessed by Vice. If he should be
incited, Vice would pull him ba^k; but none that is vicious incited to Virtue,
as none sick to health.

Stob.
Every wicked man is an exile, wanting Law and Country, for both these are
good. That a City or Country is good, Cleant^es proves thus. If there be a
habitation, where those, who fly for succor, find justice, it is good, but a
City is such a habitation, therefore a City is good. A City is taken three
ways; for a habitation, for a convention of men, and for both. In the two
latter significations it is called good.

Stob.
Every wicked man is r^stick, for rusticity is ignorance of Laws and civil
manners. A wicked man refuses to live according to Law, and is hurtful as a
savage Beast.

Stob.
A wicked man is tyrannical, cruel, violent, and in^urious, whenever he gets
an occasion.

Stob.
A wicked man is ungrateful, not obliging nor requiting; for he does nothing
by Friendship.

Stob:
A wicked man is not perseverant, for perseverance is the Science of obtaining
our purpose, not being deterred by labor.

Stob.
A wicked man is not capable of the right of donation. Donation is the good
bestowing of estimation, but nothing that is good is competible to the wicked.

Stob.
Every wicked man is delighted with his wickedness, which we may perceive not
so much by his discourse, as actions, which shows that he is carried on to
wickedness.

THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. I.
PHYSIC, and the parts thereof.
Laert
PHYSIC is divided into these places; Of Bodies, Of Principles, Of Elements,
Of Gods, of Place, Of Vacuum: thus especially; but generally into three places;
Of the world, Of Elements, Aitiologick of Causes.

That concerning the World is divided into two parts; whereof one,
Contemplation, is common also to the Mathematics, concerning fixed stars and
Planets; as whether the Sun be of the same magnitude as he appears to be, and
whether the Moon be so likewise; of their periods and the like; The other
contemplation proper only to Physic, to enquire into the essence of these;
whether the Sun and Stars consist of matter and form; whether generate or
ingenerate, whether animate or inanimate, whether corruptible or incorruptible,
whether governed by Providence or the like.

The place concerning Causes is likewise twofold; whereof one, Contemplation,
is common also to medicinal disquisitions, whereby they enquire concerning the
principal part of the soul, and those things which are produced in the Soul
and seed, and the like. The other is likewise usurped by the Mathematics, as,
in what manner we see, what is the cause of the visuall pha^tasie; How are made
Clouds, Thunder, Rainbows, Halo's, Comets and the like.

CHAP. II.
Of Bodies.
Senec. Epist. 89.
Natural Philosophy brancheth into two parts, of Corporealls and Incorporealls.

A body is that which does or suffices (...).
It is the sense with essence or substance, and finite: Flut. (...) Stoic.
whatsoever is, is a body, for whatsoever is, either does or suffers.

Laert.
Principles are Bodies void of form. Elements are bodies endued with form.
Flut. plac. phil. 1. 11.
Causes are corpor^all, because they are spirits.

Plut. con^. Stoic.
Qualities are Corpor^all, for they are spirits, and aeriall intentions, which
affect the parts of all things, generated with form and figure.

Plut. cont. Stoic. Ter^^l* d^ anima (...).
Virtues, Vices, Arts, M^mory, ^ha^tasies, Affections, Appetitions, Assents,
are bodies, existing in the Supreme part of the Soul.

Sen. Ep. 113.
The Soul is a Body, because it makes us to be living Creatures.

Plut.
Night and day are bodies.

L^ert.
Voice is a body, for it maket^^ that which is heard; in a word, whatsoever is,
is a body and a subject, ( Orig.
for the Stoi^ks take away intellectual substances, affirming all things that
are, to be comprehended by sense) only differences are not subsistent.

L^ert.
A solid body (according to Apollodorus) is divisible three ways, into length,
breadth, and depth.

A superficies is the term of a body, or that which has only length and
breadth, but no depth; thus Possidonius.

A line is the term of a Superficies, or a length without breadth, that which
has length only*

A point is the term of a line, or the least mark. Stob. Phys. 17
A body is divisible into infinite, yet it consists not of infinite bodies.

CHAP. III.
Of Principles.
S^nec* E^* 29.
THe place concerning bodies is divided into two degrees, into those which
produce, and those which are produced, the first Principles, the second
Elements.

Laert.
^Principles and Elements differ: Principles are ingenerate, incorruptible:
Elements shall perish by conflagration. Moreover, Principles are bodies, and
void of form; Elements have form.

Laert.
There are two principles of all things, the Agent, and the Patient: The
Patient is a substance void of quality, called Matter: the Agent is the reason
which is (...) the Matter, God.

Sen. Ep. 65.
Matter is sluggish, a thing ready for all things, but will cease if none move
it. The Caus^, that is, the Reason, ^formeth m^tter, and moldeth it which way
he pleases, out of which he produces various works. There must* therefore be
something out of which a thing is made, and also by which it ^s made. This is
the Cause, that Matter. Ibid.
The Cause or active Reason is God.

Cic.
In the Agent there is power, in the Patient a certain matter [or capacity,]
and in both, both; for matter it self could not (...), if it were not kept
together by a power, nor that power without some matter; for there is nothing,
which is not compelled to be somewhere.

La^tant. 7. 3.
Both (...), God and the World, the Artist and his work, they comp^ehend within
this term, Nature, as if nature were* God mixed through the World. (...)
Sometimes they call that nature which contains the World, sometimes that
which generateth and produces things upon the earth.

The Agent is, as we said, called the Cause. St^b. Phys^. 1. 16.
A Cause, according to Zeno, is that, by which there is an effect, which is not
a Cause 30 or,) as (...) the reason of the effect; or, as P^ss^donius, the
first Author of a thing. A Cause is a body, a not Cause a Categorem. It is
impossible that the cause being assigned, the effect should not be present,
which is to be understood thus. The Soul is the ^ause through which we live,
Prudence the Cause by which we are wise. It is impossible, that he who has a
Soul should not live, or he who has Prudence should not be wise.

CHAP. IV.
Of Matter.
Laert
THe substance of all [ Stob. Phys. 14.
qualitative] beings is first Matter, according to Zeno and ^hrysippu^, in his
first of Physics.

Laert.
Matter is that of which every thing is made, it has two names, (...)
Substance, and (...)* Matter. Substance is of all things in general, Matter of
particulars.

Laert.
Universal matter is [ Sword^ Phys. 14.
according to Zeno, wholly eternal,] not admitting, as Chrysippus* says,
enc^^ase or de^rease.

Laert.
Particular matter admits augmentation, and diminution, Stob. Phys. 14.
for it remains not always the same, but is separated and mixed, so that,
according to Chrysippus, its parts perish by separation, and exist by mutual
mistion. But those who call fire, air, water, and earth, Matter, assert not a
thing void of form, but of a body.

Stob. Phys. 14.
Matter is a body, [ Laert.
and finite.] Possidonius says, that the substance and matter of the Universe
is void of quality and form, in as much as it has not a certain figure and
quality in it self; but it is always seen in some figure and quality. But,
the substantial nature of the Universe, differs from matter intentionally only.

(...).
Matter is passible, for if it were immutable, things could not be generated of
it. Hence it follows, that it is divisible into infinite; yet, it self, as
Chrysippus says, it not infinite, for nothing that is divisible is infinite,
but matter is continuous.

St^b. Phys. 14.
Through this matter, Zeno affirms, that the reason of the World, which some
call Fate, is diffused as feed.

CHAP. V.
Of the World.
OF this matter was made the World. The World has several appellations,
(...), the World, (...), the ^ll; (...), the Whole. Laert.
(...), World, is taken three ways: First, for God himself, who is properly
qualified with all Essence, incorruptible, and ingenerate, who framed the
Universe after a certain period of time, who resolved all nature into himself,
and again generated it out of himself. Secondly for the starry Ornament: and
thirdly that which consists of both.

Laert.
The All, (...), is one way taken, as Apollodorus says, for the World, and
another way for the System of the World, and the vacuity beyond it. The World
is finito, the v^^uity infinite.

Stob. Ph^s. cap. 24.
Thus likewise they distinguish betwixt (...), and (...): (...), includes also
an infinite vacuity, in which the world is: (...), signifies the world without
that vacuity, which neither is increased nor diminished; but its parts are
sometimes extended, sometimes contracted. It began from the earth as its
center, for the center is the beginning of a Circle.

Laert.
The world is that which is properly qualited with the essence of all things;
or, as Stob. c. 24.
Chrysippus and Laert.
`Possidonius define it, a System of Heaven and Earth, and of the natures
therein contained; or a System of God and Men, and of all things that were made
for them.

(...) dei. cap. 10.
The world was made by God, for if (says Chrysippus) there be any thing which
produces such things, as Man, though endued with reason, cannot produce, that
(doubtless) is greater and stronger, and wiser then man. But a Man cannot make
the Celestial things, therefore that which made them, transcendeth man, in
Art, Counsel, Prudence, and Power, and what can that be but God?

Cic. de not. 2.
The World was made for those animate ^ssences which have the use of Reason,
these are the Gods and men, then whom nothing is better. Lactant de ira dei
cap. 13.
All things of which it consists, and which it produces within it self, are
accommodated to the use of Man.

The World was made in this manner; Laert.
God in the beginning being alone by himself, converted all substance (which
according to Zeno was fire) first into air, then into Water. And as in the
Plant the seed is contained; so God, who is the prolisick reason of the World,
left such a ^eed in the humidity, as might afford easy and apt matter for the
generation of those things that were to be produced.

Laert. Stob. Phys. cap. 20.
Zeno adds, that one part tending downward, was condensed into Earth, another
part remained partly water, and partly, being exhaled, air, of a particle of
which air flashed out fire.

Stob. Phys. cap. 20.
Cleanthes describes it in this manner. The Univ^rse being set on fire, the
middle part thereof first settled downwards, then the next parts by little and
little were quenched. Thus the Universe being wet, the extreme fire, (the middle
part opposing it) sprang upward, and began the costitution of the World, and
the revolution of this constitution shall never end. For as the parts of every
thing are at certain times produced of Seed; so the parts of the Universe
(amongst which are living Creatures and Plants) are produced in their seasons;
and as some reasons of the parts are mixed together in the seed, which being
composed, are again dissolved, so of one are all things made; and again* of one
is all compounded by an equal and perp^tuall revolution.

Laert.
The World is One, of the same corporeal substance, and of a Sphaericall
figure, for this is of all figures most apt for motion. Thus Zeno, Chrysippus,
P^ssidonius, and others.

Laert.
The World is feared in an infinite incorporeall vacuity, which is beyond it,
circumfused about it, Plu Pl. ^ hill. 2. 9.
into which the world shall be dissolved by conflagration. The World is finite,
the vacuity infinite, yet ^^ut. Pl. ^h ^. 2. 9.
P^ssidonius says, it is no more then will suffice for the resolution of the
World, when it shall p^rish. ^lut. contra. Stoic.
By this argument they consute the motion of Atoms downward; introduced by
Epicure, for in that which is infinite, there are no local differences of high
or low.

The world is not heavy, because the whole fabric thereof consists of heavy
and light Elements, and, being placed in the midst, whither such bodies tend,
it keeps its place.

Laert.
In the World there is no vacuity, but it is completely one, for that
necessitates a conspiration and harmony, betwixt Celestialls and Terrestrialls.

The World only is P^ut. contr^. Stoic.
self-sufficient, because it alone has all in it self, whereof it stands in
no need. Of it self it is nourished and augmented, whereas the parts are
transmuted and converted into one another.

The World is a Plut. cont. Stoic.
perfect body, the parts of the World are not perfect; because they are
respective to the whole, and not of themselves. The Universe is by Nature apt
to move it self in all parts, to contain, preserve, and not break, dissolve and
burn it self, the Universe sending and moving the same point, and the parts
thereof having the same motion from the Nature of the body. Like it is that
this first motion is naturally proper to all Bodies, namely, to incline toward
the midst of the World, considering the World moves so in regard of it self;
and the parts likewise, in that they are parts of the whole.

Laert.
The World is a living Creature, rational, animate and intellectual (so
Chrysippus, Apollodorus and P^ssidonius) and has an animate sensible essence.
For a living Creature is more excellent then that which is not a living
Creature; but nothing is more excellent then the World, therefore the World is
a living Creature. That it is animate is manifest from our Soul, which is a
piece thereof taken out of it. (but Boethius denies that the world is a living
Creature) Laert.
The mind, or Providence passes through every part thereof, as the Soul does
in us, but in, some parts more, in others less; through some permeating, as a
habit, as in the bones and Nerves, through some as a mind, as through the
principal (Hegemonick) part. In like manner the whole World is an animate
rational Creature, the Hegemonicall part thereof is the Ether, as Antipater
the Tyrian in his eighth Book of the World. But Chrysippus in his first of
Providence, and P^ssidonius, of the Gods, affirm, that Heaven is the Hegemonick
of the World; Cleanthes, the Sun. But Chrysippus in the same Book (differing
from what he said before) affirms it to be the purest part of the Ether,
which they call the first God, sensibly, because it passes through all in the
air, and through all living Creatures and Plants, but through the Earth as a
habit.

Laert.
The World, according to the greater part of St^i^ks, is corrup^ible, for it is
generated in the same manner as things comprehensible by sense. Again, if the
parts thereof be corruptible, the whole is also corruptible; but the parts of
the World are corruptible, for they are daily changed into one another,
therefore the whole it self is corruptible. And again, if any thing admit any
change into the worse, it is corruptible; but the World does, for it admits
ex^iccation, and inundation; therefore, etc.

(...) lud. de immortal. mundi.
The World shall perish by fire, caused by the power of fire which is in all
things, which, after a long time, consuming all the moisture, shall resolve all
things into it self. The Moon, Stars, and Sun, Plut. com* not.
says Cleanthes, shall perish, but God shall assimilate all things to himself,
and resolve all into himself. Numen. (...) Eujeb.
This opinion of the general conflagration of the World, was held by the first
and most ancient of this Sect, Zeno, Cleanthes and Chrysippus.

Plut. com. not.
This fire is the Seed of the World; after the conflagration it diffuseth it
self even into the Vacuity that was beyond the World. Afterward, by order of
the same reason which made the World, it shall withdraw and contract itself
toward the generation of a new World, yet not be quite extinguished, but so as
that some portion thereof remain, for as much as it is the cause of motion.

But Phi. Iud.
Boethius, P^ssidonius, and Cic. Stob.
Panaetius deny this conflagration, of the World, conceiving rather that the
World is eternal, to whom likewise Diogenes the Babylonian assents.

CHAP. VI.
Of Elements.
Laert.
GOd having converted, as we said, all matter into moisture, and prepared it
for the generation of future things, in the next place, produced the four
Elements, Fire, Water, Air, and Earth. Of these discourses Zeno in his Book
of the Universe, and Chrysippus in his first of Physics, and Archedemus of
Elements.

Laert.
Element is that, of which generated things are first made, and into which they
are resolved. The four Elements are matter or substance endued with quality.
Fire is hot, water moist, Air cold, Earth dry; yet not so, but that in Air,
t^ere is part of the same quality, for in the highest it is fire, which is
called Ether, in which is generated the first sphere of Planets, next Air,
then Water, the basis of all, Earth, being placed in the midst of all.

c Of the four Elements, two are light, Fire and Air, the other two, Earth and
water, heavy, which properly tend to the center, but the center it self is no
way heavy.

CHAP. VII.
Of Fire.
Stob.
THE first Element is that of Fire, which, as all bodies tend to the middle,
enclineth, as much as the lightness of its Nature permits, to the center of
the world, by a circular motion round about it.

Stob.
There are (according to Zeno) two kinds of fire, one artificial, requisite to
the use of life, which converteth nutriment into it self; the other
inartificiall (so De Not. deor: 2.
Cicero renders (...)) by which all things grow, and are preserved; Cic. de
Not. deor. 2.
for whatsoever is nourished and grows, compriseth within it self the power
of heat. This fire is diffused through all the parts of the World, and they are
all sustained by it. That it is in the Earth appears by Seeds and Roots,
which spring up and grow by the temperament of this heat. That it is in Water
appears, forasmuch as Water is susceptible of greater cold, as by freezing.
It is consequently in air also; that being a vapor extracted from Water, and
supplied by motion of the heat which is in the Water. But primarily, and
originally, it is in the Element of fire, a Nature absolutely hot, which
dispenses salutary* vital heat to all other things. Stob. Phys. p. 47.
This is Nature, says Zeno, and the Soul: Of fire consist the Sun, Moon, and
Stars.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Stars.
Cicer. Not. deor. 2.
IN the ether are generated the Stars, of the noblest and purest part
thereof, without admixtion of any other Nature wholly hot and pellucid, animate
creatures endued with sense and Intellect.

Stob. Phys.
Possidonius defines a Star, a divine body, consisting of sethericall fire,
splendid and fiery, never resting, but always moving circularly.

Cic. not. ^cor.
That the Stars are wholly fiery, Cleanthes proves by the testimony of two
senses, touch and sight. For the Luster of the Sun is brighter then of any
fire, seeing that it shines so far and wide, to so vast a world; and such is
its touch, that it not only warmeth, but oftentimes burns, neither of which
it would do if it were not fiery.

Now (says he) the Sun being fiery, is either like that fire which is
requisite to the use of life, or unto that which is contained in the bodies of
living creatures; but this our fire, which the use of life requires, is a
consumer of all things, disturbeth and dispatcheth all things. On the contrary,
the other is corporeal, vital, and salutary, it conserveth all things, it
nourishes, en^reaseth, sustaineth, and affects with sense; therefore, says
he, there is no question to which of these fires the Sun is like, for he causes
all things to flourish and sprout up, according to their several kinds:
Wherefore the fire of the Sun being like those fires which are in the bodies of
living creatures, the Sun must be a living creature also, and so must be
likewise the rest of the Stars in the celestial fire, which is called Ether
or Heaven.

Cic. not. deor. 2.
For seeing that of living creatures, one kind is generated in the earth,
other kinds in the water, others in the air, it were absurd to think, that in
that part which is most apt for generation of living creatures, no living
creature is generated. The Stars possess the Ether, which being most rare,
and in perpetual agitation and vigor, it is necessary the living creature
that is generated in it be endued with most acute sense, quickest mobility. The
stars therefore have sense and intelligence, whence it follows, that they
are to be reputed Gods. For we say, that they who live in the purest air are
much more acute and understanding, then those who live in a thick climate: The
diet likewise is thought to conduce not a little to the sharpening of the
understanding. Whence it is probable, the stars are endued with most excellent
understanding, forasmuch as they dwell in the aetheriall part of the world, and
are nourished with exhalations from the Sea and Earth, extenuated by a long
distance.

The sense and intellect of the Stars is chiefly manifest from their order and
constancy, for nothing can be moved by proportion and number without
providence, in which nothing is temerarious, nothing various, nothing casual.
But the order of Stars, and constancy throughout all eternity, comes neither
from Nature, for that is void of Reason, nor from Fortune, which affects
variety, and disalloweth constancy.

Again, all things are moved either naturally, or violently, or voluntarily.
Those which move naturally, are carried either by their weight downward, or by
their lightness upwards, neither of which is proper to the Stars, for their
motion is circular. Neither can it be said, that they are moved violently
against their own nature; for what power can be greater? it remains
therefore, that their motion be voluntary.

Cic.
No fire can subsist without some aliment, Laert.
the stars therefore are nourished by the vapors of the earth.

Stob.
Of Stars (according to C^rysippus) there are two sorts, both which are by
nature divine, animate, and providentiall, the fixed and the Erratick. The
multitude of the fixed is incomprehensible; the Erratick are lower then the
fixed. The fixed are all ranked in one superficies, as is manifest to the
sight; the erratick in several. The sphere of fixed stars includes that of
the erratick. The highest of the erratick, and next to the fixed stars, is
the sphere of Sa^urn, next, that of Jupiter, after which, that of Mars, then
that of Mercury, then that of Venus, then that of the Sun, and lastly that of
the Moon, which being nearest the air, seems therefore aeriall, and has
greatest influence upon terrestrial bodies.

Cic. de Not. deor. 2.
Saturn, (...), finisheth his course in almost thirty years; Jupiter, (...), in
twelve; Mars, (...), in twenty four Months wanting six days; Mercury, (...),
in a year; Venus, (...), (lowest of the five Planets) in a year.

Stob.
The Sun and the Moon are properly called (...), Stars; but (...) and (...)
differ; for every (...) is (...), but not the contrary.

Stob.
The rising of a star, Chrysippus defines, its advancement above the earth;
and the setting thereof its occultation under the earth. The same stars at the
same time, rise to some, and set to others. The apparition of a star, (...), is
its rising together with the Sun; and the setting thereof, is its setting with
the Sun: for setting is taken two ways, in opposition to rising, and in
opposition to apparition. As the apparition of the Dog^ star is its rising
together with the Sun, and its setting is its occultation under the earth
together with the Sun. The same is said of the Pleiades.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Sun.
Cic. not. deor. 2.
NExt Venus (the lowest Planet) is the Sun, the Sto. p. 56, 57.
chief of all that consist of this aetheriall fire. The Sun is defined by
Cleanthes and Chrysippus, an intellectual Taper, gathered and kindled from the
vapors of the Sea. Laert.
Possidonius defines the Sun a most pure fire, greater then the earth, of a
sphaericall figure (as Stob. p. 57.
Cleanthes also affirms) answerable to that of the world.

Laert.
That the Sun is fiery, is manifest in that it has all the operations of fire,
Cic.
and forasmuch as he is fire, it follows that he must be nourished. ^tob. p.
56, Laert.
The Sun is nourished by exhalations from the great Ocean.

Stob.
According to the expansion of this subjected aliment, says Cleanthes, in his
motion from Tropic to Tropic. He moves in a spirall line, from the
Aequinoctiall toward the North, and toward the South. Stob. p. 5^.
Zeno says, he has two motions, one with the World from East to West, the
other contrary, through the Signs.

Laert.
That the Sun is greater then the Earth, appears in that it enlightneth, not
only all the Earth, but Heaven also. Again, the shadow of the Earth being
conicall, argues the Sun to be greater then the Earth. Again, it is visible
every where by reason of its magnitude.

Laert.
The Sun is Eclipsed by interposition of the Moon betwixt us and that part of
the Sun which is toward us (as Zeno in his book of the Universe.) For meeting
the Sun, and coming under him, she seems to darken his light, and afterward
to disclose it again, as will appear in a basin of water.

CHAP. X.
of the Moon.
Stob. phys. p. 59.
IN the lowest part of the ether is the Moon: The Moon (according to Zeno) is
an intellectual, wise, igneous, Star consisting of artificial fire. Cleanthes
says, she is of a fiery substance, and (...) a dirty figure. Physiol. Stoic. 2
13.
Lipsius for (...), dirty, substitutes (...), is if of the same figure, as a
not or cap. But perhaps there needs no alteration, for they Laert.
affirmed, as she is nearer to the Earth then the Sun, so is she of a more
terrene Nature. plut. plac. 2. 25 Stob p 59.
Possidonius and most of the Stoics affirm, she is mixed of fire and air, ^ l.
plac. p hill. 2. 30.
by reason of which diversity of substance she is not subject to corruption.
St. p. 60.
To this mixtion of air in her composition, they impute likewise those spots
which are seen in her face. pl. ph. 2. 26.
She is greater then the Earth, as well as the Sun is, and Spnaericall as the
Sun, yet apeareth in various figures, the full-Moon, first quarter, New Mood,
last quarter.

Stob. p. 59.
Chrysippus says, she is a fire collected after the Sun, from the exhalation
of fresh Waters, for which cause she is likewise nourished by them, as Laert:
Possidonius also asserteth.

Laert.
Her motion is spiral; Stob. p. 5^.
Zeno says, she has two motions, as the one with the World from East to West,
the other contrary through the signs. Stob. p. 59.
The period of her course is called a Mont^; (...), is likewise that part of
the Moon which appears to us, for one half of her is always turned toward
us.

The Moon is Eclipsed when she falls into the shadow of the earth. For
although every month she is opposite to the Sun, yet she is then only eclipsed
when she is fullest, by reason of the obliquity of her course, whereby her
latitude is varied toward the north and south. When therefore she happens to
be near the Ecliptic, and opposite to the Sun, she is eclipsed; which happens
(as Possidonius says) in Libra and Scorpio, and in Aries and Taurus. Thus
Laertius, but Possidonius seems to have been ignorant of, or not to have
considered the motion of the Nodes of the Moon (commonly called Caput and Cauda
draconis) whereby the restitution or period of Eclipses is made in ninteen
years, ((...)) which was the ground of Meton's period, and of the Cycle of the
Moon, in the Julian Calender.

CHAP. XI.
Of Air.
Stob.
NExt the sphere of the Moon (says Chrysippus) is the element of Aires
interposed betwixt the Sea and Heaven ( Cicer.
sphericall in figure) Laert.
consecrated by the name of Cic.
Juno, Sister and Wife of Jupiter, who is the Ether* betwixt these there is a
near conjunction.

Stob. Phys.
The Air is divided into three regions, the highest, the middle, and the
lowest. The highest region is the hottest and dryest, and rarest, by reason of
the vicinity of the eternal fires. The lowest and nearest to the earth is
thick and caliginous; because it receives terrene exhalations. The middle
region is more temperate then the higher and lower, as to siccity and rarity,
but colder then both. This, wherein the clouds and winds are generated, is,
according to Possidonius, forty furlongs above the earth. Next to it is the
pure and liquid air of untroubled light. From the turbulent part to the Moon
is twenty hundred thousand furlongs.

Laert.
To the air is attributed the primitive cold.

Laert.
As concerning things in the Air. Winter is the rigor of the air, next above
the earth, occasioned by the remoteness of the Sun, and is the coldest of the
seasons of the year. Spring is the season succeeding Winter, preceding Summer,
and is a good temperature of the air, occasioned by approach of the Sun. Summer
is that season of the year, when the air above the earth is warmed, by the
Suns access toward the north. Autumn that season of the year which follows
Summer, and precedeth Winter, is made by the return of the Sun from us.

Laert.
Winter comes, when the air is predominant in thickness, and is forced
upward: Summer, when the fire is predominant, and driven downward.

Plut. plac. Phil. 3. 7.
Wind is a fluxion of the air, having several names, from the variety of
places; as for example: That which blows from the darkness of the night, and
Sunsetting, is called Zephyrus; from the East and Sunrising, Apeliotes; from
the North, Boreas; from the South Lybs. Laert.
It is occasioned by the Sun's extenuation of the vapors.

Laert.
The Rainbow is a reflection of the Sun's beams from a humid cloud: or, as
Possidonius, an apparition of part of the Sun or Moon in a cloud, dewy,
concave, and continuous to the phantasy, as in a looking-glass, the
representation of a Circle.

Laert.
Comets are fires subsisting of thick air, carried up to the aetheriall place.

Laert.
(...) is an accension of sudden fire, swiftly carried through the air,
appearing length-waies.

Laert.
Rain is a conversion of clouds into water, when either from the Earth, or from
the Sea, by the power of the Sun, the humor is drawn upwards ineffectually.

Laert.
Frost is congealed rain.

Laert.
Hail is a concrete cloud, dispersed by the wind.

Laert.
Snow is humidity, from a concrete cloud, according to Possidonius.

Laert.
Lightning is an accension of clouds, which are driven by the winds upon one
another, and broken, according to Zeno.

Laert. plut. plac. p hill. 3. 3. Stob. p. 65.
Thunder is a noise occasioned by the collision of clouds.

Laert.
Thunderbolt is a strong inflammation, rushing upon the earth with great
violence, when the clouds by impulsion of the winds are broken against one
another. Some define it a conversion of fiery inflamed air, violently rushing
down.

Laert.
Typho is a violent Thunder, thrust down with a great force of wind, or a
smoking wind, which rusheth down upon the breaking of the cloud.

Prester is a cloud enclosed with fire by wind in the concavities of the
earth: There are many kinds thereof, Earthquakes, C^asma's, and the like.

CHAP. XII.
Of Water and Earth.
THat part of the world (says Stob.
Chrysippus) which is the most solid support of nature, as bones are in a
living creature, is called the earth: About this the water is evenly diffused.
The earth has some uneven parts arising out of the water, called Islands, or,
if of large extent, Continents, from the ignorance of man, who knows not, that
even those are Islands, in respect of the great Ocean.

The earth is in the midst, being in the nature of a Center, Plu^. plac. Phil.
3. 9. Laert
one and finite, Plut. plac. ^hil: ^. 10.
sphericall in figure. The water is likewise sphericall, having the same center
with the earth.

The earth has five Zones, one northern, beyond the Artick Circle,
uninhabitable through extremity of cold: another temperate; a third not
habitable by reason of extreme heat, whence it is called Torrid; a fourth
temperate, a fifth southern, not habitable by reason of cold. Cleomed.
But Possidonius conceives the Climate under the Equinoctial to be temperate;
for, says he, under the Tropicks where the Sun dwells longest, the places are
habitable, and why not then under the Equator? Again, the night being equal
to the day, affords leisure enough for refrigeration, which is assisted
likewise by showers and winds.

Stob.
The generation of the world began from the earth, as from the Center; for the
Center is the beginning of a sphere.

Plut. plac. Phil. 5. 26.
Plants have not any soul at all, but spring up of themselves, as it were by
chance.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Mistion and Temperament.
CHrysippus asserteth a Stob. Phys. 20.
Spirit moving it self to it self, and from it self, or a spirit moving it
self backwards and forwards. He calls it spirit, as being moved air,
answering in some proportion to the Ether, so that it both meets in one; and
this motion is only according to those who think, that all nature receives
mutation, solution, composition, and the like.

Composition, mixtion, temperament, and confusion are different. Composition is
a contract of bodies, whose superficies are contiguous to one another, as in
heaps of grain or sand. Mixtion is of two or more bodies, whose qualities are
diffused through the whole, as we see in fire, and red hot iron, and in our own
^oules; for every where there is a diffusion through entire bodies, so as one
body does pass through another. Temperament is of two or more humid bodies,
whose qualities are diffused through the whole. Mixtion is also common to dry
bodies, as to fire and iron, to the soul and the body, temperament only to the
humid. For qualities appear from the temperament of several humid things, as
of wine, honey, water, vinegar, and the like; that in such temperament, the
qualities of the things tempered remain, is evident from this, that oftentimes
they are by some art separated from one another. For, if we put a sponge dipped
in oil into wine mixed with water, the water, separating it self from the
wine, will gather to the sponge. Lastly, confusion is the transmutation of two
or more qualities into another of a different nature, as in composition of
Unguents and Medicines.

CHAP. XIV.
Of Generation and Corruption.
Stob. Phys.
POssidonius asserteth four species of generation and corruption, of things
that are into things that are (for that of things that are not, and of things
that are not he rejected, conceiving there is none such.) Of transmutations
into things that are, one is by division, another by alteration, a third by
confusion, a fourth of the whole by resolution. Of these, alteration concerns
the substance, the other three are of the qualities which inhere in the
substance. According to these are generations made. But the substance it self
is neither augmented nor diminished by apposition or detraction, but is only
altered as happens to numbers and measures. But in things properly qualited,
as Dion and Theon, there is augmentation and diminution, wherefore the quality
of each remains from the generation until the corruption thereof, in plants
and living creatures which are capable of corruption. In things properly
qualited, he asserted two susceptible parts; one, according to the substance,
another according to the quality: This, as we have often said, admits
augmentation and diminution. Neither is the thing properly qualited, and the
substance out of which it is, all one, nor diverse, but only, not all one,
because the substance is a part, and occupateth the same place; but things that
are diverse have distinct places, and are not considered in part. That as to the
thing properly qualited, and as to the substance, it is not the same,
Mnesarchus affirms to be evident, because it is necessary, that to the same
happen the same things. For if, for example, a man having formed a horse,
should break it, and make a dog, we would presently, beholding it, say, this
was not before, but it is now: So are the qualited and the substance diverse.
Neither is it likely that we should all be the same as to substance; for it
often happens, that the substance is preexistent to the generation, as the
substance of Socrates was, before Socrates was; and after the corruption and
death of Socrates, the substance remains, though Socrates himself be not.

CHAP. XV.
Of Motion.
Stob.
MOtion (according to Chrysippus) is a mutation of parts, either in whole or in
parts, or an excession out of place, either in whole or in part, or a change
according to place, or figure. Iaculation is a vehement motion from on high.
Rest is partly a privation of motion in a body, partly the same habit of a body
before and after. There are two first motions, right and oblique; from the
mixtion of these arises great variety of motions.

Stob.
Zeno affirms the parts of all things consisting by themselves are moved
toward the middle of the whole, and likewise of the World it self; wherefore it
is rightly said, that all parts of the World tend to the middle thereof, and
principally the heavy, and that there is the same cause of the rest of the
World in the infinite vacuity, and of the rest of the Earth, in the World, in
the midst of which it is constituted as a point. All bodies have not gravity,
as air, and fire; yet these in some manner tend to the midst of the World.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Living Creatures.
Plu^. Pl. Ph.
OF animate Creatures there are two kinds (for Plants as we said have no
souls) some are appetitive and concupiscible, others rational. The Soul,
according to Zeno, Antipater and P^ssidonius, is a hot spirit, for hereby we
breath and move. Cleanthes says, we live so long as that heat holds.

Every soul has sense and is a spirit innate in us, wherefore it is a body,
and shall not continue after death; yet is it by Nature corruptible,
notwithstanding, that it is a part of the Soul of the Universe which is
incorruptible: Yet some hold, that the less firm Souls, such as are those of
the unlearned, perish at the dissolution of the body; the stronger, as those of
the wise and virtuous, shall last even until the general conflagration.

Laert. Pl^t. plac. phil. 4. 4.
The Soul has eight parts, whereof five are the Senses, the sixth generative,
the seventh Vocal, the eighth Hegemonick.

Plut. plac. phil. 4. 4.
The Supreme or Hegemonick part of the Soul, is that which makes Fantasies,
assent, sense, appetite. This Supreme part is called Ratiocination; Plut. plac.
phil. 4. 4.
it is seated in the Heart, some say in the Head, as in its sphere.

Plut. plac. phil. 4. 21.
From the Hegemonick issue and are extended to the body the seven other parts,
which it guides by their proper Organs, as a fish its claws.

Sense is an apprehension by the Sensitive Organ, or a comprehension. Sense is
taken many ways; For the faculty, habit, act, fantasy, whereby the sensible
object is comprehended, and the Hegemonick parts of the Soul are called Sense.
Again, the Sensories are intelligent spirits, diffused from the Hegemonick to
the Organs. Plut. plac. phil. 4. 21.
The senses are Sight, Hearing, Smell, ^ast, Touch.

Plut. plac. phil 4. 21.
Sight is a spirit extended from the Hegemonick part to the Eyes. Sight is made
by contraction of that light which is between the eye and the object into a
Cone, according to Chrysippus. Apollodorus says, that part of the Air which is
Conicall is next the sight, the Base next the Object; so as that which is seen
is pointed out to by the Air as by a stick.

Color is the first figuration or habit of matter.

Darkness is visible, for from the sight there issues a splendour which
passes round about that darkness. Neither is the sight deceived, for it truly
sees that it is dark. Chrysippus says, that we see according to the intention
of the mediate air, which is struck by the visuall spirit, which passes from
the Hegemonick to the apple of the eye, and, after that blow, falls upon the
ear next, extending it self in a Conicall figure. Again, from the eye are
emitted fiery rays, not black or dusky, and therefore darkness is visible.

Plut. Pl. Ph. 4. 21.
Hearing is a spirit extended from the Hegemonick part to the Ears. Hearing is
made when the Air betwixt the speaker and hearer is verberated in a
circulation, and at last by agitation, passes in at the Ears, as the circles
that are made in a pond, by casting in a stone.

Plac. phil. 4. 21.
Smelling, is a spirit extended from the Hegemonick to the nostrils.

Plut. ibid.
Tasting is a spirit extended from the Hegemonick to the Tongue.

Plut. ibid.
Touching is a spirit, extended from the Hegemonick part to the superficies, so
that it perceives that which is obliged to it.

Plut. ibid.
The sixth part of the Soul is the Generative, which is a spirit from the
Hegemonick to the Parastatae; of this part, see Laertius from (...), etc. to
(...), and Plu^arch de Philosoph. Plac. lib. 5. cap. 4, 5, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15,
16, 17, 23.

Plut. ibid.
The seventh and last part of the Soul, is that which Zeno calls vocal,
commonly called the Voice. It is a spirit proceeding from the Hegemonick part
to the throat, tongue, and other proper Instruments of speech. Plut. Pl. ph. 4.
19.
Voice is Air, not composed of little pieces, but whole and continuous, having
no vacuity in it. This Air being struck by the wind, spreads into circles
infinitely, until the Air round about it be filled like the Water in a pond by
throwing in of a stone, only the Water moves spherically, the Air circularly.
Voice is a body, for it acts, it strikes upon, and leaves an impression in
our Ear, as a seal in Wax. Again, whatsoever moves and disturbeth some
affection is a body; Harmony moves with delight, discord disturbeth. Again,
whatsoever is moved is a body, but Voice is moved and reverberated from smooth
places, as a ball against a Wall. So in the Egyptian Pyramids, one Voice is
redoubled four or five times.

CHAP. XVII.
Of God.
HItherto of the Material principle, and that which is produced of it; we come
now to the other principle, the Agent, God.

Cic. not. ^eor. lib. 2.
This question they divide into four parts; first, that there are Gods;
secondly, what they are; thirdly, that they order the world; fourthly, that
they take care of humane affairs.

Cleanthes says, Cic. ibid.
that the notions of God are imprinted in the minds of men from four causes.
First, from Divination, for the Gods afford us signs of future things, wherein
if there be any mistake, it is not from their part, but from the error of
humane conjecture. The second is from the multitude of good things we receive
by the temperature of Heaven, the fertility of the Earth, and abundance of
other benefits. The third from the Terror of Thunder, Tempest Rain, Snow,
Hail, Devastation, Pestilence, Earthquakes, and sometimes groanings, showers of
stones and blood, Portents, Prodigies, Comets and the like; with which men are
affrighted into a belief, that there is a heavenly divine power. The fourth and
greatest cause is the aequability of the motion and revolution of Heaven, the
Sun, Moon and stars, their distinctions, variety, beauty, order, the very
sight whereof declares that they were not made by chance.

That there are Gods Chrysippus proves thus* Cic. ibid.
If there is something in Nature, which the mind, reason, power, and faculties
of man could not make, that which did make it is better then Man; but
Celestial things, and all those, whose order is sempiternal, could not be made
by Man; there is therefore something which made them, which is better then Man,
and what is that but God? For if there are no Gods, what can there be in Nature
better then Man, for in him only is reason, then which nothing is more
excellent? But for a man to think that there is nothing in the World better
then himself, is a foolish arrogance. Therefore there is something better, and
consequently there is a God.

Cic. ibid.
Zeno more concisely thus; That which is rational is better then that which is
irrational, but nothing is better then the World, therefore the World is
rational. In like manner may be proved that the World is wise, that it is
happy, that it is eternal, for all these are better then the want of these;
But there is nothing better then the World; whence it follows that the World
is God.

Again, he argues thus. No part of an insensible thing has sense; but the
parts of the World have sense, therefore the World has sense.

He proceeds to urge this more strictly: Nothing, says he, that is void of
mind and reason, can of it self generate that which is animate and rational;
but the world generates animate and rational creatures, therefore the world is
animate and rational.

Likewise, according to his custom, he concludes his argument with a
similitude: IF out of an Olive Tree should come harmonious Pipes, that made
Music, you would not doubt, but that the science of Music were in the
Olive Tree. What if a Plain-tree should bear Musical instruments, you would
think there were music in those Plain-trees: Why then should we not judge the
world to be animate and wise, that produces out of it self animate and wise
creatures.

There is nothing besides the world which wants nothing, and which is perfect
and complete in all its numbers and parts: for as the cover, says Chrysippus,
was made for the shield's sake, and the scabberd for the swords; so besides the
world, all other things were made for the sake of something else. Fruits of
the earth were made for living creatures, living irrational creatures for the
use of man, horses for carriage, oxen for tillage, dogs for hunting and
defense; but, man himself was made to contemplate and imitate the world. Not
that he is at all perfect, but only a part of that which is perfect. But the
world it self, forasmuch as it comprehends all things, neither is there any
thing which is not in it, is every way perfect. What therefore can be wanting
to that which is best? But, there is nothing better then the mind and reason,
therefore these cannot be wanting to the world.

Chrysippus adds this comparison: As all things are best in the most perfect
and mature creatures, as in a Horse better then in a Colt, in a Dog better then
in a Whelp, in a Man better then in a Child: So that which is best in all the
world, must be in that which is perfect and absolute; but, then the world,
nothing is more perfect, nothing better then virtue, therefore the world has
proper virtue. The nature of man is not perfect; yet, in man there is virtue,
how much more then in the world? The world therefore has virtue, therefore it
is wise, and consequently God.

Plut. Pl. Ph. 1. 6.
Thus the notion and apprehension men have of God, is, first, by conceiving the
beauty of those things which are objected to their eyes, for no beautiful
thing has been made by chance and adventure, but composed and framed by some
ingenious and operative art. Now that the heaven is beautiful, appears by
the form, color, and bigness thereof, by the variety also of stars disposed
therein. Moreover, the world is round in manner of a ball, which figure of all
others, is principal and most perfect, for it alone resembles all the parts;
for being round it self, it has the parts also round.

As to the second part of the question, Laert.
God is an immortal being, rational, perfect, or intellectual in Beatitude,
void of all evil, provident over the world, and things in the world, not of
human form, maker of all, and as it were father of all.

Plut. Pl. Ph. 1* 6.
They define God a spirit full of intelligence, of a ^ie^y nature, having no
proper form, but transforming himself into whatsoever he pleases, and
resembling all things.

We understand by God, says Antipater, a living nature or substance, happy,
incorruptible, doing good to mankind. All^ men acknowledge the Gods immortal.
They who deprive the Gods of beneficence, have an imperfect notion of them, as
they likewise, who think they are subject to generation and corruption.

Pl. contrad. Stoic.
Yet, are there some Gods, says Chrysippus, generative and mortal, as well as
there are others ingenerate: Stob.
^The world, stars, and earth are Gods, but the supreme God is the aethe^iall
mind, Jupiter.] The sun, moon, and other such like Gods were begotten; but
Jupiter is eternal. Other Gods use a certain nourishment, whereby they are
maintained equally; but Jupiter and the world after another sort then the
generated, which shall be consumed by fire. Jupiter grows continually, until
such time as all things be consumed in him, death being the separation of the
soul and body; for seeing that the soul of the world never departs at all,
but augmenteth continnally, until it have consumed all the matter within it
self, we cannot say that the world dies.

Laert.
The substance of God, Zeno affirms to be the whole World and Heaven, so also
Chrysippus in his 11th of the Gods, and Possidonius in his first of the Gods.
But Antipater in his 7th of the world, affirms his substance to be a^riall.
Boethius in his book of nature, says, the substance of God is the sphere of
fixed stars. Sometimes they call him a nature containing the world, sometimes a
nature producing all upon earth.

As concerning the third part of the question, they affirm, that Pl^l.
God is an operative artificial fire, methodically ordering and effecting the
generation of the world, comprehending in himself all prolifick reason, by
which every thing is produced according to Fate. God is a Spirit, diffused
through the whole world, having several denominations, according to the
several parts of the matter through which he spreads, and the Laert.
several effects of his power shown therein. They call him (...), as (...), by
whom all things are: (...), as the author (...), of life. Minerva, as diffused
through the ether; Juno, as through the air; Vulcan, as through the Perhaps
i^ should ^e a (...), though Ae^^hylus ascribe this t^ Vulcan. (...)
artificial fire; Neptune, as through the water; Ceres, as through the earth.
In like manner the res^ of his names were imposed, with respect to some
property. Cic.
This place was first discoursed upon by ^ Zeno^, after whom, Cleanthes and
Chrysippus dilated more largely upon it.

Cic.
By this Providence, the World, and all parts of the World, were in the
beginning constituted, and are in all time ordered. This disputation they
divided into three parts: The first, from the same reason that teaches us
there are Gods, infers, that the World is ordered by them, seeing that there
is nothing higher or more excellent, then this administration. The second, from
that reason which teaches us, that all things are subjected to an
understanding nature, and exquisitely ordered by it, infers, that it is
generated of animate principles. The third place is derived from admiration of
celestial and terrestrial things. Upon these, Cicero discourses at large,
according to the opinion of the Stoics.

As to the fourth part of the question in general concerning the Gods, that
they have a particular providentiall care of mankind, it is manifest, in that
whatsoever is in this world was made for the use of man, and is conducible
thereunto; and if for the whole fpecies, they must consequently have the same
care of particulars, which they express by many portents, and all those fignes
whereupon the art of Divination depends. There was never any great person
without some divine inspiration. But we must not argue from hence, that if the
corn or vineyard of any man be hurt by a Tempest, or Fortune deprive him of any
of the conveniences of life, that he to whom this has happened, may be judged
to be hated or neglected of God. The Gods take care of great things, the little
they neglect; but to great persons all things have always a happy issue.

Agel. lib. 6. cap. 1.
Chrysippus in his fourth Book of Providence says, there is nothing more
ignorant, nothing more sordid then those persons, who think, good might have
been without ill. For, Good and Ill being contraries, it is necessary, that
both consist together mutually, sustaining one another, as it were by
opposition. For, how could we understand Justice, unless there were Injuries?
What is Justice, but a privation of Injustice? How can Fortitude be understood,
but by opposition to Fear? How Continence, but from Intemperance? How Prudence,
if there were not Imprudence? Why do not these fools desire that Truth might
be without Falsehood? Such are good and ill, happiness and misery, grief and
pleasure; one is tied to the other, as Plato says, by their contrary ends.

Agel. ibid.
Here follows the question, whether that Providence which framed the world
and mankind, did make likewise those corporeal infirmities and sicknesses
which men suffer. Chrysippus affirms it was not the intent of Nature to make
men obnoxious to sickness: For this agrees not with the Author of Nature, and
Parent of all good things; but he having generated many great things, most apt
and useful, other things also, incommodious to those which he made, were
aggenerated together with them, coherent to them, made, not by Nature, but
certain necessary consequence, (...) As, says he, when Nature framed the
bodies of Men, more subtle reason and the benefit of the World, would have
required that the head should have been made of the smallest and thin bones;
but this utility would have been followed by another extrinsecall inconvenience
of greater consequence, that the head would be too weakly defended, and broken
with the least blow. Sicknesses therefore and diseases are engendered whilst
health is engendered. In like manner says he, whilst Virtue is begotten in Man,
by the counsel of Nature, vices like wise are begotten by contrary affinity.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Nature.
Plut. plac. 1. 28. Lae^^.
NExt Jupiter, Possidonius places Nature. By Nature they sometimes, understand
that which contains the World, sometimes, that which produces things upon
Earth; both which, as we said, is to be understood of God. For that Nature
which contains and preserves the World, has perfect sense and reason, which
power is the Soul of the World, the mind and divine Wisdom. Lactant. lib. 7.
Cap. 3.
Thus under the term of Nature, they comprehend both God and the World,
affirming that the one cannot be without the other, as if Nature were God
permeating through the World, God the mind of the World, the World the body of
God. Flut.
This Chrysippus calls Common-Nature in distinction from particular Nature.

Laert.
Nature is defined by Zeno an artificial fire, proceeding in the way of
generation, which is the fiery spirit, the Artist of forms; by others, a habit
receiving motion from it self, according to prolifick reason, and effecting and
containing those things which subsist by it, in certain definite times,
producing all things, from which it self is distinct by Nature, proposing to it
self these two ends, Utility and Pleasure, as is manifest from the porduction
of man.

CHAP. XIX.
Of Fate.
Stob. 1. 9. Plut.
THe third from Jupiter (according to Possidonius) is Fate, for Jupiter is
first, next Nature, then Fate.

Plut. Pl. Ph. 1. 28.
They call Fate a concatenation of Causes, that is, an order and connection
which cannot be transgressed.

Fate is a cause depending on Laws, and ordering by Laws, or a reason; by which
the World is ordered.

Laert.
Fate is, according to Zeno, the motive power of matter, disposing so and so,
not much diftering from Nature and Providence.

Stob.
Panaetius assirmeth Fate to be God.

Stob.
Chrysippus desineth Fate a spiritual power, governing the World orderly; or,
Agel.
a sempiternall and indeclinable series and chain of things, it self, rolling
and implicating it self by eternal orders of consequence, of which it is
adapted and connected; or, as Chrysippus again in his Book of Definitions has
it, Stob.
The reason of the World, or Law of all things in the World, governed by
Providence; or the reason why things past have been, the present are, the
future shall be. For Reason, he uses Truth, Cause, Nature, Necessity, and
other terms, as attributed to the same thing in different respects. Fate from
the several distributions thereof, is called Clotho, Lachesis and Atropos.
Lachesis, as it dispenses to every one, as it were by lot; Atropos, as it is
an immutable dispensation, from all eternity; Clotho, in allusion to the
resemblance it has with spinning and twisting of Threads.

^l. Fl. Ph. 1. 27.
Necessity is a cause invincible, most violent, and enforcing all things. pl.
ph. 1. 29.
Fortune is a Cause unknown and hidden to humane reason. For some things come
by Necessity, others by Fate, some by deliberate Counsel, others by Fortune,
some by Casualty.

pl. ph. 1. 27.
But Fate, being a connection of Causes interlaced and linked orderly,
compriseth also that cause proceeds from us.

Laert.
That all things are done by Fate, is asserted by Zeno in his Book of Fate, and
Possidonius in his second Book of Fate, and Boethus in his 11th of Fate. Which
Cic. de Fato.
Chrysippus proves thus. If there is any motion without a cause, then every
axiom is not either true or false, for that which has not efficient causes,
will be neither true nor false; but every axiom is either true or false,
therefore there is no motion without a cause. And if so, then all things that
are done, are done by precedent causes, and if so, all things are done by Fate.
That all axioms are either true or false, Cicero says, he labored much to
prove, whereby he takes away, Possibles, indeterminates, and other distinctions
of the Academicks, of which see Alcinous, Chap. 26.

Cic. de fate.
In answer to the sluggish reason, if it be your fate to die of this sickness,
you shall die whether you have a Physician or no; and if it be your fate to
recover, you shall recover whether you have a Physician or not. Chrysippus
says, that in things some are simple, some conjunct. Simple is thus, Socrates
shall die on such a day; for whether he do any thing or not, it is appointed he
should die on such a day. But if it be destined thus, Laius shall have a son
Oedipus, it cannot be said, whether he accompany with a woman or not, for it is
a conjunct thing, and confatall, as he terms it, because it is destined that
Laius shall lie with his wife, and that he shall get Oedipus of her. As if we
should say, Milo shall wrestle at the Olympic Games, and another should infer,
then he shall wrestle whether he have an adversary or no, he were mistaken; for
that he shall wrestle is a conjunct thing, because there is no wrestling
without an adversary. Thus are refelled all sophismes of this kind (you shall
recover whether you have a Physician or not) for it is no less determined by
fate that you shall have a Physician, than that you shall recover. They are
confatall.

Thus there being two opinions of the old Philosophers; one, that all things
are so done by Fate, that Fate infers a power of Necessity, as Democritus,
Heraclitus, Empedocles, and Aristotle held; the other, that the motions of our
souls were voluntary without any Fate: Chrysippus, as an honorable
Arbitratour, took the middle way betwixt these, but inclining most to those who
conceived the motions of our souls free from necessity. The Ancients, who held
all things to be done by Fate, said, it was by a violence and necessity; those
who were of the contrary opinion, denied, that Fate had any thing to do with
our assent, and that there was no necessity imposed upon assents. They argued
thus: If all things are done by Fate, all things are done by an antecedent
cause, and if appetite, then likewise those things which follow appetite,
therefore assents also. But, if the cause of appetite is not in us, neither is
the appetite it self in our power, and if so, neither those things which are
effected by appetite are in our power, and consequently neither assents nor
actions are in our power; whence it follows, that neither praise can be just,
nor dispraise, nor honor, nor punishment; but this is false, therefore all
things are not done by Fate.

But Chrysippus not allowing this necessity, yet maintaining that nothing
happened without precedent causes, distinguishes thus. Of Causes, says he,
some are perfect and principal, others assistant and immediate. When we say,
all things are done by Fate, from antecedent causes, we understand not the
perfect and principal causes, but the assistent and immediate. He therefore
answers the former objection thus: If all things are done by Fate, it
follows, that all things be done by antecedent causes, but not by the
principal and perfect, but by the assistent and immediate, which though they
be not in our power, it follows not, that the appetite likewise is in our
power. This Argument therefore concludes well against those who join necessity
with Fate, but nothing against those who assert antecedent causes not perfect
nor principal. What assent is, and how it comes to be in our power, we have
already shown in the Logic.

Hence it follows, that Agell. 6. 2.
notwithstanding that all things are necessarily coacted and connected by Fate,
with a certain principal reason; yet (says Chrysippus) our minds are so
obnoxious to Fate, as their property and quality is. For, if at the first by
nature they were formed soundly and profitably, all that power which comes
upon them extrinsecally from Fate, they transmit easily and inoffensively; but,
if they are harsh, ignorant, and rude, not supported by any helps of good art,
although they are pressed by little or no conflict of fatal incommodity, yet
by their own unluckinesse, and voluntary impulsion, they rush into continual
sins and errors, which thing makes that this natural and necessary
consequence of things, which is called Fate, be by this reason. For it is. as
it were, fatal, and consequent in its kind, that wicked minds should not be
without sins and errors, an instance whereof he brings not unapposite. As,
says he, a rolling stone, if you turn it down a steep place, you first give it
the cause and beginning of its precipitation, but afterward it rolleth
headlong of it self; not that you make it do so any longer, but because its
figure, and the volubility of its form is such. In like manner, order, and
reason, and necessity, moves the beginnings of causes; but the impetuousnesse
of our thoughts and minds, and our own actions, are guided by every man's
private will and mind. Thence continues he, the Pythagoreans say, Men of
their own accord their ills procure. As conceiving that all ills proceed from
themselves, and according to their own appetites when they sin and offend, and
according to their own mind and sign.

For this reason he denies, that we ought to suffer and hear such wicked, or
idle, or noxious, or impudent persons, who being taken in some fault and
wickedness, have recourse to the necessity of Fate, as to a Sanctuary,
affirming that they have done wickedly, is not to be attributed to their
temerity, but to Fate.

CHAP. XX.
Of Not-Bodies, or Incorporealls; and first of Dicibles.
HItherto of Bodies, we come next to the second place of Physic, concerning
Not-Bodies, or Incorporealls. Incorporeall is that which may be, but is not
contained in bodies. Sext. Emper:
Of those there are four kinds, Dicibles, Vacuum, place, and Time.

Dicible is that which consists according to rational phantasy, a mean
betwixt notion and thing. Of this already in the Logic.

CHAP. XXI.
of Vacuum and Place.
THe second incorporeall is Vacuum, which is the solitude or vacuity of a body.
In the world there is no vacuum, neither in the whole nor in any part: Beyond
it there is an infinite vacuity, into which the world shall be resolved. Of
this already in the Chapter concerning the world.

Next is Place: Place is that which is fully occupated by the body; or, as
Chrysippus defines it, that which is or may be occupated by one or more things.
Thus it differs from vacuity, which has no body, and from space, which is
occupated but in part, as a vessel half full of wine.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Time.
LAst of the Incorporealls is Time. Time is, according to many of the Stoics,
the motion of it self, not of heaven, and had no beginning of generation.
Chrysippus says, that Time is the measure of slownesse or swiftness. Zeno
defined it the intervall of motion, and measure of slownesse and swiftness,
according to which, all things were and are.

Possidonius says, that some are wholly infinite, as all Time; some only in
part, as the past and future; for they are joined together by the present. He
defined Time the intervall of motion, or the measure of swiftness and
slownesse, one part of it being present, the other future, the present
connected to the future by something like a point. It is called (...)
attributed to the least part of Time that falls under sense, subsisting
according to the difference of past and future.

Chrysippus says, that Time is the intervall of motion, the measure of
swiftness and slownesse; a consequent intervall to the worlds motion,
according to which all things are, and are moved, unlosse rather there be a
twofold Time, as the Earth and Sea, and Vacuity and Universe, have the same
names with their parts. And as vacuity is every way infinite, so Time is both
ways infinite, for the present and future have no end. He likewise asserts,
that no entire present is Time, for continuous things being divided into
infinite, Time likewise admits of the same division; so that no Time is
properly present, but so called, after a less accurate manner. The present
only is subsistent, unless it be understood as of Categorems; as, walking is
attributed to him that walks, but not to him that sits or lies. Thus much
for the STOICALL PHILOSOPHY.

CLEANTHES
CAP. I.
His Life
CLeanthes was of Assus an Aeolian City (fortified, Laert.
as Stralo describes it, both by Nature and Art) son of Phanias. He was first
according to Antisthenes a wrastler, and comeing to Athens, having no more then
four Drachms, he applied himself first to Crates, then to Zene, whom he heard
constantly, and persevered in his Philosophy and Opinions. He was much
commended for his laboriousnesse, in as much as being poor, he went by night to
the Gardens to draw water, and in the day time studied Philosophy. Hence he was
called (...) The drawer of Water.

Being cited to the Court to give an account how he lived, being so healthful
and lusty, he produced the Gardener, under whom he drew water, and a woman for
whom he ground meal, to witness how he subsisted. The Areopagites wondering
hereat, allotted him 10. minae, which Zeno would not suffer him to accept.
Antigonus gave him 3000. minae. On a time leading some young men to a
spectacle, the wind blew back his Cloak, and discovered that he had no Coat;
whereupon the Athenians much applauded him, and, as Demetrius the Magnesian
^aith, bestowed a Coat upon him.

Antigonus, Laert. Flut.
who was his Auditor, asked him why he drew water, he answered, Do I only draw
water? Do I not also dig and water the ground, and all for the sake of
Philosophy? For Zeno brought him up to this, and bad him bring him an obolus
gained by his labor. Upon a time he brought in his gains before all his
Disciples, saying, Cleanthes, If he would, could maintain another Cleanthes;
but they who have wherewithal to maintain themselves, would be supplied by
others; yet study philosophy nothing the more diligently. Hence Cleanthes was
called a second Hercules. He was very laborious, but dull and slow.

He used to write the dictates of Zeno in shells, and the shoulder-blades of
Oxen, for want of money to buy paper. He was his auditor 19. years.

For these reasons, though Zeno had many other eminent Disciples, yet he
succeeded him in the School.

CHAP. II.
His Apophthegmes.
Laert.
HIs Fellow-Disciples derided him, he took it patiently, and being called Ass,
answered, he only could bear Zeno's burden.

Another time being reproached as timorous, therefore, says he, I sin little.

Preferring his own Poverty before the plenty of the rich; whilst they, says
he, Play at Ball, I manure a hard barren soil.

He often chid himself, being all alone, which Aristo overhearing; whom, says
he, do you chide, he smiling, answered, a greyheaded old fellow without wit.

To one that said Arcesilaus abrogated the offices of life; peace, says he,
dispraise him not, for though he take away offices in discourse, he commends
them in his actions; To whom Arcesilaus saying, I cannot endure flattery; I do
indeed flatter, replies Cleanthes, when I say, you speak one thing and do
another.

To one that asked what he should teach his Son, he answered in the words of
Electra; Peace, peace, a little step.

A Lacedemonian saying, that labor was good, he laughed, answering, My son,
thou of a generous race art come.

Disputing with a young man, he asked him whether he did feel; the other
answers he did, he replied, why then do I not feel that you feel?

Sosythius the Poet saying in the public Theater when Cleanthes was present;

Those whom Cleanthes madness leads away; he sat still, not changing his
countenance; whereupon the Auditors applauding him, turned out Sosythius, who
afterward coming to Cleanthes, told him he was sorry that he had reproached
him; Cleanthes answered, it were unsit I should behold unconcerned Bacchus and
Hercules derided by the Poets, and be angry' at a little word against my self.

He compared the Peripateticks to Lutes, that make good Music, but hear it not
themselves.

Holding according to Zeno that the mind may be discerned in the countenance,
some merry young men brought an effeminate youth to him rustically clothed,
desiring his opinion of that man's disposition. He bad him depart, which the
other going to do, sneezed; Cleanthes presently cried out, I have found out the
man, he is effeminate.

To one that was all alone talking to himself, you discourse says he, with a
man that is not ill.

To one that was reproached him with his age, I would be gone, says he, but
when I consider that I am in health, fit to write and study, I raber choose to
stay.

Cic de Fini^. lib. 2.
Cleanthes bad those who came to hear him, to fancy pleasure painted in a
Tablet, richly habited and adorned, sitting upon a Throne, the Virtues standing
about her, as her handmaids, doing nothing else but wait on her commands, and
whispering in her ear (if it can be phancied of a picture) to bid her take heed
of doing any thing imprudently, that may offend the minds of men, or any thing
that may occasion grief.

Stob. Ser. 116.
He said, whosoever swears, at the same time swears truly, or forsweareth
himself: if he intend to do that which he swears, though he do it not, he
swears truly; if he intend it not he is forsworn.

Set. 126.
One observing him silent, said to him, why do you hold your peace, it is
pleasant to talk to friends; It is indeed, answered Cleanthes, but the more
pleasant it is, the more we ought to allow them the freedom of it.

Set. 210.
He said that unlearned men differed from Beasts in their figure.

Set. 212.
Being demanded why amongst the Ancients, when there were fewest Philosophers,
there were more eminent then at this time; he answered, because then they
minded the thing it self, now only in words.

To one that asked him, Ser. 229.
how a man might be rich, he answered, by being poor in desire.

CHAP. III.
His Writings.
HE left behind him (says Laertius) these excellent Books.

Of time. Of Zeno's Philosophy. Explications of Heraclitus, 3. Of Sense 4. Of
Art. To Democritus. To Aristarchus. To Erillus. Of Appetite 2. Archaeology. Of
God. Of Giants. Of Hymenealls: Of a Poet. Of Office 3. Of right consultation.
Of Gratitude. Protreptick. Of Virtues. Of Ingenuity. Of Gorgippus. Of Envy. Of
Love. Of Liberty. The Art of Love Of Honor. Of Glory. The Politiek^ Of
Counsel. Of Laws. Of Judging. Of the reason of living. Of speech 3. Of the
End. Of honest things. Of Actions. Of Science. Of a Kingdom. Of Friendship. Of
a Symposium. That the virtue of man and woman is the same. That a wise man may
use Sophismes. Of Chria's. Dissertations 2. Of Pleasure. Of Properties. Of
Inexplicables. Of Dialectick. Of Tropes. Of Categoremes. Besides these, are
mentioned Laert vit. Zen.
Of Atoms. Of Brass. Athen. deign.
Of Sumptions. Fabulous Traditions. Cic. de fin. 1. 4.
The Art of Rhetoric.
CHAP. IV.
His Death.
HE lived according to Laertius 80. years, according to Lucian, 99. The
occasion of his death this, being troubled with a forenesse of his gumms (
Stobaeus says, an Ulcer under his Tongue) he was enjoined by the Physicians to
fast two days, which he did, and was well; then they told him he might eat
again, but he would not, saying, he was now gone a great way on his journey;
Stob.
would you have me, ^aith he, having past over the greatest part of my life,
return back again, and begin it anew? Laert.
Having fasted two days more he died.

In Epi^^et.
Simplicius says, he saw an exquisite statue of Cleanthes in Assus, an example
of the magnificence of the Romance Senate, dedicated to his honor.

CHRYSIPPVS.
CHAP. I.
His Life.
CHrysippus was of Soli, Laert.
(a City of Cilicia, afterward called Pompeiopolis.) his Father was of Tarsis,
named Apollonius, or, as Suidas, Apollonides, who came and lived at Soli, which
perhaps gave Laertius, and from him Suidas, occasion to doubt whether
Chrysippus himself were not of Tarsis.

He first exercised in the Hippodrome. Hecaton says, that having wasted his
Patrimony in the Kings service, he applied himself to Philosophy. Coming to
Athens, he heard, as some affirm Zeno, or rather (as Diocles and others)
Cleanthes, from whom whilst he was yet alive he dissented. He was an eminent
Philosopher, ingenious and acute in every thing; so that in most opinions he
differed from Zeno and Cleanthes, to whom he would only say, tell me the
Doctrines and let me alone for proofs. If at any time he crossed Cleanthes in
dispute, he was afterward sorry for it, often saying, Of happiness in all I
am possesses'd,
But in Cleanthes; there alone unblessed.


He was so famous for Dialectick, that it was a common speech, If the Gods
themselves would use Dialectick, they would make use only of the Chrysippean.
But he was more plentiful in matter then free in expression.

He was infinitely studious and industrious, as appears from the multitude of
his Books. An old woman that waited on him said, that he wrote every day 500.
Paragraphs.

When any questioned him in private, he answered meekly and freely; but as soon
as any company came, he grew eager and litigious, saying, Brother, there hangs
a cloud before your eyes,
Cast quite away this madness, and be wise.


When he drunk at Feasts he lay very still, only shaked his legs; whereupon his
woman said, Chrysippus's legs only are drunk.

He had so good an opinion of himself, that to one who asked him to whom he
should commend his son, he answered, To me; for if I knew any better, I would
hear Philosophy of him my self; Whence it was said of him, He is inspired by
Jove,
The rest like shadows move.


As also that, Had not Chrysippus been,
No Stoa we had seen.


Arcesilaus and Lacydes (as Sotion says) coming into the Academy, Laert.
he studied Philosophy with them, whence he disputed against Custom, and for
Custom, and of Magnitude and Multitude, using the arguments of the Academicks.

Laert.
He was a great despiser of honors, for of all his writings, he dedicates none
to any King. Stob.
He was content with little, for Laert.
he lived without any other attendants then one old woman; and when Ptolomy
wrote to Cleanthes, desiring he would come to him, or send some one of his
Disciples, Sphoerus went, but Chrysippus refused.

Having sent for Aristocreon and Philocrates, his sisters sons, he first taught
in the Lyceum in the open air, as Demetrius writes.

CHAP. II.
His Apophthegmes.
Laert.
TO one that blamed him for not hearing Aristo as many did; If I should follow
many, says he, I should not study Philosophy.

To a Dialectick assaulting Cleanthes with sophismes: Leave, says he,
diverting an aged person from serious things; propound those to us that are
young.

Stob.
He said, meditation is the fountain of discourse. Stob. Ser. 44.
He said, drunkenness is a lesser madness.

Ser. 40.
He said, a wise man grieveth, but is not troubled, for his mind yields not to
it.

Ser. 71.
To one that said to him, your friend revileth you behind your back: Blame him
not, says he, for he might do it before my face.

Ibid.
To a wicked man that cast many aspersions upon him: You have done well, says
he, not to omit any thing that is in your self.

Ibid.
Being told that some spoke ill of him; It is no matter, says he, I will live
so, that they shall not be believed.

Ser. 116.
He said, there is a difference between swearing true, and swearing truly, and
betwixt swearing false and forswearing. That which is sworn, at the time that
it is sworn must necessarily be either true or false, seeing that the form of
swearing is an Axiom: But he that swears, at the same time that he swears
is not necessarily perjured, or swears true, because the time is not yet
arived that must determine his oath. For as a man is said to have covenanted
truly or falsely, not when the covenant is made, but when the time whereby it
is limited is come: so a man is said to swear truly or falsely, when the time
comes wherein he promised to make good his oath.

Ser. 151.
Being demanded why he did not undertake the government of the Commonwealth;
Because, says he, If I govern ill, I shall displease the Gods; if well, the
people.

Ser. 249.
He said, he who has arrived at perfection discharges all offices, omitting
none, yet his life is not happy, for Beatitude is a post-accession thereto,
when as the mean actions acquire a constancy, habit, and peculiar confirmation.

CHAP. III.
His Writings.
BEcause, says Laertius, his writings were very celebrious, we shall give an
account of them digested according to their subjects: They were these.

Of the Logical place, Theses. Logic. Philosophic Commentaries. Dialectick
definitions, to Metrodorus, 6. Of Dialectick names, to Zeno 1. Dialectick art,
to Aristagoras 1. Of connex Probables, to Dioscorides 4.
The first order of the Logical place of things.
Of Axioms 1. Of not-simple Axioms 1. Of Connex, to Athenades 2. Of Negatives,
to Aristagoras 3. Of Catagoreuticks, to Athenodorus 1. Of things spoken by
privation, to Thearus 1. Of best Axioms, to Dion 3. Of Indefinites 4. Of things
spoken according to Time 2. Of perfect Axioms 2.
The second order.
Of true disjunct, to Gorgippides 1. Of true connex, to Gorgippides 4.
Division, to Gorgippides 1. Of Consequents I. Of that which is for three, to
Gorgippides 1. Of Possibles, to Clitus 4. Of Significations, against Philo 1.
What are false 1.
The third order.
Of Precepts 2. Of Interrogations 2. Of Percontation 4. Epitome of
Interrogation and Percontation ^. Epitome of Answers 1. Of Question 2. Of
Answer 4.
The fourth order.
Of Categorems, to Metrodorus 10. Of right and supine, to Philarchus ^. Of
Conjunctions, to Apollonides 1. To Pasylus, of Categorems 4.
The fifth order.
Of the five cases 1. Of expressions defined according to the subject 1. Of
Assimilation, to Stesagoras 2. Of Appellatives, 2.
Of the Logical place concerning words, and their reasons, the first order.
Of singular and plural expressions 6. Of Words, to Sosigenes and Alexander 5.
Of the anomaly of Words; to Dion 4. Of Sorites pertaining to voice 3. Of
Soloecismes, to Dionysius 1. Of unusual speech 1. Words, to Dionysius 1.
The second order.
Of the elements of speech 5. Of the syntax of things said 4. Of the syntax and
elements of speech, to Philip 3. Of the elements of speech, to Nicias 1. Of
relative speech 1.
The third order.
Of not-dividents 2. Of Amphibolies, to Apollas 4. Of Tropicall Amphibolies 1.
Of connex Tropicall Amphibolies 2. Upon Panthoedus, of Amphibolies 2.
Introduction to Amphiboly 5. Epitome of Amphibolies, to Epicrates 1. Connex to
the Introduction of Amphibolies 2.
Of Logical place concerning Reasons and Moods, the first order.
The Art of Reasons and Moods, to Dioscorides 5. Of Reasons 3. Of the
composition of Moods, to Stesagoras 2. Comparison of tropicall Axioms 1. Of
reciprocal Reasons and connex 1. To Agatho, or of sequent problems 1. Of
Inferences, to Aristagoras 1. Of placing the same reason in diverse Moods 1.
Against those who oppose that the same reason may be plated in syllogistick and
not syllogistick Moods 2. Against those who oppose the reduction of Syllogismes
3. Against Philo's book of Moods, to Timostratus 1. Logical conjuncts, to
Timocrates and Philomathes. Upon Reasons and Moods 1.
The second order.
Of conclusive Reasons, to Zeno 1. Of first indemonstrable Syllogismes, to Zeno
1. Of Reduction of Syllogismes 1. Of redundant Syllogismes, to Pasylus 2.
Theorems of Soloecismes 1. Syllogistick Introductions, to Zeno 1. Introductions
to Moods, to Zeno 3. Of Syllogismes false in figure 5. Syllogistick reasons by
reduction in indemonstrables 1. Tropicall Questions to Zeno and Philomathes
(suspected to be spurious) 1.
The third order.
Of coincident reasons, to Athenades 1. spurious. Coincident reasons as to the
medium 3. spurious. Of Aminius's disjunctions 1.
The fourth Order. Of Hypotheses to Meleager 3. Hypothetick reasons in Law, to
Meleager 1. Hypothetick Reasons for introduction 2. Hypothetick reasons of
Theorems 2. Solution of Hedyllus's Hypotheticks 2. Solution of Alexander's
Hypotheticks 3. Spurious. Of expositions, to Leodamas 1.
The fifth order.
Of introduction to the lying reason, to Aristocreon 1. Lying reasons to the
Introduction 1. Of the lying reason, to Aristocreon 6.
The sixth order.
Against those who think true and false are one, 1. Against those who dissolve
the lying Reason by distinction 2: Demonstration, that infinites are not to be
divided 1. Upon that which has been said against the division of infinites, to
Pasylus 3. Solutions according to the Ancients, to Dioscorides 1. Of the
solution of the lying reason to Aristocreon 3. Solution of Hedyllus' s
Hypotheticks, to Aristocreon and Apollas.
The seventh Order.
Against those who say the lying reason has false sumptions 1. Of the
negative, to Aristocreon 2. Negative Reasons, to Gymnasias 1. Of the diminutive
reason, to Stesagoras 2. Of opinionative and quiescent reasons, to Onetor 2. Of
the veiled reason, to Aristobulus 2. Of the occult reason, to Athenades 1.
The eighth Order.
Of the Nullity, to Menecrates 8. Of reasons consisting of indefinite and
definite, to Pasylus 2. Of the Nullity to Epicrates 1.
The ninth Order.
Of Sophismes to Heraclides and Pollis 2. Of insoluble dialectick reasons to
Dioscorides 5. Against Arcesilaus's method, to Sphaerus 1.
The tenth order.
Against Custom, to Metrodorus 6. Of the Logical place; besides these four
differences, there are dispersed, not containing in the body of Logical
Questions, 39. Of the Ethick Place, for direction of moral notions, the First
Order.
Description of speech, to Theoporus 1. Moral Theses 1. Probable sumptions for
Doctrines, to Philomathes 3. Definitions of civil person, to Metrodorus 2.
Definitions of wicked persons, to Metrodorus 2. Definitions of mean persons, to
Metrodorus 2. General Definitions, to Metrodorus 7. Definitions of other arts,
to Metrodorus 2.
The second Order.
Of things like, to Aristocles 3. Of Definitions, to Metrodorus 7.
The third Order.
Of things not rightly objected against Definitions, to Laodamas 7. Probables
for Definitions, to Dioscorides. Of Species and Genus, to Gorgippides 2. Of
Divisions 1. Of Contraries, to Dionysius 2. Probables for Divisions, genus's
and species. Of Contraries 1.
The fourth Order.
Of Etymologicks, to Diocles 6 Etymologicks, to Diocles 4.
The fifth Order.
Of Proverbs, to Zenodotus 2. Of Poems, to Philomathes 1. How Poems must be
heard 2. Against Critics, to Diodorus 1.
Of the moral place of common speeches, according to Arts and Virtue: The
first Order.
Against Rescriptions, to Timonax 1. How we think and speak singulars 1. Of
notions, to Laodamas 2. Of Suspicion, to Pythonax 2. Demonstrations that a wise
man does not opinionate 1. Of Comprehension and Science, and ignorance 4. Of
Speech 2. Of the use of Speech, to Leptines.
The second Order.
That the Ancients approved Dialectick with Demonstration, to Zeno 2. Of
Dialectick; to Aristocreon 4. Upon the objections against Dialectick 3. Of
Rhetoric, to Dioscorides 4.
The third Order.
Of habitude, to Cleon 3. Of art and sloth, to Aristocreon 4. Of the difference
of Virtues, to Diodorus. What virtues are 1. Of virtues, to Pollis.
Of the moral place concerning Good and Ill; the first Order.
Of Honesty and pleasure, to Aristocreon 10. Demonstration, that Pleasure is
not the chief end 4. Demonstration, that pleasure is not good 4, Of those which
are said********
Thus concludes the seventh Book of Laertius, and who sees not that the last
of these titles is defective, and moreover that the rest of the Orders,
concerning this place of Good and Ill, (whereof this is but the first) are
wanting. Doubtless the end of this book is imperfect, and wants, if not the
lives of any Stoicall Philosophers, who succeeded Chrysippus (whereof he
mentions Zeno and others else where) yet at least a considerable part of his
Catalogue, containing the rest of his Ethick writings and all his Physic, many
of which are elsewhere cited even by Laertius himself, which as the learned
Casau^on had observed, he would not have ascribed to Laertius's neglect that
Chrysippus's book of Laws is not mentioned. Of his Ethick writings, besides
those here named, were these,

Ael. 14. 4.
Of Laws. Athen. deipn. 4. and 11.
Introduction to the consideration of things good or ill. Deipn. 4. and 8.
Of Honest. Deipn. 6.
Of Consent. Athen Deipn. 7.
Of things expetible in themselves. Ath. Deipn. 4.
Of things not expetible in themselves. Laert. vit. Zen. Pl. Rep. Stoic.
Of Politic. Laert. Zen. Pl. Rep.
Of ends. Laert. vit. Zen.
Of Passions. Laert.
Of Ethick questions. Plut. rep. Laert.
Of lives, whereof Plutarch cites the 4th book. Laert.
That Zeno used names properly. Plut. repug. Laert.
Of Justice, the first book cited by La^rtius. Laert.
Of Life and Transaction. Plut. rep.
Of Offices. Plut. repugn.
Demonstration of Justice. Plut. repugn.
Protrepticks. Plut. repug. and de com. not.
Of the End. Plut. repug.
Of a Commonwealth. Plut. repug.
Of the office of a Judge. Plut. repug.
Of Good. Plut. repug.
Of Habits.
To Physic belong these.
Laert.
Physics Laert.
Of the Soul, the 12th book cited by Laertius. Laert.
Of Providence, the first book cited. Plut. repug. Laert.
Of the Gods. Plut. rep. Laert.
Of Fate. Laert.
Of Divination. Laert.
Of the Philosophy of the Ancients. Plut. rep.
In calumniation of the Senses. Plut. rep. and com. not.
Of Jupiter. Plut. repug.
Of Nature. Plut. rep.
Physical Theses. Plut. rep.
Of Substance. Plut. rep.
Of Motion. Plut. com. not.
Physical questions, the third book cited. Plut. com. not. and Laert.
Of Vacuity. Laert.
Epistles.
The number of all his writings, according to Laertius, was 705. He wrote so
much, that he had often occasion to treat upon the same subject, and setting
down whatsoever came into his mind, he often corrected and enlarged it by the
testimonies of others; whence having in one book inserted all Euripides's
Medea, one having the book in his hand, answered another that asked him what
book it was, It is Chrysippus's Medea. And Apollodorus the Athenian, in his
collection of Doctrines, asserting, that Epicurus had written many books upon
his own strength, without using the testimonies of others, and that he therein
far exceeded Chrysippus, adds these words; For if a man should take out of
Chrysippus's writings all that belongs to other men, he would leave the paper
blank.

Seneca gives this censure of him: De Benef. 1. 3.
He is most subtle and acute, penetrating into the depth of truth. He speaks to
the thing that is to be done, and uses no more words then are necessary to the
understanding thereof; but adds, that his Sen de Benef. 1. 4.
acuteness being too fine, is many times blunted, and retorted upon it self;
even when he seems to have done something, he only pricks, not pierces.

Laert.
Some there are who inveigh against him, as one that wrote many obscene things,
not sit to be spoken, as in his Commentary of the ancient Physiologists, what
he writes concerning Jupiter and Juno is obscenely feigned, delivering that in
600 Paragraphs, which the most impudent person would not have committed to
writing; for, say they, he has related the story most unhandsomly, and though
he praised it as natural, yet it becomes Curtezans rather then Gods.

Moreover what he says of those that writ of Tables is false, not to be found
neither in Polemo, nor Hipsicrates, nor Antigonus, but forged by himself.

In his book of a Commonwealth, he allows marriage with a mother and a
daughter, and repeats the same in the beginning of his book, Concerning things
expetible in themselves.

In his third book of Justice, extending to a thousand Paragraphs, he advised
to feed upon the very dead.

In his second book of Life and Transaction, he affirms, a wise man ought to
take care to provide himself food; but to what end must he provide himself
food? for Livelihood? Life is an indifferent. For Pleasure? Pleasure also is
indifferent. For Virtue? that is self- sufficient for Beatitude. Such kinds of
acquisition of wealth are very ridiculous. If they proceed from a King, there
is a necessity of complying with him; if from a friend, that friendship is
venial; if from wisdom, that wisdom is mercenary. For these things, says
Laertius, some have inveighed against him.

CHAP. IV.
His death.
HE died, according to Apollodorus, in the 143d Olympiad, (so supply Laertius,
in whom the centenary number is wanting by Suidas) having lived 73 years.

The manner of his death is differently related; Hermippus affirms, that being
in the Odaeum (a kind of public Theater at Athens) his Disciples called him
away to Sacrifice, and thereupon taking a draught of wine, he was immediately
seized by a Vertigo, of which at the end of five days he died. Others report,
he died of excessive laughter: Seeing an Asseeafigs, he bad his woman offer it
some wine, and thereat fell into such extremity of laughter, that it killed him.

As to his person, he was very little, says Laertius, as appears by his
Statue in the Ceramick, which is almost hid by the horse that stands next it,
whence Carneades called him (...), hid by a horse. The posture of this Statue,
Cicero says, was sitting, and stretching forth his hand. Pausanias says, it
was set up in the Gymnasium, called Ptolomaean from the Founder, not far from
the Forum.

Laertius reckons four more of this name.

The first, a Physician, to whom Erasistratus acknowledges himself beholding
for many things.

The Second, his son, Physician to Ptolomy, who, upon the calumnies of some
that maligned him, was publicly punished and beaten with rods.

The third, Disciple to Erasistratus.

The fourth, a writer of Georgicks.

ZENO.
Sui^as.
ZENO was of Tarsis, or, according to others, of Siodn, his Father named
Dioscorides. He was Disciple to Chrysippus, and his successor in the School.
Laert. (...) Zen.
He wrote few books, but left behind him many Disciples.

DIOGENES.
DIOGENES was born at Seleucia, ^aert. vit. Diog.
he was surnamed the Babylonian, from the vicinity of that place. He was
Disciple of Chrysippus, and is styled by Cicero an eminent and serious Stoic.
De ira. 3. 38.
Seneca relates, that discoursing earnestly concerning anger, a foolish young
man standing by, spat in his face, which he took meekly and discreetly, saying,
I am not angry, but am in doubt whether I ought to be so or not. He was one of
the three that was sent from Athens on Embassy to Rome; of which already in the
life of Car^eades, who learned Dialectick of him. Cicero says, he lived to a
great age. Amongst other things, he wrote a treatise of Divina^ion.

ANTIPATER.
Laert.
ANTIPATER was of Sidon, Disciple to De Offic. 3.
Diogenes the Babylonian^ Cicero calls him a most acute person; Senecae, one of
the great authors of the Stoicall Sect. Plut. de Garrul.
He declined to dispute with Carneades, but filled his books with confutations
of him, whence he was called (...), the clamorous penman. Cit. Ac. quaest. 4.
He disputed much against those who asserted nothing. Besides other things, he
writ two books of Divination. Cic. de divin. l. 1.
Cicero, at the latter end of his second book of Offices, says, he then was
lately dead at Athens.

PANAETIUS.
Strab. l. 14.
PANAETIUS was of Rhodes, his Ancestors eminent for Martial affairs and
exercises. He was Cic. de Divin. lib. 1.
Disciple to Antipater, intimate friend to Plut. Apoph.
^. Scipio Africanus, whom he accompanied in his journey to Alexandria. Cicero
calls him, Acad. ^. 4.
almost Prince of the Stoics, a person extremely inigenous and grave, worthy
the familiarity of Scipio and Laelius.

He was a great admirer of Plato, Cic. Tuse. quaest. lib. 1.
whom every where he calls, divine, most wise, most holy, the Homer of
Philosophers. But his opinion of the immortality of the Soul he approved not,
arguing thus; Whatsoever is generated dies; but souls are generated, as is
manifest from the likeness of those that are begotten to their Parents, not
only in body, but disposition. His other argument was, There is nothing that is
grieved or pained but is subject to be sick; whatsoever is subject to sickness
is likewise subject to death; souls are subject to grief, therefore they are
subject to death.

He alone rejected Astrologicall predictions, Cic. de divinat. lib. 2. De
divin. l 1.
and receded from the Stoics, as to Divination; yet, would not positivly
affirm there was no such art, but only that he doubted it.

He wrote three books of Offices, much commended by Cicero.

Lipsius conjectures he died old, because Cicero affirms out of Posidonius,
that he lived thirty years after he had written his Books of offices.

POSIDONIUS.
POSIDONIUS was born at Apamea in Syria. Strab. lib. 14. Cic. Tusc. qu. l. 2.
He lived at Rhodes, and there managed civil affairs, and taught Philosophy.
Pompey in his return from Syria, went to Rhodes purposely to hear him, and
coming to his door, forbad the Lictor to knock as was the custom, but he
(says Pliny) to whom the East and West had submitted, himself submitted his
Fases at this Gate. But understanding that he was very sick of a great pain in
his, joints he resolved only to give him a visit. At his first coming and
salutation, he told him with much respect, that he was extremely sorry he could
not hear him. Posidonius answered, You may; for no corporeal pain shall make
me frustrate the coming of so great a person: And thereupon he discoursed
seriously and copiously upon this subject, as he lay in his bed, That nothing
is good, but what is honest. And as often as his pain took him, he would say,
Pain, it is to no purpose; though thou art troublesome, I will never
acknowledge thou art ill.

He made a Sphere, Cic. de (...). Deor. lib. 2.
wherein were all the conversions of the Sun, Moon, and Planets exactly as they
moved in the Heavens every day and night.

Of his writings are cited by Cicero, De divinat.
five Books of Divination; as also five books of the nature of the Gods.

Thus far we have a continued succession of the Stoic Philosophers, the last
School, according to Laertius's disposition, of thsoe that were descended from
Thales.

FINIS.
2 52 3 53 4 54 Pisistratus died having reigned 17 years; Arist. Polit. 5.
Lxiii 55 2 56 3 57 4 58 Lxiv Miltiades. H^l. 7. 59 2 60 3 61 4 62 Lxv 63 Darius
begun his reign. 2 64 3 65 4 66 Lxvi 67 2 68 3 69 4 70 Lxvii 71 2 72 3 73 4 74
Lxviii Lysagoras Marm. 75 2 76 3 77 4 78 Lxix Acestorides 11. Hal. 5. 79 2 80 3
81 4 82 Lxx Myrus Hal. 5. 83 Anaxagoras born. Laert by compute. 2 84 3 85 4 86
Pythagoras died. Eusebius. Lxxi Hipparchus Hal. 6. 87 2 Pithocritus. Marm. 88 3 89
4 90 Lxxii Diognetus. Hal. 6. 91 The Marathonian fight. 2 Hybrilides. Hal. 7.
Paus. 92 3 Phanippus. Plut. Aristie. 93 4 94 Lxxiii Archises. Hal. 8. 95 2 96 3
Aristides. Marm. 97 Darius died. Xerxes succeeded. 4 Philocrates. Marm. 98
Lxxiv Leostratus. Hal. 8. 99 2 Nicodemus. Hal. 8. 100 3 101 4 112 Lxxv
Calliades. Marm. 103 Xerxes crossed the Hellespont: the ^ight at S^lamis^
Anaxagoras went to Athens. 2 Xantippus Marm. 104 3 Timosthenes Marm. 105 4
Adimantus Marm. 106 Lxxvi Phaedon. Diod. Sic. 107 2 Dromoclides 108 3
Ace^^orides 109 4 Menon 110 lxxvii Chares 111 2 Praxiergus 112 3 Demotion 113 4
Apsephion 114 Socrates born. lxxviii Theagenides 115 A stone fell down from
Heaven at Aegos Potamus; foretold by Anaxagoras. 2 Lysistratus 116 3 Lysanias
117 4 Lysitheus 118 lxxix Archedemides 119 2 Tlepolemus 120 3 Conon 121 4
Euippus 122 lxxx Phrasiclides 123 2 Philocles 124 3 Bion 125 4 Mnesithides 126
lxxxi Callias 1. 127 2 Sosistratus 128 3 Ariston 129 4 Lysicrates 130 lxxxii
Chaerephanes Hal, 131 Xenophon born about this time. 2 Antidotus 132 3
Euthidemus 133 Anaxagoras (having professed Philosophy 30 years at Athens)
condemned and banished; collected from Laert. 4 Pedicus 134 lxxxiii Philiscus
Hal 135 2 Timarchides 136 3 Callimachus 137 4 Lysimachides 138 lxxxiv
Praxiteles 139 2 Lysanias 140 3 Diphilus 141 4 Timocles 142 lxxxv Murichides
143 2 Glaucides 144 3 Theodorus 145 4 Euthemenes 146 lxxxvi Nausimachus 147 2
Antilochides 148 3 Achares 149 4 Apseudas P^ol. 150 lxxxvii Pythodorus T^uc.
151 2 Euthidemus Athen. 5. 152 1 Year of the Peloponnesian war: Thucid. lib. 2
3 Apollodo^us. Athen^ 5. 153 2 4 Epaminondas 154 3 lxxxviii Diotimus 155 4
Anaxagoras died, by compute from Laert 2 Euclides 156 5 3 Euthydemus 157 6 4
Stratocles 158 7 lxxxix Isarchus 159 8 The sight at Delium, wherein Socrates
and Xenopho^ fought. The Clouds of Aristophanes acted. 2 Amynias 160 9 The
Clouds of Aristophanes acted the second time. 3 Alcaeus 161 10 4 Ariston 162 11
The time of Xenophon's symposium xc Aristophilus 163 12 2 Archias 164 13 3
Antipho^ 165 14 4 E^phemus 166 15 xci Aristomnestus 167 16 2 Chabrias 168 17 3
Pisander 169 18 4 Cleocritus 170 19 xcii Callias 171 20 2 Theopompus 172 21
Thucydidesy ends his history; Xenophon begins where he left. 3 Glaucippus 173
22 4 Diocles 174 23 xciii Euctemon Marm. 175 24 2 Antigenes Marm. 176 25 The
first ascent of Cyrus into Asia. Marm. 3 Callias Marm. 177 26 Dionysius made K
of S^^ac^^e. diod. the fight 4 Alexias 178 27 at Argi^^^^; the 10 Captains put
to death. xciv Pythodorus Athen. 179 The thirty Tyrants. Theramenes put to
death. 2 Euclides 180 3 Micon 181 4 Exenaetus 182 The ascent of Cyrus into Asia
against his brother: his death. Xenophon retreats with the army. The ^0 Tyrants
put down. xcv Laches 183 2 Aristocrates 184 Socrates put to death. Thimbro sent
into Asia against Tissaphernes by the Lacedaemonians; and of Xenophons retreat
3 Ithicles 185 4 Lysiades 186 xcvi Phormio 187 Agesilaus goes into Asia against
the Persian. ( (...). 2 Diophaneus 188 Age^laus called home; fights with the
Boetians at Co^onon reaedisies the walls of Athens. 3 Eubulides 189 4
Demostratus 190 xcvii Philocles 191 2 Nicoteles 192 3 Demostratus 193 4
Antipa^er 194 cxviii Pyrrhio 195 2 Theodorus 196 3 Mystichides 197 4 Dexitheus
198 xcix Diotrephes 199 Aristotle born. Laert 2 Phanostratus 200 3 Menander 201
4 Demophilus 202 c Pytheus Marm 203 2 Nico Hal. 204 3 Nausinicus Hal 205 4
Calleas Hal. 206 ci Chariander 207 2 Hippoda^^us 208 3 Socratides 209 4 Asteius
Paus. 210 cii Alcisthenes. Hal. 211 2 Phrasiclides Marm. 212 3 Discinetus Paus.
213 4 Lycistratus 214 ciii Nausigenes Marm. 215 2 Polyzelus Hal. 216 3
Cephisodorus Hal. 217 4 Chion 218 civ Timocrates Hal. 219 2 Cariclides 220 3
Molon. Hal. dinar. 221 4 Nicophemus 222 cv Callimedes 223 Xenophon died. Laert.
2 Eucharistus 224 3 Cephisodotus 225 4 Agathocles Paus. Mar. 226 cvi Elpines
227 2 Callistratus Marm. 228 3 Diotimus 229 4 E^demus 230 cvii Aristodemus 231
2 Thessalus 232 3 Apollodorus 233 4 Callimachus Athen. 234 Plato died 82 years
old. Athen. lib. 5. cviii Theophilus. Paus. Ath. 235 2 Themistocles 236 3
Archias 237 4 E^bulus 238 Aristotle went to Mitelene. Laert. cix Liz^scus 239 2
Pithodorus 240 Aristotle went to King Philip^ Alexander being 15 years old.
Laert. 3 Sosigenes 241 4 Nicomachus 242 cx Theophrastus 243 2 Lysimachides 244
3 Charonidas 245 4 Phrynichus 246 cxi Pythodorus Arr. 247 2 Euaenetus 248
Aristotle teaches in the Ly^^um 13 years. 3 Ctesicles 249 4 Nicocrates 250
cxii Niceratus 251 2 Aristophanes Arr. 252 3 Aristopho^ Ar. 253 4 Cephisophon
254 cxiii Euthycritus 255 2 Hegemon Hal. Ar. 256 3 Cremes 257 4 Anticles 258
cxiv Hegesias Arr. 259 2 Cephisodorus 260 3 Philocles Laert. 261 Aristotle went
to Chalcis, and died there near 63 years old. Laert. Theophrastus succeeded. 4
Archippus Laert 262 cxv Neaechmus Hal. 263 2 Apollodorus 264 3 Archippus 265 4
Demogenes 166 cxvi Democlides 267 2 P^axibulus 268 3 Nicodorus 268 Pol^mo
president of the Academy. 4 Theophrastus 269 cxvii Polemo 270 2 Simonides 271 3
Hieromnemon 272 4 Demetr^us Phalerens 273 cxviii Carinus 274 2 Anaxicrates 275
3 Co^aebus 276 4 Xenippus 277 cxix Phericles Hal. 278 2 Leostratus 279 3
Nicocles 280 4 Calliarchus 281 cxx Hegemachus Laert. 282 2 Euctemon 283 3
Mnesidemus 284 4 Antiphanes 285 cxxi Nicias 286 2 Nicostratus 287 3
Olympiodorus 288 4 Philippus 289 cxxii 290 2 291 3 292 4 293 cxxiii 294 2 295 3
296 cxxiv 297 2 298 3 299 4 300 cxxv 301 2 302 3 303 4 304 cxxvi 305 2 306 3
307 4 308 cxxvii Pytharatus Cic. 309 2 310 3 311 4 312 cxxviii 313 2 314 3 315
4 316 cxxix Diognetus Marm. 317 2 318 3 319 4 320 cxxx 321 2 322 3 323 4 324
cxxxi 325 2 326 3 327 4 328 cxxxii 329 2 330 3 331 4 332 cxxxiii 333 2 334 3
335 4 336 cxxxiv 337 2 338 3 339 4 340 Lacydes president of the Academy 26
years Laert. cxxxv 341 2 342 3 343 4 344 cxxxvi 345 2 346 3 347 4 348 cxxxvii
349 2 350 3 351 4 352 Lxxxviii 353 2 354 3 355 4 356 cxxxix 357 2 358 3 359 4
360 cxl 361 2 362 3 363 4 364 cxli 365 Lacydes resignes the school to Euander
and Telecles. Laert. 2 366 3 367 4 368 clxii 369 2 370 3 371 4 372 ^^rineades
^orn.

THE TABLE,
The first Part;
Containing those on whom the attribute of wise was conferred.
TALES Chap. 1. His Country and Parents page 1 2 The time of his birth 2 3 His
travells 4 4 How he lived at Miletus ibd 5 The attribute of wise conferred on
him 6 6 Of his Philosophy ibid Sect. 1. That water is the principle of all
things 9 Sect. 2. Of God 11 Sect. 3. Of Demons 12 Sect. 4. Of the soul ibid
Sect. 5. Of the World 14 7 Of his Geometry 15 Sect. 1. Propositions invented by
him 16 Sect. 2. Of his taking the height of the Pyramid 18 8 Of his Astronomy
ibid Sect. 1. Of the Celestial spears 19 Sect. 2. Of the Sun, Moon, and Stars
ibid Sect. 3. Of Eclipses 20 Sect. 4. Of the year 22 Sect. 5. His Astrologicall
prediction ibid 9 His moral sentences 23 10 His judgment in civil affairs 25
11 His writings 26 12 His auditors and scholars 28 13 His death 29 SOLON Chap.
1. His Pa^ents, Country and condition 30 5 How by his means the Athenians took
Salamis, Cyrrha, and the Thracian Chersonesus 31 3 How he composed differences
at home, and was made Archon 34 4 What alterations he made during (...)
government, and first of the Sisachthia 37 5 How he divided the people into
Classes, and erected Cour^s of Judicature 39 6 His laws 41 7 Of the Axes and
Cyrtes, Senators Oath and other institutions of Solon 51 8 How he entertained
Anacharsis: his Travells to Egypt, Cyrus, Miletus, Delphi, Corinth, and Creet
50 9 The attribute of wise conferred on him; his moral sentences 53 10 How he
opposed Pisistratus, and reprehended Thespis 55 11 How he traveled to Lydia
and Cili^ia 58 12 His death 6^ 13 His writings 63 CHILON chap. 1. his life 69 2
His moral sentences, precepts, and verses 71 3 His death and writings 72
PITTACUS chap. 1. his life 73 2 His moral sentences, precepts, and verses 81 3
His death, brother, wife, son, writings 75 BIAS chap. 1. His life 79 2 His
moral sentences, precepts, and verses 77 3 His death and writings 82 CLEOBULUS
chap. 1. his life, death, and writings 85 2 His moral sentences, precepts and
verses 86 PERIANDER chap. 1. His Country, Ancestors and Parents 89 2 The time
of his birth, reign, and the change of his disposition 91 3 Of his being placed
in the number of the Seven sages: his sentences and writings 93 4 The story of
Arion 95 5 Of his wife 96 6 Of his Children ibid 7 His death 99 Sociades his
(collection of the) precepts of the seven Sophoi. 101 Ausonius his play of the
seven Sophoi 103 ANACHARSIS Chap. 1. His life and writings 109 His Apophthegmes
111 MYSON 113 EPIMENIDES 114 PHERECYDES 119
The Second Part.
Containing the Jonick Philosophers.
ANAXIMANDER Chap. 1. Of his life 1 2 His opinions 2 ANAXIMENES Chap. 1. His
life 6 2 His opinions ANAXAGORAS Chap. His Country, time, and study of
Philosophy 9 2 His opinions Sect. 1. Of the first principle of things 10 Sect.
2. Of the Heavens 11 Sect. 3. Of meteors 12 Sect. 4. Of the Earth 13 Sect. 5.
Of living Creatures ibid 3 His predictions 14 4 His Scholars and Auditors 15 5
His trial, death, sentences, and writings 16 ARCHELAUS 19
The third Part.
Containing the Socratick Philosphers.
SOCRATES Chap. 1. His Country, Parents, and time of birth 1 2 His first
education 3 3 His masters 4 4 His school and manner of teaching 5 5 Of his
Philosophy 6 Sect. 1. His Metaphysics 8 Sect. 2. His Ethics 9 Sect. 3.
Oeconomicks 17 Sect. 4. His Politics ibid Of his Demon 19 7 His military
actions 24 9 How he carried himself in the Democracy and the Oligarchy 26 9 His
falling out with all the Sophists, and with Anytus 30 10 His trial 33 11 His
imprisonment 38 12 The time and manner of his death 40 13 What happened after
his death 46 14 Of his person and virtues 48 15 His wives and children 51 16
His scholars and Auditors 54 17 His writings 57 Socrates his Epistles 59 The
Clouds of Aristophanes 67 XENOPHON Chap. 1. His Country, Parents, and following
Socrates 95 2 Upon what occasion he followed Cyrus into Asia 96 3 How he
brought off the Grecian Army 97 4 End of the retreat 101 5 His following of
Agesilaus and banishment 103 6 How he lived at Scilluns and at Corinth 104 7
His death, person and virtues 107 8 His writings 108 Xenophons Epistles 110
AESCHINES Chap. 1. His life 115 2 His writings 116 CRITO 118 SIMON ibid GLAUCON
119 SIMMIAS ibid CEBES ibid
FINIS.
Errata.
MAny errors have escaped the press by reason of the Authors absence, as page
1. lin. 15. from whence it is derived to us. p. 2. l. 4. a very great
anachronisme. l. 9. (...) p. 4. his time (...) travel; He went to Creet. p.
28. l. 18. fer his birth. p. 29. l. 9. my wave washed grove. p. 39. l. 3.
^udicature; l. 23. a silent unexpressed consent. p. 41. l. 6. with Minors. p.
63. l. 4. the checkerd cloister. ^. 21. Dion Chrysos^ome; Aristides Lycurgus.
p. 69. l. 5. in Stobeus, Pages. p. 74. l. 42. as the ground. ^. 114. l. 9.
other Do^^^es: others Agiasarchus: Apollonius, Bolus, Laertius and Suidas name
his another Bla^^a, Plutarch Balta; supposed a Nymph. p. 119. l. 34. that suits
not: In the second part; p. 14. l 24. the ninty third Olympiad. p. 19. l. 43.
These five, Thales, etc. In the third part, p. 1. l. 26. lived 70. years. p.
29. l. 42. your heard. p. 59. l. 6. What I writ before. l. 7. greater
overtures. l. 9. ^ver ^ to you. p. 68. l. 30. well, my good. p. 73. l. 26.
fer^ent vows. p. 75. l. 25. I thought that love. p. 78. l. 17. the thing that
I demand. p. 79. l. 17. and Lysinna. l. 34. within your self. p. 8^. l. 30.
dele why. p. 82 l. 16. come and I. p. 83. l. 2. of folly or. p. 85. l. 41.
Illoye sooles. p. 92. l. 34. rules all heaven. p. 105. l. 19. to Diana. In the
margent, p. 17. the words perhaps are inverted, and for (...) (...) read (...)
p. 27. both the Interpreters. p. 110 for (...). Spargapithes. Lycus. Gnurus.
Anacharsis
Saulius, or Caduida. Indathyrsus.

Part. 2. page 9. Laert: perhaps, (...) Part. 3. p. 63. for (...).

THE TABLE.
The fourth Part.
Containing the Cyrenaick, Megarick, Eleack and Eretriack Sects.
ARISTIPPUS. Chap. 1. His Country and Parents 1 II. How he went to Athens and
heard Socrates 2 III. How he went to Aegina ibid IV. His instituion of a Sect 3
Sect. 1. Of Judgment and Iudicatories 4 Sect. 2. Of the End or chief Good 4
Sect. 3. Of Virtue 5 V. How he went to Dionysius's Court ibid VI. His
Aemulators 6 VII. His Apophthegms 8 VIII. His Writings 11 IX. His Death 12 X.
His Disciples and successors 14 HEGESIAS. Chap. I. His L^fe. 15 II. His
Philosophy ibid ANNICERIS. Chap. I. His Life 17 II. His Philosophy ibid
THEODORUS. Chap. I. His Life 19 II. His Philosophy 20 III. His Death, Writings,
etc. 21 BION. Chap. I. His Life 22 II. His Apopthegms 23 III. His Death 24
EUCLID. Chap. I. His Country and Master^ 27 II. His institution of a Sect ibid
III. His Apophthegms, Writings 28 EUBULIDES 29 ALEXINUS 31 EUPHANTUS 32
APOLLONIUS CRONUS ibid DIODORUS. Chap. I. His Life ibid II. His Philosophy 33
ICHTHIAS 34 CLINOMACHUS ibid STILPO. Chap. I. His Life 35 III. His Philosophy
36 III. His Disciples 37 IV. His death, writings 38 PHAEDO 39 PISTHENES 40
Chap. Page MENEDEMUS, Chap. I. His Country, Parent^ ibid II. His School and
Philosophy 41 III. His manner of living ibid IV. His Civil Employment 43 V.
His Virtues and Apophthgmes 44 VI. His Departure from Eretria, and Death 46
The Fifth Part.
Containing the Academick Philosophers.
PLATO, Chap. I. His Country, Parents and time (...) II. His first Education,
Exercises, and studies 6 III. His Masters in Philosophy, and his Travels to
that end 7 IV. What Authors he followed 10 V. His School 13 VI. How he
instituted a Sect 14 Sect. 1. Ethick 15 Sect. 2. Physic ibid Sect. 3.
Dialectick 16 VII His Inventions 17 VIII. His Distinctions 19 IX. His three
voyages to Sicily 25 X. His Authority in Civil Affairs 34 XI. His Virtues and
Moral Sentences 37 XII. His ^ill and Death 40 XIII. His Disciples and Friends
42 XIV. His Aemulators and Detractors 43 XV His Writings 45
The Doctrine of Plato delivered by ALCINOVS.
Chap. I. Of Philosophy, and how a Philosopher must be qualified page 56 II.
That contemplation is to be preferred before Action 57 III. The three parts of
Philosophy ibid
DIALECTICK.
IV. Of the Judiciary part 58 V. The Elements and office of Dialectick 60 VI.
Of Propositions and argumentations 6^ VII. Of THEORETCK Philosophy 6^ VIII. Of
first matter 66 IX. Of Idaeas 67 X. Of God 6^ XI. Of Qualities 70 XII. Of the
Causes, generation, Elements, and order of the World ibid XIII. Of the
convenience of Figures, with the Elements and World 72 XIV. of the Soul of the
World, the spears and Stars 73

