Christianity indeed OR, The well-disciplin'd Christian the Delight of Christ.

SHOWING, How Believers in Christ ought to go in and out each before other in
Gospel Order; Governing, and being Governed, as the children of one Father.

By Fr. Stanley.

Phil. 4.8. Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; If there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.

Chap. 1.27. Only let your Conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of
Christ, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle without
Temple Bar.

To the most worthy my well beloved, and dear Relations in the Lord, of the
Congregational Churches, both Officers and Members; whom I humbly crave to
Patronize this small and mean Treatise, for whose sake I chiefly formed it, and
for whose benefit I now present it; For whom I can do no less but wish all
increase of Grace, and fullness of Peace; and as a further Duty and Obligation,
to pray and intercede for your Perfection.
My Beloved and Christian Friends,
IT is the holy Scriptures commendation, That it is written for every Man's
Instruction and as there is a mystery of Godliness and Piety, so there is a
mystery of Sin and Iniquity; and as there are Mines of Heavenly Treasure, so
there are Minerals of Tin and Clay: Now Many are so wrapped in darkness in the
depth of Impiety, and others busied laboring in the Earth for Clay, that they
have not hitherto discovered the Celestial and hidden Mysteries, nor found out
the Spiritual Mines of Divine Treasures; which precious things cannot be
obtained, unless by Gods holy Spirit a Man be inspired; for by Divine light a
Man must come to discern everlasting Mines and Mysteries, and by the eternal
Spirit, which searches the hidden and most secret things; And as these are not
Matters of Indifferency or Temporary, so they are to be sought with more than
ordinary diligence and industry; and for our better guidance, and more sure
direction, we must make use of the helps of Divine Inspiration. I can do no
less but call upon all Christian Professors to betake themselves to the
Canonical Books of the holy Scriptures; For among all other Benefits and
Benedictions, we are to bless God for those holy Writings; for they are the
best helps, that are helps in the best things; And as a Mapp directs both to
Town and Country, so does holy Writ discover the Borders and Treasures of the
Heavenly and Holy City; indeed they are like a light to our feet, and a
lanthorn to our paths, to guide us aright in all Gods pure and holy ways, and
to the finding out of the most choice and invaluable Riches, far better to the
Saints than Pearls and Jewels; for they are more than a Library for
Instruction, like a Storehouse for Soul-provision, and like a Spiritual
Armorie for Munition, where is to be found all manner of heavenly Food for
Nutriment, and all kind of holy Garments for Ornament; I may say, it is like an
Apotheries shop for Receipts and Remedies, even the most sovereign helps
against all in troubles and diseases; such Minerals will make Potions for
Soul-sick Patients, which being skilfully compounded, and carefully applied,
may prove effectual Means and powerful Remedies to expel and drive away most
dangerous Distempers. From hence Christians may be directed and provided with
Skill and right Judgment, and principled and furnished with Rules for all
Order, Discipline and Government, whether it be within the Dominion of
Congregational, Personal, or Family Jurisdiction. Besides this, a Man may
collect and form an Evidence in order to the claiming an Interest to the
everlasting Inheritance. To be be short, here is all variety of
Soul-concernment and Contentment toward the fitting a Man's self, clearing his
Assurance for his Eternal Preferment; We may say of the Holy Scriptures in
Resolution, as once was said in answer to Circumcision, That they are
profitable every way; even to such as order their Lives according to them, have
both the promise of this life, and that which is to come. Now as the Sun goes
his course, and gives light in his place, and every Star in his order gives
some light in his course: So ought every Christian to be a light in his day,
with respect to order and place; and as a Member of the Mystical Body I would
cast a Mite into the Public Treasury; and as one of the unworthy Successors
of our ancient Fathers, who sent their Epistles to the Believing Churches, I
have now an Occasion as well as a Pattern to present something to Christ's
Congregation: Or any Well-wishers who see any thing worth of acceptance, that
may deserve the place of Counsel or Direction, wherein they may see themselves
concerned in Conscience, and engaged in Duties to conform thereunto, according
to Scripture-obligations: Now because a Paper-direction may be received, where
a Man's Person will be refused; and a Matter printed may be embraced, where a
Sermon cannot be preached; and because the greatest things have the smallest
beginnings, and the Lord has ordained strength out of the mouth of Babes and
Sucklings, are moving Causes of my entering upon this Work; and so I commit
this small Labor to be perused and proved consonant to the prime Rules of
Christianity, and the pure Principles of Charity, and so to receive its
approbation or correction. Now if this little Mite be by any accepted and
embraced, if any by it be instructed and profited, the Author has his End, and
is well recompensed and satisfied.

Brethren, This is the first of my looking toward the Press, I hope I shall
have an Allowance from you more or less, where I have failed in Method or
Circumstance, I hope you will blot it out of your Remembrance.

THE Preface, or Premonition, presented to the Readers serious Consideration or
Meditation.
Christian, Courteous, and Impartial Reader,
AS the worth and loss of Heaven can neither be imagined or valued, so the
dreadful and perpetual torments of Hell can neither be measured nor reported:
To design the obtaining of the one, and to endeavor to escape the other, is
the great task and special care of every Gospell-professor; and in order to
these things, as it is the Christian man's wisdom to ask counsel of God and
his holy writings, so it is also his discretion to have an eye to his present
dispensations. 1 Chronicles. 12.32
We have lived to be eye and ear-witnesses to hear and behold Gods eminent
hand, both in respect of judgments and mercies, wherein his fatherly care has
been famously and affectionately discovered, by the soul-provisions he has
made for us, and his princely respect has been eminently demonstrated, by the
constant protection and special security he has given us; who has also
attended and alarmed us by loud calls, by happy instruments, miraculous
mercies, and admonished us by fearful apparitions, particular accidents, and
dreadful judgments, all doubtless to provoke to duty, and that we might have
a child's part in the present mercy, to escape the present severity, to avoid
the future misery, and to preserve and conduct us to the haven of Eternity. The
Lords princely favors and acts of indempuity and compassion, have been
marvelously commended to us, in his great patience, long-suffering, and
forbearance of us, yet preserving our privileges, enlarging our liberties,
augmenting our graces, and that while others have fallen by calamities. Nay
have not many cause, the whole term of their lives, to remember how eminently
they have been preserved from the sword, pestilence, and as brands pulled out
of the fire. It becomes us as obedient Children, and concerns us as loyal
Subjects, to give ear and humbly submit to the Lords voice, whether by mercies
or threatenings, warning or corrections. Christian Reader, we are admonished by
this dispensation, to hear the rod of correction, Amos 3.6.
and to consider who appoints it. Is there any evil in a City, and the Lord
has not done it; it is more than prophesied, for many have already both known
and felt what it is for a jealous God, to come down out of his place, and to
show his angry face in his hot displeasure: For proof, let the Citizens
especially remember, who live in the Metropolitan City, whom I might call to
witness if need did require, to tell their experience of Gods late Method in
the pestilence and fire; and if we needed any further testimony, to ask the
Seamen concerning the sword devouring in the Sea. It does therefore properly
and more than ordinarily concern every Christian, to be strict in attention,
and speedy in observation, and study to learn what the Lord speaks to us in
this present dispensation, before the Lord pour out the remainder of his wrath
upon the children of men. For among whom is there such a reformation, that
might give us just ground to believe, the righteous God will stay his hand of
destroying; only he is long-suffering, surely to see what use will be made of
the last Visitation. Let us therefore study the point and state the question,
what suitable sacrifice we should prepare for, and present to the God of Heaven,
that might be as fruit in its season from us, and acceptably received and
resented by him; for certainly our trespasses are aggravated, by not improving
our mercies we have enjoyed.

Doubtless the abuse of mercies is the door that lets in all our miseries:
There is therefore nothing more incumbent upon us, than thankfully to improve
our blessings, and remove far from us that which procures Gods displeasures,
and to prize our unexpected and undeserved favors and freedoms, and sensibly
to acknowledge our precious immunities and benefits in the use of them, that we
may never know their price and loss in the want of them, for sins committed
against benefits received, and that in the midst of calamities, which for
season and circumstance are no less than miracles and wonders, which being not
prized thankfully, we may expect severity to take place in the room of mercy.
For truly such have been the eminent appearances of God, the nature, number,
and measure of our privileges, who has by his most admirable and remarkable
acts of power, and his more invisible and secret way of providence, defended
and secured his poor heritage, not only when the multitude have stood for us,
but since they have turned their force against us: So that he that turned aside
as Moses, may see a great sight to be admired, to see as it were the Bush to
burn, and yet not consumed; ingratitude for such experiences without doubt will
return in great severities. Let us therefore consult our knowledge, and
recollect our memories, cast up accounts, render unto the Lord his due, in
returning praises, and cheerfully acknowledge our debts, and speedily pay our
vows, that we may be counted worthy to be the Lords Tenants, that we may still
hold our benefits, and possess our privileges.

For if in these things Christians are found in neglects and security, they may
expect to find the Lord in wrath and fury. For the Lord has made our famous
City, the beauty and glory of our Nation, to be as a Beacon to alarm the
Country, and to give them warning: He might have made us presidents of warning
to others, but it is our privilege to make others examples of warning to us.
Let not us he like some who cry out of certain persons, sad accidents, and
complain of bad times, and yet put the cause of all these things from
themselves, not pondering nor reflecting upon the matter, that it is our
deserts, we deserve no better. There is no sort or sect of men the righteous
God has spared in this sad Visitation, then, which is the people that are to
be exempted in the reformation. Now that our mercy may not be turned into
miseries, and our chastisements into judgments, Reader, let it be the next
question, what the Lord requires in duty to be done; the resolution may be
taken out of that short Breviate of Micah the Prophet, Mic. 6.9.
the sum of which duty consists in justice, mercy, and humility; for this is
to bear the rod, to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God: For
indeed this is the work of our day, and these are the weightier matters of Gods
Law; and as Ecclesiastical Government and true discipline is a prime part of
Religion, so it is a proper work to purge Christ's Congregation; and because our
holy God has a quick and strict eye upon his own people, and his jealousy is
hottest about the Altar, Ark, and Sanctuary, witness the severity of his
justice upon Nadah, and Abihu, Lev. 10.2.
Corah, Uzzah, and Ely. Also remember the state of the Church of the
Corinthians, which may be a Mapp and glass for Christians in these late times,
Numb. 16.32.
wherein we may discover our misdemeanors, the nature of our calamities, and a
method for our remedies, who suffered because the Church was not purged, and
because they presumed to be Communicants at the Lords Table, and did not
discern the Lords Body, but came unworthily, and kept their Communions
irreverently and disorderly, insomuch (for this cause) the Lord in flicts upon
them, weakness, sickness, 1 Cor. 11.30.
and mortality. So that it first and most concerns the Church of God to set
afoot this material duty, even the exercise of justice, mercy, and humility,
and impartially to judge our selves, that we may not be judged of the Lord, nor
condemned with the world, but hasten to put judgment into execution, to
cleanse our Camps, purge our Tabernacles, and Churches, both from our own and
other men's sins, both National, Congregationall, Family, and Personal crimes;
for true Government has this commendation, by its execution it orders, purges,
and establishes Christ's Congregation: Thus runs the duty of a Christian,
fervently to serve the Lord, applying themselves to the time and occasion. And
further Christian Reader, the righteous God has not only admonished us to do
our duty, but has given us a method by his late example, to proceed against
iniquity. 1. He counsels and instructs by many instruments, much tenderness,
and often entreaties. 2. He does admonish and wait to be gracious, and that with
long-suffering, and much patience. 3. He warns, alarms by particular presidents
of his anger, sad accidents, and threatens by fearful sights and apparitions.
4. If yet they reform not, he sends as we see his rod and sword, and cuts off
many persons, and makes great desolations. Thus says Micah the Prophet, The
Lord has showed thee O man what is good, which being done with an eye to the
present condition, might prove a sovereign means to prevent or remove future
tribulation.

But Christian Reader, for my own part and partern, I look at the example of
the Apostle Paul to the Corinthian-Congregation; when he saw their disorder and
impiety, their affliction and calamity, he magnifies his authority, and
discharges his duty, observing the Lords own method; after counsel and warning
he seems to threaten with his rod, and presses the Church to purge themselves,
by punishing evil doers, and reforming their abuses: And lest the Church should
question their power and privilege in the execution of judgment and justice,
he convinces them the Saints shall judge the world and Angels, much more then
those smaller matters, and that they should judge upon life and death, much
more things that pertain to this present life. And that he might put it out of
all disputation, he says, set them to judge in the Church who are of the least
estimation; and further he says, it is a shame for Christians to go out of the
Church to try their Causes; so that I have both an occasion and a pattern to
write thus to Christ's Congregation. That which is most called for is right
discipline, and that thing is the most of all wanting, by which our Borders and
Churches should be cleansed of all defilements and pollutions. These things
considered; 1. May be forceable Arguments to induce Christians to exercise a
more searching doctrine, and to execute a more severe discipline, and that in
every place and Congregation. 2. My observation of the Gospell-Churches: Some
are careless in matters of doctrine; some faulty in cases of conversation; but
more generally remiss in the true order of Governing. 3. Some looking upon
Church Government to be little less than tyranny, and their submission to it
little less than slavery. 4. Others looking upon it, as if it had no name,
being, or place, or as if it stood for no purpose and use. 5. Because such
neglects and general omissions, open a door to let in many disorders and
divisions. And because I do not remember that any Friend has writ much upon
this Subject before, are the motives of my enlarging upon this Work. I confess
this Subject is too high and too worthy to be handled by one so unworthy, and
of so mean ability; yet I would open a door to let some other in to view this
Subject, even to lend their help to supply my defects, and make it more
perfect; even one that has faith in the honesty of my intention, and to cover
my failings by a charitable construction. And so I commit it to the use of
Edification, and also present it for the benefit of Christ's Congregation.

A TREATISE, Setting forth The Gospel's Honor, AND The Churches Ornament.
IN all Nations, Provinces, and in every Society, there are two principal
Causes of Peace and common Prosperity, where Superiors freely exercise right
Government, and Inferiors are truly subject, and obedient: Even when Virtue
and welldoers are sutably praised, and constantly protected; and all Vice and
evill-doers truly restrained, and duly punished: When the People are in real
submission to Authority and the Rulers in humble submission to the Power of
those Laws they ought to rule by: Even when Government is prosecuted without
knowing of Faces, and Justice executed without regard to Causes, or respects of
Persons. And as the most High and Mighty God is the Worlds Creator, so
Government is his Royal Act and Excellent Creature; and for it is Eminency,
it is as ancient as the World for Antiquity. For when the Lord had divided the
Darkness from the Light, He made the Sun to rule by Day, and the Moon by Night:
So when the Most Gracious Lord has called and divided the Children of Light
from the Children of this World, and Translated them out of the Kingdom of
Darkness into the Kingdom of his dear Son, and so they become his Spiritual
Subjects, and He their Immortal King. Thus am I directed into my way, and cast
upon my designed Subject; which is my real Purpose and resolved Intent, even
to treat touching Christ's Princely Authority, and Ecclesiastical Government,
which I call, The Gospel's Honor, and, The Churches Ornament; And for my
better prosecution of this Matter, I will observe this following Method and
Order.

1. To show the Antiquity and Dignity of Ecclesiastical Government. 2. The
Definition, The several Parts and particular Acts of it. 3. The several Reasons
for it, and great Necessity of it. 4. Declaring the Use and great Benefit that
comes by it. 5. Some Rules tendered, directing how to Effect and Accomplish it.
6. The true Order and right Manner of the Execution of it. 7. And Lastly, Some
Directions given, how to uphold and support it.
1. Of the First; Touching the Antiquity and Dignity of Ecclesiastical
Government.
THe Excellency, Antiquity, and Dignity of all Power and Authority conferred
upon the Gospel Church, descends from the Christ of God, who is the Original
Author, and from whom it receives it is prime Honor. We may say in this case as
it is said by the Wise Man, For what can the man do that comes after the King?
Even that which has been already done; who now under the New Testament is the
only Lawgiver, and chief Establisher of Ecclesiastical Government: all Power
in Heaven and Earth is given him, and all Justice and Judgment is committed to
him, and all subordinate Power is derived from him; His Personal Excellencies
and Princely Virtues are not to be compared but admired. I have not words to
express his Royal Majesty, and to set forth his Excellent Glory: He is
exalted far above all Principalities, and far surpasses all Names and
Dignities; for the Godhead dwells in him bodily, and he is more than worthy of
all Duty and Glory; His Love unparalleled, his Wisdom matchless, his Power
boundless, his Justice unquestionable, his Innocence admirable, his Treasures
inestimable, his Fidelity inexpressable, Imanuel, God with us, and who is
Exalted above, and triumphs over all his Enemies. The most High and Mighty
Prince, upon whom he falls he grinds to powder, and crushes his Adversaries by
his Power, and breaks them in pieces like Potters vessels; who acted so
eminently for the Glory of the Creator, and so happily for the happiness of
the Creature, that Divine Justice might be completely satisfied, and Mercy
toward man admirably advanced: He that thought it no Robbery to be equal with
God, has freely humbled himself to death, to drink of a bitter Cup, and to
bear the Creatures burdens; Even he shall have the Government upon his
shoulders.

The Glory that attends him, further appears by those Excellent Appellations
attributed to him: His Name shall be called the wonderful Counselor, the
Mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, by whom Princes Reign,
and Judges decree fustice: who upholds all things by the word of his Power, and
is able to destroy all things in his wrath and anger: He is the great Judge of
quick and dead, both of this New and the Old World; and shall pronounce the
last and eternal Sentence of the everlasting Absolution and eternal
Condemnation, and that Consonant to every man's known and secret action; who
has overcome the World and the power of the Devil; having the victory, keeps
the Keys of Death and Hell; who is all-sufficient to protect and secure such as
worship him, and to restrain and destroy such as fight against him; from Sea to
Sea is his Dominion; the utmost parts of the Earth is his possession. The
absolute Sovereign of all Nations, the Universal Governor over all Persons and
Countries; he is the Alpha, and Omega; all people are commanded and bound to
honor him; every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess him; his Laws are
Spiritual, Righteous and Merciful; all his requirements are perfect and pure;
and all his promises are security, certain and sure. This is the Immortal King
of Saints, who in his times will show who is the blessed and only Potentate
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; I say he is the chiefest among Ten Thousands:
First, In respect of Personal Beauty, for he is altogether lovely. Secondly, In
respect of Purity, without either blemish or spot of Iniquity. Thirdly, In
respect of Charity, casting his love upon a lost World found in Impurity.
Fourthly, In respect of Policy, who knows the most secret Conspiracy, and
catches the wise in their own subtilty. Fifthly, In respect of Propriety, who
makes many Poor Rich out of his full Treasury. Sixthly, In respect of
Sovereignty, who in the most eminent dangers can hide and keep securely.
Seventhly, In respect of Perpetuity, who can bestow Rewards of never ending
Glory. The same is head over all things to his Church, and Lord over all to the
Conscience. We must all appear before him, be judged by him, and every one must
give an account of himself to him: he only can prescribe Rules for the Soul and
Conscience; who gives life and grace, and none but he can take it away; who
keeps the keys of these privities, and opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no
man opens. He only knows the inward affections, the omissions and submissions
of the heart to his Requirements. Heart-Iniquity is out of man's view to take
notice, and out of the reach of mortal man to punish. The Lord only can reward
with everlasting Preferment, and none but he can inflict eternal punishment.
This is the Saints great Prophet, High Priest, and Eternal King, who has of
his own free will and donation bequeathed a subordinate power to his People and
Congregation; committing to them a great trust, and conferring upon them a
great honor; saying, Whatsoever ye bind on Earth shall be bound in Heaven, and
whatsoever ye loose on Earth shall be loosed in Heaven; Whose sins ye remit
shall be remitted, and whose sins ye retain shall be retained: and as a further
Demonstration of dignifying them, he has been pleased to impart some of his
Communicable Titles to them; and that they of his Eldership (in his absence)
should serve under him, and act for him, in the Offices of Prophet, Priest and
King, in a far inferior and subordinate sense and low degree; acting by his
Authority, and yet with an humble respect and great humility in his service;
who ought to be honorably attended with all holy obedience, in all humbleness,
and with all due Reverence and Thankfulness: Representing his Person, Acting
all in his Name, by virtue of the Power and Commission committed to them. Thus
he lends them his Names, sets them in his Room, gives them the keys of the
Kingdom, puts his Image upon them, and has committed the charge of his
People, the care of his Laws, and the exercise of Government to them; and when
the last day Judgment shall be called, the Saints shall be returned as Jurors,
upon Life and Death, to judge the World. And as Prayer and Preaching holds
forth his Prophetical and Priestly Office, so right Government holds forth his
Princely Office and Dignity of his Place.

2. True Church Government defined, and the several Parts and particular Acts
distinguished.
NOw right Church Government under the Power of Christ, according to the Rules
of the New Testament, inflicts no bodily punishment; but is a just exercising
and due executing of all his Righteous and Spiritual Laws in being; consonant
to his Council and direction given, without knowing Interest, delay of Justice,
respect to persons, wresting Causes either for favor or prejudice to any degree
of persons; for we have but one Law for the same Offense, which knows no face,
nor regards no Circumstance.

2. Church Government consists of these several parts, viz. Governors,
Inferiors, Laws, and Execution. Or thus, A People truly called, and rightly
gathered, Officers fitly qualified, and orderly Ordained, Christ's Laws exactly
minded, and carefully preserved, every man's Cause timely heard, and Justice
duly executed. The true constitution and right governing of Christ's
Congregation may be further enlarged and demonstrated thus: 1. Where the People
are really converted. 2. Where they are legally and wholly separated. 3. Who
for Truths sake suffer, if persecuted. 4. Where the Word is truly preached. 5.
Where the People are truly formed, and Duties orderly observed. 6. Where the
Ordinances and Sacraments are purely administered. 7. And true Discipline duly
ordered.

3. The more particular Acts of Ecclesiastical Government, according to the
Primitive pattern, and Christ's appointment, is, That the Minister or Governor
is engaged and stands obliged to watch over each Member in love; duly
instructing them, going before them, praying for them, to be an example to
them, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith and Purity; To
teach the Ignorant, to strengthen the Weak, to comfort the Feeble minded,
succor the Tempted, encourage the Faint-hearted, restore the Fallen, admonish
the Negligent, visit the Sick, defend them from Deceivers, seek up the
Wanderers and Strayers, reprove idle and busy bodies, warn the Unruly, correct
Tale-bearers and Back-biters, sharply reprove Disturbers and Division-makers,
openly rebuke public Offenders, embrace penitent Persons, reject Heretics,
exclude Contemners and obstinate Persons, absolve the truly humbled
Trespassors, hear the Causes of Complainers, examine Witnesses, hear the
defense of the Defendants, respecting the Poor man's Cause as well as the Rich,
admonishing with compassion, re-admonishing and reproving with Long-suffering
and Doctrine, waiting with patience the restoring offenders. Not to keep
company, but refuse to associate with such persons which are Excommunicate,
always observing the Tempers of Persons, the nature of Offenses, and
seasonable times; some save with fear, and some with compassion, some with
softness, and others with sharpness; let all be done in Justice and Charity,
without demurs, delays, or partiality; let all be done freely and in order,
without exercising Lordship, or having respect to Lucre; but to add to their
performance of duty themselves patterns of Order, Humility and Piety. Thus I
have showed in part what that Ancient, Spiritual, Apostolical Government is:
which being rightly ordered, and truly executed, will answer to my first
Intent, and amount to the aforesard Account; even to hold forth Christ's Glory,
the Gospel's Honor, and the Churches Ornament.

3. The Reasons for, and necessity of Church Governors and Governments.
1. BEcause Christ's Congregation is a Spiritual Commonwealth, and holy
Nation; where Spiritual Traffic is free, Ephesians. 2.12. 1 Pet. 2.9.
where Gifts, Graces, and Privileges are common. It consists of Spiritual
Fathers, Children, Young men, and strong men, and has many Cities, much
Treasures, and many Enemies. Now Order and Government is the strength of a
Nation, and as walls to a City, to preserve heavenly Treasure from the
Spiritual Enemy: all which bespeak the need the Church has of Officers and
Governors; for indeed what is a Church, Family, or Nation, without Government,
but disorder and confusion. If the glorious Sun should retire his light, and
stay his course, and the Moon and Stars forbear their shining in the way of
their Circuit and place, which the Lord has appointed Rulers over day and
night, Times and Seasons, Light and Darkness would fall together; then all
would be in a disorderly confused mixture. So in truth take away Governors and
Government from the Church of Christ, and ye take away the Prop and Pillar of
this Spiritual Structure, and lay aside it is Instrumental Defense and Security;
and so lay it open to be taken and carried Captive by the Spiritual Adversary.
In all which appears the Reason and Necessity.

2. The Church of Christ is an Ecclesiastical Court, or Spiritual Chancery,
where all proceedings are to be Consonant to the prime Rules of Justice, Psalm.
65.4. Psalm. 84.2. and 10.
and pure Principles of Equity and Charity: where all offenses and injuries
committed, and all Offices, and Duties neglected are to be examined and
determined, according to that ancient Law, Of doing as man would be done by.
Now how can Matters in a Court be Regulated and Executed without Orders and
Officers: Therefore our Sovereign Lord has Commissionated his Ministers to be
as Judgers and Stewards, empowered by him, to Act for him in his stead and
absence, to hold forth the Majesty of his Presence, by Personating him,
Representing his Authority, and holding forth his Glory, in respect of Dignity,
Mercy, Purity and Severity, precisely to look to his Rights and Privileges,
Dues and Duties, and to inflict due punishments upon all Offenders, and against
all Offenses; To have an eye to his Spiritual Rolls, and Holy Writings; and in
the exercise of Government, to produce Commissions from the Lord, and give some
charge, according as Gods Spirit has given charge in the Word: and so all
things to be done justly without partiality.

3. Christ's Church is a Church Militant, and must manage a Warfare with the
Prince of this World, the Old Serpent, who is the most grand Politician, 1 Timothy
1.18. Ephesians. 6.11, 13.
and cruel Enemy; whose design is chiefly against the Spiritual Generation,
and Holy City; who joins in league with the World, the lusts of the flesh, and
all wicked Instruments, and is furnished with fiery darts, strong snares,
subtle wiles, and secret policy, to invade the borders, and betray the souls
of such as profess Christianity, endeavoring to divide them from the Armor
and Weapons of the Word, and to disarm them of their defense by the spiritual
sword; sometimes in fury storming the Castle of our bodies, to rob us of the
Treasure of our souls: even to steal away our spiritual Evidence, to deprive us
of our everlasting Inheritance. Is not here Reason enough to show the necessity
of being provided with all Spiritual Artillery, and to exercise all Christian
policy to put our selves into best Postures, and holy Orders; furnished with
all Officers, and the exactest Discipline and Formality, with courage and
constancy to maintain the cause of Religion and Piety, with diligence and
sobriety, and with great watchfulness and fidelity.

4. The Church of God is fitly compared to a Vineyard, which is to be separated
from other ground, Mat. 20.1. 1 Cor. 9.7.
which is to be choisely Planted, timely Watered, duly Pruned, and well Fenced.
Now Christ's Ministers are Planters, Waterers and Pruners; and Government is as
the Fence to the Churches. It Is good to see the Vine when it flourishes; but
let it alone, and in a short time it will ruin it self by superfluous
Branches: Even so for want of Spiritual Vinedressers, Decays and Ruins
suddenly befall flourishing Churches. The Lord has therefore appointed
Laborers in his Vineyard, to dress it and secure it. This similitude teaches
us that things will soon be at a loss in Christ's Vineyard, unless there be
some Governor to over-see it, order and preserve it; which shows the Reason
for it, and Necessity of it.

5. The People of God are compared to a Flock of Sheep, and Lambs; and wicked
men to Foxes, and devouring Wolves. Now Christians are too much like sheep,
Acts 20.28, 29. Joh. 21.15.16.
in respect of careless feeding, and without fear of devouring; sheep will feed
in such unwholesome Pastures without guides, that instead of feeding, they
infect themselves, to the loss of their lives; besides where there is no
Shepherd to lead and defend them, then comes the Wolves and Foxes and scatters
and worries them. We may say by sad experience we have known the same among
Christians: all which Conditions and Expressions manifest clearly there is a
Necessity of Pastors and Shepherds in Christ's Congregation, to watch over
them, feed them, govern them, and defend them from all such destructive
Creatures as seek to devour them.

6. Because the Saints are fitly compared to Merchantmen, and the Voyage of
Christianity to a Ship passing through the Sea; Mat. 13.45.
their Traffic and Merchandice is the Treasures of Knowledge, Gifts and
Graces; 1 Timothy 1.19. Isa. 51.20.
Themselves are like Merchant-Venturers; the Wicked like the troubled-Sea; the
Saints hope, an Anchor; the broken in Faith, to Shipwreck. Now how should the
Ships be guided in the Seas without Pilats and Governors, because of the force
of Storms and Tempest, the violence of the Waves, and roughness of the Waters,
and the great difficulty of getting to Harbors. Now a good Minister and
Governor is like a skillful Pilot, that takes the shortest and safest Course;
who foresees Dangers, and so orders his Affairs, that Rocks may be avoided, and
Shipwreck prevented, all Pirates defeated, and the Ship and her Treasure
secured. This also adds and confirms, that the weighty Concerns of a Church,
had need to be well Manned, and to have skillful men appointed, and to have all
things well ordered and governed, having all means of safety that can be had,
and all Instrumental helps that may be afforded.

7. That a Congregation of Christians may be compared to so many Patients, Jer.
8.21, 22.
who are always liable to spiritual diseases, to be taken with several
Distempers, and to fall into diverse Temptations, Heb. 12.12, 13.
and sometimes into desperate Consumptive diseases, either Luke-warmnesse,
Coldness, Remisness, Unfruitfulness, or unthankfulness, and the like; and are
also subject to be infected with the Contagious Plague of sin, and to be
corrupted with the leaven of unsound Doctrine. Now Christ's Ministers are or
ought to be like good Physicians, First to know the Nature of the Patient's
distemper, then sort and prepare the Medicines, and so apply the means, with
respect to the Tempers, Capacities, and Conditions of the Patients; and to give
suitable Receipts for all Diseases, for preventing, curing; to give Potions and
Cordials for Purging, Preserving and Comforting them; and for want of
Skilfulness and Faithfulness in Soul-Physitians, so many poor Christian
Patients fall into dangerous Relapses and spiritual Consumptions; and for want
of good Discipline and careful Governors, so many Societies run into such sad
Divisions and great Disorders. Thus I have offered these several particulars in
Argument, to manifest the Reasons for, and the Necessity of Church Government.

4. The good use and great benefit that comes by Right Government.
1. IT is or ought to be the First and Prime Design of every Christian
Professor to contrive and consult the advancement of Christ's Honor, which way,
Mat. 6.33. Col. 1.18.
and by what means they may best and most exalt the Dignity, and hold forth the
Excellency of his Name, and by what Instrumental helps they may Principally
Represent his Princely Fame, in other Duties we perform to him; but in Matters
of Government and Discipline, we more properly Act for him, Represent him, and
help him, and bring home the most Praise and Glory to him. For we can in
nothing more promote his Honor, then in the true execution of Government among
such as profess the Gospel. It returns the Lord increase of Glory, and
renders him his own with Usury. It encourages and praises Well-doers to be more
Zealous and Fruitful in their Actual Obedience, and it punishes Evill-doers:
and so the Lord reaps the Honor of his Justice; and by this way and means the
Lord will receive his Honor from all Persons, Actually by the godly Professor,
and Passively by evil Transgressor. And this is to rule for God, being always
consonant to the Rule and Circumstance of his Word.

2. As the true Exercise of Ecclesiastical Government is Christ's advancement;
so it is The Gospels Honor, Tit. 2.10. 1 Pet. 3.45.
and the Churches Ornament. It requires all Persons to their duties in their
several and respective places, and admonishes all Christians to a more Orderly,
Reverent, and Serious Deportment in Gods holy Worship and Service. It sets all
things in their right places, and puts all things to their proper uses, to be
done Decently and in Order, according to the true manner and direct Methods of
Matter, Form and Circumstance required in Gods Service: and things thus
performed in Christ's Congregation, promotes the Truths Credit, and the
Believers Reputation; and having their own true form, they carry a Beauty with
them: and like the order in Solomon's House, it will invite strangers to see
it, and affect such as behold it. One Argument is, why many inquiring souls
stand off at such distances, Because they see no affecting beauty in Christ's
Churches.

3. As Right Government casts out Disorders and disorderly walkers, so it
rejoices godly Professors, Col. 2.5.
and preserves Believers Rights and Privileges, and ministers just ground of
joy, more especially to such as labor in the Ministry, to behold the peoples
order and fidelity; and as a grave and holy life credits the Christian
Profession, so true Discipline honors the Gospel-Doctrine; and the constant
Exercise thereof is of such eminent tendency, that good people rejoice when
Just men are in Authority: Pro. 29.2.
For a Rulers Insufficiency proves the Nocents Encouragement, and the Innocents
calamity. For St. Paul reckons himself Renowned in the Churches steadfast and
orderly walkings; he rejoices to behold it in the Collossians, and takes
occasion to commend it, and to praise them for it; and counts it his Joy,
Honor, and Crown.

4. Order and Right Governing stands in direct opposition to all disorder and
confusion. 1 Cor. 14.33.
It Is like Light opposed to Darkness, Strength opposed to Weakness, Beauty
opposed to Deformity. It reforms Disorders, and orders Duties; It exalts any
People, and establishes Churches, and stands as it were always furnished and
ready armed against the body of Sin and the deeds of the Old man: even the
destructive enemy that would disturb the Saints peace, and inslave their souls
in misery: It Is natural to Justice to oppose and suppress Impiety: 1 Cor. 5.7.
and it is it is proper work to praise Godliness and disperse iniquity; It
cleanses Tabernacles, it purges Congregations, preserves Privileges, removes
Reproaches, it justifies the Innocent, it condemns the Guilty, it corrects the
Offender, and punishes the Oppressor, relieves the Distressed, and sets free
the oppressed, and is a sovereign Remedy to acquit our selves of other men's
Iniquity.

5. As the exercise of Government is destructive to iniquity and impurity; 1
Cor. 5.5.
so it is a Protection to Godliness and Piety; It gives opportunity and
liberty for the free exercise of Gifts and Graces, and the improvement of
spiritual Abilities, 1 Cor. 14.31.
and maintains a constant Intercourse of Heavenly Traffic and Commerce within
the Borders of their Dominion; 1 Pet. 4.10.
to the intent things may thrive and flourish within the Holy Nation.
Government is a defense to tender Plants in Christ's Congregation: It gives
countenance and a guarding presence to the Seeds and Roots of Grace and Piety;
and gives protection to the increase of godliness, and defense and security to
the growth of Christianity. Therefore the Lord has honored his Ministers with
some of his own Appellations, that they should imitate and honor him in their
several Offices and respective places; that they should endeavor under him to
preserve his People in all their freedoms and liberties, and to demean
themselves in his absence with all tenderness and kindness to the least of his
Servants: Not quenching the smoking Flax, nor breaking the bruised Reed, but
cherishing and nourishing the Babes in Christ; giving a Guard to every weak
faith, being always free to direct them, and a ready assistance in all matters
of Faith and Conscience.

6. I say it is weighty upon the Churches Concernment to maintain good Order,
true Discipline, 2 Cor. 2.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
and Right Government. It is the most effectual means and sovereign help (under
God) against the grand Enemy of our Souls, who has fiery darts and makes
desperate Attempts, and sets his Ambushments, and with policy and cruelty
designs against the Saints to betray them by secret insinuation, or to fright
them out of their Faith and Profession, and to weaken their hands for Christian
Resolution; to break their bands of Union and Charity, and to cut the cords of
Love and Unity; Prove. 6.19.
endeavoring to disorder them by sowing Discord among them. First, to divide
them, to make way for an advantage to destroy them. Now Order is the Life and
Strength of any Cause, and the most advantage to any People: for when a People
are freely united and well Disciplined, it is the greatest offense and dread to
the enemy; So it is when Christians have faith in Gods promises, and keep order
in his Services, it tends to their safety and security. When the Soldiers are
disordered the Victory is hazarded; and he is no good Christian-souldier that
observes not Place and Order.

7. Right Government, which consist Principally in the execution of Justice and
Judgment, Isa. 32.1. Isa. 6.7.
It may have the same commendation as was once given to Circumcision; for it is
useful and beneficial every way; and when Persons shall see it in it is Beauty,
and how it brings in profit, and themselves being partakers of the benefit of
it. It will engage and oblige the hearts of those that live under it, peaceably
and cheerfully to conform themselves to it, and not only to approve of it, but
in their several Duties and Respective Places with Freedom and Affection help
to preserve and support it. For God himself is the Author of it, the Holy Ghost
appoints overseer of it, God dwells with it, and will certainly bless it: for
in truth Order duly kept, and Government truly ordered, is of that Fame and
Glory it would invite strangers out of the Country; As once the Order and Fame
of Solomon's House, invited the Queen of Sheba. If our Spiritual Solomon's
House were but wisely governed, and the things therein rightly ordered, and all
Matters and Manors prudently managed, and all Discipline truly executed,
Strangers would be more invited, dissenting friends and differing persuasions
would be more engaged, and Christ's Church more Renowned. Thus I have showed in
part the benefit that comes to Christ's Church by means of Ecclesiastical
Government.

5. Some Rules tendered how to Effect and Accomplish a right Government.
THe First thing that I shall propound unto the Church, in order to this great
end is, Their choice of Officers; and herein to bespeak and exhort them that
they neglect not their duty and care, and so the blame to lie at their door.
None of the Saints and Brotherhood ought to consult for private Interest, but
for a general and public good; that whosoever among them the Lord has
suitably gifted, and fitly qualified for the conversion of sinners, the
constituting of Churches, and the well being, and better governing of Christ's
Congregations; they stand bound in duty legally to elect and orderly to appoint
such to the work of the Ministry; Acts 13.3.
even to Separate and Ordain them according to their several Parts and
Abilities to more general and particular places, even to follow the Lord, to
put them into such places as he has gifted for that purpose: Even such who
come orderly into, and are tutered and brought up in the School of Christ's
Church, and learning there, until they come to good degrees of Knowledge;
rightly qualified and considerably gifted by Gods Spirit: amongst such some are
to be freely Elected by the Church, and Ordained by Fasting and Prayer, and
laying on of hands by the Eldership; such so Ordained and abiding Faithful we
own as Ministers of the Gospel; and let them first be proved whether they have
such qualifications as the holy Scriptures gives directions. This being a
principal case toward the obtaining right Government; Take therefore advice
of both old and New Testament; ye may please so far to view Moses Counsel in
the Old Testament, as to see what kind of Persons was then chosen to be Rulers;
Provide, says he, Wise men, Understanding men, and known men in your Tribes;
Men of courage, men fearing God, men of truth and hating Coveteousness: I offer
this of Moses, not so much for Rule, as for the good agreement it bears with
the Rules of the New Testament. But give heed to St. Paul's Counsel in the
general qualifications mentioned and Recorded for our directions; 1 Timothy 3.8.
Tit. 1. etc.
which the Apostle sets down both Negative and affirmative. First, What they
must not be; Not soon angry, not given to Wine, no striker; not self-willed,
not a brawler, not covetous, not a Novice. Secondly, What they must be;
Blameless, one that rules well his own house, apt to teach, a lover of good
men, sober, just, temperate, holding fast the faithful Word as he has been
taught; that they may improve and convince Gainsayers; and if it can be
obtained, let them have the Principles of Order, and spirit of Government, in
and about this great Office and Duty. We are to look at a man's personal
sufficiency, the Gravity of his Yoke Fellow, the Fidelity of his Posterity, and
also the good report of his Neighborhood and Country. For if we would have
Church Government rightly ordered, there must be suitable Governors and fit
Instruments to accomplish it.

These Rules that follow, touching this point, are chiefly imposed upon the
Eldership;

By Election, Direction, Protection, Supplication and Exclusion.
2. By Election; As there is a great charge lies upon Churches, concerning the
Election of Officers, Mat. 3.8.
So there is a special care lies upon Officers, touching the receiving and
admitting Members into the Congregation. To see some Fruits of Repentance,
Regeneration renewed in the spirit of the mind, born again; for ye know
Churches under the Gospel are not gathered by Generation, but by Regeneration,
Joh. 3.3.5, 6.
Except a man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. For
if they have not the birth of New Creatures, how can we expect the life of well
ordered Christians, 2 Cor. 5.17.
that they should naturally learn the true Doctrine, and really observe, and
duly submit to the true methods of Discipline, which so much concerns and
adorneth every Gospel Congregation. Every one had need understand Gods
Ordinances and their own Duties, and to be able to demonstrate something of the
authority, Matter, Manner, and End of every Principle and practice; For
Ignorance is the Mother of much mischief; for some by their behaviors discover
and also their Actions determine, that they never past the new birth. Neither
is their descent from Heaven; for they act and walk as not becoming the Royal
Family, and such as pertain to the Heavenly Posterity; For many act so
unnatural toward the Lord, as if he was never their Father, and so untaught in
his word and Oracles, that they are no whit like his Disciples and Scholars;
neither respecting Principles nor Orders, and some are already departed; being
never well grounded, nor really and truly converted.

3. By Direction; By a due and seasonable instructing and directing such as are
admitted into Membership, 2 Timothy 4.2.
to acquaint and educate them in the knowledge of God, and the Affairs of the
Gospel; and to learn them to know the Principles of Order and true Forms of
Government, which are to be exercised under the New Testament: to keep close to
the direct Rules of Discipline, and right orders of Governing, and to beget in
them a Respect and Honor to the Truth, with all it is Oracles, and it is due
Circumstances, and to second and seal this with a holy and well ordered, and a
right governed Conversation; admonishing them to observe the true Methods of
proceedings toward all differing, dissenting, weak, fallen, and offending
Brerhren: Mat. 18.15.
To admonish the offending Brother timely before sin has hardened him.
Secondly, If it be a private Offense, to tell him of it privately between thee
and him alone, which is the ready way to gain him. Thirdly, To do it in
Charity, wherein a man most resembles the God of Piety. Fourthly, the end must
be to restore the sinner, but to destroy his iniquity; always remembering them
to perform duty that relates to each other, with Compassion and Piety, as
children of the Father of Mercy; Even consonant to their Heavenly Parentage and
Spiritual Pedigree, of the Select number, chosen Generation, Royal Priest
hood, peculiar People and holy Nation; like men of the new Creation, and such
as are redeemed from a vain Conversation; being as dead men to sin, and buried
with Christ in Baptism, and risen with him to Newness of life, and so to
exercise a spiritual Dominion, and give no place or subjection unto Satan; but
to endeavor to reign over the body of flesh and sin. But alas how often is this
general and known Rule abused and broken, wanting Charity to the person
offending, or Fidelity to the Rule directing. The truth is, much of the
Churches grief and care, breaks in among them at this door; but let Christ's
Ministers lead and guide the Members into Rules of Piety, and Orders of
Decency, and to second their Exhortation by going before them as a pattern, and
by good Counsel and by good Example to establish the Believers in Doctrine
Discipline, and other Gospel orders.

4. By impartial Admonition and due Correction; for as the Scripture says in
another case, in a Church-sence, we may say in this, that Christ's Rulers bear
not the spiritual sword in vain, but to turn the edge of the Word against all
vice and iniquity, 2 Timothy 3.16. 1 These. 5.12.
and to be a defense to all acts of Virtue and Piety; waiting all approaches,
and watching all designs of Satan, and all motions and appearances of the
flesh. For many times the greatest disturbances are brought about by the least
beginnings: for it is Satan's policy to carry on his designs by entering them in
by the smallest appearances. Gal. 5.20.
Beware therefore of the works of the Flesh, as Hatred, Variance, Emulation,
Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, and the like, which war against the Soul;
which actings cause breaches and disorders: unto which, Officers and Overseers
are to have a foresight of preventing, and a ready hand of suppressing such
things as disturb the peace of the Churches, and break orders; without regard
to Causes, or respect to Person, by a diligent and severe hand against all
Talebearers, Evil surmisers, Back-biters, Rule-breakers, Devision-makers,
secret Censurers, and private Judges of others, who in their Court of Confusion
condemn their Brethren, and cast them upon their Reputation. These and such
like are all Disquieters of Churches, Wounders and Underminers of Governments;
and for the better discovering and removing all-such disturbances, let all
diligence be exercised, all Circumstances of Reprehension and Correction, be
truly observed, and all such offenders timely restrained and duly punished.

5. By Countenancing and Protecting good orders, and giving encouragement to
orderly Walkers. Psalm. 15.4.
To look with a sour face upon evil doers, and a severe countenance against
Evil workers; but to honor the Pious and to praise the truly Religious, to
cherish them in their Duties, and encourage them in Gods services. Now
Gospel Order is not only Beautiful and Honorable, but acceptable to God and
profitable to men: for the Lord himself is Author of it, and his Peoples
experience prove the great benefit by it. Let the Lords Overseers approve
themselves prevalent instruments to effect and keep 1 Cor. 14.
good Government, and by good Exhortation and Provocation study to maintain
good order. For the Lord strictly charges and precisely enjoins Order in all
his Services and Sacrifices, Typical and Ceremonial, more especially then in
the Worship and Service of the Gospel; where Duties are more rarely blessed,
and Defaults more sorely punished. Let Rulers know their places and do their
Offices, even cherish good people, promote good Causes, to assist good
Consciences, and to endeavor to preserve Christiansin their Liberties and
Privileges, suitng and sorting their Counsels and Instructions, observing and
taking advantages of seasons, and the Peoples conditions; improving all
abilities, and the best faculties to defend them from deceivers; giving timely
admonition to Church-disturbers. Succor the Tempted, encourage the
Faint-hearted, to take off yoaks and remove oppressions that may lie upon men's
consciences, watching diligently over them, carefully to govern them, gently
leading such as be with young, to keep them from decaying, to support them from
fainting, to restore them from erring, and like good Shepherds to feed and rule
them, to defend and secure them from all those Poxes and Wolves that seek to
scatter them, and endeavor to destroy them.

6. By sincere and fervent Supplication and Prayer, because all things are
sanctified by the Word and Prayer; a duty never out of date, 1 Timothy 4.5. Phi.
4.6. 1 These. 5.17.
but in season, and more especially upon such weighty Concernments and eminent
occasions: as the elections of Officers, the admission of Members, and in the
great duties of Direction, Correction, Protection and Exclusion. To acknowledge
Gods grace to be the efficient Cause in all such Matters, and to beg his
Blessing upon all endeavors, without which all labor is nothing: pray to be
directed aright to use the means, and then pray that the means may be
sanctified, may be successeful and effectual, praying and waiting upon the
great Counselor, the prime Director, and God of Order, that he would be
graciously pleased to give Governing Principles to right gathered Churches, and
he would please so far to own and honor them, as to bestow upon them the
precious gifts of Discerning, Discretion, and Moderation toward all Persons,
upon all occasions, and in all conditions; and more particular for the Spirit
of Judgment and the spirit of Government: to order, establish and govern the
Lords own People and Congregation, and to be found in the Faithful discharge
of their great duty of exercising Justice, Mercy and Humility, and to adorn the
Churches with Just and Righteous Proceedings. That the Lords Name may be
honored, the Church rightly governed, the Truth renowned; that the fame of
true Order may be more Proclaimed and further spread, that Strangers to it may
be invited, Well-wishers may be engaged, Enemies may be prevented, and the
Lords Faithful Servants may ever be encouraged and resolved.

7. By Exclusion, according to the Rule of Purging, putting out, cutting off,
or Excommunication. Not always bearing and for bearing such as are common and
impenitent Trespassers, 1 Cor. 5.13. Gal. 5.12.
after prayers made, and other Christian means Religiously and indifferently
used and improved, and a considerable time and space has been waited and
delayed, and yet all Counsels and Reproofs are refused and rejected; Then to
proceed gradually according to the Rule in that case provided, and to see that
Discipline be rightly performed, and Justice duly executed, without knowing of
Faces or regarding Causes. For sin is infectious, and a disease very dangerous
and contagious. If humane Wisdom teaches us to separate our selves from
infected bodies, places, and garments for the safety of the outward man; much
more does spiritual discretion admonish us, and bespeak us to separate our
selves from spiritual corruptions, and to exclude from us corrupted
professors, defiled, polluted, impenitent Persons, which so nearly relate to
Soul matters, and so muchrespects Immortal things For a little Leaven, Jos.
7.11.
leaveneth the whole lump, The whole Camp of Israel stand charged for one
Achan, and the Church of Corinth for one Incestuous person. Cor. 5.2.
Though Justice be shoulder-work and a hard duty, yet it is better cut off a
member then destroy the body. Let all such proceeding be attended with the face
of Authority, the garments of Humility, and with arms of Mercy, with Patience
and Compassion; designing to save the sinner, by endeavoring to destroy his
transgression. So let the Church purge themselves of their own and other men's
sins, by calling offenders into question, and putting Christ's laws into
execution. Thus I have tendered my judgment in order to obtain Right Government.

Concerning Christians as they stand related to civil Magistrates,
NOw no man can be a good Governor, unless he first knows the place and
service of an Inferior; It Is therefore needful for us to know our standing
and relation, and what is required of us in respect of subjection, as we are men
and members of a Nation, and to be truly informed how we become concerned in
duty, as we are placed in a politic body. We are taught by the holy Scriptures
to know that there is no power but of God, Romans 13.12.3, 4, 5.
and whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God. From thence we
are instructed what the Magistrates Office is, even to punish evil doers, and
to be a praise to them that do well: So also by the authority of the same
Scriptures and holy writings, we are commanded and enjoined to be subject to
civil powers in civil things, and that under the penalty of condign
punishments: not only for wrath, but for conscience sake; and we ought to obey
not for fear of vengeance, but because of a good conscience. It Is also matter
of conscience to obey good and profitable laws wherein our submission may tend
to the civil peace of our Country and Nation, Mat. 22.21.
and to give to Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God that which is Gods.
It Is therefore our burden to hear our selves misreported, as if we were no
well wishers to National Government, when as we look upon good Governors and
good Government to be as great an external Privilege and Blessing as any other
in the World; and whereas the Lord knows we look upon our selves directed by
the holy Scriptures, and obliged by Gospel Rules to be in subjection to the
higher Powers, 1 Pet. 2.13.
to obey Magistrates, and to submit our selves to every Ordinance of man for
the Lords sake (in the sense aforesaid) and not to revile them, or speak evil
of them, or to imagine evil in our hearts against them; For there is a tongue
and heart-murderer, as well as an eye and heart-Adulterer; but to study to know
our Places and Duties, as we are Inferiors, 1 Timothy 2.11.
and therein to discharge our consciences, as we are Christians, even to yield
submission to them, and to pray for them, that we may lead a peaceable and
godly life under them; believing there ought to be Civil Magistrates in all
Nations, and always rendering unto our Governors their due in tribute, and
always reserving and rendering unto God his due in worship.

Concerning some Rules that respect and relate to Christian Families.
THe Rules which I have already tendered and freely offered to Christ's
Congregation, may be useful in every Family, and to every Christian; which
method is by Election, Direction, Correction, Protection, Supplication,
Exclusion and Execution; And because I will take in that which may be a good
Second, and a special Assistant to this prime part of Religion, even
Ecclesiastical Government, I will humbly tender the aforesaid Rules to
believing Families, but especially to the Heads and Overseers, to look upon
their several Obligations, Genesis 3.16.
that respect their several duties and respective places. For when the Lord had
created Man and Woman, he was pleased to appoint Order and Government betwixt
them. I would therefore urge the Argument of the Prophet Isaiah, Set thy House
in order because of Mortality, Isa. 38.1.
that ye may be prepared when ye are called to dye.

1. By Election, In making choice and placing your affections upon Virtuous and
Religious Yoak-fellows in the Conjugall bond of Wives and Husbands; That may be
suitable and meet helps, not only in respect of the concerns of the World, but
more especially in the matters of God; for such are the best helps that are
helps in the best things. Number. 36.6. 1 Cor. 7.39.
Let them therefore that are or may be in that capacity, first look for Piety,
Gravity, and Fidelity; for such bring good portions and great blessings with
them into a Family. I could be severe against some Professors, who offend in
this case, and give such great offenses to others, who for Worldly Interest,
run into such unequal and unmeet Marriages; and others, that rather covet to be
equal or above in respect of Temporal portion, than to be united in one in
matters of Faith and Religion. Let Masters make choice of such Servants as
truly fear the Lord; Ps. 101.6.
for how should a man expect Gods Service should be promoted, and good order
observed, when a man shall take such persons into his Family, as are strangers
to the Rule of Truth and Verity.

2. By Direction, By instructing and directing them in the knowledge of the way
and fear of the Lord, teaching his Laws and Oracles unto them, Deuteronomy. 6.7.
begetting in them an affection and Reverence to his Will and Word, acquainting
them with the blessings promised upon the believing and obeying Gods
Requirements, and the dangers threatened against neglectors, and the dreadful
Judgments that fall upon despisers of Gods worship and orders. Let the Heads
and Governors of this little Church or Kingdom (as I may call it) exercise
the Office in an humble sense of Prophet, Priest, and King; to teach them, to
offer Sacrifice for them, and to govern them. Let believing Parents give their
children Gospel-breeding, and spiritual Education, that they may know how to
behave themselves in the Household of God as becomes the Family of so Princely a
Posterity, and to learn the carriage of holy manners, and precisely to prove
all things like the Baereans, who by so doing, may be reputed truly Noble and
well bred Christians. I would respectively impose upon superiors to take the
place of Tutors, and their houses to be as Nurceries of Learning, there to be
instructed and prepared even to fit them to Degrees of Piety and Religion:
Prove. 22.6.
and for this take the Counsel of Solomon, who says, Train up a Child in the
way he should go, and he will not depart from it when he is old: Mark, he says
he will not depart. Mind what Saint Paul says, Ephesians. 6.4.
Bring up your Children in the Lords nurture and admonition, and so to
endeavor by good Counsel and good example to incline their hearts and conform
their minds to sound Doctrine, Gospel Order, and a holy conversation, and so
come to be made capable of spiritual Privileges and Church Communion.

3. By Correction, By discountenancing, Correcting, Preventing and Restraining
of sin, to prevent and reform them from vanity and vice by the reproof of a
severe countenance and angry face, Prove. 23.13. Prove. 13.14.
and to stop their growing into folly, and the bringing forth evil action, by
rectifying all disorders in their conversation, and this to be done timely and
in due season, agreeable to the best Rules of discretion, have a respect to
their disposition; some to gain by fear, and some by favor. Let the
Circumstances observed in Correction give evidence for a man's self, his end is
good in Correcting. I have heard at the common place of Execution, some
complaining of Fathers, and others of Masters, because they did not restrain
them from vain Courses; saying, if they had, it might have been a prevention of
their ever coming to that shameful Execution: And indeed God has set Fathers
and Masters, as Rulers, and to have dominion within the borders of their
Family, Jurisdiction, and doubtless of their places they must give an account;
Therefore they have great reason to discharge their trust to their Inferiors,
and to make use of their power and advantages, which are many, they having so
much opportunity to discern into their actions, and to discover their lives,
and to know their designs; and having so near a relation to them, and so great
a command over them might be much instrumental (by Gods blessing) to do much
for God, and for their souls benefit and eternal good.

4. By Protection, By Countenancing and Cherishing the budding of grace, and
nourishing every appearance of God in the soul, 1 Cor. 11.2.
giving timely encouragement and a seasonable assistance to the matters of
Faith and Conscience, and to be a guarding presence to the small beginning; not
to quench the smoking Flax and bruised Reed, to mind them of spiritual
Traffic, and to bring them up in the knowledge of spiritual Husbandry;
protecting in them the heads of Grace and plants of Piety; using much
diligence, waiting with tenderness their growth and increase; 1 These. 2.7.
For as the Schoolmen say, The greatest Matters have the smallest Beginnings.
The Seeds and Roots of Grace and Piety are like the tender Herbs and Plants
that have need to be tenderly preserved, to be often watered and weeded, and
well fenced and secured. For a man is a Prince in his own Family, to protect
Order and Piety, and to banish Sin and Iniquity; and having cast out the things
that offend, and well prepared the ground, the next thing is to put things into
some Method, Form and Order. And here the Christian professor may learn a
Lesson of the Gardener, who in his Plantation and Garden, having gotten the
choicest Herbs and Plants, he devises his form, and sets them according to
rule and order, both for profit, and also to delight the owner: So Christians,
when they have prepared Matter, they are to place them in the Lords Vineyard,
and that in a Gospel manner, that they may be fruitful for their Lord and
Master; and also to invite and delight the beholder to take them with Orders
beauty: for it was the Order of Solomon's Family that astonished the Queen of
Sheba.

5. By Supplication, For Family and Children; always remembering the Lord is
the Donor and Bestower of all Gifts and Graces, and that we are but poor
begging Instruments at the Throne of Grace, and Door of Mercy for our selves
and Families, praying humbly and heartily that the Lord would please to
Sanctify all means, and Crown all endeavors with his own benedictions; Joh.
15.5.
without which all other labors are nothing; for without him we can do
nothing: fervently petitioning the Lord that our Families might be his Family,
that he would direct and bless us in our Election, Direction, Correction,
Protection and Exclusion; And that our Children might be his Children, and our
Servants his Servants; that the Lord would please to season their hearts with
his Grace, enlighten their understanding by his Spirit, to engage their
affections by his Love, and so to prepare them and conform them to his Will and
Word; That with Joshua, We and our Houses may serve the Lord; Jos. 24.15.
That as they grow in years and strength, so they may increase in Knowledge and
Goodness, that they might be Plants in his House, and placed in his Family,
and so be fruitful Instruments of his Glory, and humbly to offer Sacrifice for
them, and to intercede the Lord, that they might orderly obey his Doctrine, and
cheerfully submit to his Discipline, and to entreat his favor to guide them by
his Counsel here, and receive them into his Kingdom hereafter.

6. By Exclusion; Yet here I do not intend in the least to meddle with Wife and
Children, no more than to purge sin out of them; Deuteronomy. 19.16.
but in this case I mind only Servants, Busiebodies and Tale-bearers, which are
oft-times Instruments of Disorder and Disturbance in many Families; And as the
Wise man says, Prove. 26.20.
Where there is no wood the Fire goes out; So where there is no Talebearer,
Strife cease. And for Servants that are vain and disorderly, may in time
infect and corrupt the rest in a Family. Now it is better to remove and exclude
such persons, than that they should defile and pollute many others, that ye may
keep Discipline within your Family Dominion: there is for this a good example
of David, Psalm. 101.6, 7.
who says, Men of Faithfulness and Integrity shall dwell with me, and serve
me. But he would not keep a Liar about him, nor he that works deceit should
neither dwell in his House, nor tarry in his sight. Thus every man within his
own Jurisdiction may exercise Family Discipline, both to teach, intercede and
govern, and by diligence and prudence may be an Instrument to bring his House
in order in Gods Service.

7. Let all these things be put into due execution, without which the knowledge
of them comes to nothing. Every man to exercise himself in his place
faithfully, to instruct and govern his Family consonant to to the Rules of
Piety, and Principles of Charity, and to act by the Law of Equity to all under
them, as men in some sense obliged to give an account of them.

These things considered, and calling to remembrance my place of trust in Gods
House, and our special Obligations each to other as we are Chistians, I can do
no less than advise, warn, exhort and entreat you, according to the relation,
I stand with you, and inteterest I have in you, to put your duties into
practices, and remove out of your Families all offenses and disorders; Deuteronomy.
13.8. 1 Timothy 5.21.
for ye know we ought not to bear with sin, to regard Causes, or respect
Persons, although they be our near relations: but to do Justice with Equity,
and that without delay or partiality; for we may not harbor evils, nor suffer
disorder in our Families, and that we have no just complaining in our streets.
It Is true we cannot expect members of Families should be free from all
Infirmities; where then would be the use of bearings and forbearings? Beware of
Upbraiding and Retorting Languages which oft-times creates discontents, and
raises disturbances in Families. There ought rather to be found among
Christians a condescension to each others dispositions, concerning their
deformities, bearing one another weaknesses, and if it may be to determine
Family-failings, within the compass of Family Jurisdictions, and to endeavor
to bear one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ. To sympathize
with each other in temptations and afflictions; that ye may not make your lives
a burden to your selves, and a trouble and grief to others: for consider that
miscarriages among Christians are attended with high aggravations. First, a
dishonor to God, a discredit to the truth, a disparagement to Professors, a
grief to Relations, a sorrow to well-wishers, a bondage to themselves, and a
rejoicing to their Enemies. My advise is therefore for the time past, wherein
any of you have offended each other, to repent it, and wherein others have
trespassed against you, upon their submission pardon it; and let all former
things be laid dead, and buried in the grave of Oblivion, no more to be
remembered, or have any more Resurrection, to disquiet your peace here, or to
evidence against you hereafter. And for the time to come, my Counsel and
Exhortation is, to set the fear of the Lord before you, and observe one
another tempers; consider each others frailties, and when ye have any thing to
say, remember to take suitable seasons; endeavoring to remove Jelousies, avoid
all occasions that may tend to provocations, and if possible let all be
swallowed up in dear affections, which best becomes such near Relations, and
most adorns professing Christians.

But yet a few words more particularly, that respects every House and Family to
divide their Duties to each other, and that severally.
1. HUsbands ought to love their Wives, as Christ loved the Church, and as they
love themselves, and to rule over them with much Tenderness, Ephesians. 5.25.28.
and to govern with discretion, and commend their submission by the power of a
free and constant affection: to imitate the Lords Pattern, who loved his Spouse
better than himself; covering deformities, bearing Infirmities, taking part
with them in their Distresses, attending them with necessary Accommodations and
suitable conveniences at all times and in all conditions; remembering both are
but one flesh; and that a man's wife is half himself; considering she is a
Building of the greater Admiration; and being brought to man, holds forth the
Order, Honor and Perfection of Gods Creation. Likewise Husbands are to dwell
with their Wives according to Knowledge, having respect to their weaknesses,
and to honor them as the weaker Vessels; For the Woman is the glory of the
Man, and yet under his Authority, to teach her subjection, and to show him he
is her protection.

2. Wives ought to submit themselves to their own Husbands as unto the Lord,
Ephesians. 5.25.
Remembering it is Gods own Institution, That man should Rule and have the
Dominion, and Woman should obey and be in Subjection: and God has Ordained and
Honored men to be Heads and Superiors; Genesis 3.16.
and as the Church is subject to Christ, so ought Wives to be to their own
Husbands; and that Gods own Order and Ordinance might be owned and adorned. Let
them imitate Sarah, who obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord. Thus in old time
the holy Women put on the Ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which well
becomes every Christian, and is much set by in the sight of God and man. Let
Wives then give that Reverence and freely yield that due submission to their
Husbands which God has required of them; always endeavoring to approve
themselves suitable assistants, and meet helps, according as they were first
created and appointed to be a comfortable Nurse and Yoak-fellow, to rejoice
them, and to be a constant succor and comfort to them.

3. Parents ought to educate and bring up their Children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, and by good Counsel and sound instruction to discharge
their duties to them in matters of Faith and Religion; Ephesians. 9.4.
and as God has blessed you with Children, so persuade your Children to be
Instruments of Glory to him, and to make known to them their natural affection,
according to the neernesse of their Relation; avoiding temptations and
occasions of their provocations. Let every man exercise his fatherly care with
Providence and Moderation, to make a comfortable provision for them;
endeavoring to match and prefer them to such as truly fear the Lord, and act
and walk consonant to the Rule and Circumstance of his Word.

4. Children ought to obey their Parents in the Lord, and to honor Father and
Mother; Ephesians. 6.1.
this is Gods Precept, for so says the Word, acknowledging them duty and
obedience, and rendering them their due in Reverence, confessing their propriety
in them and their authority over them; to command them and dispose of them
freely, to observe their instructions, and patiently submit to their
corrections, knowing that children which are Inferiors, being disobedient to
Parents, their Superiors in so near a Relation, is an offense with a high
aggravation: First, it is a sin against God the Author of Family-Government.
It Is a sin against man, which God has appointed as his Vicegerent. It Is
against their own father, and so it is unnatural and contrary to the light of
Nature. But let children humbly obey their Parents, and see that they do their
duties; so may they expect in due time to inherit Gods promised blessings.

5. Masters which also stand in the place of Superiors, and may do much for
God in their places, and by that power and command they have under God and over
their Servants, by restraining them from vice and vanity, and by giving liberty
and encouragement in acts of Virtue and Piety. Masters are to give unto their
Servants that which is equal and just, knowing they have a Master in Heaven,
Col. 4.1.9.
who respects not Persons but just and equal dealings. They also are to
forbear Threatenings and oppressings, because whatsoever is measured to another
by any man, the same measure shall be measured to him back again.

6. Servants ought to obey and submit to their Masters in all things as unto
the Lord; not only to the gentle and good, but to such also of them as are
froward; not with eye service as men-pleasers, but with singleness of heart as
the Servants of Christ, acknowledging their power by obeying their precepts,
striving toplease them well in all things not answering again, Tit. 2.9, 10.
nor purloyning; walking in all honesty, and showing all Fidelity, that in all
services, and by all means they may adorn the Doctrine of Christ in all things.

7. And Lastly, Let every one do their duties in their several Obligations,
whether Superiors or Inferiors. I may add to the rest, Landlords and
Tenants, who ought to deal faithfully each to other as unto the Lord.
Landlords are in such places, and have great advantages to do good services,
if they do improve themselves for the Lord, and give good Council to their
Tenants, according to his Holy Word. Let them remember although they are
Landlords to men, yet they are but Tenants and Stewards to the God of Heaven;
Who has the disposing of all things, who can increase and diminish at
pleasure, and gives and takesaway as he pleases: and as they expect Obedience,
Dues and Just accounts of their Tenants, So the Lord, the great Landlord,
expects his Obedience, Dues, and just accounts, as we stand his Tenants and
Servants. Let Tenants also deal faithfully and do equally in Justice, Mat.
7.2.12.
agreeable to the good Rule of doing as a man would be done by; acting
according to the laws of Righteousness toward God, and the Principles of
Uprightness toward men: For whosoever shall make a breach upon the Rules of
equity and equal dealing, the Lord will requite them in Justice answerable to
the Law of Retalliation. But let Superiors know the limits of their Commands,
which is over Bodies and not Consciences.

Some Rules concerning private and personal Government.
EVery particular person is charged with a souls protection; and it being a
weighty employment to be charged with a Souls Concernment, Joh. 2.8.
it being of a greater value than can be reckoned the gain and loss of it,
being more than the gain and loss of the whole World. Let the former Rules be
taken upon once again in order to personal Regulation. For there we ought to
begin the Foundation, for the better accomplishing of the great work of
Church-Reformation; for although this come last, it is none of the least works
to be done, and that which pertains to every Christian man to set and keep
things in order at home in this little World and more private Jurisdiction. For
it is the greatest piece of Knowledge for a man to know the depth of himself,
and the highest Conquest for a man to overcome himself; and the most excellent
part of Government, when a man can rightly order his own heart, govern his own
life, and rule well his own spirit. Prove. 16.32.
It Is not only reported but experienced, that Heart-work is the most difficult
work; to which we had need use all the means that may be allowed, and to make
use of all the helps that can be obtained.

1. By Election; As the Universal Lord has set too great Lights to rule in the
Universal World, and has appointed Guides and Overseers to enlighten and
govern the Church of God; so has he been graciously pleased to make Heavenly
provision, to order and rule the Inner man; and as the Lord in his matchless
love has freely sent his Son to ransom us from everlasting slavery, so he
has freely given his Spirit to conductous toward eternal felicity. Acts 5.32.
Let every one then choose and embrace that means God has Ordained for the
obtaining and receiving Gods holy Spirit, which with Reverence I may truly
call, The prime Overseer over the Soul; he is the great Teacher, Leader and
Conducter of the Saints, and whose Office may be fitly compared to the Office
of an Overseer or Ruler. He is the Christians guide to enlighten and direct
them, to sanctify and comfort them, to strengthen and confirm them, to improve
and quicken them to duties; and likewise he helps our infirmities, interprets
our groans, and presents our supplications, and makes requests for Saints
according to the will of God. The bodies of Saints are the Temples of the Holy
Ghost, and the Tabernacle of God, where he dwells and governs according to his
word; he helps us to mortify our sins, and is grieved at our Transgressions.
Thus is the Kingdom of Heaven within you agreeable as the Scripture has
expressed; which consists of Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. He
also convinces the World of Sin, strives and waits upon man to correct and
conform them, the Gospel Order and holy Profession, Jo. 16.13.
and so guides the saints into all truth, and shows them things to come.
Secondly, Conscience may be called an Overseer in a more subordinate and
limited sense, which the Lord has set in man, which is the Epitome and
Breviate of the World, which will act for God, and assist for the Souls
spiritual good; serving to rule and order the whole man, even to regulate and
Record every word and action. The Office of Conscience is to oppose sin,
reprove sin, condemn for sin; and if the sinner be impenitent, it terrifies and
torments the sinner, and like a faithful friend, first tell him of his fault
secretly; if he amends, it is forgiven by God freely; but if not, Conscience
either discovers it to be judged here, Romans 2.15.
or else bears witness against them at the Bar of Judgment hereafter. But
Conscience will do Justice in it is Office; for it will excuse if guiltless,
and bear testimony to a man's simplicity and godly sincerity, and upon every
pious action it ministers joy to the Inner-man. I may add the light of Nature,
which I may call a help in this personal Government, 1 Cor. 11.14.
which in moral things will give information, and tell a man of sin. These
helps, with a man's own endeavor, may (by Gods blessings) come to set his house
in order.

2. By Direction; To give a man's self up to be directed and taught by the
dictates of Gods holy Spirit, submitting to the Laws and Oracles of the Spirits
administrations; Isa. 11.2.
making his Rules and Orders his first and chiefest Counselors, giving heed to
the, Psa. 119.24.
motions and pressings of the spirit, and to the direction of the light within.
For although some dissenting friends may Idolize it, yet I warn the brethren
that they no way despise it, but observe Conscience in it is Informations and
Encouragements, in it is Reproof, Recalls, and Chidings; for Officer-like it
praises for well doing, and reproves and punishes for evil acting. Let Gods
goodness be admired in assigning such helps for us, in setting such lights in
us, and Overseers over us, to watch for us, to strive with us, to assist and
help us, to govern our hearts and houses when as we cannot help our selves: Let
these Lights and Guides be consulted with, and submitted to, well observing
their Counsel and Direction in order to a better Regulation, and that within
the Precincts of this Personal Dominion.

Beware of grieving and quenching the Spirit, and of resisting and offending
Conscience, Ephesians. 4.30.
and extinguishing the light the Lord has placed in us; but rather humbly to
accept and reverently to entertain the Lords Overseers, 1 These. 5.19.
as the Lord welcomes poor converted sinners, even to affect them, to embrace
them, to delight in them, to honor them, highly to prize them, to rejoice in
them, and to be thankful for them. These things being well observed, God might
be more glorified, the heart better commanded, and the Soul more rejoiced. For
a man to till his own ground is the best Husbandry, and a man is most discreet
when he is wise for Eternity. A man's chiefest work is to study his own
condition, to take himself to cure, and become his own Physician. To conclude
this point, let every Christian take care for his souls nutriment, it is holy
Ornament, i'ts spiritual Contentment, and eternal Preferment.

3. By Correction, By afflicting, judging, and correcting a man's self for good
omitted, and for evil committed against a gracious and holy God, who waits to
be gracious to do our Souls good, Jam. 4.9.
and to resist the motions of the flesh; and as the Apostle speaks to beat down
and keep under the body, 1 Cor. 9.27.
and bring it into subjection, and to exercise the spiritual sword, to revenge
all disobedience, and pull down the strong holds of sin; submitting to the
guides in this prime and more private Kingdom; and in all souls dangers to
take care to engage their assistance, who will be faithful for a man's
security, to manage the War against the spiritual enemy; Jer. 17.9.
and because the heart is deceitful and treacherous, and will be ready to
comply with the Souls enemies, and so beget an inward and homebred war, which
will grieve the Spirit, disquiet the Conscience, darken the Light, and endanger
the Soul. Beware therefore Christians, and endeavor to prevent these dangers:
let every one stand upon their watches. The Christians task is a double watch,
the one to keep the heart from extravagancies, and the other to keep the enemy
from approaches; Pro. 4.23.
as the Wise man speaks, above all, keeping watch over the heart with all
diligence; for if he take the heart, the Tower of the body, then will all be in
danger to be yielded to the power of the adversary, and then he will turn all
members as Instruments to serve Iniquity, the foot to walk to do Impiety, the
ears to hear Folly, the eyes to behold Vanity, and the tongue to speak
corruptly. Thus sin when it is conceived in the womb of the heart, and is
nourished and nursed there, in time comes to look out at the windows of the
eyes, and breaks out at the door of the mouth, and so brings all out of order,
and brings the soul into imminent danger; for he that has not rule over his
own spirit is like a City without walls, Pro. 25.28.
And be that bridles not his tongue, that man's Religion is vain; besides he
lies open to be taken and carried captive by the spiritual enemy, and so in
danger of being inslaved in everlasting misery.

4. By Protection; Keep thy soul with all diligence, for it is the best policy
for a man to make provision for his souls security, make the Name of God thy
Castle of retreat, Deuteronomy. 4.9.
and his promises thy chief Tower and refuge of defense, take to thy self all
the armor of God, especially the shield of Faith, Pro. 18.10.
and the Gospel-sword. I would have the Reader do in this case as a Prince had
done for his own safety and protection, who kept his Soldiers always armed;
being demanded why he did so, he replied, How did he know which way, at what
time, and with what power the enemy would come upon him? This may be fitly
applied by every Christian who has a precious soul to preserve, and a politic
and potent enemy to encounter withal, who sometimes presents gilded baits,
and beautiful temptations to betray and ensnare innocent souls, and other
times by dismal storms and dreadful apparitions to fear and drive us from
our faith and holy resolutions. Christians of all others had need to be
furnished and armed with spiritual weapons, Ephesians. 6.11.13.
because they are the most provided and stored with Heavenly Graces and
Soul-Treasures, and that is the cause the evil one is so frequent and violent
in their borders; for their own protection; Let Christians act like
Garison-men, examine all that go and come, and like the Temple-men, to let in
the Holy, and keep out the unclean; and also like the Seamen, if the Vessel
leak, they speedily cast it out again. Be wise, and set a watch before the door
of the heart, and three outward guards at the several Ports, before the Mouth,
the Eyes, and the Ears, that nothing be conveyed in or our at these passages,
that may prove the Souls destructive enemies. For the more certainty and better
security, observe these short Rules;

1. Get all things within into Order, Peace, and Unity; for Concord and Unitly
like wall to a City.

2. Get thy self stored and armed with spiritual Artillery.

3. Wait and watch the motions and assaults of thy subtle adversary.

4. Manage with courage all Combats and Encounters to obtain the Conquest and
Victory.

5. By Supplication; By Verbal, Mental, and Cordial Prayers, to ask with the
mouth, to seek with the heart, and knock by the hand of Faith; Ephesians. 6.18.
Let Gods free grace, the prime and efficient Cause of all safety and success;
be humbly admired, and thankfully acknowledged, and by a constant and fervent
interceding the Throne of Grace for Gods blessing to season and sanctify all
means and endeavors. Mat. 7.7.
The effectual and fervent prayer of a Righteous man avails much; being mixed
with Faith, obtains Virtue and Power from God, to assist and us to order and
govern our selves according to his Word, Isa. 5.16.
and that he would be graciously pleased to enable and quicken us to our
duties, to teach us to number our days, to improve us by his Spirit, supply us
with his grace, relieve us by his power, protect us by his providence, to
furnish us with Might in the Inner-man, to know our selves, to rule our own
houses, to command our own spirits, that we may be patterns of Order and
Government to other believers, and that he would be entreated to learn us
spiritual Art and holy Skill, to defend and secure our selves our souls and
Soul-Treasures against all the wiles and policies of our grand enemies, that
having the Rule over our own spirit, we may be as him that has taken a City,
and obtained the Conquest over the great Adversary, and so by Gods grace we may
be safely conducted through all Combats and Temptations, and at last received
into Everlasting Mansions.

6. By Exclusion; To exclude all false Counsels, foolish conceits and vain
imaginations from the heart, Ephesians. 4.31, 22.
and to banish all lurking lusts and absurd pretenses from the Court of the
Inner-man. But in order to the Executing and Effecting this good Work, let
every soul apart call and keep a private and particular Court within the limits
of his own personal dominion, and let this judgment be holden as Gods spirit
has given Charge and Commission, and so to exercise the power of a just and
righteous government, and to bring every word and action into judgment: and
because the heart is deceitful and will oft-times disguise it self, and evade
the truth, and is full of windings and turnings, Pro. 19.21.
and false pleadings. Let every one take an exact and legal way of trial, and
a strict and formal way of Judgment, and so proceed to Examination, Probation,
Pro. 28.26.
Condemnation and Execution; and let all be done according to Law and Truth.
For a man may do Injustice upon himself: Let Conscience sit as Judge, for
Conscience will side with the Lord, and judge for God and for the souls good.
Let the pure Law of God contained in his Word be the Rule to proceed by; let
the knowing and understanding part be the witnesses to give in the testimony to
every action, and against every Circumstance of evil doing; let all the
faculties of Soul and body be as Jurors, and call in every miscariage to make
up the clearness of the Evidence, which is the ground and guide of Justice.
Let the Law and the Offense be equally compared, and neither bosom nor secret
sins be respected; that the Old man with his deeds may be cast and condemned,
and the body of sin executed and destroyed, and buried in the grave of
Oblivion, never to have any more Resurrection; Either to disquiet our peace
here, or to evidence against us hereafter; knowing the terror of the Lord
moves me to be earnest to persuade. 1 Cor. 11.31.
For if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged of the Lord, neither
condemned with the World. Let us therefore beware and sin no more, for behold
the great Judge stands before the door.

7. By Execution; To put personal Discipline into due Execution, without which
all is nothing; for practice is the life of the Law, for if the practick part
be neglected, the blessing will not be obtained, and that because the condition
is unperformed. Let all persons learn to command and rule themselves, and
especially Superiors, who should command and rule others. For if a man knows
not how to command himself, how should he command Inferiors; and as the
Apostle speaks, If a man knows not how to rule his own house, how should he
take care of the Church of God? According to the old saying, If every man would
rightly order and govern one, it is the ready way to reform the whole
Congregation. I hope the words I have written touching personal Regulation will
not be thought so Impertinent, but that they being timely applied and sutably
improved, may tend to the furthering and establishing a Righteous Government.
And as I have been speaking of some particulars touching the governing a man's
life, so I would add a few words by way of Remembrance what is to be set in
order at or before a man's death. I will ground my speech upon the words of the
Prophet Isaiah to King Hezekiah, Isai. 38.1.
who was commanded to set his House in order because he should not live but
dye: we being all under the sentence of Mortality, become concerned to set our
houses in order speedily. Doubtless as Hezekiah was a King, he was under a
great care to set and leave things in order within his dominion, and as he was
head of a Family to set things in order within his Family-Jurisdiction, and as
he was a servant and child of God to set his accounts in order according to his
Will and Word; so is every Christian concerned within the compass of his place
and power, as he may have the charge of a Congregation or the charge of a
Family and the charge of his own soul, to discharge our trust and do our duty,
and so set our house in order before we dye. Hezekiah's pattern is a good
precedent for every man's direction to prepare our reckoning, to form and
present our accounts. Mark well what he says, in Verse the third, Isa. 38.3.
in giving up his Accounts to the Lord, saying, 1. I have walked before thee in
truth; 2. And have done that with a perfect heart; Thirdly, And that which is
good in thy sight. This is but a brief and short breviate, but it contains an
excellent and full account. 1. I have not talked, but I have walked not before
others but before thee, not in Error but in Truth. 2. Not in show but in heart;
not with a double and impure heart, but with a upright and perfect heart. 3. He
does not say he would and will do, but I have done, not that which is vain, but
that which is good; not in the sight of men, but in the sight of God. To be
short, let these words be laid to heart; For God is exact and will view every
man's Account, 2 Cor. 5.10.
for we must all appear at the Judgment Seat; See that ye have prepared a good
account to present in the day of Accounts. 2. As every Christian is to set
things in order to account with God; Romans 14.12.
so he is to leave behind him some examples of Piety to the World, that his
orderly life, zeal for godliness, and his acts of charity, when he is no more,
may perfume his memory, and be like Abels Sacrifice, to speak after he dies,
and may be worthy of Imication to Church-family, and Neighborhood Nation. 3.
As touching temporal substance, that the Lord has made a man Master of, or
rather Steward over. He is likewise to set in order to discharge his place and
Steward ship faithfully; that he may have peace when he is called to dye. To
dispose and divide his wordly goods and earthly possessions timely and equally,
agreeable to the Righteous rules of Religion and the best principles of Equity
and Reason, both to Yoke Fellow and Posterity; or for any other for whom he may
be entrusted or obliged; either to widows or to fatherlerlesse, and both
toward God and men to discharge a good conscience. 4. To consider and ponder
well to settle all things so straight and just between them that may prevent
all future strife and discord among them; that none may justly say when he is
gone, he is the man that did, or caused this or that wrong: this being
Religiously observed, many injuries and quarrels would be prevented, and so
peace and love may be preserved. 5. If any one shall be like to depart this
present life, possessed of this Worlds goods, and has no natural Heirs or near
Relations: let him not forget but remember to communicate to the poor
Christians; let them make the Deacons of the Churches their Overseers, and the
poor Saints their Executors. Let all remember, but such in a special manner;
Or else to bequeath his Wealth and Treasures to some pious and public
services; in so doing they will honor their Profession, and lay up for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come.

Some may think I am out of the way in leaving the Churches and turning into
Families, and treating with particular persons. Let them know I have been in
the Churches service, attending and instructing Churchmembers apart in their
own houses, and to instruct them in their Family Duties and Church-Orders;
Inciting them and exhorting them to prepare their Children and Servants for
members to people the Churches.

6. The true Order and right manner of the Execution of Church Government.
Justice and Judgment are the substantial parts of Church government. Justice
is a great word, and the action is a shoulder work, Isai. 9.7.
and being in it is Execution, carries a great commendation. It advances
Christ's Honor, promotes Truths Credit, renowns Christ's Churches; It breaks
Satan's designs, promotes good Causes, prevents and disturbs evil instruments,
and rejoices Christ's innocent servants. In my further prosecution of this
matter I would observe this following order;

1. What Justice and Discipline is in it self. 2. What, or who are the
offenders upon whom it is to be executed. 3. What is to be understood and
observed in it is prosecution. 4. What privileges are to be maintained in
Christ's Congregation. 5. What disorders are to be prevented, corrected and
removed. 6. Some branches of Injustice and oppression to be avoided. 7, How the
Execution it self should be rightly performed.
First, What Justice is; it consists of these general parts: an Offender, an
Executioner, a Law, and a penalty. Justice in it is Execution is, when a
faithful power shall inflict punishment upon a convicted Offender, consonant
to the true intent of the Law in that case provided, and the Execution
performed without delay or partiality.

2. What are the Offenders and offenses against whom Justice is to be executed.
First, There are private faults and offenses that are committed between Brother
and Brother: in which case the injured or offended brother is to tell his
brother offending, Mat. 15.
of his fault betwixt them alone; If he hear not, take one or two more, If he
neglect to hear them tell it to the Church, if he neglect to hear them, then
let the Church do their duty, and purge themselves of iniquity; For as a man
will hasten to purge poison out of his body corporal, much more ought
Christians to purge sin out of the body spiritual; But if thy brother hears
thee and repents of the evil heartily, thou ought to forgive him freely,
fully and perpetually. But if it shall happen that any two persons shall oppose
each other, Josh. 7.18.
in and about a matter and fault committed, and have no other witness but
themselves, and there can be neither punctual nor circumstantial proof made to
decide the controversy; then doubtless it is the Churches duty and liberty to
make their humble appeal to the God of Heaven, by casting lots, Prove. 8.18.
Prove. 16.13. Acts 1.26.
and making serious supplications tohim, that he would be pleased to order and
dispose of the lot for their direction, to show which of those two was the
guilty person: and when the Lord has discovered him, let the Church do their
duty that concerns them.

Concerning RESTITUTION.
IF an Offender do confess his fault, and promise an amendment, let him make
Restitution for that wrong he has done. Exodus 22.12.
For as it is a great part of Justice, so it is a very necessary part of
Repentance; for it repayes a just recompense for injuries done, and it is a very
great destruction to sin. How can a man expect his sin should be pardoned, Jud.
1.7.
before the wrong he has done be repaired, or that be restored which he has
unjustly took and wrongfully detained. Doubtless if a man injure his brother
in body, goods or good name, he stands bound in Justice to make him reasonable
Restitution, and this is congruous with Gods righteous Law of Retaliation; For
oftimes Justice requits and inflicts punishment in the same Act in which a man
has sinned. Mat. 7.2.
This also concurs with the Law Christ has given, which says, In effect, what
measure a man measures to another in sin, the same shall be measured to him in
punishment back again.

Concerning Heretics.
An Heretic, after the first and second admonition reject or cast away;
because one corrupted person may corrupt the whole body, Tit. 3.10, 11.
being one that is perverted or willingly turned aside from the Truth; an Actor
of Sexts, or maintainer of a false belief, and has subverted or overthrown
himself; rejecting the true Religion, and so becomes an instrument of his own
condemnation.

Concerning dealing with public Offenders.
Such as sin openly are to be rebuked publicly, and the Church is to withdraw
from every one that walks disorderly, 1 Timothy 5.20. 2 These. 3.6.14.
that he may be ashamed of his Iniquity, and that every particular admonition
and public withdrawing may put others in fear and be as a general warning. Now
touching such sinners mentioned in the Fifth of the Corinthians; There is some
small distance between some faithful Christians: Whether such offenders there
noted may be received into Communion if they be penitent; some judging, if they
repent they may be received; others judging, although they do confess their
sin, yet the Church ought to withdraw from them. I confess they plead reason
on both sides. One alleging thus, That if that end be already accomplished for
which the Ordinance of Excommunication was appointed, what need or reason is
there the person should be excluded? Others reply, If the sinner be not
speedily sentenced, the Church will be leavened, and that for such public and
scandalous sins, by which God is so highly dishonored, and the Church so
greatly reproached. The Church cannot be purged until the guilty person be
punished.

Christian Reader, As touching this matter, I will presume to take the place of
a Moderator; for I have heard the question debated among able men, who in the
main agree and design the self same thing, there is only a form of words betwixt
them, both agree the sinner shall be called into question: The one admonishes
him for his evil in the Name of the Lord; The other passes a sentence against
him by the power of the same Lord; both rebuke the person for the wickedness
done, both bear their testimony against the crime, in order to clear the Church
of his Transgression; both dis-priviledge the Transgressor of Communion, until
he appears a truly humbled person, and gives the Congregation full
satisfaction: so that in truth upon the whole matter there is no material
substance that is worthy to bear the name of a difference; so that for my own
part, for peace sake, I could consent either ways; provided the best care be
taken by all that are concerned, That Gods Honor be preserved, all scandal be
removed, the Truths Innocence delivered, and the Churches Reputation vindicated.

3. What is to be understood and observed in the prrosecution of Discipline
FIrst, There is steps and Circumstances to be observed in reproving; 1.
Timely, 2. Affectionately. 3. A private fault privately. 4. To design the
restoring the sinner from iniquity. Concerning Excommunication, let this order
be observed. 1. Let it be done in Christ's Name and Authority. 2. See that
sinner be convicted legally. 3. Let the Counsel and Blessing of God be sought
fervently. 4. To the end the flesh may be destroyed, and the spirit saved in
the day of the Lord. Repentance consists of four parts, 1. Contrition of the
heart. 2. Confession of the mouth. 3. Reformation of the life. 4. Restitution
for the wrong done. An order in forgiveness, 1. It must be groundedly. 2.
Freely, 3. Fully, 4. Perpetually. There is a method to be observed in Prayer,
as our Lord has taught us saying, when we pray, pray after this manner. When
Duties want their Order and Circumstance, they are oft-times rejected, instead
of being accepted; for it is evident God requires equal submission to order as
he does to the duty it self. The Wise man Solomon says, He would put his
Proverbs in order. Eccles. 12.9.
In all Gods former services about the Ark, Alter and Sanctuary, the Lord
precisely required all persons to attend respectively their Offices and places,
and that all things should exactly be set in order and appointed to their
several uses; and for the breach in Order, 1 Chr. 19.13.
the Lord in his anger caused some deeply to suffer. The Apostle Paul speaking
of Churchassembling, and about Prophesying, and touching the Lords Supper, he
sums up all with this charge, Let all things be done decently and in order. 1
Cor. 14.40.
The same Apostle beholds, rejoices, commends, and praises the order of the
Colossians. Doubtless there ought to be some method in Preaching: It Is great
pity that divine and pure matter should want its beauty and ornament of form
and order. St. Paul commands Timothy to study to show himself a workman,
rightly dividing the Word of truth. There is a Rule to be observed in hearing;
1. Preparation to hear. 2. Attention in hearing. 3. Meditation after hearing.
4. Supplication before and after a blessing. There are steps and degrees in
believing; 1. The faith of credence. 2. The faith of adherence. 3. The faith of
endurance. 4. Of steadfast reliance. A Rule to be observed in suffering; 1. To
have a good cause. 2. A right call. 3. A good conscience. 4. A pure end. To be
short, there ought to be an order in all obedience, in respect of matter,
manner, end, and circumstance; for the righteous God as truely-punishes for the
breach of order, as he does for neglect of services. As order is the ornament
of profession, so I may call it the masterpiece of Religion, for both Gods
precepts for it, and punishments upon the neglect of it, witness the same.
There ought to be a strict order in the commemoration of the Lords Supper, even
to hold and keep it with such observation, 1 Cor. 11.28.
as may answer to the first institution; and in presuming to come to such holy
Mysteries, there ought to be great heart-preparations, and self examinations;
1. In unity of heart, judgment, and affection. 2. In purity of life and
conversation. 3. Reverently, as being at the Table and in the presence of the
God of Heaven. Psalm. 86.11.
4 Having an eye to the end, which is the victory Christ has obtained for
every Christian. 5. To act in charity, and freely, because love was the first
cause of our felicity. 6. Rejoycingly, as men having interest in the spiritual
conquest over our souls adversary, and as men purchased from everlasting
misery. 7. Thankfully, humbly accepting, reverently and cheerfully embracing,
and with thankfulness partaking of those soul-benefits, conveyed and received
in that Administration.

SABBATH.
SOme brief Rules for the better order and observation of the Lords Day, or
First Day Sabbath: Or if I may not call it a Sabbath: I know no reason; Deuteronomy.
5.15. Col. 1.12, 13.
But if the Jews were obliged to keep a Sabbath in remembrance of a temporal
deliverance, from temporal bondage, Christians should be much more bound to
observe a day, as strict as a Sabbath, in memorial and remembrance of their
spiritual and eternal deliverance, from spiritual and eternal bondage. For
doubtless Christians are at great losses, because of so much remisness and want
of strictness in the First Days service. First, Then let the Lords People be
stirring betimes upon the Lords Day, called so by way of Eminency, having a
greater work to do than on other days a work attended either with greater
blessings, if religiously performed, or with greater damages, if neglected or
misimproved. Secondly, Let them make serious preparation, remembering whose
service it is, and into whose presence they come; considering well what they go
about, and how nearly it respects their eternal Estate. Eccles. 5.1.
Thirdly, When they come into the Church Assembly, let them attend diligently,
and behave themselves reverently, and that before the Lord, with due and humble
respect to the administration and Majesty of the Word. Fourthly, Let them with
all watchfulness and holy indignation, strive to avoid those unseemly and
uncomely behaviors, tempers and gestures of lukewarmness, coldness, drowsy,
heavy, and dull and sleepy carriages in Gods Divine services, which is
dishonorable to their persons, and also unprofitable to their souls. Fifthly,
Let them Meditate upon what they have heard: For although the Lords People of
the Congregationall way, are necessitated to take the most pains to hear the
Word, in respect of distance of place; yet they have one privilege, being
improved may yield some advantage, having a fit opportunity to meditate as they
go asunder, or to make repetition as they walk together. Sixthly, To pray that
the Preachers heart may be enlarged, and his tongue unloosed, to speak that
which is sound, profitable, and seasonable for their conditions; and when they
have heard, to pray that the precious Word may be blessed and sanctified to
their souls, that by it they may be benefited and profited. Seventhly, To stir
up each other to a better zeal, even to their first love, and to do their first
works, and in a more strict sense and exact manner, more religiously to regard
to keep and sanctify a Day to the Lord, by improving the whole Day in holy
Exercise, either in Praying, Reading, Hearing, Conferring, or Meditating, and
to lay aside all such talk and occasions, as either respect State Matters, or
any Secular Concernments, and keep your selves that Day to Works of Piety,
Mercy, Charity, and Necessity. If these Circumstances were but religiously
regarded and carefully observed; 1. Gods Honor would be more advanced, the
Lords Day better improved, the peoples souls more edified, truth and profession
more credited, much needless discourse prevented, Satan's design more weakened,
their endeavors would be more certainly blessed, and their days work more
fully rewarded.

There is an order to be observed in debates and discourses, which being
discreetly managed, may tend to profit and benefit. But beware of anger, which
I may call the souls fever, and causes the tongue to make digression, and to
exceed the bounds of moderation. Let this Rule be taken; to speak one by one,
short, material, and plain; Jam. 1.26.
as He that bridles not his tongue his Religion is vain: So the well governing
of the tongue, is a good degree of Religion, and deserves the honor of a good
commendation. One by one, to preserve order; material, to have the weight of
reason; plain, to help the understanding; short, to help the memory. I have
observed a distinction; a man may have wit and yet want wisdom: Knowledge is
the treasure of the mind, but discretion is the key. I may call the tongue the
hearts messenger, and as often as it speaks without meditation, goes without its
errand, if not without reason. Some are so improvident in their words, and so
extravagant of their understanding, that they can neither conceal it, nor know
well to improve it, but inconsiderately lay it out, that it returns them damage
and not profit. Prove. 17.28.
Every one has a double lesson to learn; one to know how to speak, another to
know when to hold his tongue. If such Rules were put into practices, it would
cause men to speak to purpose, or else spare their speeches: For a word spoken
in its season and order, Prove. 25.11.
is like apples of gold in pictures of silver.

Lastly, Under your correction, I would tender my private opinion touching the
readmission of penitent persons, that have been under Excommunication. I have
thought there is some observation to be taken, Luke 15.24.
from the Lords receiving of the prodigal son, that some solemnity and form of
speech may be used to declare it, and to have as public a consent to his
absolution, as there was at his exclusion; and as the Parable speaks, to
embrace them, and to rejoice with them, because they were lost, but now found,
and wandered from the Lord, but are now returned. And as the Apostle speaks
concerning the Incestuous Corinthian; 2 Cor. 2.7, 8.
he exhorts the Congregation to consider his remorse and contrition, to forgive
him, comfort him, and confirm their love to him. And there is good reason they
should give thanks to God for them, for hearing their prayers for them, for
blessing the Ordinance executed against them, for recovering the finners out of
the kingdom of Satan, and re-entering them into the privileges of his
Congregation.

Fourthly, What Privileges are to be maintained in Christ's Congregation.
FIrst, We may say in this Case of Privileges, as Solomon speaks in his
Proverbs, Let none remove the Landmarks which our Forefathers or Elders have
set; concerning Churches Rights and Privileges, which we are to preserve as a
matter of moment, which is part of Gospell-Order and Church Government. 1.
Touching Elders and Superiors, they are honored and privileged with the
Offices of Ministers and Stewards, acknowledged by the Lord to be over his
Family and Household. 2. They have the privilege to forbear working with their
hands, especially such as labor in the public Ministry, who are to give
themselves wholly unto such things. 3. They have the privilege to command
others, 1 Timothy 4.15.
and others are commanded to obey them; provided all things be done according
to Christ's Laws given them. 4. They ought not to be rebuked as others, but have
the privilege to be entreated as Fathers. 5. For their works sake and
Gospell-labour, they ought to be much respected in love, and counted worthy of
double honor. 6. The Church ought not to receive an accusation against them,
under two or three witnesses, doubtless because the truth is so much concerned
in their reputations, and repute and credit being the life of spiritual
employments. 7. It Is also their privilege to be highly esteemed, encouraged,
and rewarded, according as the Lord has given direction and commanded.

Secondly, The Privileges of the members. 1. As members ought to acknowledge
Officers in their Privileges, so Officers ought in their places, to preserve
and secure the Privileges of the members. The people of God have a common
right and equal propriety in the wisdom, gifts, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22.
and graces, which the Lord has given to his Ministers. For as Paul, Apollo,
and Cephas, are reckoned within the Saints Inventory, they are become obliged
freely to disburse spiritual Treasures: By virtue of an interest the Saints
may claim it as their right and legacies. In this Case the People are
proprietors, Romans 1.14.
and their Ministers as debtors: For as the Lord has been pleased to furnish
his Ministers with heavenly riches and graces, so he has commanded his
Ministering Servants, to bestow and improve such gifts for the benefit of the
Churches.

Secondly, Another Privilege as belongs of right to Church Members, is to have
their part and equal share in all Gospel-advantages, and holy mysteries, even
in that solemn and sacred administration of participating, and having communion
together in the Lords Supper, in the serious commemoration of the Lords Death
and Passion. 1 Cor. 11.28.
But let all that presume to be Communicants at the Lords Table, examine
themselves, and make judgment first whether they discern the Lords Body, and
so come worthily, understanding his Real, Mystical, and Representative Body.

Thirdly, It Is the members Right and Privilege, to have their voice in
electing their Overseers and Officers that are to be set over them, Acts 6.3, 5.
and also in the degrading or excluding any person in Office among them; upon
which solemn occasions they ought to be acquainted, that the matter may be
freely and generally voted, that no members may complain of being
dispriviledged; and good reason for it, because they are to be as Fathers to
educate and feed them, and to provide their souls food, in order to their
spiritual interest and everlasting good.

Fourthly, It Is doubtless the Brethrens Privilege, to have the knowledge of
recieving or excluding any member or members, into or out of communion with
them, especially in doubtful or difficult Cases, because they are to be or not
to be members of the same body, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5.
and to have fellowship with them in the same holy mystery; and if there be any
sin contracted, either in denying, recieving, detaining, or excluding any
person, the evil may reflect upon the whole Congregation.

Fifthly, Another Privilege is, If any Brother has any injury offered him, or
wrong done him, he ought to bring it legally to the Church, and there claim his
Privilege to be heard and relieved, and to call for justice to be executed.
Then it is the Churches duty to proceed, and do them equity, consonant to that
good ancient Rule of doing as a man would be done by, Mat. 8.7.
and that without delay and partiallity, that while we are complaining for want
of justice from others, we may not neglect to do justice in the Churches.

Sixthly, Such among the Lords People as are justly poor, being of the body,
have a right to be relieved in their outward necessity: for as there is a right
of propriety, Heb. 13.3.
so there is a right of charity; it is the Lords Rentcharge, the Poors due, and
the Churches duty. There are some unjustly poor, who are either idle persons,
or led through their lusts into poverty; others by man's oppression are brought
into penury; there are some impotent poor, so naturally; and there are the
Lords poor, who become so through the consequences of Christianity.

Seventhly, There is another Privilege that belongs to Christians: That if any
Person or Party in a Congregation, should verily judge and absolutely believe,
they were oppressed and overruled by the rest of the Congregation, in any case
or controversy, that it amounts to high contention and disputation, Deuteronomy.
17.8, 9, 10.
after all christian and serious means used, he or they may make their humble
appeal, to some other Church in the same Faith; and if the case be very
weighty, then to have recourse to some general Assembly, Acts 15.2.
that by all means schism may be prevented, and peace and concord preserved.

To conclude these things: There are other Rights, Immunities, and Privileges,
that of right appertain to Church Members, that if any have a gift in Prayer, 1
Pet. 4.10.
or by way of Exhortation to have his seasonable time of liberty, for the
exercise of his gift, and to have encouragement in so good a work. Moreover; if
any are under temptation, as wounding of spirit, sickness of body, or any other
afflictions, he may and ought to have recourse to the Ministers, and to ask
counsel and assistance of the Elders, Jam. 5.14.
or to call for them to be their visitants, and the Elders ought to attend
them, in waiting upon their duties, by Prayers, Instruction, or any other
services, wherein Christ's Ministers are obliged, and become concerned, as they
are spiritual guides, and Gospel-Physitians. Thus we may both learn and
discern the great Privileges, that pertain to such as belong to
Gospel-Churches; to have interest in such provisions and advantages, and all
within themselves, under Christ's government and dominion, and within their own
limits and jurisdiction, where all rights and proprieties are equally to be
distributed, their souls duly nourished, their temptations considered, burdens
removed, their bodies healed, their poverty supplied, their injuries redressed,
and their privileges maintained, and their causes heard, and contentions
determined. Thus ought Christians to have things common, in the spiritual
Commonwealth and holy Nation, and to maintain a free fellowship and communion
both in privileges and sufferings. The truth is, the charge of these things
chiefly respects Officers, to whom the Church has committed her power, and
upon whom they have cast the burden of their care, who ought as instruments in
the name of Christ, with the Churches consent, to exercise the several parts
and offices of Government; and as they are entrusted by God, so they ought to
act faithful according to his Word; and as they ought not to exercise
lordship, to usurp authority, so they ought not to deface and diminish ought of
Christ's or his Churches power and dignity: For if our Lord died to enter the
government, and our liberties and privileges were purchased at so dear a rate,
and now committed to the care of the Churches, there is a great obligation lies
upon the Congregation, to see that these things be carefully maintained, and
constantly preserved; and especially such as are in public trust, to improve
their places, and discharge good consciences, to be a just defense to all
persons in their spiritual rights and immunities, that there may be no just
cause of complaints in all our streets or borders.

Fifthly, What Disorders are to be prevented, corrected, and removed.
AS when duties are put into the best form, they appear with the most beauty,
so when the branches of impiety are set in order, they appear in their ugly
shape of deformity. I will set some before you, which I believe are sometimes
found amongst you, which are a dishonor to Christians, and are great
disturbances to the peace of the Churches; and these evils are both of omission
and commission.

First, It Is found too much neglected by teachers and leaders, that the People
are not taught, but are very ignorant in the orders and principles of true
discipline and right government.

Secondly, When a man does not prize and tender the unity and Peace of the
Church as he ought, but shall inconsiderately and indiscreetly publish, and
possibly endeavor to enforce a Principle upon the People, or a Practice upon a
Person, before they themselves have sufficiently tried and proved it, or the
People or Person are prepared to bear it, Ioh. 16.12.
or made fit and capale to receive it, and so oft-times a disturbance attends
it.

Thirdly, Another Disorder which does mostly respect the Elders: That is, when
disorderly walkers who are known to live and continue in sin, and the Church
neglects her Duty in Discipline, not remembering all the time this sin is
unpunished, 1 Cor. 5.2.
God is dishonored, their Duty neglected, the Truth reproached, the most
religious grieved and scorners at Religion rejoiced, Gods appointed Ordinance
to destroy the flesh omitted, and the proper means neglected, by which the
sinner should be restored.

Fourthly, Another Disorder is, when the members of one Congregation, shall
receive a member or members from another Congregation, without their knowledge
or consent, or a letter of Recommendation from them to whom he or they did
belong (except in any case extraordinary) by which disorders follow bad
consequences; Romans 16.1, 2. Act. 18.27.
for some persons that think Christ's Discipline too straight, judging it little
less than tyranny, and their subjection to it little less than slavery, when
they are under reproof for some misdemeanors will be shifting places and
removing themselves into Communion with other Churches.

Fifthly, Another disorder is, when one member has committed a trespass
against another. The brother offended, which ought to treat with his brother
offending betwixt them alone, and to have endeavored to restore his brother
again, neither has affection to regard his brother offending, or faithfulness
to respect the rule directing, 2 Cor. 12.20.
but takes his own irregular course, and whispers the matter till it comes to a
breach, and so possibly at last becomes a general disturbance in the Church,
and endangers the division of the Congregation.

Sixthly, Another disorder is, when the Congregation shall receive a matter
between brother and brother into hearing, and not inquire of the orderly
bringing it to the Congregation. If the matter be brought disorderly to them,
they by receiving it, become guilty of disorder with them; whereas they ought
rather to reprove them and send them back to the Rule to do their duty, and
refuse to receive it before it is brought legally. If this was but duly observed
many disorders and breaches would be prevented, and the Churches peace better
preserved.

Seventhly, Another disorder is when the Church deals with any person or
persons for Misdemeanor, either in matter of Doctrine, or for evil in
conversation, or Heresy, or Schism or the like; 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. Oft-times
other members for private ends, either for Interest or Relation, will
countenance, associate or side with them, and encourage them, and so many times
make a destruction, if not a division; such are enemies to peace and contemners
of Government; such ought to be speedily noted as disturbers timely restrained,
and duly punished.

Eighthly, Another disorder touching the Church assembling upon the Lords day
some as it were forsaking, others neglecting and give no cause of their
ablenting; others come late, which doubtless ought to be there at the Churches
prayers, made in order to their Preparation, Sanctification and Direction
concerning the work of the Day, Heb. 10.20. Some come when the Lords Market is
half over; others with drowsiness and fleepinesse, as if they intended to make
the Meeting House their sleeping place; and that time they pretend to improve
in Gods service, they sinfully and wastfully spend in the satisfying of the
desires of the flesh.

Ninthly, Another disorder is, when the Brethren absent from Church Communion
in the Lords Supper, upon their own private Opinion, conceit, or imagination,
to the offense of the Congregation, not giving any Cause or Reason to any for
their so doing; making no account either to Church or Elder, whether the cause
be in themselves or in another, not considering their loss and damage in
their neglects, or their error in not committing their Case to censure.

Tenthly, Another disorder is, when the Church have discharged her duty against
others that have committed Iniquity. Many such offenders will be their own
Judges, Deuteronomy. 17.12. and that in their own Causes, and refuse to submit, if not
contemn the Churches censures, not considering that they do presumptuously and
dangerously, and do as much as in them lies to dis-office Christ,
dis-priviledge the Church, and not discerning that they refused to be judged by
the Law, but will be Judges themselves and that of the Law.

Eleventhly, Another disorder is, when one Brother shall believe a report
against against another brother, and that before he knows the truth of the
matter, and possibly proceeds upon Rumors, Conjectures or Imaginations to pass
sentence of condemnation, and that before any legal Trial or hearing, and so
becomes guilty himself of the wrong that is done, Prove. 8.13. in crediting such
reports against his brothers reputation, and to judge a matter before it is
heard, is a fault of which a Christian ought to be ashamed.

Twelfthly, Another disorder or grievance is, when there is not an equal
compliance together in matter of expense and public charges, either touching
the poor members or any other necessary disbursements; but 2 Cor. 8.13, 14. one
is burdened, and another is eased, some neglecting their duties, others not
answerable to their abilities, and so the affairs and needful occasions of the
Churches, are not carried on by Equality, according to ability, and to answer
to Rules of Equity.

Thirteenthly, Another disorder is to receive an occasion against an Elder, and
not under two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. which is a disorder in many
places, not observing the Rule in that case provided, but upon every suspicion
or light occasion disaffected persons will bring their Ministers repute into
question.

Fourthteenthly, Another disorder is, when the Officers with the members
appoint days of meeting upon necessary occasions which concern all, and for
the good of the whole, as days of Instruction, Discipline, Humiliation or
Thansgiving, or the like; and then Brethren shall upon every temporal,
indifferent and small occasion neglect such appointments and useful meetings
to their own losses and the discouragement of others.

To conclude these things, God is not the Author of such confusions, but a God
of Order and the Author of peace in all the Churches; But it is the Prince of
mis-rule, who by his subtle wiles stirs up such instruments to make breaches,
and to break the Churches: and as I have drawn you a little Map to show you the
path of his designs; In like manner I would present to you as in a glass, the
nature of your adversary by his Names:

1. He is called the god of this World, who blinds the minds of such as believe
not, lest the light of the Gospel should shine unto them.

2. He is called the Prince of the Air, that works and rules in the hearts
of the children of disobedience.

3. Satan, who opposes the Lord in his designs, and to pervert the Saints in
their paths.

4. Devil, one that devises mischiefs, and by his wiles and darts to get
advantages to overruled and destroy the Saints.

5. Serpent, to show his great policy, craft, and subtilties, in beguiling and
betraying innocent souls.

6. He is compared to a Lion and a Dragon to show his strength, violence and
cruelty, to fear, scatter and devour the Saints.

7. Belial, I may add Tyrant, to draw persons into Infidelity and Apostacy; a
Tyrant over them he takes captive, an oppressor, cruel and mercylesse, that
Tyranizes over soul and conscience.

Thus I have given you the naming of the Titles of your Adversary, some hold
forth his great policy, and some his great cruelty; I have done it to alarm
you to take to your armor, to keep your watches, to defeat your enemy, and
secure your souls.

6. Some branches of Injustice and Opppression to be avoided in the punishment
of Sin.
1. THe punishing of sin is our great design. 1. What is sin? It Is the
transgression of Gods Righteous Laws: and these evils are both of Omission and
Commission. In the execution of Discipline we are to endeavor the destruction
of all sin, and for our better knowledge and prosecution of this design, we may
enquire how many ways a man may sin. A man may sin several ways in the
Commission of sin, and several ways touching the punishment of sin: 1. In the
commission of sin, a man may actually sin in his own person. 2. A man may sin
by counselling and abetting with another in sin. 3. A man may sin by
countenancing and encouraging one that has sinned. 4. A man may sin by not
restoring his brother that is overtaken in sin. 5. A man may hate his brother
and have fellowship with sin by not reproving his sin. 6. In a compact body all
are guilty of another man's sin that refuse to join in the punishment of a
sinner. 7. And the Church may contract iniquity in doing Justice and not doing
it thoroughly.

2. How may a man be guilty and sin in punishing of sin? Answ. In the branches
of in justice and Oppression.

1. To punish a man as an offender without the breach of some Law is Injustice
and Oppression. 2. To neglect to punish an Offender that transgresses the Law,
is a branch of Injustice. 3. To wrest Judgment out of it is true Channel, and
to turn Justice out of it is legal course, is another branch of Injustice. 4.
To respect Persons and regard Causes, so as to condemn the innocent and clear
the guilty, it is Oppession, In juffice, and an abomination. 5. To impose a
less penalty upon an offender then his offense deserves, is another branch of
Injustice. 6. To inffict a greater punishment upon a Trespasser than the Law
requires, is another branch of Injustice and Oppession. 7. Not timely to
relieve the Oppressed, and duly to acquit and discharge the Innocent man, is
another high branch of Injustice and Oppression. To conclude this point in
question, this shows us what Justice is, by the rule of a contrary observation.
To execute Justice timely, impartially, and thoroughly is true Justice
according to Gods Law: having thus sorted our materials and made our division,
I proceed to Justice it self in it is Execution.

7. Tho true Order of the Execution of Justice and Discipline.
EXecution is the life of Governing; when Laws and Rules lie unexecuted, it is
like Engagements unperformed. Right Discipline in it is execution carries a
good Reputation, It beats down evil designs, it gives Countenance to the best
things, it disturbs the Nocent, and rejoices the innocent. It displeases the
Righteous God when such as are placed, and be trusted Prove. 17.15. with the
weighty employment of Church Government; and shall either not judge at all, or
else in judgment are unjust and partial. To punish the Innocent that ought to
be cleared, or to clear the Guilty that ought to be punished. A man had need be
just in discharging Conscience in punishing sins, lest he be found guilty of
the blood of perishing souls: and when the Church of God shall assemble
themselves upon this solemn occasion;

1. Let the Word be sounded like a Trumpet, that the people may be warned and
informed into whose all-seeing presence they come; and that God is present with
them, and judges among them, to beget the people in an awful fear and holy
reverence of his sacred Majesty and Presence; To remember the people by
improving some words by way of charge, and to produce Commissions from Gods
holy writing, and to let the people know they are properly concerned, legally
returned, and solemnly engaged, to take their places, and humbly to attend upon
Gods services, and to tell them the Lord has betrusted us with Offices and
Privileges, and furnished us with such authority, that we should act like a
holy Nation and spiritual Court, in all Justice and Fidelity.

2. Because all things are sanctified by the Word and Prayer, let humble and
fervent supplications be made to the God of Heaven to be counsel for you, and
to prepare, sanctify and direct you in that serious matter undertaken by you,
and that your part may be so done and performed on earth, That whatsoever ye
bind or loose may be done and confirmed in Heaven; Mat. 18.18. and as in all
other Religious services there ought to be good advice taken sufficient trial
made before the exercise of action, much more in this case wherein we act for
God, and must give an account to God in this matter: there had need to precede
a Judgment of preparation before the judgment of Execution. 1. To consider,
we must act in Christ's Name and by virtue of his Authority, and that this
action ought as it were to type out the last judgment, and to hold forth
Christ's Righteous Government. 2. To examine whether the matter be brought
orderly, and the parties have proceeded legally. 3. To consider the capacity of
the person offending whether a member or a Officer; for although the Lord
respects not Persons, yet he allows some privilege to Offices. 4. To enquire
of the nature of the Offense, whether more directly against God or man, whether
public or private. 5. To examine what provocations the offender had to it, and
what design he had in it, whether ignorantly or wilfully. Seventhly, Having
found out the nature of the sin then to have recourse to the law that makes it
a transgression. Let the Law and the Offense be equally compared, and the
penalty justly imposed. 7. Let all proceedings be mixed with compassion, that
it may answer to the design of Heaven, the end to destroy the flesh and to
restore the offender out of transgression. Having thus made preparation,
proceed to probation and to the act of Execution; also remembering God is with
you, and Judges of the judgment passed by you, Psalm. 83.1.
and that in a subordinate and humble sense: ye ought to hold forth the glory
of his Presence, and that with all justness, humbleness and gravity
representing his dignity, mercy, purity, and severity, and so to pass sentence
according as in Justice ye shall see cause, without delay or partiality, purged
of all favor, prejudice, and hypocrisy, without regard to causes, knowing
faces or repecting persons, as acting for God uprightly, Deuteronomy. 1.17.
that it may be received and approved in the Court of Eternity.

Secondly, Some further circumstances to be observed in the prosecution of
Church Discipline, let be done and executed speedily; not to suffer sin to lie
upon thy brother, Lev. 19.17.
or to infect the spiritual body. A green sore is soonest healed, a disease
taken new is easiest cured; in like manner trespasses or contentions amongst
Church Members taken timely, are best purged, appeased and reconciled.

Thirdly, Them that are Judges of others in the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction are
to be Counselors to the offenders, especially if they be ignorant persons, not
to daunt or surprise them or take quick advantages against them, but as we
ought to act in the Lords Name, so to act in the Lords fear toward them; to
instruct them and convince them from the Scriptures, and show them the Laws
they have broken that judge them trespassers, and condemns them for
transgressors.

4ly. show them their sin in it is body and deformity; the sad accidents and bad
consequences that attend sin, and to make them sensible of their iniquity from
the evidence of Scripture-testimony; say to the sinner, Come see what you have
done, look upon your sin in it is aggravation, how serpent like it darts and
stings every one, it reflects upon Gods honor, it darts Religion, stings the
brethren, disturbs your Inner-man, gives an occasion of stumbling to the weak;
in profession, it daunts the well-wishers, and enquires after Religion, and
gives the enemies truth an occasion of rejoicing.

Fifthly, To learn to know the offenders design; for oft-times a design by an
act intended, may be worse than the action it self committed: there may be
Circumstances depending, to be considered, by which the Act may be much
mitegated or aggravated, as ignorance or wilfulness, as in pretense of
conscience, or a design of disturbance, as from a principle of Charity, or in a
course of subtilty, the best of these Circumstances will make no justification
for any evil action, for that will be to countenance sin, but the better
circumstances are to have their mittegations in damages, (I mean in
punishments) and the other their aggravations.

6. To observe the disposition, capacity, and temper of the person, not to
favor his sin, but in order to gain an advantage upon the sinner; some to save
with compassion, some with fear, some with gentleness, others with
sharpnessei, always tosort, fit, and direct all admonishions, reproofs and
corrections, as may best suit with the offenders disposition, and the demerits
of his sin and transgression.

Seventhly, To take the most convenient season, as I have said; things done in
their season and order, are like apples of gold in pictures of silver, they are
not only beautiful to the action, but a disadvantage to the enemies design;
but beware lest while ye are about to heal some breaches, you neither prevent
nor disturb your selves in some other weighty and public services, and so let
in Satan to make his advantages. For a man must have some respect in matters of
Government to three Estates, The honor of God, the quiet of Conscience, and
the peace of the Church. Thus I presume to tender my Counsel and offer my
Judgment and direction, especially to such as have any trust and public
employment over their brethren; for men of wisdom, honesty and sufficiency are
most sensible of the Office and buthen of the place, careful of the Charge and
apprehensive of the accounts they must make; like men of discretion let them
well observe the nature of their Office and the worthiness of their places,
and judge for God, according to the rule of his Word, with all justness and
gravity. As one observing the Judges sit in the Judgment Seat; while they were
grave and just he thought they were gods, but when they changed into lighenesse
and fell into passion, he concluded they were but men. Let Christ's Officers and
Ministers act gravely, justly, and discreetly; instructing themselves and
others in their several obligations, both as they are men and Christians: As
once a Governor of a Nation observed; says he, I am King of Bodies not of
Souls, a Commander of men not of Conscience. And as our Lord himself has
taught us to distinguish of duties, and to render every one their dues, and to
owe nothing to any man but love. To honor our Lord Christ as the head of the
Church, and to respect civil Magistrates as the politic fathers of our
Countries. To conclude this point let me say to my brethren as once a Prince
said to his son, observing him to mind trifles; said, Come my Son, leave
trifles and mind the matters of the Kingdom: So I say to my brethren and every
Christian, to leave the trifles of this World, and mind the matters of Christ's
Kingdom.

Peace and Unity is the great end I have here designed, and it is a design God
has greatly blessed. The Scholars in Christ's Church ought to be Students for
quietness and peace in the Churches. The Lord has not only commanded it, but
he prefers Peace before any other Sacrafice. Mat. 5.24.
2. He enjoined his Disciples to seek, peruse, and prosecute Peace. 3. It Is
further told us from the Lord, without Peace and Holnesse no man shall see God.
4. Such as pray for Peace shall be blessed with Prosperity. 5. To the
Counselors of Peace there shall be Joy. 6. The makers of Peace are honored by
being called Gods posterity. 7. Peace is a fruit of Gods spirit, and a
Character of heavenly wisdom. To have, God is the God of Peace, and Christ is
a Prince of Peace, and the Kingdom of God is Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
Thus are Saints to preserve Peace among them, and the Peace of God that passes
all understanding shall keep them.

Thus are Christians become concerned to endeavor to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of Peace; that is, What the Spirit of God has united,
formed and compacted together, either in respect of Fundamentals, Ephesians. 4.3.
governing and perfecting Principles, always to maintain the ancient Form and
true Pattern of sound Doctrine and right Discipline; That Truth and Peace may
go hand in hand together, be constant Companions, and embrace each other. You
may please to learn a Lesson from our experience in the Nation; When we are at
Peace at home, then we see our Enemies are quiet abroad; when we disturb and
afflict each other by way of persecution, it invites and emboldens our enemies
of other Nations, and in the midst of homebred contentions we hold open a door
to let in foreign adversaries. Let Christians make spiritual application, who
are within the borders of the holy Nation, to beware of Strife and Envy which
makes way for the souls enemy, but to maintain Concord and Unity, which are as
Bulwarks against the Adversary, but let Union be made, and Charity increase,
and have salt in your selves and be at Peace one with another; and as a
conclusion, I would impose this one Obligation, as the late Legacy of a dying
man; that the parties more chiefly concerned, may seriously apply it, and
profitably improve it to Gods glory and their own felicity. It Is an Incumbent
among Christians; I wish it may never cease, to keep the Unity of the spirit
(and Truth) in the bond of Peace.

Seventhly, and Lastly. Some Directions given how to uphold and support
Church Government.
IN order to the preserving and supporting Church Government, the matter will
charge every man's concernment, both Offices and Members; It invites them to
their duties, and obliges them as Christians to discharge good consciences in
all due concernments, as they are under several obligations, and become
concerned in their respective places.

And First to my well beloved Brethren in the Lord, whom God has called to
high Offices, honored with great Endowments, and obliged in public services,
and therefore I do honor them in their respective places; Even those Elders
whom the Lord has commissionated upon a more general account, who has
enlarged their missions into the Nations, and betrusted them with the care of
the Churches. I will not presume to teach them because I have more need to be
taught by them; yet I would humbly take leave to be their Remembrancer, and to
entreat them as Fathers to observe their Gospell-lessons as they are directed
to them by their several Appellations.

First, they are sometimes called Angels, to hold forth Innocence and Purity.

Secondly, Ambassadors in Christ stead, to personate his Majesty and hold forth
his glory in the World, sent to treat with sinners, and to state the terms of
Reconciliation, to engage their souls in affection with all bowels of Christian
compassion, to beseech them to be reconciled to God.

Thirdly, Messengers sent out by the Churches upon the Lords message, 2 Cor.
8.23, 24.
even upon the grand errand of publishing glad tidings. That matchless and
welcome news to poor sinners; Phil. 2.25.
even to publish and proclaim a free tender of a crucified Christ unto a
perishing and lost World; that Lamb of God that cleanses souls by his precious
blood. These are Instruments in Commission from Christ, to unite strangers to
affect sinners, to prepare members, to people the Churches.

Fourthly, They are called Bishops to show they have a charge, and are
Overseers of the souls of such as are Gospell-professors, and are to feed
Christ's flock, and to rule the Church of God, which he has dearly purchased
with his own blood.

5. Ye are Ministers to show ye ought not to have dominion over the peoples
Faith, neither to be Lords over Gods heritage, but to be faithful servants to
Christ and the Churches.

6. Ye are called Rulers, to regulate Ecclesiastical Affairs, and to set in
order things that are wanting in the Churches to ordain them Elders, and reform
disorders in the several Congregations.

7. Ye are called Stewards and placed over the Lords Household, to make
provisions, and to give them their spiritual portion of meat in due seasons;
which Office presupposes a high trust, and ye must expect to give a faithful
and just account at last. Now that you may be guided aright to rule for God, I
can do less but pray and wish that the blessing of Heaven may be upon you, and
in you, even the blessings of soul and body, health and prosperity, but more
especially in the holy and high concerns of Eternity; That ye may have all
increase of grace, fullness of of peace, and at last your portion in the
everlasting state of perfection, and in the mean time I freely wish ye may be
all sanctified and richly furnished with all spiritual gifts and heavenly
treasures, and plentifully accommodated with the fullness of the Holy Ghost;
that ye may hold forth the Image of God and the glory of Christ in dignity,
mercy, purity and severity. To prize and praise the Godly and Pious, and to
disclaim and condemn the Irreligious, and that ye may be duly directed and
constantly protected by the goodness and providence of God, in and about the
most sacred acts of Religion, and in that serious and ponderous employment of
the Ministry, that the same Lord that has commanded your service, and given
you authority, would be pleased to attend you with his presence, and give you
security, and that you may lay sure foundations, and build aright Gods holy
habitations, that ye may be Pious Examples to the believers both in Doctrine
and Conversation, and worthy patterns of Government in every Congregation;
leaving behind you solemn and solid precidents of humility, fidelity, and
gravity, with harmless and discreet demeanors accompanied with holy policy,
cincerity, and purity; that you may both constitute and consolate Churches,
unite Christians, repair breaches, and establish the Congregations Even to
perfect faith and conduct souls to the everlasting habitations

2. Concerning Elders appointed over particular Churches.
I Now direct my speech to the Elders, charged with particular Congregations.
My well-beloved Brethren; Considering my relation with you, Acts 14.23.
and the great charge committed to you, and the great account that is required
of you, I could not well omit to advise, exhort, and entreat you, not so much
to instruct you, as to remember you, Tit. 1.5.
to ponder the worthiness of your places, and the weightiness of your
obligations: That ye are to serve Christ under his three fold Offices, in
subordination to him; under the Offices of Prophet, Priest, and King. And 1. In
order and honor to his Prophetical; to teach the people whatsoever God has
commanded you, and to withold nothing that is profitable for them,
instructing them publicly, privately, and from house to house, declaring all
the counsel of God, that ye may be pure from every man's blood, and seasonably,
faithfully, and constantly, opening and preaching the wholesome words and found
doctrine, as ye have received it from the Apostles, according to the holy
Scriptures, which was sealed by God, and confirmed to them by miracles. In
Christ's name to teach and persuade, and in much affection to exhort to duty,
and by good instruction and a good pattern, to lead and guide the believers in
acts and orders of Religion, and a well ordered conversation, observing seasons
and dispensations, having an eye to the peoples estate and conditions,
discovering to every one their duty, with the benefits that attend it, and also
acquainting them with the danger, upon the neglects and contempts of it. 2
Under his Priestly Office, ye are to enquire of God for them, and to intercede
him in their behalf, that they may have an evidence of their interest in
Christ's sacrifice, and assurance of the remission of sin through him: That the
Lord would please to increase their graces, and that the blood of Christ might
purge them from all corruptions, and upon every occasion, and in every
condition, to commend them to God by supplication; and that they may be
supported and comforted in the inner man; to offer the sacrifice of
thanksgiving unto God for them, for all benefits and benedictions freely
received from him: Moreover, to instruct and acquaint them with the great
blessings, that are presented and conveyed by Christ's Death and Passion, and to
principle them in the great privilege of his Intercession, and often to
celebrate the commemoration of that memorable act, that so evidently preaches a
crucified Christ; to teach them to discern the Lords Body, and to direct them
how to communicate worthily; then to call them to the Lords Supper, and
endeavor to feast them with the Lords dainties, being communicants at the
Lords Table, craving a blessing in every administration, and a sanctified use
of every privilege and blessing, rejoicing with them, and offering
thanksgiving for them, for all benefits bestowed upon them. 3. Under his Kingly
Office, ye are to make known his Laws, and in his name to instruct them in the
order and government of his house, and learn them to know how to behave
themselves in the Church of God, that when they trespass, they may not plead
ignorance, and so oft-times matters are disputed, in the mean time duties lie
unperformed; but let Rulers require obediences according to Scripture
directions, with authority, and yet in humility, to act and govern for the
Lord, as men that are governed by the Lord, and so to rule and judge in all the
Saints affairs, as them that must give an account to God themselves; to
counsel, warn, reprove, cast out the impenitent and obstinate, to restore the
fallen, to strengthen the weak, to embrace the humble, to absolve the truly
penitent, not to bear the spiritual sword in vain, even to do justice, and to
show mercy, always designing to save the sinners, but to destroy their
iniquity: Let the exercise of discipline be well mixed with patience and
compassion; teach them to have a filial fear, and to stand in dread of him,
who threatens to slay such as will not have him reign over them. I will also
set your Titles before you, and for my self I pray and wish all suitable
blessing may attend you, in the discharge of the great work ye have to do.
These are your Names; Bishops, Elders, Pastors, Rulers, Shepherds, Stewards,
and Ministers, all which speak out the burden of your trust, and charge ye have
of souls. If one soul be of more value than the whole world, what an obligation
has he that has the oversight, and must give an account of many souls. Look
upon your Offices, and feel the weight of your burdens: Take good heed to your
selves, to your doctrine, to your discipline, and to your conversation, and to
all the flock over which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed and
rule the Church of God, which he has purchased dearly by his own blood; taking
care of them, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a
ready mind, not as though ye were lords over Gods heritage, but ensamples to
the flock: As Elders, to go before and direct them; as Rulers, to command and
govern them; as Pastors, to feed and nourish them; Ministers, not as lords, but
to be servants to them; as Stewards, to make provision for them, and give an
account of them; and as Shepherds, to watch over them. My dearly beloved,
relations in the Lord; look upon that word of the Prophet Isaiah for your
learning, and take it for your pattern, Chap. 40. Verse. 11. To feed the flock
like a shepherd, to gather the lambs in the arms of tenderness, and into the
bosom of your affections, and gently to entreat and guide such as are with
young: To lead them into green and sound pastures, and to water them in the
springs of pure and wholesome waters, and faithfully to exercise all the parts
of the office of a good shepherd; and as the wise man says, To look well to
the Flocks; even to take the number of them, the charge of them; to feed them;
to assemble them; to rule them; to defend them from men-Wolves and seducers,
that design to deceive and destroy their souls. To conclude; to act in all
godly simplicity, fidelity, and gravity toward them, as men always obliged to
give an account for them.

3. Concerning the Deacons in Christ's Congregation.
DEacons are Ministers in Christ's Churches, and are to be men of wisdom, full
of faith, and of a good report, sound in the holy mysteries, and men of pure
consciences, whose quallifications are to be suitable to the Elders, 1 Timothy 3.8.
even to be grave and sober, not greedy of filthy lucre; likewise must their
wives be grave, sober, and faithful in all things; to have well-ordered
children, and well-governed families; Phil. 1.1.
they are the poor Saints overseers, and are betrusted with the Churches
treasures; ye are Gods eminent servants, and are to be appointed and ordained
by election, prayer, and laying on of hands; your place is of weighty
concernment, and doubtless ye ought to be helps and assistants in government,
and as instruments in offices, to sulfill Gods gracious promises: In a sense,
to be fathers to the fatherless, and busbands to widows, and as it were to be
eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and as advocates for the poor saints.
And as Elders are set over the Lords people, more directly and properly in
spiritual things, and soul-matters, so Deacons are to wait and serve at the
Lords Tables, and to make due provisions for the poors external and bodily
concernments, in respect of their Deaconship, and yet may be useful to souls,
as they may be gifted disciples. In this we may behold Gods wonderful
providence and goodness, in appointing Offices and Officers, to make suitable
provisions for his peoples souls and bodies, and that at all times, and in all
conditions. And as this is an Office of eminency and necessity, so it is
accompanied with great care and much difficulty; to carry an even hand, and a
faithful heart, between the Churches poverty, and the poors necessity. And
doubtless as Elders are to admonish and reprove in neglects, touching duties of
Religion and Piety, which are more spiritual, in like manner it does concern
Deacons to exhort and reprove, in matters that respect the poors ou ward
necessity temporal. Let them remember they are instruments by the Lords order,
to take the care and oversight of the Lords poor; for where there is an
Office, without doubt there is power to admonish, that things may be done by
equallity, according to every man's state and abillity; not one burdened and
another eased. And having so good a cause to plead, in the behalf of the poor
and needy, it well becomes you to take boldness to blame such, as detain from
the poor their right of charity. My well beloved Brethren, I wish and pray ye
may be blessed from heaven with suitable graces, and spiritual accommodations,
in discharge of your duties and great obligations; that as the Lord has
honored you with a trust in your Offices, so you may faithfully endeavor to
honor God in your respective places, acting in all fidelity, confonant to the
prime Rules of justice and equal dealings, as men obliged to give an account
to God and the Churches. 1. Let them be to the poor as fathers, in respect of
compassion, as men naturally sympathizing with them in their low condition. 2.
Give them good advice and counsel, to be industrious in their callings, and
provident in their expenses, that they may not bring any unnecessary charges,
and unjust burdens, upon the Congregations. 3. If they be able, and refuse to
work, then to admonish them. The Apostle is sharp in this case, and says, If
any would not work in their common employments, neither should he cat of the
Churches charges. Lastly, They are in the place of fathers, to enquire into
their conditions, lest any lie under temptations, for want of outward supplies,
and according to the justness of their necessity, and equallness of their
poverty, to relieve them, and prepare portions for them, suitable to their
conditions; even to feed the hungry, cloth the naked, visit the sick, house
the harbourless: This has the repute of pure Religion, even to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction. Let all be done according to those
good laws of piety, equity, and charity, and of doing as a man would be done
by: And as the burden of the Office is cast upon you, see that you discharge
your trust faithfully. And in all this the Deacons are to be assisted, and
enabled by the Churches collections, distributions, and communications.

Now what power and order there ought to be among Officers themselves; what
power the Messengers have over the Elders; what power the Elders have over the
Deacons; what power the Deacons have over the Members, which doubtless there is
some order, and that among such as have power, even among Governors as well as
in Governments: But I shall refer this difficult point to some abler head, and
more skillful hand, to determine it. But thus I will conclude to wish; That as
God has called you to places of order and honor here, so you may be rewarded
and crowned with dignities and honor hereafter. To end this point, I desire
that both Officers and Members may learn a lecture for government and orders,
from the Firmaments, and by the Sun, Moon, and Stars: They be like the Sun for
light and heat; like the Moon for declaring seasons, and constancy in circuit;
and like the Stars, for holding on their course, and keeping order and place.
Now if you think these few lines, especially spoken to Officers, be worthy of
acceptance, and may deserve the place of counsel and direction, consider of
them, and the Lord increase all your wisdom and understanding.

4. Concerning the duties of Church Members to their Officers.
MEmbers of Churches as they stand in relation to their Officers it concerns
them to acquaint themselves with Scripture-obligations, what is required of
them in submission to Officers laws and orders, that they may clearly know, and
cheerfully do, what respect them on their part, to preserve true order, and
support right government.

First, It Is the mind and also command of God, that Christians should obey such
overseers, as are set over them in the Lord, and whosoever refuses to be
obedient, resist Gods appointment, always provided, they exercise rule
according to the direction of his Word, not to their persons as they are men,
but as they are the Ambassadors and Stewards of Christ, for they act by virtue
of the Lords Commissions; and it is written, the holy Ghost appoints overseers,
and it is the Lords message they are upon, Heb. 13.17.
and the Lords work they labor in, and God is a God of order, and not of
confusion, who has ordained government, and required your subjection Officers
rule for him, therefore members ought to submit to them, for the Lords sake,
for conscience sake, for the Gospels sake, and your own souls sake, That they
which watch for your souls, may give an account with joy, 1 Pet. 5 5.
and not with grief, for that will be unprofitable for you; for indeed your
obedience is not to man but to God. My dearly beloved Brethren, I beseech you
beware in this weighty matter, for there is no fin in the world which the Lord
has punished with greater severity, than he has disobedience to Authority;
neither was it ever heard that the earth opened her mouth wide, to swallow up
man, as it did Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, for their resistance and contempt to
Moses and Aaron. The Apostle Peter and St. Jude do both aggravate this crime,
as a grand transgression, for To speak evil of dignities, and to despise
dominion. St. Peter one of our ancient Fathers, in his Epistle to the scattered
Christians, he is a very full Author, and that to this very matter, who pleads
for submission to Authority, both in Nation, Church, and Family: first to
honor God, and to obey such as are appointed by him; to submit to supreme
Governors, and such as are sent by them; wives are to be in subjection to
their own husbands; servants are to be subject to their masters, not only to
the courteous and good, but also to the discourteous and froward; and this
obedience must be for the Lords sake, always to make true distinctions betwixt
spiritual and temporal services, to give to man their dues and duties, and to
God his honor and praises.

5. And as the Lord has required submission to his Ministers, so he has
enjoined his people to honor them that rule over them, 1 These. 5.12, 13.
and to know such as labor among them, and admonish them, and to count such
worthy of high respect for their works sake, Phil. 2.29.
because God himself has dignified them, and has commanded the Saints highly
to esteem them. St. Paul gives this high commendations of the faithful and
painful Elder, that he deserves the privilege of double honor; and because
their work is labourious and dangerous, the people ought to countenance them by
being courteous. The meanest instrument employed by the Lord in his service,
the Saints ought to receive, and accept with readiness and cheerfulness.
Doubtless he that loves God, his truth, order, and ordinances, will naturally
respect such as act in them as instruments: I speak not of needless customs,
or idolizing persons, but to honor God in them, and to honor God by them, and
to reverence them, because the image of God is upon them; for God was angry
with the Jews, because they despised his messengers, and it mounted their sins,
until there was no more remedies. And to some the Lord says in the
Lamentations, He would divide them, and no more regard them, because they
respected not their Teachers, nor reverenced the face of the Elders: For what
kindnesses or injuries are done to them, the Lord takes it as done to him; and
Christians are to hold such in repute, and to endeavor as much as they may to
preserve their credit, for Gospel-reputation is the life of spiritual trading:
Therefore none are to receive an accusation against an Elder, under two or
three witnesses, because in defaming an Elder, the truth suffers treble
damages; but the same and eminency of Christ's Ministers, is a glory to Christ,
and an honor to his Churches.

6. It Is a duty incumbent, and a matter of high concernment, to present humble
and fervent prayers, for such as are called to be Gospel-governours, that they
may rule for God agreeable to his counsel, contained in his Word, with all
justice and righteousness, toward all degrees of persons; and to pray, being
earnest, that God would send more faithful laborers into his harvest, Mat.
9.38.
that the ignorant world may be converted, and that there might be daily added
unto the Church of God, such as should be saved. And as for those instruments
the Lord has already appointed, to intercede him that he would be graciously
pleased, to furnish them with wisdom, enrich them with graces and spiritual
treasures, and bestow upon them the spirit of revelation; to ask for spiritual
boldness, and for the gift of utterance, and that they may be spirited against
all allurements and discouragements, that neither the fear of men, nor the
cares of this world, may remove them or divide them from their duties in Gods
services, but that they may speak as they ought to speak, with courage and
faithfulness: And to beg of God that he would please to give them right
principles of government, and to honor them with the spirit of discerning and
judgment; and as the Apostle says, 2 These. 3.1.
Pray for us; that the Gospel may have a free course, and run and be glorified,
and the Gospel Ministers preserved and delivered: For as we are to pray and
give thanks for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that we may live a
peaceable life under them, so we ought to make prayers and supplications, for
all spiritual Guiders and Governors, that the Gospel may be advanced by
them. Let all Christians know, it is a material duty in the several
Congregations, to assist the Preachers of the Word, by their fervent and
constant supplications; and that giving of thanks be returned, and duly
rendered unto God, for all those gifts and graces he has bestowed on them, and
for the blessing of God you enjoy by them, and for all the experiences they
have enjoyed through Gods goodness to them, the admirable provisions made for
them, and his wonderful providence over them, and for the unexpected benefit
you reap by the enjoyments of your Ministers, and that they are not yet removed
into corners. Let these things be freely owned, and sensibly and thankfully
acknowledged, and Gods due praises sutably and constantly rendered; and if our
duties and the Lords due Rents be seasonably discharged, it may be our
privileges may be enlarged, our spiritual immunities increased, our gifts and
graces augmented, and our liberties and freedoms established.

7. Lastly, Touching Gods Ordinance, that respects his Ministers Maintenance.
First, The Church of Christ ought to observe Gods Ordinance, to assist and
encourage Gospel Ministers with a Gospelmaintenance, that the Gospel may not
stand at their door, and the obstruction and neglect of this good work, may not
be charged upon their score. And because this point may seem the most strange,
I would borrow the more time to speak more at large. In my prosecution I would
observe this method following, to distinguish of it: What it is, and what it is
not. 1. What it is not: It Is not a compelled and forced maintenance, no
otherwise than the Word of God compels. 2. Christ's Ministers ought not to
make reward so their end of Preaching, 1 Cor. 9.17
as no pay no preach. 3. They ought not to expect much less to extort from poor
men, to whom they had more need to give than receive. 4. Upon the neglect and
none-payment, 2 Cor. 12, 14.
there is no rule in the Gospel to inflict bodily punishment.

2. What Gospel-maintenance is: It Is a free communicating by him that is taught
in the Word, Gal. 6.6.
to him that teaches in all good things: he that preaches the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14, 11.
and such as minister spiritual things to the people, the people ought to
minister temporal things to them. It Is due by divine right; the Lord has
ordained it and commanded it; his eminent servants have pleaded it and also
received it; and St. Paul speaking of his privileges, says, he has power to
forbear working; and the same Apostle, laboring with his hands, reckons it
among the rest of his afflictions, and enjoins Timothy to give himself wholly
to the Ministry: And although they may not preach for lucre, yet they ought to
be supplied in necessities, if not with conveniences; and though they may not
expect great revenues and augmentations, yet doubtless they ought to be so
remembered, as to prevent decays and poverties, that so the Ministry may be
preserved from reproaches; some having spent a great part of their outward
substance, some their all, and some more than all, which is a temptation to
Ministers, and a dishonor to the Gospel.

3. The Arguments alleged for the probation of it. As the Gospel Ministers are
reckoned within the Saints Inventory, and their graces the peoples by legacy,
so Christ's Ministers have a right of propriety in the peoples common treasury.
The Lord has given his own precept for it, and has charged his Church in
trust to perform it; the neglect is not only the breach of a Law, and omission
of duty, but it highly reflects upon the Lords honor and dignity, who has
designed all things to be acted freely; God loved us freely; Christ dyed
freely; this good news is to be preached freely; and such as are taught ought
to communicate freely. Every man's servants are allowed some recompense for
their labors; all differing persuasions do much countenance their Ministers,
and shall ours want their due encouragements; and this is no more in substance,
than what was confessed and subscribed in the Confession of Faith, 1660, If a man
neglect his own private occasions, and for the good of others adventure himself
into eminent dangers, it is reasonable he should be accommodated from the
peoples treasures: It neither consists with Religion nor common reason, that a
man in this case should bear his own burden, expend his own particular
substance, upon the public cause and general occasion; as the Apostle speaks,
No man goes to warfare at his own charges; 1 Cor. 9.7.
as the Scripture says, Who is there among you that would shut the doors for
naught: St. Paul does not say, they that preach the Gospel may live, but
should or ought to live of the Gospel. He further reasons the case from
natural civillity and common equity, to convince the Corinthians of the
Gospel Ministers maintenance; and although he refused to take of the
Corinthians, because of the false teachers, yet he tells them again, he robbed
other Churches to do their services: And he says elsewhere, they that are
employed in Gospel-labour, are accounted worthy of double honor; 1 Timothy 5.17,
18.
the workman is worthy of his meat, and the labourer of his wages: And though
they labor not so much with their hands, yet they labor with their brains,
and undertake and undergo great difficulties; they are set not only to preach,
but defend the Gospel; rulers of a holy Nation; stewards of a spiritual
Court; warriers against spiritual adversaries; planters in the Lords Vineyard;
feeders of his Flock; governors of his ships; physicians of his patients;
plowers of his earth; sowers of his seed; laborers in his harvest; and as
threshers in his barn: and all for spiritual provision for the nourishment of
souls, even for their welfare, safety, and present profit, and to guide and
conduct them to their eternal preferment.

4. The necessity of it. In the former buildings some laid the foundations,
other were overseers of the work, and some to bear burdens. There is a
necessity the Gospel should be preached, and the foundations of Gods
spiritual house laid, and overseers appointed, and the work preserved, and
others to help to bear the burdens: 1 Cor. 9.16.
For if the Gospel be neglected, there is a woe pronounced; so that in this
Gospell-work there are instruments and assistants. Then let all ponder and
seriously consider, that are become concerned and are obliged in this weighty
matter; for some betake themselves to farming, that are appointed to public
preaching, and cannot go out upon the work of the Ministry, because of the
pressing cares of family-necessity; when as the Apostle says, No man that
warreth entangles himself with the affairs of this life: 2 Timothy 2.4.
And if the Apostles thought it not reason and meet to leave the Word and
Prayer, to serve tables, an office in the Churches, much more is it
unreasonable for Gospel Preachers to leave the work, to follow worldly
occasions. I may say some have robbed their own families to spend their time in
the Churches services; for much is already known, and much more is feared and
foreseen, of the great inconveniences that attend this business as natural
consequences.

5. The bad and sad effects that accompany the neglect of it. It Is to be feared
that some that have been eminent in the Ministry, have declined the way of
truth and verity, being under temptations, for want of supplies necessary. In
the former dispensation, when the people detained the Lords servants right, the
Lord charged them that they robbed him, and for that he would come as a swift
witness against them: Mal. 8.3.
If the Scripture says it is even so in the duty, we may justly fear it may be
even so in the penalty. If the keeping back the laborers wages, Jam. 5.4.
cries in the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, shall not we fear if we neglect such
as faithfully and painfully labor in the Word and Ministry. My dearly beloved
Brethren, let these things be pondered; I do not charge you but warn you, and
in discharge of my own duty, and to give you notice to escape the danger of the
penalty; for there is a neglect, and it will be charged somewhere; let every
man do his duty according to his measure. This then is the great strait, that
either the work of the Lord must be neglected, or that which properly belongs
to wife and children, must be wasted. It Is not the mind, neither is it for Gods
honor, that one servant should be oppressed and another eased; and whether the
Lord may not reckon for estates decayed, bodies wasted, spirits and blood spent
and not regarded, as well as consciences oppressed and bodies destroyed. This is
the strait betwixt two, either to neglect the worthy work of the Gospel, or
else to be in danger of being reputed worse than an Infidel. Moreover besides
all this; it is more than hard to obtain a succession of Ministers, because it is
foreseen and known the Church makes no provisions: And these things I have not
only by intelligence, but by sad and known experience.

6. There are some circumstances to consider, touching and relating to this
matter. Let none be mistaken or deceived, as to think that I plead for
particular persons, Phil. 4.17.
or private interest; not that I desire a gift, or that it should be so done to
me: For I thought I might speak the more freely, because I have not been
chargeable to any, no otherwise than in common entertainments; nay if need be I
can give testimony, that I have refused when it has been tendered me. But I can
assign more public and better ends; as the preaching the Gospel, the
conversion of sinners, Tit. 1.9.
the constituting and confirming of Churches, the convincing and improving
gainsayers, the uniting Christians, the repairing breaches, and the
establishing and setting in order the Congregations, and moreover, that fruit
might abound upon the Lords peoples account. There may be times and occasions
that a man may abate of his due, and remit of his right: Some circumstances may
require it, where the people have not ability, and when the Lords people may be
in distress and necessity, whose conditions may call for more than ordinary
supplies: Such circumstances ought to be observed, notwithstanding it be a duty
commanded. I speak not this that the Lords people should be burdened, nor any
particular man's desire answered, but that every man's duty and conscience may be
discharged, the Gospel preached, Ministers encouraged, and the work of God
furthered and advanced.

7. An Exhortation to discharge your duties in these weighty businesses. God is
not mocked; what a man sowes that he shall reap. Let not me be thought tedious,
neither let this work be counted weariness: There is such great need the
Gospel should be spread, and such great complaints for instruments, moves and
presses me to be earnest to persuade to answer their expectations, and the
Lords requirements. 1. Let the Lords Ministers see there be no default and
neglect in them, 2 Pet. 5.2.
neither to have a covetous desire after gain and filthy lucre; but freely to
go out in the Lords name upon the Lords work, and cheerfully cast themselves
upon the Lords promises and providence, for their success and security. And
let the Churches see that they neglect not their duty, as helps and assistants
to them in the Ministry; for coin and treasure is the sinews of warfare. Let
every one help as he has received, not one eased, and another over-burdened: 2
Cor. 3.13, 14.
Let this law be the rule and order, as you would have another do to you, do
you in like manner to another. And whose heart the Lord has enlarged toward
this needful work, let it be done cheerfully and in charity, agreeable to
principles of equallity, answerable to ability, and consonant to rules of
equity, for all receipts must be accounted, for we are but Stewards of that we
are possessed, for the earth is the Lords and all things therein, for we our
selves are not our own, neither is any of our substance or coin; bodies, goods,
and spirits, are to glorify him, for we are but tenants to the immortal and
universal Lord, when he calls for our selves or substance to serve him, we
ought to render up all to him; for every Christian man the Lord has made
stewards of a worldly possession, stands obliged with this Rentcharge, by
virtue of Religion; besides those of his family, to communicate to the poor
saints, and such as labor in the Ministry. Beloved brethren, I can do no less
but caution you against covetousness, Col. 3.5.
which is so destructive to piety, and which the Apostle calls Idolatry, which
especially consists of two general parts, either an unlawful getting and
possessing, or an unjust withholding and detaining that from another, of which
he is the true owner, especially when his necessity calls for it speedily.
Beware then of detaining any dues from the Lord when he calls for it, even that
which he has reserved and excepted for the poor Saints, and his ministering
servants, which belongs to them, as given from the Lord, and proved to be their
right by his Word. My dearly beloved brethren, let not me be thought the worse,
although I present you with this discourse. I hope you will excuse and pardon
my boldness and plainness, because it is a public good, and an universal
cause, even a design to advance the honor of God, and for poor souls spiritual
and eternal good. Let every man help as he has received, and as he stands
obliged, whether it be in respect of spiritualls or temporalls: The wise man
with his wisdom; the gifted man by exhortation; the rich man with his
treasures; all help together by their hearty and fervent prayers. He that
gives let him do it with singleness; he that rules, with diligence; and he
that shows mercy, with chearfullness, for the Lord loves a cheerful giver.
Romans 12.8.
Take one reason more: When many shoulders are set to bear a heavy weight, it
causes each man's burden to become very light; and as Gospel Preachers ought to
be tender in being chargeable to the Churches, so ought Churches not to make
the Gospel burdensome to the Preachers. Let Christians comply and agree
together, as Joab and Abishai did, to maintain a temporal war; Joab said to
his brother, If the enemy be too strong for me, thou shall help me, if he be
too strong for thee, I will help thee: So ought brethren to do who are engaged
in the cause of Christ, to assist each other in all spiritual combats, and to
help to bear one another burdens, Gal. 6.2.
for this is to fulfill the royal Law of Christ. But to be short and plain; my
brethren, I am not without my fear, lest we should provoke the Lords
displeasure, even to blast our blessings, and dispossess us of our freedoms,
because he has done so much for us, and we have done so little for others;
being subject to forget we ought to be lights to the world, Mat. 5.13, 14.
and salt to the earth; and because we have not such sympathizing dispositions,
and compassionate hearts, to pity the dark condition of the world, and
ignorant estate of poor sinners, even while we hear them calling upon us in
several places, as it were complaining for want, and calling out for help, and
asking relief for their poor souls. Let Churches therefore set out their lights
and every one add their helps, some as actual instruments, others as
isntrumental assistants, that the Gospel may be published, unregenerate
persons converted, and hungry and thirsty souls may be supplied and refreshed.
I will take leave to add one thing more which I have observed: That our
Christian relations come short of some other persuasions, who when they depart
this world possessed of temporal wealth, bequeath part to some pious and public
services; and this part of their charity as it were perfumes their memory, and
like Abels faith and sacrifice will speak and (in a sense) preach after a man
dies. If ye believe this concerns you, consider what I say, and the Lord give
you understanding in all things.

Object. But we are unable and cannot give because of our families, and many
other expenses, payments, and charges.

Answ. The husbandman that labors, must first be partaker and receive of the
fruits. Ought not Christians first to advance the kingdom of God, 2 Timothy 2.6.
and pay their first fruits to their supreme Lord. Let the Objection be thus
resolved; that the interest of Christ and the cause of souls shall be first
preferred. If you cannot give talents, yet cast in your mites into the common
treasury, for it will be accepted according to what a man has, if it be done
cheerfully. Take heed my brethren of distrusting or murmuring at free
disbursing to Gospell-Preaching; he that thus expends his treasure lends to the
Lord, Heb. 6.10.
and the Lord will not forget but requite them an hundred fold. Who knows but
the Lord intends to tempt you to prove him, as in the Prophet Malachies time,
when he said, If you will bring meat into my storehouse, see if I will not
open the windows of heaven, and pour you out blessings without measure, that
there shall not be room enough to receive it. Who knows but that for a little
expended, there may be much received: But I leave it to the wise for them to
apply and Gospellize. Heb. 13.16.
To do good and communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased, and the sacrificer shall be well rewarded.

And if in this small Tract any thing that pertains to this present Subject,
has either slipped my memory, or has been above my capacity, that has or may
arise as a question in Christ's Congregation, I not knowing what particular
thing, I will give this general resolution: That when two things or two ways
shall arise in debate, and one of them is doubtful and the other is safe, then
in such a case, to choose the way that is safe, always designing and pursuing
after the things that make for peace. Romans 14.19.


Thus I have briefly declared and freely tendered my judgment and opinion, in
my own plain style, and according to my own understanding: It has also been my
care to avoid occasions of offenses and grounds of disputations; and withal I
have endeavored to free my self from detraction and derogation of any man's
person, office, or persuasion, it being much contrary to my disposition; yet
this I know, what of truth I have written, bears its opposition to all that
oppose it, whether they speak evil of it, or come short of it, or act contrary
to it, or depart from it, it stands in its own defense. If yet notwithstanding
my respect to dissenting and differing brethren, and tenderness to others, any
man shall carp and be contentious, 1 Cor. 11.16.
their end will be the better discovered; let them know we have no such
custom, nor the Churches of God.

To conclude all, I give this Admonition, Caution, and Encouragement, touching
the exercise of right discipline and righteous government; that ye call to
memory the danger of the curse, chreatned against such as do the work of the
Lord negligently, or deceitfully, and sloathfully, witness old Ely, for
reproving too lightly, and Saul for executing judgment deceitfully, and that
wicked sloathfull person, who neglected to improve his talent faithfully, for
his negligence and remisness, is sencenced to be bound hand and foot, and cast
into utter darkness. Mat. 25.26, 30.
Moreover Judas for deceit and treachery, and Demas for turning from the truth
to idolatry: Besides in the time of the Prophet Malachy, the Lord blames the
people for dealing deceitfully, detaining from his servants their right of
propriety, by which his service should be performed, his servants maintained,
and the poor relieved: The Lord is pleased to define the sin, and calls it
robbery and injustice, he repayes the evil with a curse of penury. And as all
Scripture is recorded for our learning and instruction, so these presidents of
miscarriages and punishments, are become our premonitions and warnings, that by
preventing the sins, we may clearly escape the punishments. Thus much be spoken
touching the Caution and Admonition.

Lastly, A word of Encouragement, and so I have done: I am of St. Peter's
persuasion, to put you in remembrance of these things, although ye know them,
and be established in them; but to observe the special notice the Lord takes,
and countenance he manifests, to such as are just and righteous, as Noah, Lot,
and Phineas, Caleb, Joshua, and many others, who for their integrity, fidelity,
and singularity, are blessed with special security, that while others fall under
judgment and misery, as a demonstration, the Lord records their names,
commends their actions, secures their persons, and comprehends in the blessing
their posterities and families. The Prophet Jeremiah speaking in commendations
of Josiah King of Judah, said thus of him, Jer. 22.15, 16.
that he did execute judgment and justice, and then it was well with him; this
is rightly to know God; Was not this to know me, says the Lord. These that
were men of justice and faithfulness, the Lord counts it unto them for
righteousness. John the Baptist was a righteous man, and faithful and just in
reproving sin, and so obtained this commendation to be called a just and holy
man. Also the Lord was pleased greatly to honor Abraham, in making him privy
to his design of justice upon Sodom, and admits him to parle touching their
destruction; the Lord gives this character of him, that he will command his
children and his household after him, Genesis 18.19.
and like a man of government, to keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and
judgment. The Lord does so highly account and so much delight in truth and
judgment, that if there were but one man found in the City Jerusalem, Jer. 5.1.
to seek for it, and in the execution of it, notwithstanding a wicked City, he
would pardon it. The Lord takes such pleasure in justice, that he prefers it
above other sacrifice, for it is the habitation of his holiness.

Finally, The benefits that attend such as give Christ's servants their due
encouragements. If I may take leave once again to look back into the Old
Testament Mapp, recorded in the Prophecy of Malaechy, I will show you a
threefold blessing that attends this duty. 1. The Lord invites and tempts them
to do their duty. 2. He is pleased to promise upon doing their duty, he will
pour out blessings, and that abundantly for their sakes. 3. He will remove the
curse, stop the destroyer, reprove the consumer, and rebuke the devourer. 4.
The Lord will so raise their fame and commendations, that they shall be called
a blessed people, and that by all Nations. In my making use of Old Testament
Scriptures, it is not to make it our rule, but to make use of their concurrences
and assistances, for they may in some measure help us as mapps and glasses to
discover our duties, and to see our dangers. For as in the Gospel days,
duties are more richly and rarely blessed, so new testaments, neglects, Heb.
10.28, 29.
and contempts, are more sorely and dreadfully punished. Thus I have as it were
set some Landmarks to guide you in the way to felicity, and also discovered
some Seamarks to avoid the rocks of misery; and having thus born my testimony,
I commend you all to God, and wish you eternal mansions of glory.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
NOw if any Brother or Well-wisher shall conscientiously doubt or be
dis-satisfied, touching any particular Point contained in this Treatise,
because of my speaking to many things in a little room: And if he or they shall
be serious in so doing, and will be-friend me so far, and do me that courtesy,
to send to me, before they condemn me, and let me know their scruples in a few
words of writing, I shall look upon my self obliged both in affection and
reason, to endeavor to give them full satisfaction.

FINIS.
A Table of the principal Matters contained in this Book.
CHAP. I. THe Causes of peace and prosperity in the Churches of Jesus Christ.
page 1, 2. The antiquity and dignity of Church Government. p. 3. The personal
and princely Excellencies in Christ, as the head of his Church. p. 6. Chap. 2.
Showing the definition of Church Government in New Testament days, viz. in not
inflicting bodily punishment upon offenders, but spiritually executing Laws
without knowing faces, respecting persons, wresting causes, either for favor
or prejudice to any persons. p. 9. A true Ministers most special work and duty
to the flock under all circumstances, laid down. p. 11, 12. Chap. 3. Showing
the necessity of and reasons for Church Governors and Governments. p. 12, 13.
Chap. 4. Showing the good use and great benefit that comes by right Government.
p. 19. Right Government is destructive to iniquity, and a protection to piety.
p. 22, 23. Chap. 5. Rules tendered to accomplish a right Government, and the
manner how to choose their Officers. p. 26. 27. The work of the Officers when
chosen. p. 28, 29, 30. Chap. 6. Showing the duty of Christians, as they stand
related to civil Magistrates, requiring civil subjection, not only for wrath,
but for conscience sake. p. 38. Chap. 7. Treating of Family duties, Superiors
to Inferiors, and Inferiors to Superiors, with Directions to a religious
choice in Yoke-fellows. p. 40, 41, etc. Chap. 8. Treating particularly of
Family duties. p. 51. Chap. 9. Treating of private and personal Government. p.
56. Cautions not to grieve Gods Spirit, nor offend Conscience. p. 61. Rules for
the heart, mouth, eyes, and ears. p. 65, etc. Chap. 10. Showing the true order
and right manner of executing Church Government, in seven Rules. p. 73, 74.
Chap. 11. Treating of restitution to be made by an offender. p. 76. Concerning
dealing with Heretics, and other offenders. p. 77, 78. Chap. 12. Rules of
Discipline how to treat an offender in orderlyest ways; how to restore him. p.
80. Rules of better observation of the Lords Day, or First Day Sabbath. p. 83.
Rules for Admonition of penitent persons after Excommunication. p. 87. Chap.
13. Showing what Privileges are to be maintained to Officers, and Members in
Christ's Congregation. p. 88, etc. Chap. 14. Showing what Disorders ought to be
prevented, corrected, or removed. p. 95. Rules how the offended ought to treat
the offending Brother. p. 97, etc. Seven Descriptions of the nature of the
Devil, the Churches adversary, by his names. p. 102. Chap. 15. Showing what
Branches of injustice and oppression are to be avoided in the punishment of
sin. p. 103. Chap. 16. Showing the true order and the execution of Discipline
and Justice. p. 105. Rules to set out the ugly nature of sin in its
aggravations, to the through humbling the offender. p. 109. Useful Directions
for the promoting and preserving unity and peace in the Churches of Christ. p.
112, 113, etc. Chap. 17. Giving Directions how to uphold and preserve
Church Government. p. 115 etc. Chap. 18. Showing the duty of particular Elders
over particular Churches. p. 119. to 124. Chap. 19. Showing the Office and Duty
of Deacons in Christ's Congregations. p. 124. to 129. Chap. 20. Showing the Duty
of Church Members to their Officers. p. 129, 130, etc. A Duty incumbent and of
high concern for Churches to present humble, frequent, and fervent prayers, for
such as are called to be Gospell-Governours, that they may rule for God in
justice and righteousness, and for the increase of faithful Laborers in his
harvest. p. 132, to 135. Chap. 21. Showing what God has ordained respecting
his Ministers Maintenance. p. 135, 136, etc. The Necessity of making careful
and suitable provision for the Ministry, with the sad effects that accompany the
contrary. p. 139, 140, etc. Encouragements to this work, showing the advantages
that attend the due performance of it. p. 143, 144, etc. Counsel to
forwardness in assisting the Ministry with our worldly possessions: Also a
Caution against Covetonsness, describing what it is. p. 145, 146. Objections
against this needful work answered. p. 148. A general resolution in all
difficult and doubtful Cases. p. 149. The dreadful consequences in Minister
and People, to do the work of the Lord negligently, with comfortable
Encouragements to constant diligence. p. 150, 151, 152, etc.

