A DIALOGUE BETWEEN A Blind Man AND DEATH.
Bl. M. THE more Men see, the less they do enquire;
The worse they see, the more they do desire
Others to grant, what Blindness cannot give,
And for Intelligence grow Inquisitive;
They ask to be informed, who cannot see;
I know it by Sad Experience, Woe is me!

Death. Where are you, Sir? What, sitting all alone?
I did suppose 'twas you by that Sad Moan:
Coming this way to gather what is my due,
I thought it not amiss to call on you.

B. I do not know that Voice, it is sure some Stranger,
And by his words, he seems to Boad me Danger.

D. You guess aright, Sir, and before I go,
I Will make you know me whether you will or no.

B. Why, what are you? Pray tell me, what is your name?
And what is your Business? and from whence you came?

D. I will declare what no Man can deny:
There Is none so great a Traveller as I;
Yet you must know I am no wandering Rover,
For my Dominion lies the World all over:
I March through Court and Country, Town and City;
I know neither how to Fear, nor how to Pity.
The highest Cedar, and the lowest Flower,
Sooner or later do both feel my Power:
The mighty'st Emperors do Submit to me,
Nor is the poorest Tattered Beggar free:
In Peace I Glean here one, and there another;
Sometimes I sweep away whole Streets together.
In times of War, thus much I can Divine,
Whoever gets the Day, the Triumph's Mine.
I am indeed a very great Commander;
'Twas I that Conquered that Great Alexander:
And after all the Victories he wan,
Compelled him to Confess, he was a Man.
Were you Goliath great, or Sampson strong,
Were you as Wise, as Rich as Solomon;
Were you as Nestor Old, as Infant Young;
Had you the fairest Cheek, the sweetest Tongue:
Yet you must stoop, all these will naught avail,
For my Arrests do not admit of Bail;
For to deal plainly, Sir, my Name is Death,
And it is my Business to Demand your Breath.

B. My Breath and Life shall both go out together.

D. And on that Errand 'twas that I came hither:
I Will have both Breath and Life without delay,
You must and shall dispatch: Come, Come away.

B. What need such posting haste? pray change your Mind,
It Is a poor Conquest to Surprise the Blind.

D. You may not call it Posting, nor Surprise;
For you had warning when you lost your Eyes:
Nor could you hope your House should long be free,
After the Windows were possessed by me.

B. But Life is sweet; who would not, if he might,
Have a long Day before he bid good Night?
O spare me yet a while, slight not my Tears;

D. Hard Hearts, and Hungry Bellies, have no Ears.

B. I am not yet quite ready for the Table.

D. All Is one to me, I am Inexorable.

B. Yet by your favor I may step aside;

D. Be not deceived, for it is in vain to hide;
My Forces are dispersed through all Places,
And Act for me without respect of Faces;
I have a Thousand ways to shorten Life,
Besides a Rapier, Pistol, Sword and Knife;
A Fly, an Hair, the Splinter of a Thorn,
A little Scratch, the cutting of a Corn
Have sometimes done my Business heretofore
So to the full, that I need wish no more;
Should all these fail, enough of Humors lurk
Within your Body, Sir, to do my work.

B. Well then, let some one Run for my Physician,
Tell him I want his Aid in this Condition.

D. Run Boy, and fetch him, call the whole College, do,
For I intend to have them shortly too;
I value not their Potions, nor their Pills;
Nor all the Cordials in the Doctors Bills;
When my Time's come, let them do what they can,
We have my due, so vain a thing is Man!
Should Galen and Hipocrates both join,
And Paracelsus too, with them Combine,
Let them all meet to Countermine my strength,
Yet shall they be my Prisoners all, at length:
I grant, that Men of Learning, Worth, and Art,
May have the better of me at the Start.
But in long running they will give out, and tire,
And quit the Field, and leave me my desire;
As for those Quacks who Threaten to undo me,
They are my Friends, and speed some Patients to me,

B. Well, if I must, I will yield you the Day:
It Is so Enacted, and I must Obey;
Henceforth I Will count my self among your Debtors:
For it is I see the measure of my Betters,
But tell me now, When did your Power Commence?

D. My Power began from Adam's first Offense.

B. From Adam's first Offense? O base Beginning?
Whose very first Original was Sinning.

D. My Rising did from Adam's Fall begin,
And ever since my strength and sting's from Sin.

B. To know wherein the Enemy's strength does lie,
In my Conceit, is half a Victory,
Have you Commission now for what you do?

D. I have Commission, What Is all this to you?

B. Yes, very much; for now I understand,
I am not altogether at your Command:
My Life's at his who gave you this Commission;
To him I Will therefore make with my Petition;
I Will seek his Love, and on his Mercy trust,
And when my sins are Pardoned, do your worst.

D. That you may know how far my Power Extends,
I will Divorse you from your dearest Friends;
You shall resign your Jewels, Money, Plate;
Your Earthly Joys shall all be out of date;
I will deprive you of your dainty Fare;
I Will strip you to your Skin, Naked and Bare;
Linen or Woolen you shall have to wind you,
As for the rest, all must be left behind you:
Bound Hand and Foot I Will bring you to my Den,
Where constant, Dreadful Darkness Reigns; and then
Your only Dwelling House shall be a Cave,
Your Lodging Room, a little narrow Grave,
A Chest your Closet, and a Sheet your Dress;
And your Companions, Worms and Rottenness.

B. If this be all the Mischief you can do,
Your Harbingers deserve more Dread than you:
Diseases are your Harbingers I am sure,
Many of which, it is grievous to endure;
But when once Dead, I shall not then complain
Of Cold or Hunger, Poverty or Pain.

D. There Is one thing more, which here to mind I call,
When once I come, then come I once for all;
And when my stroke does Soul and Body Sever,
What Is left undone, must be undone for Ever.

B. That Is a great Truth, and I have learned to know,
That there is no Working in the Grave below;
To be beforehand therefore I will try,
That then I may have naught to do but Die:
But tell me, Sir, do all Men Die alike?

D. To me they do, for whom God bids, I strike,
Look how the Foolish Die, so Die the Wise,
As do the Righteous, so the Sinner Dies;
The greatest difference will appear hereafter,
But that is a thing that is beyond my Charter.
That I to some prove better, to some worse,
To some a Blessing, and to some a Curse,
That Is none of mine, I may not undertake it,
It Is God's appointment, and Men's works that make it.
Hence it is that Sinners Troubles never Cease,
And that the Upright Man his End is Peace.

B. There now remains but only one thing more:
Will not your Power be one Day out of Door?

D. Must I needs tell you, Sir? it is certain true,
There is a Death for me as well as you,
And mine is the worse, for I must Die for Ever,
You may Revive again, but I shall Never.

B. By all that has been said, now I do see,
You needed not have been so rough with me.

D. Come, let that pass; The kinder to appear,
I will reveal a Secret in your Ear.
The Death of Christ upon the painful Cross,
Which seemed to be my Gain, turned to my Loss:
All in his Hair the Strength of Sampson lay,
All with his Hair went Sampson's Strength away.
I have no strength but what I had from Sin,
I have no sting but what lies hid therein;
Christ Suffering Death to put this Sin away,
Has made me his, whom I supposed my Prey;
My strength is now Decayed, my sting Rebated,
My Boldness Checked, and my Dominion Mated;
And I am now both Faint and Feeble grown,
Much like to Sampson, when his Hair was gone;
In my own Craft I was completly Routed;
My Jaws were broken, and my Holders Outed:
What now I Catch I have no Power to keep,
My very Name is changed from Death, to Sleep.
It Is true, I seized on Christ, and had him down,
And Bound him in a Prison of my own;
But all my strongest Doors, Bars, Bolts, and Bands,
Were but mere Nothings in his Mighty Hands:
He broke through all, and left my Doors wide Open,
And all his Servants Prisoners of Hope;
For though they Die, yet with Devout Affection
They do expect a Joyful Resurrection;
And with their Master to be brought again,
That they with him for ever may remain.
Thus Christ by Dying did become Victorious,
And from his Bed of Darkness rose more Glorious.
And I by Binding him, made my self Fast,
And his, I know, will prove my Death at Last.

B. These words give Comfort, and Instruction too,
Henceforth I shall be better pleased with you.
Decreed it is for all Men once to Die,
After that Judgment, then Eternity.
To Prayer therefore will I join Endeavor,
So to Live here, that I may Live for Ever:
And seeing they that have, and keep Christ's words,
Whether they Live or Die, be all the Lords,
Repentance, Faith, and New-obedience shall
Fit and prepare me for my Funeral;
From whence I trust my Savior will Translate me
In Season due, beyond their reach that Hate me;
Even to that place of Life and Glory too,
Where neither Death, nor Sin, has ought to do:
This Hope in me, that Word of his does Cherish,
He that Believes in me shall never Perish.
Now welcome Death upon my Saviors Score,
Who would not Die to Live for Evermore?

D. Sir, I perceive you speak not without Reason,
I Will leave you now, and call some other Season.

B. Call when you please, I will await that Call,
And while I stand, make ready for my Fall:
In the mean time, my constant Prayers shall be,
From Sudden, and from Endless Death

Good Lord deliver me.

Judge not of Death by Sense, lest you mistake it:
Death's neither Friend nor Foe, but as you make it.
Live as you should, you need not to Complain,
For where to Live is Christ, to Die is Gain.

R. S.

FINIS.

