A Bosome-Piece FOR COMMUNICANTS. OR, THE Nature and Design OF THE SACRAMENT Of
the Lord's Supper.

Laid Open in a Letter to Mrs. ELIZ. YEARLEY, of Ockham in Surrey.

By JOSHVA STANLEY, Late Chaplain to the Lady Nicholas.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1699.

To my truly Virtuous Cozen, Mrs. ELIZ. YEARLEY, of Ockham in Surry.
Madam, my dear Cozen!
I must of necessity, return this Bosome-Piece into your Breast again, lest
(unhappily) my Cold Affections Congeal so warm a Subject. Truly, I am apt often
to Censure my self with being a bad master to so Divine a piece; and fancy that
it longs to be remitted Home, where it may follow it is wonted Exercise with a
more Zealous Divinity. Take it, then, Madam, my dear Cozen! but not with a
Belief, that it has made no Impression on my obdurate Heart; but, to the
Contrary, since through it is Merit, and the Author's Worth, I have made it to the
Life Universal.

As to the Late Reverend Mr. Stanley's Letter, I have Presumed to Entitle it; A
Bosome-Piece for Communicants, etc. For, What Breast Plate so Armor-proof
against the Assaults of Death and Hell, as the blessed Sacrament of our
Redeemer's Body and Blood? -- A Breast Plate as well to be worn by the Fair Sex,
as others, to the making 'em Champions over the Vassals of Sin, and complete
Heroesses in Divinity, under the Banner of their GOD!

In fine, the World may give a large Guess how Divine a Soul the now Happy
Author had, and how close his Zeal kept him to the Altar of his holy Jesus, by
the following Letter; which is, at your Command returned Home in a more
Universal Dress, from him who is,

Madam, my dear Cozen! your Humble Servant, Benj. Harris, junr.
Jan. 12. School.
A BOSOME-PIECE FOR Communicants: In a LETTER.
Betty!
BECAUSE you Desire to Receive the Sacrament, (and if you did not Desire it,
you would not be Fit to Receive it:) it is Fit you should Understand in some
Measure, the Meaning of what you Do, and what you Receive, that so your Desires
may be Increased in some Proportion to the Excellency of the Thing, and your
Zeal may not be altogether without Knowledge. Therefore be Pleased to Accept,
for the present, this Plain and Easy Direction.

FIRST, I. What a Sacrament is.
It is Fit you should Understand, What a Sacrament is.

A Sacrament is a Seal of the Promises of GOD, made to us in CHRIST, wherein,
by some Outward Signs, Commanded by GOD, and Blessed by His Minister, our
blessed Savior, with all the Blessings he has purchased for us, is Signified
and Conveyed to our Souls; and (that we may not Doubt) it is likewise a Pledge
and Earnest of all those Things.

AND, the Reason that GOD gives us Spiritual Blessings, by Outward and Visible
Signs, is, That He may condescend to our weak Capacities, to Help our
Infirmities, and Understandings, and to Strengthen our Faith, and to mind us of
His Covenant with us, and of Ours with Him; for He Promises, Mercy, Grace,
Peace, and Pardon here, and Eternal Life Hereafter, to all those that keep His
Commandments, and come unto Him by Jesus Christ; and we, for our part, promise
all Duty, and Love, and a sincere Obedience, to him again.

NOW as for the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, It Is Nature opened briefly.
I shall lay down the Nature and Design of it in the plainest method I can
devise; deriving it from the very Fountain, by explaining those Texts of
Scripture, wherein we find it described.

[This do in remembrance of Me] This is a Command Luc. 22.19.
of CHRIST, 1 Cor. 11.24.
which makes it an indispensable Duty to every one that calls himself a
Christian, to come to the Sacrament, as soon as he understands it; and when he
is come, it tells him, That it is his Duty to remember that great Love, and
bitter Sufferings of CHRIST dying for his Sins; which, how great soever, if we
consider the Malice of some, and the Frailties of all, might have been
forgotten; unless remembered, and continually fixed in our minds, by some
visible Sign or Token: And so by this --

[WE show the LORD's Death till he come.] 1 Cor. 11.26.
That is, Declare openly, that we do seriously, and heartily Believe, that
CHRIST did Dye for us, to Redeem us, and procure great Blessings for us; some
of which He bestows here, especially in the Sacrament; and some of which He
faithfully keeps for us hereafter. And besides this, We show, and offer unto
GOD the Father, the Sufferings, the Obedience, and Sacrifice of his Dear Son,
pleading them, for that Pardon, and those Graces, which we want: And this we do
with all possible Praise, Humility, and Thanksgiving. And so it is called,

[The Cup of Blessing;] 1 Cor. 10.16.
Wherein we offer up our hearty Praises, and Adoration,

To GOD the Father, who gave His Son for us; and now is ready to give him to us.

To GOD the Son, who gave Himself for us; and now offers Himself to us, and to
His Father for us. And,

To GOD the Holy Ghost, through whom Christ was offered up; and who now conveys
Him to us, with all the Benefits of that Eternal and Glorious Sacrifice. And so
it is called,

[THE Communion of the Body, 1 Cor. 10.16.
and Blood of CHRIST.] That is, a holy Ordinance and Institution, whereby GOD
the Father does communicate, and impart to worthy Receivers, all the Benefits
of CHRIST's Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension; all which is
meant by the Body and Blood of CHRIST, and all which good things are conveyed
to us, and by those outward Signs of Bread and Wine.

AND therefore, (says CHRIST) after He had broke, and blessed the Bread, Take,
Eat, this is my Body, Mat. 26.26. Luc. 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24.
and for the Cup, This is my Blood. Not that they are really so indeed; for you
may see, and taste it to be Bread and Wine; but they are the Figures, and
Representations of the Body and Blood of CHRIST. In Pictures, we say, this
Picture is a Man, and this is an Angel; that is, these Pictures do represent
such things. And therefore, when you see the Bread blessed, and broken by the
Minister, then lift up your Heart, and imagine to your self, that you behold
your dear Savior's Body torn with Whips and Scourges, Crucified, and dying
upon the Cross: And so likewise, when the Wine is poured forth in Consecration;
think you see your Savior's Side pierced, and His precious Blood streaming
forth upon every penitent Sinner, to wash away his Stains and Corruptions: And
then, think more sadly with your self, that your Sins have often done the same,
and been as cruel in Crucifying the Lord of Glory, and putting him to an open
shame; and be mighty Humble, and mighty Thankful.

FOR, Mat. 26.28. Luc. 22.20.
this is the Blood of the New Testament, which is Shed for you, and for many,
for the Remission of Sins. 1 Cor. 11.25.
Now, this New Testament is nothing else, but the Second Covenant, confirmed to
us in the Blood of JESUS, wherein GOD promises Pardon to every Sinner that
truly Repents, and Grace, and Peace, in this Life, and Glory hereafter: And
here it is in this Sacrament, which is called the Blood of the New Testament,
that GOD Offers, and Seals, and Conveys to our Souls, all these Promises, and
Blessings; and we by Faith do receive them, and at the same time enter into
Covenant with him, to perform a Faithful, and Sincere Obedience to all His
Commands.

NOW, from these Places of Scripture, thus Explained, and made easy for any
Capacity, You may Observe, That this is the Nature and Design of the Sacrament
of the LORD's Supper.

THAT it is a Feast of Mercies,
wherein we thankfully remember the Great Love, and Bitter Sufferings of
CHRIST; and firmly Believe to be a Seal of that Gracious Covenant, which GOD
has made with His Blood; and a Pledge or Earnest of all those Benefits He has
procured for us, by the Obedience of his Life and Death.

AND here then it is, my Friend, that with an humble penitent Heart, and a
lively Faith working by Love, you may Expect to receive spiritual nourishment
for your Soul; and such increase of Grace, as will enable you more and more for
the work of your Salvation, and the Subduing of your Corruptions, and the
Reparing of your Infirmities, and the exercise of a Holy Religion, till GOD
shall see you meet to be partaker of His Glory.

AND therefore, here you must offer up your Self, your Soul and Body, as a
reasonable Sacrifice, which being joined to that Oblation of CHRIST upon the
Altar is well-pleasing and acceptable unto GOD.

For you must understand that here the Minister offers up to God the Father, in
the Name of all the Communicants, the Passion and Sacrifice of his dearly be
loved Son, as a Sacrifice still Fresh and Powerful for our Pardon and
Salvation. And as the Minister does this here, in a Sacramental way, so Christ,
the true Priest, does really offer up Himself in Heaven to His Father, for the
Remission and Expiation of all our Sins, who receive Him worthily; that is,
with a true Repentance, and a lively Faith, a perfect Charity, and a great
Love, Humility, and Devotion.

But as for your Preparation, you will find your self best Instructed out of
your Practice of Piety, and, The Whole Duty of Man.

Only, I beseech you, my Friend, that you would be very, Extremely careful in
your Examination, at some time, when you can, with convenience retire, in
Private; for upon that, will depend much of the Efficacy, and Force, and
Sincerity of your Repentance, and So Consequently your worthy Communicating.
For which I shall desire you to look upon that Short Thing of Particulars, at
the end of the Whole Duty of Man.

I commend this Form of the Explanation of the Sacrament to you, no longer,
than you shall be better Provided for. I have designed by this, to Ease your
memory, and fix your Thoughts, and therefore I will trouble you no Further, but
Commend you to these Good Books; praying, That as you do intend to receive The
LORD JESUS CHRIST, so you would walk in Him; Rooted and built up in Him, and
Stablished in the Faith, wherein you have been Taught, Col. 2.6.7.
abounding therein, with Thanksgiving.

Even so Prays your True Friend Joshua Stanley.

A Prayer to be said before you receive the Sacrament.
O Most merciful God, Who have in thy great goodness prepared this spiritual
feast for sick and famished souls, make my desires and gasping after it,
answerable to my needs of it. I have, with the prodigal, wasted that portion of
grace thou bestowedst upon me; and therefore do infinitely want a supply out of
this treasury: But, O Lord, how shall such a wretch as I dare to approach this
holy Table? I am a Dog, how shall I presume to take the Childrens bread? Or how
shall this spiritual Manna, this food of Angels, be given to one who has
chosen to feed on husks with swine? Nay, to one who has already so often
trampled these precio^^ things under foot, either carelessly neglecting, or
unworthily receiving these holy mysteries? O Lord, my horrible guiltiness makes
me tremble to come, and yet makes me not dare to keep away: for where, O Lord,
shall my polluted Soul be washed, if not in this fountain which thou have
opened for sin and for uncleanness, Hither therefore I come, and thou have
promised, that him that comes to thee, thou will in no wise cast out: This is,
O Lord, the blood of the New Testament; grant me so to receive it, that it may
be to me for remission of sins, and though I have so often and so wretchedly
broken my part of that Covenant, whereof this Sacrament is a Seal, yet be thou
graciously pleased to make good thine; to be merciful to my unrighteousness,
and to remember my sins and my iniquities no more; and not only so, but to put
thy laws into my heart, and to write them in my mind, and by the Power of thy
grace dispose my Soul to such a sincere and constant obedience, that I may
never again provoke thee. Lord, grant, that in these holy mysteries I may not
only commemorate, but effectually receive my blessed Savior, and all the
benifits of his Passion: and to that end give me such a preparation of soul as
may qualify me for it, give me a deep sense of my sins and unworthiness, that
being weary and heavy laden, I may be capable of his refreshings, and by being
suppled in my own tears. I may be fitter to be washed in his Blood; raise up my
dull and earthly mind from grovelling here below, and inspire it with a holy
zeal, that I may with Spiritual Affection, approach this spiritual feast. And
let, O Lord, that infinite love of Christ in dying for so wretched a sinner,
inflame my frozen benumbed Soul* and kindle in me that sacred fire of love to
him, and that so vehement, that no waters may quench, no floods drown it, such
as may burn up all dross, not leave one unmortified lust in my soul, and such
as may also extend it self to all whom thou have given me command and example
to love, even enemies as well as friends. Finally, O Lord, I beseech thee to
clothe me in thy wedding garment, and make me, though of my self most unworthy,
yet by thy mercy an acceptable guest at this holy Table, that I may not eat and
drink my own condemnation, but may have my pardon sealed, and my weakness
repaired, my corruptions subdued and my soul so inseparably united to thee,
that no temptations may ever be able to dissolve the Union; but that being
begun here in grace, it may be consummated in glory. Grant this O Lord, for thy
dear Sons sake, Jesus Christ.

Ejaculations to be used at the LORD's Table.
LORD, I am not worthy that thou should come under (...) roof.

I have sinned: What shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?

[Here recollect some of thy greatest Sins.]

If thou, Lord, should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may
abide it.

But with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous Redemption.

Behold, O Lord, thy beloved Son, in whom thou art well pleased. Hearken to the
cry of his blood, which speaks better things then that of Abel.

By his Agony and bloody Sweat, by his Cross and Passion, good Lord deliver me.

O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, grant me thy Peace.

O Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon me.

Immediately before Receiving.
THou have said that he that eats thy Flesh, and drinks thy Blood, has
eternal Life.

Behold the servant of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy Word.

At the Receiving of the Bread.
BY thy Crucified Body deliver me from this body of death.

At the Receiving of the Cup.
O Let this blood of thine purge my Conscience from dead works to serve the
living God.

Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.

O touch me, and say, I will, be thou clean.

After Receiving.
WHat shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me?

I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord.

Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom,
and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing.

Therefore blessing, honor, glory and power be to him that sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. Amen.

I have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous judgments.

O hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

A Thanksgiving after the Receiving of the Sacrament.
O Thou Fountain of all goodness, from whom every good and Perfect gift comes,
and to whom all honor and glory should be returned. I desire with all the most
fervent and inflamed affections of a grateful heart, to bless and praise thee
for those inestimable mercies thou have vouchsafed me. Lord, what is man that
thou should so regard him as to send thy beloved Son to suffer such bitter
things for him; But Lord, what am I, the worst of men, that I should have any
part in this atonement, who have so often despised him, and his sufferings? O
the height and depth of this mercy of thine, that art pleased to admit me to
the renewing of that Covenant with thee, which I have so often, and so diversely
broken! That I, who am not worthy of that daily bread which sustains the body,
should be made partaker of this bread of life, which nourishes the soul; and O
Lord God, suffer me no more, I beseech thee, to turn thy grace into wantonness,
to make thy mercy an occasion of security, but let this unspeakable love of
thine constrain me to obedience; that since my blessed Lord has died for me, I
may no longer live up to my self, but to him: O Lord, I know there is no
concord between Christ and Belial, since he has now been pleased to enter my
heart, O let me never permit any lust to chase him thence, but let him that so
dearly loved me, still keep possession of me, and let nothing ever take me out
of his hand. To this end be thou graciously pleased to watch over me, and
defend me from all my assaults of my spiritual enemies, but especially deliver
me from my self, from the treachery of mine own heart, which is too willing to
yield it self up a prey: And where thou see I am either by nature or custom
most weak, there do I beseech thee, magnify thy power in my preservation. (Here
mention thy most dangerous temptations.) And, Lord, let my Savior's sufferings
for my sins, and the Vows I have now made against them, never depart from my
mind, but let the remembrance of the one enable me to perform the other, that I
may never make truce with those lusts which nailed his hands, pierced his side,
and made his soul heavy to the death. But that having now new listed, my self
under a new banner, I may fight manfully, and follow the Captain of my
Salvation, even through a sea of blood. Lord, lift up my hands that hang down, and
my feeble knees, that I faint not in this warfare; O be thou my strength, who
am not able of my self to struggle with the slightest temptations. How often
have I turned my back in the day of battle? How many of these Sacramental vows
have I violated? And Lord, I have still the same unconstant deceitful heart to
betray me to the breach of this. O thou, who art Yea, and Amen, in whom there
is no shadow of change, communicate to me, I beseech thee, such a stability of
mind, that I may no more thus start aside like a broken bow, but that having my
heart whole with thee, I may continue steadfast in thy Covenant, that not one
good purpose which thy Spirit has raised in me this day may vanish, as so many
have formerly done, but that they may bring forth fruit unto life eternal.
Grant this, O merciful Father, through the merits and mediations of my Crucified
Savior, Amen.

FINIS.
London, Printed and Sold by Benj. Harris, at the corner of Grace church-street
next Cornhill.


