THOMAS STANLEY ARM:



THE HISTORY OF THE CHALDAICK PHILOSOPHY

By THOMAS STANLEY.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, and are to be sold at his Shop at the George
in Fleet Street near Cliffords-Inn. Anno 1662.

TO Sir JOHN MARSHAM, Knight.
SIR,
I Send this Book to you, because you first directed me to this design. The
learned Gassendus was my precedent; whom nevertheless I have not followed in
his Partiality: For he, though limited to a Single person, yet gives himself
liberty of enlargement, and takes occasion from his Subject to make the World
acquainted with many excellent disquisitions of his own. Our scope being of a
greater Latitude, affords less opportunity to favor any Particular; whilst
there is due to every one the commendation of their own deserts. This benefit I
hope to have received from the Variety of the Subject; but far more are those I
ow to your encouragement, which if I could wish less, I should upon this
occasion, that there might seem to have been expressed something of choice and
inclination in this action, which is now but an inconsiderable effect of the
gratitude of,

Dear Uncle, Your most affectionate Nephew, and humble Servant, THOMAS STANLEY.

PREFACE.
WE are entering upon a Subject which I confess, is in it self harsh, and
exotic, very unproper for our Tongue; yet I doubt not but they will pardon
this, who shall consider, that other Philosophies and Sciences have been lately
well received by several Nations translated into their own Languages; and that
this, as being the first, contributes not a little to the understanding of the
rest.

Another disadvantage this Subject incurres far more considerable: There is not
any thing more difficult to be retriv'd out of the Ruins of Antiquity than the
Learning of the Eastern Nations, and particularly that of the Chaldaeans. What
remains of it is chiefly transmitted to us by the Greeks, of whom, some
converted it to their own use, intermixing it with their Philosophy, as
Pythagoras and Plato; others treated expressly of it, but their Writings are
lost. Of its first Authors nothing remains; what others took from it, is not
distinguishable from their proper Philosophy. The Greeks were first made
acquainted with it by Osthanes, and, long after, by Berosus, the former living
in the time of Xerxes, the other, under Ptolomaeus Philadelphus. Whence it may
be inferred, that the Discourse, which Democritus writ of Chaldaea, and his
Commentary, of the Sacred Letters at Babylon, either came short of these
Sciences, or were so obscure, that they conduced little to their discovery.
Neither seems the Treatise, entitled Magicum, ascribed, by some, to Aristotle,
by others, to Rhodon, but indeed written by Antisthenes, to have considered the
Learning and Sciences, so much as the History of the Professors. Of which kind
were also the Writers concerning the Magi, cited, under that general Title, by
Diogenes Laertius.

But there wanted not those, who further explained to the Greeks what Osthanes
and Berosus had first communicated. Hermippus (to use Pliny's words) wrote most
diligently of Magic, and Commented upon the Verses of Zoroaster. About the
time of Antonius Pius flourished the two Julians, father and son, Chaldaick
Philosophers: the first wrote concerning the Chaldaick Rites, the later,
Theurgick Oracles in Verse, and other secrets of that Science. Afterward,
wrote Symbulus and Pallas, concerning the Magi; and the later Platonic
Philosophers more frequently: Amelius, 40 Books, of confutation; Porphyrius, 4.
on the History of Julian the Chaldaean; Jamblichus, 28. entitled, Of the most
perfect Chaldaick Theology; and Syrianus, 10. upon the Oracles.

Of all these, there is nothing extant, unless (which we shall have occasion
hereafter to prove) the few Oracles, dispersed among the Platonic Writers, be
part of those, which were, by the Greeks, (Hermippus, Julian the son, and
others) translated out of the Chaldaick, Some of these Pletho and Psellus have
explained with a Comment, adding two brief obscure Summaries of the Chaldaick
Doctrine, which we have endeavored to supply and clear, by adding and
digesting the few remains of those Sciences which ly dispersed amongst other
Authors; taking care to reject such as are supposititious, or of no credit, as,
in the Historical part, Annius Viterbiensis, Clemens Romanus, and the like: in
the Philosophical, the Rabbinical Inventions, which (though incuriously
admitted by Kircher, Gaulmin, and others) manifestly appear to have been of
later invention.

THE HISTORY OF THE CHALDAICK PHILOSOPHY.
THE FIRST BOOK.
Of the Chaldaeans.
PHILOSOPHY is generally acknowledged even by the most Learned of the Grecians
themselves, to have had its original in the Ea^t. None of the Eastern Nations,
for antiquity of Learning, stood in competition with the Chaldaeans and
Egyptians. The Egyptians pretended that the Chaldaeans were a Colony of them,
and had all their Learning and Institutions from them: but they who are less
interessed, and unprejudiced Judges of this Controversy, assert that The Author
of the Treatis (...) cited by Laertius in Pooem.
The Magi (who derived their knowledge from the Chaldaeans) were more ancient
than the Egyptians, that Joseph. 1. 8.
Astrological Learning passed from the Chaldaeans to the Egyptians, and from
them to the Grecians; and, in a word, that the Chaldaeans were Cic.
antiquissimum Doctorum genus, the most ancient of Teachers.

Chaldaea is a part of Babylonia in Asia, the Inhabitants termed Chasdim, (as
if Chusdim) from Chus the son of Cham. But the Philosophy of the Chaldaeans
exceeded the bounds of their Country, and diffused it self into Persia and
Arabia that border upon it; for which reason the Learning of the Chaldaeans,
Persians and Arabians is comprehended under the general Title of CHALDAICK.

Of these therefore we shall begin with That, from which the other two were
derived, and is more properly termed CHALDAEAN in respect of the Country. In
treating of which (as likewise of the other two) the first Part of our
Discourse shall consider the Authors or Professors and their Sects; the Second,
their Doctrine.

THE FIRST PART.
The Chaldaean Philosophers, Institution, and Sects.
SECT. I.
Of the Chaldaean Philosophers.
CHAP. I.
The Antiquity of the Chaldaick Learning.
THe Antiquity of the Chaldaick Learning, though such as other Nations cannot
equal, comes far short of that to which they d^d pretend. When Alexander, by
his Victories against Darius, was possessed of Babylon, (in the 4383d. year of
the Julian Period) Aristotle, a curious promotor of Arts, requested his Nephew
Calisthenes, who accompanied Alexander in the expedition, to inform him of what
Antiquity the Learning of the Chaldaeans might with reason be esteemed. The
Chaldaeans themselves pretended, that, from the time they had first begun to
observe the Stars until this Expedition of Alexander into Asia, were 4^0000
years. But far beneath this number were the Observations which (as Porphyrius
cited by in lib. 2. de coelo, p. 123. lin. 18.
Simplicius relates) Calisthenes sent to Aristotle, being but of 1903 years,
preserved to that time, which from the 4^83d. year of the Julian Period upward,
falls upon the 2480th. And even this may with good reason be questioned, for
there is not any thing extant in the Chaldaick Astrology more ancient than the
Era of Nabo^assar, which began but on the 3967th of the Julian Period. By this
Era they compute their Astronomical Observations, of which if there had been
any more ancient, Ptolemy would not have omitted them. Prol. lib. 4. cap. 6, 7.
The first of these is in the first year of Merodach ( Ezekiel.
that King of Babylon who sent the message to Ahaz concerning the miracle of
the Dial,) which was about the 27th of Nabonassar. The next was in the 28th of
Nabonassar. lib. 5. p. 125
The third Observation is in the 127th of Nabonassar, which is the 5th year of
Nabopolassur. This indeed is beyond all exception; for we have them confirmed
by the Authority of Ptolemy, who shows the Reasons and Rules for the
Observations. What is more then this, seems to have been only hypothetical.
And if we shall imagine a canicular Cycle which consists of 1461 years (and are
1460 natural years) to have been supposed by Porp^yrius to make up his
Hypothesis, then there will want but 18 years of this number.

CHAP. II.
That there were several Zoroasters.
THe invention of Arts among the Chaldaeans is generally ascribed to Zoroaster.
The name Zoroaster (to omit those who give it a Greek Etymology from (...) and
(...)) Dinon cited by in Prooem.
Laertius interprets (...), rendered by his Translators, a Worshipper of the
Stars. Obelisc, Pamphil. l. 1. c. 2.. 1.
Kircher finds fault with this Etymology, as being compounded out of two
several Languages from the Greek (...) and the Chaldee Zor, and therefore
endeavors to duduce it from (...)
tsura, a figure, or (...)
^sajar, to fashion, and (...)
as and (...)
ster, hidden fire, as if it were (...)
Zairaster, fashioning images of hidden fire, or (...)
^suraster, the image of secret things; with which the Persian Zarast agrees.
But it has been observed, that Ester in the Persian Language signifies a
Star. The former particle Zor Geogr. Sacr. l. 1. c. 1.
Bochartus derives from the Hebrew Schur, to contemplate, and thereupon, for
(...), (in Laertius) reads (...), a contemplator of the Stars. But we find Zor
used amongst other words (by composition) in the name Zorobabel, which we
interpret, born at Babylon: Zoroaster therefore properly signifies the Son of
the Stars.

The same name it is which some call Zabratas, others Nazaratas, others Zares,
others Zaran, others Zaratus, others Zaradas; all which are but several
corruptions from the Chaldee or Persian word which the Greeks most generally
render Zoroaster.

That there were several Zoroasters (except Goropius, who paradoxically
maintains there was not any one) none deny: but in reckoning them up, there is
no small disagreement amongst Writers, grounded chiefly upon cont. gent.
Arnobius, whom they differently interpret; his words these, Age nunc veniat
quis super igneam zonam Magus interiore ab orb Zoroastres, Hermippo ut
assentiamur Authori: Bactrianus et ille conveniat, cujus ^tesias res gestas
historiarum exponit in primo; Armenius, Hostanis nepos, and familiaris
Pamphilius Cyr^. Mag. Phil.
Patricius, Apol. Mag. 8.
Naudaeus, Obelisc. Pamphil.
Kirch^r, and others, conceive that Arnobius here mentions four Zoroasters; the
first a Chaldean, the second a Bactrian, the third a Pamphylian (named also
Erus,) the fourth an Armenian, son (as Kircher would have it) of Hostanes.
Plin. exercit.
Salmasius alters the Text thus, Age nunc veniat quaeso per igneam Zonam Magus
interiore ab orb Zoroasters, Hermippo ut assentiamur Auctori, Bactrianus. Et
ille conveniat, cujus Ctesias res gestas historiarum exponit in primo,
Armenius, Hostanis nepos, and familiaris Pamphilus Cyri. Which words thus
altered by himself, imply, as he pretends, but three Zoroasters; the first,
according to some, an Ethiopian (a Country near the torrid Zone) but,
according to Hermippus, a Bactrian; the second, Armenius, Nephew of Hostanes,
of whose actions Ctesias gives account in the first Book of his Histories; the
third named Pamphilus, friend to Cyrus, in Zor.
Ursinus, from the same reading of the words, infers that Arnobius mentions
only two, that he manifestly explodes the Bractrian Zoroaster of Hermippus, and
that Ctesias confuting the fabulous relation of Eudoxus, proved Zoroaster to
have lived in the times of Cyrus. But the words of Arnobius seem not to require
such alteration; which will appear more, if we mention particularly all those
on whom the name of Zoroaster was conferred.

The first a Chaldaean, the same whom in Zor.
Suidas calls the Assyrian, adding that he died by fire from Heaven; to which
story perhaps Arnobius alludes, or to that other relation mentioned by Orat.
Boristh.
Dion Chrysostom, that Zoroaster the Persian (for their stories are
confounded) came to the people out of a fiery mountain; or else, by fiery zone,
he means the seat of the zoned Deities just above the Empyreal or corporeal
Heaven, according to the doctrine of the Chaldaeans; for I find not any where
that Zoroaster was esteemed an Ethiopian, or of interior Lybia, as Salmasius
expounds, Concerning this Zoroaster, Arnobius cites Hermippus: who, as lib. 36.
c. 1.
Pliny says, wrote in explication of his Verses, and added Tables to his
Volumes.

The second, a Bractrian; lib. 1.
Iustine mentions Zoroastres King of Bractria contemporary with Ninus the
Assyrian, by whom he was subdued and slain; adding, He was said to be the first
that invented Magical Arts, and observed the beginnings of the World, and the
motions of the Stars. Arnobius says, cont. gent.
he contested with Ninus, not only by steel and strength, but likewise by the
Magical and abstruse disciplines of the Chaldeans. The actions of this
Zoroaster, Ctesias recorded in the first Book of his Persica; for so Arnobius,
loc. cit.
Bactrianus and ille conveniat, cujus Ctesias res gestas historiarum exponit in
primo. The first six Books of that Work, treated (as Biblioth.
Photius shows) only of the Assyrian History, and passages that preceded the
Persian affairs. Whereupon, I cannot assent to the conjecture of Salmasius, who
applies the citation of Ctesias to the Nephew of Hostanes, since Hostanes (as
lib. 36. c. 1.
Pliny affirms) lived under Darius. But lib.
Diodorus names the King of Bactria whom Ninus conquered, Oxyartes; and some
old Mss. of Iustine (attested by Ligerius) Oxyatres, others Zeorastes: perhaps
the neerness of the names and times (the Chaldaean living also under Ninus, as
in Zor.
Suidas relates) gave occasion to some to confound them, and to ascribe to the
Bactrian what was proper to the Chaldaean; since it cannot be imagined, that
the Bactrian was Inventor of those Arts, in which the Chaldaean, who lived
contemporary with him, was so well skilled. Elichmannus, a Persian Writer,
affirms the Arabians and Persians to hold, that Zoroaster was not King of the
Bactrians, but a Magus or Prophet; who by persuasions having wrought upon their
King, first introduced a new form of superstition amongst them, whereof t^ere
are some remainders at this day.

The third a Persian, so termed by in Prooem.
Laertius and others; the same whom Clemens Alexandrinus styles a Mede; Suidas,
a Perso-Mede; Institutor of the Magi, and Introductor of the Chaldaick Sciences
amongst the Persians. Some confound this Zoroaster with the Chaldaean, and both
of them (as Obel. Pamphil. lib. 1. cap. 2. sect. 1.
Kircher does) with Cham the Son of Noah, not without a very great anachronism:
for we find the Word Persian no where mentioned before the Prophet Ezekiel,
neither did it come to be of note till the time of Cyrus. The occasion of which
mistake seems to have been for that Zoroaster the Persian, is by Pliny,
Laer^ius, and others, styled Institutor of Mag^ck, and of the Magi, which is to
be understood no otherwise then that he first introduced them into Persia. For
de Isid. and Osirid.
Plutarch acknowledges, Zoroaster instituted Magi amongst the Chaldaeans, in
imitation of whom the Persians had theirs also: And the Set forth by Erpenius.
Arabic History, that Zaradussit not first instituted, but reformed, the
religion of the Persians and Magi, being divided into many Sects.

The fourth a Pamphylian, commonly called Er, or Erus Armeniu^. That he also
had the Name of Zoroaster, Strom. lib.
Clemens witnesses: The same Author, (says he, meaning Plato) in the 10. of
his Politics, mentions Erus Armenius, by descent a Pamphylian, who is
Zoroaster; now this Zoroaster writes thus, reading (...).
This wrote I, Zoroaster Armenius, by descent a Pamphylian, dying in War; and
being in Hades, I Learned of the Gods. This Zoroaster, loc. cit.
Plato affirms to have been raised again to Life, after he had been Dead ten
days, and laid on the Funeral pyre, repeated by lib. 1. c. 8.
Valerius Maximus, and in somn. Scip.
Macrobius. To this Zoroaster, doubtless the latter part of Arnobius's Words,
with which Interpreters are so much perplexed, ought to be referred, Armenius
Hostanis nepos, and familiaris Pamphylius Cyri. Some conjecture he mentions two
Zoroasters; I rather conceive, the Words relate only to this one, and perhaps
are corrupt, thus to be restored and distinguished, Armenius Hostanis nepos and
familiaris, Phamphylius Erus: Armenius, Nephew and Disciple (in which sense
(...) is usually taken) of Hostanes, Erus Pamphylius.

The fifth a Proconnesian, mentioned by lib. 36. c. 1.
Pliny; Such as are more diligent (says he) place another Zoroaster, a
Proconnesian, a little before Hostanes. This Zoroaster might probably be
Aristeas the Proconnesian, who, according to in Aristeas.
Suidas, lived in the time of Cyrus and Croesus. He adds, that his soul could
go out of his Body, and return as often as he pleased. lib.
Herodotus relates an instance hereof, not unlike that of Erus Armenius, that
he died suddenly in a Fuller's shop at Proconnesus, and was seen at the same
time at Cyzicus: his Friends coming to fetch away his Body, could not find it.
Seven years after he returned home, and published the Verses which were
afterward called Arimaspean; a Poem describing a Happy Life, or rather an
Imaginary civil Government after such a manner as he conceived most perfect.
This we may gather from Strom. lib.
(lemens Alexandrinus, who says, that the Hyperborean and Arimaspian Cities,
and the Elyzian fields are forms of civil Governments of just Persons; of
which kind is Plato's Commonwealth.

To these may be added a sixth Zoroaster, (for so Flor.
Apuleius calls him) who lived at Babylon, at what time Pythagoras was carried
Prisoner thither by Cambyses. The same Author terms him, omnis divini arcanum
Antistitem, adding, that he was the chief Person whom Pythagoras had for
Master; probably, therefore; the same with Zabratas, by whom Porphyr. ^it.
Pythag.
Diogenes affirms, he was clea^sed from the pollutions of his Life past, and
instructed from what things virtuous Persons ought to be free; and learnt the
Discourse concerning Nature (Physic), and what are the Principles of the
Universe; The same with Nazaratas the Assyrian, whom Alexander in his Book of
Pythagorick Symbols, affirms to have been Master to Pythagoras; the same whom
Suidas calls Zares; Cyril, Zaran; Plutarch, Zaratas.

That there should be so many Zoroasters, and so much confusion amongst Authors
that write of them, by mistaking one for another, is nothing strange; for, from
extraordinary Persons, Authors of some public benefit, they who afterward
were Eminent in the same Kind, were usually called by the same Name. Hence is
it, that there were so many Belusses, Saturns, Jupiters; and, consequently, so
much confusion in their Stories. The like may be said of Zoroaster the
Chaldaean, who being the Inventer of Magical and Astronomical Sciences, they
who introduced the same into other Countries, as Zoroaster the Persian did, in
imitation (as Plutarch says) of the Chaldaeans, and such likewise as were
eminently skillful in those Sciences, as the Bactrian, the Pamphylian, and the
Proconnesian, are described to have been, were called by the same Name.

CHAP. III.
Of the Chaldaean Zoroaster, Institutor of the Chaldaick Philosophy.
THe first of th^se Zoroasters termed the Chaldaean or Assyrian, is generally
acknowledged the Inventer of Arts and Sciences amongst the Chaldaeans, but
concerning the time in which he lived, there is a vast disagreement amongst
Authors.

Some of these err so largely, as not to need any Confutation; such are Laert.
in P^o^em.
Eudoxus, and the Author of the Treatise entitled (...) commonly ascribed to
Aristot^e, (and so lib 36. c. 1.
Pliny cites it,) who asserts he lived 5000. years before Plato. Such likew^se
are Hermippus, Hemodorus the Platonic, Plutarch, and Ge^istus Pletho
(following Plutarch,) who place him 5000. years before the Destruction of Troy.

Others conceive Zoroaster to be the same with Cham, the son of Noah; of which
Opinion (not to mention the Pseudo-B^rosus of Annius Viterbiensis) were Didymus
of A^exand^i^, Agathias, Scholasticus, and Abenephi: Cham (says the la^) was
the Son of Noah; he first taught the worshipping of Idols, and first introduced
Magical Arts into the World, his Name is Zuraster, he the second Adris, a
perpetual fire. Hither also some refer the Rabbinical stones concerning Cham,
that R. Levi in Ge^. R. ^^muel. in fo^tali^^^ fidei.
by Magic he emasculated his Father, etc. Rassi.
That Noah being by this means disabled from getting a fourth Son, cu^sed the
fourth Son of Cham; That Aben Es^a in Genesis
this curse (which was that he should be a Servant of Servants) implied strange
service, viz. Idolatry; That R. Hanasse in S^uto fo^tium.
hereupon the posterity of Chus became Idolaters, Cham himse^f being the first
that made Idols and introduced strange service into the World, and taught his
Family the worshipping of Fire.

The greater part of Writers place him later. Epiphanius in the time of Nimrod,
with whom agree the Observations Simpli^.
said to be sent by Callisthenes to Aristotle of 1903. years before Alexanders
taking Babylon: for from the year of the Julian Period in which Babylon was
taken, the 1903. upward falls on the 2480. of the same Era; about which time
Nimrod laid the foundations of that City, and there settled his Empire.

Suidas relates him contemporary with Ninus King of Assyria; Eusebius, with
Semiramis Wife of Ninus; Ninus is placed by Chronologers above the 3447. of the
Julian Period.

Suidas (elsewhere) reckons him to have lived 500. years before the taking of
Troy; Xanthus, 600. years before Xerxes's expedition into Greece. Troy,
according to the Marmor Arundelianum was taken 434. years before the first
Olympiad. Xerxes's expedition was on the first of the 75. Olympiad, viz. the of
the Julian Period. The account of Suidas therefore falls on the 3030. that of
Xanthus on the 3634. of the Julian Period. The latest of these seems to me
most Historical, and agreeable to Truth.

Of his Birth, Life, and Death, there is little to be found; and even that,
uncertain, whether appliable to him or to the Persian. Plato styles Zoroaster
the Son of Oromases; but Oromases (as Plutarch and others show) was a Name
given to God by Zoroaster the Persian and his Followers: whence I conceive that
Plato is to be understood of the Persian Zoroaster, who perhaps in regard of
his extraordinary knowledge, was either Allegorically styled, or fabulously
reported to be the ^on of God, or of some good Genius, as Pythagoras, Plato,
and many other Excellent Persons were.

lib. 36. c. 1.
Pliny reports, that Zoroaster, (not particularizing, which of them) laughed
the same day he was Born; and that his brain did beat so hard that it heaved up
the hand laid upon it, a presage of his future science; and that he lived in
the Deserts twenty years upon Cheese so tempered as that it became not old. ^he
Assyrian Zoroaster, (says Suidas) prayed he might dye by fire from Heaven, and
advised the Assyrians to preserve his ashes, assuring that as long as they kept
them, their Kingdom should never fail: but Cedrenus attributes the same to the
Per^^an.

Of Writings attributed to him, are mentioned

Plin. lib. 36. c. 1.
Verses, two millions, upon which Hermippus wrote a Comment, and added ^ables
to them.

Oracles, perhaps part of the foresaid Verses; upon these Syrianus wrote a
Comment in twelve Books.

Of Agriculture, or Mechanics; Pliny alleges a rule for sowing; and the
Author of the Geoponicks, many Experiments under his Name: but this was either
spurious, or written by some other Zoroaster.

Revelations; supposititious also, forged (as Porphyrius professes) by some
Gnostics.

To these add, cited by the Arabians, a Treatise of Magic; and another, of
Dreams and their Interpretation, cited by Gelaldin frequently; Inventions
doubtless of latter times.

Some ascribe the Treatises of the Persian Zoroaster to the Chaldaean; but of
those hereafter.

CHAP. IV.
Of Belus, another reputed Inventor of Sciences amongst the Chaldaeans.
SOme there are who ascribe the Invention of Astronomy to Belus, of which Name
there were two Persons, one a Tyrian, the other an Assyrian, who reigned in
Babylonia next after the Arabians, about the 2682. year of the World, according
to the account of Africanus; for whose Inventions the Babylonians honored him
as a God. There is yet standing, (says lib.
Pliny) the Temple of Jupiter Belus; he was the Inventor of the science of the
Stars, and lib. 1.
Diodorus, speaking of the Egyptians, They affirm that afterward many
Colonies went out of Egypt, and were dispersed over the Earth, and that Belus
reputed to be Son of Neptune and Lybia, carried one to Babylon; and, making
choice of the River Euphrates, to settle it instituted Priests after the manner
of those in Egypt exempt from all public Charges and Duties, which the
Babylonians call Chaldaeans; these observed the Sta^s imitating the Egyptian
Priests, Naturalists and Astrologers. Thus Diodorus. But that Belus was son of
Neptune and Lybia, is nothing but Greek Mythologie; that he brought a Colony
out of Egypt into Babylon, is fabulous. For the Egyptians had not any
Correspondence with foreigners for a long time after. But to confirm that he
was skilful in those Sciences, Var. Hist.
Aelian gives this Relat^on.

Xerxes son of Darius, breaking up the Monument of ancient Belus, found an Urn
of Glass in which his dead Body lay in Oil; but the Urn was not full, it
wanted a hand-^readth of the Topp: next the Urn there was a little Pillar, on
which it was written, that whosoever should open the Sepulcher and did not fill
up the Urn, should have ill fortune. Which Xerxes reading grew afraid, and
commanded that they should power Oil into it with all speed; notwithstanding,
it was not filled: Then he commanded to power into it the second time; but
neither did it increase at all thereby. So that at last failing of success he
gave over; and shutting up the Monument, departed very sad. Nor did the Event
foretold by the Pillar deceive him: for he led an Army of 50 Myriads against
Greece, where he received a great defeat, and returning home, died miserably,
being murdered by his own Son, in the Nightime, a-bed.

To this Belus, Semiramis his Daughter Diod. l. 2.
erected a Temple in the middle of Babylon which was exceeding high, and by the
help thereof the Chaldaeans who addicted themselves there to Contemplation of
the Stars, did exactly observe their risings and settings.

CHAP. V.
Other Chaldaean Philosophers.
FRom Zoroaster were derived the Chaldaean Magi and Philosophers his Disciples;
amongst whom, lib. 36.
Pliny mentions one Azonaces Master of Zoroaster; which doubtless must have
been meant of some later Zoroaster, there being many of that name, as we showed
formerly.

By the same loc. cit.
Author are mentioned of the ancient Magi Marmaridius a Babylonian, and
Zarmocenidas an Assyrian; of whom nothing is left but their names, no monuments
extant of them.

To these add Suid.
Zoromasdres a Chaldaean Philosopher, who wrote Mathematics and Physics; and
Teucer a Babylonian an ancient Author who wrote concerning the Decanates.

The Mathematicians also, says lib.
Strabo, mention some of these, as Cidenas, and Naburianus, and Sudinus, and
Seleucus of Seleucia a Chaldaean, and many other eminent persons.

CHAP. VI.
Of Berosus, who first introduced the Chaldaick Learning into Greece.
AFter these flourished Berosus, or, as the Greeks call him (...), which name
Jos. Scal. in Eusebius.
some interpret the Son of Oseas: for, as is manifest from Elias, (...) with
the Chaldees is the same with (...) in Syraic^; whence Bar-ptolemaeus, as if
the Son of Ptolemy, Bar-timaeus, and the like: Gorionides and other Rabbis
call him (...)
Bar-Hosea; The Arabians Barasa; so Abenephi, and others.

Voss. de hist. Graec. lib. 1. c. 31.
Barthius says that there are some who assert him contemporary with Moses,
which opinion justly he condemns as ridiculous; Adversar. 51. 7.
Claudius Verderius in his Censure upon the Annian Berosus affirms, he lived a
little before the reign of Alexander the Great; upon what authority, I know not;
That he lived in the time of Alexander, we find in the Oration of Tatian
against the Gentiles; but the same Tatian adds, he dedicated his History to
that Antiochus who was the third from Alexander. But neither is this reading
unquestionable; for Praepat. Evang. l. 10.
Eusebius cites the same place of Tatian thus, Berosus the Babylonian, Priest
of Belus at Babylon who lived in the time of Alexander, and dedicated to
Antiochus, the third after Seuleucus, a History of the Chaldaeans in three
Books, and relates the actions of their Kings, mentions one of them named
Nabuchodonosor etc. Here we find (...), but in the Text of Tatian, (...) after
Alexander. And indeed this reading seems most consonant to the story. The next
to Alexander was Seleucus Nicator: the next to him, Antiochus (...); The third,
Antiochus (...), who began his reign sixty one years after the death of
Alexander: Now, it is possible that Berosus at the time of Alexander's taking
Babylon might be thirty years old or less; and at his 90th year or somewhat
younger might dedicate his History to Antiochus (...). Or we may say, that by
Antiochus the third from Alexander is meant Antiochus (...), reckoning
Alexander himself inclusively for one, Seleucus the second, Antiochus (...) the
third; to whom from the death of Alexander are but 44 years: And in approving
this Account we may retain the reading of Eusebius, supposing the first to be
Seleucus, the second Antiochus Soter, the third Antiochus (...): neither is
this inconsistent with Gesner's Translation of the words of Tatian (...) as in
Stephens edition, of Eusebius; or (...), as in Tatian himself, qui Alexandri
aetate vixit: which interpretation lib. de Sibyl.
O^^phrius Panuinus also follows. But considering these words more intently it
came into my mind (says Vossius) that it might better be rendered qui Alexandri
aetate natus est, whereby all scruple may be taken away, supposing Berosus to
have been born but two years before Alexanders death; By which account he must
have been but 64 years old when Antiochus (...) to whom he dedicated his Book
began to reign: which way soever it is, Berosus published his History in the
time of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus; for he reigned 38 years, and in the sixth year
of his reign Antiochus Soter began to reign in Syria in the 22d of Antiochus
(...), to one of whom Antiochus dedicated his Book. But by no means can we
assent to the Learned in Tatian.
^onradus Ges^erus, who by Alexander conceives to be meant not he who was
surnamed the Great son, of Philip, but that Alexander who succeeded Demetrius
Soter, in the Kingdom of Syria, and was succeeded by Demetrius Nicanor; by
Antiochus understanding Antiochus Sedetes, who Reigned next after Demetrius
Nicanor: for if it were so Berosus must have been a whole age later than
Ma^etho; but Ma^etho flourished under Philadelphus (as Vossius elsewhere
proves) Philadelphus died in the third year of the 133d Olympiad; but Antiochus
Sedetes invaded Syria in the first of the 16^th Olympiad: How then could
Berosus live so late, who was a little precedent to Manetho, as Syncellus
expressly affirms? Again, we may assert the time of Berosus another way. lib.
6. c. 55.
Pliny says he gave account of 480 years, which doubtless were years of
Nabonassar: now the era of Nabonassar begun in the second year of the 8th
Olymp^ad; from which if we reckon 480, it will fall upon the later end of
A^tiochus Soter's reign; wherefore Beros^s dedicated his Book either to him or
to Antiochus (...) his son. These Arguments will not suffer us to doubt of the
time of Berosus.

This Berosus is mentioned by many of the Ancients. lib. 9. c. 7.
Vitruvius says, he first settled in the Island Coos and there opened Learning.
contra Apion. lib. 1.
Josephus that he introduced the Writings of the Chaldaeans concerning
Astronomy and Philosophy among the Grecians. lib. 7. c. 37.
Pliny that the Athenians, for his divine Praedictions, dedicated to him
publicly in their Gymnasium a Statue with a golden Tongue. He is mentioned
likewise by in Apologet. c. 19.
Tertullian, and the Author of the p. 48.
Chronicon Alexandrinum.

He wrote Babylonicks or Chaldaicks, in three Books: for they are cited
promiscuously under both these Titles: The Babylonicks of Berosus, deipn. l. 14.
Athenaeus cites; but Tatian says, he wrote the Chaldaick History in three
Books. And Strom. 1.
Clemens Alexandrinus cites Berosus, his third of Chaldaicks; and elsewhere,
simply his Chaldaick Histories: And Agathias affirms, he wrote the antiquities
of the Assyrians and Medes; for those Books contained not only the Assyrian or
Chaldaean affairs but also the Median; lib. 2.
Agathias, as somewhere Berosus the Babylonian, and Athenocles, and Simacus,
relate, who have Recorded the antiquities of Assyrians and Medes. Out of this
work Antiquit. Jud. 1. 5. contra Apion. lib. 1.
Josephus has preserved some excellent fragments; But the supposititious
Berosus of Annius is most trivial and foolish, of the same kind as his
Megasthenes and Archilochus: many Kings are there reckoned which are no where
to be found; and scarce is there any of those fragments which Josephus cites
out of the true Berosus: on the contrary, some things are plainly repugnant, as
when he says Semiramis built Babylon; whereas Josephus says Berosus wrote,
that it was not built by Semiramis.

A daughter of this Berosus is mentioned by Paraen.
Justin Martyr a Babylonian Sibyl, who prophesied at Cumae; This cannot be
understood of that Cumaean Sibyl, who lived in the ^ime of Tarquinius Priscus;
for betwixt Tarquinius Priscus and the first Pontick war (in which time Berosus
lived) are 245 years; but of some other Cumaean Sibyl of much later time. That
there were several Sibyls, who prophesied at Cumae, lib. de Sibyl.
Onuphrius has already proved out of the Treatise of wonderful things ascribed
to Aristotle; and out of Martianus Capella, and other Writers.

Berosus being the person who introduced the Chaldaick Learning into Greece, we
shall with him close the History of the Learned Persons or Philosophers amongst
the Chaldaeans.

SECT. II.
The Chaldaick Institution, and Sects.
CHAP. I.
That all Professors of Learning were more peculiarly termed Chaldaeans.
PHilosophy or Learning was not taught and propagated by the Chaldaeans after
the Grecian manner, communicated by public Professors indifferently to all
sorts of Auditors; but restrained to certain Families. These were by a more
peculiar compellat on termed Chaldeans; addicted themselves wholly to study;
^ad a proper habitation allotted for them; and lived exempt from all public
charges and duties.

Of these is lib. 1.
Diodorus to be understood; who relates, that Belus instituted Priests exempt
from all public charges and duties, whom the Babylonians call Chaldaeans.
Strabo adds, that there was a peculiar habitation in Babylonia allotted for the
Philosophers of that Country who were termed Chaldaeans; and that they
inhabited a certain Tribe of the Chaldaeans, and a portion of Babylonia,
adjoining to the Arabians and the Persian-Gulf.

There were those Chaldaeans who, asb Cicero says, were named not from the
Art, but Nation. And of whom he is elsewhere to be understood, when he affirms
thatc in Syria the Chaldaeans excel for knowledge of the Stars, and acuteness
of Wit; and lib.
Q. Curtius, who describing the solemnity of those who went out of Babylon to
meet Alexander, says, Then went the Magi after their manner; next whom, the
Chaldaeans, Non vates modo sed artifices Babyloniorum: Where though some
interpret artifices, those Astrologers who made Instruments for the practice of
their Art; yet Curtius seems to intend no more then the Chaldaeans of both
sorts, the Plebeian Tradesmen, and the Learned.

Of these Chaldaeans peculiarly so termed, is in prooem.
Laertius likewise to be understood, when he cites as Authors of Philosophy
amongst the Persians the Magi, amongst the Babylonians or Assyrians the
Chaldaeans. And Hesychius, who interprets the word Chaldaeans, a kind of Magi
that know all things.

CHAP. II.
Their Institution.
THese Chaldeans preserved their Learning within themselves, by a continued
Tradition from Father to Son. They learn not, (says lib. 1.
Diodorus) after the same fashion as the Greeks; For amongst the Chaldeans,
Philosophy is delivered by Tradition in the family, the Son receiving it from
the Father, being exempted from all other employment; and thus having their
Parents for their Teachers, they learn all things fully and abundantly,
believing more firmly what is communicated to them: and being brought up in
these Disciplines from Children, they acquire a great habit in Astrology, as
well because that age is apt to Learn, as for that they employ so much time in
Study. But among the Greeks, for the most part they come unprepared, and attain
Philosophy very late; and having bestowed some time therein, quit it to seek
out means for their Livelihood: and though some few give themselves up wholly
to Philosophy, yet they per^ist in Learning only for gain, continually
innovating some things in the most considerable Doctrines, and never follow
those that went before them; whereas the Barbarians persevering always in the
same, receive each of them firmly: But the Greeks aiming at gain, by this
Profession erect new Sects, and contradicting one another in the most
considerable Theorems, make their Disciples dubious; and their minds, as long
as they live, are in suspense and doubt, neither can they firmly believe any
thing: for if a man examine the chiefest Sects of the Philosophers, he will
find them most different from one another, and directly opposite in the
principal Assertions.

CHAP. III.
Sects of the Chaldaeans distinguished according to their several Habitations.
AS all Professors of Learning amongst the Chaldaeans, were distinguished from
the rest of the People by the common Denomination of the Country, Chaldaeans;
so were they distinguished amongst themselves into Sects, denominated from the
several parts of the Country, wherein they were seated: whereof lib. 6. c. 26.
Pliny and lib. 16. p. 739.
Strabo mention Hipparenes from Hipparenum, a City in Mesopotamia; Babylonians,
from Babylon; Orchenes, ( lib.
a third Chaldaick Doctrine) from Orchoe a City of Chaldaea; and Borsippenes,
from Borsippe, another City of Babylonia dedicated to Apollo and Diana. And
though supra citat.
Diodorus prefer the Chaldaeans before the Graecians, for their perseverance in
the same Doctrines without Innovations; yet we must not infer thence, that
there was an universal consent of Doctrine amongst them; but only, that each of
them was constant in belief, and maintenance of his own Sect, without
introducing any new Opinion. For, that amongst these Sects there was no
absolute agreement, is manifest from Strabo, who adds that loc. cit.
they did, (as in different Sects) assert contrary Doctrines; loc. cit.
some of them calculated Nativities, others disapproved it; Whence lib.
Lucretius, The Babylonick Doctrine does oppose
The Chaldee, and Astrology ore'throws.


CHAP. IV.
Sects of the Chaldaeans distinguished according to their several Sciences.
ANother (more proper) distinction of Sects amongst the Learned Chaldaeans,
there was, according to the several Sciences which they professed* The Prophet
cap. 2. v. ^.
Daniel relating how Nebuchadonosar sent for all the Learned Men, to tell him
his Dream, takes occasion to name the principal of them, which were four;
Hhartumim, Ashaphim, Mecashephim, Chasdim.

Hhartumim, are by Abrabaniel, expounded Magi skillful in Natutural things; and
by Iachiades, those Magi who addicted themselves to contemplative Science,
which interpretation suits well with the Derivation of the word; not as some
would have from Charmini, Burnt bones, (for that the Magi performed their Rites
with Dead men's bones) nor from Charat, a Pen or Scribe, (in regard, the
Egyptians used to call their wise Persons, Scribes:) for the Word in Chaldee
is not taken in that sense; but from (...) a Persian word, (by Transmutation of
(...) into (...)) signifying to know, whence Elmacinus instead of this
Perse-Chaldee, uses two Arabic Words, Alhochamaon, Walarraphaon; Wise and
Knowing Persons. The Hhartumim, therefore, were not (as commonly rendered)
Magicians, but rather such as studied the Nature of all things, under which
contemplation is comprehended Theology, and Physic, the knowledge of Beings,
Divine and Natural.

Ashaphim in Dan. p. 34.
Iachiades expounds those Magi qui scientiam activam excolebant: so
Constantinus renders him, but adds, that Iachiades is mistaken, and that the
Ashaphim were rather the same as Souphoun in Arabic, Wise, Religious Persons
This indeed, is the more probable; Souphoun is an attribute, proper to those
who delivered all Theology, Mystically, and Allegorically, derived from Souph,
Wool; either for that the Garments of these professors of Theology, were made
only of Wool, never of Silk; or, from attiring and vailing the things which
concern the Love of God, under the figures of visible things: whence is
derived, the Word Hatseviph, Mystic Theology; and perhaps, from the Hebrew
root, Ashaph, comes the Greek (...), the first attribute given by the Greeks to
Learned Persons, afterward changed into (...). These Ashaphim, the ordinary
Interpretation of the Text in Daniel styles Astrologers: and Aben Ezra derives
the Word from (...) twy-^ight, because they observe the Heavens, at that time;
But the Astrologers are meant afterward by the Word Chasdim, (last of the
four.) The Ashaphim of the Chaldaeans, seem rather to be the same with the Magi
of the Persians, Priests, the professors of Religious Worship, which they
termed Magic.

Mecashphim properly signifies Revealers, (that is,) of abstruse things: the
Word is derived from Chashaph, which the Arabians still use in the same sense
of Revealing: Mecashphim are generally taken, (as by R. Moses, Nachmarides,
Abrabaniel, and others) for such as practiced Diabolical Arts: not improperly
rendered, Sorcerers.

Chasdim, (or Chaldaeans) was an attribute (as we showed formerly) conferred in
a particular sense upon the Learned Persons of the Chaldaeans: Amongst whom, by
a restriction yet more particular, it signified the professors of Astrology,
this being a study to which they were more especially addicted, and for which
most eminent; lib. 16. p. 739.
these are those Chasdim, whom Strabo styles (...), astronomical Chaldaeans.

Besides these four kinds (which seem to have been the principal,) there are
several others mentioned, and prohibited by the Levitical Law, Deuteronomy. 18. 10.
Choser, Casmim, Megnonenim, Menacheshim, Hhober, Hhaber, Shel, Ob, Iideoni,
Doresh el Hammetim. R. Maimonides reciting them all, adds, that, they were
several sorts of Diviners sprung up of old amongst the Chaldaeans. Iachiades
mentions them, as particular kinds of the Mecashphim.

THE SECOND PART.
The Chaldaick Doctrine.
FRom the four general kinds of the professors of Learning amongst the
Chaldeans, mentioned by the Prophet Daniel, (of which we part. 1. Sect. 2.
chap. 4.
last treated) may be inferred, Of what Parts or Sciences the Chaldaick
Doctrine did consist. The Hhartumim were employed in Divine and Natural
speculation; The Ashaphim, in Religious Worship, and Rites; The Mecashphim, and
Chasdim in Divination; these by Astrology, those by other Arts: which two last,
Diodorus, speaking of the Learned Chaldeans, comprehends under the common name
of Astrologers; the other two, under that of Natural Philosophers, and Priests:
for he says, they imitated the Egyptian Priests, Naturalists, and Astrologers.

In treating therefore of the Chaldaick Doctrine, we shall first lay down their
Theology, and Physic, the proper study of the Hhartumim; Next, their
Astrology, and other Arts of Di^i^ation, practiced by the Chasdim, and
Mecashphim: thirdly, their ^heurgy, and Lastly, their Gods. Which contemplation
and rites were peculiar to the Ashaphim.

SECT. I.
Theology, and Physic.
THe Chaldaick Doctrine, in the first place considers all Beings, as well
Divine, as Natural: the contemplation of the first, is Theology; of the latter,
Physic.

Psell. in Orac. p. 51.
Zoroaster divided all things into three kinds; the first Eternal; the second
had a beginning in time, but shall have no end; the third Mortal: the two first
belong to Theology. The Subject of Theology, ( says praep. Evang. lib. 4. cap.
3.
Eusebius, speaking doubtless of the followers of Zoroaster) They divided into
four kinds; The first is God, the Father and King: next him, there follows a
multitude of other Gods; in the third place they rank Demons; in the fourth
Heroes, or, according to others, Angels, Demons, and Souls.

The third, or mortal kind is the Subject of Physic; It comprehends all things
material; which they divide into seven Worlds, one Empyreal, three Aetherial,
three Corporeal.

CHAP. I.
Of the Eternal Being, God.
THe first kind of things (according to Zoroaster) is Eternal, the Supreme God.
In the first place (says Eusebius) they conceive that God the Father and King
ought to be ranked. This the Delphian Oracle (cited by Porphyrius) confirms
Chaldes and Jews wise only, worshipping
Purely a self-bego^^en God and King.
This is that principle of which the Author of the Chaldaick Summary says,
They conceive there is one principle of all things, and declares that it is one
and good.

Porph. vit. Pythag.
God (as Pythagoras learnt of the Magi, who term him Oromasdes) in his Body
resembles Light, in his Soul Truth; That God (according to the Chaldaick
opinion) is Light, besides the testimony of Eusebius, may be inferred from the
Oracles of Zoroaster, wherein are frequently mentioned the (...).
light, beams, and splendour of the Father.

In the same sense they likewise termed God a Fire; for Ur in Chaldee
signifying both Light and Fire, they took Light and Fire promiscuously (as
amongst many others Plato does when he says that God began to compound the
whole body of the World out of fire and earth: by which fire he afterward
professes to mean the Sun whom he styles the brightest and whitest of things,
as if light and fire, brightness and whiteness were all one;) this is Manifest
from the Zoroastraean Oracles also, wherein he is sometimes called simply fire,
sometimes the paternal fire, the one fire, the first fire above.

Upon this ground (doubtless) was the worship of Fire instituted by the
Ancient Chaldaeans, and Agath.
from them derived to the Persians; of which hereafter, when we shall come to
speak of their Gods and Rel^gious Rites.

CHAP. II.
The emanation of Light or Fire from God.
GOd being (as we have shown) an Intellectual Light or Fire did not (as the
Oracle says) shut up his own fire within his intellectual power, but
communicated it to all Creatures; first and immediately to the first Mind (as
the same Oracles assert) and to all other aeviternal and incorporeal Beings,
(under which notion are comprehended a multitude of God's Angels good Demons
and the Souls of Men): The next emanation is the supramundane light an
incorporeal infinite luminous space in which the Intellectual Beings reside;
The supramundane light kindles the first corporeal World, the Empyreum or fiery
Heaven, which being immed^ately beneath the incorporeal light, is the high^st
bright^st and rarest of bod^es. The Empyreum diffuseth it self through the
Ae^^^r which is the next body below it, a fire less refined than the Empyreum:
But that it is fire, the more condensed parts thereof, the Sun an^ Star^,
su^^^ently evince; from the Ether this fire is transmitted to the material or
sublunary world; for though the matter whereof it consist^ be not light but
darkness, (as are also the material or bad Demons) yet this (...) Orac.
vivificative fire actuates and gives life to all it is parts, insinuating,
diffusing it self, and penetrating even to the very Center: passing from above
(says the Oracle) to the opposite part, through the Center of the Earth. We
shall describe this more fully, when we treat of the particulars.

CHAP. III.
Of things aeviternal and incorporeal.
THe Second or middle kind of Things (according to Zoroaster is that which) is
begun in time but is without end (commonly termed aeviternal.) To this belong
that multitude of Gods which Eusebius says they asserted next after God the
Father and King; and the Souls of Men; Psellus and the other Summarist of the
Chaldaick Doctrine name them in this order, Intellig^bles; Intelligibles and
Intellectuals; Intellectuals; Fountains; Hyperarchii or Principles; Unzoned
Gods; Zoned Gods; Angels; Demons; Souls. Eusebius.
All these they conceive to be light, (except the ill Demons which are dark.)

Plut.
Over this middle kind Zoroaster held Mithra to preside, whom the Oracles
(says Psellus) call the Mind. Plut.
This is employed about secondary things.

CHAP. IV.
The First Order.
IN the first place are three Orders, one Intelligible, another Intelligible
and Intellectual, the third Intellectual. The first order which is of
Intelligibles, seems to be (as the Learned Pa^ricius conjectures; for Psellus
gives only a bare account, not an exposition of these things) that which is
only understood: This is the highest Order: The second or middle Order is of
Intelligibles and Intellectuals, that is, those which are understood, and
understand also, as Zoroaster.

There are Intelligibles and Intellectuals, which understanding are understood.

The third is of Intellectuals; which only understand: as being Intellect,
either essentially or by participation. By which distinction, we may conceive
that the highest Order is above Intellect, being understood by the middle sort
of Minds. The middle Order participates of the Superior, but consists of Minds
which understand both the superior and themselves also. The last Order seems
to be of Minds, whose office is to understand not only themselves but
superiors and inferiors also.

Of the first of which Orders, the Anonymus Author of the Summary of the
Chaldaick Doctrine, thus: Then (viz. next the one and good) they worship a
certain paternal Depth consisting of three Triads; each Triad has a Father, a
Power, and a Mind: Psellus* somewhat more fully; Next the One they assert the
paternal Depth completed by three Triads: each of the Triads having a Father
first, then a Power middle, and a Mind the third amongst them: which (Mind)
shuts up the Triad within itself, these they call also Intelligibles.

This Triple Triad seems to be the same with the Triad mentioned in the Oracles
of Zoroaster. What Psellus terms Father, he calls Father also. The Father
perfected all things, and Paternal Monad Where the Paternal Monad is. -- The
second which Psellus calls Power, he terms also the power of the Father.
Neither did he shut up his own fire in his Intellectual power. and -- The
strength of the Father And the Duad generated by the Monad and resident with
him: The Monad is enlarged which generates two. And again, The Duad resides
with him. This is also the first paternal Mind; for the third of this Triad,
which Psellus terms the Mind, he says is the second Mind. The Father perfected
all things, and delivered them over
To the second Mind, which all Mankind calls the first.
And as Psellus says, that this Mind shuts up the Triad and paternal Depth
within it self; so Zoroaster It is the Bound of the paternal Depth and Fountain
of Intellectuals. And again, It proceeded not further but remained in the
paternal Depth.

CHAP. V.
The Second Order.
NExt these (says Psellus) there is another Order, of Intelligibles and
Intellectuals; This also is divided threefold, into Iynges, Synoches, and
Teletarchs. With him agrees the Anonymous Summarist, Then is the Intelligible
Iynx; next which are the Synoches, the Empyreal, the Aetherial and the
Material; after the Synoches, are the Teletarchs. The first are Jynges, of
which the Oracle
Intelligent Iynges do themselves also understand from the Father
By unspeakable counsels being moved so as to understand;
Psellus says, they are certain powers next to the paternal Depth consisting
of three Triads (I would rather read, the paternal Dept^ which consis^s of
three Triads, for so it is described in theforegoing Chapter by the same
Author) which, according to the Oracle, understand by the paternal Mind, which
contains the cause of them singly within it self: Plet^o, They are Intellectual
species conceived by the Father, they themselves being conceptive also and
exciting conceptions or notions by unspeakable counsels; These seem to be the
Ideas described by the Zoroastraean Oracle; The Mind of the Father made a
jarring noise, understanding by vigorous counsels
Omni-form Idea's, and flying out of one fountain
They sprung forth, for from the Father was the counsel and end;
But they were divided, being by Intellectual fire distributed
Into other Intellectuals, for the King did set before the multi-form World
An Intellectual incorruptible pattern, the print of whose form
He promoted through the World, and accordingly the World was framed
Beautified with all kind of Idea's of which there is one fountain,
Out of which came rushing forth others undistributed.
Being broken about the Bodies of the World which through the vast Recesses
Like swarms are carried round about every Way
Intellectual Notions from the paternal fountain cropping the flower of fire.
In the point of sleeplesse Time; of this
Primigenious Idaea the first self-budding fountain of the Father budded.


Upon which words Proclus, having cited them as an Oracle of the Gods, adds,
Hereby the Gods declared as well where the subsistence of Idaea's is, as who
that God is who contains the one fountain of them, as also, after what manner
the multitude of them proceeded out of this Fountain, and how the World was made
according to them. And that they are movers of all the Systemes of the World,
and that they are all Intellectual essentially: Others may find out many other
profound things, by searching into these Divine Notions; but for the present
let it suffice us, to know that the Gods themselves ratify the Contemplations
of Plato, for as much as they term those Intellectual Causes Idaea's; and
affirm that they gave pattern to the World, and that they are Conceptions of
the Father: for they remain in the Intellections of the Father: and that they
go forth to the making of the World, for (...) implies their going forth: and
that they are of all forms, as containing the Causes of all things divisible:
and that from the fountaineous Idaea's there proceeded others, which by several
Parts framed the World, and are said to be like swarms (of Bees) because they
beget the secundary Idaea's: thus Procl^^.

The second are the Synoches which are three, the Empyreal, the Aetherial, the
Material: answerable to the several Worlds, which they govern: for they seem to
be Minds, which receiving from Hecate the influence of that fire which
dispenses life, infuse it into the Empyreal, Aetherial, and Material Worlds,
and support and govern those Worlds and give them vital Motion. The Oracle
terms them Anoches.

Each World has intellectual Anoches inflexible, where Psellus interprets them
the most excellent of Intelligible Species, and of those that are brought down
by the Immortals in this Heaven, in the head of whom is conceived to be a God,
the second from the Father.

The last of this Order are the Teletarchs, joined with the Synoches by the
Oracle.

The Teletarchs are comprehended with the Synoches.

This second Order or Triad, Proclus and Damascius often mention, styling it by
the double name of Intelligent and Intellectual.

CHAP. VI.
The third Order.
THe last Order is of Intellectuals; Epist.
Psellus, After the middle Order is the Intellectual having one paternal Triad,
which consists of the once above, and of Hecate and of the twice above; And
another (Triad) which consists of the Amilicti, which are three; And one, the
Hypezocos. These are seven fountains. Anonymus summarist, After these are the
fountainous Fathers called also Cosmagogues; the first of whom is called the
once above, next whom is Hecate; then the twice above, next whom three
Amilicti; and last, the Hypezocos.

Of the Cosmagogues Psellus interprets the Zoroastraean Oracle.

Oh how the world has intellectual Guides, inflexible!

The Chaldaeans, says he, assert Powers in the World, which they term
Cosmagogi, (guides of the World) for that they guide the World by provident
Motions. These Powers the Oracle calls (...) Sustainers; as sustaining the
whole World. The Oracle says, they are immovable, implying their settled
Power; sustentive, denoting their Guardianship. These Powers they design only
by the Causes and immobility of the Worlds. Pletho interprets them the most
excellent of Intelligible Species, and of those that are brought down by
immortals in this Heaven. The Coryphaeus of whom, he conceives to be a God, the
second from the Father.

The Amilicti also, and the Hypezocos are mentioned by the Oracle. -- for from
him
Spring forth all the implacable (Amilicti) Thunders.
And the Recesses (suscipient of Presters) of the omni-lucent Strength.
Of Father-begotten Hecate, and Hypezocos the flower of fire.


The Amilicti [implacable] are Powers so termed, Psell. in Orac.
for that they are firm and not to be converted toward these inferior things;
and also cause that Souls be not allured by affections.

CHAP. VII.
Fountains, and Principles.
BEsides this last Order of Intellectuals, which Psellus styles seven
fountains, and the Anonymus summarist fountainous fathers, the latter gives
Acount of many other fountains, They reverence also (says he) a fountainous
Triad of Faith, Truth, and Love; they likewise assert a Principiative Son from
the solar fountain, (...).
and Archangelical, and the fountain of Sense, and fountainous Judgment, and
the fountain of Perspectives, and the fountain of Characters which walks on
unknown Marks, (...).
and the fountainous Tops of Apollo, Osyris, Hermes, they assert material
fountains of Centers and Elements, and a Zone of Dreams, and a fountainous Soul.

Next the fountains, says Psellus, are the Hyperarchii; The Anonymus more
fully, (...).
Next the fountains, they say, are the Principalities, for the fountains are
more principle then the principles; Both these names of Fountains and
Principles are used by Dionysius Areopagita, frequently; even in the third
Triad, he puts the name of Principles, (...) (or Principalities) after whom the
Archangels.

Of the Animal-productive Principles, (continues the Anonymus) the top is
called Hecate, the middle principiative Soul, the bottom princiative Virtue.
This seems to be that Hecate, whom Psellus says, they held to be the fountain
of Angels, and of Demons, and of Souls, and of Natures; The same which the
Oracle means, saying,

On the left side of Hecate, is the fountain of virtue: for the Chaldaeans, in
Orac.
( as Psellus says) esteem Hecate a Goddess, seated in the middle rank, and
possessing as it were the Center of all the Powers; in her right parts they
place the fountain of Souls, in her left the fountain of goods or of Virtues;
Moreover they say, the fountain of Souls is prompt to propagations, but the
fountain of Virtues continues within the bounds of its own Essence, and is as
a Virgin incorrupted; which setlednesse and immobility, it receives from the
power of the Amilicti, and is guirt with a Virgin Zone. What Psellus here calls
the fountain of Souls, and the fountain of Virtues, is the same which the
Anonymus styles, principiative Soul, and principiative Virtue.

CHAP. VIII.
Unzoned Gods, and Zoned Gods.
NExt (the Hyperarchii, according to Psellus) are the Azoni, (Unzoned Gods)
there are amongst them, (says the Anonymus summarist) Reading (...).
unzoned Hecates, as the Chaldaick, the Triecdotis, Comas, and Ecclustick: The
unzoned Gods are Sarapis and Bacchus, and the (...).
Chain of Osyris and of Apollo, (continued series of Geniusses, connected in
the manner of a chain) they are called unzoned, for that they use their power
freely (without restriction) in the Zones, and are enthroned above the
conspicuous Deities: These conspicuous Deities are the Heavens and the Planets,
(perhaps of the same kind as the Intelligences, which the Peripateticks
asserted Movers of the Spears) and whereas he says, they live in Power,
(...), it is the same Attribute which Dionysius gives the third of the second
Hierarchy, (...).

Psell.
The Zoned Gods are next: Anon.
These are they which have (confinement to) particular Zones, and are rouled
freely about the Zones of Heaven, and have the Office of governing the World;
for they hold, there is a Zoned kind of Deity, which inhabits the parts of the
sensible World, and guirdeth (or circleth) the Regions about the material
Place, acccording to several distributions. The same Office Dionysius seems to
assign to the second and third Hierarchies.

These Azoni, and Zonaei, are mentioned also by Damascius; Thi^ (says he)
sends out of her self the fountain of all things, and the fountainous (...).
chain; but That, sends out of her self the fountainous chain) of
particulars; and passes on to Principles and Archangels, and Azoni, and
Zonaei, as the Law is of the procession of the renownd particular Fountains. In
Prooem. Parmenid.
And by Proclus, The sacred names of the Gods delivered according to their
mystical interpretation, as those which are celebrated by the Assyrians, Read,
(...).
Zonaei, and Azoni, and Fountains, and Amilicti, and Synoches, by which they
interpret the Orders of the Gods.

CHAP. IX.
Angels and Immaterial Demons.
NExt (the Zonaei) are the Angels. Arnobius says of Hosthanes, Psel.
(one of the Persian Magi, who received their Learning from the Chaldaeans)
that he knew the Angels Ministers and Messengers of God (the true God) did wait
on his Majesty, and tremble as afraid, at the Beck and Countenance of the Lord;
the Zoroastrian Oracles mention reductive Angels, in Orac.
which reduce Souls to them, drawing them from several things.

The next are Demons; Of these the Psel. in Orac.
Chaldaeans hold some to be good, others bad. Eusebius.
The good, they conceive to b^ Light; the bad Darkness. That there are good
Demons, natural reason tells us; Oracle: Nature persuades that there are pure
Demons.
The bourgeons even of ill matter are beneficial and good.


Nature, or natural reason, says Pletho, persuades, that the Demons are holy,
and that all things proceeding from God, who is good in himself, are
beneficial: if the bloomings of ill matter (viz. of last substances) are good,
much more are the Demons such, who are in a more excellent rank, as partaking
of Rational nature, and being mixed with Mortal nature.

CHAP. X.
Souls.
NExt to Demons, Psellus (in his Epitome of the Chaldaick Doctrine) places
Souls, the last of eviternal beings.

Pletho in Orac.
Of Forms, the Magi, (and from them the Pythagoreans and Platonists) assert
three kinds; One wholly separate from matter, the supercel^stial Intelligences;
An other inseparable from matter, having a substance not subsisting by it self,
but dependent on matter, together with which matter, which is sometimes
dissolved by reason of it is nature subject to mutation, this kind of Soul is
dissolved also, and perishes. This they hold to be wholly Irrational.

Ibid.
Betwixt these, they place a middle kind, a Rational Soul, differing from the
Supercelestial Intelligences, for that it always coexists with matter; and
from the Irrational kind, for that it is not dependent on matter, but on the
contrary matter is dependent on it; and it has a proper substance potentially
subsistent by it self. It is also indivisible, as well as the Supercelestial
Intelligences, and performing some works in some manner allied to theirs, being
it self also busied in the knowledge and contemplation of Beings, even unto the
supreme God, and for this reason is Incorruptible.

Psel. in Orat.
This Soul is an Immaterial and Incorporeal Fire, exempt from all compounds,
and from the material body; it is consequently Immortal: for nothing material
or dark is commixed with her, neither is she compounded so as that she may be
resolved into those things of which she consists.

in Ora^.
This Soul has a self-generate and self-animate essence; for it is not moved
by another: for if according to the Oracle, it is a portion of the Divine fire,
and a Lucid fire, and Paternal notion, is is an immaterial and self-subsistent
form, for such is every Divine Nature, and the Soul is part thereof.

Epit.
Of humane Souls they allege two fountainous causes, the Paternal Mind, and the
Fountainous Soul: the particular Soul, according to them, proceeds from the
Fountainous, by the will of the Father.

Psel. in Orac.
Now whereas there are several mansions, one wholly bright, another wholly
dark, others betwixt both, partly br^ght, partly dark, the place beneath the
Moon is circumnebulous, da^k on every side; the Lunary, partly lucid, and
partly dark, one half bright, the other dark; the place above the Moon
circumlucid, or bright throughout; the Soul is seated in the circumlucid region.

Psel. epi^.
From thence this kind of Soul is often sent down to Earth, upon several
occasions, either by reason of the flagging of its wings, (so they term the
d^viation from its original perfection) or in obedience to the will of the
Father.

Pletho in Orac.
This Soul is always coexistent with an Aetherial body as its Vehiculum, which
she by continual approximation makes also immortal. Neither is this her
Vehiculum inanimate in it self, but is it self animated with the other species
of the Soul, the Irrational (which the Wise call ((...)) the Image of the
Rational Soul) adorned with Phantasy and Sense, which sees and hears it self
whole through whole, and is furnished with all the Senses, and with all the
rest of the Irrational facult^es of the Soul.

loc. cit.
Thus by the principal faculty of this body Phantasy, the Rational Soul is
continually joined to such a body, and by such a body sometimes the Humane Soul
is joined with a Mortal body, by a certain affinity of nature, the whole being
infolded in the whole enlivening Spirit of the Embryon, this Vehiculum it self
being of the nature of a Spirit.

in Orac.
The Image of the Soul, viz. that part which being it self void of Irrational
is joined to the Rational part, and depends upon the vehicle thereof, has a
part in the circumlucid region; for the Soul never lays down the vehicle
adherent to her.

Pletho in Orac.
The Soul being sent down from the mansion wholly-bright, to serve the mortal
body, that is, to operate therein for a certain time, and to animate and adorn
it to her power, and being enabled according to her several Virtues do dwell in
several Zones of the world, if she perform her office well, goes back to the
same place, but if not well, she retires to the worst mansions, according to
the things she has done in this life. Psel. in Epit.
Thus (the Chaldeans) restore Souls to their first condition, according to the
measure of their several purifications, in all the Regions of the World; some
also they conceive to be carried beyond the World.

CHAP. XI.
The Supramundane Light.
ALl these aeviternal and incorporeal Beings are seated in the Supramundane
Light, which it self also is incorporeal, placed immediately above the highest
Corporeal World, and from thence extending upwards to infinite; Proclus (cited
by Simplicius on this Oracle of Zoroaster
Abundantly animating Light, Fire, Ether, Worlds.)
says, This Light is above all the seven Worlds, as a Monad before or above
the Triad of the Empyraeal, Aetherial, and Material Worlds: adding, that this
primary Light is the Image of the Paternal Depth, and is therefore
supramundane, because the Paternal Depth is supramundane. And again, this
Light, says he, being the supramundane Sun, sends forth Fountains of Light;
and the Mystic Discourses tell us, that it is generality is among supramundane
Things, for there is the Solar World, and the Universal Light, as the Chaldaick
Oracles assert.

And again, the Centers of the whole World, as one, seem to be fixed in this:
for, if the Oracles fixed the Centers of the material World above it self, in
the Ether, proportionably ascending, We shall affirm that the Centers of the
highest of the Worlds are seated in this Light. Is not this first Light the
Image of the Paternal Depth, and for that reason supramundane also, because
that is so?

CHAP. XII.
Of things Temporal (or Corruptible) and Corporeal.
THe third and last kind of things, according to Zoroaster, is Corruptible or
Temporal; which as it began in time, so shall it likewise in time be dissolved:
The President over these is Arimanes.

Under this third kind are comprehended the Corporeal Worlds, the Empyreal
immediately below the Supramundane light, the Aetherial next the Empyreal, and
the Material the lowest of all, as the Oracle ranks them. Abundantly animating,
Light, Fire, Ether, Worlds.
These corporeal Worlds are seven; Orac.
For the Father formed seven firmaments of Worlds,
Including Heaven in a round figure,
He fixed a great company of inerratick stars,
He constituted a Heptad of Erratick animals,
Placing the Earth in the middle, but the Water in the bosom of the Earth
The Air above these:


Psellus explaining how they are seven, says, They affirm that there are seven
corporeal Worlds; one Empyreal and first; then three Ethereal; and lastly
three Material, the fixed Circle, the Erratick, and the Sublunary Region: But
this enumeration seems to fall short; for he mentions but two Ethereal Worlds
(the Orb of fixed Stars and the Planetary Orb) and one Material, (the Sublunary
Region:) as the Learned Patricius observes, who therefore reckons the seven
thus; One Empyreal, three Aetherial, (the Fixed Orb, the Planetary Orb, the Orb
of the Moon) and three Elementary, (the Aerial, the Watery, and the
Terrestrial;) But perhaps it will better suit with the Oracle (which includes
the Moon within the Planetary Orb, and places the Water under the Earth,) as
also with Psellus (who calls the last three Worlds, Material), to dispose them
thus,

Corporeal Worlds seven, One Empyreal World Three Aetherial Worlds The Supreme
Ether next the Empyreum The Sphere of fixed Stars The Planetary Orb
Three Material Sublunary Worlds The Air The Earth The Water.



Neither can it seem strange that the three last only should be called
Material: for the Chaldaeans conceiving matter to be a dark substance or rather
Darkness it self, the Empyreal and Aetherial Worlds, which (as we shall show)
consist only of Light or Fire, cannot in their sense be said to be Material,
though Corporeal.

The Empyreal or First of these, says Psellus, Epitom. 1.
they attributed to the Mind, the Aetherial to the Soul, the Material to Nature.

CHAP. XIII.
The Empyreal World.
THe Psel.
First of the Corporeal Worlds, is the Empyreal; (by Empyreum the Chaldaeans
understand not, as the Christian Theologists, the Seat of God and the Blessed
Spirits, which is rather analogous to the Supreme Light of the Chaldaeans, but
the outmost Sphere of the Corporeal World). It is round in figure, according to
the Oracle, Enclosing Heaven in a round figure. It is also a solid Orb, or
Firmament: for the same Oracles call it (...). It consists of fire, whence
named the Empyreal, or, as the Oracles, the fiery World; which fire being
immediately next the Incorporeal supramundane Light is the rarest and subtilest
of Bodies, and by reason of this Subtilty penetrates into the Ether, which is
the next World below it, and, by Mediation of the Ether, through all the
Material World: This may be evinced more particularly, says Proclus, from the
Divine Tradition (meaning the Zoroastrian Oracles): for the Empyreum penetrates
through the Ether, and the Ether thro^gh the Material World; and though all
the Intellectual ^etrads and Hebdomads have a Fountainous Order, and
consequently an Empyreal President, nevertheless they are contained in the
Worlds, since the Empyreal passes through all the Worlds.

Nevertheless, the Empyreum it self is fixed and immovable; as Simplicius,
further explicating the Chaldaick Doctrine, acknowledges, by this similitude,
Let us imagine to our selves (says he) two Spears, one consisting of many
Bodies, these two to be of equal bigness, but place one together with the
Center, and put the other into it; you will see the whole World existing in
place, moved in immovable Light, which World according to it is whole self is
immovable, that it may imitate Place, but is moved as to it is parts that
herein it may have less than Place.

CHAP. XIV.
The Ethereal Worlds.
AFter the Empyraeum, the Oracle names the Ether, Fire, Ether, Worlds;
confirmed by Psellus and the Anonymous Summarist, who assert, that next the
Empyraeum are the three Aetherial Worlds, but of these three they mention only
two, (and those misapplied to the Material Worlds) The Sphere of fixed Stars,
and the Planetary Sphere: The third (perhaps implied though not expressed) might
be the Ether which is betwixt the Empyreum and the Sphere of fixed Stars.

The Ether is a fire (as it is name implies) less subtle than the Empyreum,
for the Empyraeum penetrates through the Ether: yet is the Ether it self so
subtle that it penetrates through the material World:

The second Aetherial World is the Sphere of fixed Stars, which are the more
compacted or condensed parts of the Aetherial fire, as Patricius ingeniously
interprets this Oracle, He compacted a great number of inerratick Stars
Forcing (or pressing) fire to fire.


The third Aetherial World is that of the Planetary Orb, which contains the
Sun, Moon, and five Planets; styled by the Oracles, Erratick animals and Fire
He constituted a heptad of Erratick animals; and again, He constituted them
six; the seventh was that of the Sun; Mingling fire in them.

CHAP. XV.
The Material Worlds.
THe last and lowest are the Material Worlds, which Psellus and the other
Summarist assert to be three; meaning doubtless the Air, Earth, and Water; for
so the Oracle ranks them, Placing the Earth in the middle, but the Water in the
bosom of the Earth, The Air above them.

This is that last order of Worlds, of which the Chaldaick summary says, It is
called terrestrial, and the hater of light: it is the region beneath the Moon,
and comprehends within it self matter, which they call the bottom. By which
words it appears upon what ground the Chaldaeans asserted only these Sublunary
Worlds to consist of Matter, but the Empyreal and Aetherial to be Immaterial
though Corporeal: for Matter they understand to be the hater of Light,
Darkness, and the Bottom of a nature quite different from the Empyreum and
Ether whose very substance is Light it self, yet it is actuated by their
vivificative fire which penetrates quite through it even to the Center as we
showed formerly.

Concerning the Earth, Diodorus Siculus says, Lib. 1.
they held Opinions peculiar to themselves, asserting that it is in Figure like
a Boat, and hollow, for which, as likewise for other things concerning the
World, they abound with probable Arguments.

Psellus adds, that they sometimes call this sublunary Region Hades.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Material Demons.
OF Demons, as we said, they asserted two kinds, some good, others ill; the
good, light, the ill, dark. The former are those whom Arnob.
Hostanes calls the Ministers and Messengers of God, dwelling in his presence;
But these, he describes as Terrestial, wandering up and down, and enemies of
Mankind. Of the First we have treated already; of the Latter Psellus, in his
discourse upon this subject, gives a large account from one Marcus of
Mesopotamia, who having been of this Religion, and well acquainted with their
Institutions, was afterward converted to Christianity: what he relates, as
well from the Doctrine it self, as from the place, sufficiently appears to be
of the Chaldaick Tradition. It is to this effect.

These Demons are of many kinds, and various sorts, both as to their Figures
and Bodies, insomuch that the Air is full of them, as well that which is above
us, as that which is round about us. The Earth likewise is full, and the Sea,
and the most retired cavities and depths.

There are six general kinds of these Demons. The first named Leliurius, which
signifies Fiery. This kind dwells in the Air that is above us: for from the
places next about the Moon, as being Sacred, all kinds of Demons, as being
profane, are expelled. The second kind is that which wandreth in the Air
contiguous to us, and is by many peculiarly called Aerial. The third,
Terrestial. The fourth, Watery and Marine. The fifth, Subteraneous. The sixth
Lucifugous, and hardly sensible.

All these kind of Daemors are haters of God, and enemies of Man. Moreover, of
these ill Demons, some are worse than others. Aquatile, and Subterran^ous, and
Lucifugous, are extremely malicious and pernicions: for these do not hurt Souls
by phantasms and delusions, but by assault, like the most savage beasts,
accelerate the destruction of men. The Watery drown those who are sailing upon
the water. The Subterraneous and Lucifugous, insinuating into the entrails
cause Epilepsies and Frenzy. The Aerial and Terrestial circumvent Men by art
and subtilty, and deceive the minds of Men, and draw them to absurd and illegal
passions.

They effect these things not as having dominion over us, and carrying us as
their slaves whithersoever they please, but by suggestion: for applying
themselves to the Fantastic spirit which is within us, they themselves being
spirits also, they instill discourses of affections and pl^asures, not by voice
verberating the Air, but by whisper insinuating their discourse.

Nor is it imp^ssible that they should speak without voice, if we consider that
he who speaks, being a far off, is forced to use a greater sound, being near,
he speaks softly into the ear of the Hearer, and if he could get into the
spirit of the Soul, he would not need any sound, but what discourse soever he
pleases, would, by a way without sound, arrive there where it is to be
received, which they say is likewise in Souls, when they are out of the body,
for they discourse with one another without noise. After this manner the
Demons converse with us, privately, so as we are not sensible which way the
war comes upon us.

Neither can this be doubted, if we observe what happens to the Air. For, when
the Sun shines it assumeth several colors and forms, transmitting them to
other things, as we may see in Looking-glasses. In like manner the Demons,
assuming figures and colors, and whatsoever forms they please, transmit them
into our animal Spirit, and by that means afford us much business, suggesting
counsels, representing figures, resuscitating the remembrance of pleasures,
exciting the images of passions, as well when we sleep as when we wake, and
sometimes, titillating the genital parts, inflame us with frantic and unlawful
desires, especially if they take, cooperating with them the hot humidities
which are in us.

The rest of the Demons know nothing that is subtle, nor how to breed
disturbance, yet are they hurtful and abominable, hurting in the same manner
as the spirit or vapor in Charon's Cave: For as that is reported to kill
whatsoever approaches it, whether Beast, Man, or Bird; in like manner these
Demons destroy those upon whom they chance to fall, overthrowing their Souls
and Bodies, and their natural habits, and sometimes by fire, or water, or
precipice, they destroy not men only, but some irrational creatures.

The Daemon^ assault Irrational creatures, not out of hate, or as wishing them
ill, but out of the love they have of their Animal heat: For dwelling in the
most remote cavities, which are extremely cold and dry, they contract much
coldness, wherewith being afflicted, they affect the humid and animal heat,
and, to enjoy it, they insinuate themselves into Irrational creatures, and go
into Baths and Pits; for they hate the heat of Fire and of the Sun, because it
burns and dries up.

But they most delight in the heat of Animals, as being temperate, and mixed
with moisture, especially that of men, being best tempered, into which
insinuating themselves, they cause infinite disturbance, stopping up the pores
in which the Animal spirit is inherent, and streightning and compressing the
spirit, by reason of the grossnesse of the bodies with which they are endued.
Whence it happens, that the bodies are disordered, and their principal
faculties distempered, and their motions become dull and heavy.

Now if the insinuating Demon be one of the Subterraneous kind, he distorteth
the possessed Person, and speaks by him, making use of the Spirit of the
patient, as if it were his own Organ. But if any of t^ose who are called
Lucifugous, get privately into a Man, he causes relaxation of the limbs, and
stops the voice, and makes the possessed Person in all respects like one
that is dead. For this being the last kind of Demons is more Earthly and
extremely cold and dry, and into whomsoever it insinuates, it hebetates and
makes dull all the faculties of his Soul.

And because it is Irrational, void of all Intel^ectual contemplation, and is
guided by Irrational fantasy, like the more savage kind of beasts, hence it
comes to pass, that it stand^ not in awe of menaces, and for that reason most
persons aptly call it Dumb and Deaf, nor can they who are possessed withit by
any other means be freed from it, but by the Divine favor obtained by Fasting
and Prayer.

That Physicians endeavor to persuade us, that these Passions proceed not from
Demons, but from Humors, and Spirits ill affected, and therefore go about to
cure them, not by Incantations and Expiations, but by Medicines and Diet, is
nothing strange, since they know nothing beyond Sense, and are wholly addicted
to study the Body. And perhaps not without reason are some things ascribed to
ill-affected Humors, as Lethargies, Melancholies, Frenzies, which they take
away and cure, either by evacuating the Humors, or by replenishing the Body if
it be Empty, or by outward applications. But as for Enthusiasms, ragings, and
unclean Spirits, with which whosoever is possessed is not able to act any
thing, neither by Intellect, Speech, Fantasy nor Sense; or else there is some
other thing that moves them unknown to the Person possessed, which sometimes
foretells Future events; How can we call th^se the Motions of depraved Matter?

Not kind of Demon is in it is own Nature Male or Female, for such affections
are only proper to Compounds: but the Bodies of Demons are simple, and being
very ductile and flexible are ready to take any Figure. As we see the Clouds
represent sometimes Men, sometimes Bears, sometimes Dragons, or any other
F^gures: so is it with the Daemoniack Bodies. Now the Clouds appear in various
Figures according as they are driven by exterior blasts or winds: but in
Demons, who can pass as they please into any Bodies, and sometimes contract,
sometimes extend themselves like worms on the Earth, being of a soft and
tractable Nature, not only the Bulk is changed, but the Figure and Color, and
that several ways; for the Daemoniack body being by Nature capable of all
these, as it is apt to recede, it is changed into several forms; as it is
Aerial, it is susceptible of all sorts of Colors, like Air, but the Air is
colored by something extrinsecal.

The Daemoniack Body, from it is intrinsecal Fantastic Power and energy,
produces the forms of colors in it self, as we sometimes look Pale, sometimes
Red, according as the Soul is affected either with Fear or Anger. The like we
must imagine of Demons: for from within they send forth several kinds of
colors into their Bodies. Thus the^r Bodies being changed into what Figure,
and assuming what Color they please, they sometimes appear in the shape of a
Man, sometimes of a Woman, of a Lion, of a Leopard, of a wild Boar, sometimes
in the figure of a Bottle, and sometimes, like a little Dog fawning upon us.

Into all these forms they change themselves, but keep none of them constantly:
for the figure is not solid, but immediately is dissipated; as when we pour
something colored into Water, or draw a figure in the Air. In like manner is it
with Demons, their Color, Figure, and Form presently vanish.

But all Demons have not the same power and will, there is much inequality
amongst them as to these. Some there are Irrational, as amongst Compound
Animals; for as, of them, Man, participating of Intellect and Reason, has also
a larger Fantasy, extending also to all ^ensibles, as well in the Heavens, as
on Earth and under the Earth; but Horses, Oxen, and the like, have a narrower
and more particular Fantasy, yet such as extends to the knowledge of the
Creatures that feed with them, their Mangers, and their Masters; lastly, Flies,
Gnats, and Worms have it extremely contracted, and incoherent; for they know
neither the hole out of which they came, nor whither they go, nor whither they
ought to go, they have only one Fantasy which is that of aliment. In like
manner there are different k^nds of Demons. Of these some are Fiery, others
Aerial; these have a various Fantasy, which is capable of extending to any
thing maginable. The Subterraneous and Lucifugous are not of this Nature;
whence it comes to pass, that they make not use of many Figures, as neither
having variety of Phantasms, nor a Body apt for action and transformation. But
the watery and Terrestial, being of middle kind between these, are capable of
taking many forms, but keep themselves constantly to that in which they
delight. They which live in humid places, transform themselves into the shapes
of Birds and Women; whence termed by the Greeks Naiades and Nereides and
Dryades in the Feminine gender. But such as are conversant in dry places have
also dry Bodies, such as the Onosceles are said to be. These transform
themselves into Men, sometimes into Dogs, Lions, and the like Animals, which
are of a Masculine d^sposition.

The Bodies of Demons are capable of being struck, and are pained thereby,
though they are not compounds, for Sense is not only proper to compounds. That
thing in Man which feels, is neither the Bone nor the Nerve, but the Spirit
which is in them. Whence if the Nerve be pressed, or seized with cold, or the
like, there arriseth pain from the em^ssion of one Spirit into another Spirit:
for it is impossible that a Compound. Body should in itself be sensible of
pain, but in as much as it partaketh of Spirit, and therefore being broken into
pieces, or dead, it is absolutely insensible, because it has no Spirit. In
like manner a Demon being all Spirit; is of his own nature sensible in every
part; he immediately sees, and hears, he is obnoxious to suffering by touch;
being cut assunder, he is pained like Solid bodies, only hereindiffering from
them, that other things being cut assunder, can by no means or very hardly be
made whole again, w^ereas the Demon immediately comes together again, as Air
or Water parted by some more Solid Body. But though this Spirit joins again in
a moment, nevertheless at the very time in which the dissection is made, it is
pained.

Hitherto the Theology and Physic of the Chaldaeans.
The Second SECTION.
ASTROLOGY and other Arts of DIVINATION.
THe Second part of the Chaldaick Learning consists in Arts of Divination: The
chief whereof was Astrology. This, as it is generally acknowledged to have been
their proper invention, so were they most particularly addicted to it: for
which Ptolomy gives a reason, out of the Art it self; because they are under
Virgo and Mercury; But Cicero one, much better; that the plainness and
evennesse of the Country did invite them to contemplation of the Stars.

It consists of two parts; one Meteorologick, which considers the Motions of
the Stars; the other Apotelesmatick, which regards Divination: The first was
known to the ancient Graecians by the common names of Astronomy and Astrology;
until the other being brought into Greece also, they for dictinction called
the former more particularly Astronomy, the latter Astrology. The excellent
Proleg: in Manil:
Joseph Scaliger to advance the cred^t of the Greek learning constantly averres
that the Chaldaeans had only a gross and general, not exact Knowledge of
Astronomy; ((...) tantum, non etiam (...),) and that the Greeks learned nothing
therein of the Chaldaeans: when as Aristotle ingenuously acknowledges the
contrary, the Aegytians and Babylonians says he, from whom we have many
informations concerning each of the Stars. Though doubtless they were far
short of that height in this Art, to which the Greeks who brought it out of the
East, improoved it: for Diodorus Siculus affirms that lib. 1.
they alleged very weak reasons for the Eclipses of the Sun, which Eclipses
they neither durst foretell nor reduce to certain Periods.

But of the Apotelesmatick part they boasted themselves not only the Inventors,
but Masters; insomuch that all the professors of it, of what Country soever,
were (as we formerly showed) called after them, Chaldaeans.

CHAP. I.
Of the Stars Fixed and Erratick, and of their praesignification.
THey First lay down for a ground, That Terrestials Sympathise with the
Caelestials, Sext. Emp:
and that every one of those is renewed by the influence of these. For every
Man's endued with such a mind,
As by the Sire of Gods and Men's assigned.


Above all things they hold that our Act and Life is subjected to the Stars,
Censor.
as well to the Erratick as the Fixed, and that Mankind is governed by their
various and multiplicious course; Sext. Emp. loco cir.
That the Planets are of the kind of efficient causes in everything that
happens in life, and that the Signs of the Zodiac cooperate with them; Diod.
lib. 1.
That they conferr all good and ill to the Nativities of Men, and that by
contemplation of their Natures may be known the chief things that happen to Men.

They held the principal Gods to be twelve, Diod. lib. 1.
to each of which they attributed a Month, and one of the Signs of the
Zodiac.

Next the Zodiac they assert twenty four Stars, Diod. loc. cit.
whereof half they say are ranked in the Northern parts, the other half in the
Southern: Of these they which are apparent they conceive to be deputed to the
Living, the inapparent congregated to the Dead: These they call Judges of all
things.

But the greatest Observation and Theory they hold to be that concerning the
Five Stars termed Planets, Diod. loc. cit.
which they call the Interpreters, ibid.
because the rest of the Stars being Fixed and having a settled Course, these
only having a peculiar course foretell things that shall come to pass,
interpreting and declaring to Men the Benevolence of the Gods: for somethings
(say they) they praesignify by their rising, some things by their setting, some
things by their color if observed; sometimes they foretell great Winds,
sometimes extraordinary Raines or Drought. Likewise the rising of Comets, and
Eclipses of the Sun, and of the Mind, and Earthquakes, and in a Word all
Alterations in the Air signify things advantageous or hurtful not only to
Nations or Countries, but even to Kings and private Persons.

Beneath the Course of these, they hold that there are placed thirty Stars,
which they call Consiliary Gods; Diod. loc. cit.
that half of these oversee the Places under the Earth, the other half oversee
the Earth and the Business of Men, and what is done in the Heaven; and that
every ten days one of these is sent to those below as a Messenger, and in like
manner one of the Stars under the Earth is sent to those above, and that they
have this certain Motion settled in an Aeternal revolution.

CHAP. II.
Of Planets.
TThe greatest Theory they hold (as we said) to be that which concerns the
Planets: Diod. lib. 1.
^hese they call the Interpreters, because whereas the rest of the Stars are
Fixed and have one settled course, these having their proper courses foretell
what things shall come to pass, Interpreting and declaring to Men the
benevolence of the Gods.

Of the Seven they hold the Sun and Moon to be the chief, and that the other
five have less power than they, Sext. Emp.
as to the causing events.

Of the five they affirm that there are three which agree with and are
assistant to the Sun, Sext. Emp. loc. cit.
viz. Saturn, Jupiter, and Mercury; these they call Diurnal, because the Sun to
whom they are assistant praedominates over the things that are done in the day.

As concerning the Powers of the Five, some they say are Benevolent, others
Malevolent, Sext. Emp. loc. cit.
others Common; the Benevolent are Jupiter and Venus; the Malevolent Mars and
Saturn; the Common, Mercury, who is Benevolent with the Benevolent, and
Malevolent with the Malevolent.

CHAP. III.
The Divisions of the Zodiac.
THe Chaldaeans having at first no certain rule of observation of the other
Stars, Sext. Emp.
in as much as they contemplated not the Signs as within their proper
circumscriptions, but only together with their observation of the seven
Planets, it came at length into their minds to divide the whole Circle into
twelve parts: The manner they relate thus; they say that the Ancients having
observed some one bright Star of those in Zodiac, filled a vessel (in which
they bored a hole) with water, and let the water run into another vessel placed
underneath, so long until the same Star rose again; collecting that from the
same Sign to the same, was the whole revolution of the Circle; Then they took
the twelfth part of the water which had run out, and considered how long it was
in running; affirming that the twelfth part of the Circle past over in the same
space of time; and that it had that proportion to the whole Circle which the
part of water had to the whole water: By this Analogy (I mean of the
Dodecatemorion or twlelfth part) they marked out the extreme term from some
Signal Star which then appeared, or from some that arose within that time,
Northern or Southern; the same course they took in the rest of the
Dodecatemoria.

That to each of these Dodecatemoria, the ancient Chaldaeans applied a
particular Figure and a Character, (as for instance to the first the Figure of
a Ram and this Character..) though denied by the Learned contra Astrol. lib.
John Picus Mirandula, seems manifest enough from what we find ascribed
peculiarly to them, by Ptolomy, Sextus Empyricus and others, which we shall
cite in their due places.

To each of these Signs they appropriated One of the principal Gods which they
held to be twelve, Diod. lib. 1.
and One of the Months; the Zodiac it self they termed the Circle Mazoloth,
which the Septuagint render (...), interpreted by Su^das the Constellations
which are commonly termed (...) Signs, for Mazal signifies a Star. That they
ascribed several Gods to them agre^th with what is said of the ^ollowers of
Baal (whom Rabbi Maimonides conceives the same with these Chaldaeans) they
burnt Incense unto Baal, 2. Kings 23. 5.
to the Sun, and to the Moon, and to the Mazaloth, and to all the Host of
Heaven. Hence some are of Opinion that Homer received this Doctrine from the
Egyptians, as the Egyptians from the Chaldaeans, alluding to it in the first
of his Iliads, where he mentions the Entertainment of Jupiter and the rest of
the Gods in Aethiopia twelve days, with the several Houses built for them by
Vulcan; and much better deserve they to be credited than those Ancients w^o
(according to Eustathius) write that Homer first gave the Hint of this Opinion
to the Mathematicians. in Iliad. 1.
Neither is what he adds in Explication of this Mythology dissonant from the
Chaldaick Doctrine, in Iliad: 1.
that the making those Mansions for the Gods or Stars is ascribed to Vulcan in
respect of the Aetherial Heat of the Caelestial Orb.

Of the Signs some they call Masculine, Sext. Emp.
others Feminine, some Double, others Single, some Tropical, others Solid.

The Masculine or Feminine are those which have a Nature that co-operates
toward the Generation of Males or Femals, Aries is a Masculine Sign, Taurus a
Feminine, Gemini a Masculine, in like manner the rest alternately are Masculine
and Feminine; In Imitation of whom as I conceive the Pythagoreans call the
Monad Masculine, the Duad Feminine, the Triad Masculine, and so on through all
numbers odd and Even. Some there are who divide every Sign into twelve Parts,
observing almost the same order; As in Aries they call the first twelfth part
Aries and Masculine, the second Taurus and Feminine, the third Gemini and
Masculine, and so of the rest.

Double Signs are Gemini, and it is diametrically opposite Sagittarius; Virgo
and Pisces: the rest are single.

Tropical are those to which when the Sun comes he turns back, and makes a
Conversion: Such is the Sign Aries, and it is opposite Libra, Capricorn and
Cancer; In Aries is the Spring Tropic, in Capricorn the Winter, in Cancer the
Summer, in Libra the Au^umnal. The Solid are Taurus and it is opposite Scorpio,
Leo and Aquarius. Sext. loc. cit.


Some Chaldaeans there are who attribute the several parts of Man's Body to
particular Signs, as sympathising with them; To Aries the Head, to Taurus the
Neck, to Gemini the Shoulders, Cancer the Breast, Leo the Sides, Virgo the
Bowels and Belly, Libra the Reins and Loy^s, Scorpio the Secret parts and Womb,
Sagittarius the Thighs, Capricorn the Knees, Aquarius the Legs, Pisces the
Feet. This did they not without consideration, for if any Star shall be in any
Ascension of these Malignant Signs, it will cause a Maim in that part which
bears the same N^me with it. Thus much in brief of the Nature of the Signs in
the Zodiac.

Besides this Divis^on of the Zodiac into Sigres Sext. Emp.
they Subdivided every Sign into 30 Degrees, every Degree into 60 Minutes, so
they call the leas^ indivisible Par^s, (as Empyrius affirms; whence it may be
argued that the Chaldaeans made not any lower divisions into Seconds or the
l^ke.) Censorin. de dienatali.
The Degrees being in every Sign 30 are in the whole Zodiac 360: in Some One
of these the Sun must necessarily be at the time of the Nativity; which Degree
the Chaldaeans properly call the place of the Birth. Hence the Greeks call
these Degree (...) in Allusion to the (...) Goddesses of Destiny, these being
our Fates; for it is of greatest Importance which of these Degrees is Ascendant
at the time of Birth.

Three other Ways there are of dividing of the Zodiac ascribed to the
Chaldaans, which are Triplicities, Terms, Decanates.

The Trigons or Triplicities are these four. The first is Aries, Leo, Ptol.
Sagittarius, the second ^aurus, Virgo, Capricorn, the third (Gemini, Libra,
Aquarius,) the l^st (Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces;) That the Chaldaeans divided the
Zodiac according to these Triplicities is manifest from their Way of
collecting the Terms of the Planets described by Ptolomy.

Ev^ry Sign^ has five Terms. Ptol.
The Chaldaick Way of finding out the Quantity of the Terms in every Sign is
one, and that very plain, for their quantities differ by an equal Diminution;
every Term is less than the precedent by one Degree, for they made the first
Term of every sign to be eight degrees, the second seven, the third six, the
fourth five, the fifth four, which make up 30 Degrees.

Lastly the Signs are divided into Faces, for so the Ancients called them, in
Hebrew Phanim, in Arabic Mageah, in Greek (...); but the latter Astrologers
Decanates (...) Decanos a word (as Scaliger observes) derived from the Roman
Militia, in Manil.
of these in every Sign there are three, each of which comprehends ten
degrees; that the Chaldaeans were not ignorant of these is manifest, in as much
as ^emer the Babylonian an Author of great Antiquity wrote concerning them.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Planets considered in respect to the Zodiac.
THe Chaldaeans held that the Planets have not always Power alike, Sext. Emp.
as to the procuring of Good and Ill; but that in some Places [or Signs of the
Zodaick] they are more ^fficacious, in others less; and that the same Stars
have greater Power being in their proper Houses, Sext. Emp. loc. cit.
or in their Exaltations [or Triplicities,] or Terms, or Decanates. All which
the later Astrologers call their Essential Dignities.

The most Efficacious is that of Houses. Sext. Emp. ibid.
They hold the Suns House to be Leo, the Moons Cancer, Saturn's Capricorn and
Aquarius, Jupiter's Sagittarius and Pisces, that of Mars Aries and Scorpio,
that of Venus Taurus and Libra, that of Mercury Gemini and Virgo.

They call the Exaltations and Depressions of the Planets, when they are in
Signs wherewith they are delighted, Sext. loc. cit.
or when they are in those in which they have little (or no) Power: for they
are delighted in their Exaltations; but have little (or no) Power in their
Depressions. As the Suns Exaltation is in Aries when he is exactly in the 19th
degree thereof, his Depression in the Sign and Degree diametrically opposite to
it. The Moons Exaltation is in Taurus, her Depression (or Detriment) in the
Sign diametrically opposite. That of Saturn is in Libra, of Jupiter in Cancer,
of Mars in Capricorn, of Venus in Pisces, and their Depressions are in the
Signs diametrically opposite to their Exaltations.

The Trigones or Triplicities of Planets are ordered by the Chaldaeans after
this manner. Ptol.
The Lord of the first Triplicity (of the Zodiac) is Jupiter, of the 2^ Venus;
the same Order they observe in the other two Triplicities, except that the
third is said to have two Lords, Saturn and Mercury: the first part of the Day
is assigned to Saturn, the Night to Mercury. The Lord of the last Triplicity is
Mars. How much this diff^rs from the vulgar way (which takes in the Sun and
Moon) will easily appear to those who will take the pains to compare them. The
later way see in Firmicus.

They call the Terms of the Planets in every Sign, Sext. Emp.
those in which any Planet from such a Degree to such a Degree is most powerful
or prevalent. Ptol.
The Chaldaick way of Terms is gathered from the Lords of the Triplicities,
(which is plainer and more effectual than that of the Egyptians from the Lords
of the Houses) yet neither in their Orders or Quantities do they always follow
those Planets which govern the Triplicities. In the first Triplicity, their
Division of Terms in every Sign thereof is one and the same. The first term
they give to the Lord of the Triplicity Jupiter, the second, to the Lord of the
following Triplicity Venus, the third and fourth, to the two Lords of the
Triplicity of the Gemini, which are Saturn and Mercury; the fifth, to the Lord
of the last Triplicity Mars. In the second Triplicity they divide every Sign
alike, and alot the first term to Venus, by reason of her Dominion in that
Triplicity, the second and third to the two Lords of the Triplicity of the
Gemini, which are Saturn and Mercury; the fourth to Mars, the last to Jupiter.
To Saturn are attributed in the Day 66 Degrees, in the Night 78, to Jupiter 72,
to Mars 60, to Venus 75, to Mercury in the Day 66, in the Night 78.

The Terms of the Chaldaeans or Babylonians.
Aries Jupiter 8 Venus 7 Saturn 6 Mercu. 5 Mars 4 Taurus Venus 8 Sa^urn 7
Mercu. 6 Mars 5 Jupiter 4 Gemini Saturn 8 Merur. 7 Mars 6 Jupiter 5 Venus 4
Cancer Mars 8 Jupiter 7 Venus 6 Saturn 5 Mercu. 4 Leo Jupiter 8 Venus 7 Saturn
6 Mercu. 5 Mars 4 Virgo Venus 8 Saturn 7 Mercu. 6 Mars 5 Jupiter 4 Libra Saturn
8 Mercu. 7 Mars 6 Jupiter 5 Venus 4 Scorpio Mars 8 Jupiter 7 Venus 6 Saturn 5
Mercu. 4 Sagittar. Jupiter 8 Venus 7 Saturn 6 Mercu. 5 Mars 4 Capricor Venus 8
Saturn 7 Mercu. 6 Mars 5 Jupiter 4 A^uar. Saturn 8 Mercu. 7 Mars 6 I^piter 5
Venus 4 Pisces Mars 8 Jupiter 7 Venus 6 Saturn 5 Mercu. 4

The Decanates or faces of the Planets, have reference to those of the Zodiac;
the first face is that Planet whose sign it is: the second, the next Planet;
and so on. That these were of ancient Chaldaick invention is manifest, not
only in regard that Teucer the Babylonian wrote concerning them, but likewise
they were observed by the Egyptians, who (as Josephus says) derived this
Learning from the Chaldaeans. Nicip^o King of Egypt, a most just Governor, and
excellent Astrologer, did (if we credit Julius Firmicus) collect all sicknesses
from the Decanates; showing what diseases every Decanate caused; because one
nature was overcome by another, and one God by another. The same Author adds,
that Petosiris touched this part of Astrology but lightly; not as being
ignorant of it, but not willing to communicate his immortal Learning to
posterity.

CHAP. V.
Aspects of the Signs and Planets.
EVery Sign of the Zodiac has a mutual Aspect to the rest; Censor.
In like manner the Planets have several Aspects; Sext. Emp.
They are said to be in mutual Aspect or configuration, when they appear either
in Trine or Square. They are said to behold one another in Trine, when there is
an interposition of three signs between them: in Square or Quartile, when of
two.

The Sun passing into the Sign next to that, Censor.
wherein he was at the time of birth, regards the place of conception eit^er
with a very weak Aspect, or not at all; for most of the Chaldaeans have
absolutely denied, that the Signs which are next to one another behold one
another; But when he is in the third Sign, that is, when there is a Sign
betwixt them, then he is said to behold the first place whence he came, but
with a very oblique and weak light, which Aspect is termed Sextile; for it
subtends the sixth part of a Circle: for if we draw lines from the first Sign
to the third, from the third to the fifth, and from thence to the seventh, and
so on, we shall describe an aequilateral Hexagone; This Aspect they did not
wholly of, for that it seemed to conduce the least to the Nativity of the
Child, but when he comes to the fourth Sign, so that there are two betwixt, he
looks on it with a Quarterly Aspect: for that line which his Aspect makes, cuts
off a fourth part of the Circle. When he is in the fifth there being three
betwixt, it is a Trine Aspect, for it subtends a third part of the Zodaick:
which two Aspects the Quartile and Trine being very efficacious afford much
increase to the Birth. But the Aspect from the sixth place is wholly
inefficacious, for the line there makes not a side of any Polygone, but from
the 7th Sign which is the opposite the Aspect is most full and powerful, and
brings forth some i^fants already mature, termed Septimestres, from being
born in the 7th Month: But if within that space it be not mature, in the 8th
Month it is not born, for from the 8th Sign as from the 6th, the Aspect is
inefficacious, but either in 9th Month, or in the 10th: for the Sun from the
9th Sign beholds again the particle of the Conception in a trine Aspect, and
from the 10th in a Quartile; Which Aspects, as we said, are very efficacious:
But in the 11th Month they hold, it cannot be born, because then, the Light
being weak, sends first his languishing Ray in a Sextile Aspect, much less in
the 12th, which Aspect is not all valid.

CHAP. VI.
Schemes.
THe way by which the Chaldaeans from the very beginning observed the Horoscope
of any Nativity, Sext. Emp.
corresponds with that of their Division of the Zodiac (mentioned formerly;)
For a Chaldaean sat in the Nightime on some high Promontory contemplating
the Stars; another sat by the Woman in travail until such time as she were
delivered. As soon as she was delivered, he signified it to him on the
Promontory, which as soon as he had heard, he observed the Sign then rising for
the Horoscope, but in the Day he attended the Ascendants and Suns Motion.

Of the twelve Parts or Houses into which the Zodiac is divided, Sext. Emp.
loc. cit.
those which are predominant in every Nativity, and chiefly to be considered in
Prognostics, are four, which by one common Name they term Centers (or Angles,)
but more particularly, they call one the Horoscope, or Ascendant, another the
Medium Caeli, (the tenth House,) another the Descendant, (the seventh House,)
another the Subterrestrial and opposite to the Medium Caeli, (the fourth
House.) The Horoscope is that which happens to be Ascendant at the time of the
Birth, the Medium Coeli is the fourth Sign inclusively from it. The Descendant
is that which is opposite to the Horoscope. The Subterrestrial and Imum Coeli,
that which is opposite to the Medium Coeli: as (to explain it by an Example) if
Cancer be the Horoscope, Aries is the Medium Coeli, Capricorn Descendant, and
Libra Subterrestrial. That House which goes before either of these Houses they
call cadent, that which follows, succedent; now that which goes before the
Horoscope being apparent to us, they affirm to be of the ill Genius, that next
which follows the Medium Coeli of the good Genius, that which is before the
Medium Coeli, the inferior Portion and single Lot, and God: That which is
before the Descendant, a slothful Sign, and the beginning of Death; that which
is after the Ascendant, and is not apparent to us, the Fury and ill Fortune;
that which comes under the Earth good Fortune, opposite to the good Genius:
that which is beyond the Imum Coeli toward the East, Goddess; that which
follows the Horoscope slothful, which also is opposite to the slothful.

Or more briefly thus: Sex. loc. cit.
The Cadent of the Horoscope is called the ill Genius, the Succedent slothful,
the Cadent of the Medium Coeli, God, the Succedent good Genius, the Cadent of
the Imum Coeli, Goddess, the Succedent good Fortune, the Cadent of the
Descendant ill Fortune, the succedent slothful. These, as they conceive, ought
to be examined not superficially.

Upon these Grounds the Chaldaeans made their Apotolesmatick Praedictions,
Sext. loc. cit.
of which there is a difference; for some of them are more simple, others more
accurate: the more simple, those which are made from any one Sign, or the
simple force of a single Star, as that a Star being in such a Sign shall cause
such kind of Men: the more accurate, those which are made by the Concourse, and
as they say, the Contemporation of many. As if one Sar be in the Horoscope,
another in the Mid-heaven, another in the opposite Point to the Mid-heaven,
others thus or thus posited, then these or these things will come to pass.
These are all the remains of this Art, which can be attributed to the Ancient
Chaldaeans.

CHAP. VII.
Other Arts of Divination.
THe Chaldaeans, besides Astrology, invented and used many other ways of
Divination, of which lib. 1.
Diodorus Siculus instanceth, Divination by Birds, interpretation of Dreams,
Explication of Prodigi^s, and Hieroscopie. Mor. Nov.
R. Maimonides likewise affirms, that amongst the Chaldaeans anciently there
arose several sorts of Diviners, in particular these, Megnonemin, Menacheshim,
Mecashephim, Chober chaber, Shel ob, Iid^^o^i, Doresh el hammetim; all which
are mentioned Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11.

The first ascribed by Diodorus to the Chaldaeans, is Divination of Birds,
(...), or Augury: neither is it probable, that they who were so great
Inquisitors into the several kinds of Divination, should be ignorant of this,
which after-ages esteemed one of the most considerable. But they who understand
the word (...)
Menacheshim in this sense, seem to have been drawn to it by a mistake of the
Latin word augurari, by which it is rendered.

The next, interpretation of Dreams, (...), Suid.
Philo Iudae^s affirms to have been invented by Abraham. Indeed that it was
professed by the ancient Chaldaeans appears from their answer to Nebuchadnezzar,
Dan. 2.
Tell thy servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation. There are
extant many onirocritical Verses, under the name of Astrampsychus, collected
out of Suidas, and digested by Joseph Scaliger: Astrampsychus is mentioned
amongst the Magi by Laertius: and U^sin. Zo^.
there are who conceive the name to be only an Interpretation of the Chaldaean
or P^rsian Zoroaster, which some render, a living star.

The third, Explication of Prodigies, (...), this kind the Greek Interpreters
conceive included in the word Iide^oni, for they render it (...).

The last that Diodorus mentions, is Hieroscopie, by which I conceive to be
meant extispicium, Divination by inspection into the entrails ((...)) of
sacrificed Beasts. That the Chaldaeans used this kind, may be argued from the
Prophet Ezekiel, who says of the King of Babylon (using Divination,) chap. 21.
v. 21.
he looked into the liver. Th^se seem to be the gazrin, reckoned by chap. 2.
Daniel amongst the Chaldaean Diviners; from gazar, to cut; for they cut open
the Beast and divined by his entrails.

O^, is rendered Pytho, or (rather) Pythonicus spiritus; the word originally
signifies a Bottle; and ther^upon is taken for that spirit which speaks ex
utero Pythonissae: The Sacred Text calls the Woman Esheth Baalath Ob, which the
Septuagint render, (...), and where Saul says, 1 Samuel 28. v. 8.
I pray thee divine unto me in Ob, they translate, (...). R. Maimonides says,
she that was initiated held in her hand a myrtle wand, and received
suffumigatio^s: R. Abraham ben David, that these Rites were usually performed
at some dead man's Tomb.

Doresh el hammetim, is properly (as rendered) a Necromancer: Fran. Mirand. de
^er. praenot. lib. 4. p. 328.
some affirm this kind of Divination had it is original in Chaldaea.

These and the rest of this kind are all comprehended under the general name
Mecashphim, of which formerly.

The Third SECTION.
MAGIC, Natural and Theurgick.
THe third part of the Chaldaick Doctrine was Magic: for though the Name is
conceived to be Persian (by some derived from Mog, Salmas.
a Surname of the Persian Zoroaster, Suid.
by others from the Ma^ussaea^s) yet this Science it self was originally
Chaldaean, and properly the study of the Ashaphim; of whom Laertius is to be
understood, when he says that the Chaldaeans were the same with the
Babylonians, as the Magi with the Persians: Hence is it also that the term Magi
is some times extended to the Chaldaea^ Philoso^hers.

Pliny indeed says, that lib. 30. cap. 1.
Magic had it is ^eginning in Persia from Zoroaster, but adds, that whether
this Zoroaster was one, or afterward a second also, is not certain: and that
he rather meant the Chaldaean, that the Persian, may be inferred from his
citing those Authors who placed this Zoroaster 6000 years before Plato, or 5000
years before the Trojan war; which accounts (though extravagant) were
doubtless intended of the most ancient Zoroaster, the Chaldaean. He likewise
instanceth loc. cit.
as skilful in this Art Marmaridius a Babylonian, and Zormocenidas an Assyrian,
both so ancient as that there are not any Monuments of them extant.

The few remains we find of the Chaldaean Magic may be reduced to two kinds,
Natural and Theurgick.

CHAP. I.
Natural Magic.
THe First Part of the Chaldaick Magic is that which we commonly term Natural,
because it contemplates the Virtues of all Natural beings Caelestial and
Sublunary, Psel.
makes scrutiny into their Sympathy, and by a mutual application of them,
produces extraordinary effects.

By this kind of Magic the Chaldaeans professed Maimon. Mor. Ne.
to perform many admirable things, not only upon particular Persons, but upon
whole Countries. R. Maimonides instanceth the Mor. Ne.
expelling of Noxious Animals, as Lions, Serpents, and the like, out of Cities;
the driving away all kind of harms from Plants, prevention of Hail, the
destroying of Worms that they hurt not the Vines; concerning these (says he)
they have written much in their Books; and some there are who boast they can
cause that no Leaves or Fruit shall fall form the Trees.

CHAP. II.
Magical Operations, their kinds.
THeir operations Mor. Ne.
R. Maimonides reduces to three kinds. The First is of those which deal in
Plants, Animals, and Metals. The Second consists in Circumscription and
Determination of some time, in which the Operations are to be performed. The
Third consists in Human Gestures and Actions; as in Clapping the Hands,
Leaping, Crying aloud, Laughing, Lying Prostrate on the Earth, Burning of any
thing, Kindling of Smoke, and Lastly in Pronouncing certain words Intelligible
or Unintelligible; these are the kinds of their Magical Operations.

loc. cit.
Some there are which are not performed but by all these Kinds: As when they
say, take such a Leaf of such an Herb when the Moon is in such a Degree and
Place: Or, take of the Horn of such a Beast, or of his Hair, Sweat or Blood,
such a quantity, when the Sun is in the middle of Heaven, or in some other
certain Place. Or, take of such a Metal, or of many Metalls, melt them under
such a Constellation, and in such a Position of the Moon; then pronounce such
and such words; make a suffumigation of such and such leaves, in such and such
a figure, and this or that thing shall come to pass.

loc. cit.
Other Magical operations there are which they conceive may be performed by one
of the forementioned kinds, only these (say they) are performed for the most
part by Women, as we find amongst them: for the bringing forth of Waters, if
ten Virgins shall adorn themselves and put on red Garments, and leap in such
manner that one shall thrust on the other, and this to be done going backwards
and forwards, and afterward shall stretch out their fingers toward the Sun,
making certain Signs, this action being finished, they say that waters will
issue forth. In like manner they write, that if four Women etc. using certain
words and certain gestures, by this action they shall divert hail from falling
down. Many other such like vanities they mention all along their writings,
which are to be performed by Women.

Maim. Mor. Ne.
But none of these (as they imagine) can be performed without having respect
and consideration of the Stars; for thy conceive that every Plant has it is
proper Star: they ascribe also certain Stars to all living Creatures and
Metalls; Moreover these operations are peculiar worships of the Stars, and that
they are delighted with such an action, or speech, or Suffumigation, and for
it is sake afford them what they wish. Hitherto R. Maimonides, who only has
preserved these remains of the ancient Chaldaick superstition.

CHAP. III.
Of the Tsilmenaia (or Telesmes) used for Averruncation.
MOreover the Chaldaeans are by the Rabbis reported to have been the first
that found out the secret power of Figures; neither was there any thing more
celebrious than the Images of this kind made by them.

They are called in Chaldee and Persian Tsilmenaia, from the Hebrew Tselem, an
Image: in Arabic, Talitsmam or Tsalimam, perhaps from the same Root; rather
than as some conjecture from the Greek word (...).

These Images were prepared under certain Constellations, for several purposes;
some for Averruncation, others for Praediction.

Those that serve for Averrancation, some conceive to have been of later
Invention, and ascribe them to Apollonius Tyanaeus; he indeed was the first
amongst the Graecians that was famous for them: but it is most probable that he
brought this Art out of the East, there being yet to be seen many of these
Figures or Telesmes throughout the whole Eastern part of the World; and some of
them very ancient, which Curios. inoyez.
Gaffarel allegeth to confirm, that the Persians, or if you will, the
Babylonians or Chaldaeans, were the first that found them out.

These the Greeks term also (...), and (...); and the makers of them
Stoicheiomaticks. Centiloq.
Ptolemy, The generable and corruptible Forms are affected by the Celestial
Forms: for which reason the Stoickeiomaticks make use of them, considering the
entrance of the Stars into them: On which words Hali Aben Rodoan (or as the
Hebrew translation Aben Giafar) writes thus. In this Chapter Ptolemy means to
discover many secrets of Images, and that the Figures which are here below are
correspondent to the like figurations above, which predominate over them: as
for instance, the Celestial Scorpion predominates over the terrestrial
Scorpions, and the Celestial Serpent over the Terrestrial Serpents, and the
skillful in Images (Stoicheiomaticks) observed, when a Planet was out of his
Combustion, and entered into any of these Figures, then placing the Planet in
the Horoscope, they engraved the Figure upon a stone, and having added what
else was necessary, they fitted it for preservation, or destruction, as they
pleased; and this power continued in the stone a long time after.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Tsilmenaia, used for Prediction.
ANother kind there was of Tsilmenaia or Telesmes, used for Prediction: These
Images (according to the description of Mor. Ne.
R. Maimonides) they did erect to the Stars: of Gold to the Sun, of Silver to
the Moon, and so distributed the Metalls and Climates of the Earth among the
Stars, for they said, that such a Star is the God of such a Climate. There they
built Temples, and placed the Images in them, conceiving that the Power of the
Stars did flow into those Images, and that those Images had the faculty of
understanding, and did give to Men the gift of Prophecy, and in a word did
declare to them what things were good for them. So also they say of Trees which
belong to those Stars, every Tree being dedicated to some Star, and planted to
it is Name, and worshipped, for this or that reason, because the Spiritual
Virtues of the Stars, are infused into that Tree, so that after the manner of
Prophecy they discourse to Men, and speak to them also in Dreams.

The word Teraphim in the Sacred Scripture, amongst other significations, is
sometimes taken for these Images, whence Genesis 3.
Onkelos the Chaldee paraphrast renders it Tsilmenaia, with which the Syriack
version agrees; The Septuagint (...), and (...), and (...), implying by all
these Interpretations, that they were endewed with the gift of praediction:
which is no more than the Text it self confirms; for chapter 21. 21.
Ezekiel says of the King of Babylon using Divination, that he consulted the
Teraphim.

Of this kind are those Teraphim conceived to be, which Rachel stole from her
father Laban; for he calls them his, Genesis 31.
Gods; the Copti^k version renders it, the greatest of his Gods: R. D. Kimchi
conceives they were made by Astrologers to foretell things to come, and that
they were Images whose figures we know not, by which the Ancients were informed
of future events, they being in some manner like the Oracles which often spoke
by the mouth of the Devil. R. Eliezer, that they were statues made in the
figure of men under certain constellations, whose influences (which they were
capable of receiving) caused them to speak at some set hours, and give an
answer to whatsoever was demanded of them. Aben Ezra, that they were made after
the shapes of Men, to the end they might be capable of Celestial influence (and
in the same manner interprets he the Teraphim placed by Michol in David's bed.)
Adding, that the reason why Rachel took them away, was not to take her father
off from Idolatry; for if it were so, why then did she take them along with
her, and not rather hide them in the way near his house: But by reason that her
father was skilful in Astrology, she feared lest by consulting those Images and
the Stars, he should know which way Jacob was gone. And S. Augustine, in Genesis
quaest. 94.
that Laban says, why have thou stolen my Gods? it is perhaps in as much as he
had said be divined, Genesis 30.
I divined the Lord blessed me because of thee,] for so the more ancient
Expositors interpret the word nichashti, (...) de Diis Syris.
and the Jews understand that place, of prescience, divination, or conjecture,
as Mr. Seldom observes.

Philo Iudaeus speaking of the Judge. 17.
Teraphim of Micah, fancies that Micah made of fine Gold and Silver three
Images of young Ladds, and three Calves, and one Lion, one Dragon, and one
Dove, so that if any had a Mind to know any secret concerning his Wife, he was
to have recourse to the Image of the Dove which answered his Demands; if
concerning his Children, he went to the Boys; if concerning Riches, to the
Eagle; if concerning Power and Strength, to the Lion; if it anything concerned
Sons and Daughters, he went then to the Calves; and if about the length of
Years and Days, he was to consult the Image of the Dragon. This, how light
soever, shows that he also understood the Teraphim to be prophetical.

CHAP. V.
Theurgick Magic.
THe other part of the Chaldaick Magic is Theurgick: to which perhaps Plato
more particularly alluded, when he defind Alcibiad. 1.
the Magic of Zoroaster, the service of the Gods. This they called also Psell.
in Orac.
the Method of Rites; the Works of Piety, and (as renderd by the Greeks) (...)
the Telestick Science and Telesiurgick. In what it did consist may be gathered
from what Suidas says of the two Iulians; Julian (says he) the Chaldaean, a
Philosopher, father of Julian surnamed the Theurgick; He wrote of Demons four
Books; they treat of Preservatives of every part of Man's Body; of which kind
are the Chaldaick Telesiurgicks. And again, Julian son of the afore-mentioned,
lived under Marcus Antonius the Emperor, he also wrote Theurgick Initiatory
Oracles in Verse; and all other secrets of the Science.

Thus the Telestick Science was conceived to procure a conversation with
Demons by certain Rites and Ceremonies, and Psell. in Orac.
to initiate or perfect the Soul by the power of materials here on Earth; for
the supreme faculty of the Soul cannot by it is own guidance aspire to the
sublimest institution, and to the comprehension of Divinity; but the Work of
Piety leads it by the hand to God by illumination from thence; Plato indeed
holds, that we may comprehend the ungenerate Essence by Reason and Intellect;
but the Chaldaean asserts, that there is no other means for us to arrive at
God, but by strentghning the Vehicle of the soul by material Rites: for he
supposes that the soul is purified by stones, and herbs, and charms, and is
rendered expedito for ascent.

It is likewise beneficial to the Body as well as to the Soul, for Psell. in
Orac.
if a man shall give his mind to these, he shall not only render his soul
unvanquishable by passions, but shall also preserve his body the better in
health: for the usual effect of Divine illuminations is to consume the matter
of the Body, and to establish Nature by health, that we be not seized either by
Passions or Diseases.

CHAP. VI.
Theurgick Rites.
BY Theurgick or Telestick Rites they conceived that they could procure a
communication with the good Demons, and expulsion or averruncation of the bad.

The chief of these Rites was Sacrifice; concerning which, there is a
remarkable passage in de Myster. Egypt.
Iamblichus, who delivers the Chaldaick opinion thus: The Gods give those
things that are truly good, to such as are purified by sacrifices; with whom
also they converse, and by their communication drive away wickedness and
passion far from them; and by their brightness chase from thence the dark
Spirit; for the evil Spirits, when the light of the Gods comes in, fly away
as shadows at the light of the Sun: neither are they able any longer to disturb
the pious sacrificer, who is free from all wickedness, perverseness, and
passion: but such as are pernicious, and behave themselves insolently in
opposition to sacred Rites and Orders, these by reason of the imbecility of
their action, and want of power, are not able to attain to the Gods, but
because of certain pollutions are driven away from the Gods, and associated
with ill Demons, by whose bad breath they are inspired, and depart thence most
wicked, profane and dissolute; unlike the Gods in desire, but in all things
resembling the bad Demons with whom they converse daily. There men therefore
being full of passion and wickedness, by the affinity that is betwixt them,
draw the evil Spirits to them, by whom being quickly possessed, they are again
excited to all iniquity, one assisting and strengthening the other, like a
Circle whose beginning and end meet.

Several other Rites they used also, which they conceived to be prevalent in
evocation of these Demons. They are allured (says in Synes.
Gregorius Nicephoras) out of the Air and Earth by certain stones or pulse, or
certain Voices or Figures, which they call Characters, invented by the
Chaldaeans and Egyptians who first found out the proper dignoscitive sign of
every Demon.

Some few of these are mentioned in the Chaldaick Oracles; as, When thou see
the Terestial Demon approach,
Sacrifize the Stone Mnizuris, using invocation.


The Demons (says Psellus) that are near the Earth are by Nature lying, as
being far off from the Divine Knowledge, and filled with dark matter. Now if
you would have any true discourse from these prepare an Altar and Sacrifize the
Stone Mnizuris. This Stone has the power of evocations, the other greater
Demon who invisibly approaches to the material Demon will pronounce the true
relation of demands, which transmits to the demandant the Oracle the vocatine
name with the Sacrificing of the Stone.

Another of these Rites mentioned by the same Oracles, is that of the Hecatine
Strophalus.

Labor about the Hecatine Strophalus. The Hecatine Strophalus (says Psellus)
is a golden ball, in the midst whereof is a Sapphire, they fold about it a
Leather thong, it is beset all over with Characters; Thus whipping it about
they made their Invocations. These they use to call Iynges whether it be round
or triangle or any other Figure, and whilst they are doing thus they make
insignificant or brutish cries, and lash the Air with their whips. The Oracle
advises to the performance of these Rites, or such a Motion of the Strophalus,
as having an expressible power. It is called Hecatine as being dedicated to
Hecate. Hecate is a Goddess amongst the Chaldaeans, having at her right side
the Fountain of Virtues.

No little Efficacy was attributed to certain words used in these Rites, which
the Chaldaick Oracles expressly forbid to be changed.

Never change Barbarous names. There are certain names (says Psellus) among
all Nations delivered to them by God; which have an unspeakable Power in Divine
Rites, change not these into the Greek Dialect; As Seraphim and Cherubin, and
Michael and Gabriel: These in the Hebrew Dialect have an unspeakable Efficacy
in Divine Rites; but changed into Greek names are ineffectual.

CHAP. VII.
Apparitions.
THe Apparitions procured by these rites are of two kinds. Psel. in orac. 15.
The First is called (...) Super-inspection (in respect to the initiated
person:) When he who orders the Divine Rites sees a mere Apparition, (as for
instance) of light in some figure or form, concerning which the Chaldaick Psel.
in orac. 14.
Oracle advises, that if anyone sees such a light, he apply not his mind to
it, nor esteem the voice proceeding from thence to be true. Psel. in orac. 19.
Sometimes likewise to many initiated persons there appears whilst they are
sacrificing some Apparitions in the shape of Dogs and several other Figures.
These are apparitions of the passions of the Soul in performing Divine Rites,
mere appearances, having no substance, and therefore not signifying any thing
true.

The Second is called Psel. in orac. 15.
(...) self inspection, this is when the initiated person sees the Divine
Light it self without any figure or form: This the Oracle calls (...) loc. cit.
Sacro-sanct, for that it is seen with a beauty by Sacred Persons, and glides
up and down pleasantly and graciously through the Depths of the World. loc. cit.
This will not deceive the initiated person, but whatsoever question you shall
propose, the answer will be most true. When thou see (says the Oracle) a
Sacred fire, without
Form, shining flashingly through the depths of the whole World,
Hear the voice of Fire.


Psel. in orac. 21.
When thou beholdest the divine Fire void of Figure brightly gliding up and
down the World, and graciously smiling, listen to this voice, as bringing a
most perfect Praescience.

But Psel in orac. 25.
these things which appear to initiated persons as Thunder, Lightning, and all
else whatsoever, are only Symbols or Signs, not the Nature of God.

CHAP. VIII.
Material Demons how to be repulsed.
AS it is one property of Theurgy to evocate and procure a conversation with
good Demons, so is it another, to repulse and chase away the Material Demons,
which as they conceive may be effected several ways; either by words, or
actions.

By Words: For (as Psel. de. demon.
Marcus delivers the Chaldaick opinion) these Material Demons fearing to be
sent to Abysses and Subterraneal places, and standing in awe of the Angels who
send them thither, If a Man threaten to send them thither, and pronounce the
names of those Angels whose office that is, it is hardly to be expressed how
much they will be affrighted and troubled; so great will their astonishment be,
as that they are not able to discern the person that menaces them, and though
it be some old Woman, or a little old Man that threatens them, yet so great is
their fear, that commonly they depart as if he that menaces were able to kill
them.

By actions: For the Bodies of Demons ( says the same de. demon.
Author) are capable of being struck, and are pained thereby; Sense is not the
property of Compounds, but of Spirits; That thing in a Man which feels, is
neither the Bone, nor the Nerve, but the Spirit which is in them: whence if the
Nerve be pressed or seized with cold or the like, there arises pain from the
Emission of one Spirit into another Spirit; for it is impossible that a
compound Body should in it self be sensible of pain, but in as much as it
partaketh of Spirit, and therefore being cut into pieces, or dead, it is
absolutely insensible; because it has no Spirit. In like manner a Demon being
all Spirit is of his own Nature sensible in every part; he immediately sees
and he hears; he is obnoxious to suffering by touch; being cut assunder he is
pained like Solid Bodies; only herein differing from them, that other things
being cut assunder can by no means or very hardly be made whole again, whereas
the Demon immediately comes together again, as Air or Water parted by some
more solid Body. But though this Spirit joins again in a moment, nevertheless
at the very time in which the dissection is made it is pained; for this reason
they are much afraid of swords, which they who chase them away knowing, stick
up pointed Irons or swords in those places where they would not have them come,
chasing them away by things Antipathetical to them, as they allure them by
things Sympathetical.

From these Material Demons, Psel. de. demon.
upon those that worship them, descend certain Fiery irradiations, like those
we call falling Stars, gliding up and down; which those mad persons term
apparitions of God; but there is nothing true, firm or certain in them, but
cheats, like those of Iuglers, which the common people term wonders, because
they deceive the eye; Psel. in orac. 23.
for being removed far from the beatitude of Divine life, and destitute of
Intellectual contemplation, they cannot praesignify futures, but all that they
say or show is false and not solid, for they know beings (...) by their
outsides, but that which knows futures particularly, uses Notions
indivisible and not figured.

THE FOURTH SECTION.
Of the Gods, and Religious worship of the Chaldaeans.
IN the last place, (as to the Explication of the Chaldaick Doctrine,
especially of that part which concerned their Ashaphim) it is necessary we give
account of the Gods of the Chaldaeans, and of their Religious worship.

And though Mr. Seldom has reduced all the Asiatick Gods under the common name
of Syrian, in his Excellent Treatise upon that Subject; yet we shall take
notice of such only as were proper to Assyria, (whether as being worshipped no
where else, or from thence brought into Syria and other Countries:) conceiving
the rest nothing pertinent to the Chaldaeans or Babylonians.

The Religious Worship of the Chaldaeans may be reduced to three kinds; The
first, a worship of the true God, but after an Idolatrous manner: The second,
of Demons, or Spirits: The third, of the Celestial Bodies, and Elements.

CHAP. I.
Of their Idolatrous Worship of the True God.
THe first kind of the Chaldaick Worship, was of the True God, though after an
Idolatrous manner: The Author of the Chaldaick Summary affirms, that they held
one principle of all things, and declare that it is one and good. That by this
one and good they meant the true God, (to whom alone those attributes belong)
may be gathered from Praepar. Evang.
Eusebius, who says, (speaking doubtless of the Followers of Zoroaster) that
in the first place they conceive God the Father and King ought to be ranked;
for this reason the Delphian Oracle attested by Porphyrius, joins them with the
Hebrews; Chaldees and Jews wise only, worshipping
Purely a self-begotten God and King.
but (notwithstanding the Oracle) that this Worship, though of the True God,
was Idolatrous, is beyond doubt: so as to them might be applied what St. Paul
says of the Romans, Romans 1. 21.
when they knew God they glorified him not as God, but ver. 23.
changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an Image made like to
corruptible man.

The Name and Image whereby they represented the Supreme God was that of Bell,
as appears by the prohibition given by God himself not to call him so any more:
Hos. 2. 16.
Thou shall call me no longer Baali; Bell with the Chaldaeans is the same as
Baal with the Phoenicians, both derived from the Hebrew Baal, Lord; this Bell of
the Babylonians is mentioned by the Prophets Esaias and Jeremy: They who first
translated the Eastern Learning into Greek, for the most part interpret this
Bell by the word (...) Jupiter. So Herodotus, Diodorus, Hesychius, and others:
Berosus (says Eusebius) was Priest of Belus, whom they interpret ((...))
Jupiter; the reason of which seems to be, for that Bell was the chief God with
the Chaldaeans, as Jupiter with the Graecians, who by that name meant the true
God, as the Chaldaeans by the other; for to him St. Paul applies that hemistick
of Aratus, (...), (for we are also his offspring,) which has reference to the
first Verse, Act. 17. 28.
(...). And upon these words of St. Peter, worship ye God, but not as the
Graecians, Clemens Alexandrinus observes, Strom. 6.
that he says not, worship not the God whom the Graecians, but as the
Graecians: he changed the manner of the worship, but preached not another God.

The Temple of this Jupiter Belus at Babylon, is exactly described by Herodotus
an eyewitness, lib. 1.
in whose time it was yet extant, thus; The gates were of Brass; the Temple it
self square; every side two furlongs broad. In the midst of the Temple there
was a solid Tower (not hollow) of the thickness and height of a Stadium; upon
which there was set another, and another upon that, and so on to eight: on the
outside of these were st^^rs, by which to go up to every one of them; in the
midst of the stairs were seats for such as went up, to rest themselves: in the
highest Tower there was another Temple (or Chapel,) and in it a Bed sumptuously
furnished, and a Table of Gold; but neither in this was there any Statue, nor
does any personly here a-nights except one wo^an, a foreiner, of whom the God
makes choice above all other, as the Chaldaeans who are Priests of this God
averr: for they say (though I hardly credit it) that the God himself comes into
this Temple, and rests in this Bed: There is moreover in this Temple another
lower Chapel, in which there is a great Statue of Jupiter all of Gold, sitting;
and beside it a Table and Bench all of Gold also; in so much that the
Chaldaeans value it at 800 Talents: Likewise without the Chapel there is an
Altar of Gold, and another Altar very great, upon which are sacrifized Sheep of
full growth, for upon that of Gold it is not lawful to sacrifize any but
Sucklings; On this greater Altar the Chaldaeans burn yearly Frankincense to the
value of a hundred thousand talents, in sacrifice to their Gods. There was also
at the same time in this Temple a Statue 12 Cubits high, of massy Gold, which I
saw not, but take upon the report of the Chaldaeans: this Statue Darius son of
Hystaspes had a great mind to take, but durst not; but his son Xerxes
afterward took it, and slew the Priest who forbad him to stir it: Thus was
this Temple built and beautified, besides infinite gifts and presents. Hitherto
Herodotus: he terms the Priests of Belus Chaldaeans; and R. Maimonides ass^rts
the Chaldaean Idolaters to be the same with the Prophets of Baal.

The Festival of Bell is mentioned 2 Kings 10. 20. his Oracle by Arrian; the
same which Step^anus means saying, The Chaldaeans had an Oracle which was no
less in esteem with them, than that at Delphi was with the Graecians.

CHAP. II.
Worship of other Gods, Angels and Demons.
THe second kind of their Religious Worship, was that of other Gods, Angels and
Demons; Next the Supreme God (says Eusebius, delivering their opinion) there
follows a multitude of other Gods; Angels and Demons. These Gods they
distinguished into several Orders, Intelligibles; Intelligibles and
Intellectuals; Intellectuals; Fountains; Principles; Unzoned Gods; Zoned Gods;
Angels and Demons. To the Worship of these belongs what we have already
delivered concerning their Theurgy.

CHAP. III.
The Chaldaean Worship of the Caelestial Bodies.
THe third kind of Idolatrous Worship used by the Chaldaeans and Babylonians
was of the Celestial Bodies; into which, Maimonides says, Mor. Ne.
they fell soon after the Flood: perhaps occasioned by their continual
addiction to Contemplation of them; and grounded upon Observation of the great
Benefits communicated to Mankind by their Influence.

The Levitical Law, in prohibiting this Idolatry, sets down the particulars of
of it, Deuteronomy. 4. 19.
Lest thou lift up thine eyes unto Heaven, and when thou see the Sun, and the
Moon, and the Stars, even all the Host of Heaven, should be driven to Worship
them and serve them. 2 King. 23. 5
And of the Jewish Idolaters put down by Josiah (besides those that burnt
Incense to Baal, of whom already) are reckoned those that burnt Incense to the
Sun and to the Moon, and to the Planets (or Signs, Mazaloth) and to all the
Host of Heaven. This doubtless they learned of their Neighbors the Assyrians,
of whom the Prophet Ezekiel complains that they doted.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Sun.
THe Sun and Moon are first named and distinguished from the rest; with them
perhaps this kind of Idolatry began, before it came to be applied to any of the
other Stars; cap. 31. v. 26.
for in the most ancient mention of it, (which is by Job a Neighbor to the
Chaldaeans) we find these two only named: That the Chaldaeans esteemed these
the principal is confirmed by R. Maimonides, Mor. Ne.
who says, They held the rest of the seven Planets to be Gods, but the two
Luminaries the greatest.

But of these (adds Maimonides) they held the Sun to be the greatest God. Mor.
Ne.
What he further relates in confirmation hereof, out of the Books of the
Sabaeans concerning Abraham and the like, was delivered formerly. Of the
Assyrian Idols dedicated to the Sun, Macrobius mentions three, Adad, Adonis and
Jupiter Heliopolites.

Adad (says he) signifies one; Saturn. 1. cap. 8.
this God they adore as the most powerful, but they join with him a Goddess
named Atargatis, ascribing to these two an absolute power over all things; by
these they mean the Sun and the Earth; that hereby they understand the Sun, is
manifest, for the Image of Adad is very fair, and has beams bending downwards,
to show that the power of Heaven consists in the beams of the Sun, sent down
upon the Earth. The Image of Atargates has beams erected; to show that the
Earth produces all things by the power of the beams sent from above: Thus
Macrobius; but whereas he says that Adad signifies one, either he himself is
mistaken, or his Text depraved, for (as Mr. Seldom observes) with the Syrians,
(...)
and Chaldaeans or Assyrians, Chad, from the Hebrew Achad, signifies one; but
Adad or Adod which in the Scripture is Hhadad is of a different spelling;
Drusius reads (in Macrobius) Hhada, which signifies One in Syriack. Of this
Idol perhaps is the Prophet Isaiah to be understood, cap. 66. v. 17.
They that sanctify and purify themselves after One in the midst of the
gardens, dedicated to that Idol behind the Temple; Subintelligendum enim
Templum, pone Templum says Joseph Scaliger.

Adonis is derived from Adon, Saturn. 1. 21*
Lord. That Adonis is the Sun (says Macrobius) is not doubted, upon view of
the Religion of the Assyrians, with whom Venus Architis (now worshipped by the
Phoenicians) and Adonis were held in great veneration: For the Naturalists
worshipped the Superio^r Hemisphear of the Earth, in part whereof we dwell, by
the name of Venus; the inferior they called Pro^erpina. Hereupon amongst the
Assyrians or Phoenicians the Godd^ss is introduced mourning, because the Sun in
performing his Annual Course passes through the twelve Signs of the Inferior
Hemisphear; for of the Signs of the Zodiac six are esteemed superior, six
inferior; And when he is in the inferior, and consequently makes the days
shorter, the Goddess is believed to mourn, as if the Sun were snatched away by
Death for a time, and detained by Proserpina the Goddess of the inferior part,
and of the Antipodes; Again they conceive that Adonis is restored to Venus when
the Sun surmounting the six stars of the inferior Order begins to illuminate
our Hemisphear, and lengthen the light and days.

The last is Jupiter Heliopolites; Sat. 1. 17.
The Assyrians (says the same Author) under the name of Jupiter worship the
Sun (whom they style (...)) with extraordinary ceremonies: The Image of this
God was taken from a Town in Egypt, named Heliopolis also, at what time
Senemus, perhaps the same as Senepos, reigned over the Egyptians; it was
brought thither by Oppias Ambassador of Delebois King of the Assyrians, and by
the Egyptian Priests, the chief of whom was Parmetis; and having been a long
time kept by the Assyrians, was afterward removed to Heliopolis (in Egypt)
the reason of which, and why being carried out of Egypt it was brought back
into the place where now it is, and where it is worshipped with Rites that are
more Assyrian than Egyptian, I forbear to relate, as being nothing pertinent
to our purpose. That this Jupiter is the same with the Sun, appears as well by
their Religious Rites, as by the fashion of the Image, for it is being of Gold
(of which Metal Maimonides describes those Telesmes to have been which the
Chaldaeans made to the Sun) and without a Beard, is sufficient argument hereof.
The right hand is lifted up, holding a Whip like a Charioteer, the left holds a
Thunderbold and some ears of Corn, all which denote the consociate powers of
Jupiter and the Sun. Moreover the Religion of this Temple is excellent for
Divination, which is ascribed to the power of Apollo, who is the same with the
Sun: Likewise the Image of the Heliopolitane God is carried on a Beer, as the
Images of the Gods are carried at the Solemnity of the Games of the Circensian
Gods; Many Nobles of that Country follow, their heads shaved, they themselves
pure by a long Chastity; they are driven by Divine Inspiration, not as they
will themselves, but whither the God caries them. This God they consult even
absent, by sending Table^books sealed up, and he writes back in Order to the
questions inserted in them: Thus the Emperor Trajan being to go out of that
Country into Parthia with his Army, at the request of his Friends zealous in
this Religion, and who having had great experiments in this kind, persuaded him
to inquire concerning the success of his expedition, proceeded with Roman
prudence, lest there might be some deceit of man it, and first sent the
Table-books sealed up, requiring an answer in writing: The God commanded paper
to be brought, and ordered that it should be sent to him, blank: to the
astonishment of the Priests. Trajan received it with admiration, for that he
also had sent a blanck Table Book to the God. Then he took another Table Book,
and wrote in it this question, whether having finished this War, he should
return to Rome; ^his he sealed up: The God commanded a Centurial Vine, one of
those gifts that were in the Temple, to be brought, and to be cut into two
pieces, and wrapped up in a Napkin and sent. The event appeared manifest in the
death of Trajan, his bones being brought back to Rome: for by the fragments,
the kind of Relics (his bones,) ^y the token of the Vine, the future chance
was declared. Hitherto Macrobius.

To these add Bell or Belus, a name though more peculiar to the Supreme Deity,
yet common to many of the Chaldaean Gods, and amongst others to the Sun, in
Aeneid. 1*
as Servius witnesses. In Punick language (says he) God is named Bal; but
amongst the Assyrians he is called Bell, and by a certain mystical reason,
Saturn and the Sun.

CHAP. V.
The Chaldaean Worship of the Moon.
THe Moon was worshipped by the Chaldaeans under many names, all which are
Feminine; and the greater part answerable to those of the Sun (last mentioned)
which seems to confirm what R. Maimonides delivers of them, p. 18.
that they held the seven Planets to be Gods and Goddesses, Male and Femal,
married to one another.

Now as the Chaldaeans (or rather They who first translated the Chaldaick
Learning into Greek) amongst other names applied to the Sun those of Jupiter
and Adonis, in like manner did they give to the Moon the correspondent
attributes of Juno and Venus.

To Juno belong Ada and Belta, for so interpreted by Hesychius; in Ada.
Ada, Juno, with the Babylonians; in Belthes*
Belthes, Juno or Venus. Both which are doubtless no other than the Feminine
names answerable to Adad and Bell, two names of the Sun. That by Juno
Mythologists sometimes understand the Moon, the Learned de diis Sir.
Mr. Seldom confirms by the old form of incalation which the Roman Priests used
at the Nones of every Month, dies te quinque calo Juno novella (or covella,
Caelestis.) To this Juno perhaps may more properly be referred what Julius
Firmicus applies to the Air; The Assyrians (says he) ascribed the principality
of the Elements, to the Air, the Image whereof they worshipped, styling it by
the name of Juno or Venus the Virgin; Whom the Quires of their Priests
worshipped with effeminate Voices and Gestures, their skin smoothed, and their
habit after the fashion of Women; thus he; But that the Assyrians worshipped
the Element of Air is not else where easily found; what de adds concerning
their immodest Rites, seems rather of affinity with those of Venus, as
described by other Authors.

To Venus (taken for the Moon) belong the names Mylitta and Alilat. They learnt
(says Herodotus speaking of the Persians) of the Assyrians and Arabians to
Sacrifize to Urania: the Assyrians call Venus Mylitta, lib. 1.
the Arabians (our Sabaeans) Alilat. Thus Herodotus; who indeed seems to make
this Mylitta distinct from the Moon; (of whom he had spoken a little before)
but that by Alilat was meant no other, is evident from it is Etymology from Lail
Night. The Ancients (says Sihal Assemon) amongst many other false Gods, served
one whom they called Alilath, and affirmed that she is the Moon, as being the
Mistress and Queen of the Night.

CHAP. VI.
The Chaldaean worship of the Planets.
THe rest of the Seven Planets (as Mor. Ne.
Maimonides says) they held to be Gods also. To Saturn, whom Diodorus (if the
Text be not depraved, which I suspect) affirms they held to be the chiefest of
the five, they gave the common name of Bell. Eusebius, in the 28th year of
Thara; Belus the first King of the Assyrians died; whom the Assyrians styled a
God; others call him Saturn; and Servius, cited elsewhere, in Aeneid. lib.
In the Punick language God is named Bal; but amongst the Assyrians he is
called Bell, and by a certain Mystical reason, Saturn and the Sun. ^d Antolic.
lib. 3.
Whence Theophilus Patriarch of Antioch, Some worship Saturn as a God; and call
him Bell, and Bal; this is done chiefly by those who dwell in the Eastern
Climates, not knowing who Saturn is, and who Belus.

Some conceive that the more particular name of this Planet was Chiun or
Remphan: chapter 5.
of which the Prophet Amos, But ye have born the Tabernacle of your Moloch and
Chiun your Images, the Stars of your God which ye made to yourselves: Which
text St. Stephan renders thus, Ac. 6. 43.
Yea, ye took up the Tabernacle of your God Remphan, Figures which ye made, to
worship them; What is in the Hebrew Chiun, the Greek renders Remphan. By Chiun
Aben Ezra understands the Planet Saturn, whom Plautus also, as Petitus
observes, calls Chiun: Rephan (as Kircher attests) is used in the Coptick
language for the same Planet.

Of Jupiter (having spoken already in treating of Bell and the Sun, to both
which this name was applied,) there is little more to be said.

Mars (as the Author of Chronicon Alexandrinum relates) was first owned as a
Deity by the Assyrians: the Assyrians says he were the first who did erect a
Column to Mars, and adored him as a God; They gave him the common name of
Belus, whence the Babylonian Belus is by Hestiaeus interpreted (...) Jupiter
Martius.

But a more particular name of Mars was that of Azizus, under which he was
worshipped together with Mercury in the Temple of the Sun at Edessa a City of
Mesopo^omia. They who inhabit Edessa (says Julian) a region of a long time
Sacred to the Sun, place together with him in the Temple Monimus and Azizus.
That by Monimus they understood Mercury, by Azizus Mars, and that both these
were assessours to the Sun, Julian acknowledges to have learned of his Master
Iamblicus.

Some there are who refer the Idol Negal (brought by the Samaritans out of
Assyria) to this Planet, 2 Kings 17. 30.
for the Rabbis fancy this Idol to have been in the form of a Cock: Now the
Cock being Aristoph. Scol. Aristoph.
Sacred to Mars, and styled his Bird, in regard of it is couroge, hence Kircher.
they infer that Mars was represented under that form, as Venus under that of
the Hen by the Idol Succoth Benoth.

Venus was worshipped by the Assyrians and Chaldaeans under many names: Three of
which we find in Hesychius: The first Belthes (or rather Belta) which he
Interprets Juno and Venus. This was a name common to the Moon also, and spoken
of formerly.

The next, Delephat, a name more appropriate to Venus than the former, as
appears by it is Etymology, from the Syriack word Delpha coition.

The last Myleta, as Hesychius reads, who adds, the Assyrians (so called)
Urania. Herodotus writes it Mylitta: They Learned (says he, speaking of the
Persians) from the Assyrians and Arabians, to sacrifize to Urania: The
Assyrians call Venus Mylitta, the Arabians Alilat. Of which two names, though
Alilat (as was observed heretofore) was given to the Moon also; yet that of
Mylitta seems peculiar to Venus, it being no other (as Scaliger observes) than
the plain Syriack word Mylidtha, generative or prolifick: Venus genetrix. With
this Etymology well suit the Rites belonging to the Idol; Lib. 1.
of which thus Herodotus: The Babylonians have one abominable Law; every Woman
of that Country, must once in her life sit in the Temple of Venus, and there
accompany with a stranger. Some of the Richer sort not deigning to associate
themselves with the rest of ordinary quality, are carried thither in covered
Chariots: and stand before the Temple, a long train of attendants coming after
them; the greater part do in this manner; there are many Women sitting in the
Temple of Venus Crowned with Garlands of Flowers, some coming, others going:
There are also several passages distinguished by cords, which guide the
strangers to the Women; of whom they make choice as they best like; No Woman
being once set there, returns home, until some stranger has cast money in her
lap, and taking her aside, lain with her. The stranger who offers this money
must say, I invoke the Goddess Mylitta for thee; the Assyrians call Venus
Mylitta; the money she must not refuse whatever it be; for it is Sacred:
Neither may the Woman deny any man, but must follow him that first offers her
money, without any choice on her part. As soon as she has lain with him, and
performed the Rites of the Goddess, she returns home, nor from thence forward
can be allured by any price whatsoever. Such as are handsome are the soonest
dismissed; but the deformed are forced to stay longer before they can satisfy the
Law; sometimes it happens that they attend a whole year, or two, or three in
expectation. Hitherto Herodotus, of which Custom some interpret the words of
the Prophet Baruch concerning the Chaldaean Women, The Women sit in the ways
guirded (or rather surroundred (...)) with rushes; and burn straw; and if one
of them be drawn away and ly with such as come by, she casts her Neigbour in
the teeth, because she was not so worthily reputed, nor her cord broken.

To these add Succoth benoth, 2 Kings 17. 30.
an Idol made by the Men of Babylon: the signification of the word being the
tents of the daughters. Some conceive that hereby were meant those Tents or
Partitions by Chords described by Herodotus, in which the Women sat to perform
the Rites of Ve^us Mylitta; Venus being, as Mr. Seldom is of opinion, derived
from Benoth: but from the words of the Sacred Text, it is manifest, that by
Succoth Benosh was meant rather an Idol, than Temple or Tents. The Rabbis
fancy it to have been in form of a Hen and Chicken, Radak.
For as they called a Hen Succus, that is covering, so they called Hens
Succoth, as brooding and covering, and Benosh they interpreted her Chickens,
which she uses to cover with her wings. Whence Kircher expounds it of Venus
Mylitta.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Other Stars.
NOr were the Planets only but the Signs and all the rest of the Stars esteemed
Gods by the Chaldaeans: for they burnt Incense to the Mazaloth and to all the
rest of the Host of Heaven. 2 Kings.
Mazal is a Star: they called the Signs the twelve Mazaloth: the Zodiac the
Circle Mazaloth; and sometimes changing (...) into (...) Mazaroth; the
Septuagint renders it (...), which Suidas interprets, the Constellations called
(...) Signs. This agrees with what Diodorus reports of the Chaldaeans, that
they held the principal Gods to be twelve, lib. 1.
to each of which they attributed a Month, and one of the Signs of the Zodiac.

That they worshipped the rest of the fixed Stars as Gods also, is implied by
the Sacred Text last cited, which adds, and to all the Host of Heaven; and is
more expr^sly asserted (amongst others) by Diodorus, lib. 1.
who in his account of their Doctrine affirms, that as they called the Planets
Interpre^ers, so of the other Stars, they called some the Judges of all things,
others consiliary Gods; as we shall show more particularly, when we come to
speak of their Astrology: Neither is it to be doubted, but that as they owned
some of the fixed Stars by these common titles of dignity Judges and
Consellers, so to the principal of them they att^ibuted particular names and
Idols, as well as to the Planets; And since the Chaldaick polytheism was not
(like that of the Greeks) founded upon an Imaginary Mythology, (though later
Writers treat of it after the same manner) but had reference to the Celestial
Bodies, which they Worshipped under several Names and Idols; It is no less
probable than consonant to the Chaldaick Doctrine, that those other Assyrian
Idols, (Ashim, Nibhaz, Tartak, Adrammelek, Anammelek, Nisroch,) mentioned in
the Scripture, were of the same kind with the rest, and belonged to several
others of the Stars; But this conjecture is not easily evinced, in regard that
there is little extant of those Idols more than the bare mention of their Names.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Fire.
THere are who reckon the Elements amongst the Gods which the Chaldaeans
Worshipped: That they had a particular devotion to the Fire, is certain; by it as
some conceive they represented the supreme God; as others, the Sun; the ground
of which Analogy we delivered formerly.

Concerning this Pyrolatry of the Chaldaeans there is a memorable passage
related by Hist. Ecclesiast. l. 2.
Ruffinus; The Chaldaeans in the time of Constantine the Great traveled all
over the Earth to show all men that their God excelled all other Gods, for they
destroyed all the Statues of other Gods by their Fire; At length coming into
Egypt, and making this challenge, the Egyptian Priests brought forth a large
Statute of Nilus, filling it (for it was hollow) with store of water, and
stopping up the holes it had (which were many) with wax so artificially, that
it kept in the water, but could not hold out against the fire. [ in voce (...),
Suidas relates this something differently, as performed by a Priest of
Canopus, who taking off the Head of an old Statue, put it upon a water-pot,
which (stopping the holes with wax) he painted over, and set up in the room of
Canopus.] The Chaldaean began the contest with much rejoicing, and put fire
round about the Statue; the wax melted, the holes opened, the water gushing
forth put out the fire, and the Chaldaeans were laughed at for their God.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Air, and Earth.
OF the Air thus de error. p^ofan. Relig.
Julius Firmicus, The Assyrians ascribed the principality of the Elements to
the Air, the Image whereof they worshipped, stiling it by the name Venus the
Virgin; whom the Quires of their Priests worshipped with effeminate voices and
gestures; their Skin smoothed, and their Habit after the fashion of Women.

As for the Earth, Saturn. lib. 1. c. 21.
Macrobius says, They worshipped the superior Hemispear of it, in part
whereof we dwell, by the name of Venus; the inferior Hemisphear of the Earth
they called Proserpina; More of this Mythology, rather Phoenician than
Assyrian, and perhaps more Grecian than either, see in Macrobius. Thus much
concerning the Doctrine of the Chal^aeans.

THE SECOND BOOK.
Of the Persians.
BEyond Chaldaea, to the South, on one hand lies Persia, on the other, Arabia.
Philosophy (or Learning) was communicated to both these Countries by their
neighbors, the Chaldaeans. Zoroaster, says de Isid*
Plutarch, instituted Magi amongst the Chaldaeans, in imitation of whom, the
Persians had theirs also. Persia is the most considerable Kingdom of Asia;
bounded, on the North, by Media; on the East, by Cilicia; on the West, by
Susiana; on the South, by part of the Persian Gulf.

THE FIRST PART.
The Persian Philosophers, their Sects and Institution.
SECT. I.
Of the Persian Philosophers.
CHAP. I.
Of the Persian Zoroaster, Institutor of Philosophy amongst the Persians.
THe Persian Learning is generally acknowledged to have been instituted by
Zarades, Zaradussit, or Zoroaster: but this name, (as we observed formerly,)
seems to have been commonly attributed to such persons as were eminently
Learned. Who therefore this Zoroaster was, or Agath.
about what time he lived, is uncertain. in Prooem.
Laertius styles him a Persian; Strom. lib.
Clemens Alexandrinus, a Mede; Zor.
Suidas, a Perso-Mede: whence it may be argued, that he was not of so great
Antiquity, as most Authors conceive. For we find the word Persian no where used
before the Prophet Ezekiel; neither did it come to be of any note, until the
time of Cyrus. The later Persians, says lib. 2.
Agathias, affirm, he lived under Hystaspes, but simply, without any addition,
so as it is much to be doubted, nor can it be certainly known, whether this
Hystaspes were the father of Darius, or some other. Hystaspes the father of
Darius was contemporary with Cyrus, neither does it appear, that the Persian
Zoroaster lived much earlier.

But at what time soever he lived, says loc. citat.
Agathias, he was the Author, and Introducer, of Magical Religion, amongst the
Persians, and changing their old form of Sacred Rites, he introduced several
opinions. So likewise Elm.
the Arabic Historiographer, Zaradussit not first instituted, but reformed the
Religion of the Persians and Magi, it being divided into many Sects.

A fabulous tradition of the occasion and manner thereof related by the
Persians themselves, receive from Boristhen.
Dion Chrysostom, They say, that through love of Wisdom, and Justice, he
withdrew him from men, and lived alone in a certain mountain; That afterward
leaving the mountain, a great fire coming from above, did continually burn
about him; That hereupon the King, together with the Noblest of the Persians,
came nigh him intending to pray to God; That he came out of the fire unharmed,
appeared propitiously, bidding them to be of good cheer, and offered certain
sacrifices, as if God had come along with him into that place; That from
thenceforward he conversed not with all men, but with such only as were
naturally most addicted to truth, and capable of the knowledge of the Gods,
whom the Persians called Magi.

To this Persian Zoroaster in Zor.
Suidas ascribes, Of Nature, four Books; Of precious Stones, one; Astroscopick
Apotelesmes, five; Praepar. Evang. l. 1. c. 7.
Eusebius, a Sacred collection of Persicks, which, by the fragments he cites,
seems to have treated of the Persian Religion. These some attribute to the
Chaldaean Zoroaster; others, to some other, not any with greater certainty than
the rest.

CHAP. II.
Of Hystaspes, a great Improver of the Persian Learning.
THe Doctrine of the Persian Magi was much augmented by Hystaspes. He was
(according to lib. 1.
Herodotus) of Achaemenia, a Region of Persia, son of Arsames, or, (as other
Editions) Arsaces; he lived in the time of Cyrus, whose dream concerning
Darius, the eldest son of Hystaspes, prognosticating his being King of Persia,
together with the discourse betwixt Cyrus and Hystaspes concerning it, is
related by loc. ci^.
Herodotus. Darius the son of this Hystaspes was born in the 4165. year of the
Julian period, and was almost 20. years old a little before Cyrus died. About
the same time also, Xenoph. Instit. Cyr. lib. 7.
Hystaspes and Adusius joining together conquered all Phrygia bordering upon
the Hellespont, and taking the King thereof, brought him prisoner to Cyrus.

Hystaspes was, (as lib. 23.
Ammianus Marcellinus affirms) a most wise person, who adds, that boldly
penetrating into the inner parts of upper India, he came to a woody Desert,
whose calm silence was possessed by those high Wits the Brachmanes. Of these he
learnt the discordant concord of the motions of the Stars, and of Heaven, and
of pure Rites of Sacrifice, which, returning into Persia, he contributed as an
addition and complement to Magic.

CHAP. III.
Of Osthanes, who first introduced the Persian Learning into Greece.
THe Persian Learning, (as lib* 30. 1*
Pliny affirms,) was first communicated to the Grecians by Osthanes. The first,
says he, that I find to have commented upon this Art (Magic) is Osthanes, who
accompanied Xerxes King of the Persians in the War which he made upon Greece.
Zerxes set out from Susa upon this expedition in the beginning of the fourth
year of the 74. Olympiad, though Diodorus Siculus, confounding the transactions
of two years in one, relates this done in the first year of the Olympiad
following. lib. 7. c. 21.
Herodotus affirms, that this provision was in making the three whole years
before this year; but with a note premised in the precedent Chapter, which
cannot consist with the exact course of the times. For, says he; From the
subduing of Egypt, he was full four years in gathering an Army, and in making
his preparations, and in the beginning of the fifth year, he began to march
with a huge Army; for indeed he set out from Susa, in the beginning of the
fifth year, not from his subduing of Egypt, but from his coming to the Crown.
So that both lib. 2. c. 20.
Iustine out Trogus, and Orosius following him do unadvisedly attribute five
years: but most absurdly, does Iulianus, in his first Oration of the praises of
Constantine, say, that he was ten years in making this preparation. But more
Ingenuous than all those, (yet not over exquisite in his account) is in (...).
Libanius, where he says, that, between Darius and Xerxes there was ten years
time spent in making this preparation against Greece, since we have formerly
showed out of Plato, that from the fight at Marathon, to the fight* of Salamis,
which was fought in the first year of the 75. Olympiad (almost a full year
after Xerxes his setting out from Susa) there were only ten years run out.

Hence it appears that Pythagoras and Plato, who where precedent in time to
Osthan^s, and in their Travels conversed with the Persian Magi, were not fully
acquainted with the depth of their Sciences, or else being more res^rv'd
forbore to communicate them, otherwise than as intermingled with those which
they appropriated to themselves.

loc. cit.
Pliny adds, that Osthanes, whilst be accompanied Xerxes into Greece, scattered
the seeds as it were of this portentuous Art (Magic) wherewith he infected the
World, all the World whither soever he went; and it is cer^ain, that this
Osthanes chiefly made the Grecians not desirous, but mad after his Art. Thus
Pliny, alluding to Goetick Magic, of which the Author of the Laertius prooem.
Treatise (...), asserts the Magi to have been wholly ignorant. And cont. gent.
Arnobius affords him a bett^r character, that he was chief of the Magi, both
for eloquence and action; that he made address to the true God with due
veneration; that he knew the Angels did wait upon the true God, and the like.

By Osthanes (as we said) the Persian Learning was brought into Greece, and
therefore we shall not proceed further in our inquiry after the Professors of
it amongst the Persians.

SECT. II.
The Institution, and Sects of the Persians.
CHAP. I.
The Persian Magi their Institution.
ALl Professors of Learning amongst the Persians were termed Magi. Prooem.
Laertius, It is said, that Philosophy and its original from the Barbarians,
since among the Persians were Magi; amongst the Babylonians, or Assyrians, the
Chaldaeans; and Gym^osophists amongst the Indians; amongst the Celtae and
Gallatae, were those who were called the Druides, or Seninothei, as Aristotle,
in his Trea^ise Magicum, and Sotion, in the 23. chap. of his Succession,
affirms. Hence in voce Magus.
Suidas, Magi amongst the Persians were Philosophi and Philothei. But, their
principal study and employment consisting in Theology and Religious Rite, Magus
is more frequently interpreted a Priest. Amongst the Persians, saithc
Porphyrius, those wise persons who were employed about the Divinity, and served
him, were called Magi; this is the signification of Magus in their Dialect. And
Apolog. 1.
Apuleius, Magus in the Persian Language, signifies the same as Priest in
ours. Hesychius, A worshipper of God and a Theologist, and a Priest, is by the
Persians styled Magus.

Some conceive they were so termed by Zoroaster, at their first Institution. in
Zor.
Suidas, Zoroaster the Perso-Mede, who first began the name of Magi celebrious
amongst them. Salmas.
Others derive the word from Mog a surname of Zoroaster, or fromg Mije Gush,
one that has short ears, affirming that Zoroaster was such.

The Author of the Arabic History relates, that theh Religion of the Persians
being before Zoroaster's time divided into many Sects, he reformed it;i
Agathias, that he changed their old form of Sacred Rites, and introduced many
new Opinions, and was the Author and introducer of Magical Religion among the
Persians.

Ammian. Marcellin.
The Magi delivered their Learning successively in their Families from one age
to another, whence after the succession of many ages, at this present, says
Ammianus Marcellinus, a multitude sprung from one and the same race, is
dedicated to the Rites and worship of the Gods. For, increasing by degrees,
they grew at last to the largeness and name of a complete Nation dwelling in
Towns not fortified with any walls, and, being permitted to use their own Laws,
they were honored in respect of their Religion.

The Country of the Magi in Persia, is mentioned by Strom. 6.
Clemens Alexandrinus, who takes notice of three wonderful Mountains in it.
Andm Solinus mentions, as belonging to them, the City Pasagarda. n Suidas ando
Cedrenus call them Magussaeans, and affirm, that they were called Magog by
those of their own Country.

So great was the esteem which the Magi had among the Persians, thatp Cicero
says, the Kings of Persia, before they undertook the government, were always
initiated in the sacred Mysteries of the Magi, which Alcib.
Plato describes thus: At fourteen years old they whom they call the Royal
Paedagogues take charge of the youth. These are four men chosen out of the most
excellent of the Persians, in the prime of their age. The most wise, the most
just, the most temperate, and the most valiant. The first of these teaches him
the Magic of Zoroaster the son of Horomases (this is the service of the Gods)
and teaches him also the Royal Institutions. Dion Chrysostom says, that the
Magi were admitted to the Kings Counsels, and were assessors with him in
Judicature, as being well acquainted with the natures of things, and knowing
after what manner the Gods are to be served. All public affairs ( saithr
Agathias) were managed by their direction and advice. They adjudged rewards or
punishments. Dion elsewhere relates, that Cambyses, upon his expedition into
Egypt, resigned the Government of the Persians into the hands of the Magi.s
Constantius Manasses styles them the Guardians of the Royal Palaces, and 30. 1.
Pliny, speaking of Magic, says, it grew up at last to so great height, that
even at this day it is exceeding prevalent with many Nations, and in the East
it bears sway over the King of Kings: King of Kings was the proper Title of
the Persian Monarch.

CHAP. II.
The Sects, Discipline and Manners of the Magi.
EUbulus, D. Hieron. advers. Jovin. lib. 2.
who wrote the History of Mythra in many Volumes, affirms, that amongst the
Persians t^ere were three kind of Magi: the first, who were the most Learned
and Eloquent of them, did eat no other food but Meal and Oil. Thus Eubulus
cited by S. Hierome. More of the distinction of the Magi into three Sects w^
m^^t not elsewhere; but, probably, it had reference (as amongst the Chaldaeans)
to their several studies, of which hereafter.

Laert. in prooem.
Dinon and Aristotle, or rather the Author of the Treatise of Magic cited by
Laertius, relate of the Mag^, that they renounce rich attire, and to wear Gold.
Their raiment is white upon occasion, their beds, the ground, their food,
nothing but herbs, cheese, and bread; instead of a staff they carry a ca^e, in
the top whereof they put their cheese, which as occasion served they did eat.

They had one in their Society chief amongst them, called byc Sozomene, the
Prince of the Ma^i.

Laert.
Their chief employment was Religious worship, they being conceived to be the
only persons w^ose prayers the Gods would hear.

Laert. prooem.
They made discourses concerning Justice, and esteemed it impious to burn the
bodies of the dead, and lawful to ^y with a mother or a daughter, as Solion in
his 23. Book.

lib.
Herodotus says, they differ, as from ot^ers, so from the Egyptian Priests,
in this, that these pollu^e themselves with the death of nothing but their
sacrifices, whereas the Magi, with their o^n hands, kill any thing, except a
man and a dog; yea they esteem it a great exploi^, if they have killed very
many Ants, or Serpen^s, or other creeping or flying things.

THE SECOND PART.
The Doctrine of the Persians.
THat which is delivered to us of the Persian Doctrine and Opinions is so
little and so imperfect as it will not easily admit of being knit together by
any Method; yet, in regard of the near affinity their Learning is conceived to
have had with the Chaldaeans, we shall observe the same course in collecting
and digesting the few remains of it: First to allege what concerns their
Theology and Physic; Next, Their Arts of Divination; Thirdly, Their Religious
worship and Rites, particularly termed Magic; and lastly, to give a Catalogue
of all their Gods.

CHAP. I.
Theology and Physic.
THat the Persian Magi were not unacquainted with Theology and Physic is
confirmed by Voc. Mag.
Suidas. Magi, says he, among the Persians are Philosophers and lovers of God.
in Prooem*
Laertius affirms, they discoursed concerning the substance and generation of
the Gods; andc Dion Chrysostom, that they were skilful in Natures.

Eusebius. Praep. Evang.
Zoroaster the Magus, in his sacred collection of Physics, says expressly
thus. God has the head of a Hawk: he is the first incorruptible, aeternal,
unbegotten, indivisible, most like himself, the Charioteer of every good, one
that cannot be bribed: the best of things good; the wisest of things wise:
Moreover he is the Father of Equity and Justice: self-taught, natural and
perfect and wise, and the sole Inventor of sacred Nature.

Plith* in Orac. ad. fin.
Plutarch relates of Zoroaster, that he divided all things into three kinds.
Over the first kind he conceived Horomazes to be president, the same whom the
Oracles call the Father. Over the last, Arimanes; Over the middle kind, Mithra,
whom the Oracles call the second Mind. And that Horomazes made himself three
times as big as the Sun (who in the Persian language is called Cyrus.) Mithra
made himself twice as big (as the Sun) who was next to Horomazes. To which
these Platonic assertions are correspondent, That all things are about the
King of all, and that all things are for him, That he is the cause of all good
things, The second is employed about the secondary things, The third is
employed about the third kind of things. The three parts into which Zoroaster
and Plato divided all things, are these, The first is aeternal; The second had
a beginning in time, but is aeternal; The third is corruptible. Thus Plitho
citing Plutarch whose own words are these.

Isid. and Osirid.
Some are of opinion that there are two Gods, one opposite in operation to the
other; one, working good, the other, ill. Others call him who is the good, God,
the bad, Demon: of this opinion was Zoroaster the Magus, whom they report to
have preceded the Trojan War 5000. years. This Zoroaster declared the names of
the good, to be Oromazes, of the bad, Arimanius, adding, that, of sensible
things, the one did most resemble light, and knowledge, the other, darkness,
and ignorance. Wherefore the Persians call Mithra the mediator. He further
taught, that, to one, we ought to offer votives and gratulatory sacrifices, to
the other, averruncative and dismal oblations. For, pounding a certain herb
called Omomi in a mortar they invoke hades and darkness, then, mixing it with
the blood of a slain Wolf, they carry it forth and throw it into a place, where
the beams of the Sun come not, for, of plants, they hold, that some belong to
the good God, others, to the ill Demon, and that, of animals, some, as Dogs,
Birds, and Porcupines belong to the good, the aquatile, to the bad, for which
reason they esteem him blessed who has killed most of that kind.

loc. cit.
They likewise relate many fabulous things concerning the Gods, of which kind
is this I will allege, That Oromazes was produced of purest light, Arimanes of
darkness, and that these two war against one another; That Oromazes made six
Gods, The first, of benevolence; The second, of truth; The third, of aequity;
the rest of wisdom, riches, and pleasure, which good things are attendant upon
the Maker; That then Horomazes tripled himself, and removed himself so far from
the Sun, as the Sun is distant from the Earth, and that they adorned the Heaven
with Stars, appointed one the Dog Star as Guardian and watch for the rest; That
he made 24. other Gods, and put them in an Egg, and that Arimanius having made
as many more, they broke the Egg: Whence it comes, that good is intermingled
with ill. That the fatal time approaches, in which these shall be destroyed by
famine and pestilence, and Arimanius utterly destroyed, and the Earth made even
and smooth; There shall be one life and one City (or common society) of all men
living, and one language.

CHAP II.
Arts of Divination.
AMongst the other parts of the Persian Learning, are to be reckoned their Arts
of Divination and Prediction, which in Prooem.
Laertius affirms were practiced by the Magi. de Divi. not.
Cicero adds, that they assembled (in fana) in Temples or consecrated places,
to consult about Divination.

Hence lib.
Strabo says, that, by the ancients, Diviners were much esteemed, such as,
amongst the Persians, were the Magi, and Necromancers, and Lecanomancers, and
Hydromancers: Var. Hist.
Aelian, that the wisdom of the Persian Magi, besides all other things which it
was lawful for them to know, did consist also in Divination; And Macrob.
Lucian styles the Magi a kind of persons skilful in Divination, and dedicated
to the Gods. Of their Divination de Divinat. lib. 1.
Cicero gives an instance concerning Cyrus; Var. Hist. 2. 17.
Aelian, another concerning Ochus.

Amongst other kinds of Divination, lib. 2.
Velleius Paterculus affirms, that they foretold by the marks of the Body. They
seem to have been skilful likewise in Astrology, for in Zo^.
Suidas ascribes to the Persian Zoroaster five Books of Astroscopick
Apotelesmes. That they were also consulted concerning the presignification of
Prodigies, is manifest from the relation of lib. 1. c. 6.
Valerius Maximus, concerning that which happened to Xerxes.

CHAP. III.
Of the Religious Rites, or Magic of the Persians.
THe chief Science and employment of the Persian Magi, was termed Magic, from
the Professors, Magi, and is defined by Plato, Alcibiad.
the service of the Gods, called also (...). The Magi, says Prooem.
Laertius, are employed in the service of the Gods, and about sacrificing and
praying, as being the only persons, whom the Gods will hear. So Bo^isthen.
Dion Chrysostom, The Persians call them Magi, who are skilful in the worship
of the Gods, not like the Greeks, who, ignorant of the meaning of the word,
call them so who were skilful in Goetick Magic; of which that the Persian Magi
were ignorant, Prooem.
Laertius allegeth the testimonies of Aristotle, in his Treatise entitled
Magic, and Dinon, in the first Book of his Histories.

As concerning their Religious Rites, lib.
Herodotus and lib.
Strabo affirm, that they had no Temples, Altars, or Images, but did impute it
to madness in such as had; the reason whereof loc. cit.
Herodotus conceives to have been, for that they did not believe as the
Grecians, that the Gods were de leg. 2.
of humane form; or as (...), i. e. (...).
Cicero, for that they conceived the Gods, to whom the whole World was but a
Temple or house, could not be shut up within walls; upon which ground the Magi
persuaded Xerxes to burn the Grecian Temples.

Butk Strabo frequently elsewhere mentions their Temples, Altars and Images;
whence it may be argued, either that in the time of Herodotus they had not any,
and that Strabo, in affirming the same, with Herodotus, is to be understood
only of their primitive Institution, which when the Macedonians afterward
conquered them, became corrupted with Grecian Rites; Or that there were
different Sects among them from the beginning: whereof some allowed Altars,
Images, and Temples, others disallowed them.

l Herodotus and Strabo further add, that they sacrifised in high places; their
Rites and Sacrifices Herodotus describes thus* When they go about to sacrifise,
they neither erect an Altar, nor kindle fire, nor use libation, nor flutes, nor
garlands, nor cakes, but when any man intends to sacrifise to some one of these
Gods, he drives the victime to a clean place, and invoc^tes that God; his tyara
being crowned with myrtle; It is not lawful for him who sacrifiseth to pray for
good things for himself alone, but he must pray for all the Persians in
general, and in particular for the King: for in praying for all the Persians he
includes himself. Having cut the victime into little pieces he boiles the
flesh* and strewing soft herbs, especially Trifoly, he lays the flesh upon
them; The Magus standing by sings a theogonial hymn; for this they conceive to
be a powerful incantation. Without a Magus it is not lawful for them to
sacrifise; Soon after, he who sacrifiseth takes away the flesh and disposes of
it as he pleases.

lib. 15.
Strabo adds, that when the Magus who declares the sacrifice has distributed
the pieces of the flesh, every one taking his piece they all depart home:
leaving no part for the Gods; for they say the Gods require nothing but the
Soul of the victime: Yet some (it is said) lay part of the sat upon the fire.

CHAP. IV.
The Gods of the Persians.
HErodotus lib. 1.
and lib. 15.
Strabo reckon the Gods of the Persians thus, Jupiter; the Sun; the Moon;
Venus; the Fire; the Earth; the Winds; the Water. Prooem.
Laertius not so fully, the Fire, the Earth, and the Water.

By Jupiter, as loc. cit.
Herodotus and Strabo affirm, they understood the whole Circuit of Heaven:
Agathius adds, that they worshipped Jupiter under the name of Bell, which
sufficiently argues they derived this God from the Chaldaens.

To the Sun (as both loc. cit.
Herodotus and Strabo witness) they sacrifised: Strabo adds, that they called
him Mithra. This was the greatest of their Gods, as Cyrus (introduced by
Oeconom.
Xenophon) acknowledges; swearing by him: H^sychius likewise affirms it was
the greatest of their Gods, and that the greatest Oath which the King himself
took was by Mithra.

They represented him with the face of a Lion, in a Persian habit, with a
Tiara, holding with both hands a Bull by the horns, which seemed to strive to
get from him; signifying, that the Moon begins to receive her light from him
when she leaves him.

Porphyr. in antr. Nymph.
Zoroaster first amongst the Persians (as Eubulus affirms, who wrote many
Volumes of the History of Mithra) did consecrate a natural Cave in the
Mountains next Persia, in honor of Mithra, the King and Father of all:
signifying by this Cave the World framed by Mithra; by the other things
disposed within it, in fit distances, the Elements and Quarters of the World.
The Cave of Mythra is mentioned by many others.

In the Mythraean Rites (for so Lampridius terms them) Celsus (cited by lib. 6.
contra Cells.
Origin) says, the twofold motion of the Stars, fixed and erratick, was
represented; and the passage of the Soul through them: in sign whereof there
was set up a high pair of stairs, having seven gates, the first of Lead, the
second of Tin, the third of Brass, the fourth of Iron, the fifth of Leather, the
sixth of Silver, the seventh of Gold: The first belongs to Saturn, the Lead
signifying the slowness of that Planet; the second to Venus, to whom they
compare Tin, for its brightness and softness; the third to Jupiter, as being
most solid with brazen steps; the fourth to Mercury, for they hold him to be
the stoutest undertaker of all business, cunning and eloquent. The fifth to
Mars, in regard of its unequal and various commixture; the sixth to the Moon,
of Silver; the seventh to the Sun, whose color as also that of the Stars
resembles Gold.

He who was initiated into these Rites proceeded, as Suidas relates, through
several degrees of contumely, ( in Stelicut.
Nonnus upon Gregory Nazianzen says twelve) Gregor. Naz.
and of pain, as burning, blows, and the like, by which trial he was to give
testimony of his sanctity and of his being void of passion.

Of the Rites of the Moon there is nothing said in particular.

Concerning those of Venus, lib. 1.
Herodotus says, They sacrifise also to Urania which they learnt of the
Assyrians and Arabians; the Assyrians call Venus, Militta, the Arabians Alilat,
the Persians Metra. And as Milidtha in Syriack signifies generative,
prolifick, (Venus genetrix) so mader, or matter, with the Persians signifies (as
Raphelengius observes) a mother. This perhaps was that Mother of the Gods,
whichm Cicero affirms to have been worshipped by the Persians, Syrians, and all
the Kings of Europe and Asia, with great devotion.

The Fire, deerror. prof. Relig.
Julius Firmicus says, they preferred before all the other Elements;o Agathias
affirms, they learnt to worship it of the Chaldaeans: lib. 15.
Strabo relates, that in Cappadocia there was a great number of Magi, called
Pyrethi, and many Temples of the Persian Gods; they kill not the victime with a
kni^e, but strike it down with a club: Here also there are Pyretheia Chapels,
in the midst of which is an Altar, covered with great store of ashes; where the
Magi preserve a fire that never goes out; and coming in every day sing almost
the space of an hour, holding a bundle of rods before the fire, [with which, as
de Diis Sir. synt. 2. c. 7.
Mr Seldom observes, they stirred it up whilst they sung,] Their heads are
covered with woollen Tiaras, which being tied on both sides hide their lips and
cheeks: Thus Strabo, an eyewitness. These Pyratheia (or as Suidas terms them
Pyreia,) were those sempiternal fires of the Magi mentioned by lib.
Ammianus Marcellinus: Neither in Temples only did they use th^se Rites, but in
private Caves, where lib.
Julius Firmicus reports they worshipped the Fire with many extraordinary
Ceremonies, as amongst other things using to pronounce these words, (...). Nor
did this worship extend to fire only, but Perieg.
to all things that resembled it, as Dionysius reports, whereof lib.
Strabo instanceth the Pyropus.w Julius Firmicus adds, that they called the
fire Mithra, by which, as also by their worshipping it in Caves, it is manifest
that (sometimes at least) they took it for the Sun, their greatest Deity.

Concerning the worship of the Earth and Winds nothing particular is delivered;
That of the Water was performed in this manner, lib.
They go to a Lake, River, or Spring, where they make a trench and kill a
victime; taking care that none of the blood come at the water; then laying
Myrtle and Laurel upon it they burn it with rods, and making some prayers,
sprinkle oil mixed with milk and honey, not in the fire or water, but on the
earth.

Other Gods the Persians had, though not reckoned amongst these, whether as
less principal, or of later date; of th^se are mentioned by the same Author
(Strabo,) and by others, Anaitis (Venus) Amandatus, Sacaea, Sands and Na^naea
(Diana).

Hitherto of the Doctrine of the Persians.
THE THIRD BOOK.
Of the Sabaeans.
ARabia the noblest Peninsula (if we may so term it) of Asia, is terminated by
the Persian, the Indian, and the Red Sea, except that on one side it is
conterminous to Syria, by which vicinity was occasioned so near a
correspondence betwixt those Nations, that as the Chaldaean Learning
overspreading all Mesopotamia, Syria, and Assyria, did on one side extend to
their Neighbors the Persians, so on the other it ^eached to the Arabians. From
which neernesse perhaps it was (not only of Situation but Religion and
opinions,) that Pliny uses their names promiscuously, calling a great part of
Mesopotamia, Arabia, and the Arabians themselves Syrians. And the later Eastern
Writers (especially the Arabians) under the appellation of Chasdim or Chaldanin
(Chaldaeans,) comprehended not only the Babylonians but the Nabathaeans,
Charaneans, and Sabaeans, as (amongst others) Muhamed Isacides takes Chasdanin
and Nabathaea to be synonimous, and Ahmedus, to his Book concerning the
Religion of the Sabaeans, gives this Title, Of the Rites of the Charanean
Chaldaeans commonly known by the name of Sabaeans, he adds, commonly known by
the name of Sabaeans, because the Sabaeans being the most considerable of
these, they likewise under the appellation of Sabaeans included all the rest;
even the Chaldaeans of Mesopotamia: using the terms of Chaldaea and Sabaea no
less promiscuously than Pliny those of Arabia, Mesopotamia, and Syria: for
which R. Maimonides (who does so throughout all his Writings) gives this
reason, because the Doctrine of the Chaldaeans extended thither, and that the
Religion of all these Nations was the same.

Now whereas Arabia is commonly distinguished into the Stony, the Desert, and
the Happy, we here mean not that part which is styled the Desert, lying on the
North of Sabaea, and first planted by Ismael, whose Posterity afterward,
having learned the Language of the Sabaeans (Arabic) were called Arabians
also, or more properly, Hagarens, as descended from Hagar, and Aarab
Mastiaarabah, the made Arabians, (that is, made such by cohabitation and
conversation with the true Arabs,) but those other true Arabs the Inhabitants
of the Desert and the Happy, whereof the former came from Nebaiothus, son of
Ismael, and are by Pliny, Strabo, and Ptolomy called Nabataeans, as the Country
it self Nabataea, the later from Saba, son of Chus, the son of Cham, after whom
styled Sabaeans (as the Country Sabaea) and (in distinction from the made
Arabians of Arabia the Desert) the native Arabians. The Charanaeans mentioned
together with these, were the Inhabitants of Cara, a City of Arabia, mentioned
by Pomponius Mela, whose Inhabitants the Carraeans, Pliny places next the
Sabaeans, distinct from Hara or Caran in Mesopotamia.

THE FIRST PART.
The Sabaean Philosophers.
CHAP. I.
Of the Institutors of the Sabaean Sect.
COncerning the first Institutor of Learning and Religion amongst the Sabaeans,
there is not any certain agreement of Authors. Patricides, an Arabian Writer,
attributes this Invention to a certain Persian, named Zerodast, contemporary
with Terah father to Abraham; Zerodast and Zoroaster are the same; whereby it
appears, that Patricides means one of those two Zoroasters, whereof one was the
first Author of Sciences amongst the Chaldaeans, the other introduced the same
Sciences amongst the Persians; and though he calls this Zerodast a Persian, yet
by the antiquity of the time in which he conceives him to have lived, it is
probable he rather intended the Chaldaean.

Others (adds Patricides,) are of opinion that Tachmurat King of Persia gave
beginning to this Religion. The same perhaps whom Elmacinus (another Arabian
Historian,) calls Tachurith: Others (says he) conceive that the Religion of
the Sabaeans was manifested by a certain King of the Persians, whose name was
Tachurith.

Elmacinus mentions another Persian, to whom the same Invention was attributed,
In those days, says he, came forth Nazarib a Persian, who, as is reported,
was Author of the Religion of the Sabaeans.

Others (continues Patricides) derive the infancy of the Sabaeans from a
certain Grecian named Juvan or Javan, son of Berkley, and him they will have to
be of the City Zaittuna, which was built in Attica. Thus he: where Hottinger
for Berkley reads Mercolim, Mercury, confirmed by Elmacinus upon the same
subject. Others says he, affirm, that the Religion of the Sabaeans was brought
forth by a Man whose name was Juvan, son of Markoli, a Grecian, who first found
out the Science of the Stars.

To these Patricides adds the Opinions of some others, who held that the
Authors of this Sect were some of those who were at the building of the Tower
of Babel. Thus the Arabians.

Some attribute the Institution of the Sabaeans to Cham, son of Noah, who being
banished from his Fathers sight, fled thither, and (to use the words of
Lactantius) settled in that part of the Earth which is now called Arabia. This
was the first Nation that knew not God, because the principal Founder thereof
had not received the Worship of God by Tradition from his Father: Thus
Lactantius, with whom Many agree in attributing the Original of Idolatry to
Cham, and to his son Chus the first Planter of Chaldaea, from whose son Saba
the Sabaeans were so named, and, upon this ground, some have labored to prove
Cham and Chus, to be same with the first and second Zoroasters, of which
formerly.

Others (as Damascen) ascribe the Original of Idolatry to Serug. Epiphanius,
and the Author of the Chronicon Alexandrinum, affirm that Hellenism began in
the time of Serug, This Hellenism some conceive the same with the Sabaean
superstition; what the Greek Fathers call Hellenism, the Rabbis term Goth, the
Arabians, Algiaheleiton, the time of Ignorance and Paganism. And though to
determine any thing of those early and obscure times be very difficult, yet we
cannot doubt, but that the Idolatrous Worship of Fire and of the Sun (ascribed
to the Sabaeans) was of great Antiquity among them, since mentioned by the most
ancient of Authors, Job, who lived near them, as appears by the inroad which
the chap. 1. v. 15.
Sabaeans made upon him. chap.
If I beheld (says he) the The word is Ur, which signifies as well Fire.
Sun when it shined, and the Moon walking in brightness, and my heart has been
secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand, this also were an Iniquity
to be punished by the Judge, for I should have denied the God that is above;
where by kissing of the hand is implied the ancient manner of Veneration.

CHAP. II.
Others of the Sabaean Sect.
THat Terah Father of Abraham was bred up in this Doctrine might be conjectured
from Iosuah 24. 2. where he is reckoned among those that served strange Gods.
de Nobilit.
Philo terms him an Astronomer, one of those that are v^rst in Mathematics.

Of Abraham son of Terah, M^r. Nev.
R. Maimonides expressly says, It is well known that our Father Abraham was
educated in the faith of the Zabians, who held there is no God but the stars;
indeed Joseph. Antiquit. 1. 8.
Berosus acknowledges he was skilful in the Celestials, and Eupolemus, cited
by Eusebius, ascribes to him the Invention of Astrology and Chaldaick. The
Zabians themselves in their Annals give this account of his departure out of
Chaldaea. Mor. Nev.
Abraham, say they, being educated in Ur, but dissenting from the Vulgar, and
asserting that there was another Creator besides the Sun, they began thus and
objected against him, and amongst other objections, they alleged the evident
and manifest operations of the Sun in the World; but A^raham answered them, You
are right, which Sun is like the Ax which is in the hand of him that strikes
therewith: then they recite some of the Objections which he brought against
them, and at last they say, that the King cast him in prison, but nevertheless
he persisted in prison to oppugn them, whereupon the King fearing lest he might
do some hurt to his Kingdom, and seduce men from their Religion, confiscated
all his Estate, and banished him to the utmost Borders of the East. ^hus the
Zabians: from which relation Josephus differs not much, who says, that lib. 1.
c. 3.
Abraham first undertook to convince the received Erroneous Opinion of men,
concerning the Deity, and that he first taught and proved that there is but one
God, but seeing the Chaldaeans and Mesopotamians began to mutiny against him
for it, he thought it expedient to forsake the Country.

The Rabbinical Traditions are more particular herein: R. Solomon Hiarki
reports from an ancient Commentary, that Terah fell out with his son Abraham,
in the presence of Nimrod, for breaking his Idols, and that Abraham was
thereupon cast into a fiery Furnace. Moses Gerundensis confirms the same story,
but R. Chain relates it otherwise: Abraham, says he, met with a Woman holding
a Dish in her hand, and the Woman asking him whether he would offer any thing
to the Gods, he took a staff, and broke the Images which the Woman had, and
threw away the staff; his Father coming thither at the same time, demanded what
was the matter, Abraham answered, that she had asked him, whether he would make
an offering, and that upon his answering that he would first eat something,
there arose a dispute betwixt them: but his Father urged that the business was
otherwise, and that he was heard to say many reproachful things of Nimrod. The
Controversy was brought before Nimrod the King of Babel: he commanded Abraham
to worship the Fire that was set before him; Abraham answered, If so, then
adore you the Water, Water which quenches Fire. Nimrod said to him, Worship
the Water; Abraham answered, If so, worship the Clouds which distill the Water.
Nimrod said, Then worship the Clouds; whereupon Abraham, If it be so, then the
Wind is to be worshipped which agitates and scatters the Clouds. Again Nimrod,
Worship the Wind; but Abraham, if so, then is Man much more to be worshipped
who understands the Wind. At length Nimrod growing angry, You talk, says he,
idly, I worship none but the Fire, into the midst of which I will cast thee.
Let the God whom thou worshipest come and free thee by his right hand. Aran
stood by and talked; they asked of which opinion he was; he answered, If
Abraham get the better, I will be for him, if Nimrod, for Nimrod. After Abraham
had gone into the fiery Furnace and was freed, they said to Aran, of which side
art thou? he said of Abraham's; then they took him, and cast him into the fire,
and all his Bowels were burned, and he was taken out dead in the presence of
his Father. Thus R. Chain; but Cedrenus affirms, that Abraham throwing his
Fathers Idols into the fire, his Brother Aran endeavoring to rescue them, was
burned.

The Arabians who imitate the Jews in Relations of this kind, and fancy
superstructures of their own upon fables of the Rabbis, give a further account
of what happened unto Abraham after his departure from Nimrod, as appears by a
fragment of a Mohammedan Writer, of which I shall cite only so much as most
particularly concerns the Sabaeans. Edris, on whom be peace, was the first who
after Enoch, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, on whom peace, wrote with a pen.
This thing afterward Edris taught his sons, and said to them, O sons, know
that you are Sabaeans, learn therefore to read Books in your youth. Now
Sabaeans are Writers, of whom the High (he means Mahomed) said (Alk. Sur. 2.)
The Sabaeans and the Nazarenes. The Author adds, that they ceased not to
possess the Books of S^th and Edris by hereditary right among themselves, until
the times of Noah, and of Abraham, after that the High God aided him against
Nimrod, on whom be malediction. But in that day wherein Abraham went out of the
land of Irack, and would go into Syria, into the la^d of his Forefathers, he
went to the land of Charan and Ghesira, and there he found a people of the
Zabaeans who read old Books, and believed such things as were contained in
them. But Abraham said, O my God, I did not think that besides my self and
those that are with me, there had been any of the Faithful who believed thee to
be one; and God breathed to Abraham this Answer. O Abraham, the Earth is never
destitute, but that there are some in it that dispute for God: But God
commanded him to call them to his Religion, and he called them, but they would
not, saying, How shall we believe thee, when thou read not a Book? and God
sent among them a forgetfulness of these things whicb they knew of Sciences and
Books, for they conceived the Books which they used to be from God, and some of
them believed, others not. Afterward the Zabaeans were divided, and some of
them believed, viz. the Barhameans, who did not separate themselves from
Abraham of blessed memory, but the rest followed their own Religion very
eagerly, viz. those who are in the land of Charan, who went not with Abraham
into Syria, and said, we follow the Religion of Seth, Edris, and Noah; Thus
according to Kissaeus, the Religion of the Sabaeans was the same with that of
the Haranaeans, or Mesopotamians. What he relates of Abraham' s being sent to
the Sabaeans, is all borrowed from the Rabbinical Traditions.

But that there were anciently Learned Persons in Arabia, skilful in Natural
Philosophy, Astronomy, and other Sciences, is manifest from testimonies far
more authentic; as (particularly) from the discourses betwixt Job and his
Friends: of the Arabian Philosophers is it understood, that Salomon's Wisdom is
said to have excelled the wisdom of all the sons of the East. Tacitus,
describing Iudaea, the land and bounds to the East are terminated by Arabia.
And that the Jews called Arabia the East Country is evident from several places
in Scripture, as Genesis 10. 30. and 25. 6. 18. Job 1. 3. Judge. 30. 1.
6. 3. 1. etc. Pliny also mentions the Magi of Arabia, (of whom he instanceth
Hippocus.) Ptolomy, the Gulf of the Magi, in Arabia, and Porphyrius (citing
Diogenes) relates that Pythagoras (amongst other Countries to which he
traveled for Learning) went also to Arabia, and lived with the King there.

CHAP. III.
Their Writings.
THe Sabaeans pretended (as was lately showed out of Kisseus,) to have had the
Books of Seth, and Edris, and not only those, but some also written by Adam;
for the same Author continuing the story of Abraham' s coming amongst the
Sabaeans, adds, that afterward Abraham opened the Chest of Adam, and behold,
in it were the Books of Adam; likewise the Books of Seth, and of Edris; as also
the names of all the Prophets that were to be sent after Abraham; But Abraham
said, Happy indeed are the loins out of which all tbese Prophets shall come:
and God breathed to him (this answer) Thou, O Abraham, art the Father of them
all, and they thy Children; and for this reason Abraham deserved to be called
the Father of the Prophets, upon whom be peace.

Of the same allay Mor. Nev. lib.
Maimonides conceives the Book of Healings to have been, which was hid by
Ezekiel.

The same Mor. Nev. lib.
Maimonides cites many other Books of the Sabaeans, translated into Arabic, of
which the chiefest is entitled, of the Agriculture of thec Nabateans,
translated by Aben Vachaschijah: full of Idololatrical extravagancies; it
treats of the making of Tsilmenaias, of the descent of familiar spirits, of
conjurations of Demons, of Devils, of such as dwell in Deserts (as Satyrs were
thought to do) many other things it contained very ridiculous, by which
nevertheless they conceived that they could confute the manifest miracles (of
Moses, and the Prophets.)

Another entitled, the Worship, or of the worship of the Nabateans, out of
which lib.
Maimonides cites a story concerning Abraham related formerly.

Maim. Mor. Nev. lib.
The Book Haistamchus, ascribed to Aristotle, but falsely.

Ibid.
The Book Hattelesmaoth, of Tsilmenaias; Buxtor^ius renders it, of speaking
Images; the reason we have given formerly.

The Book ^amtam.

The Book of Hassearabh.

The Book of the Degrees of the Celestial Orbs and the Figures that are
ascendent in every Degree.

Another Book concerning Tsilmenaias, which also is attributed to Aristotle.

Another Book ascribed to Hermes.

The Book of Isaak the Zabian, wherein he argues in defense of the Law of the
Zabians.

A great Book of the Customs and particularities of the Law of the Zabians, as
of their Feasts, Sacrifices, Prayers, and other things concerning their belief:
All these (says Maimonides) are Books which treat of Idolatrical things, and
are translated into the Arabic tongue.

Besides these, (as Maimonides acknowledges,) there are many others, Histor.
Oriental. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Hottinger cites (in his own possession) A Treatise of Mahomet the elder, son
of Isaak, who is otherwise called Abulfark, the son of Abi Iakub.

THE SECOND PART.
The Doctrine of the Sabaeans.
WHat is left to us of the Doctrine of the Sabaeans is delivered upon later
Authorities than those from which we have the Chaldaick: and therefore perhaps
is but an account of what it was in later times, degenerated from their
primitive Doctrine, which was immediately derived from the Chaldaick. Nor is it
improbable, but that this corruption might be somewhat aggravated by the eager
opposition of the Talmudists, and some Arabic Writers that follow them, from
whose hands only we receive it. However, we conceive it necessary to be annexed
to the former, of which, though depraved, it pretends at least to be the
continued succession.

CHAP I.
Of the Gods and Rites of the Sabaeans.
TThe Maimon.
Sabaeans held (as the Chaldaeans) that the Stars are Gods, but the Sun the
greatest God; for they plainly assert, that the Sun governs the superiou^ and
inferior Worlds; idem.
and call him, the great Lord, the Lord of good. What they relate concerning
Abraham, refusing to worship the Sun, is delivered elsewhere; what they further
fable of the Patriarchs, That Adam, (not being the first Man, but begotten by a
Man and Woman) was a Prophet of the Moon, and, by preaching, persuaded men to
worship the Moon, and composed Books of Husbandry; That Noah was a Husbandman
likewise, but believed not in Idols, for which they discommended him in all
their Writings; That Seth also dissented from Adam as to worshipping the Moon;
See delivered more fully by Mor. Nev.
Maimonides.

Their forms of worshipping these Gods was twofold, daily, and monthly; the
daily, is by Said Vahed described thus: They make the first day sacred to the
Sun, the second, to the Moon; the third, to Mars; the fourth, to Mercury; the
fifth, to Jupiter; the sixth, to Beltha Venus; the seventh, to Saturn.

The description of their monthly worship receive from a Ms. of Mahumed ben
Isaac, cited by Hottinger; They begin the year from the month Nisan, of which
they keep holy the first, second, and third days; adoring and praying to their
Goddess Beltha: they go to her Temples, sacrifising Sacrifices, and burning
living Creatures: On the sixth day of the same month they kill a Bull to their
Goddess the Moon; and toward the evening of the same day eat it: On the
eighth day they a keep Fast, and likewise celebrate (at night) a Feast in
honor of the seven Gods and of the Demons; offering a Lamb to the God of the
Blind (Mars): On the fifteenth day is the Festival of Sammael, (by this name
the Talmudists understand the Devil) celebrated with many Sacrifices,
Holocausts, and Offerings: On the twentieth they visit a Coenobium of the
Harranaeans, called Cadi, where they kill three Oxen, one to Saturn; another to
Mars, the blind God; the third to the Moon: they kill likewise nine Lambs,
seven to their seven Gods (the Planets) one to the God of the Geniusses, and
one to the God of the Hours. They likewise burn many Lambs and Cocks. On the
28. day, they go into the Temple which they have in the City Saba, at a certain
gate of Charran, called the gate Assarah; and kill to Hermes their God a great
Bull; as also seven Lambs to their seven Gods; one to the God of the Demons,
and to the God of the Hours, eating and drinking; but they burnt nothing of
any Beast that day.

The second month which is Iiar, they begin also with Sacrifices, celebrating
the consecration of Sammael, and Feasting: The second day they keep in honor
of Aben Salem; drinking, and filling their hands with Tamarisk and other Fruits.

The 23. day of the third month they keep in honor of Sammael, whom they
affirm to be the God that makes the Arrows fly; the Cumar, or Priest, makes an
Arrow take fire twelve times, by rubbing another stick against it: the last
time he creeps upon the ground, and puts flax to it; if their flax kindle, they
conceive their Rites well accepted of the Gods, otherwise not.

The fourth Month Thammus, had a peculiar solemnity about the middle of it,
called the Festival Albukal, of the weeping Women: The original of which is
thus related by R. Maimonides: In the same Book, says he, they tell a story of
a certain Idolatrous Pseudo-Prophet, named Thammuz: who calling upon the King
to worship the seven Planets, and the twelve signs of the Zodiac, and being by
the King put to an ignominious death, the same night in which he was slain, all
the Images from all parts of the Earth met in the Palace which was erected at
Babylon to the great Golden Image of the Sun, suspended betwixt Heaven and
Earth: There this Image of the Sun fell down prostrate in the midst, and (all
the rest of the Images standing round about it) bewailed Thammuz, and began to
relate what had happened to him; whereupon the rest of the Images fell
a-weeping, and lamented all that night: But as soon as the morning appeared they
all flew away and returned home to their several Temples. Hence came the
Custom, that on the first day of the month Thammuz (June) they weep, lament,
and bewail Thammuz. This Custom of Women weeping for Tammuz is mentioned also
by the Prophet chapter 8. v. 14.
Ezekiel, as imitated by the Jews. The 27. day of this month they consecrate
to Sammael, and to other Gods and Demons; sacrificing nine Lambs to Hanan.

In the fifth month, which, as the Syrians, they call Ab, they press new Win^
to their Gods, and give it several names, this they do the eight first days.
They likewise kill a new born Infant to their Gods, which they beat all to
pieces; then they take the flesh and mix it with Ry-meal, Saffron, Ears of
Corn, Mace and little Cakes like Figs; they bake this in a new Oven, and give
it to the People of the Congregation of Sammael all the year long; no Woman
eats of this, nor servant, nor son of a Bondwoman, nor Man that is possessed,
or mad.

The Rites of the sixth month, named Eil^ul, are thus described by the same
Author; three days They boil Water to wash themselves, that they may perform
the Rites of Sammael, who is the Prince of the Demons and the greatest God;
into this Water they cast some Tamarisk, Wax, Olives, Spice, etc. and when it
is hot, take it before Sunrise, and power it upon their Bodies, as an Amulet:
The same day also they kill eight Lambs, seven to their Gods, and one to the
God Sammael; they eat also in their Congregations, and drink every Man seven
Cups of Wine; The Prince exacts of every one of them two Drachmes to be paid
into his Exchecquer. On the 26. day on the same month, they go forth to a
Mountain, celebrating the Rites of the Sun, Saturn and Venus; burning eight
Hen-chickens, eight Cocks, and as many Hens; He who made a prayer and request
to Fortune takes an old Cock, or a Cock-chicken, to the wings of which he ties
two strings; and sets their ends on fire, and gives up the Chickens to the
Goddess Fortune; If the Chickens are quite consumed by the fire, his prayer is
heard; but if the fire of those strings goes out before the Chickens be quite
burnt, the Lord of Fortune accepts not his Prayer, nor Offerings, nor
Sacrifices. On the 27. and 28. they have their Mysteries, Sacrifices,
Offerings, and Holocausts to Sammael, (who is the greatest Lord:) to the
Demons and Genuisses, which compass them about, defend them, and bestow good
fortune on them.

The seventh month, which the Syrians and Sabaeans call the first Tischri,
has peculiar Rites, thus described by the same Author: About the middle of
this Month, they burn Meat to the dead, in this manner: Every one buys of
every sort of meat that is in the Market; of all kind of Flesh, Fruits, green
and dry; they likewise dress it several ways; all which they burn in the
nightime to the dead, and wish it the thigh bone of a Camel; they also pour
mixed Wine upon the fire, for the dead to drink.

In the eighth month, which is called the later Tischri, they fast on the 21.
day, and so on, for nine days, the last of which is the 29. this day they do
in honor of the Lord of Fortunes, etc.

The ninth month, called the first Canun, is chiefly sacred to Venus; On the
fourth day they set up a Tabernacle, which they call the Bed of Beltha;
adorning it with several Leaves, Fruits, Roses, etc. Before they offer their
Sacrifices of Beasts and Birds, they say, Let these Sacrifices be destined to
our Goddess Beltha; this they do for seven days: all which time they burn many
Beasts to their Gods and Goddesses. On the 30. day of the same month, the
Priest sits in a High Chair, to which he gets up by nine steps; and, taking in
his hand a stick of Tamarisk, stretches it out to them all, and strikes every
one of them with it three or five or seven times. Afterward he makes a
Discourse to them, wherein he declares to the Congregation their continuance,
multitude, places, and excellency above all other Nations; he likewise tells
them the largeness of their Empire, and the days of their Reign: After which
he comes down from the Chair, and they eat of the things offered to the Idols,
and drink: and the Prince exacts of every one of them this day two Drachmes to
the Exchecquer.

The tenth month, called the other Canun, seems particularly devoted to the
Moon; for on the 24. day thereof is the Nativity of the Lord, that is, the
Moon, at what time they celebrate the Rites of Sammael, sacrificing, and
burning fourscore living Creatures four-footed Beasts and Fowl; They also eat
and drink, and burn Badi, sticks or canes of Palm slender at the bottom, to
their Gods and Goddesses.

In the eleventh month, Sijubat, they fast seven days together, beginning
from the ninth day, upon which they proclaim a Fast to the Sun, who is the
great Lord, the Lord of good: They eat not in all this time any thing of Milk;
nor drink Wine; nor pray during this moaeth to any but Sammael, the Gen^i, and
Demons.

In the mon^th Adar, which is the tw^lfth and last, they fast also to the Moon,
especially on the 28. day; The President di^^ributes a Barley Loaf to the
Congregation, in honor of Mars; the Prince exacts of every one of them toward
his Exchecquer two Drachmes.

CHAP. II.
Other Rites of the Sabaeans contrary to the Levitical Law.
Mor. Nev.
RMaimonides mentions several other Rites of the Sabaeans, which were
expressly repugnant to the Levitical Law, adding, that he was acquainted with
the Reasons and Causes of many of the L^ws of Moses, by means of knowing the
Faith, Rites and Worship of the Sabaeans. The Examples alleged by him and
others are these.

They (...) leavened Bread only, and, for their offerings, made choice of sweet
things only, and anointed their Sacrifices with Honey; prohibited, Levit. 2. 11.

They used on a certain day to feed on Swines flesh; prohibited, Levit. 11. 7.

They held it unlawful to kill and feed on some Beasts permitted to the Jews;
as the Ox, which Maimonides says, they much honored for the great profit he
brings by Agriculture, and therefore held it unlawful to kill him, as also the
Sheep; neither of which they killed.

Some of the Sabaeans worshipped Devils, believing they had the shapes of
Goats, and therefore called them Seirim; On the contrary, the Levitical Law
prohibits to offer Sacrifices le Seirim, unto Goats, that is to say, Devils
appearing in the forms of Goats. Levit. 17. 7.

Though they did abhominate Blo^d, as a thing exceeding detestable, yet they
did eat it, believing it to be the Food of the Demons, and that he that did
eat of it should become a Brother or intimate acquaintance of the Demons,
insomuch that they would come to him and tell him future events; prohibited,
Levit. 17. 10. 23.

They worshipped the Sun at his rising, for which reason, as our Rabbis
expressly teach in Gemara, says Maimonides, Abraham our Father designed the
West for the place of the Sanctum Sanctorum, when he worshipped in the
Mountain Moria. Of this Idolatry they interpret what the Prophet chapter 8. 16.
Ezekiel says, of the men with their backs toward the Temple of the Lord, and
their faces toward the East, worshipping the Sun toward the East.

Mahummed Be^-Isaac relates, that they shaved themselves with Razors, and
br^^d^d themselves with fire; there were also married Women amongst them who
shaved themselves in the same manner; forbidden, Levit. 21. 5.

Maimon. Mor. Nev. 3.
They had a Custom of passing their Children, as soon as they were born,
through the fire, which they worshipped, affirming that such Children as were
not so passed would die. This was also expressly forbidden by the Levitical Law.

Another most obscene Custom they had of Engrafting, described by Mo. Nev. 3.
37.
Maimonides, to which he conceives the Levitical prohibition to allude.

Others there are of the same kind cited by the same Author, Mor. Nev. 3. 44.
who concludes, that as concerning those particular Laws, the reasons whereof
are concealed, and the benefit unknown to me, it proceeds from hence, that the
things which we hear are not such as those which we see and perceive with our
eyes. For this cause, those things concerning the Rites of the Sabaeans, which
I have learnt by hearing, and from their Writings, are not so solid and
certain, as with those who have seen them practiced, especially seeing that
their Opinions and Sects perished 1000. years since, and their Names were
abolished.

With the Sabaeans, we conclude the Chaldaick Philosophy.

THE CHALDAICK ORACLES OF ZOROASTER And his Followers. WITH THE EXPOSITIONS OF
PLETHO and PSELLUS.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, 1661.

THE CHALDAICK ORACLES OF ZOROASTER and his Followers.
THE most considerable remains of the Chaldaick Philosophy are those Oracles
which go under the name of Zoroaster; Some indeed condemn them as
supposititious, Beza.
forged by some Pseudo-Christian Greek; (perhaps the rather, because Clam.
Strom.
The followers of Prodicus the Heretic, boasted that they had the secret Books
of Zoroaster.) But this seems less probable, in regard they lie dispersed
amongst several Authors; nor are they to be neglected, in that they have been
held in great veneration by the Platonic Philosophers. Which sufficiently also
argues that they are none of the Writings charged by vit. plotin.
Porphyrius upon the Gnostics, as forged by them under the name of Zoroaster,
since those (as he acknowledges) were by the Platonic Philosophers, (of whom
he instanceth Plotinus and Amelius) rejected and demonstrated to be spurious
and suppositions.

Some argue that they are not Chaldaick, because many times accommodated to the
Greek Style; But there are in them many so Harsh and Exotic Expressions, as
discover them to be Originally foreign; and where they agree in Terms with that
which is proper to the Greek Philosophy, we may say of them as de Mist. Egypt.
Iamblichus upon another Occasion, (on the Writings that go under the Name of
Hermes Trismegistus) as they are published under the Name of Zoroaster, so also
they contain the Doctrine of Zoroaster, though they frequently speak in the
style of the Greeks; for they were Translated out of Chaldee into Greek by
persons skillful in the Greek Philosophy.

To persuade us that they are genuine, and not of Greekish Invention, Epist.
Mirandula Professes to Ficinus, that he had the Chaldee Original in his
possession, I was (says he) forcibly taken off from other things, and
instigated to the Arabic and Chaldaick Learning by certain Books in both those
Languages, which came to my Hands, not accidentally, but doubtless by the
Disposal of God in favor of my Studies. Hear the inscriptions, and you will
believe it. The Chaldaick Books, (if they are Books and not rather Treasures)
are, The Oracles of Aben Esra, Zoroaster and Melchior, Magi: in which those
things which are faulty and defective in the Greek, are Read perfect and
entire. There is also, (adds he) an Exposition by the Chaldaean Wisemen upon
these Oracles, short and knotty, but full of Mysteries; There is also a Book of
the Doctrines of the Chaldaick Theology, and upon it a Divine and copious
Discourse of the Persians, Graecians, and Chaldaeans; Thus Mirandula, after
whose Death these Books were found by Ficinus, but so worn and illegible that
nothing could be made out of them;

Further, To confirm that these Oracles were (as we said) Translated into Greek
by persons skillful in the Greek Philosophy, let us call to mind that Berosus
Joseph contra Apion. ^.
introduced the Writings of the Chaldeans concerning Astronomy and Philosophy
amongst the Graecians; and that Julian the Son, a Chaldean Philosopher, Suid.
in voce sulianus.
Wrote Iheurgick Oracles in Verse, and other secrets of that Science: and
probably, if these were no part of that Chaldaick Learning which Berosus first
rendered in Greek, they yet might be some of the Theurgick Oracles (for such
the Title speaks them) of Julian; for some of them are cited by Proclus as
such. From the account which Mirandula gives of those in his possession, to
which were added a Comment, and a Discourse of the Doctrines of the Chaldaick
Theology, it might be conj^ctur'd, that what is delivered to us by Pletho and
Psellus, who besides the Oracles, give us a comment on them, together with a
Chaldaick summary, was extracted out of that Author which Mirandula describes
to have been of the same Kind and Method, but much more Perfect and Copious.

This Title of Oracles was perhaps not given to them only Metaphorically to
express the Divine Excellence of their Doctrine, but as conceived indeed to
have been delivered by the Oracle it self; for De u^b.
Stephanus testifies that the Chaldaeans had an Oracle which they held in no
less Veneration than the Greeks did theirs at Delphi: This Opinion may be
confirmed by the high Testimonies which the Platonic Philosophers give of
them, calling them Procl. ^n Tint.
the Assyrian Theology revealed by God, and the Theology delivered by God. And
Proclus elsewhere having cited as from the Gods, one of these Oracles which
speaks of the Ideas, (a Platonic Doctrine) adds, that hereby the Gods declared
the subsistence of Ideas, and acquiesceth as satisfied in that the Gods
themselves ratify the contemplations of Plato.

Some of these Oracles which escaped the injuries of time, were first published
by Ludovicus Tileanus, anno 1563. at Paris; together with the commentaries of
Gemistus Pletho, under the Title of the Magical Oracles of the Magi descended,
from Zoroaster, the same were afterward Translated and put forth by Iacobus
Marthanus, and lastly together with the comment of Psellus also, by Johannes
Opsopaeus at Paris. 1607.

These by Franciscus Patricius were enlarged with a plentiful Addition out of
Proclus, Hermias, Simplicius, Damascius, Synesius, Olympiodorus, Nicephorus,
and Arnobius: increasing them Zo^. page 4 b.
by his own account, to 324. and reducing them for the better perspicuity to
certain general Heads, put them forth and Translated them into Latin anno 1593.

They were afterward put forth in Latin by Philos. barbar.
Ottho Heurnius, anno 1619. under the Title of The sincere Magical Oracles of
Zoroaster King of Bactria, and Prince of the Magi; but Heurnius under the
pretense of page
putting them into good Latin, (as he calls it) and polishing them with a
rougher File, has patched up and corrupted what Patricius delivered faithfully
and sincerely, endeavoring to put these Fragments into a Continued Discourse,
which in themselves are nothing Coherent but Dispersed amongst several Authors.

Patricius indeed has taken much Learned pains in the Collection of them; but
with less Regard to their Measures and Numbers, and (as from thence may be
shown) sometimes of the Words themselves: nor is there any certain means to
redress this Omission, by comparing them with the Authors out of which he took
them, since few of those are extant, neither does he (as he professes to have
done) affix the Names of the Authors to the several Fragments, except to some
few at the beginning; However, we shall give them here according to his
Edition, that being the most perfect; together with such Additions as we meet
withal else where, and some Conjectures to supply the Defect we mentioned.

And whereas many of these Oracles are so Broken and Obscure, that they may at
first sight seem rather Ridiculous than Weighty, yet he who shall consider,
that as many of them as are explained by Pletho, Psellus, and others, would
without those Explications seem no less absurd than the rest, but being
explained disclose the Learning of the Chaldaeans in a profound and
extraordinary manner, will easily believe all the rest (even those which appear
least intelligible) to be of the same kind, and consequently ought no more to
have been omitted than any of the rest.

(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...).
FRANCISCI PATRICII ZOROASTRI ORACULA.
MONAS, DYAS, ET TRIAS.
Psel.
UBI paterna monas est.
Dam.
Ampliata est Monas, quae duo generat.
Pro. Da.
Duitas enim apud hunc sedet, and intellectualibus fulget sectionibus.
Et gubernare cuncta, and ordinare quodcumque non ordinatum.
Dam.
Toto enim in mundo lucet Trias, cujus monas est princeps.
Principium omnis sectionis hic est ordo.
Proc.
In tria namque Men's dixit Patris secari omnia,
Cujus voluntas annuit, and jam omnia secta fuere.
In tria namque dixit Men's patris aeterni,
Mente omnia gubernans.
Dam.
Et apparuerunt in ipsa Virtus and Sapientia,
Et multiscia Veritas.
Hinc fluit Triadis vultus ante essentiam,
Non primam, sed eam quae mensuratur.
Principiis tribus hisce capias servire cuncta.
* * * * *
Et fons fontium, and fontium cunctorum.
Matrix continens cuncta.
Proc.
Inde affatim exilit generatio multivariae materiae.
Inde tractus praester exilis ignis flos,
Mundorum indens cavitatibus. Omnia namque inde.
Incipit deorsum tendere radios admirandos.
PATER ET MEN'S.
Psel.
Seipsum rapuit pater, neque suae
Potentiae mentali claudens proprium ignem.
Psel.
Non enim a paterno Principio imperfectum quid rotatur.
Cuncta namque perfecit pater,
Et menti tradidit secundae,
Quam primam vocat omne genus hominum.
Proc.
Patrogenia lux: multum namque sola
E patris robore decerpens mentis florem.
Opera enim intelligens paterna men's e se genita,
Cunctis inseminavit vinculum igni gravis amoris;
Quo omnia maneant, tempus in interminatum amantia.
Neque omnibus quae patri mentaliter contexta monstret.
Ut in amore maneant mundi elementa manentia.
Habet ipsa intelligentia paternam mentem indere
Omnibus fontibus and principatibus.
Est enim finis paterni profundi, and fons mentalium.
Neque progressus est, sed man^it in paterno profundo,
Et in adyto, per deo-nutriens silentium.
Non enim in materiam, ignis trans primus
Suam potentiam claudit operibus, sed mente.
Symbola enim paterna men's seminavit per mundum.
Quae intelligibilia intelligit, and ineffabilia exornat.
Dam.
Tota partitio, and impartibilis.
Mente quidem continet intelligibilia, sensum vero inducit mundis.
MEN'S, INTELLIGIBILIA, and Mentalia.
Dam.
Et unius mentis intelligibilis.
Proc.
Non enim sine intelligibili men's est: non seorsum existit.
Quaedam sane sunt mentalia and intelligibilia, quaecunque dum intelligunt
intelliguntur.
Cibus vero intelligenti est intelligibile.
Disce intelligibile, quandoquidem extra mentem existit.
Et Mentis, quae empyreum mundum ducit.
Mentis enim men's est quae mundi est artifex ignei.
Qui supermundanum paternum profundum estis intelligentes.
Intelligibilis omnis sectionis princeps est.
Est enim quoddam intelligibile, quod oportet te intelligere mentis flore.
Dam.
Vel enim inclines, ut mentem, and illud intellexeris.
Ut aliquid intelligens, non illud intelliges.
Est enim roboris circumquaque lucidi potentia,
Mentalibus fulgens sectionibus. non sane oportet
Vehementia intelligere intelligibile illud,
Sed mentis amplae ampla flamma
Omnia metiente, praeterquam intelligibile illud.
Opus ergo est hoc intelligere; nam si inclinaveris
Mentem tuam, etiam illud intelliges non parum.
Sed purum converte oculum,
Ferentem tuae animae tendere vacuam mentem
In intelligibile; ut discas intelligibile,
Quandoquidem extra mentem existit.
Deum hunc intelligit omnis men's, non enim sine
Mente est intelligibili, and intelligibile non sine mente existit.
Ignis mentalis mentalibus praesteribus cuncta
Cedunt servientia, Patris persuasorio consilio.
Et intelligere, semperque manner impigra vertigine.
Font and principii. vertere semperque manner impigra vertigine.
Sed nomen venerandum insomni vertigini
Mundis indens, terribiles ob patris minas.
Sub duabus mentibus vitigenius fons continetur animarum.
Et facta, qui per se operans fabrefecit mundum.
Qui ex mente exiliit primus.
Indutus igne ignem, Vinculorum ut temperet
Fontanos crateras, sui ignis florem sustinens.
Mentalibus fulget sectionibus, amoreque implevit omnia.
Infigurata figurans.
Examinibus similes feruntur, perrumpentes
Per mundi corpora.
Quae men's dicit, intelligendo sane dicit.
Potentia quidem cum illis, Men's vero ab illa.
IYNGES, IDEAE, PRINCIPIA.
Multae quidem hae scandunt lucidos mundos.
Insilientes, and in quibus summitates sunt tres.
Subjectum ipsis est principale pratum.
Principia; quae patris opera intelligentes intelligibilia
Sensibilibus operibus, and corporibus revelarunt.
Transvectrices stantes dicere patri and materiae.
Et manifesta imitamina latentium operantes.
Et latentia in manifestam Cosmopoeiam inscribentes.
Men's patris striduit, intelligens vigente consilio
Omniformes Ideas, Font vero ab uno evolantes
Exilierunt. A patre enim erat consilium and finis.
Per quae conjunguntur patri, per aliam atque aliam
Vitam, a compartitis canalibus.
Sed partitae sunt, men^ali igne dispositae,
In alias mentales: mundo namque rex multiformi
Proposuit mentalem typum incorruptibilem, non per mundum
Vestigium promovens formae per quae mundus apparuit.
Omnifariam ideis gratiosus, quarum unus fons.
Ex quo strident dispertitae aliae,
Immensae, perrumpentes mundi circa corpora:
Quae per sinus immensos, examinibus similes,
Feruntur conversae: circumque alibi alia.
Conceptiones mentales font a paterno
Multum decerpentes ignis florem
Insomnis temporis. Vigor principigeniae ideae
Prima. e patris missa est; cujus per se florens fons*
Intellectae Iynges a patre intelligunt and ipsae;
Consiliis ineffabilibus moventur ut intelligant*
HECATE, SYNOCHES, ET Teletarchae.
Ex ipso enim omnes exiliunt
Amilictique fulmines, and presterocapaces sinus
Omnilucidae vigoris patrogenii Hecates.
Et Hypezocus ignis flos, and fortis
Spiritus polorum, igneos trans.
Custodire presteribus suis summitates dedit.
Immiscens vigoris proprium robur in Synochis.
Quo mundus habeat mentales sustentatores inflexiles*
Quia operatrix, quia largitrix est ignis vitiferi.
Quia and vitigenium implet Hecates sinum.
Et influit Synochis vigorem, vitidonum ignis
Magni potentis.
Sed and custodes operum sunt patris.
Assimilat enim se ipsum; ille urgens
Typum induere idolorum.
Teletarchae comprehensi sunt cum Synochis.
His vero ignis mentalis mentalibus presteribus
Omnia parent servientia.
Sed and quaecumque materialibus serviunt Synochis.
Induti armorum vigorem luminis resonantis.
Vigore Triglicho, mentem animamque armantem.
Pervarium Synthema jacere ratiocinio.
Neque super incedere empyreis sparsim canalibus,
Sed collectim.
Hi vero individua, and sensibilia efficient,
Et corporiformia, and destinata in materiam.
ANIMA, NATURA.
Quoniam anima ignis potentia patris existens lucidus,
Immortalisque manet, and vitae domina est:
Et tenet mundi multas plenitudines sinuum.
Mentis enim imitamen est, partum vero habet quid corporis.
Mistis vero canalibus, ignis incorruptibilis opera efficiens.
Post vero paternas conceptiones anima, ego, habito;
Calida, animans omnia. reposuit enim
Mentem sane in anima, animam vero in corpore inerti.
Nostri imposuit pater hominumque Deumque.
Affatim animans lucem, ignem, aethera, mundos.
Coexistunt namque naturalia opera mentali splendori
Patris. Anima enim est quae ornavit magnum
Coelum, and quae ornat simul cum patre.
Cornua and ipsius firmata sunt sursum.
Humeros vero circa Deae natura immensa attollitur.
Imperat rursus natura infatigabilis mundisque operibusque;
Coelum ut currat sursum aeternum trahens;
Et celer sol circa centrum, ut assuetus veniat.
Non naturae inspicias fatale nomen ejus.
MUNDUS.
Factor qui per se operans fabrefacit mundum.
Etenim quaedam ignis moles erat altera: haec omnia
Per se efficiens, ut corpus mundanum....
Mundus ut manifestus, and non videatur membraneus.
Totum mundum ex igne, and aqua, and terra,
Et omni-alente aere.
Ineffabilia, and fabilia synthemata mundi.
Aliam per aliam vitam, a partitis canalibus.
Desuper permeantis in oppositum
Per centrum terrae. and quintum medium, alium
Igneum, ubi descendit usque ad materiales canales.
Vi^ifer ignis.
Centro incitans Seipsum lumine resonante.
Fontanum alium. qui Empyreum mundum ducit.
Centrum a quo omnes usquequo forte aequales fuerint.
Symbola enim paterna men's seminavit per mundum.
Medium inter patres singulae centrum fertur.
Mentis enim imitamen est; quod vero partum est habet quid corporis.
COELUM.
Septem enim in moles formavit Pater firmamenta mundorum:
Coelum rotunda figura circumcludens.
Fixitque multum coetum astrorum inerrantium,
Animaliumque errantium constituit septenarium.
Terram in medio posuit, aquamque in terrae sinibus,
Aeremque supra haec.
Fixitque multum coetum astrorum inerrantium,
Tensione, non laboriosa mala.
Sed fixione errorem non habente in motu.
Fixitque multum coetum astrorum inerrantium.
Ignem ad ignem cogens.
Fixione errorem non habente in motu.
Sex eos constituit, septimum Solis,
In medium jaciens ignem.
Inordinationem eorum bene-ordinatis suspendens zonis.
Parturit enim Dea Solemque magnum, and splendidam Lunam.
Ether, Sol, spiritus Lunae, aeris ductores,
Solariumque circulorum, and lunarium est repituum,
Sinuumque aereorum.
Aetheris cantus, Solisque, and Lunae canalium, and aeris.
Et latus aer, lunarisque cursus, and polus Solis.
Colligit ipsum, accipiens aetheris harmoniam,
Solisque, Lunaeque, and quaecumque aere continentur.
Ignis ignis derivatio, and ignis penu.
Crines enim in acutum nato lumini conspiciuntur,
Ubi Saturnus.
Sol assessor intuens polum purum.
Aetheriusque cursus, and Lunae ingens impetus,
Aeriique fluxus.
Solemque magnum, and splendidam Lunam.
TEMPUS.
Deum mundanum, aeternum, infinitum.
Juvenem, and senem...
Et fontanum aliud, quod empyreum mundum ducit.
ANIMA, CORPUS, HOMO.
Oportet te festinare ad lucem and patris lumina,
Unde missa est tibi anima, multam induta mentem.
Hae pater mente concepit, mortalisque ei est animatus.
Symbola enim paterna men's seminavit in animis.
Amore profundo replens animam.
Reposuit enim mentem in anima, in corpore vero
Vos reposuit pater hominumque deumque.
Incorporea quidem sunt divina omnia.
Corpora vero in ipsis vestri causa sunt alligata
Non potentes continere incorporeos corpora,
Ob corpoream, in quam concentrati estis, naturam.
Inque deo jacent faces trahentes validas.
A patre descendentes, a quibus anima descendentibus
Empyreos carpit fructus, animam-alentem florem.
Ideoque mente concipientes opera patris
Parcae fatalis alam fugiunt inverecundam.
Et si hanc animam videris redeuntem,
At aliam immittit pater, ut in numero sit.
Certe valde illae sunt beatissimae supra omnes
Animas, ad terram a coelo profusae.
Illaeque divites, and ineffabilia stamina habentes.
Quaecunque a lucente, o rex, a te, vel ipso
Jove sunt progenitae. Miti valida a necessitate
Ducatur animae profunditas immortalis, oculosque affatim
Omnes sursum extend.
Nec deorsum pronus sis in nigricantem mundum.
Cui profunditas semper infida substrata est, and Ades
Circumquaque caligans, squalidus, idolis gaudens, amens,
Praecipitosus, tortuosus, caecum profundum semper involvens,
Semper desponsus obscuram faciem, inertem, spiritu-carentem.
Et osor luminis mundus, and tortuosi fluxus
A quibus vulgus attrahitur.
Quaere paradisum.
Quaere tu animae canalem, unde, aut quo ordine
Corpori inservieris, in ordinem, a quo effluxisti
Rursus restituas, sacro sermoni operam uniens.
Neque deorsum sis pronus, praecipitium in terra subest,
Septemvios trahens per gradus: quo sub
Horribile necessitatis Thronus est.
Ne tu augeas fatum.
Anima hominu^ Deum coget quodammodo in seipsam:
Nihil mortale habens, tota a Deo est ebria facta:
Harmoniam resonat namque, sub qua est corpus mortale.
Extendens igneam mentem ad opus pietatis,
Et fluxile corpus servabis.
Est and idolo portio in loco circumlucente.
Undique inficta anima ignis habenas tend.
Igne calens cogitatio primissimum habet ordinem.
Igni namque mortalis propinquans a Deo lumen habebit.
Immoranti enim mortali praesto Dii aderunt.
Poenae hominum sunt angores.
Et malae materiae germina utilia sunt, and bona.
Spes nutriat te ignea Angelica in regione.
Sed non recipit illius velle Paterna men's,
Donec non exeat ex oblivione, and verbum loquatur
Memoriam indens Paterni Synthematis puri.
His quidem discibile lucis dedit notitiam suscipere.
Hos vero and somnolentos sui fructum dedit roboris.
Ne spiritum macules, neque profundum fac superficiem.
Neque materiae quisquilias praecipitio relinquas.
Ne educas, ne exiens habeat quidpiam.
Vi corpus relinquentium animae sunt purissimae.
Animae expulsores, respiratores and faciles solutu sunt.
Sinistris in lumbis Hecates virtutis est fons,
Intus tota manens, virgineum non abjiciens.
O audacissimae naturae, homo, artificium!
Neque ingentes mensuras terrae in tuam mentem pone,
Non enim veritatis planta est in terra.
Neque in mensuris mensuras Solis regulas congregans,
Aeterno consilio fertur, non gratia tui.
Lunarem quidem cursum, and astreum progress^m
Lunae strepitum dimitte. semper currit opera necessitatis
Astreus progressus, tui gratia non est partus.
Aethereus avium pes latus nunquam verus est.
Non sacrificia visceraque cupio: haec sunt omnia ludi,
Mercatoriae deceptionis firmamenta; fuge tu haec
Si vis pietatis sacrum paradisum aperire.
Ubi virtus, sapientiaque, and bona lex congregantur.
Tuum enim vas bestiae terrae habitabunt.
Ipsas autem terra sepeliit ad filios usque.
DAEMONES, SACRIFICIA.
Natura suadet esse daemonas puros.
Et mala materiae germina, utilia, and bona.
Sed haec in abditis septis mentis evolvo.
Ignis simulacrum saltatim in aere in tumorem extendens,
Vel etiam ignem infiguratum, unde vocem currentem,
Vel lumen abundans radians, streperum, convolutum:
Sed and equum videre, luce magis fulgurantem,
Vel etiam puerum suis humeris inequitantem equo,
Ignitum, vel auro distinctum, vel spoliatum,
Vel etiam sagittantem, and stantem super humeris.
Multoties si dixeris mihi, cernes omnia leonem,
Neque enim coelestis curvitas tunc apparet moles.
Astra non lucent, Lunae lux opertum est,
Terra non stat, cernuntur vero cuncta fulminibus.
Neque naturae voces per se visile simulacrum,
Non enim oportet illos te spectare antequam corpus sacris purgetur.
Quando animas mulcentes semper a sacris abducunt.
Ergo ex sinibus terrae exiliunt terrestres canes,
Nunquam verum corpus mortali homini monstrantes.
Operare circa Hecaticum turbinem.
Nomina barbara nunquam mutaveris,
Sunt enim nomina apud singulos a Deo data
Potentiam in sacris ineffabilem habentia.
Quando videris forma sine sacrum ignem,
Collucentem saltatim totius per profundum mundi,
Audi ignis vocem.
THE ORACLES OF ZOROASTER; Collected by FRANCISCUS PATRICIUS.
MONAD. DUAD. TRIAD.
WHere the Paternal Monad is.
The Monad is enlarged, which generates two.
For the Duad sits by him, and glitters with Intellectual Sections.
And to govern all Things, and to Order every thing not Ordered.
For in the whole World shines the Triad, over which the Monad Rules.
This Order is the beginning of all Section.
For the Mind of the Father said, that All things be cut into three,
Whose Will assented, and then All things were divided.
For the Mind of the Eternal Father said into three,
Governing all things by Mind.
And there appeared in it [the Triad] Virtue and Wisdom,
And Multiscient Verity.
This Way flows the shape of the Triad, being prae-existent.
Not the first* [Essence] but where they are measured.
For thou must conceive that all things serve these three Principles.
The first Course is sacred, but in the middle,
Another the third, aerial; which cherishes the Earth in fire.
And fountain of fountains, and of all fountains.
The Matrix containing all things.
Thence abundantly springs forth the Generation of multivarious Matter.
Thence extracted a prester the flower of glowing fire,
Flashing into the Cavities of the Worlds: for all things from thence
Begin to extend downwards their admirable Beams.
FATHER. MIND.
THe Father has snatched away himself: neither
Has he shut up his own fire in his Intellectual Power.
For the Father perfected All things, and delivered them over to the second
Mind,
Which the whole Race of Men calls the First.
Light begotten of the Father; for he alone
Having cropped the flower of the Mind from the Fathers Vigor.
For the paternal self-begotten Mind understanding [his] Work,
Sowed in all, the fiery Bond of Love,
That all things might continue loving for ever.
Neither those things which are intellectually context in the light of the
Father in All things.
That being the Elements of the World they might persist in Love.
For it is the Bound of the paternal Depth, and the Fountain of the
Intellectualls.
Neither went he forth, but abided in the paternal Depth,
And in the Adytum according to Divinely-nourished silence.
For the fire once above, shuts not his Power
Into Matter by Actions, but by the Mind.
For the paternal Mind has sowed Symbols through the World
Which understands intelligibles, and beautifieth ineffables.
Wholly Division and Indivisible.
By Mind he contains the Intelligibles, but introduces Sense into the Worlds.
By Mind he contains the Intelligibles, but introduces Soul into the Worlds.
MIND. INTELLIGIBLES. INTELLECTUALS.
ANd of the one Mind, the Intelligible [Mind]
For the Mind is not without the Intelligible; it exists not without it.
These are Intellectuals, and Intelligibles, which being understood, understand.
For the Intelligible is the Aliment of the Intelligent,
Learn the Intelligible, since it exists beyond the Mind.
And of the Mind which moves the Empyraeal Heaven.
For the Framer of the fiery World is the Mind of the Mind.
You who know certainly the supermundane paternal Depth.
The Intelligible is predominant over all Section.
There is something Intelligible, which it behooves thee to understand with the
flower of the Mind.
For if thou enclinest thy Mind, thou shall understand this also;
Yet understanding something [of it] thou shall not understand this wholly; for
it is a Power
Of Circumlucid Strength, glittering with Intellectual Sections. [Raies.]
But it behooves not to consider this Intelligible with Vehemence of
Intellection,
But with the ample flame of the ample Mind, which measures all things
Except this Intelligible: but it behooves to understand this.
For if thou enclinest thy Mind, thou shall understand this also,
Not fixedly, but having a pure turning Eye [thou must]
Extend the empty Mind of thy Soul toward the Intelligible,
That thou may learn the Intelligible, for it exists beyond the Mind.
But every Mind understands this God; for the Mind is not
Without the Intelligible, neither is the Intelligible without the Mind.
To the Intellectual Presters of the Intellectual fire, all things
By yielding are subservient to the persuasive Counsel of the Father.
And to understand, and always to remain in a restless Whirling
Fountains and Principles; to turn and always to remain in a restless
Whirling.
But insinuating into Worlds the Venerable Name in a sleeplesse Whirling,
By reason of the terrible menace of the Father.
Under two Minds the Life-generating fountain of Souls is contained;
And the Maker, who self-operating framed the World.
Who sprung first out of the Mind.
Clothing fire with fire, binding them together to mingle
The fountainous Craters preserves the flower of his own fire.
He glittereth with Intellectual Sections, and filled all things with Love,
Like swarms they are carried, being broken,
About the Bodies of the World.
That things unfashioned may be fashioned,
What the Mind speaks, it speaks by understanding.
Power is with them, Mind is from Her.
JYNGES. IDAEA'S. PRINCIPLES.
THese being many ascend into the lucid Worlds.
Springing into them, and in which there are three Tops.
Beneath them lies the chief of Immaterialls,
Principles which have understood the intelligible Works of the Father.
Disclosed them in sensible Works as in Bodies;
Being (as it were) the Ferry-men betwixt the Father and Matter.
And producing manifest Images of unmanifest things,
And inscribing unmanifest things in the manifest frame of the World.
The Mind of the Father made a jarring Noise, understanding by Vigorous Counsel,
Omniform Idaea's; and flying out of one fountain
They sprung forth; for from the Father was the Counsel and End,
By which they are connected to the Father, by alternate
Life from several Vehicles.
But they were divided, being by intellectual fire distributed
Into other Intellectuals: for the King did set before the multiform World
An Intellectual incorruptible Pattern; this Print through the World he
promoting, of whose form
According to which the World appeared
Beautified with all kind of Idaea's; of which there is one fountain,
Out of which come rushing forth others undistributed,
Being broken about the Bodies of the World, which through the vast Recesses,
Like swarms are carried round about every Way.
Intellectual Notions from the paternal fountain cropping the flower of fire.
In the Point of sleeplesse time, of this primigenious Idea.
The first self-budding fountain of the Father budded.
Intelligent Jynges do (themselves) also understand from the father:
By unspeakable Councels being moved so as to understand.
HECATE. SYNOCHES. TELETARCHS.
FOr out of Him spring all
Implacable Thunders, and the Prester-receiving cavities
Of the Intirely-lucid strength of Father-begotten Hecate.
And He who beguirds (viz.) the flower of fire, and the strong
Spirit of the Poles fiery above.
He gave to his Presters that they should guard the Tops.
Mingling the power of his own strength in the Synoches,
Oh how the World has Intellectual guides inflexible!
Because she is the Operatrix, because she is the Dispensatrix of Life-giving
fire.
Because also it fills the Life producing bosom of Hecate.
And instills in the Synoches the enliving strength
Of potent fire.
But they are Gardians of the Works of the Father.
For he disguises himself, possessing
To be clothed with the Print of the Images.
The Teletarchs are comprehended with the Synoches.
To these Intellectual Presters of Intellectual fire,
All things are subservient.
But as many as serve the Material Synoches
Having put on the compleatly-armed Vigor of resounding Light.
With triple strength fortifying the Soul and the Mind.
To put into the Mind the Symbol of Variety.
And not to walk dispersedly on the Empyraeal Channels;
But stiffely
These frame indivisibles, and sensibles,
And Corporiformes, and things destined to matter.
SOUL. NATURE.
FOr the Soul being a bright fire, by the power of the Father
Remains Immortal, and is Mistress of Life;
And possesses many Complections of the Cavities of the World:
For it is in Imitation of the Mind; but that which is born has something of
the Body.
The Channels being intermixed, she performs the Works of incorruptible Fire
Next the paternal Conceptions I (the Soul) dwell;
Warm, heating, all things; for he did put
The Mind in the Soul, the Soul in the dull Body.
Of us the Father of Gods and Men imposed,
Abundantly animating Light, Fire, Ether, Worlds.
For natural Works co-exist with the Intellectual Light of the Father, for the
Soul which adorned the great
Heaven, and adorning with the Father.
But her Horns are fixed above,
But about the shoulders of the Goddess, immense Nature is exalted.
Again indefatigable Nature commands the Worlds and Works.
That Heaven drawing an Eternal Course may run.
And the swift Sun might come about the Center as he uses.
Look not into the fatal Name of this Nature.
THE WORLD.
THe Maker who Operating by himself framed the World.
And there was another Bulk of fire,
By it self operating all things that the Body of the World might be perfected
That the World might be manifest, and not seem Membranous.
The whole World of Fire, and Water, and Earth,
And all-nourishing Ether
The unexpressible and expressible Watch-words of the World.
One Life by another from the distributed Channels.
Passing from above to the opposite Part,
Through the Center of the Earth; and another fifth Middle:
Fiery Channel, where it descends to the material Channels.
Life-bringing fire.
Stirring himself up with the goad of resounding Light.
Another fountainous, which guides the Empyraeal World.
The Center from which all (Lines) which way soever are equal.
For the paternal Mind sowed Symbols through the World.
For the Center of every one is carried betwixt the Fathers.
For it is in Imitation of the Mind, but that which is born has something of
the Body.
HEAVEN.
FOr the Father congregated seven Firmaments of the World;
Circumscribing Heaven in a round figure.
He fixed a great Company of inerratick Stars.
And he constituted a Septenary of erratick Animals.
Placing Earth in the middle, and the Water in the middle of the Earth,
The Air above these.
He fixed a great Company of inerratick Stars,
To be carried not by laborious and troublesome Tension,
But by a settlement which has not Error,
He fixed a great Company of inerratick Stars,
Forcing fire to fire.
To be carried by a Settlement which has not Error.
He constituted them six; casting into the amidst,
The fire of the Sun.
Suspending their Disorder in well-ordered Lones.
For the Goddess brings forth the great Sun, and the bright Moon.
O Ether, Son, Spirit, Guides of the Moon and of the Air;
And of the solar Circles, and of the Monthly clashings,
And of the Aerial Recesses.
The Melody of the Ether, and of the Passages of the Sun, and Moon, and of the
Air
And the wide Air, and the Lunar Course, and the Pole of the Sun.
Collecting it, and receiving the Melody of the Ether,
And of the Sun, and of the Moon, and of all that are contained in the Air.
Fire, the Derivation of fire, and the Dispenser of fire;
His Hair pointed is seen by his native Light;
Hence comes Saturn.
The Sun Assessor beholding the pure Pole;
And the Aetherial Course, and the vast Motion of the Moon
And the Aerial fluxions.
And the great Sun, and the bright Moon.
TIME.
THe Mundane God, Aeternal, Infinite.
Young, and Old, of a Spiral form.
And another fountainous, who guides the Empyraeal Heaven.
SOUL. BODY. MAN.
IT behooves thee to hasten to the light, and to the beams of the Father;
From whence was sent to Thee a Soul clothed with much Mind.
These things the Father conceived, and so the mortal was animated.
For the paternal mind sowed Symbols in souls;
Replenishing the Soul with profound Love.
For the Father of Gods and Men placed the Mind in the Soul;
And in the Body he established You.
For all Divine things are Incorporeal.
But bodies are bound in them for your sakes.
Incorporeals not being able to contain the bodies.
By reason of the Corporeal Nature in which you are concentrated.
And they are in God, attracting strong flames.
Descending from the Father, from which descending, the Soul
Crops of Empyreal fruits the soul-nourishing flower.
And therefore conceiving the Words of the Father
They avoid the audacious wing of fatal Destiny;
And though you see this Soul manumitted,
Yet the Father sends another to make up the Number.
Certainly, these are superlatively blessed above all
Souls; they are sent forth from Heaven to Earth,
And those rich Souls which have unexpressible fates;
As many of them (O King) as proceed from shining Thee, or from
Jove Himself, under the strong power of (his) thread.
Let the Immortal Depth of thy Soul be predominant; but all thy eyes
Extend upward.
Stoop not down to the dark World,
Beneath which continually lies a faithless Depth, and Hades
Dark all over, squallid, delighting in Images, unintelligible,
Praecipitious, Craggy, a Depth; always Rolling,
Always espousing an Opacous idle breathless Body.
And the Light-hating World, and the winding currents,
By which many things are swallowed up.
Seek Paradise;
Seek thou the way of the Soul, whence or by what Order
Having served the Body, to the same place from which thou did flow.
Thou may rise up again, joy^ing Action to sacred speech,
Stoop not down, for a precipice lies below on the Earth;
Drawing through the Ladder which has seven steps, beneath which
Is the Throne of Necessity,
Enlarge not thou thy Destiny.
The soul of Men will in a manner clasp God to her self;
Having nothing mortal, she is wholly inebriated from God:
For she boasts Harmony, in which the mortal Body exists.
If thou extend the fiery Mind
To the work of piety, thou shall preserve the fluxible body.
There is a room for the Image also in the Circumlucid place.
Every way to the unfashioned Soul stretch the rains of fire.
The fire-glowing Cogitation has the first rank.
For the Mortal approaching to the fire, shall have Light from God.
For to the slow Mortal the Gods are swift.
The Furies are stranglers of Men.
The bourgeons, even of ill matter, are profitable and good.
Let hope nourish thee in the fiery Angelical Region.
But the paternal Mind accepts not her will,
Until she go out of Oblivion, and pronounce a Word,
Inserting the remembrance of the pure paternal Symbol.
To these he gave the docible Character of Life to be comprehended.
Those that were asleep he made fruitful by his own strength.
Defile not the Spirit, nor deepen a Superficies.
Leave not the Dross of matter on a Praecipice.
Bring her not forth, lest going forth she have something.
The souls of those who quit the Body violently, are most pure.
The unguirders of the Soul, which give her breathing, are easy to be loosed.
In the side of sinister Hecate, there is a fountain of Virtue;
Which remains entire within, not omitting her Virginity.
O Man the machine of boldest Nature!
Subject not to thy Mind the vast measures of the Earth;
For the plant of Truth is not upon Earth.
Nor measure the Measures of the Sun gathering together Canons;
He is moved by the Eternal Will of the Father, not for thy sake.
Let alone the swift course of the Moon; she runs ever by the impulse of
Necessity.
The Progression of the Stars was not brought forth for thy sake.
The aetherial wide flight of Birds is not veracious.
And the Dissections of Entrails and Victims, all these are toys,
The supports of gainful cheats; fly thou these,
If thou intend to open the sacred Paradise of Piety
Where Virtue, Wisdom, and Aequity are assembled.
For thy Vessel the Beasts of the Earth shall inhabit.
These the Earth bewails, even to their Children.
DEMONS. RITES.
NAture persuades that there are pure Demons;
The bourgeons, even of ill matter, are profitable and good.
But these things I revolve in the recluse Temples of my mind,
Extending the like fire sparklingly into the spacious Air
Or fire unfigured, a voice issuing forth.
Or fire abundant, whizzing and winding about the Earth,
But also to see a Horse more glittering than Light
Or a Boy on [thy] shoulders riding on a Horse,
Fiery or adorned with Gold, or divested,
Or shooting and standing on [thy] shoulders,
If thou speak often to me, thou shall see absolutely that which is spoken:
For then neither appears the Celestial concave Bulk,
Nor do the Stars shine; the Light of the Moon is covered,
The Earth stands not still, but all things appear Thunder.
Invoke not the self-conspicuous Image of Nature;
For thou must not behold these before thy Body be initiated.
When soothing souls they always seduce them from these Mysteries.
Certainly out of the cavities of the Earth spring Terrestrial Dogs,
Which show no true sign to mortal Man.
Labor about the Hecatick Strophalus
Never change barbarous Names;
For there are Names in every Nation given from God,
Which have an unspeakable power in Rites.
When thou see a sacred fire without form,
Shining flashingly through the Depths of the World,
Hear the voice of Fire.
PLETHO HIS EXPOSITION Of the more obscure passages in these Oracles.
Seek thou the way of the Soul, whence or by what Order.
Having served the body, to the same order from which thou did flow.
Thou may rise up again; joining action to sacred speech.]
THe Magi that are followers of Zoroaster, as also many others, hold that the
Human Soul is immortal; and descended from above to serve the mortal Body, that
is, to operate therein for a certain time; and to Animate, and Adorn it to her
power; and then returns to the place from which she came. And whereas there are
many Mansions there for the Soul, one wholly-bright, another wholly-dark;
others betwixt both, partly-bright, partly-dark: The Soul, being descended from
that which is wholly-bright, into the Body, if she perform her Office well,
runs back into the same place; but if not well, she retires into worse
Mansions, according to the things which she has done in Life. The Oracle
therefore says, Seek thou the Souls path, or the way by which the Soul flowed
into thee; or by what course (viz of Life) having performed thy charge toward
the Body, thou may Mount up to the same place from which thou did flow
down, viz. the same Track of the Soul, joining action to sacred speech. By
sacred speech, he understands that which concerns Divine Worship; by action,
Divine Rites. The Oracle therefore says, that to this Exaltation of the Soul,
both speech concerning Divine Worship (Prayers,) and Religious Rites
(Sacrifices) are requisite.

Stoop not down, for a praecipice lies below on the Earth,
Drawing through the Ladder which has seven steps; beneath which
Is the ^hrone of Necessity.]
He calls the Descention into wickedness, and misery, a Precipice; the
Terrestrial and Mortal Body, the Earth: for by the Earth he understands mortal
Nature, as by the fire frequently the Divine; by the place with seven Ways, he
means Fate dependant on the Planets, beneath which there is seated a certain
dire and unalterable Necessity: The Oracle therefore advises, that thou stoop
not down toward the mortal Body, which being Subject only to the Fat^, which
proceeds from the Planets, may be reckoned amongst those things which are at
our Arbitrament: for thou will be unhappy if thou stoop down wholly to the
Body, and unfortunate and continually failing of thy Desires, in regard of the
Necessity which is annexed to the Body.

For thy Vessel the Beasts of the Earth shall inhabit.]
The Vessel of thy Soul, that is this mortal Body, shall be inhabited by Worms
and other vile Creatures.

Enlarge not Thou thy Destiny.]
Endeavor not to increase thy Fate, or to do more then is given thee in
charge, for thou will not be able.

For nothing proceeds from the paternal principality imperfect.] For from the
paternal Power, which is, that of the supreme God, nothing proceeds
imperfect, so as thou thy self might complete it; for all things proceeding
from thence are perfect; as appears, in that they tend to the perfection of the
Universe.

But the Paternal Mind accepts not her will,
Until she go out of Oblivion, and pronounce a Word,
Inserting the remembrance of the pure paternal Symbol.]
The Paternal Mind, (viz. the Second God and ready Maker of the Soul) admits
not her Will or Desire until she come out of the Oblivion, which she
contracted by Connection with the Body; and until she speak a certain Word, or
conceive in her thoughts a certain Speech, calling to remembrance the paternal
Divine Symbol or Watchword, this is the pursuit of the good which the Soul
calling to remembrance, hereby becomes most acceptable to Her Maker.

It behooves thee to hasten to the Light, and to the beams of the Father:
From whence there was sent to thee a Soul endued with much mind.]
The Light and splendor of the Father is that Mansion of the Soul which is
circumlucid, from whence the Soul arrayed with much of mind was sent hither,
wherefore We must hasten to return to the same Light.

These the Earth bewails, even to their Children.]
Those who hasten not to the Light, from which their Soul was sent to them, the
Earth or mortal Nature bewails, for that they being sent hither to Adorn her,
not only not adorn her, but also blemish themselves by Living wickedly;
moreover the Wickedness of the Parents is transm^tted to the Children,
corrupted by them through ill Education.

The unguirders of the Soul, which give her breathing, are easy to be loosed.]
The Reasons which expel the Soul from Wickedness, and give her breathing,
are easy to be untied; and the Oblivion which keeps them in, is easily put off.

In the side of the sinister bed there is a fountain of Virtue:
Which remains entire within; not emitting her Virginity]
In the left side of thy Bed, there is the Power or Fountain of Virtue,
residing wholly within, and never casting off her Virginity, or Nature void of
Passion: for there is always in us the power of Virtue without passion which
cannot be put off; although her Energy or Activity may be interrupted: he says
the power of Virtue is placed on the left side, because her Activity is seated
on the right: by the Bed is meant the seat of the Soul, subject to her several
Habits.

The soul of Man will, in a manner, clasp God to her self.
Having nothing mortal, she is wholly inebriated from God;
For she boasts Harmony, in which the mortal Body consists.]
The human Soul will in a manner clasp God, and join him strictly to her self,
(who is her continual Defense) by resembling him as much as she can possibly;
having nothing mortal within her, she is wholly drenched in Divinity, or
replenished with Divine goods, for though she is fettered to this mortal Body,
yet she glories in the Harmony or Union in which the mortal Body exists; that
is, she is not ashamed of it, but thinks well of her self for it; as being a
Cause, and affording to the Universe, that, As Mortals are united with
immortals in Man, so the Universe is adorned with one Harmony.

Because the Soul being a bright fire by the power of the Father;
Remains immortal, and is Mistress of Life,
And possesses many Completions of the cavities of the World.]
The second God, who first before all other things proceeded from the Father
and supreme God, these Oracles call all along, The power of the Father, and his
intellectual Power, and the paternal Mind. He says therefore, that the Soul
procreated by this power of the Father, is a bright fire, that is, a Divine and
Intellectual Essence, and persisteth immortal through the Divinity of its
Essence, and is Mistress of Life, viz. of her self, possessing Life which
cannot be taken away from her; for, how can we be said to be Masters of such
things, as may be taken from us, seeing the use of them is only allowed us? but
of those things which cannot be taken from us, We are absolute Masters: The
Soul according to her own Eternity, possesses many Rooms in the Receptacles of
the World, or diverse places in the World, which according as she has led her
Life past is allotted to every One.

Seek Paradise.]
The circumlucid Mansion of the Soul.

Defile not the Spirit nor deepen a Superficies.]
The Followers of Pythagoras and Plato conceive the Soul to be a Substance not
wholly separate from all Body, nor wholly inseparate; but partly separate,
partly inseparate; separable potentially, but ever inseparate actually. For
they assert three kinds of Forms, One wholly separate from matter, the
Supercelestial Intelligences; another wholly inseparable from matter, having a
Substance not subsistent by it self but dependant on matter; together with
which Matter, which is sometime dissolved by reason of its nature subject to
Mutation, this kind of Soul is dissolved also and perishes: this kind they
hold to be wholly irrational. Betwixt these they place a middle kind, the
rational Soul, differing from the Supercelestiall Intelligences, for that it
always co-exists which Matter; and from the irrational kind, for that it is
not dependant on matter; but, on the contrary, matter it is dependant on it,
and it has a proper substance potentially subsistent by it self; it is also
indivisible, as well as the supercelestial Intelligences, and performing some
works in some manner allied to theirs, being it self also busied in the
knowledge and contemplation of beings even unto the Supreme God, and for this
reason is incorruptible. This kind of Soul is always co-existent with an
Aetherial Body as it is Vehiculum, which she by continual approximation makes
also immortal: neither is this her Vehiculum inanimate in it self, but is it
self animated with the other species of the Soul the irrational, (which the
Wise call the Image of the rational Soul) adorned with Fantasy and Sense which
sees and hears it self whole through whole, and is furnished with all the
Senses and with all the rest of the irrational faculties of the Soul. Thus by
the principal faculty of this Body, Fantasy, the rational Soul, is
continually joined to such a Body and by such a Body sometimes the humane Soul
is joined with a Mortal Body by a certain affinity of Nature, the whole being
infolded in the whole enlivening Spirit of the Embryon. This Vehiculum it self
being of the nature of a Spirit. The Demons Souls differ not much from the
humane, only they are more noble and use more noble Vehicles: Moreover, they
cannot be mingled with corruptible Nature: Likewise the Souls of the Stars
are much better than the Demons, and use better Vehicules; are Bodies splendid
by reason of the greatness of the operative faculty: These Doctrines
concerning the Soul the Magi, followers of Zoroastres, seem to have used long
before. Defile not this kind of Spirit of the Soul, says the Oracle, no^
deepen it being a superficies; He calls it Superficies, not as if it had not a
triple Dimension for it is a Body; but to signify its extraordinary rarity:
nor make it become gross by accession of more matter to its Bulk: for this
Spirit of the Soul becomes gross, if it declines too much toward the mortal
Body.

There is a room for the Image also in the circumlucid place.]
He calls the Image of the Soul that part which being it self void of
irrational, is joined to the rational part, and depends upon the Vehicle
thereof: now he says that this kind of Image has a part in the circumlucid
Region; for the Soul never lays down the Vehicle adherent to her.

Leave not the dross of matter on a Precipice.]
He calls the mortal Body the Dross of matter, and exhorts that We neglect
it not being ill affected, but take care of it whilst it is in this life, to
preserve it in Health as much as possible, and that it may be pure, and in all
things else correspond with the Soul.

Carry not forth, lest going forth she have something.]
Carry not forth, meaning the Soul, out of the mortal Body lest by going forth
thou incur some danger, implying as much as to carry her forth beyond the
laws of Nature.

If thou extend the fiery mind to the work of Piety, thou shall preserve the
fluxible Body.]
Extending up thy divine Mind to the Exercise of Piety or to religious Rites,
and thou shall preserve the mortal Body more sound by performing these Rites.

Certainly out of the cavities of the Earth spring terrestrial Dogs;
Which show no true sign to mortal Man.]
Sometimes to many initiated Persons there appear, whilst they are sacrificing,
some Apparitions in the shape of Dogs and several other figures. Now the
Oracle says, that these issue out of the Receptacles of the Earth, that is,
out of the terrestial and mortal Body, and the irrational Passions planted in
it which are not yet sufficiently adorned with Reason, these are Apparitions of
the passions of the Soul in performing divine Rites; mere appearances having no
substance, and therefore not signifying any thing true.

Nature persuades that Demons are pure;
The bourgeons even of ill matter, are profitable and good.]
Nature or natural Reason persuades that Demons are Sacred, and that all
things proceeding from God who is in himself good are beneficial; and the very
bloomings of ill Matter, or the forms dependant upon Matter are such: also he
calls Matter ill, not as to it is substance, for how can the substance be bad
the bloomings whereof are beneficial and good? but for that it is ranked last
among the substances and is the least participant of good, which littleness of
good is here expressed by the Word ill: now the Oracle means that if the
bloomings of ill matter viz. of the last of substances are good, much more are
the Demons such, who are in an excellent Rank as partakeing of rational Nature
and being not mixed with mortal Nature.

The furies are Stranglers of Men.]
The furies or the Vindictive Demons clasp Men close, or restrain and drive
them from Vice and excite them to Virtue.

Let the immortal depth of the Soul be praedominant; but all thy Eyes
Extend quite upward*] Let the divine depth of thy Soul govern, and lift thou
all thy Eyes or all thy knowing faculties Upward.

O Man, the machine of boldest Nature.]
He calls Man the Machine of boldest Nature, because he attempts great things.

If thou speak often to me, thou shall see absolutely that which is spoken;
For there neither appears the caelestial concave bulk;
Nor do the Stars shine: the light of the Moon is covered,
The Earth stands not still, but all things appear Thunder.]
The Oracle speaks as from God to an initiated Person, If thou often speak to
me or call me, thou sha^t see that which thou speak, viz. Me whom thou
call every where: for then thou shall perceive nothing but Thunder all about
fire gliding up and down all over the World.

Call not on the self-conspicuous image of Nature.]
Seek not to behold the self-seeing Image of Nature, viz. of the Nature of God,
which is not visible to our Eyes: but those things which appear to initiated
Persons, as Thunder, Lightning, and all else whatsoever, are only Symbols or
Signs, not the Nature of God.

Every way to the unfashioned Soul stretch out the reins of fire.]
Draw unto thy self every way the reins of fire which appear to thee when
thou art sacr^ficing with a sincere Soul; viz. a simple and not of various
habits.

When thou see a sacred fire, without form,
Shining flashingly through the depths of the World.
Hear the voice of Fire.]
When thou be hold the divine fire void of figure brightly gliding up and
down the World and graciously smiling, listen to this Voice as bringing a most
perfect Praescence.

The Paternal mind has implanted Symbols in Souls.]
The Paternal Mind viz. the sedulous Maker of the Substance of the Soul, has
ingrafted Symbols or the Images of Intelligibles in Souls, by which every Soul
possesses in her self the reasons of beings.

Learn the Intelligible, for as much as it exists beyond thy Mind.]
Learn the Intelligible, because it exists beyond thy Mind, viz. actually; for,
though the Images of intellectual things are planted in thee by the Maker of
All, yet they are but potentially in thy Soul; but it behooves thee to have
actually the knowledge of the Intelligible.

There is a certain Intelligible which it behooves thee to comprehend with the
flower of thy Mind.]
The Supreme God, who is perfectly One, is not conceived after the same manner
as other things, but by the flower of the Mind, that is, the Supreme and
singular Part of our understanding.

For the Father perfected all things and delivered them over to the
Second Mind, which the Nations of Men call the First.]
The Father perfected All things, viz. the Intelligible Spe^ies, (for they are
absolute and perfect) and delivered them over to the second God next him to
rule and guide them: whence if anything be brought forth by this God, and
formed after the likeness of Him, and the other intelligible Substance, it
proceeds from the Supreme Father; This other God Men esteem the First, that is
they who think him the Maker of the World, to whom there is none Superior.

Intelligent Iynges do themselves also understand from the Father;
By unspeakable counsels being moved so as to understand.]
He calls Iynges the Intellectual Species which are conceived by the Father;
they themselves also being conceptive, and exciting conceptions or Notions, by
unspeakable or unutterable Counsels: by Motion here is understood Intellection
not transition, but simply the habitude to Notions so as unspeakable Counsels
is as much as (...) for speaking consists in Motion: the meaning is this, that
these Species are immovable and have a habitude to Notions not transiently as
the Soul.

Oh how the World has intellectual Guides inflexible?]
The most excellent of the Intelligible Species, and of those which are brought
down by the Immortals in this Heaven, he calls the Intellectual Guides of the
World; the Coryphaeus of whom he conceives to be a God, which is the second
from the Father. The Oracle saying that the World has inflexible Guides,
means that it is incorruptible.

The Father has snatched away himself;
Neither has he shut up his own fire in his Intellectual power.]
The Father has made himself exempt from all others; not including himself
neither in his own Intellectual Power, not in the second God who is next him;
or limiting his own Fire his own Divinity; for it is absolutely ungenerate, and
it self existing by it self; so that his Divinity is exempt from all others;
neither is it communicable to any other, although it be loved of all: That he
communicates not himself, is not out of envy, but only by reason of the
inpossibility of the thing.

The Father infuseth not fear but persuasion.]
The Father makes no impression of fear, but infuseth persuasion or love; for
He being extremely good, is not the cause of ill to any, so as to be dreadful;
but is the cause of all good to all; whence he is loved of all.

These Oracles of Zoroaster many Eminent Persons have confirmed by following
the like opinions; especially the Pythagoreans and Platonists.

PSELLUS HIS EXPOSITION of the Oracles.
There is a room for the Image also in the Circumlucid place.]
IMages, (...), with the Philosophers, are those things which are connatural to
things more Excellent then themselves, and are worse then they; as the Mind is
connatural to God, and the rational Soul to the Mind, and Nature to the
rational Soul, and the Body to Nature, and Matter to the Body: The Image of God
is the Mind; of the Mind, the rat^onal Soul; of the rational Soul, the
Irrational; of the Irrational, Nature; of Nature, the Body; of the Body,
Matter. Here the Chaldaick Oracle calls the irrational Soul the Image of the
rational, for it is connatural to it in Man, and yet worse then it. It says,
moreover, that there is a part assigned to the Image in the circumlucid Region,
that is to say, the irrational Soul, which is the Image of the rational Soul,
being purified by Virtues in this Life, after the Dissolution of the human
Life, ascends to the place above the Moon, and receives its Lot in the
Circumlucid place, that is, which shines on every side, and is splendid
throughout; for the Place beneath the Moon is circumnebulous, that is, dark on
every side: but the Lunary, partly Lucid, and partly Dark, that is, one half
bright, the other half dark; but the place above the Moon is circumlucid or
bright throughout. Now the Oracle says, that the circumlucid Place, is not
designed only for the rational Soul, but for its Image also, or the irrational
Soul is destined to the circumlucid place, when as it comes out of the Body
bright and pure, for the Grecian Doctrine asserting the irrational Soul to be
immortal, also exalts it up to the Elements under the Moon: but the Chaldaick
Oracle, it being pure and unanimous with the rational Soul, seats it in this
circumlucid Region above the Moon. These are the Doctrines of the Chald^ans.

Le^ve not the Dregs of matter on a precipice.]
By the Dregs of Matter, the Oracle understands the Body of Man consisting of
the four Elements, it speaks to the Disciple by way of Instruction and
Exhortation, thus* Not only raise up thy Soul to God, and procure that it may
rise above the Confusion of Life, but, if it be possible, leave not the Body
wherewith thou art clothed, (and which is dregs of Ma^ter, that is, a thing
neglected and rejected, the sport of Matter) in the inferior World: for this
Place, the Oracle calls a Praecipice. Our Soul being dart^d down hither from
Heaven, as from a sublime place. It exhorts therefore, that we refine the
Body (which he understands by the Dregs of Matter) by Divine fire, or that,
being stripped, we raise it up to the Ether; or that we be Exalted by God to a
place Immaterial and Incorporeal, or Corporeal but Aetherial or Caelestial,
which Elias the This bite attained; and, before him, Enoch, being Translated
from this Life into a more Divine Condition, not leaving the dregs of Matter,
or their Body, in a precipice; the Precipice is, as we said, the Terrestrial
Region.

Bring not forth, lest going forth she have something.]
This Oracle is recited by Plotinus in his Book of the Eduction of the
irrational Soul; it is an Excellent and Transcendent Exhortation. It advises,
that a Man busy not himself about the going forth of the Soul, nor take care
how it shall go out of the Body; but remit the Business of its dissolution to
the Course of Nature; for, Anxiety and Solicitude about the Solution of the
Body, and the Eduction of the Soul out of it, draws away the Soul from better
Cogitations, and busieth it in such cares that the Soul cannot be perfectly
purifyed; for if Death come upon us at such time as we are busied about this
Dissolution, the Soul goes forth not quite free, but retaining something of a
passionate Life. Passion the Chaldaean defines, A Man's sollicitous thinking of
Death; for we ought not to think of any thing, but of the more Excellent
Illuminations; neither concerning these ought we to be sollicitous, but
resigning our selves to the Angelical and Diviner powers, which raise us up,
and shutting up all the Organs of Sense in the Body and in the Soul also
without Distractive cares and sollicitudes, We must follow God, who calls us.

Some interpret this Oracle more simply; Bring it not out lest it go forth,
having something: that is, Anticipate not thy natural Death, although thou be
wholly given up to Philosophy; for as yet thou have not a complete Expiation;
So that if the Soul pass out of the Body by that way of Educting, it will go
forth retaining something of mortal Life: for if we Men are ^n the Body, as in
a Prison, (as Plato says,) certainly no Man can kill himself, but must expect
till God shall send a Necessity.

Subject not to thy Mind the vast measures of the Earth:
For the plant of Truth is not upon the Earth.
Nor measure the measures of the Sun, gathering together Canons:
He is moved by the Eternal will of the Father, not for thy sake.
Let alone the swift course of the Moon: she runs ever by the impulse of
Necessity.
The progression of the Stars was not brought forth for thy sake.
The aetherial broad-footed Flight of Birds is not veracious:
And the Dissections of Entrails and Victims, all these are toys,
The supports of gainful Cheats. Fly thou those,
If thou intend to open the sacred Paradise of piety,
Where Virtue, Wisdom, and Equity are assembled.
The Chaldaean withdraws the Disciple from all Grecian Wisdom, and teaches
him to adhere only to God, Subject not (says he) to thy Mind the vast Measures
of the Earth; for the plant of Truth is not upon Earth; that is, Enquire not
sollicitously the vast measures of the Earth, a Geographers use to do,
measuring the Earth; for the seed of Truth is not in the Earth. Nor measure the
Measures of the Sun, gathering together Canons; He is moved by the aeternal
will of the Father, not for thy sake, That is, Busy not thy self about the
Motion and Doctrine of the Stars, for they move not for thy sake, but are
perp^tually moved according to the Will of God; Let alo^e the swift course of
the Moon, she runs ever by the impulse of Necessity, That is, enquire not
anxiously the rolling motion of the Moon, for she runs not for thy sake, but is
impelled by a greater Nec^ssity. The Progression of the Stars was not brought
forth for t^y sake; that is, the Leaders of the fixed Stars and the Planets
received not (...) Essence for thy sake. The aetherial broad-footed flight of
Birds is not veracious; that is, the Art concerning Birds flying in the Air,
called Augury, observing their Flight, No^es, and P^a^ching, is not true. By,
broad-feet, he means the walking or pace of the Foot, in respect of the
Extension of the Toes in the skin. And the Dissections o^ Entrails and Victims,
all these are toys: that is, the Art of Sacrificing, which enquireth after
future Events, as well by Victims, as by inspection into the Entrails of
sacrificed Beasts, are merely toys. The supports of gainful cheats: fly thou
those, that is, fraudulent Acquisitions of gain. If thou intend to open the
sacred Paradise of Piety, where Virtue, Wisdom, and Equity are assembled. Thou
(says he) who art under my Discipline, enquire not curiously after these
things, if thou would that the sacred Paradise of piety be open to thee. The
sacred Paradise of piety, according to the Chaldaeans, is not that which the
Book of Moses describes, but the Meadow of sublimest Contemplations, in which
there are several Trees of Virtues; and the Wood, (or Trunk) of Knowledge, of
Good and Evil, that is, Dijudicative prudence which distinguishes Good from
Evil; likewise the Tree of Life, that is, the Plant of Divine Illumination,
which brings forth to the Soul, the Fruit of a more holy and better Life; In
this Paradise, therefore, grow Virtue, Wisdom, and Aequity; Virtue is one in
General, but has many Species; Wisdom comprehends within it self all the
Virtues, which the Divine Mind pronounces, as only unspeakable.

Seek thou the way of the Soul, whence or by what Order
Having served the Body, to the same order from which thou did flow,
Thou may rise up again: joining Action to sacred speech.]
That is, seek the Origin of the Soul, from whence it was produced and served
the Body, and how Men cherishing and raising it up by the Exercise of Divine
Rites, may reduce it to the place whence it came. Uniting Action to sacred
Reason, is to be understood thus. Sacred Reason (or Discourse) in us is the
Intellectual Life, or rather the supreme faculty of the Soul, which the Oracle
elsewhere styles the flower of the Mind; but this sacred Reason cannot by its
own guidance aspire to the more sublime Institution, and to the comprehension
of Divinity; the work of Piety leads it by the hand to God, by assistance of
Illuminations from thence: but the Chaldaean, by the Telestick Science,
perfects (or initiates) the Soul by the power of Materials here on Earth. To
this sacred Reason, says he, when thou have united Action, that is, joined the
Work of Initiation to the sacred Reason, or better faculty of the Soul.

Our Theologist Gregory raises the Soul to the more Divine things by reason
and Contemplation: by Reason which is in us the best and most intellectual
faculty; by Contemplation, which is an illumination coming from above: But
Plato affirms, that we may comprehend the ^ngenerate Essence by reason and
Intellect. But the Chaldaean says, that there is no other Means for us to
arrive at God, but by strengthening the Vehiculum of the Soul by material Rites;
for it supposes that the Soul is purifyed by Stones and Herbs and Charms and
is rendered expedit for Assent.

Stoop not down; for a precipice lies below on the Earth.
Drawing through the Ladder which has seven steps, beneath which
Is the throne of Necessity.]
The Oracle advises the Soul which is next to God, that she adhere only to
him with her whole mind, and bend not downwards; for there is a great Pr^cipice
betwixt God and the Earth which draws Souls down the Ladder which has seven
Steps: The Ladder of seven steps signifies the Orbs of the seven Planets; if
therefore the Soul decline, she is carried to the Earth through the seven Orbs:
but that passage through the seven Circles leads her as by so many steps to the
Throne of Necessity, whither when the Soul arriveth, she is necessitated to
suffer the terrestial World.

Never change barbarous names.]
That is, There are certain Names amongst all Nations delivered to them by God,
which have an unspeakable Power in Divine ^ites: change not these into the
Greek Dial^ct; as Seraphim and Cherubin, and Michael and Gabriel: These in the
Hebrew Dialect have an unspeakable Efficacy in divine Rites; but changed into
Greek Names, are in effectual.

The world has intellectual guides inflexible,]
The Chaldaeans assert Powers in the World, and call them (Cosmogogi) guides of
the World, for that they guide the World by provident Motions: These Powers the
Oracles call (...), Sustainers, as sustaining the whole World. Unmovable
implies their settled Power; sustentive, their Gaurdianship; these Powers they
design only by the Cause and Immobility of the Worlds: There are also other
Powers (amilicte) unplacable as being firm and not to be converted toward
these inferior things, and cause that Souls be never allured with Affections.

Labor about the Hecatine Strophalus.]
The Hecatine Strophalus is a golden Ball, in the midst whereof is a Sapphire,
they fold about it a leather Thong: it is beset all over with Characters: thus
whipping it about, they made their Invocations: these they use to call Iynges,
whether it be round or Triangular or any other Figure; and whilst they are
doing thus they make insignificant or brutish Cries, and lash the Air with
their whips. The Oracle advises to the performance of these Rites or such a
Motion of the Strophalus, as having an expressible Power. It is called
Hecatine, as being dedicated to Hecate: Hecate is a Goddess amongst the
Chaldaeans, having at her right side the Fountain of Virtues.

If thou speak often to me, thou shall see absolutely that which is spoken.
For then neither appears the Celestial concave bulk,
Nor do the Stars shine; the light of the Moon is covered,
The Earth stands not still, but all things appear Thunder.
The Lion is one of the twelf Signs of the Zodiac, and is called the House of
the Sun, whose Fountain or the cause of his Lion-formed Constellation the
Chaldaeans calls (...): now He says, That amidst the Sacred Rites thou call
this Fountain by its Name, thou shall see nothing else in Heaven but the
apparition of a Lion, neither will the Concave Bulk, or the Circumference of
Heaven, appear to thee, neither shall the Stars shine, even the Moon herself
shall be covered, and all things shall be shaken; but this Lion having Fountain
takes not away the Essence of those, but their own praedominating Existence
hides their view.

Every way to the unfashioned Soul, extend the reins of fire.]
The Oracle calls the Soul (...), that is, without form and figure, or most
simple, and most pure. Rains of fire of such a Soul are the expeditious
activity of the Theurgick life, which raises up the fiery Mind to the Divine
Light: therefore by stretching the rains of fire to the inform Soul, he means,
endeavor that all the faculties consisting both in the Intellect, Cogitat^on,
and Opinion, may receive Divine illuminations suitable to themselves. This is
the meaning of stretch the rains of fire; but Nature uses to fail, and busy
it self in the second or worse life.

Oh Man, the Machine of boldest nature.
Man is called a Machine as being framed by God with unspeakable Art: the
Oracle likewise calls him audacious Nature, as being busied about excellent
things, sometimes measuring the Course of the Stars, sometimes enquiring into
the Orders of the supernatural Powers; contemplating also the things which are
far above the Celestial Orb, and extending to discourse something of God. For
these endeavors of the Mind in Disquisition proceed from an audacious Nature:
he calls it boldness, not by Way of Reproach, but to express the forwardness of
Nature.

In the side of the sinister Hecate is a fountain of much
Virtue; which remains entire within, not emitting her Virginity.]
The Chaldaeans esteem Hecate a Goddess, seated in the middle rank, and
possessing as it were the Center of all the Powers; in her right parts they
place the Fountain of Souls, in her left, the Fountain of goods or of Virtues;
and they say, that the Fountain of Souls is prompt to Propagations, but the
Fountain of Virtues continues within the Bounds of it is own Essence, and is as
a Virgin uncorrupted: this Settledness and Immobility it receives from the
power of the Amilicti, the Implacables, is girt with a Virgin-Zone.

When thou see a sacred fire without form
Shining flashingly through the depths of the whole World,
Hear the voice of fire.]
The Oracle speaks of a Divine Light, seen by many Men, and advises, That if
any one see such a Light in some figure and form, he apply not his Mind to it,
nor esteem the Voice proceeding from thence to be true; but if he see this
without any figure or form he shall not be deceived: and whatsoever Question he
shall propose, the Answer will be most true, he call this (...) Sacrosanct, for
that it is seen with a beauty by Sacred Persons; and glides up and down
pleasantly and graciously through the Depths of the World.

Invoke not the self-conspicuous Image of Nature.]
(...), Self-i^spection, is, when the initiated person (or he who performs
Divine Rites) sees the Divine Lights: but if he who orders the Rites sees an
Apparition, this in respect of the initiated person is (...)* superinspection.
The Image which is evocated at Sacred Rites, must be intelligible and wholly
separate from bodies: but the form or Image of Nature is not every way
intelligible: for Nature is for the most part an Administrative faculty. Call
not, says he, in the Rites the self-conspicuous Image of Nature; for it will
bring thee nothing along with it but only a crowd of the four Natural Elements.

Nature persuades that Demons are pure.
The bourgeons even of ill matter are profitable and good.
Not that Nature her self persuades this, but that being called before her
presence there flows in a great Company of Demons, and many Daemonious forms
of several shapes appear raised up out of all the Elements, compounded and
shaped from all the parts of the Lunar Course, and many times appearing
pleasant and gracious they make show of an apparition of some good to the
initiated person.

The Soul of Man will in a manner clasp God to her self*
Having nothing mortal, she is wholly inebriated from God.
For she boast^ harmony, in which the mortal body exists.]
He says that the Soul forces, for that is the meaning of (...), the divine
fire into herself through immortality and purity, for then she is w^olly
inebriated, that is, she is replenished with the more excellent Life and
Illumination, and exists as it were out of herself: then the Oracle says to
her boast of Harmony; that is, Glory in the obscure and intelligible Harmony by
which thou art tied together in Arithmetical and Musical Proportions: for under
this intelligible Harmony even the mortal and compounded Body is composed,
having it is compositions derived from thence.

Let the immortal depth of the Soul be predominant, but all thy Eyes
Extend upward.]
The depth of the Soul is her threefold powers; the intellectual, the
intelligent, the opiniative. Her Eyes are the threefold cognoscitive operations
of these; for the Eye is the Symbol of Knowledge, as Life is of Appetite. Open
therefore, says he, the immortal Depth of the Soul, and extend thy
cognoscitive Powers upwards, and even thy own self (to use our own Expression)
transfer to the Lord.

Defile not the Spirit, nor deep not a Superficies.
The Chaldaeans cloth the Soul with two Garments: one they call Spiritual,
woven for it by the sensible World; the other Luciform, tenuious and
intangible, which is here termed Superficies: Defile not, says he, the
spiritual Garment of thy Soul with impurity; neither cause it is Superficies to
grow deep by certain material Additions: but preserve both in their own
Natures, one pure, the other undipt.

Seek Paradise.]
The Chaldaick Paradise is the whole Chorus of Divine powers about the Father,
and the fiery Beauties of the creative fountains: The opening thereof by piety
is the Participation of the Goods: The flaming Sword is the implacable power
which withs^ands those that approach it unworthily; to such persons it is shut,
for they are not capable of it is felicity. To the Pious it is open: to this
place tend all the Theurgick Virtues.

This Vessel the Beasts of the Earth shall inhabit.]
The Vessel is the compounded mixture of the Soul, the Beasts of the Earth are
the Demons which rove about the Earth: our life therefore being full of
passions shall be inhabited by such Bea^s; for such kinds are essentiated in
passions, and have a material Seat and Order. Wherefore such as are addicted to
passions are glued to them by assimulation, for they attract what is like them,
having a motive-faculty from the passions.

If thou extend the fiery mind to the work of Piety,
Thou shall preserve the fluxible Body.]
That is, If thou extend thy illuminated Mind upwards, and the Work of fire to
the Works of Piety, (the Works of Piety, with the Chaldaeans, are the Methods
of rites), thou shall not only render the Soul unvanquishable by Passions, but
shall also preserve thy Body ^he more healthful; for this Ordinarily is the
effect of Divine illuminations, viz. to consume the matter of the Body, and to
es^ablish health, that it be not seized either by passion or diseases.

Certainly, out of the cavities of the Earth spring terrestrial Dogs,
Which show no true sign to mortal Man*]
The speech is of material Demons: These he calls Dogs, for that they are
Executioners of souls; Terrestrial, for that they fall from Heaven, and are
rolled about the Earth. These, says he, being removed far from the Beatitude
of Divine Life, and destitute of Intellectual Contemplation, cannot
praesignifie Futures; whence all that they say or show is false, and not solid:
for they know Beings (...), by their Outsides; but, that which knows figures
(...), particularly, uses Notions indivisible and not figured.

For the Father perfected all things, and delivered them over to the second
Mind, which all Nations of men call the first.]
The first Father of the Triad, having made the Universal Frame, delivered it
over to the Mind; which Mind the whole Race of Mankind (being Ignorant of the
Paternal Excellency) call the first God: but our Doctrine holds the contrary,
viz. that the first Mind, the Son of the Great Father, made and perfected every
Creature; for the Father, in the Book of Moses, declares to the Son the Idaea
of the Production of Creatures, but the Son himself is the Maker of the Work.

The furies are Stranglers of Men.]
((...)) The reductive Angels reduce Souls to them, drawing them from general
things; but the Furies ((...)) being the Tormentors of the Natures which are
dispersed, and envious of human Souls, entangle them in material Passions; and
as it were strangle them; and not only Torture such as are full of passions,
but even those that are converted toward the immaterial Essence, for these
also coming into matter and into generation, stand in need of such
purification: for we see many Persons even of those who live holily and purely,
fall into unexpected Miseries.

The Paternal mind has implanted Symbols in Souls.]
As the Mosaic Book says, that Man was formed after the Image of God; so the
Chaldaean says, that the Maker and Father of the World sowed Symbols of his
Essence in the Souls thereof. For out of the paternal Seed, not only Souls, but
all superior Orders sprung. But in Incorporeal substances, there is one kind
of signs, viz. Incorporeal, and Individual; In the World, there are other signs
and Symbols, the unspeakable properties of God, which are far more Excellent
then the Virtues themselves.

The Souls of those who quit the Body violently are most pure.
Whosoever shall take this saying rightly, will find that it contradicts not
our Doctrine; for the Crowned Martyrs who in time of persecution leave their
Bodies by a violent End, purify and perfect their Souls: but this is not that
which the Chaldaean means. He praises all violent Death, because the Soul,
which leaves the Body with trouble, abhorrs this Life, and hates conversation
with the Body, and, rejoicing, flies up to the things above: but those Souls
which forsake this Life, their Bodies being naturally dissolved by sickness,
do regret it is propension and inclination to the Body.

Because the Soul being a bright fire by the power of the Father
Remains immortal, and is Mistress of Life,
And possesses many Completions of the cavities of the World.]
The Soul being an immaterial and incorporeal fire, exempt from all compounds,
and from the material Body, is immortal: for nothing material or dark is
commixed with her, neither is she compounded, ^o as that she may be resolved
into those things of which she consists; but she is the Mistress of Life,
enlightening the Dead with Life, she has the Complements of many Recesses, that
is, susceptive of the Government of Matter, for she is enab^ed according to her
different Virtues to dwell in different Zones of the World.

The Father infuseth not fear, but instead of perswasion]
That is, the Divine Nature is not stern and full of indignation, but sweet and
calm; whence it does not cause fear in the Natures subjected to it, but
attracts all things by persuasion and graciousnesse; for if it were formidable
and minacious, every Order of Beings would have been dissolved; None of them
being able to endure his Power. And this Doctrine, is in part esteemed true
amongst us; for God is a Light, and a fire consuming the Wicked: The Menaces
and affrightings of God are the Intermission of the Divine Goodness toward
us, by reason of our ill management of our Affairs.

The Father has snatched away himself:
Neither has he shut up his own fire in his Intellectual fire.]
The meaning of which Oracle, is this, The God of all things, who is also
termed Father, has made himself incomprehensible, not only to the first and
second Natures, and to our Souls, but even to his own Power; for the Father,
says he, has snatched himself away from every Nature: But this Doctrine is
not Orthodox; for with us the Father is known in the Son, as the Son in the
Father, and the Son is the Definition of the Father, and the Divine
supernatural World.

For the Intelligible is something, which it behooves thee to comprehend with
the flower of the Mind.]
The Soul has a power correspondent to every thing that is conceivable by the
Mind; As to sensibles, Sense; to cogitables, Cogitation; to intelligibles,
Mind. Now the Chaldaean says, that, although God is an Intelligible, yet he is
not Comprehensible by the Mind, but only by the flower of the Mind. The flower
of the Mind is the ((...)) singular power of the Soul; Since, therefore, God is
properly One, endeavor not to comprehend him by the Mind, but by the singular
power: for that which is first One, can only be apprehended by that which is
one in us, and not either by cogitation or Mind.

The unguirders of the Soul which give her breathing are easy to be loosed.]
Lest any One should say, I would free my Soul from my Body, but I cannot; the
Oracle tells us, that the powers, which thrust the Soul out of the natural
Body, and give her breathing, as it were, from the toil and trouble of the
Body, are easily loosed; that is, these faculties are free, and not restrained
by any Nature, and able to set the Body at Liberty, generously from corporeal
Bonds.

It behooves thee to hasten to the Light, and to the beams of the Father,
From whence was sent to thee a Soul clothed with much Mind.]
Seeing that the Soul has not it is Being from Seed, neither consists of
corporeal mixtures, but had its Essence from God above; therefore she ought to
turn toward Him, and to make her return to the Divine Light: for she came down
clothed with much Mind; that is, she was furnished by the Maker and Father
with many Remembrances of the Divine sayings, when she came hither, whence she
should endeavor to return by the same Remembrances.

All things are produced out of one Fire*]
This is a true Doctrine, conformable to our Religion; for all Beings, as well
intelligible, as sensible, received their Essence from God above, and are
converted to God alone; those which have being only, Essentially; those which
have being and Life, Essentially and Vitally; those which have being and Life
and Mind, Essentially and Vitally and Intellectually. From One therefore all
things came, and to One is their return: This Oracle is not to be condemned,
but is full of our Doctrine.

What the Mind speaks, it speaks by Intellection.]
When (says he) thou shall hear an articulate Voice, Thundering from above out
of Heaven, think not that the Angel or God who sends forth that Voice, did
articulate it after our manner enunciatively; but that He, according to his own
Nature, conceived it only inarticulately: but thou, according to thy own
Impotence, hear the Not on syllabically and enuntiatively. For as God
hears our Voice not vocally, so Man receives the Notions of God vocally,
every one according to the operation of his Nature.

These the Earth bewails even to their Children.]
It is meant of Atheists, that God extends his Vengeance even to their
Posterity: for the Oracle, to express the torments which they shall receive
under the Earth, says, It howles beneath for them: that is, the Place under
the Earth bellows to them, and roareth like a Lion. Whence Proclus also says,
The Composition of Souls that are of Affinity with one another, is of like
Nature; and those which are not yet loosed from the Bands of Nature, are
entangled and detained by like passions. These therefore must fulfill all
punishments, and since by natural Affinity they are infected with Pollutions,
must again be cleansed from them.

Enlarge not thy Destiny.]
The wisest of the Greeks call Nature or rather the Completion of the
Illuminat^ons which the Nature of Beings receives ((...)) Fate. Providence is
an Immediate Beneficence from God. But Fate is that which governs all our
Affairs, by the concatenation of Beings. We are subjects to Providence, when we
act Intellectually; to Fate, when corporeally. Increase not therefore, says
he, thy Fate, no^ endeavor to surmount it, but commit thy self wholly to the
Government of God.

For nothing proceeds from the paternal principality imperfect.]
The Father (says he) produces all things perfect and self-sufficient
according to their Order, but the Imbecility and Remission of the things
produced sometimes causes a Defect and Imperfection, but the Father calls
back again that Defect to Perfection; and converts it to it Self-sufficience.
Like this, is that which James the Brother of our Lord pronounces in the
beginning of his Epistle, Every perfect gift comes down from above from the
Father of Lights. For nothing proceeds Imperfect from the Perfect, and
especially when we chance to be ready to receive that which is primarily
distilled from him.

But the Paternal Mind accepts her not until she come forth.
The Paternal Mind does not admit the Impulsions of the desires of the Soul,
before she has excluded the forgetfulness of the riches which she received
from the most bountiful Father, and called back to her Memory the sacred
Watch-words which she received from him, and pronounce the good speech
imprinting in her remembrance the Symbols of the Father who begot her. For the
Soul consists of sacred Words and divine Symbols, of which those proceed from
the sacred Species, these from the divine Monads; and We are ((...)) Images of
the sacred Essences, but ((...)) Statues of the unknown Symbols. Moreover we
must know that every Soul differs from another Soul specifically, and that
there are as several species of Souls as there are Souls.

When thou see the terrestrial Demon approach, sacrifice the stone Mnizuris,
using invocation.]
The Demons that are near the Earth are by nature lying, as being far off
from the Divine knowledge, and filled with dark matter. Now if you would have
any true discourse from these, prepare an Altar, and sacrifice the stone
Mnisuris: this stone has the power of evocating the other greater Demon, who,
invisibly approaching to the material Demon, will pronounce the true solution
of demands, which he transmits to the demandant. The Oracle joyneth the
evocative Name with the sacrificing of the stone. The Chaldaean asserts some
Demons good, others ill; but our Religion defines them to be all ill, as
having by a premedi^ated defection exchanged good for ill.

Learn the Intelligible, forasmuch as it exists beyond the Mind.]
For though all things are comprehended by the Mind, yet God the first
intelligible exists without or beyond the Mind. This without you must not
understand distantially, nor according to intellectual alterity, but according
to the intelligible Excess alone, and the propriety of the existence, it being
without or beyond all Mind, whereby the superessential is manifested. For the
first intelligible Mind is Essence, beyond which is the self-intelligible.
Besides these is God, who is beyond the intelligible, and self-intelligible:
for We assert the Divinity to be neither intelligible nor self-intelligible, it
being more excellent then all Speech and Notion, so as that it is wholly
unintelligible, and unexpressible, and more to be honored by Silence, then
reverenced by wonderful Expressions. For it is more sublime then to be
reverenced, spoken, and conceived.

Intelligent Iynges do themselves also understand from the Father,
By unspeakable Counsels being moved so as to understand.]
Iynges are certain (Virtues or) Powers, next the paternal Depth, consisting of
three Triads. These understand according to the paternal Mind, which contains
their Cause solely in himself. Now the Counsels of the Father, in regard of
their intelligible sublimity, are not vocal; but the intellectual Marks of
abstract things, though understood by secondaries (or inferiors) are
understood as without speaking, and as it were abstracted from intelligible
Prolations. For as the conceptions of Souls, they understand intellectual
orders, yet understand them as immutable: So the Acts of the Intellectuals
understanding the intellectual signs, understand them as not a vocal subsisting
in unknown Existences.

CONJECTURES upon the Greek Text of the Oracles.
WHO it was that rendered these Oracles in Greek is (as we said) uncertain; much
more certain is it that they were all composed in Hexameter verse: though they
are sometimes cited indistinctly and abruptly by Patricius, seeming wholly
irreconcilable with poetic numbers; yet that the greater part of them are
Hexameters, none can deny; and whosoever shall look more cautiously upon the
rest, will find prints enough by which they may be traced and demonstrated to
have been of the same kind, though confounded in the manner of citations,
sometimes by the Authors out of which Patricius took them, sometimes by
Patricius himself, who was far more diligent to collect and digest, then
curious to distinguish them, or to regard their numbers: which defect we shall
endeavor, in some measure, to supply.

(...).
(...).] The latter part of the Hexameter, -- (...). as is that also which
immediately follows, -- (...). and the next, -- (...). That which follows is
cited again by it self afterward.

(...)] This seems to be a loose citation of two several Hemistichs, with
reference to the phrase (infinitively) not to the verse.

(...)]
Read, perhaps, (...).
(...)]


The verse requires -- (...). (...)]

Before, (...).
(...)]


Perhaps [(...)] -- (...).
(...).
(...)]


Read (...). (...)]

Perhaps, (...) the rest being a gloss. (...)]

It should be (...). (...)] Proclus reads (...) in Theolog.

(...).
(...)] Pletho reads, (...).
(...)]


Pletho, (...).
(...) (perhaps (...)]
(...)]


Distinguish, -- (...).
(...).
(...) and afterward, (...). (...)]

Perhaps, (...), etc.
(...)]


Perhaps, -- (...) (...).
(...)]


Distinguish, -- (...).
(...).
(...) --
(...)]


Distinguish, -- (...),
(...) --


(...).
(...)] Afterward cited thus, (...).
(...).
(...)]


Afterward, (...) --
(...)]


Distinguish, -- (...).
(...) --
(...).
(...)]


Read and distinguish, (...),
(...)
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).


And presently after, -- (...)
(...) --


(...).
(...)] Distinguish, -- (...)
(...)
(...).
(...)]
cited elsewhere by Patricius clearly, without [(...)] which belong to some
other place. (...)]

Distinguish, -- (...),
(...)
(...).
(...)]


Distinguish, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).


(...).
(...)] Distinguish, -- (...) (...)
(...),
(...).
(...)]


Distinguish, (...)
(...).
(...)]


Distinguish, (...),
(...).
(...)]


Distinguish, (...)
(...).


(...).
(...)] Pletho, (...). (...)]

Distinguish, -- (...),
(...).
(...)]


Proclus in Theolog. (...).

What follows under the title of (...) is very confused, the same Fragments
being often repeated.

(...).
Most of these are perfect, being put forth by Pletho and Psellus. (...).
(...) (so Pletho) (...) (read (...))
(...), etc.


The rest may be corrected by the Edition of Pletho and Psellus.

THE TABLE.
THE FIRST BOOK,
Of the CHALDAEANS. Page 1.

THE FIRST PART.
The Chaldaean Philosophers, Institution and Sects. 2

SECT. I.
Of the Chaldaean Philosophers. ibid. Chap. I. The Antiquity of the Chaldaick
Learning. ibid. II. That there were several Zoroasters. 3 III. Of the Chaldaean
Zoroaster, Institutor of the Chaldaick Philosophy. 6 IV. Of Belus, another
reputed Inventor of Sciences amongst the Chaldaeans. 8 V. Other Chaldaean
Philosophers. 9 VI. Of Berosus, who first introduced the Chaldaick Learning
into Greece. 10
SECT. II.
The Chaldaick Institution and Sects. 13 Chap. I. That all Professors of
Learning were more peculiarly termed Chaldaeans. ibid. II. Their Institution.
14 III. Sects of the Chaldaeans distinguished according to their several
Habitations. ibid. IV. Sects of the Chaldaeans distinguished according to their
several Sciences. 15
THE SECOND PART.
The Chaldaick Doctrine. 17

SECT. I.
Theology and Physic. ibid. Chap. I. Of the Eternal Being, God. 18 II. The
Ema^ation of Light or Fire from God. ibid. III. Of things eviternal or
incorporeal. 19 IV. The first Order. ibid. V. The second Order. 21 VI. The
third Order. 22 VII. Fountains and Principles. 23 VIII. Unzoned Gods and Zoned
Gods. 24 IX. Angels and Immaterial Demons. 25 X. Souls. ibid. XI. The
Supramundane Light. 27 XII. Of things Temporal or Corporeal. 28 XIII. The
Empyreal World. 29 XIV. The Ethereal Worlds. 30 XV. The Material Worlds.
ibid. XVI. Of Material Demons. 31
SECT. II.
Astrology and other Arts of Divination. 36 Chap. I. Of the Stars, fixed and
erratick* and of their presignification. 37 II. Of the Planets. 38 III. The
Divisions of the Zodiac. ibid. IV. Of the Planets considered in respect of the
Zodiac. 41 V. Aspects of the Signs and Planets. 43 VI. Schemes. 44 VII. Other
Arts of Divination. 45
SECT. III.
Magic Natural and Theurgick. 47 Chap. I. Natural Magic. ibid. II. Magical
Operations, their kinds. 48 III. Of the Tsilmenaia (or Telesmes) used for
averruncation. 49 IV. Of the Tsilmenaia used for prediction. 50 V. Theurgick
Magic. 51 VI. Theurgick Rites. 52 VII. Apparitions. 53 VIII. Material Demons
how to be repulsed. 54
SECT. IV.
Of the Gods, and Religious worship of the Chaldaeans. 56 Chap. I. Of their
Idolatrous worship of the true God. ibid. II. Worship of other Gods, Angels,
and Demons. 58 III. Worship of the Celestial Bodies. ibid. IV. Of the Sun. 59
V. Of the Moon. 61 VI. Of the Planets. 62 VII. Of the other Stars. 64 VIII. Of
fire. 65 IX. Of the Air and Earth. 66
THE SECOND BOOK.
OF THE PERSIANS.

THE FIRST PART.
The Persian Philosophers, their Sects, and Institution. 67
SECT. I.
Of the Persian Philosophers. ibid. Chap. I. Of the Persian Zoroaster,
Institutor of Philosophy amongst the Persians. ibid. II. Of Hystaspes a great
Improver of the Persian Learning. 68 III. Of Osthanes, who first introduced the
Persian Learning into Greece. 69
SECT. II.
The Institution and Sects of the Persians. Chap. I. The Persian Magi their
Institution. 70 II. The Sects, Discipline, and Manners of the Magi. 72
THE SECOND PART.
The Doctrine of the Persians. Chap. I. Theology and Physic. 73 II. Arts of
Divination. 74 III. Of the Religious Rites or Magic of the Persians. 75 IV.
The Gods of the Persians. 76
THE THIRD BOOK.
OF THE SABAEANS.

THE FIRST PART.
The Sabaean Philosophers. Chap. I. Of the Institutors of the Sabaean Sect. 80
II. Others of the Sabaean Sect. 82 III. Their Writings. 84
THE SECOND PART.
The Doctrine of the Sabaeans. 86 Chap. I. Of the Gods and Rites of the
Sabaeans. ibid. II. Other Rites of the Sabaeans contrary to the Levitical Law.
90
A TABLE Of the principal Matters of the Chaldaick Philosophy.
A
AArab Mastiaarabah. 79 Ada. 61 Adad. 59 Adonis. 59 Ether, what. 30 Air,
worshipped by the Chaldaeans. 66 Algia^eleiton. 81 Amandatus. 78 Amilicti. 23
Anaitis. 87 Angels. 25 Apotelesmes. 75 Arabians, skilful in Natural Philosophy,
Astronomy, and other Sciences. 84 Arimaspean Verses, their Subject. 6 Arts of
Divination practiced by the Chaldaeans. 45 Aristeas the Proconnesian Zoroaster.
5 Ashaphim, a Chaldaick Sect. 15 Aspects of Signs and Planets. 43 Astrology,
how far the Chaldaeans skilful in it. 36 Azizus. 63 Azonaces, Master of
Zoroaster. 9
B.
BAbylonians, a Chaldaick Sect. 14 oppose Astrology, contrary to the
Chaldaeans. 15 Bell. 57, 58, 61, 62 Belus. 8 Beltha. 61, 63, 87 Berosus. 10, 11
Borsippenes, a Chaldaick Sect. 14
C.
CHaldaean Zoroaster. 4 Chaldaeans, their Institution. 14 Chaldaeans, a
peculiar Sect of Astronomers. 16 Chaldaick Learning, how ancient. 2 Chaldaean
Zoroaster, his time. 7 Cham. 81 Characters of the Signs ancient. 39 Chiun. 62
Cidenas, a Chaldaean Mathematician. 9 Circumlucid place. 26, 27 Conciliary
Stars. 37 Cosmagogues. 23 ^tesias his History, of what Subject and time. 4
D.
Demons material. 31 Demons immaterial. 25 Demons material how to be
repulsed. 54 The apparitions of Demons. 25 Decanates, of Planets. 41
Decanates. 41 Delephat. 63 Duad. 20
E.
EArth worshipped by the Chaldaeans. 66 Its figure. 31 Edris. 83 Empyreum, what
according to the ^hald^ans. 29 Er^s Armemus, called Zoroaster. 5 Exaltations
and depressions of Planets. 41
F.
FAther. 20 Fire worshipped by the Chaldaeans. 65 Fire, why worshipped. 18 Fire
worshipped by the Sabaeans. 81 Fountains. 23 Forms, their kinds. 25
G.
GOd, how described by Zoroaster the Magus. 73 God, a fire. 18 God, one. 18
God, how worshipped by the Chaldaeans. 56 Gods, how many, according to the
Persians. 74
H.
HAdes. 31 Haistamchus. 85 Hartumim, a Chaldaick Sect. 15 Hecate. 22, 23, 24
Hecatine Strophalus. 53 Hellenism. 81 Hipparenes, a Chaldaick Sect. 14 Houses
of Planets. 41 Hypezocos. 23 Hystaspes. 68
I.
IDaeas. 21 Idolatry, how ancient with the Chaldaeans. 58 Intelligibles. 19
Intellectuals. 22 Intelligibles, and Intellectuals. 21 Interpreters, Stars. 37
Iulian's two Chaldaick Philosophers. 51 Jupiter Heliopolites. 60 Iuvan. 81
Iynges. 21
L.
LIght, how it emanates from God. 18 Light Supramundane. 27
M.
MAgi, Chaldaeans so called. 47 Magi, who, and whence so called. 70, 71 Magic
Natural. 47, 48, 49, 50 Magi wherein differ from the Egyptian Priests. 72
Markoli. 81 Marmaridius, a Chaldaean Philosopher. 9 Material World. 30
Mazaloth. 64 Mecashephim, a Chaldaick Sect. 15 Mind, first, paternal. 20 Moon
worshipped by the Chaldaeans. 61 Monad. 20 Monimus. 63 Myleta. 63
N.
NA^^rianus, a Chaldaean Mathematician. 9 Nan^^a. 78 Nararib. 80 N^rgal. 63
Nizur^^. 53
O
ORchenes, a Chaldaick Sect. 14 Osthanes. 68
P.
PAmphilian Zoroaster. 5 Persian Zoroaster, his time. 68 Persian Zoroaster. 5
Persian Magi. 70, 71, 72 Persians sacrifize to the Sun, and the other Planets.
76, 77 Planets worshipped by the Chaldaeans. 62 Planets. 38 Polytheism
Chaldaick, its ground. 65 Power of the Father. 20 Principles. 23 Prince of the
Magi. 72 Proconnesian Zoroaster. 5 Professors of Learning. 13
R.
REmphan. 62
S.
SAbaeans what they sacrifiz'd. 87 Their Gods. 86 Their Books 85 Sacaea. 78
Sacrifice, its use according to the Chaldaeans. 52 Sands. 78 Schemes, who
first erected. 44 Self-inspection, what. 54 Seleucus, a Chaldaean
Mathematician. 9 Serug. 81 Seth and Edris, their Books possessed by the
Sabaeans. 83 Signs, dignoscitive of Demons by whom invented. 52 Soul, what.
25 Stars 24. next the Zodiac. 37 Succoth-benoth. 64 Sudinus, a Chaldaean
Mathematician. 9 Sun worshipped by the Chaldaeans. 59 By the Sabaeans. 82
Super-inspection, what. 53 Synoches. 21
T.
TAchurith, King of the Persians, first Author of the Sabaean Religion. 80
Tamtam. 85 Telesmes for Prediction. 50 Telesmes, of two sorts. 49 Telesmes for
Aver^uncation not invented by Apollonius Tyanaeus. 49 Teletarchs. 21 Telestick
Science. 51 Teucer, a Chaldaean Philosoper. 9 Teraphim, what. 50 Terms of
Planets. 41 Terms. 40 Theurgy, what. 15 Triad triple. 20 Triplicities of
Planets. 41 Triplicities. 40
V.
VEhicle of the Soul. 26 Unzoned Gods. 24
W
WInds worshipped. 78
Z.
ZArmocenidas, a Chaldaean Philosopher. 9 Zerodast, first Institutor of
Learnning amongst the Sabaeans. 80 Zodiac, how first divided. 38 Zodiac, Gods
ascribed to the Signs. 39 Zoned Gods. 24 Zoromasdres, a Chaldaean Philosopher.
9 Zoroasters how many. 3 Zoroaster the name whence derived. 3 Zoroaster, Master
to Pythagoras 6 Zoroaster, why several persons so called. 6
A TABLE OF PHILOSOPHERS Mentioned in the History of the Chaldaick and Greek
Philosophy.
ABavis, Pyth. chapter 23. 24. Abroteles, chapter 24. Acmonides, ibid. Arousiladas,
ibid. Acusilaus, Preface. Adicus, Pyth. chapter 24. Adras^us, Arist. chapter 14. 17.
Aegeas, Pyth. chapter 24. Aegon, ibid. Aemon, ibid. Aeneas, ibid. Aenesidemus,
ibid. Aeschines. Aeschrion, Arist. chapter 14. Aethiops, Aristip. chapter 9. Aetius,
Pyth. chapter 24. Agelas, ibid. Agesarchus, ibid. Agesidemus, ibid. Agylas, ibid.
Alcias, ibid. Alcimachus, ibid. Alcimus, Stilp. chapter 3. Alcuneion, Pyth. chapter 24.
Alexander Aprodisaeus, Arist. chapter 17. Alexinus. Aliochus, Pyth. chapter 24.
Al^meon. Alopecus, Pyth. chapter 24. Ammonius, Arist. chapter 17. Amoetus, Pyth. chapter
24. Amyclus, Pla. chapter 13. Anacharsis. Anaxagoras. Anaxarchus. Anaximander.
Anaximenes. Anchypillus, Mened. chapter 1. Andronicus, Arist. chapter 17. Animenes,
Pyth. chapter 24. Anniceris. Anthocharides, Pyth. chapter 24. Antimedon, ibid.
Antiochus, Tim. chapter 3. Antipater, Aristip. chapter 9. Antipater, the Sidonian.
Antisthenes. Apellico, Arist. chapter 16. Apollonius Cronus. Apollodorus
Cepotyrannus, Epic. chapter 16. Arcesila^s. Arc^elaus. Archippus, of Samus, Pyth.
chapter 24. Archippus, of Tarentum, ibid. Arestades, ibid. Arete, Aristip. chapter 8.
Arignote, Pyth. chapter 21. Arimnestus, Pyth. chapter 21. Aristaeus, Pyth. chapter 24.
Aristagoras, Socr. chapter 3. Aristangelus, Pyth. chapter 24. Aristeas, Chal. lib. 1.
p. sect. chapter 2. Aristides, Stilp. chapter 3. Aristides, Pyth. chapter 24. Aristides, a
Locrian, Plat. chapter 13.* Aristippus. Aristippus, the younger, Aristip. chapter 9.
Aristippus, of Tarentum, Pyth. chapter 24. Aristo, Arist. chapter 17. Aristoclides,
Pyth. chapter 24. Aristocrates, ibid. Aristodemus, Preface, Thal. chapter 5.
Aristomenes, Pyth. chapter 24. Aristonymus, Pla. chapter 13. Aristotle. Aristotle, the
Cyrenaean. Aristoxemus, Arist. chapter 14. Arytus, Pyth. chapter 24. Asclepiades, Pyth.
Mened. Aspasia, Socr. chapter 3. Aspasius, Arist. chapter 17. Asteas, Pyth. chapter 24.
Astraeus, Pyth. chapter 21. Astylus, Pyth. chapter 24. Athamas, Pyth. Athenodorus, of
Soli, Zen. chapter 9. Athenodorus, of Tharsis, Arist. chapter 17. Athosion, Pyth. chapter
24. Attlcus, Arist. chapter 17. Averroes, ibid. Avicenna, ibid. Axiothea, Pla. chapter
13. Spe^s. chapter 2. Azonaces, Chald. lib. 1. p. 1. sect. 1. c. 5.
B.
BAlielyma, Pyth. chapter 24. Basilides, Epic. chapter 16. Bathilaus, Pyth. chapter 24.
Belus, Chald. lib. 1. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 4. Berosus, Chald. lib. 1. p. 1. sect.
chapter 6. Bias. Bio, Pyth. chapter 24. Bion. Boethus, Arist. chapter 17. Brias, Pyth. chapter
24. Bruthius, ibid. Bryas, ibid. Brontinus, ibid. Bryso, Socr. chapter 3.
Bulagoras, Pyth. chapter 24. Butherus, ibid.
C.
CAenias, Pyth. chapter 24. Calibrotus, ibid. Caliphon, Pyth. chapter 23. Callippus, an
Athenian, Pla. chapter 13. Arist. chapter 14. Callippus, a Corinthian, Zen. chapter 9.
Callisthenes, Arist. chapter 14. Carneades. Carophantidas, Pyth. chapter 24. Cebes.
Cerambus, Pyth. chapter 24. Chaerephon, Socr. chapter 17. Chaeron, Pla. chapter 13.
Charondas, Pyth. chapter 24. Chilas, ibid. Chilon. Chilonis, Pyth. chapter 24.
Chrysippus. Chrysippus, a Tyrrhene, Pyth. c. 24. Cleaechma, ibid. Cleanor,
ibid. Cleanthes. Clearatus, Pyth. chapter 24. Clearchus, of Soli, Arist. chapter 14.
Cleobulina, Cleob. chapter 1. Cleobulus. Cleon, Pyth. chapter 24. Cleophron, ibid.
Cleosthenes, ibid. Clinagoras, ibid. Clinias, ibid. Clinomachus. Clitarchus,
Stilp. chapter 3. Clitomachus. Clitus, Arist. chapter 14. Colaes, Pyth. chapter 24.
Colotes, Epic. Coriscus, Pla. chapter 13. Cranius, Pyth. chapter 24. Crantor. Crates.
Crito. Crito, the Aegean, Pyth. chapter 24. Critolaus.
D.
DAcydes, Pyth. chapter 24. Damarmenus, ibid. Damascenus Jo. Arist. c. 17.
Damascenus, Nicho. ibid. Damascius, ibib. Damocles, Pyth. chapter 24. Damon, ibid.
Damotages, ibid. Dardanius, ibid. Demetrius of Amphipolis, Pla. c. 13.
Demetrius Lacon, Epic. chapter 16. Demetrius Phalereus. Democritus. Demon, Pyth.
chapter 24. Demosthenes, ibid. Deonax, ibid. Dexippus, Arist. chapter 17. Dexitheus,
Pyth. chapter 24. Dicaearchus, Arist. chapter 14. Dicaearchus, Pyth. chapter 24. Dicon,
ibid. Dinarchus, ibid. Dinocrates, ibid. Diocles, a Phliasian, ibid. Diocles, a
Sybarite, ibid. Dioclides, Stilp. chapter 1. Diogenes. Diogenes, of Seleucia, Epic.
chapter 16. Diogenes, of Tharsus, ibid. Diodorus, the Aspendian, Pyth. c. 24.
Diodorus Cronus. Diodorus, the Peripatetick. Dion, Pla. chapter 13. Dionysius,
Epic. chapter 16. Dionysius, a Colophonian, Menip. Dioscorides, Timon chapter 3.
Dioteles, Arist. chapter 14. Diotyma, Socr. chapter 3. Diphylus, Stilp. chapter 3. Drymon,
Pyth. chapter 24. Dymas, ibid.
E.
ECcelo, Pyth. chapter 24 Echecrates, a Phlyasian, ibid. Echecrates, a Tarentine,
ibid. Echecrates, a Woman, ib^d. Echecratides, Arist. c. 14. Egesinus.
Eiriscus, Pyth. chapter 24. Elicaon, ibid. Empedocles. Empedus, Pyth. chapter 24.
Epicurus. Epimenides. Epiphron, Pyth. chapter 24. Episylus, ibid. Epitimides,
Aristip. chapter 9. Erastus, Pla. chapter 13. Eratus, Pyth. chapter 24. Erus Armenius,
Chald. lib. 1. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 2. Estiaeus, Pyth. chapter 24. Euaemon, Pla. chapter
13. Euaeus, Pyth. chapter 24. Euagon, Pla. chapter 13. Euander. Euander, of Crotona,
Pyth. chapter 24. Euander, of Metapontum, ibid. Euander, of Tarentum, ibid. Euanor,
ibid. Eubulides. Eubulus, Timon* chapter 3. Euclid. Eucratides, Epic. chapter 16.
Eudemus, of Cyprus, Arist. chapter 14. Eudemus, of Rhodes, ibid. Eudoxus. Euelthon,
Pyth. c. 24. Euetes, ibid. Eumeridias ibid. Euphantus. Eu^hemus, ibid.
Euphranor, Timon chapter 3. Euphratus, Pla. chapter 13. Eurymedon, Pyth. chapter 24.
Euriphamus, ibid. Eurycrates, ibid. Eurytus, ibid. Eustathius, Arist. chapter 17.
Euthenus, Pyth. chapter 24. Euthycles, ibid. Euthymus, ibid. Euxithi^s, Arist. chapter
14.
G.
GLauco. Glorippus, Pyth. chapter 24. Glycinus, ibid. Gyptius, ibid.
H.
HEgesias. Hegesilaus, see Egesin^s. Heloris, Pyth. chapter 24. Heracleodorus, Pla.
chapter 13. Hera^lides, an Aenian, Pla. chapter 13. Heraclides, the Peripatetick.
Heraclides, of Pontus, Pla. chapter 13. Arist. chapter 14. Heraclides, the Sceptick,
Timon chapter 3. Heraclitus. Hermachus, Epic. chapter 12. Herminus, Arist. chapter 17.
Hermodamas, Pyth. c. 2. Hermodorus, Pla. chapter 13. Herodotus, Timon chapter 3.
Hestiaeus, Pla. chapter 13. Hieronymus, of Rhodes, Arist. chapter 14. Hipparchia.
Hipparchides, Pyth. chapter 24. Hipparchus, Arist. chapter 14. Hippasus. Hippochus,
Chald. l. 4. p. chapter 2. Hippomedon, Pyth. chapter 24. Hippocrates, Democr. chapter
Hippon, Pyth. chapter 24. Hippostatus, ibid. Hipposthenes, of Crotona, ibid.
Hipposthenes, of Cyzicus, ibid. Hippothales, Pla. chapter 13. Hystaspes, Chald. l.
2. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 2.
I.
JAmblicus, Arist. chapter 17. Iccus, Pyth. chapter 24. Ichthyas. Itanaeas, Pyth. chapter
24.
L.
LAcon, Pyth. chapter 24. Lacrates, ibid. Lacydes. Laphaon, Pyth. chapter 24.
Lasthenia, Pla. chapter 13. Speus. chapter 2. Lasthenia, a Pythagorean, Pyth. chapter 24.
Lasus, Preface. Leocritus, Pyth. chapter 24. Leocydes, ibid. Leon, Arist. chapter 14.
Leon, a Pythagorean, Pyth. chapter 24. Leophantus, Preface. Leophron, Pyth. chapter 24.
Leptines, ibid. Leucippus. Lyco. Lyco, a Pythagorean, Pyth. chapter 24. Lysides,
ibid. Lysias, Epic. chapter 16. Lysibius, Pyth. chapter 24. Lysiphanes, Epic. chapter 1.
Lysis, Pyth. chapter 24. Lytamnus, ibid.
M.
MAgentinus, Arist. chapter 17. Malias, Pyth. chapter 24. Marinus, Arist. chapter 17.
Marmaridius, Chal. lib. 1. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 5. Maximus, Aristot. chapter 17.
Mededimus, Pla. chapter 13. Megistias, Pyth. chapter 24. Melanippus, ibid. Melisies,
ibid. Melissus. Menedemus, the Cynick. Menedemus, the Eretrian. Menestius,
Pyth. chapter 24. Menippus. Menodorus, Epic. chapter 10. Menodotus, Timon chapter 3. Menon,
Pyth. chapter 24. Meton, ibid. Metopus, ibid. Metrocles. Metrodorus, surnamed the
Theoretick, Stilp. chapter 3. Metrodorus, the Chian, Epic. chapter 4. Milias, Pyth. chapter
24. Milo, ibid. Miltiades, ibid. Mimnomachus, ibid. Mnason, Arist. chapter 14.
Mnesarchus, Pyth. chapter 21. 24. Mnesibulus, Pyth. chapter 24. Mnesistratus, Pla. chapter
13. Moschus, Mened. chapter 1. Muya, Pyth. chapter 21. Muyes, Pyth. chapter 24. Myrmex,
Stilpo chapter 3.
N.
NAstas, Pyth. chapter 24. Nausiphanes, a Pythagorean, Epic. chapter 4. Nausitheus,
Pyth. chapter 24. Neocritus, ibid. Nicanor, Arist. chapter 14. Nicephorus Blemmydes,
Arist. c. 17. Niolochus, Tim. chapter 3.
O.
OCcelo, Pyth. chapter 24. Occlo, ibid. Ocylus, ibid. Odius, ibid. Olympiodorus,
Arist. chapter 17. Onatus, Pyth. chapter 24. Opsimus, ibid. Oresandrus, ibid. Osthanes,
Chald. lib. 2. p. 1. sect. 1. chap. 3.
P.
PAchymerius Georg. Arist. chapter 17. Paction, Pyth. Paeonius, Still. chapter 3.
Palaephatus, Arist. chapter 14. Pamphilius, Epic. chapter 4. Panaetius. Parmenides.
Parmiscus, Pyth. Pasciles, Stilp. chapter 1. Pasicrates, Arist. chapter 14. Periander.
Phaedo. Phaedo, a Pythagorean, Pyth. chapter 24. Phaesidemus, Stilp. chapter 3.
Phancelus, Pyth. chapter 24. Phanias, Arist. chapter 14. Phanton, Pyth. chapter 24.
Pherecydes. Philippus, an Opuntian, Pla. chapter 13. Philo, a Theban, Zen. chapter 9.
Philo, the Peripatetick, Arist. chapter 14. Philodemus, Pyth. chapter 24. Philolaus.
Philolaus, of Tarentum, Pyth. chapter 24. Philonides, ibid. Philoponus, Arist. chapter
17. Philtes, Pyth. chapter 24. Phiatias, ibid. Phormio, Pla. chapter 13. Phrasidemus,
Arist. chapter 14. Phrinychus, Pyth. chapter 24. Phrontides, ibid. Phyacyades, ibid.
Phytius, ibid. Piserrydus, ibid. Pisicrates, ibid. Pithon, Pla. chapter 13.
Pittacus. Plato. Plato the yourger, Arist. chapter 14. Plisthenes. Plutarch the
younger, Arist. chapter 17. Polemaeus, Pythag. chapter 24. Polemarchus, ibid. Polemo.
Poliades, Pyth. chapter 24. Polymnestus, ibid. Polystratus, Epic. chapter 17.
Posidonius. Praxiphanes, Epic. chapter 4. Praytus, Tim. chapter 3. Proclus, Arist. chapter
17. Proclus, a Pythagorean, Pyth. chapter 24. Prorus, ibid. Protagoras. Protarchus,
Epic. chapter 16. Proxenus, a Posidonian, Pyth. chapter 24. Proxenus, a Sybarite, ibid.
Psellus, Arist. chapter 17. Ptolemaeus, a Cyrenaean, Tim. chapter 3. Ptolemaeus the
Black, Epic. chapter 16. Ptolemaeus the White, ibid, Ptolemaeus, of Cyrene, Tim.
chapter 3. Pylyctor, Pyth. chapter 24. Pyrrho. Pyrrho the younger, Tim. chapter 3. Pyrrho,
a Pythagorean, Pyth. chapter 24. Pysirronde, ibid. Pythagoras. Pythodotus.
R.
RHexibius, Pyth. chapter 24. Rhodippus, ibid.
S.
SAlaccra, Pyth. chapter Sara, Pyth. chapter 21. Sarpedon, Tim. chapter 3. Saturninus,
ibid. Satyrus, Arist. chapter 14. Sextus, Tim. chapter 3. Sycas, Pyth. chapter 24. Silius,
ibid. Simichus, Pyth. chapter 23. Simmias. Simmias, the Megarick, Stilp. chapter 3.
Simon. Simplicius, Aristot. chapter 17. Simus, Pyth. chapter 24. Smichaeas, ibid.
Socrates. Socrates, a Bythinian, Arist. chapter 14. Solon. Sosistratus, Pyth. chapter
24. Sosthenes, ibid. Sostratius, ibid. Sotion, Arist. chapter 17. Speusippus.
Sphaerus, Zeno chapter 9. Sthenonides, Pyth. chapter 24. Stilpo. Strato. Syrianus,
Aristot. chapter 17.
T.
TAurus, Arist. chapter 17. Telauges, Pyth. chapter 21. Terpsion, Socr. chapter 17. Teucer,
Chald. lib. 1. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 5. Thales. Theano, wife of Brontino, Pyth.
chapter 24. Theano, wife of Pythagoras, c. 21. 24. Themistius, Arist. chapter 17.
Theodas, Tim. chapter 3. Theodectus, Arist. chapter 14. Theodorus the Atheist.
Theodorus Metochita, Arist. chapter Theodorus, of Cyrene, Pyth. chapter 24. Theodorus,
of Tarentum, ibid. Theophrastus. Theoridas, Pyth. chapter 24. Thrascus, ibid.
Thrasydemus, ibid. Thrasymachus, Stilp. chapter 1. Thrasymedes, Pyth. chapter 24.
Timaeus, the Crotonian, ibid. Timaeus, the Cyzicene, Pla. chapter 13. Timaeus, the
Locrian, Pyth. chapter 24. Timaeus, the Parian, ibid. Timagoras, Stilp. chapter 3.
Timaras, Pyth. chapter 24. Timarchus, Arist. chapter 14. Timesianax, Pyth. chapter 24.
Timolaus, Pla. chapter 13. Timosthenes, Pyth. chapter 24. Tydas, ibid. Tymasius, ibid.
Tymicha, ibid. Tyrsenes, ibid. Tyrsenus, ibid.
X.
XAnthus, Tim. chapter 3. Xenocides, Pyth. chapter 24. Xenon, ibid. Xenocrates.
Xenophanes. Xenophantes, Pyth. chapter 24. Xenophilus, ibid. Xentas, ibid.
Z.
ZAbratus, Pyth. chapter 5. Zaleucus, Pyth. c. 24. Zamoxis, Pyth. chapter 21.
Zarmocenidas, Chal. l. 1. p. 1. sect. 1. c. 5. Zeno. Zeno Eleates. Zeno, the
Epicurean, Stilp. chapter 3. Zen. chapter 9. Epic. chapter 16. Zeno, of Tarsis. Zeuxes,
Tim. chapter 3. Zeuxippus, ibid. Zopyrus, a Colophronian, Menipp. Zopyrus, a
Tarentine, Pyth. chapter 24. Zoroaster, the Chaldaean, Chald. l. 1. p. 1. sect. 1.
chapter 2. 3. Zoroaster, the Babylonian, Chald. lib. 1. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 2.
Zoroaster, the Bactrian, ibid. Zoroaster, the Pamphilian, ibid. Zoroaster, the
Persian, ibid. lib. 2. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 1. Zoroaster, the Proconnesian,
Chald. lib. 1. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 2. Zoromasdres, Chal. lib. 1. p. 1. sect. c.
5.
A TABLE Of the principal Matters in the Doctrines of the Chaldaick and Greek
Philosophers.
A.
ABduction, Arist. doctr. p. 1. chapter 4. Abstinence, Pyth. doct. p. 1. chapter 5. p.
3. sect. 1. chapter 1. Accident, Arist. doct. p. 1. c. 6. p. 4. c. 3. doubted.
Sext. lib. 2. chapter 21. Achilles, an argument, Parmenid. chapter 2. Zeno Eleat. chapter
2. Acme, Arist. doct. p. 4. chapter 25. Acousmata, Pyth. doct. p. 1. chapter 8. Act,
Arist. doctr. p. 4. chapter 4. Action, Plat. doctr. chapter 2. Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter
12. p. 2. chapter 10. Active life, Plat. doct. chapter 2. Addition, see Augmentation;
doubted, Sext. lib. 3. chapter 10. Adjurative axioms, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 18.
Adnexe axioms, Sto. doct. p. 1. c. 21. Adverse axioms, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 22.
Aequinox, Thal. chapter 8. sect. 1. Anaximand. chapter 1. Aestimation, Sto. doctr. p.
2. chapter 12. Ether, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 14. Anaximand. chapter 2.
sect. 3. Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 2. Pyth. doctr. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 3. Aetna,
Epic. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 2. Affections or passions, Socr. chapter 5. sect. 2.
Aristip. chapter 4. sect. 2. Epic. doctr. p. 1. chapter 4. Affirmative propositions,
Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 3. Age, Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter 25. Agent, Democr. chapter
9. sect. 1. Agent Intellect, Arist. doct. p. 2. c. 23. Air, Anaxim. chapter 2.
sect. 1. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 11. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 3. 4. Timaeus,
Emped. chap. 7. worshipped, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 9. Alteration,
Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter 9. doubted, Sext. lib. 3. chapter 13. Alterity. Amber,
Thal. chapter 6. sect. 4. Amphiboly, Sto. doct. p. 1. chap. 9. slighted, Sext. lib.
2. chapter 23. Analogy, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 6. 9. Analysis, Plat. doct. chapter 5.
Analytical method, Plat. chapter 7. Angels, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. c. 9.
Anger, Plat. doct. chapter 32. Animals, Anaximand. chapter 2. sect. 3. Anaxag. chapter 2.
sect. 5. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 14. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 5. Timaeus.
Anomaly of words, Sto. doct. p. 1. c. 9. Antidivision, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 11.
Appellations, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 9. Appetite, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 24. Sto.
doct. p. 2. chapter 2. 3. 4. Argument, Plat. doctr. chapter 6. Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter
6. Aristocracy, Plat. doct. chapter 33. Arithmetic, Socr. chapter 5. Plat. chapter 7.
Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. Arithmomancy, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 15.
Articles, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 9. Art, Plat. chapter 8. Art about life, Sext. lib.
3. chapter 24. doubted, Sext. lib. 3. chapter 25. 26. 27. 31. Aspects, Chald. lib. 1.
p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 5. Assimilation, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 6. Assumption, Eucl.
chapter 2. Sto. doct. Astrology judiciary, Chal. lib. 1. p. 2. chapter 2. Thal. chapter 8.
sect. 5. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 3. chapter 4. denied, Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 4.
chapter 7. Astronomy, Thal. chapter 8. Plat. chapter 7. Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 4. Atoms,
Leucippus; Democr. chapter 9. sect. 1. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. c. 4. etc.
Avernal places, Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 16. Augmentation, what. Arist.
doct. p. 2. chapter 9. doubted, Sext. lib. 3. chapter 9. Augury, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2.
sect. 2. chapter 7. Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. c. 15. Autumn, Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter
11. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 4. Axioms, or Propositions, Clinom. Sto.
doct. p. 1. chapter 19.
B.
BAld, an argument. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 34. Barbarism, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 9.
Bear lesser, Thal. chapter 8. sect. 2. Beatitude, Aristip. chapter 4. sect. 2. Pla.
doct. chapter 27. Beauty, Pla. doct. chapter 8. Beneficence, Pla. chapter 8. Epic. doct. p.
3. chapter 29. Bodies, Arcesil. chapter 2. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 2. Timaeus. are
passible; Thal. chapter 6. sect. 5. divisible into infinite; Thal. chapter 6. sect. 5.
Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 1. continuous; Thal. chapter 6. sect. 5. incomprehensible;
Sext. lib. 3. c. 5. Body of man, Pla. doct. chapter 17. 23. Breath, Plat. Anaximen,
chapter 2. sect. 3. Broad Iron, why it swims, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 8. Democr. chapter
9. sect. 1.
C.
CAnonick Music, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 2. Dialectick, so called; Epic. doct.
p. 1. Cases, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 19. Categoremes, Clinom. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter
19. denied, Stilpo chapter 2. Categorical syllogism, Pla. doct. c. 6. Categories
ten, Pl. doct. chapter 6. Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. p. 4. chapter Cause, Arist. doct.
p. 2. chapter 3. doubted; Sext. lib. 3. chapter 3. Cause first; Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect.
4. chapter 3. Chance, what. Arist. doct. p. 11. chapter 3. Charms, Pyth. doct. p. 3.
sect. 5. chapter 2. Chasmes (meteors) Ari. doct. p. 2. c. 12. Circumcurrent
phantasy, Carnea. c. 2. Clemency, Heges. c. 2. Pla. doct. c. 23. Clouds,
Anaximen. chapter 2. sect. 3. Xenophan. c. 2. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 4. c. 9.
Coaequals, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Cold, Anaximen. chapter 2. sect. 3. Pla. doct.
chapter 19. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 15. Cogitation, Pla. doct. chapter 4. Arist.
doct. p. 2. chapter 19. Democr. chapter 9. sect. 8. Epic. doct. p. Color, Sto. doct.
p. 3. c. 16. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. c. 7. Epic. doct. p. (...) sect. 1. c.
15. Comets, Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 3. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 12. Sto. doct. p. 3.
chapter 2. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 3. Democr. chapter 9. sect. 5. Anaxag. chapter 2.
sect. 3. Commonwealth, Pla. doctr. chapter 33. Compellative proposition, Sto. doct.
p. 1. chapter 18. Composition, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 6. p. 3. chap. 13. Compositum,
Arist. doct. p. 4. chapter Comprehension, Aristip. chapter 4. sect. 1. Sto. doctr. p.
1. chapter 4. 6. denied, Arcesil. chapter 2. Lacydes. Carnead. chapter 2. Philo.
Comprehensive phantasy, Arcesil. chapter 2. Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 4. denied; Philo.
Concoction, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 13. Concupiscible part of the Soul; Pla.
doctr. chapter 17. 23. Confusion, Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 13. Congruities and less
than Congruities; Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 19. Conjunct axioms, Sto. doct. p. 1. c.
21. Conjunct syllogismes, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 28. Conjunctions, Sto. doct. p.
1. chapter 9. Connex, what; Diod. chapter 2. Philo. which true; which false; ibid.
Cons^ctation, or aequipollence of propositions, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 3.
Consultation, Pla. chapter 8. Contact, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 10. Contemplation,
Pla. doct. chapter 2. Continence, Pyth. doctr. p. 3. chapter 3. Socr. c. 5. sect. 2.
Epic. doct. p. 3. c. 14. Contingent proposition, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 3.
Contingents, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 13. Contradictories, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter
2. Contraries, Pla. chapter 8. Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 6.
Contrary axioms, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 22. Conversation, Soc^. chapter 5. sect. 2.
Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 2. chapter 1. Conversion of propositions, Arist. doct. p.
1. chapter 3. Conversion of terms, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 9. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter
14. Corruption, Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter 9. Country, the world is our Country;
Theod. chapter 2. Criteries, Aristip. chapter 4. sect. 1. Pla. doct. chapter 4. Sto. doct.
p. 1. chapter 2. Parmenid. chapter 2. Epic. doct. p. 1. chapter 1. doubted; Sext. l. 2. c.
3. etc. denied, Carn. c. 12. Crocodilite, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 32.
D.
Demons, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 9. 16. sect. 3. chapter 6. 7. 8. Thal.
chapter 6. sect. 3. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 3. chapter 2. Plato, chapter 15. Epic. doct. p.
2. sect. 2. chapter 6. Darkness, Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 16. Death, Anaxag. chapter 2.
sect. 5. Socr. chapter 12. Heges. c. 1. 2. Euclid. c. 3. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 25.
Pyth. doct. p. ^ chapter 5. Epic. doctr. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 23. Decad, Pyth. doct.
p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 14. Decanate, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 3. 4.
Declarative axiom of the more and of the less, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 21.
Defective reason, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 32. Definition, Pla. doct. chapter 5. Arist.
doct. p. 1. chapter 6. Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 11. doubted, Sext. lib. 2. chapter 16.
Democracy, Plat. doct. chapter 33. Demonstration, Arist. d^ct. p. 1. chapter 5. S. 0.
doct. doubted, Sext. lib. 2. chapter 13. Detraction or substraction; see
Diminution. Dew, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 12. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 15.
Diaetetick, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 5. chapter 1. Dialectick, Euclid. chapter 2. Pla.
chapter 6. Pla. doct. chapter 3. 4. 5. Clitom. Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 1. 6. Sto doct.
p. 1. chapter 1. Zeno Eleat. chapter 2. taken away; Antisth. chapter 2. Epic. doct.
Dialogue, Pla. chapter 15. Diapason, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 2. c. 4. 5. Diapente,
Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 4. Diatetessaron, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter
4. Dicibles, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 18. p. 3. chapter 20. Diminution, Arist. doct.
p. 2. chapter 9. Sto. doct. p. 1. c. 6. doubted; Sext. l. 3. c. 10. Diseases of the
Body, Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 5. Pla. doct. chapter 22. Timaeus; Of the Mind; Sto.
doct. Dispositions. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 5. Disputation, Arcesil. chapter 2. Arist.
doct. p. 1. chapter 16. Epic. doct. p. Distinctions, Pla. chapter 8. Diverse, Arist.
doct. p. 4. chapter 6. see Alterity. Divination, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. c. 7.
lib. 2. p. 2. chapter 2. Division, Pla. doct. chapter 5. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 2.
doubted, Sext. lib. 2. chapter 18. 19. 20. Dogmatize, Pla. chapter 15. denied; Arcesil.
chapter 2. Sext. lib. 1. chapter 6. Dominative reason, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 32. Dreams,
Pla. doct. chapter 15. 18. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 22. Democr. chapter 9. sect. 8. Epic.
doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 2^. Duad, Xenocr. chapter 2. Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 1.
chapter 6. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 1. Dubitative axiom, Sto. doct. p. 1. c. 18.
E.
EArth, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 15. Thal. chapter 6. sect. 5. chapter 6.
sect. 1. Pla. doct. chapter Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 7. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 12.
Pyth. doct. Timaeus; Empedocles chapter 7. Hippasus, Xenophanes, chapter 2. Parmenides
chapter 2. Democrit. chapter 9. sect. 6. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 1. worshipped,
Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 9. lib. 2. p. 2. chapter 4. Earthquakes, Thal.
chapter 6. sect. 1. Anaximen. chapter 2. sect. 3. Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 3. Archelaus.
Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 12. Democr. chapter 9. sect. 6. Epic. doctrine, p. 2. sect.
3. chapter 2. Echo, Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 5. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 17. Epic. doct.
Eclipse, Thal. chapter 8. sect. 3. Anaximander chapter 2. sect. 2. Anaximenes chapter 2.
sect. 2. Sto. doct. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 5. p. 3. chapter 9. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect.
4. chapter 5. E^nephias, Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter 11. Efficient cause, Arist. doct.
p. 2. c. 3. Electrum, Eubulides. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 32. Element, Thal. chapter 6.
sect. 1. Pla. c. 7. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 7. 8. 12. Elements, Pla. doct. chapter
12. 13. 15. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 8. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 6. Pyth. doct. p. 3.
sect. 4. chapter 4. Timaeus. Empedocles chapter 7. Xenophanes chapter 2. Parmedides chapter 2.
Empyreal World, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 13. End, or chief good; Socr.
chapter 5. sect. 2. Aristip. chapter 4. sect. 2. Stilpo c. 2. Pl. doct. chapter 27.
Carneades, chapter 2. Arist. doct. Sto. doct. p. 2. chapter 10. Democr. chapter 9. sect. 9.
Epic. doctrine p. Elench, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 6. Ennead, Pyth. doct. p. 2.
sect. 1. c. 13. Envy, what. Socr. chapter 5. sect. 2. Enthymeme, Arist. doct. p. 1.
chapter 4. Eristick, Euclid, chapter 2. Stilpo, chapter 2. Essence, Pla. chapter 2. Ethick,
Socr. chapter Pla. chapter 6. Pla. doct. chapter Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 1. Sto. doctr. p.
1. chap. 1. p. 2. chapter 1. Epic. doct. p. 3. doubted, Sext. Etymology, Sto. doct.
p. 1. chapter 9. Even and odd, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 3. Evidence of sense,
Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 3. Evident incursion, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 6. Eupathies,
Sto. doct. p. 2. chapter 6. Examination of our selves, Pyth. doct. p. 1. chapter 10.
Example, Aristot, doctrine, p. 1. chapter 4. Eyes, Pla. doct. chapter 18.
F.
FAculties, or powers of the Soul, Pla. doct. chapter 23. Faith, Pla. doct. chapter 7.
Falling stars, Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 3. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 2. Epic. doctr.
p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 8. False, Arist. doct. p. 4. c. False phantasy, Sto. doct.
p. 1. chapter 4. Fate, Pla. doct. chapter 26. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 19. Pyth. doct. p.
3. sect. 3. chapter 3. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 2. Felicity, Heges. chapter 2.
Pla. chapter 8. Epic. doct. p. 3. chapter 1. Figure, how it causes motion, Arist.
doctr. p. 2. chapter 8. Democr. chap. 9. sect. 1. Figures Geometrical suit with the
Elements, Pla. doct. chapter 13. Figures of Syllogismes, Arist. doctr. p. 1. chapter 4.
of hypothetical Syllogismes, Pla. doctr. chap. 6. Sto. doct. Final cause,
Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter 3. Fire, Arcesil. chapter 2. Arist. doct. p. 4. chapter Pyth.
doct. p. Timaeus. Empedocles, chapter 7. Hippasus. Heraclitus, chapter 8. sect. 1. Sto.
doct. p. 3. chapter 5. 7. worshipped, Chald. lib. 1. p* 2. sect. 4. chapter 8. lib. 2.
p. 2. chapter 4. lib. 3. p. 1. chapter 2. Firebrands, meteors, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter
2. Flesh, Pla. doct. chapter 17. Form, Arist. doctr. p. 4. chapter Sto. doctr. p. 1.
chapter 15. Form of Syllogismes, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 4. Formal cause, Aristot.
doctr. p. 2. chapter 3. Fortitude, Socr. chap. 5. sect. 2. Pla. doct. chapter 28.
Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 1. Sto. doct. p. 2. chapter 9. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 1.
chapter 2. Epic. doct. p. 3. c. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. Fortune, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter
3. Pyth. doctr. p. 3. sect. 3. chapter 3. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 2.
Fountains, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 7. Arist. doct. p. 2. ^ Epic.
doct. p. 3. chapter 6. how caused, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 1. Freewill, Pla. doct. chapter
26. Epic. doct. p. 3. chapter 6. Friendship, Socr. chapter 3. sect. 2. Hegesias, chapter 2.
Annice^is, chapter 2. Theodorus, chapter 2. Pla. doct. chapter 21. Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter
1. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 2. chapter 2. Epic. doct. p. 3. chapter 30. Its kinds,
Plato, chapter 8. Frost, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 12. Sto. doctr. p. 3. chapter 11. Epic.
doctr. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 14.
G.
GAlaxie, Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 2. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 12. Parmenides, chapter 2.
Generation and corruption, Archelaus. Arist. doct. p. 2. c. 9. Sto. doct. p. 3.
chapter 14. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 4. Democr. chapter 9. sect. 1. Epic. doct.
p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 17. doubted; Sext. lib. 3. chapter 14. denied; Empedocles, chapter
7. Parmenides, chapter 2. Melissus, chapter 2. Generation of living Creatures, Sto.
doct. p. 3. chapter 16. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 6. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect.
3. chapter 9. Genus, what; Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 6. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 12.
Geometry, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 7. Socr. chap. 5. Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter
2. Geometrical Propositions, Thales, chapter 5. sect. 1. 2. Euclid. chapter 3. Pla. chapter
7. Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. c. 2. 3. God, Chald. l. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 1.
sect. 4. chapter 1. lib. 2. p. 2. chapter 1. Thal. chapter 6. sect. 2. Anaximander, chapter 2.
sect. 2. Anaximenes, chapter 2. sect. 2. Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 1. Socrat. c. 5.
sect. 1. Stilpo chapter 1. Theodorus, c. 1. Plat. doct. chapter 10. Arist. doct. p. 4.
chapter 8. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 17. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 3. chap. 1. Timaeus,
Xenophanes, chapter 2. Melissus, chapter 2. Zeno Eleat. chapter 3. Democr. chap. 9. sect.
8. Protagoras. Sext. lib. 3. c. 1. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 3. Gods,
Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 2. Euclid, chapter 3. Xenocrat. chapter 2. Pyth.
doctr. p. 3. sect. 3. chap. 2. Gods younger, makers of Men, Pla. doct. chapter 16.
Good, Euclid. chapter 2. Menedemus, chapter l2. Plat. chapter 8. Plat. doct. chap. 27.
Clitomachus. Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 1. Sto. doctr. p. 2. chapter 5. doubted, Sext.
lib. 3. chapter 23. Government, Plat. chapter 8. Gratitude, Epic. doct. p. 3. chapter 29.
Gravity, Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 1. Grief, Aristip. chap. 5. sect. 2. Pla. chapter
32. Gulfs, (Meteors) Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 2.
H.
HAbit, a Category; Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Hail, Anaximenes, chap. 2. sect.
3. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 12. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 11. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect.
4. chapter 14. Halos, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 12. Epic. doctr. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter
15. Hand, Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 5. Harmony, Pyth. doctr. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 6.
Hate, Hegesias. Health, Al^maeon. Hearing, Plat. doct. chapter 19. Arist. doct. p.
2. chapter 17. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 16. Pyth. doct. p. 2. chap. 17. Emped. chapter 7.
Alcmaeon, Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 13. Heat, Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 1.
chapter 15: Hegemonick, Plat. doct. chapter 23. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 16. Alcmaeon.
Democrit. chapter 9. sect. 8. Heaven, Anaximander, chapter 2. sect. 2. Anaximenes, c.
2. sect. 2. Anaxag. chap. 2. sect. 2. Plat. doct. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 7.
Emped. chapter 7. Heavy and light, Plat. doct. chapter 20. Heptad, Pythag. doctr. p. 2.
sect. 1. chapter 11. Heroes, Thal. chapter ^. sect. 3. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 3. chapter 2.
Sto. doct. Hesper, Pyth. doct. ^ Timaeus. Hexad, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter
10. Hieroscopy, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 7. Homoiomeras, Anaxag. chapter
2. sect. 1. Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Honest and profitable the same, Socr. chapter
5. sect. 2. Sto. doct. Horned reason, Diodorus, chapter 2. Eubulides, Sto. doct. p.
1. chapter 32. Hot, Pl. doct. chapter 19. Humanity, Plato, chapter 8. Hydromancy, Pyth.
doct. p. 3. sect. 2. chapter 4. Hypate, Pythag. doctr. p. 2. sect. 2. c. 2. 4.
Hypothetical Proposition, Pla. doct. chapter 5. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 15.
Hypothetical Syllogism, Pl. doct. chapter 6. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 28.
I.
ICe, Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 4. Idea, Plat^,
chapter 4. Pl. doct. chapter 9. Timaeus; Parmenides chapter 3. Identity, Timaeus. Idolatry,
Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 3. lib. 3. p. 1. chapter 1. 2. Ignorance,
Arcesilaus, chapter 2. Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 5. Theod. chapter 2. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter
9. Ill, Aristip. chapter 4. sect. 2. Theodor. chapter 2. Sto. doctr. doubted, Sext.
lib. 3. chapter 23. denied, Euclid chapter 2. Image of the Soul, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2.
sect. 1. chapter 10. Imagination, Pla. doctr. chapter 7. Immortal, aeternal substances,
Arist. doct. p. 4. chapter 7. Imperative proposition, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 18.
Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 3. Imperfect syllogysm, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 4.
Impossible proposition, Arist. doctr. p. 1. chapter 3. Sto. doct. Imprecative
proposition, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 18. Incomprehensible, all things, Xenophan.
chapter 2. Inconcoction, Aristot. doctr. p. 2. chapter 13. Indefinite proposition,
Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 3. Indemonstrables, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 29.
Indifference, Theod. chapter 2. Indifferents, Sto. doctr. p. 2. chapter 11. doubted;
Sext. lib. 3. chapter 23. denied; Antisthenes, chapter 2. Indignation, Arist. doct. p.
3. chap. 1. Indolence, Aristip. chapter 4. sect. 2. Epic. doct. Induction, Socr.
chapter 4. Theodor. chapter 2. Plat. chap. 7. 15. Pl. doct. chap. 5. Arist. doctr. p.
1. chapter 4. doubted; Sext. lib. 2. chapter 15. Inexplicable reason, Sto. doctr. p. 1.
chapter 32. Infant, Alcmaeon, Democr. chap. 9. sect. 7. Inference, Euclid. chapter 2.
Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 26. Infinite, Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter 4. Infinity,
Anaximander, chapter 2. sect. 1. Insects, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 24. Instance,
Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 4. Intellect, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 23. Epic. doct. p.
2. sect. 3. chapter 17. Intellection, Democr. chapter 9. sect. 8. Intellection of
Primaries and Secondaries, Pla. doct. chapter 4. Intellectual number, Pyth. doct.
p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 1. Intellectuals, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 6.
Intelligences, Arist. doct. p. 4. chapter 9. Intelligibles, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2.
sect. 1. chapter Pyth. doctr. p. 3. sect. 3. chapter 2. Intelligibles and
Intellectuals, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. ^. chapter 5. Interrogation, Sto. doct.
p. 1. chapter 18. Interrogation, or argument, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 26. Irascible
part of the Soul, Pla. doct. 17. 23. Irony, Socr. chapter 4. Irrational Creatures
have reason, Sext. lib. 1. chapter 13. Irrational Soul, Plat. doct. chapter 25.
Judgment, Aristip. chapter 4. sect. 1. Plat. doct. chapter 4. C^rneades, chapter 2. Sto.
doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Jus, right; Epic. doct. p. 3. chapter 25. etc. Just, Archelaus,
Aristip. chapter 2. sect. 3. Theodor. chapter 2. Justice, Socr. chapter 5. sect. 2. Plato,
chapter 8. Pl. doct. chapter 28. Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 1. Sto. doctr. p. 2. chapter 9.
Epic. doct. p. 3. chapter 24.
K.
KNowledge, Socr. chapter 5. sect. 1. denied, Arcesil. chapter 2.
L.
LAw, Solon, chapter 5. 6. 7. Plat. chapter 8. Law-making, Pyth. doctr. p. 3. sect. 2.
chapter 6. Least things, Heraclitus, chap. 7. sect. 1. Letters, Sto. doct. p. 1.
chapter 9. Liberal Sciences taken away, Antisth. chapter 2. Liberality, Socr. chapter 5.
sect. 2. Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 1. Epic. doct. p. 3. chapter 17. Lichanus, Pyth.
doct. p. 2. chapter 25. Life, Hegesias. Pla. doct. chapter 2. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter
25. Light, Pla. doct. chapter 18. Light emanating from God, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2.
sect. 1. chapter 2. Light supramundane, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 11.
Lightning, Anaximander, chapter 2. sect. 2. Anaximenes, chapter 2. sect. 3. Anaxag. chapter
2. sect. 3. Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter 12. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 11. Epic. doct. p.
2. sect. 4. chapter 12. Like to, or transcending, an axiom, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter
18. Line, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 1. Liquidity and concretion, Democrit.
chapter 9. sect. 3. Liver, Plat. doct. chapter 23. Living creatures, Anaxag. chapter 2.
sect. 5. chapter 4. sect. 5. chapter 3. sect. 5. Archelaus, Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 16.
Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 5. Timaeus, Heraclitus, chapter 7. sect. 4.
Lodestone, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 4. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 6. Logic,
Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 1. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 1. Looking-glass, Plat. doct. p.
3. sect. 1. chapter 7. Empeaocles, chapter 7. Lying reason, Eubulides, Sto. doctr. p.
1. chapter 32.
M.
Magic, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 3. Magic natural, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2.
sect. 3. chapter 1. 2. Magnanimity, Socr. chapter 5. sect. 2. Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 1.
Epic. doct. p. 3. chapter 18. Magnificence, Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 3. Man,
Heraclitus, chapter 7. sect. 4. Mankind without beginning, Pythag. doct. p. 3.
sect. 4. chapter 6. Marrow, Pla. doct. chapter 17. Mathematick, Plat. doct. chapter 7.
Speusippus, chap. 2. Pyth. doctrine. p. 2. chapter 2. Matter, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 5.
Plat. doct. chapter 8. Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter 2. p. 4. chapter Sto. doctr. p. 3. chap.
4. Timaeus. Matter fluid, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 5. Protagoras. Matter of
syllogismes, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 4. Mean affection, Plat. doct. chapter 29. Mean
state, Aristip. chapter 4. sect. 2. Medicine, Plat. chapter 8. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect.
5. Mediocrity, Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 1. Medium of a syllogism, Arist. doct. p.
1. chapter 4. Meekness, Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 1. Epic. doct. p. 3. chapter 15.
Memory, what; Plat. doct. c. 4. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 20. Men, how first
generated, Parmenides chapter 2. Mese, Pyth. doctr. p. 2. sect. 2. chap. 2. 4.
Metaphysick, Aristot. doctr. part 4. chapter 1. Meteors, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 12.
Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 4. Method, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 33. Metalls, Arist.
doctr. p. 2. chapter 12. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 5. Mind, Thal. chapter 6. sect.
4. Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 1. Speusippus, chap. 2. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter
8. Democritus, chapter 9. sect. 8. Timaeus. Archelaus. Minerals, Arist. doct. p. 2.
chapter 12. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 5. Misling, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 12.
Mist, ibid. Mistion, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 5. Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 1. Arist. doct.
p. 2. chapter 11. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 13. Mixed syllogism, Pla. doct. chapter 6. Modal
proposition, Aristot. doct. p. 1. chapter 3. Modesty, Pla. doct. chapter 32. Arist. p.
3. chapter 1. Epic. doctr. p. 3. chap. 16. Monad, Xenocrat. chap. 2. Pyth. doct. p.
2. sect. 1. chapter 5. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 1. Monochord, its canon, Pyth. doct* p.
2. sect. 2. chapter 6. Monsters, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 2. Moods of Hypothetick
syllogismes, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 29. Moon, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 5. Anaximand.
chapter 2. sect. 2. Anaximenes, chapter 2. sect. 2. Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 2. Pla. doct.
chapter 14. Sto. doctr. p. 3. chapter 10. Pyth. doctr. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 3. Timaeus.
Empedocles, chapter 7. Alcmaeon. Hipp^sus. Heraclitus, chapter 7. sect. 2. Xenophanes,
chapter 2. Leucippus. Democrit. chapter 9. sect. 5. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 5.
Worshipped; Chald. l. 1. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 5. lib. 2. p. 2. chapter 4. Moral
Philosophy, Socr. chapter 5. Motion, Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 4. Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter
2. 5. p. 2. chapter 4. 5. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 15. Pythag. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter
4. doubted, Sext. lib. 3. chapter 8. d^ny'd, Diodorus, chapter 2. Melissus, chapter 2. Zeno
Eleat. chapter 2. Motive faculty, Arist. doctrine, p. 2. chapter 24. Motive qualities,
Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter 8. Mover first, proved, Arist. doct. p. 11. chapter 6.
Mower, a Reas^n, Sto. doctrine p. 1. Music, Plato, chapter 7. Pla. doct. chapter 8.
Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 2. Music of the Planets, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 2.
chapter 2. Music of the Spears, Pyth. doct. p. 4. sect. 4. chapter 3. taken away,
Antisth. chapter 2. Institution by Music, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 7.
Medicine by Music, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 8.
N.
NAmes, Pla. doct. chapter 6. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 10. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3.
chapter 2. Nature, Arist. d^ctr. p. 2. chapter 2. 3. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 18.
Empedocles, chapter 7. Necessary axi^m, Sto. doctrine, p. 1. chapter 23. Nec^ssary
proposition, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 32. Necessity, Arist. doct. p. ^. chapter 3.
Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 19. Timaeus. Necessity, or Providence, Thal. c. 6. sect.
2. The Negative, a Reason, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 32. Negative Proposition, Plat.
doctr. chapter 5. Arist. doct. p. 1. (...). 3. denied, Menedem. chapter 2. Neither
preferred nor rejected, Arcesilaus chapter 2. Sto. doctrine, p. 2. chapter 12. Neuter
Categoremes, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 19. Nete, Pythag. doctrine, p. 2. sect. 2.
chapter 2. 4. Night, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 5. Nilus, ibid. Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 4.
Democr. chapter 9. (...) 6. Epic. doctr. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 3. Nobility, Pla. chapter
8. The Nobody (a Reason) Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 32. Not-bodies, Sto. doctrine,
part 3. chapter 20. Not-conclusive Reasons, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 30.
Not-syllogistick conclusive Reasons, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chap. 31. Notion, what,
Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 3. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 9. Number, Pyth. doct. p. 2.
sect. 1. chapter 1. 2. 3. 4. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 1. doubted, Sext. lib. 3. chapter 18.
Nutrition, Plat. doctr. chapter 17. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 9. Nutrition of the
World, Philolaus. Nutritive faculty, Aristot. doct. p. 2. chapter 16.
O.
OBedience, Socrat. chapter 5. sect. 2. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 2. chapter 5. Oblique
Cases, Sto. doctrine, p. 1. chapter 19. Observance, Epicur. doctrine, p. 3. chapter 29.
The Occult, (a Reason) Eubulides. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 32. Odd and even, Pyth.
doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 3. Odor, Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter 17. Oeconomick, Socr.
chapter 5. sect. 3. Arist. doctrine, p. 3. chapter 1. Offenses why to be pardoned,
Hegesias. O^sices, Arcesil. chapter 2. Sto. doct. p. 2. chapter 13. Ogdoad, Pyth.
doctr. p. 4. chapter 6. Xenophanes, chapter 2. Parmenides, chapter 2. Melissus, chapter 2.
Oneiromancy, Chald. l. 1. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 7. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter
4. Onomancy, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. c. 15. Opinion, Pla. doct. chapter 4.
Parmenid. chapter 2. Epic. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Opposites, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 2.
Opposition of propositions, Arist. doctrine, p. 1. chapter 3. Optative proposition,
Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 18.
P.
PAedeutick, Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 1. Pain, Aristip. c. 4. sect. 2. Theod.
chapter 2. Paradox, Sto. doct. p. 2. chapter 15. Paradoxal axiom, Sto. doctrine, p. 1.
chapter 23. Paramese, Pyth. doctrine, p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 2. Parelies, Anaxag. chapter
2. sect. 3. Paronymous terms, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Particular proposition,
Plat. doctr. chapter 5. Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 3. Partition, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter
11. Parypate, Pythag. doctr. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 2. Passion, Plato, doctr. chapter
32. A Category, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. p. 2. chapter 10. Sto. doct. p. 2. chapter 7.
Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 19. Passion of the Mind, Socr. c. 5. sect. 2.
Aristip. chapter 4. sect. 2. Epic. doct. p. 1. chapter 4. Patience, Socr. chapter 5. sect.
2. Patient Intellect, Arist. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 9. Percontation, Sto.
doct. p. 1. chapter 18. Perfect syllogism, Arist. doctr. p. 1. chapter 4. Pestilence,
Epic. doctrine, p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 17. Phantasm, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 4.
Phantaston, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 4. Phantasy, Pla. doct. chapter 4. Arcesil. c. 2.
Carneades, chapter 2. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 19. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 4. Phasmes
(meteors) Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 2. Philosopher, Pla. doct. chapter 1. 2.
Philosophy, Socrat. chapter 5. sect. 1. Pla. doct. chapter 1. Philo. Arist. doct. p. 1.
chapter 1. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 1. Pythag. chapter Pyth. doct. p. 3. chapter 1. Parmeneids,
chapter 2. Epic. doct. chapter 1. Plegm, Pla. doct. chapter 22. Physic, Chald. lib. 1. p.
2. sect. 1. lib. 2. p. 2. chapter 1. Socrat. chapter 5. Aristip. chapter 4. Pla. c. 6.
^Pla. doct. chapter 7. Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter 1. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 1. Pyth.
doctr. p. 3. sect. 4. Epic. doct. p. 2. rejected, Antisthenes, chap. 2. Sext.
lib. Physiognomy, Pythag. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Piety, Socrat. chapter 5. sect. 2.
Epicur. doctrine p. 3. chapter 29. Piety to the dead, Pythag. doctr. p. 3. sect. 2.
chapter 4. Place, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 4. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 21. doubted, Sext.
lib. 3. chapter 16. denied, Zeno Eleat. chapter 3. Planets, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. c. 1.
Pla. doct. chapter 14. Pyth. doctr. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 2. Timaeus. Alcmaeon. Their
Music; Pythag. doctr. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 2. 4. Worshipped; Chald. lib. 1. p.
2. sect. 4. chapter 6. lib. 2. p. 2. chapter 4. lib. 3. p. 2. chapter 1. Plants, Arist.
doctr. p. 2. chapter 14. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 12. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 5.
Pleasant, whether any thing or not; Hegesias. Pleasure, Aristip. chapter 4. sect.
2. Heges. Antisthen. Plat. doctr. chapter 32. Annicer. chapter 2. Theod. chapter 2. Epic.
doctr. p. 3. chapter 2. 3. 4. Point, Pyth. doctr. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 1. p. 3. sect.
4. chapter 1. Politic, Thal. chapter 10. Solon, chapter 4. 5. 7. Socr. chapter 5. sect. 4.
Pla. doct. chapter 33. Arist. doctr. p. 3. chap. 3. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 2.
Pores, Pla. doct. chapter 21. Position, a Category, Arist. doctr. p. 1. chapter 2.
Possession, Arist. doctrine, p. 1. chapter 2. Possible, Arist. doct. p. 4. chapter
Possible axioms, S^o. doct. p. 1. c. 23. Possible propositions, Arist doct. p.
1. chapter 23. Power, Pla. chapter 8. Arist. doct. p. 4. chapter Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 15.
Practick Intellect, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 23. Practick knowledge preferred,
Socr. chapter 5. Practick Philosophy, Pla. doct. chapter 3. Arist. doctr. p. 1. c. 1.
Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 1. Praecedents, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 1. Praedicates,
see Categoremes; denied, Stilpo, chapter 2. Praenotions, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 8.
Epic. doct. 1. chapter 3. Praeter-offices, Arcesil. chapter 2. Sto. doct. p. 2. chapter 14.
Prayers, Socr. chapter 5. sect. 2. Prayer, not delightful to the Gods, Stilpo, chapter
1. Preferred, Arcesilaus, chapter 2. Sto. doct. p. 2. chapter 12. Prester, Anaximander,
chapter 2. sect. 2. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 12. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 11. Epic. doct.
p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 10. Primum mobile, Aristot. doctr. p. 2. chapter 7. Principle,
Thal. chapter 6. sect. 1. Principles, That. chapter 6. sect. 1. Anaximander, chapter 2.
sect. 1. Anaximenes, chapter 2. sect. 1. Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 1. Archelaus. Socr.
chapter 5. sect. 1. Diodorus, chapter 2. Pla. doctr. Arist. doct. p. Sto. doct. p. 3.
chapter 3. Pythag. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 1. ^imaeus. Hippasus. Heraclitus, chapter
8. sect. 1. Parmenides, c. 2. Melissus, chapter 2. Democr. chapter 9. sect. 1.
Principle complex, Arist. doct. p. 4. chapter 2. Principles (an Order of Spirits)
Chal. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 7. Private prudence, Epic. doct. p. 3. chapter 9.
Privatives, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Probable axiom, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 4.
23. Probable phantasy, Carneades, chapter 2. Clitomachus. Sto. doctrine p. 1. chap.
4. Problem, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 6. Dialectick Problem, Arist. doct. ibid.
Proposition, Arist. doct. ibid. Proprium, Arist. doct. ibid. Providence, Thal.
chapter 6. sect. 2. Socr. chap. 5. sect. 1. Plat. chapter Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 17.
Pyth. doct. doubted; Sext. denied; Epic. doct. p. Prudence, Aristip. chapter 4.
sect. 3. Prudence, Plat. doctr. chapter 28. Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 1. Sto. doct. p.
2. c. 9. Epic. doct. p. 3. chapter 8. Pure proposition, Arist. doctrine, p. 1. chapter
3. Putrefaction, Arist. doctr. p. 2. chap. 13.
Q.
QUalitatives, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 15. Quality, Plat. doctr. chap. 11. Arist.
doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 15. Epicur. doctrine, p. 2. sect. 1.
chapter 12. etc. Quantity, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Qu^escent reason, Sto.
doctrine p. 1. chapter 32. Quintessence, Arist. doct. disallowed, Arcesil. chapter 2.
Quodammodotatives, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 16. Quodammodotatives, as to others,
Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 17.
R.
RAin, Anaximenes, chapter 2. sect. 3. Arist. doct. p. 2. chap. 12. Sto. doct. p.
3. chapter 11. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 13. Rainbow, Anaximenes, chapter 2.
sect. 3. Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 3. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 12. Sto. doct. p. 3.
chapter 11. Pythag. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 3. Epic. doctr. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 15.
Rational Phantasy, Sto. doctrine, p. 1. chap. 18. Rational Soul, Plat. doct.
chapter 25. Reason, Heges. chapter 2. Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 5. Plat. doctr. chapter 4.
Alcmaeon. Sext. Emp. lib. 1. chapter 13. Reason, or argument, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter
26. Reasonable axioms, Sto. doctrine, p. 1. chapter 23. Reciprocal axioms, Sto.
doctr. p. 1. chapter 23. Reciprocal reasons, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 32. Reciprocally
active and passive categoremes, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 19. Rectitudes,
Arcesilaus, chapter 2. Sto. doct. p. 2. chapter 13. Rejected, Sto. doct. p. 2. chapter 12.
Relatives, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Relative opposites, Aristot. doct. p. 1.
chap. 2. Reminiscence, Socr. chap. 5. sect. 1. Pla. doctr. chapter 4. Arist. doct.
p. 2. chapter 20. Reputation, Sto. doctrine, part 2. chapter 12. Resisting Bodies, Pla.
doct. chapter 19. Respiration, Pla. doctr. chap. 21. Timaeus. Rest, Arist. doct. p.
2. chapter 5. doubted, Sext. lib. 3. chapter 15. Reverence of Parents, Pyth. doct. p.
3. sect. 2. chapter 1. Rhetorical method, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 23. Rhetorical
syllogism, Plat. doctrine, chapter 3. Rhetoric, Plat. doctr. chapter 8. ^litomach.
Arist. doct. p. ^ c. 1. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 1. Riches, Aristip. chapter 4. sect.
2. Hegesias, chapter 2. Sto. doct. Right case, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 19. Right
categorems, Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 19. Right reason, Epicur. doctr. p. 3. chapter 6.
Right-speaking, Plat. chap. 8. Rigor, Pla. doct. chapter 19. Rivers, Arist. doct.
p. 2. chapter 12. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 3. Rough, Plat. doct. chapter 19.
S.
SAme, Arist. doct. p. 4. chapter 6. Sapours, Pla. doctr. chapter 19. Arist. doct. p.
2. chapter 17. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 15. Skepticism, Sext. Emp. Sceptick
phrases, Sext. lib. 1. chapter 26. Schemes, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 6.
Science, Pla. chapter 8. Pla. doct. chapter 4. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 1. denied, Arcesil.
chapter 2. Sciential number, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 2. Sea, Anaxag. chapter 2.
sect. 4. Archelaus. Empedocles, chapter 7. Democr. chapter 9. sect. 6. Epic. doct. p.
2. sect. 3. c. 3. Heraclitus, chapter 7. sect. 3. Secrecy, Pyth. doct. p. chapter 11.
Seeing, Pla. doct. chapter Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 17. Selas, Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter
11. Sensation, Democr. chapter 9. sect. 8. Aristip. chapter 4. sect. 1. Sext. Sense,
^la. doctr. chapter 4. Arcesil. chapter 2. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 3. 16. Pyth. doct. p.
3. sect. 4. chapter 7. Timaeus. Parmenid. chapter 2. Democr. chapter 9. sect. 8. Epic.
doct. p. l. c. 2. p. 2. sect. 3. c. 10. Sense conduces nothing to Reason;
Hegesias. Sensitive faculty, Aristot. doct. p. 2. chapter 17. Sensible phantasy
Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 24. Separate State of the Soul, Socr. chapter 5. sect. 1.
Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 9. Timaeus, denied, Anaxagoras chap. 2. sect. 5.
Sexes, Democrit. c. 9. sect. 7. Anaxag. chapter 3. sect. 5. Sickness, Pyth. Anaxag.
chapter 2. sect. 5. Pla. doct. chapter 22. Timaeus. Alcmaeon. Sickness and infirmity of
Mind, Sto. doctr. p. 2. chapter 8. Sight, Pla. chapter 18. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 16.
Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 7. Epic. doctr. p. 2. sect. 3. chap. 11. 12.
Signs, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 2. c. 3. Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 25. doubted,
Sext. lib. 2. chapter 11. Signs of Summer and Winter, Anaximen. chapter 2. sect. 2.
Significants and Significates, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 9. Silence, Pyth. doctr. p.
1. chapter 4. p. 3. sect. 1. chapter 1. Similitude, Euclid. chapter 2. Simple axioms, Sto.
doctrine, p. 1. chapter 3. Simple propositions, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 3. Singular
propositions, Aristot. doctr. p. 1. chapter 3. Skin, Pla. doct. chapter 17. Sleep,
Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 5. Euclid. chapter 3. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 20. Epic. doct.
p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 21. Sluggish reason, Sto. doct. p. 1. c. 32. p. 3. chapter 19.
Smelling, Plat. doct. chapter 19. Arist. doct. p. 4. chapter 17. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter
16. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 7. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 14. Snow,
Anaximen. chapter 2. sect. 3. Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 11. Epic. doctr. p. 2. sect.
4. chapter 14. That it is black, Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 3. Sobriety, Epic. doct. p.
3. chapter 13. Solaecism, Sto. (...), part 1. chapter 9. Sophismes, Pla. doctr. chapter 6.
Aristot. doctr. p. 1. chapter 6. Sto. doctr. p. 1. chap. 32. rejected, Sext. lib.
2. chapter 22. Sophist, Pla. doct. chapter 34. Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 6. Sorites,
Eubulides, Sto. doctrine, p. 1. chapter 32. Soul, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter
10. Thal. chapter 6. sect. 4. Socrat. chapter 5. sect. 1. Pla. chapter 8. Pla. doct. chapter
24. 25. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 15. p. 3. chapter 1. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 16. Pyth.
doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 7. Timaeus. Empedocl. chapter 7. Alcmaeon. Heraclitus chapter
7. sect. 4. Xenophan. chapter 2. Democrit. chapter 9. sect. 8. Protagoras. Epicur.
doctrine, p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 9. Soul of the World, Thal. Pla. doct. chapter 14.
Timaeus. Heraclitus, chapter 7. sect. 1. Sound, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 17. Epic.
doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 15. Species, Arist. doct. Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 12.
doubted, Sext. denied, Stilpo, chapter 2. Speaking, Epicur. doctr. p. 2. sect. 3.
chap. 20. Speculative Science, rejected, Socrat. chapter 5. Speech, Pla. doct. chapter
4. Arist. doctr. p. 1. chap. 3. Sto. doctrine, p. 1. chapter 10. Spears,
Anaximander, chapter 2. sect. 2. Arist. doct. p. 4. chapter 9. Pythag. doct. p. 2.
sect. 4. chapter 3. Spleen, Pla. doct. chapter 23. Spring, Sto. doctr. p. 3. chapter 2.
Pythag. doct. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 4. Springs, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 12. see
Fountains. Square, Pythag. doctrine p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 1. Stars, Chald, lib. 1.
p. 2. sect. 2. c. 1. Thal. chapter 6. sect. 5. Anaximand. chapter 2. sect. 2. Anaximen.
chapter 2. sect. 2. Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 2. Archelaus, Pla. doct. chapter 14. Sto.
doct. p. 3. chapter 8. Arist. doctr. p. 2. chapter 7. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 3.
Empedocles, chapter 7. Alcmaeon. Heraclitus, chapter 7. sect. 2. Xenophanes, chapter 2.
Leucippus. Democritus, chapter 9. sect. 5. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 1. 2. 3.
4. 5. Worshipped, Chald. l. 1. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 7. falling Stars, Anaxag. chapter
2. sect. 3. Stereometry, Pla. doct. chapter 7. Stones, Epic. doctrine, p. 2. sect.
3. chapter 5. Streaks, (Meteors) Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 12. Subdivision, Sto. doct.
p. 1. chapter 11. Subjects, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 14. Substance, Arist. doct. p. 1.
chapter 2. p. 4. chapter Summer, Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 2. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter
4. Empedocl. chapter 7. Heraclitus, chapter 7. sect. 2. Sumption, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter
26. Sun, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 5. chapter 8. sect. 2. Anaximander, chapter 2. sect. 2.
Anaximenes, chapter 2. sect. 2. Anaxag. c. 2. sect. 2. Archelaus. Pla. doct. chapter
14. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 9. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 3. Timaeus.
Hippasus. Heraclitus, chapter 7. sect. 2. Xenophanes, chapter 2. Leucippus. Democritus,
chapter 9. sect. 5. Epic. doctr. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 4. Worshipped, Chal. lib. 1. p.
2. sect. 4. chapter 4. lib. 2. p. 2. c. 4. lib. 3. p. 1. chapter 1. Superficies, Pla.
chapter 7. Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 1. Supine categoremes, Sto. doct. p. 1.
chapter 19. Suspension, Sext. lib. 1. Syllogism, Arist. doct. p. 1. c. 4. 5. 6.
doubted, Sext. lib. 2. chapter 14. Symbols, Pyth. doct. p. 4. Symbolical number,
Pyth. doct. p* 2* sect. 1. chapter 4. Synonymous terms, Arist. doctr. p. 1. chapter 2.
Syntax, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 9.
T.
TAsting, Plat. doct. chapter 19. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 17. Sto. doctr. p. 3. chapter
17. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 7. Alcmaeon. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter
16. Teaching, and Learning, Sext. doubted, sect. lib. 3. chapter 28. 29. 30.
Telesmes, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 3. 4. Temperament, Arist. doct. p.
2. c. 2. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 13. Pyth. doct. p. 1. chap. 5. doubted, Sext.
lib. 3. chapter 6. Temperance, Socr. chapter 5. sect. 2. Pla. doct. chapter 28. Sto. doct.
p. 2. chapter 9. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 1. chapter 3. Archytas. Epicur. doctrine, p.
3. chapter 12. Terms, Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 2. Terms of Planets, Chald. lib. 1. p.
2. sect. 2. chapter 3. 4. Tetractys, Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. c. 8. p. 3. sect.
4. chapter 1. Tetrad, Pyth. doctrine, p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 8. Theology, Chald. lib.
1. p. 2. sect. 1. Lib. 2. p. 2. chap. 1. Plat. doctr. chapter 7. Theoretick
Intellect, Arist. doct. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 23. Theoretick knowledge
limited, Socr. chapter 5. Theoretick Philosophy, Plat. doct. chapter 3. 7. Pyth. doct.
p. 3. sect. 3. Therapeutick, Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 5. chapter 2. Thesis, Arist.
doct. p. 1. chapter 6. Theurgy, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 5. 6. Things,
Plat. chapter 8. Sto. doctr. p. 1. chapter 13. Thinking, Epicur. doctr. p. 2. sect. 3.
chapter 18. Thunder, Anaximander, chapter 2. sect. 2. Anaximenes, chapter 2. sect. 3.
Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 3. Arist. doct. p. 2. c. 12. Sto. doct. p. 3. c. 2. Epic.
doct. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 10. Thunderbolt, Arist. doct. p. 2. c. 12. Sto. doct.
p. 3. chapter 11. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter Time, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 2.
Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 22. Protagoras. Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 10.
doubted, Sext. lib. 3. chapter 17. Timocracy, Plat. doct. chapter 33. Tone in Music,
Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 2. Touching, Plat. doctr. chapter 19. Arist. p. 2.
chapter 17. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 16. Pyth. doct. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 7. Epic. doct.
p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 16. Transition, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 6. Transference, Sto.
doct. ibid. Transmigration of the Soul, Pyth. doctr. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 9.
Empedocles, chapter 7. Transposition, doubted, Sext. lib. 3. chapter 11. Triad, Pythag.
doctr. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 7. Triangle, Pythag. doctr. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 1.
Triplicities, Chal. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 3. 4. Tropicks, Thal. chapter 8.
sect. 1. Empedocl. chapter 7. True and Truth, Arist. doctr. p. 4. chapter 5. Sto.
doctr. p. 1. chapter 5. Parmenides, chapter 2. Epic. doct. p. 1. c. 1. doubted, Sext.
lib. 2. chapter 8. 9. Truth, or sincerity, Arist. doctr. p. 3. chapter 1. Typho, Arist.
doct. p. 2. chapter 12. Sto. doct. p. 3. chap. 11. Tyranny, Pla. doct. chapter 33.
V.
VAcuum, Arist. doctr. p. 2. c. 4. Sto. doctr. p. 3. chapter 21. Leucippus. Democr.
chapter 9. sect. 1. denied, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 5. Zeno Eleat. chapter 3. Veiled reason,
Diodorus, chapter 2. Eubulides, Sto. doct. p. 1. chapter 32. Vehicle of the Soul,
Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 10. Veracity, Socr. chapter 5. sect. 2. Venus,
Pythag. doctrine, p. 2. sect. 4. chapter 4. Verb, Aristot. doctr. p. 1. chapter 3. Sto.
doct. p. 2. chapter 9. Vesper, Parmenides, chapter 2. Virtue, Socrat. chapter 5. sect. 2.
Annicer. chapter 2. Menedemus, chapter 2. Pla. chapter 8. Plat. doctr. chapter 27. 28. 29.
Arcesil. chapter 2. Arist. doct. p. 3. c. 1. Antisthenes, chapter 2. Sto. doctr. p. 1.
chapter 1. p. 2. chapter 9. Epic. doct. p. 3. chapter 5. 7. Undistracted Phantasy,
Carneades, chapter 2. Universe, Archelaus. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 5. Melissus, chapter 2.
Leucippus. Epic. doctrine, p. 2. sect. 1. chap. 1. 2. Universals, denied,
Stilpo, chapter 2. Universal proposition, Pla. doct. c. 5. Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter
3. Unzoned Gods, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 8. Voice, Anaxag. chapter 2.
sect. 5. Archelaus. Plat. chapter 8. Arist. doct. p. 1. chapter 3. p. 2. chapter 16. Sto.
doct. p. 1. chapter 9. p. 3. chapter 16. Pyth. doct. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 1. Voluntary
motion, Epic. doct. p. 2. sect. 3. chapter 20. Urbanity, Socrat. chapter 5. sect. 2.
Arist. doct. p. 3. chapter 1. Vtility, Pla. doctr. chapter 27.
W.
WAking, Arist. doctrine, p. 2. chapter 21. Water, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 1. Archelaus.
Aristot. doctr. p. 2. chap. 12. Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 12. Timaeus. Emped. chapter 7.
Worshipped, Chald. l. 2. p. 2. chapter 4. Wealth, confers nothing to pleasure,
Hegesias. When, a Category, Aristot. doctr. p. 1. chapter 2. Where, a Category,
Aristot. doctr. ibid. Whole and part, Arist. doctr. doubted, Sext. lib. 3. chapter
12. Will, Aristot. doct. p. 2. chapter 24. Wind, Anaximander, chapter 2. sect. 3.
Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 3. Aristot* doct. p. 2. chapter 12. Sto. doctr. p. 3. chapter 11.
Democric. chapter 9. sect. 6. Epicur. doctrine, part 2. sect. 4. chapter 10. Winter,
Sto. doct. p. 3. chapter 11. Pyth. doctr. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 1. 4. Empedocl. chap.
7. Heraclitus, chap. 7. sect. 2. Wisdom, Aristot. doctrine, p. 3. chap. 1. Sto.
doct. p. 1. chapter 1. Pyth. doct. p. 3. chapter 4. Wise man, Aristip. chap. 4. sect.
3. Hegesias, chapter 2. Anniceris, chapter 2. Theodorus, chapter 2. Antisthenes, c. 2. Sto.
doct. p. 2. chapter 15. Words, their use, Epic. p. 1. chapter 5. World, Thal. chapter 6.
sect. 5. Anaximander, chapter 2. sect. 1. 2. Anaxag. chapter 2. sect. 4. Pla. doct. chapter
12. 13. 14. 15. Polemo. Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 7. Sto. doctr. p. 3. chapter 5.
Pyth. doctr. p. 3. sect. 4. chapter 2. Timaeus. Empedocl. chapter 7. Heraclitus, chapter 7.
sect. 1. Xenophanes, chapter 2. Democr. chapter 9. sect. 4. Zeno Eleat. chapter 3. Epicur.
doctrine, part 2. sect. 2. Worship of the Gods, Stilpo, chapter 1. Pyth. doct. p.
3. sect. 2. chapter 3.
Y.
YEar, Thal. chapter 8. sect. 4. Plato, doct. chapter 14. Yielding bodies, Plat.
doctrine, chapter 19. Youth, Arist. doct. p. 2. chapter 25.
Z.
Zodiac, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 3. Thal. chap. 8. sect. 1.
Anaximander, chapter 1. Zoned Gods, Chald. lib. 1. p. 2. sect. 1. chapter 8. Zones,
Thal. chapter 8. sect. 1. Sto. doctr. p. 3. chapter 12.
A TABLE Of Authors restored, explained, and noted (or Censured) in the History
of the Chaldaick and Greek Philosophy.
ANonymous Summarist of the Chaldaick Doctrine, frequently in the Chaldaick
Philosophy. Aristotle, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 1. Democr. chapter 9. sect. 6, 7, 8.
Arnobius, Chald. p. 1. chapter 1. sect. 2. Basil, Plat. chapter 1. Pyth. doctr. p. 3.
sect. 1. chapter 3. Cicero, Speusip. chapter 2. Zeno Eleat. chapter 2. Clemens
Alexand^inus, Chald. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 2. Pyth. chapter 24. Heracl. chapter 1. Democr.
chapter 4. Curtius, Chald. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 1. Diodorus Siculus, Chal. p. 1.
sect. 2. chapter 7. Socr. chapter 1. Pyth. doctr. p 1. chapter 10. Diogenes Laertius,
frequently in the Greek Philosophy. Dionysius Halycarnassaeus, Socr. chapter 16.
Epicharmus, Pla. chapter 4. Etymologicum magnum, Solon, chapter 11. Eustathius, Pyth.
doct. p. 3. sect. 3. chapter 4. Gregor. Nazianzenus, Pyth. chapter 22. Herodotus,
Thales, chapter 10. Anachars. chapter 1. Hierocles, Euclid. chapter 3. Higi^^^, Thal. chapter
1. Iambli^hus, frequently in the life and Doctrine of Pythagoras. Marmora
Arundeliana, Chilon, chapter 1. Xenoph. chapter 2. Nicomachus, frequently, Pyth. doctr.
p. 2. Pliny, Pyth. chapter 20. Plutarch, Pyth. chapter 19. Porphyrius, Pyth. chapter 2. 7.
doctr. p. 4. chapter 1. Preclu^, Chald. doctr. p. 1. sect. 2. chapter 7. Thal. chapter 7.
ibid. sect. 1. Euclid. chapter 3. Pyth. doctr. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 2. sect. 3. chapter
2. Sextus Empiricus, his Pyrrhonian Hypotyposes, in the Skepticism. Socratick
Epistles, Socr. epist. 1, 5, 6, 7. Simon. Aristip. chapter 6. Stobaeus, Sto. doctr.
Strabo, Chald. p. 1. sect. 2. chapter 4. Pyth. chapter 10. Themistius, Pyth. chapter 19.
Timaeus, after the life of Pythagoras. Zoroastraean Oracles, after the
Chaldaick Philosophy.
NOTED.
ALdobrandinus, Thal. chapter 6. sect. 4. and frequently elsewhere. Anonymous
Author of Aristotle's life, Aristot. chapter 3, 6, 8. Apuleius, Pyth. chapter 2.
Casaubon, Thal. chapter 1. Chilo, chapter 1. An^ximander, sect. 2. chapter 2. Xenoph. chapter
1. Eugubinus, Pla. chapter 4. Gassendu^, Democr. chapter 9. s^ct. 3. Epic. chapter 2.
Kircher, Chald. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 2. and frequently in the Chaldaick Doctrine.
Leo Allatius, Socrat. chapter 1. 12. Epist. 1. 6. Xenoph. Epist. 5. 8. Simon.
Aristip. chapter 8. Lipsius, Zeno Eleat. chapter 2. Lucas Holstenius, Pyth. chapter 19.
Lucian, Tha^. chapter 13. Magneaus, Democr. chapter 2. 7, 8, 9. sect. 1. 2, 4. chapter 1^.
Meibomius, Pythag. doct. p. 2. sect. 2. chapter 3, 4. Meursius, Thal. chapter 2. Socr.
chapter 1. 12. Naudaeus, Chald. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 2. Nunnesius, Arist. chapter 8.
Olympiodorus, Aristot. chapter 3. Patricius, Chald. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 2. Petavius,
Thal. chapter 2. 13. Carnead. chapter 5. Pliny, Pyth. chapter 10. doct. p. 2. sect. 4. chapter
4. Ramus, Thal. chapter 7. sect. 1. Salmasius, Thal. chapter 5. Pla. chapter 1. Pyth. chapter
2. Scaliger, Chald. p. 1. sect. 2. Thal. chapter 2. Socr. chapter 1. 12. Seldom, (...),
chapter 1. Xenoph. chapter 2. Sigo^ius, Thal. chapter Simplicius, ^yth. doctr. p. 2. sect.
4. chapter 1. Stephanus, Thal. chapter 10. Suidas, Thal. chapter 2. Zeno, chapter 6. Valertus
Maximus, Plat. chapter 7. Valla, Thales chap. 10. Vossius, Thal. chapter 2. Ursinus,
Chald. p. 1. sect. 1. chapter 2. Zoroastraean Oracles, after the Chaldaick
Philosophy.
FINIS.

