A SERMON PREACHED AT Gray's Inn Chapel November. the 26th. 1691.

BEING The Day of Thanksgiving, For the Success of Their Majesty's Forces, and
Reducing of IRELAND.

By GEORGE STANHOP, Vicar of Lewisham in Kent.

Published at the Request of that Honorable Society.

LONDON: Printed for Sam. Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

A SERMON PREACHED AT Gray's Inn Chapel November. the 26th. 1691.
ISAIAH xxvi. Ver. 4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting Strength.


IN order to understand the true Meaning of this Chapter, it will be convenient
to cast our Eyes back, as far as the 24th. where, after having foretold a
general Destruction and Desolation in the Land, the Prophet comforts his People
and himself with the escape of a Remnant; but that Remnant so few in
comparison, and in such apparent danger of being swept away in the same common
Ruin, that they are with great elegance represented, under the figures of the
shakings of an Olive Tree, Chapter xxiv. ver. 13.
and the gleaning Grapes when the Vintage is done. And in regard this
Deliverance was to be terrible to their Enemies, no less than wonderful in it
self, therefore Isaiah, according to that loftiness of style, so peculiar to
him, breaks forth into Songs of Joy and Triumph, such as might at once both
magnify the Goodness of Almighty God, and make that people duly sensible how
safe and happy they were under his gracious and powerful Protection.

And if some of the best Interpreters are not mistaken in referring that
Calamity to the Ten Tribes led Captive by Salmanesor, and this mavelous
Deliverance of God's People to the rescue of Jerusalem from Sennacherib's Army;
the potent Adversary of this Kingdom, from whose Rage God has in some measure
delivered us already, and against whom we still implore the continuance of his
Defense; bears so near a resemblance to that insulting Assyrian, that the
Application is most easy, and the Parallel naturally draws it self. His
grasping Ambition and haughty Cruelty, which are so well known to have rendered
him a Terror both at home and abroad, abundantly prove the fitness of this
Hymn, being made a part of our Thanksgiving Service, and the necessity of my
exhorting all that hear me to day, to a firm and devout Confidence in God. And
therefore, Though your Enemies be mighty, and they that hate you wrongfully are
many in number, yet still, Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting Strength.

The Text plainly persuades to a Duty, and backs that Persuasion with an
Argument, drawn from the Power and Providence of Almighty God; for the
enforcing whereof, I shall, First, say something to the Prophet's Arguments,
and show how secure a Ground of Dependence that Power and Providence of God is
to us.

Secondly, What this Duty of trusting in him for ever implies. and when we may
be said truly to discharge it. And,

Thirdly, I shall bring these general Considerations home to our selves, and to
the particular occasion of this present Solemnity.

1.] First, I am to speak to the Prophet's Argument, and show, how secure a
Ground of Dependence the Power and Providence of God is to us. It requires but
very moderate Reflection, and no extraordinary Depth of Thought to convince
men, that the Successes of their Undertakings, and Accomplishment of their
Hopes, are not perfectly in their own power: The vast and surprising variety of
Accidents that attend human Life, demonstrates most sensibly to each particular
person's experience, the truth of the Preacher's Observation, That the Race is
not always to the swift, Eccles. ix. 11.
nor the Battle to the strong. And this teaches us, at the same time, the
extreme ^olly of depending upon our own Abilities, and most probable
Endeavors, when we frequently see the events of things so little correspondent
to them. But though this perplexing Consideration have driven some to impute
all to the undistinguishing hits of blind Chance, because of the great
disproportion between Men's Merits and their Fortunes; and though others have
been carried into a very distant but altogether as unaccountable an Extreme,
and bound up every thing in the Fetters of a necessary Fatality, yet we are to
remember, these were such as knew not God, nor had any just Apprehensions of
his wise and steady Government of the World; and that we may and ought to
possess our Souls in much more patience. We can take more effectual Methods,
both for the conducting our Actions, and for satisfying our selves with the
different Conclusions of them to us. We, I say, who have learned from the
unerring Oracles of God, where our Confidence is to be placed, from whence we
must expect the last Results of all, and, that what St. Paul has told us in
another case, is true also in this; That it is not of him that wills, Romans
ix. 16.
nor of him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy.

And, after we have brought our selves to this general acknowledgment of God's
overruling Providence, there are several Attributes in his Nature, which may
strongly move us to take off our Confidence from all other, though never so
promising Objects, and place it entirely in that alone. Such, for instance, is
his Goodness, which ever inclines him to grant what is most advantageous, and
make all things work together, Romans viii. 28.
for the benefit of them that love him. Such his Wisdom, whereby he defeats all
the most politic Contrivances of Men, and manifests to the whole World, how
vain and inconsistent, how thin and slight, how like the wild sick Dreams of
Feverish men, all their fond Imaginations are; and such his Power, which, in
despite of any opposition to the contrary, effects the whole good Counsel of
his Will, and performs all his Pleasure. Of this last more especially the Text
takes notice, and has recommended it, from the Greatness and the Eternity of
it. In the Lord Jehovah is strength, and that strength is everlasting.

What this Strength is originally, and in it self, we cannot comprehend, but
that it is inherent and essential to the Nature of God, the Prophet hints, by
mentioning him under the Appellation of Jehovah; which, above all other his
Titles, does most significantly set forth the Glory of His Majesty, and the
unchangeable Constancy of those Perfections we ascribe to him. The external
Operations then of this Strength, are the most powerful Inducements to rely
upon it: And though, even of these too, a great part is a Secret to us; nor can
we pursue Providence through all the Labyrinths of its dark and wonderful
Dispensations toward Mankind, yet is there so much of it visible and evident,
as most justly commands our observation, and is proper to fix our Confidence;
as particularly in these three Instances that follow.

1.] First, The gracious Concurrence of Almighty God with Second Causes, and
his enabling them to produce their usual effects. 2.] Secondly, His more
wonderful transcending or superseding those Causes, so as upon some occasions,
either to make them act beside their Natural Power and Order, or to produce
such things without them, to which, according to the common course of the
World, they are necessarily required. 3.] Thirdly, The occasion of his exerting
these Powers in such a manner, which is generally, for the sake of all, or part
of Mankind.
1.] The first Evidence of this Power, is his gracious Concurrence with Second
Causes, and enabling them to produce their usual Effects. In all Employments
and Designs of Life, particular means and instruments are chosen for particular
and distinct purposes, and every thing will no more serve for every use, than
every Sense can perceive every Object. He that would expect Moisture out of
Iron, or Heat out of Ice; and he that hopes to hear with his Eyes, and to see
with his Ears, were equally ridiculous. Now, the bestowing these several
Dispositions upon things, the determining them at first to their several
Faculties, and limitting their Powers to such peculiar uses, rather than
others, is manifestly the wise disposal of a Superior Mind. And after that
these Dispositions are thus bestowed and restrained, yet still his Concurrence
is necessary, to bring these Abilities he has given to a good effect: For, even
the most proper and likely means do sometimes fail of compassing their ends,
which they could never do, if they had an absolute Sufficiency in themselves,
and did not depend upon some Higher Being for Perfection and Success. As
therefore the Ax is fitted for cutting, but yet can only do it in such a place,
and at such a time, and to such a degree as the Hand of the Artificer directs;
so are these lower Causes, which this World contains, no more in truth, than so
many Aptnesses and Tendencies, able to perform only such things, and in such
proportions, as the Great Maker and Mover of all is pleased to give Leave and
Assistance. If He but hold his Hand, the whole Engine stands still; if He
withdraw the Powers derived from him, then the Work is not only interrupted,
but all the Fabric falls to pieces. The swiftness of Pharaoh's Chariots could
do him no Service when the Lord clogged the Wheels with new weight, and made
them drive heavily: Exodus xiv. 25.
And all Creatures attend so entirely upon his Pleasure, that, as the Psalmist
observes very well, Psalm. civ. 29.
He need only hide his Face, and they are troubled; when he takes away their
Breath they dye, and are turned again to their primitive Dust. Of such absolute
Necessity is the Almighty's continual Concurrence, and so clear an Evidence of
his Strength it is, even when the most ordinary things are effected by even the
most ordinary means.

2.] But, because our Observation is wont to rest too soon, and pursue things
no farther than the lowest Causes and most immediate Instruments, by which our
Senses show them perfected to us; and because, according to the common method
of Nature, effects are usually, though not always the same when the same
course is taken to bring them about: Therefore Almighty God does sometimes
awaken men's Minds by the more sensible Tokens of his Presence, and extort an
acknowledgment of his Providence by some more wonderful and surprising
Instances. These are such as my second particular mentions, when he either
transcends, or wholly supersedes these next Causes. The former is done when he
makes them act beside their Natural Power and Order; the latter, when he
produces such things without them, as they are necessarily required to the
production of, according to the settled course of the World.

Sometimes we find him transcending these Causes, by stretching their Efficacy
farther than Nature and Use have done; as, when a Barrel of Meal, and a Cruise
of Oil, 1 Kings, xvil, 11. etc. Joh. vl. 5, etc.
sustained several persons for a good while without wasting; when five Barley
Loaves and two small Fishes satisfied five thousand people; when a raw unarmed
Youth, as David, slew an experienced mighty Champion, 1 Samuel xvii.
Goliath the Great, infinitely his Superior in strength and all the advantages
of War; when Jonathan and his Armor-bearer attacked the Garrison at Mickmash,
1 Samuel xiv.
and a whole Army of Philistines were put into disorder by two men. In all
these cases Nature outdid her self, and the Event was very much above what we
commonly find it, or what Prudence and a well-weigh'd Judgment can fairly
promise from any human means. Upon other occasions he puts a Restraint upon
Nature, and sets a Bar to its Dispositions and Faculties; as, in shutting up
the Lions mouths, and faming that Hunger and Native Rage to Daniel; Dan. vi.
which when this miraculous Confinement was taken off again, returned with all
its ravening force upon his Accusers. And that yet more amazing preservation of
the Three Children in the Furnace, Dan. iii.
upon whom not so much as the smell of Fire had passed, though the persons that
bound and cast them in, perished at a distance, with the Extremity of its Heat.

Again, as Nature is sometimes thus disjointed and put out of course, so is it
at others wholly laid aside: And this happens either when God produces things
without any contribution of Second Causes; as, when he rained Manna upon the
Israelitish Camp, Exodus xvi. Numb. xi. Psalm. lxxviii. Ver. 25, 28. Numb. xxii.
and feathered Fowls as the Sand of the Sea; when he empowered the dumb Ass
with Man's voice, to rebuke the madness of the Prophet; and when he sustained
Moses forty days and forty nights, Exodus xxxiv. 28.
without eating or drinking in the Mount: Or, which seems still to be a greater
Violence, when he makes those Causes subservient to quite contrary Effects; as,
Exodus xiv.
in gathering the Waters of the Red Sea together, and fixing them like Walls
and Rocks at one time, and at another, cleaving the hard Rock, and melting it
down, so that the Waters gushed out, xvii.
and Rivers flowed in the dry places. These, and infinite other Examples the
Scriptures furnish us with, wherein the Lord Jehovah showed his everlasting
Strength; which will appear to be most fitly laid by the Prophet here, as a
sure Foundation for our Trust in him, if we proceed to consider,

3.] Thirdly, That that which gives occasion for the exerting this Duty, is
generally the Benefit of all, or part of Mankind. We cannot think at all, and
at the same time continue insensible, what a cherishing and constant Care is
taken of the whole World, and how liberally our indulgent Creator extends his
Mercy over all his Works. Now both our Savior and his Apostle have given us
Authority to improve this Consideration to our own comfort and very great
advantage: That if God cloth the Grass of the Field, Mat. vi. 26, 30. 1 Cor.
ix. 9, 10.
and feed the Fowls of the Air, and take care for Oxen, he does it for our
sakes. That he cannot in reason be supposed to neglect a Creature that wears
his own Image, and consequently of much more excellence and value with him than
they: So that Men seem to have the first Title to his Affections; they are
justified in expectations of a peculiar Tenderness and most immediate
Protection: And every unworthy Distrust of this is often reproved in the
Gospel, as arguing either great Ignorance or little Faith in them.

But even among Men we may discern some difference made; for, though His
Concern descend to all, even the most minute-circumstances of Human Life, and
the very Hairs of our Head are all numbered before him, Mat. x. 30.
yet where we meet with a person of extraordinary Piety and Worth, or such a
one as he has chosen, and marked out for an Instrument of doing some Great
Work, and manifesting his Power to the World, there it is easy to observe, how
Providence charges it self after a more signal manner with that persons's
Preservation and Success. 1 Kin. xvii.
Such was the feeding Elijah by Ravens, and hiding him with his own hand in the
hollow of a Rock; 1 Samuel xix. xx, etc.
such the frequent Rescues of David, from the Malice of that blood-thirsty
Tyrant, that hunted him like a Partridge upon the Mountains; 2 Samuel 11.
and at last the exaltation of him to the Throne of his unnatural Enemy; and
such the Refreshment of Sampson, Judge. xv. 19.
when just expiring with Thirst, by turning the Jaw Bone of an Ass into a
springing Well.

Yet after all this, it must be acknowledged, that as the dignity and
consequence of the Occasion does best justify such Miracles of Mercy, so the
care and kindness of our God is then most eminent and illustrious, when
employed in the protection of whole States, and Religious Kingdoms, People that
have undertaken the profession of the Truth, and devoted themselves to his
Service. What a continued Chain of Wonders do we read in all his dealings with
the Children of Israel? in forming them at first into a Nation; in redeeming
them from their Bondage; in sustaining them in the Wilderness, in the midst of
Scarcity and Drought, of Serpents and Scorpions; in dispossessing the
Canaanites, and subduing their foreign Invaders; and when their incorrigible
Offenses and inflexible Hardness of Heart provoked his Justice, then, by an
astonishing mixture of Kindness and Severity, at once preserving his People,
and punishing their Perverseness. No History in the World could ever furnish
out such memorable Instances of God's tender Regard; and yet, every Christian
Country is as truly his Darling and Peculiar as they were; every such Community
is as deeply interested in his Favor, except, like them too, they obstruct the
Current of his Grace, and forfeit their own Advantages.

The Sum of my first Head is briefly this: That Almighty God, like a wise
Ruler, has fixed a Law and regular Method in Nature, yet in such a manner,
that nothing should be perfectly independent, but the very Success of common
and probable means should be still owing to his Blessing and gracious
Permission, and the Divine Power show it self eminently, even in this point;
That there are besides and above these Rules, some special and reserved Cases,
which appeal from, and are Exceptions to them, and that for the more awakening
and conspicuous Demonstrations of his Power, upon solemn and emergent
occasions: To which, when we have added one Reflection more, viz. That the Good
of all or some part of Mankind is generally the occasion which calls forth this
Power into exercise; nothing can be wanting to establish our Hearts by a
steadfast Trust in God.

Which Duty, what it imports, after all that has been already said, will very
easily appear, and that by three Particulars, with respect to each of the three
former Considerations.

1.] As, first, the Concurrence of God's Power with ordinary Causes, implies,
that, as a Testimony of our Trust in him, we should make use of proper and
pertinent means, and that this be done with Diligence and Submission to his
wiser disposal of us and our Affairs.

1.] With Diligence, because these inferior Helps are the Instruments he
usually works by, and has promised to prosper Men's Undertakings in proportion
to them. For, though the Race be not always, yet is usually to the Swift, and
the Battle for the most part to the Strong; and he that should assault an Enemy
without any Regard had to the Strength and Number, the Conduct and Counsel on
either side, deserves to stand in History a lasting Monument of Infamy and
Reproach, for Folly and Irreligion. To cast all our care upon God, in this
sense is not Confidence, but Presumption; and those who have the vanity to
expect he should break the Scheme of his Government, and do things out of the
common Road of Nature, merely to patronize their Sloth or Enthusiastic
Madness; that plunge themselves in apparent and unnecessary Difficulties, in
hopes that, when they are entangled in the Snare, an Almighty Hand should come
down in Thunder and cut it, and set them free; these men do not trust in God,
but tempt him. David, it is true, has taught us, That no King can be saved by
the multitude of an Host, Psalm. xxxiii. 15
if the LORD of Hosts think fit to interpose and disappoint him; Luke xiv. 31,
32.
but yet a greater than David condemns the Imprudence of that King, who being
to wage War, does not first sit down and consult, whether he be able with Ten
thousand to meet him that comes against him with Twenty thousand; or else, if
he find himself hard pressed, does not send and solicit a Treaty of Peace,
rather than hazard his own and his Peoples Safety upon unequal and
disadvantageous Terms.

But to this prudent Care we must add Submission too; for, if the want of our
own Diligence be an abuse of God's Power, the resting entirely upon that
Diligence is a disowning of it. This tends directly to the shutting out
Providence from any Right or Interest in human Affairs, and strikes at the very
Root and Bottom of all Religion. This is a sort of Idolatry to our selves, for
which reason the Prophet calls it very elegantly, Habak. i. 16.
sacrificing to men's own Net, and burning Incense to their own Drag: For,
nothing is more certain than this; That if there were no Superintendency of an
Higher Being, to assist or oppose, to crown or to defeat our Endeavors, all
Devotion and Prayer for temporal Blessings, all Thanks and Praise, (and this
days Assembly, to be sure, in a particular manner) would be not only an
unnecessary Trouble, but the idlest and rudest Mockery of God, the most
senseless Hypocrisy, and ridiculous piece of Pageantry in the whole World. When
we have therefore done all within the power of Counsel and Strength, still this
is but preparing our business for Perfection. Ours is the rough Draught, but
the finishing strokes must be received from another Hand: And, except He
ratify all with his Royal Assent and Confirmation, our most auspicious
Beginnings are as if nothing had ever been begun at all. This then is the short
but true state of our Condition: If any Failings on our part hinder the
Success, we have been our own Defeaters; if our Wishes and Attempts have found
a fortunate Conclusion, this is the Grace of ours and the Worlds Governor; if
our Desires and Endeavors prove abortive, and Dangers at any time grow upon
us, and all this too, notwithstanding the discharge of a sincere Conscience and
prudent Application, the next step of our Duty is, a free and humble
resignation of our Persons and Interests, into the Hands of our merciful
Creator.

2.] And this makes way for a second Argument of our Trust in God, that as his
Strength is everlasting, so our Trust should be for ever too: For, from the
Consideration, That he can transcend or supersede all second or common Causes,
we are obliged not to cast away our Considence in him, no, not though all human
and probable Prospects should have forsaken us. Thus we find Hezekiah upon his
Knees, in the Distress to which this Prophecy is supposed to referr, inflaming
his Zeal with the greatness of the Danger, and his utter Inability to disingage
himself from it: He laments it as a day of Trouble, and Rebuke, Chapter xxxvii.
and Blasphemy, and compares his condition to the pangs of a Woman in Travail,
when the Children are come to the Birth, and there is not strength to bring
forth: And then is the proper Season for the Divine Power to glorify it self;
then the Mercy is enlarged to them that confess its kindly Influences, and its
Honor best asserted to those who profane and deny them, when the Impotence of
Human Methods has made us ripe for Miracles, and no Interposition less than
Divine can retrieve us: And accordingly the Answer of Isaiah presents us with a
lively and beautiful Image of God's overruling and invincible Strength; for,
though this insulting Tyrant might slounce and kick, like a wild Bull in a Net,
or an untamed Horse, yet God would put his Hook in his Nose, V. 29.
and his Bridle in his Lips; would break and manage this headstrong rebellious
Beast, and like a skilful Rider, turn him his own way, i. e. command him
immediately home again. And certainly he, who rather than desert his Servants,
is used to engage the very Elements on their side, that slew multitudes with a
Storm of Hailstones, Josh. x. Judge. v.
and marshalled the Stars in their courses to fight against Sisera; can never
want Methods, though to us unknown, to rescue his People from their Calamities.
Whether it be by turning their Enemy's Counsels into Foolishness, 2 Samuel xvii.
14. Chapter xxxvii. 36. 2 Kin. vli, 6.
as he did Achitophel's, or by blowing up Dissentions among themselves, as
between the Three Kings combined against Jehoshaphat; or by confounding them
with a sudden panick Fear, as he did the Host of the Syrians; or by giving them
some Diversion; or by a swift Messenger of Vengeance and Slaughter; as in this
very Case, when the Assyrian hasting to preserve his own Country against
Annoyances from a Neighboring Prince, 2 Chronicles. xx. 23.
left Fourscore and Five thousand of his Army behind him, slain by an unseen
Hand. These, and many other the like Instances, will condemn all mean Thoughts
and unworthy Distrusts of God's Everlasting Strength, all the Measurings of his
Mighty Arm by our own weak Arm of Flesh; for, then it is that our Hearts speak
noble and becoming Apprehensions concerning him; when, though our Enemies are
daily in hand to swallow us up, and many continually fighting and troubling us,
yet we are not dismayed at what Man can do unto us. And though Flesh and Blood
will recoil, and we be sometimes afraid, yet may we conquer all the Surprises
and Amazements of frail Nature, and buoy up our sinking Souls with this single
but most powerful Reflection; That if God be for us, it signifies little, but
very little, who can be against us.

3.] Thirdly, From God's exerting his Power for the Good of Mankind, and among
them distinguishing between his faithful Servants and the rest of the World, we
may plainly perceive, that the Duty of trusting in God implies a Care to lead
such Lives, as may fit us for his Mercy, and recommend us to his more peculiar
Favor and Protection. The distribution of Worldly Blessings is not so confined
to good and holy men, as that Prosperity should be a mark of Piety; very far
from that, God knows: But yet these Happinesses are much more reasonably
expected, and may be more securely depended upon, by such as study to please
God, than those that make it their constant business to provoke and affront
him. However, the public Peace and Safety will hardly fail a Nation truly
zealous in the Promotion and Practice of Religion, because these Societies
being dissolved and lost hereafter, there can be no common Reward then for men
considered in their public Capacities. And this makes a very remarkable
difference between the Fortunes of Kingdoms and those of private persons. In
one of these Cases there is a very fair account to be given of that promiscuous
Providence, so observable in the World, because we know there is still a future
Judgment in reserve, and God can make any single man ample amends in another
World, for any the severest Tribulations in this: But, there are no politic
Bodies of Men in the other World, and therefore there seems to be a Necessity
that such Communities should receive their Recompense at present, because
otherwise they can never be in a condition of receiving any Recompense at all.
I add too, That this Reflection, by the same reason, must needs prove the
Necessity of such Societies being punished in this World, and, by consequence,
the abominable Impiety and Profaneness of imploring National Blessings,
without serious Resolution and strict Endeavors of better Obedience. In this
case it is not merely a Persuasion of God's Power, though never so strong and
sanguine, but it is a Conscientious Care to engage that Power on our side, that
is trusting in him. Else we may lament our Distresses to no purpose, so long as
that Reproach lies against us, in the 59th. of this Prophecy, at the first and
second Verses. Behold, the Lord's Hand is not shortened, that it cannot save;
nor his Ear heavy, that it cannot hear; but your Iniquities have separated
between you and your God, and your sins have hid his Face from you, that he
will not hear.

Thus I have done with the Text in its comprehensive Sense, and as propounding
a general Duty with the Ground of it; I beg Leave now only to bring these
Considerations home to our own Case, and so conclude.

1.] And, First, For the Almighty's favorable Concurrence with Human Means and
Second Causes, we all stand here as so many living Monuments of Joy, for his
Power and Goodness in it. And sure it were too vile, too impious an Indignity
to the just Honors of this Day and Place, not to commemorate with a most
sensible and fervent Gratitude, those Mercies, to which we owe the very
opportunities of addressing our Thanks to GOD in this religious manner; for,
not only our Liberties and Civil Rights, but, in all human prospect, our very
Lives too, and which to every good man is infinitely dearer than both, the
Purity of our Faith and Worship, have been preserved to us by these Successes.
What words then shall we find expressive enough of the Acknowledgments due to
our Gracious GOD, for all those prosperous Events, which either our own
Strength and Policy, the Courage and Conduct of our Defenders and Allies, or
the Cowardice, Cruelty, Imprudence, or Misfortunes of our Enemies, have been
the Instruments of to us? For, even these are His, and could avail us nothing,
till he was pleased to perfect and form them into Blessings. But especially,
What Incense, what Sacrifice of Praise can be too much for his reserving to us,
and to our Age, an Age that so much needed him, a Prince of that indefatigable
and generous Valor? For, inspiring his Royal Breast with a vigorous and active
Fire, not such as wastes away ingloriously, in the soft Delights and Luxuries of
Courts, or is kindled by devouring Avarice, and preys upon all about it; but
which exercises it self in Arms and Dangers, for a Check to mighty Oppressors,
and the seasonable Relief of Distressed Mankind. And more particularly yet,
while he despised his own for the sake of our common Safety, for the watchful
Care, and many eminent Preservations of that Royal, that most Important Life,
by the single Thread of which the present Happiness and future Hopes, I say not
of these Kingdoms, but of all this Western World, seem at this juncture to
hang. Thus far we have tasted the Bounties of an Indulgent Providence already,
a foretaste, I hope, of many more and greater; for into more and greater we may
and must endeavor to improve them. And if this be not done by a cheerful
Fidelity and unanimous Diligence, an humble Submission to, and a becoming
Entertainment of the Divine Dispensations toward us, our Blood must lie upon
our own Heads; and all our future Fears and future Miseries may be justly
esteemed no longer our Fate, but our foolish and perverse Choice: For, Whence
shall we fetch Arguments strong enough to smooth the roughness of our Minds at
home, and cement us close in Peace and mutual Affection to one another, if the
universal Apprehensions of the same formidable Common Enemy will not do it, and
the being engaged for the same public Cause abroad, in which, as in one common
center, all our most distant Opinions and divided Interests are united and
concerned? Or, What can quicken our Diligence, and confirm our Resolution, if
the bright Example of a Royal Leader, so unusually lavish of Toil and Blood,
will not awaken the old English Gallantry, and warm our frozen Zeal, and
provoke us to a decent imitation? But, above all, How shall we answer to God
and our own Consciences those desponding Murmures and unreasonable Complaints,
which are more than whispered in our Streets? We deal with Providence like
greedy insatiable Traders, who compute their Advantages only by clear Gains,
and never allow the Goods that are saved to them any place at all in the
Account. For, Is it (I am sure it ought not to be) a small thing with us, that
we have seen safe, when almost despaired, arrivals of rich Cargoes from abroad;
that the Clouds, which so often were gathering in our sight, have not broken
upon our Heads; that we are not reduced to the last shifts of Poverty and
Exile, nor ask our Food and Raiment in a strange Land; but, while other
Countries have been the Unhappy Scenes of Violence and Confusion, Ours, whose
Interest is yet equal in the Quarrel, continues calm and composed, a peaceful
Habitation for Natives, and a Sanctuary and sure Retreat for afflicted
Strangers? Blessed therefore be that good Providence, by which we only hear and
read those distant Tragedies that others languish and dye under. And much too
coldly are they heard and read, if we have not the Grace to grow thankful by
the Comparison. Blessed be his Name, that we have lived to see the British
Monarchy once more balancing Kingdoms, restraining exorbitant Power and
Oppression, giving Life to a noble, numerous, and most just Confederacy,
putting a stop to proud triumphant Armies, full of Blood and Conquest, and
stemming the Torrent of that still-growing Ambition, which else would bear down
and swallow all before it. These are something more than the Beginnings of
Victory and Happiness; and if such considerations cannot prevail with Men, not
to be peevish, and dissatisfied at least, it is from a narrow Spirit of private
Discontent, or because they want Bowels for their Brethren's Calamities, and
have too faint a sense of the near approaches of their own. If Losses and
Disappointments have been sometimes mingled with such signal Preservations,
this is but a human and very ordinary thing, agreeable to the Condition of War,
in which there are so many Contingencies, so many seeming-little Accidents,
which yet draw vast Consequences after them, that a clear and uninterrupted
Conquest cannot in reason ever be expected; but agreeable especially to the
Justice of GOD, who often deals thus with Men; and (as he imposed upon the
murmuring Israelites a Forty Years sojourning in the Wilderness) so makes the
crossing of our Expectations, and the delay of future Mercies a punishment for
being ungrateful, and insensibly of the present ones.

2.] Secondly, As the Successes received by ordinary means, call for our
Thanks, so our very Difficulties and Disasters, were they infinitely blacker,
and more ghastly than even Discontent can paint them, would not justify any
repining Distrust of God's Strength and Providence; because we observed before,
that he does not bind himself up to the common Laws of Nature, nor always rest
in usual means, but has left a Power of dispensing with those Laws at
pleasure, and acting by methods superior to them. This I have showed he often
does upon solemn and urgent occasions, when the Necessities of his Servants, or
the Provocations of his Enemies, are grown above all common Remedies, and
require a miraculous Redress. And truly, if we compare the present state of
Affairs with some Instances, in which he has formerly thought his Honor
concerned, many circumstances seem to call aloud for his particular and more
immediate Vindication: For, if the Sighs and Tears of Widows and Fatherless,
and the Cry of the Blood of Innocents have not lost their ancient Faculty of
piercing the Clouds; if Cities laid in Ashes, whole Country's depopulated; if
Oppression and Sacrilege, Broken Faith with Subjects, and Leagues with
Infidels, to assist in the Destruction of Christians; if these be as much the
God of Justice and Pity's Care now, as he once declared them to be; again, if
the Martyrdom and Flight of some, whose only Crime was a steadfast Belief of
the Truth, and a just Abhorrence of Idolatry and Superstition, and the
dissembled Retractations of others, extorted by Violence and Human Frailty, be
not negligently overlooked by that tender Savior, who suffers in his afflicted
Members, hungers and thirsts in their Wants, is cold in all their Nakedness,
bleeds in all their Wounds, and is oppressed in all their Persecutions: Lastly,
If extravagant Insolence, and blasphemous Pride, even Medals and Statues, with
Inscriptions peculiar to GOD alone, can awake the Jealousy of Heaven, we may,
without incurring the imputation of Enthusiasm, expect that the Divine
Judgments will not always linger, but in some eminent manner discharge it
self, upon this bold Defier of GOD, this Christian, and for that reason, the
blacker and more provoking Sennacherib of the two.

These are, in plain terms, the due Praises of that Glorious, that Invincible
Monarch; these the Noble Topics, that have exhausted all the nauseous
Flatteries of so many mercenary Tongues and Pens: As if they would fain make us
believe, that Christianity and Human Nature have both forgot themselves, and
neither now know any Quality so Great and Godlike as that of being a Terror to
Subjects and Neighbors, and a mighty Murderer of Mankind. It is with a very
ill Grace that these barbarous Excellencies are Deified, since the gentle and
peaceable Doctrine of JESUS was sent abroad to reform and compose the World.
Nor could such Glories ever be proper Ornaments in a Prince's Character, since
those dark and wretched days of Superstitious Ignorance and Slavish Fear, when
Men burnt Incense to that roaring Lion, who goes about continually, seeking
whom he may devour.

3.] These Reflections are but too just upon our Adversary; but alas! while we
indulge them, do not our own grievous Offenses give us check, and will hardly
suffer us to believe, that Vengeance, though fit to be taken, is yet likely to
be taken for our sakes: And therefore, unless, according to my Third
Observation, we fix Almighty GOD in our Interests, by sincere amendment of
Life, all other Encouragements will prove at last no better than imaginary
Delusions; Luke i. 51, 52
He scatters the proud indeed, and puts down the mighty, but it is, that he may
exalt the humble and meek, those that, as the Prophet says here, wait for him
in the way of his Judgments; that is, v. 8.
receive all his Providence with a pious and becoming Temper of Mind, and make
the true and best improvements of them. When our Behavior has distinguished us
first, then there is a good Hope that his Mercy will do so too: For, the wise
Ammonite's Advice to Holofernes is very remarkable to this purpose; ( Judith,
v. 20, 21.) Now therefore, my Lord and Governor, if there be any Error in
this People, and they sin against their God, let us consider, that this shall
be their ruin, and let us go up, and we shall overcome them: And if there be no
Iniquity in their Nation, let my Lord now pass by, lest their Lord defend them,
and their God be for them, and we become a reproach before all the World.

Thus the Sins of a Kingdom enfeeble and expose it; these give an Edge to their
Enemies Swords, and deal more certain Deaths than Fire and Gunpowder; but
Innocence fences a People in, and renders them invincible. This then is the
true method of loving our Country, and preserving the common Safety, by just
and holy Conversations to prevent and remove our greatest and most fatal
Danger, to become, even at home, a secret Shelter and impregnable Bulwark to
those Fleets and Armies that are our Defense abroad: For, without Repentance
and Virtue, to help forward the Success, their Strength is vain, and our
Fastings and Thanksgivings are also vain: But if Reformation be our serious
Care, then they may have boldness in the day of Battle, and we at the Throne of
Grace, to which Throne we are all, I hope, now come full of this holy
Resolution, and therefore let us approach with that pleasing importunity
recommended in the second Lesson for this day; Luke xviii.
and may the God of Heaven mercifully incline his Ear to our Prayers.

May whatever Evils the craft and malice of the Devil or Man works against us
be scattered and brought to naught; may the Almighty still immure the King's
Person with a Guard of Angels, and continue him a successful Instrument of his
wise and gracious purposes; may these joyful Solemnities of Thanks and Triumph
for his and our Deliverances, make frequent returns upon us; and may he daily
erect new Trophies in the Hearts of his Subjects, till all the glad Presages of
our Souls be fully confirmed and accomplished, till Peace and Happiness, Truth
and Justice, Religion and Piety, be established among us for all Generations.
And let all the People say, Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS printed for Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul 's
Churchyard, 1691.
A Sermon preached at the Assizes at Horsham in the County of Sussex, Aug, 23.
1691. before the Honorable Sir William Dolben, Knight, one of the Justices of
the Court of King's Bench. By Richard Lucas, D. D. Vicar of St. Stephens
Colemanstreet, London. In 4 to. Price 6 d.

Enquiry after Happiness. Vol. the First, in 8 vo. Price 3 s. 6 d.

The true Notion of Human Life; or, a Second Part of the Enquiry after
Happiness. In 8 vo. 1690. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Duty of Servants. Containing, 1. The Parents Duty, how to educate their
Children, that they may be fit to be employed and trusted. 2. What preparation
is needful for such as are entering into Service, with some Rules to be observed
by them, how to make a wise and happy Choice of a Service. 3. Their Duty in
Service toward God, their Master, and themselves; tegether with suitable
Prayers to each Duty; and some Directions peculiarly to Servants, for the
worthy receiving the Holy Sacrament. Published for the benefit of Families. In
8 vo. Price 1 s. 6 d.

All written by the same Author.

A Sermon preached at the Assizes held at Chelmsford in the County of Essex,
Sept. 2. 1691. before Sir William Dolben, Knight, etc. By Stephen Thornton. A.
M. 4 to. 1691.

The Wisdom of God manifested in the Works of the Creation. By Jo. Ray, M. A.
Fellow of the Royal Society. In 8 vo. 1691. Price 2 s. 6 d.

A New History of the Roman Conclave: Containing the Rites and Ceremonies used
and observed at the Death, Election, and Coronation of the Pope. As also an
exact Description of the state of Rome, during the Vacancy of that Chair.
Together with a brief account of the Life of this present Pope Innocent XII. 4
to. Price 6 d. 1691.

The Triumphs of the Holy Jesus; or, a Divine Poem of the Birth, Life, Death
and Resurrection of our Savior. By J. Salter formerly of St. Mary
Magdalen-College in Oxon, now Vicar of St. Marys Church in Devon. 1692.


