Psalterium Carolinum. THE DEVOTIONS OF HIS SACRED MAJESTY CHARLES THE FIRST IN
HIS SOLITUDES AND SUFFERINGS, Rendered in Verse by T. S. Esquire;,

And set to Music for three voices, an Organ or Theorbo, by John Wilson, Dr.
and Music Professor in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for John Martin, James Allestry, and Thomas Dicas, and are to
be sold at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

^


TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY CHARLES, THE SECOND.
SIR,
THe Psalms of David have been continued in verse through many Languages; in
these your Majesty's Royal Father, (a Person of like Dignity, Sufferings and
Piety,) breaths forth, (for so he calls them) the comforts of David. The
Parallel gave occasion to this attempt; and that inaccessible perfection of
Language, in which they were first clothed, will justify to the World, that
there could not be any possible encouragement to this undertaking, more than
that of a pious Duty to the sacred memory of the Author; and a particular
Devotion to declare my self,

SIR, Your Majesty's most Loyal and Obedient Subject; THO. STANLEY.

Psalterium Carolinum.
ODE. I. Upon his Majesty's calling the Parliament.
THou Lord, have made us see, that pious thoughts
Of future reformation for past faults;
Nor satisfy thy justice; or prevent
Always the strokes of thy dire punishment.
Our hopes, ore-laid by sin, on thee depend
For pardon, not on our Resolves t'amend,
When by vindictive judgments on us laid,
Thou have thy glory in our shame displaid:
And how unsafe it is, shown us by these,
To dare to offend, on after hopes to please.
Thy mercies then (I trust) the blessings may
Restore, which wronged, we forced thee snatch away.
Who early penitence for sin denied,
Now mourn for remedies too late applied.
Yet as my Aims were right, I not repent
That I this later Council did convent.
Th'insuing Miseries have, for our sin,
The sad effects of thy just anger bin;
And through thy mercy may preparatives
Of future blessings be, and better lives.
Stripped of all else, teach us by them to thrive;
That as thy Staff, thy Rod may comfort give*
If with afflictions, patience thou bestow,
The strokes are of a Father, not a Foe.
Nor shall I then the ills this Council wrought
Repent; by them to true repentance brought.
Our sufferings with thy Grace, far more we prize,
Than our own peace with our impieties.
Sole Good and Wise, our hearts as Counsels steare;
That the worst things we from thy justice bear
To better, by thy mercy us inure,
Poisoned with Antidotes, with poison cure.
So we by sins of Peace, to War inclined,
Through this sad war, thy happy peace may find.
Whilst I (though troubles here perplex my reign)
May in my heart, and in thy Heaven attain
That Crown of Peace which Christ has bought, and thou Will on thy servant for his sake bestow.
ODE II. Upon the Earl of Strafford's death.
THou whose mercies know no bound,
Pardon my compliant sin.
Death in me the guiltless found,
Who his Refuge should have bin.
To her self and thee my Soul,
Her transgression open lays;
Cleanse me from a guilt so foul,
And thy mercies I shall praise.
With the crime, my heart withstood,
Did my differing hand comply;
Yet if bathed in thy rich blood,
Snow my whiteness shall outvy.
Justice let me learn of thine,
Who for death unjustly given;
Future dangers to decline,
Into greater now am driven.
Nor by partial judgments swayed
Let me with thy will dispense.
Once (too often) I was betrayed
Man to appease and thee incense.
Nor bribed by Interest let me,
My misguided heart withdraw
From my conscience and from thee:
Thou my Judge, and that my Law.
To thy joy my Soul unite,
And my ready will submit
To thy spirits saving light,
Truth my heart and actions knit.
Lord to the interceding Voice,
Of my Saviors blood incline.
O make me and mine rejoice,
And the broken bones rejoyn.
ODE III. Upon his Majesty's going to the house of Commons.
LOrd thou in Heaven and in my heart
My witness art,
If to oppress the Innocent
I ever meant,
Then let the Foe my life confound,
And tread my Honors to the ground.
The mists which cozen humane sight
Shrink from thy light;
The Heart and Reins thy searching eyes
Anatomize;
Truth wrapped in darkness, lost in doubt,
To day restoring; O shine out.
Nor guilty in the ills I bear
Let me appear;
Though innocence from their success
My foes profess,
Yet pardon what amiss they do,
Even in this World unpunished too.
From ills that rage, or seem to sleep,
Thy servant keep:
As to this crime my hands are white;
My heart upright.
Plead thou my cause, just Judge defend me,
And joy in thy salvation send me.
ODE IIII. Upon the insolency of the Tumults.
TO thee I fly thou sole defense
Of my invaded innocence:
Who only can the stubborn Main,
And people more enraged restrain.
The floods, the floods, or'e-swell their bounds,
Danger my threatened soul surrounds.
Mine and my Realms iniquity,
(The tumults of our souls against thee)
These popular inundations cause,
That bear down Loyalty and Laws.
But thou to Seas did fix a shore,
And from the Deluge, Earth restore,
O quell these salvage Beasts, and me
From their tumultuous Rapines free.
In all our Counsels once again,
Let peace and equal freedom reign:
That Reason, and Religion may
Our Hearts, as Men and Christians, sway.
And we thy sacred name shall bless,
Who can, what men design, repress.
Instruct their Leaders to repent,
Be Shame, not Death, their punishment:
Errors with Truth, Passion with Reason,
Schisms with Love, with Laws bound Treason:
That like thy City, We in one
May meet* This grant for thy dear Son.
ODE V. Upon his Majesty's passing the Bill for Trienniall Parliaments.
TO thee, my God, I still appeal,
Whose all discerning eyes reveal,
The clouds that humane thoughts conceal.
A heart thou gav'st me to bestow
Much on my Subjects, which must now
Learn much from them to undergo.
Thy will be done, and ours denied,
When most to thine, it seems allied
And theirs, who thee pretend their guide.
Instruct me wisely to employ
The Crosses, that my hopes destroy;
As the fullfillings of my joy.
I raised my own fears, theirs t'abate,
Unsettled mine, to fix their State,
Who recompense my love with hate.
In this dark Storm my Pilot be,
Which to make home, nor suffers me,
Nor elsewere, with security.
My life thou safely can dispose,
Circled by friends, or tossed by those
Who poison what my love bestows.
My bounty they, I thine abuse:
Such Grace, such Penitence infuse,
We may not injure, thou accuse.
May I their errors rightly see,
By their ingratitude to me,
Wisely reforming mine to thee.
That though from temporal blessings thrown,
By sins of others for my own;
Thy mercies may my sufferings crown.
ODE VI. Upon his Majesty's retirement from Westminster.
OUR native freedom, Lord, preserve,
Which bids our wills thy will obey:
Yet from our Conscience never swerve,
Whilst men's Decrees with Law we weigh,
And Reason, nor of ought allow
But that, to which our judgments bow.
Where fixed by thee I did reside,
That place, by Subjects forced, I quitted:
Yet for their good my self denied
In all to my dispose submitted:
Let no Demands in Tumults pressed,
From my consent unjust power wrest.
The greatest mischief of my Foes,
Teach me with joy to entertain;
Ere the least sin that they propose,
The whiteness of my Conscience stain:
Just freedom let thy People have,
Yet not my Soul be made a Slave.
Thou have disposed me to a Throne,
And with a Crown my Temples decked:
The reason which from thee I own,
Let others Passions not subject.
So shall my truth with thee comply,
Though them I cannot satisfy.
Whilst I, by their injurious wrath,
With violence am forced away;
Guide thou my steps, nor from the path
Of Truth and Justice, let me stray.
For which my troubles now increase,
But they at last shall crown my Peace.
ODE VII. Upon the Queens departure and absence out of England.
LOrd those whom thou in Vows have tied,
Yet now by distance do divide,
Here or in Heaven unite.
Defend Us from despightfull Foes,
And by the sufferings they impose,
Prepare Us for thy sight.
Though in Religion we dissent,
Hear our Devotions jointly bent
Thy sacred Truth to find:
Love in our equal hearts infuse
Of thee, and him, who us to excuse
His sinless life resigned.
With judgment and desire endue,
Goodness to know and to pursue;
These in our Souls prevent:
Ere Disobedience Harbor win,
Or Blindness, be not that our sin;
Nor this our punishment,
O let no Truth my Foes profess,
Be blemished by the wickedness
That in their actions thrives;
May Mine and others Constancy,
An Antidote more powerful be
Against their poisonous lives.
Let that sole Faith thou do approve,
In Loyal Peace, and humble Love,
(Their native dress) appear:
Not in the loathsome black disguise,
Of new Rebellious Heresies,
Which they would force her wear.
That she whom Vows make part of me,
Thy sacred saving Truth may see,
From humane Dross refined;
And (in that Crystal Glass displayed)
The mercies in his Blood conveyed,
Whose life his Precepts signed:
May knowledge of Earths vain delights,
Eclipsed by unexpected Nights,
By sudden Storms ore-cast;
Inflame our Spirits with desire,
To those Celestial joys t'aspire,
Which time shall never wast.
ODE VIII. Upon his Majesty's repulse at Hull, and the Fates of the Hothams.
WHO vengeance on my wrongs have shown,
And by my Foes, my Foes ore-thrown:
Let not his fall invite
My Soul by close delight;
To make thy just revenge her own.
Thou have reverted on his head
The mischiefs he for others spread,
Unwish'd, unasked by me:
That all the Earth may see;
Thou did my Cause in judgment plead.
I will not, dare not imprecate
The like on all that bear me hate.
No: to their Souls dispense
Pardon and Penitence,
Charged with no due afflictions weight.
Deprive me not of Theams so fit
For Mercy: but their sins remit
Whose bold Demerit climbs,
Next those ungrateful Crimes,
Of which thou Me art pleased t'acquit.
Their Sins be to their Conscience pressed,
In Sorrow not in Judgment dressed;
The Thunder that was thrown
So dreadfully at one,
Be a just terror to the rest.
Fear with repentant Knowledge join,
Of their malicious black Design:
That to thy mercies they,
Finding the spacious way;
May thy devouring Wrath decline.
Lord, send thy Truth and Mercy down,
In them set fast thy servants Throne,
Let Peace and Justice meet,
With mutual Kisses greet,
And prop my never fading Crown.
Be to our prayer for Foes intent;
Whom (when thy foes) thou did prevent
With offered Clemency,
Sending thy Son to dye
For them who on his Death were bent.
ODE IX. Upon the Listing and Raising Armies against the King.
THrough humane clouds thy Rays
like Lightning glide;
No prejudice thy Sentence swaies,
For Knowledge is thy Judgments guide.
The proud, my Soul oppose,
And slight thy Laws;
Help, Lord, for many are my Foes,
They hate me yet without a cause.
I never did (thou know)
These Broiles begin,
In which, though I adventure most,
Yet I am certain least to winn.
But often deplored and strove,
With care to avoid;
My life such dangers could not love,
Better to save than kill employed.
My other sufferings far
Their Calumny
Outweighs: who tell the World this war
(My greatest cross) was raised by Me.
Yet this by silence I
Willingly could own;
Might it their malice satisfy,
Whilst thou my innocence have known.
Deceitful Murderers shall
Thy Vengeance find;
Already some by timeless fall,
Are barred the fruit their Rage designed.
Who War affect suppress,
My God arise,
Lift up thy self, my Foes increase,
Pregnant with Mischief, Sin, and Lies.
My Life and Conscience they
At once invade;
Let that to their fierce Rage a Prey,
Ere this to thy just Wrath be made.
My clearness Refuge claims;
Yet if my Blood
Can only quench my Kingdoms flames,
Let my own Subjects sluice the Flood.
But (O) the Blood of Me
their sinful King,
Washed in my guiltless Saviors, be
Thy mercies unexhausted Spring.
When Death, thy Wrath to appease
I undergo,
My People from this sin release;
Forgive! They know not what they do.
ODE X. Upon the seizing the Kings Magazins, Forts Navy, and Militia.
O my God, to thee I fly,
Stronger than the Enemy;
Heaven nor Earth are wished by me,
In comparison of thee.
Let me be when All denied,
More than All by thee supplied.
Have to help, thou failst not those
Who their trust in thee repose.
Robbed of Power to check their Will,
Who are blindly led to Kill,
By pretenses to Protect;
I to thee my Eyes erect.
Help thou need'st not, nor shall I,
Whilst thou do not thine deny;
To subdue or undergo.
If Success thou not bestow,
Nor my safety wilt allow,
To thy judgment see I bow;
Which upon thy Children fall:
Nothing I, so thou be all.
Kings are unsecure that boast
In the number of an Host;
But thy numerous Mercies are
Our defense, O God of War.
Dangers on each side press near;
Help; and Man I shall not fear.
My distresses glory I
To thy justice will apply,
Glorified thy Mercy be,
In my safe delivery.
By my sins against thee I fought,
And to robb thy Glory sought;
Though thy Subject; by my own,
Justly me thou migh'st unthrone.
But break forth! nor let the Foe
Boast his God no strength can show.
In thy paths my footsteps guide,
Suffer not my feet to slide;
As thine Eye my Soul defend,
And thy shady wing extend,
From the wicked that oppose,
And with Malice me enclose;
To those joys my conduct be,
Which in fullness wait on thee.
ODE XI. Upon the Nineteen Propositions sent to the King.
Eternal wisdom armd with might,
With Truth and Right my Reason clear;
To which so make my will adhere,
No threats may from their Dictates fright:
Thou did not raise me to a Throne,
To bar me common liberty.
Shall that be named a crime in me,
Which others as a virtue own?
Unjustly they their King deny
The freedom, which all mortals claim:
Whilst even themselves exact the same,
With partial pertinacity.
To thee I pray who through the maze
Of my own thoughts, and suits (like snares
Spread to involve my soul in cares)
Can surely guide: make plain thy ways.
Let not my Passions cloud thy light;
Thy Word my Rule, thy Praise my End.
To all I cannot, will not bend
To some; Thee pleased all else I slight.
Who Plots unweav'st, and the Self-wise
Entangl'st in their own design;
To thy wise Truth my soul incline,
And men's esteem I shall despise.
The less my wisdom shall appear,
More thine that guide'st me shines; whilst I
Nothing through willfullness deny,
Nor grant through Flattery, or Fear.
No suits by my consent be signed,
Injurious to the public good:
No public benefits withstood,
To sooth my own dissenting mind.
To such, though from my Enemies,
Teach me to give a free access;
Our honest errors thou can bless,
As blast the Counsels falsely wise.
Since private words thy scourge obey,
Teach me to poise what I declare.
The bolder men's Petitions are,
Let me the more my Answers weigh.
Though troubles Me and mine attend,
And Peace our Pressures would acquit;
Yet let me not to purchase it,
My Conscience (which is thine) expend.
ODE XII. Upon the Rebellion and troubles in Ireland.
THy mercies Lord (hence in displeasure fled)
On me and my torn Kingdoms I implore:
Whose loss we both too justy merited,
But never can deserve thou should restore.
Thou see the cruelty that Christians use,
In the false colors of Religion died;
As if the names of Christians they should lose,
Unless they one another crucified.
Since we thy Truth and Charity despised,
Error, and Hatred now their room possess.
My God, O pardon those thou have chastised;
Our wounds with penitential Balm redress.
Make not our sufferings less in thy esteem;
And to our Conscience let our sins appear,
As they in th'mirrour of thy judgments seem;
Which to small crimes are never so severe.
Remove their numerous weight, and be appeased,
Yet then our sins may they afflict us less:
More willing to repent than to be eased,
With peace our Souls, and next our Kingdoms bless.
By thy great mercy our offenses drowned,
In the calm Sea of our Redeemers blood:
And through the purple current of our own,
Steer us at last to Plenty, Peace, and Good.
To me a share of all the ills that press
My Subjects, does my wide relation bring:
Give me a pious sense of their distress,
Such as befits their Father and their King.
Let the reproachful breath their Malice spreads,
Kindle in me compassionate desires:
My Charity heap Coals upon their heads,
Whose zealous cruelty my Kingdom fires.
O rescue those whom yet thou have preserved,
Reduceing all to thy Truths saving ways;
Who by mistake or ignorance have swerved,
But punish them who these combustions raise.
Not with the guilty thou the innocent,
Nor th'erring, wilt with the malicious slay:
To Foes, through avarice on Slaughter bent,
Give not that poor seduced Realm away.
In the devouring Furnace of thine ire,
A race, that may thy mercy praise, maintain*
Deal not with me as men's untruths require,
But as my guiltless hands are free from stain.
If I have sought or loved my Kingdoms woes,
Nor did my studies faithfully employ,
These bloody wild distractions to compose,
Then let thy hand my fathers house destroy.
That I have Foes enough thou Lord do see,
I durst not call thy curse on me and mine,
Were I not guiltless to my self and thee;
Thy mercies are my trust: Thy wrath decline.
ODE XIII. Upon the calling in of the Scots.
MY troubles, Lord, are multiplied,
O succor the distressed!
In simplest truth thy Servant guide,
The wisest interest.
From th'associate strength of Foes
Be thou my just defense,
Who, for the Serpents craft, depose
The Doves white Innocence.
Though to oppress Me they agree;
Combined in mutual aid,
Let not my Soul and Honors, be
to their deceits betrayed.
Devotion, and Allegiance, thou
Can in their hearts renew;
That him they may restore, whom now
They eagerly pursue.
Love of thy Truth preserve in me,
And I despair not theirs:
At thy command the flowing Sea
Back to its Bound repair's.
My God, on thee my hopes depend,
Me let not shame surprise,
But them who without cause offend;
Repulse my Enemies.
My Armor be Integrity,
For Lord, on thee I wait:
The Church, which thou have owned, set free
From her perplexed estate.
ODE XIV. Upon the Covenant.
LOrd, I to thee direct my cries,
My Subjects forward Oaths remit:
Quicken their sense of those firm ties,
By law upon their Conscience knit.
With which no pious, no pretense
Of Reformation can dispense.
Religion owns no injury:
No Sacreledge by thee allowed;
Though masked with hate t'Idolatry:
Their zeal-disguised fraud uncloud.
Things Holy it is a snare to take,
And after Vows enquiry make.
Asssist thy servant to withstand
Rapines involved in Perjury:
Nor ever let me wear the brand
Of having robbed thy Church and thee.
Since what to us thy bounty gives,
From us thy Clemency receives.
Though my Revenues are decreast,
My debts enlarged, my Treasures drained,
Let not my wants, by such unblest
Rapines, consent to be sustained:
Least from thy Altar fall a Cole,
And fire at once my Throne and Soul.
Let no vain public Indigence,
The Church from her endowments sever,
The 'State, by peaceful Providence,
May theirs regain the Church can never:
Whilst Charity is thought a vice,
Religion placed in Avarice.
Let them who in thy Temple serve,
What pious Donors gave, enjoy:
And (those incitements to deserve)
Their wealth, to aid the low, employ:
The Priests in Righteousness arrayed,
The hunger of the Poor allai'd.
No hallowed things let Swine divide,
Nor Dogs devour the Churches bread:
But Grin and Snarle unsatisfi'd.
Whilst all that have already fed
Death in those sacred morsells find,
And leave a rotten name behind.
Lord, break the Treasons of my Foes,
In Sacrilege Confederate:
Disjoin the Hearts and Tongues of those
Who bandy against the Church and State
Let all the world their folly see,
And in my clearness succor me.
ODE XV. Upon the Iealousies raised, and Scandalls cast upon the King etc.
O Lord thou see my wrongs abound;
Lions enraged my Soul surround,
With poi'snous words
Their Tongues like Swords,
Their teeth like Arrows wound.
My foes reproach me all the day,
And sworn deceits together lay;
My God! how long
Shall they grow strong,
Who with vain Lies inveigh.
The Calumnies which they have sown
On every side to thee are known,
Hold not thy peace
Least they increase,
And bury my Renown.
The Lier thou will ruinate,
The Bloody and the false do hate;
Let my upright
Intents, a light,
Clear as the Sun dilate.
My patience let not wrath outweigh,
Nor silence Innocence betray,
That I may tread,
As thou have led,
Curses with blessings pay.
Shimei, when his envenomed pride
Seemed by thy judgments justifi^d*
Thou did ore-throw:
But deal not so
With them that me deride.
My Prayer and Patience in these wrongs,
Like water, cool, and quench their toungs;
Enflamed with Ire,
By that black fire
Which unto Hell belongs.
O let my Deeds their Words refute,
Nor they enjoy the deadly fruit
Which (dipped in gall)
Their lips let fall:
But my indulgent suit.
My Soul to meek Devotion win:
That I thy boundless mercies, in
Their malice, may
With joy survay;
Thy justice in their sin.
O let the Curses they have thrown
At me, invite thy blessings down.
What some refuse,
Be pleased to choose
For the Head corner stone.
Look down from thy eternal Tower,
Redeem from them that would devour:
My Soul O hide,
From men's bold pride,
From their invective power.
ODE XVI. Upon the Ordinance against the Common Prayer Book.
THou still the same for ever blessed,
Whom mercies infinite invest,
In various constancy expressed?
Thou have us with new sense indu'd
Of our old wants, nor scornst renewed
Desires, in unchanged words pursued.
Still let our fixed Devotions join;
Our suits to thy firm will incline;
Our fervent Spirits move by thine.
For thou, in all perfection wise,
Nor novelty in prayer do prize,
Nor pious constancy despise.
By thy command preferring neither,
Left in thy Churches power together,
To use, but not disparage either.
Devotions moderately guide,
None injured, none just helps denied,
By others ignorance or pride.
Since Errors ever are unsure,
And by pretense of change allure;
Whilst truth in Union is secure:
Preserve thy Church, that no unfit
Orders (as various) she admit;
Nor Constancy, as formal, quit.
Lord, chase Hypocrisy away,
And then (we know) we safely may,
In settled forms, or praise, or pray.
Teach us what dwells within to mend,
And less we outward need attend.
From bold blind zeal thy Church defend.
ODE XVII. Upon the differences between the King, and the two Houses, in point
of Church Government.
TO thee my uprightness is known,
Who have appointed me to own
Thy s^cred Faiths defense;
O let me not of thee forlorn,
Against my Conscience be ore-born,
By floods of violence.
Up Lord, in thine own cause arise;
Least Schism make thy Church its prize,
And trample on her power;
From thee continued to our time,
When Wealth is made her fatal crime;
Her sin is her fair Dower.
Whom, some have plunderd, others wound,
The rest deserted as they found,
Or in her sufferings joy:
May I her hurts, and wants relieve,
The power which I from thee receive:
Teach me for thee t'imploy.
To her that love be still sustained,
I owe as Christian, though restrained:
As King from all my right;
The bounties on thy Church displaid:
By providence, let none invade,
With sacrilegious might.
Forgive their Error, and their Sin,
Who wrought thy sufferance to let in:
Fly Foxes and wild Boars,
To lay that goodly Vineyard wast,
Which thy right hand in planting graced
Watered with heavenly showers.
Oh! never let such Infamy,
Brand my clear Name, as to agree:
To Oppose the Church and those,
Whose Errors I should rather hide:
With silence, or with meekness chide,
Than to comtempt expose.
The wrongs which with thy Church I bear,
And for her sake, to thee appear:
Have, Lord, to set us free,
From ravenous men of reason void:
Who have old Bounds of Peace destroi'd,
To let in Heresy.
Thou God of Peace and Order, quell
The malice of our Foes, dispell
Their black devices, then
May we, who in thy Church delight,
The wonders of thy Praise recite,
Before the Sons of men.
ODE XVIII. Upon the Uxbridge Treaty, etc.
OF Peace and Reason Lord!
Delighting in accord;
The wicked who from sin,
With offered Grace would win!
Whose mercy courts to save,
Though power to kill thou have!
(Our hearts to softness wooed
In our Redeemers blood)
Persuade us to agree,
Both with our selves and thee:
As Men and Christians ought,
Peace often have I sought,
But it no sooner name,
Than war my Foes proclaim.
Our actions never may,
Destructive Passions sway.
Our Judgments clear, that we
Thy Truth may plainly see.
Our stubborn Hearts incline,
In bonds of Peace to join.
Our irreligious hate
To thee, oh dissipate;
That to our selves, remove
With interchanged Love,
The war our sins have wrought,
With Peace, which Christ has bought;
ODE XIX. Upon the various events of War, Victories, and Defeats.
With ready joy oh let me, Lord! agree
To be overcome when thou will have it so:
Instruct me in the noblest Victory,
By patience to subdue my self, and foe;
Conquest like Christ's, a Christian King best show:
Mold us to Piety betwixt thy Hands,
Pressed by thy left, supported by thy right;
Pardon the pride of our succesfull Bands,
And the repinings of our luckless Fight,
When (trusting in our own) denied thy might:
When we are ought, or nothing, be thou All;
That thy wide glory's the whole World may fill,
Or in our Conquest, or inglorious fall.
Thou know with what Regret I suffer ill,
From those whose Good's the scope of all my will.
The Ills they force me to inflict, I bear;
And in their punishments, my own embrace,
Victor or vanquished? since a double share
Of certain suffering does my Hope displace,
Grant me a double Portion of thy Grace.
As most afflicted, Lord, reform me most,
To see our Peace, and to restore it blessed.
That all subdued by reasons power, may boast,
A mutual Conquest, common strife suppressed
In public Union, our joint Interest.
But if as sins of Peace provoked this War,
Peace for the sins of War thou should deny,
Making our miseries more circular:
Yet let thy servant midst these broils enjoy
That Peace the World nor gives, nor can destroy.
To me impute not, Lord! the purple Flood,
Shed with unwilling grief in my defense.
But wash me in my Saviors precious blood:
By whom my troubles hope a quick dispense;
For short are impious joy's, and Confidence.
ODE XX. Upon the Reformation of the Times.
LOrd, thou who Beauty can return,
To them that mourn;
And the disguised pretext of Art,
To Truth convert;
Oh let us not by shows be guil'd,
Seem pure without, within defiled.
Within, where most deformed we are,
Be our first care,
Then with clear eyes the Church we may
And State survey.
Our Hearts, our Spirits, Lord, renew,
That we thy Dictates may pursue.
Upon our foul disorders, bred
By them, who (led
With rage) to purge us undertook,
With pity look.
Quench thou the fire that Factions raise,
From Reformations specious Blaze.
As their Division, Lord, proclaims
Their weak, bad Aims?
So let us (in those fires refined)
In love be joined;
From Passions freed: blessed with increase
Of inward Virtue, outward Peace.
ODE XXI. Upon his Majesty's Letters taken and divulged?
THou Lord, who by thy wise Decree,
Do our Contingency dispose;
Make me thy constant mercyes see,
In the advantage of my Foes.
Thou can their Counsels turn away,
And their devices ruinate:
Who all my secrets open lay,
To work me in my Peoples hate.
To thy Omniscience I repair,
Witness with my Integrity,
How false the wrested Comments are,
Which they to what I write apply.
The ill directed by their Aim
To me; so turn upon their Head,
That they may be involved in shame;
And with Confusion overspread.
Thou see with what malicious Art,
They seek to cloud me with disgrace:
But give me a submissive Heart,
Dishonor for thy sake to embrace.
Make me intent to honor thee,
And I in Honor shall abound;
Restored to my first Dignity,
Or else with equal Patience crowned.
Thou art in Majesty arrayed!
Goodness and Glory from Thee spring:
With Wisdom, Justice, Mercy aid,
I shall not want what fits a King.
Thou the Exalter of my Head,
In Thee is my Salvation placed:
Lord by thy Grace to Glory lead,
Which to Eternity shall last.
ODE XXII. Upon his Majesty's leaving Oxford, and going to the Scots.
Thou, who all Souls, all Consciences do sway,
To thee I look dismayed!
To thy Protection I commit my way.
Thou, who my life did aid,
Still in thy weakness can thy strength display.
A fiery Pillar in dark nights to me,
And with thy light direct,
In scorching Day's a cloudy Pillar be;
And with thy shade protect.
O let me find both Sun, and Shield in Thee.
My life I was not by perverseness wrought
To hazard thus t'xpose:
But Reason, Honor, and Religion taught,
To guard my self from those,
Whose impious force to wrest them from me sought.
Let not the just Resolves, I have endu'd
With outward strength, abate
A Conscience where no wrong did e're intrude:
Be my Associate,
In my Desertions greatest Solitude.
My Fort of Reason let me not betray,
Trusted to keep for Thee.
From thy Salvation that I never stray,
My constant Conduct be.
If Thee I please, Peace shall my Foes allay.
ODE XXIII. Upon the Scots delivering the King to the English, and his
Captivity at Holmeby
THou that alone art infinite
In good, and greatness; dwel'st with me,
Weighed with thy Presence Life is light,
Thy service perfect Liberty:
Own me for thine, I cannot but be free.
As I am Man with Reason bless,
With Zeal as Christian; Right as King:
Of outward stripped, let me possess
Thee in the joy's that from Thee spring;
Which against my will no force can from me wring.
Let not my Passion over-boyle
To fruitless Rage, or sordid fear:
They think him helpless whom they foil:
But let thy cheerful light appear,
And secure freedom shall my glories clear.
Befitting my afflicted state,
A patient Constancy bestow:
My strength and hopes are dissipate,
My self imprisoned by the Foe:
O be not far, least they too mighty grow.
A scorn and wonder I am made;
Thou my defense and succor be:
My Foes ashamed to see thy aid,
In thy free Spirit settle me
To act and suffer, what is willed by Thee.
My Soul into thy favor bring,
For She her Hope in Thee has placed?
My shelter is thy shady Wing,
Till these Calamities be past:
Rise to deliver us, my God make have!
Thy mercy (though the Life it gives,
Thou take away) shall be my Trust:
I know that my Redeemer lives,
Though in Deaths vale resolved to Dust,
Yet shall no taint of fear my bright Faith rust.
ODE XXIIII. Upon their denying his Majesty the attendanc^ of his Chaplains.
TO Thee my solitary Prayers I send,
The help that others my Distress deny,
With thy assistant Spirit Lord supply:
To dullness Life, Light to my Darkness lend.
Thou, Sun that beams of Righteousness do spread,
Thou sacred Spring of heavenly Light and heat,
Both warmth and clearness in my Heart beget,
Instruct, and for thy Servant intercede.
Fullness, sufficience, favor thee array;
Enough Thou Comfort art, and Company:
Thou art my King, my Priest and Prophet be;
Rule, teach, pray, in me, for me, with me stay.
Jacob who singly did with Thee contest
In sacred Duel, Thee his second had:
He conquered, and a blessing (by thy aid)
From Thee with welcome Violence did wrest.
With mercy on thy Servant be intent,
Who his Devotions once with them did join,
Whose fervor might inflame the cold of mine;
When to thy House with Joy and Peace we went.
Of those Occasions our neglect forgive,
Which we with just Improvement would not scan;
Now like the desert-hunting Pelican,
Or Sparrow pearch'd on some housetop I live.
And scattered like a dying Coal, from all
Those pious glowings that might fire impart:
Keep and increase on The Altar of my Heart,
On Thee in sacrifice of Prayer to call.
Yet thou that do not break the bruised Reed,
Nor quench the smoking Flax, oh! not despise,
The smothered Prayers that from my lone Soul rise,
Denied the helps which I desire and need.
The hardness of their Hearts, let soften mine;
Their hate my Love, deny all Prayers excite,
Their deafness thy Attention Lord invite,
Whose ready Ear, Heart, Hand to help incline.
Men may debar thy Churches outward right,
Not inward Grace to humble minds conveyed.
O make me such, and thou will Teach, Hear, Aid:
A broken contrite Heart, thou will not slight.
Thou Temple, Altar, Sacrifice and Priest,
At once can make me* who each day alone
In Vows Prayers, Tears am thy Oblation:
By whom prepared, accepted, and possessed?
Thou did the Widow's Meal and Oil increase,
And secretly by strange supply's infuse
Into the Vessel and unwasting Cruze,
Which with the Drought and Dearth did only cease.
O my forsaken widowed Soul preserve,
Let not thy Truth and sweet Effusions fail
My memory and heart, but so prevail,
Kept from accustomed food, I may not sterve.
Yet better sterve than by their Hands to feed,
Who mix my Bread with Ashes, and infect
My Wine with Gall; who torture, not direct;
Prone to reproaches, which their Prayers exceed.
To my Destruction they pervert thy Word,
O be it not eternally to theirs:
Devouring under color of long Prayers,
The Houses of their Brethren, King, and Lord.
Let not the Balm of these Men break my Head,
Nor let their Cordials my heart oppress:
Against their precisely colored wickedness,
My fervent Prayers incessantly shall plead.
Lord from the Snares their treacherous Lips include,
Their poy'snous toungs, and from their words sharp fire
Keep me and those who my Souls good desire,
Relieving with their Prayers my solitude.
ODE XXV. Penitential Meditations and Vows in the Kings solitude at Homeby.
My God, my King incline thine Ear,
My cry to Thee directed hear.
Incensed I said, we from Thy Care
Are cast: yet Thou receiv'st my Prayer.
Thy Rigor who can satisfy?
But to thy mercy's sinners fly.
Lord I acknowledge my offense,
Dilated in my Eminence.
The sins I act, or do permit
By unimproved Power acquit.
Rebellious I to Thee became,
Now, Prisoner to my Subjects am.
Yet though restrained my Person be,
By grace enlarge my Heart to Thee;
Though David's Piety I want,
His griefs I have; His comforts grant!
O be my Penitential sense
Of sins, their Pardons evidence.
^steem not our Afflictions small,
Though our loud Crimes for greter call
Turn Thee, O Lord, Thy mercy show,
For I am desolate and Low.
The sorrow's of my Heart increase,
O give my miseries release.
Have Thou forgotten to be kind?
In wrath thy tender Care confined?
O call to mind thy Love of old,
And thy Compassions manifold.
Amongst the living I expected,
Thy Goodness, else had been dejected.
Let not our prosperour sins make less,
The benefits of ous distress.
Consume the Dross in this sharp fire,
Which by long Peace, we did acquire:
On us if Thou Afflictions lay,
Take not thy strengthening Grace away.
With patient Penitence supply
The want of our Prosperity.
And if thy Wrath not yet shall end,
If still thy Justice thou extend:
Me and my Fathers House ore-run,
As for these sheep what have they done?
O let my sufferings satiate those,
Who to thy Church and me are Foes.
But not when they most cruel grow,
My wider Charity out-goe:
No vengefull thought my Patience stain,
Whose glory's thine, but mine the gain.
Me thou to Pardon have inclined,
Let both our Foes thy Pardon find:
And now as Thou my heart do bow
To Prayer, hear, and accept my vow.
If thou remember us in Love,
Nor wilt thy sacred Light remove;
Of Law and Justice repossest,
Faction and Heresy suppressed.
If me and mine thou will restore
To the just Rights we held before:
If thou each subjects stubborn Heart
By Piety to Thee convert:
By humble Loyalty to Me,
And to themselves by Charity;
From civil Broils, if thou release,
And make their fatal causes cease:
If thou free Councels wilt dispense,
Not curbed by vulgar insolence:
If thou my Conscience wilt defend:
Nor to Church Rapins let me bend:
If me with Power thou reinvest,
Such as thy Glorys may attest,
Then shall my soul thy Praise proclaim:
And to thy people laud thy Name:
Then shall thy truth, and thy Renown
My only treasure be and Crown,
Then I with Equity shall sway;
In Justice shall my Realms obey.
That as my Right from Thee alone,
I may my Restitution own:
If I by thy Assistance come
With Honor, Peace, and safety home.
If thou once more the awful sword
To punish and protect afford,
Then all shall see my Foes partake,
This Vow which now to Thee I make.
What now as Christian I forgive,
No snare of law shall back retrieve.
Me from my self their Skill can part,
But I will never learn that art.
A full Indemnity shall clear
The growing doubts of jealous fear:
Strict Amnesty shall Peace prefer,
And in Oblivion wrongs interre.
No future Counsels shall control
This solemn purpose of my Soul:
To me let Mercy so increase,
As I resolve on Truth and Peace.
To my Petition, Lord, attend,
Which Lips with guile untainted send:
His Name be blessed who hears my Cry,
Nor his full mercy will deny.
My Soul thy way to God commit,
Him trust, and he shall perfect it.
If not restored, yet who am I,
That I should charge thee foolishly?
Thou gav'st? thou, Lord, have taken away,
We blessings to thy Name shall pay.
Happy thy Church, my People, be,
At least without, if not by Me.
ODE XXVI. Upon the Armies surprizall of the King at Holmeby, and the Ensuing
distractions in the two Houses, the Army, and the City,
LOord, Thou sacred Unity,
In an undivided Trine,
Those combined in Mercy see;
Whom thy Justice does disjoyne.
Save me from dissenting Foes,
Who my Prayers and pity need;
And each other now oppose,
Though to fight with me agre'd.
All discording parties guide,
To the Peace from which they sway,
Whilst they serve or Court a side,
Not the voice of Law obey.
Make me willingly to go
Where thy Providence will lead:
And the change of things below,
In thy constant Presence read.
Make me by thy skillfull Hand,
Such as thou would have me be;
Then waft me safely to that Land,
Where Peace ever dwells with thee.
Spare our Citie's (Lord) impure,
Through their Wealth and Plenty made;
In their multitude secure,
By Security betrayed.
Make them see, weigh, chose and do
For thy Glory, and our Peace:
Lest affliction like a Foe,
Armed for slaughter on them seize.
Enemies their sins excite,
Long unfoyl'd they cannot be,
Who (their conscience thwarting) fight
More against themselves than Me.
Guilt thy Justice has pursued,
And for Rapin Wealth makes way:
Tumults grow from multitude;
Those to confusion betray.
Though with mutual forwardness,
They have set malicious Snares
Me in mischief to oppress:
Be not yet my Ruin theirs.
Let me not so much debate,
What they do, or what I bear;
As my Savior imitate,
And their Advocate appear.
That when longer Me to live,
These extremities forbid;
Pray, Father them forgive!
For they knew not what they did.
Tears which to my Misery,
They denied, to theirs deplore:
Which the less they spend for me,
For themselves they need the more.
My Blood light not on their Head,
Who my Crucifixion sought:
By the fraud of some misled,
Not by general malice taught.
But thou, Lord, can with thy Care,
Me by sufferings elevate;
Where thy Mercy's have more share,
Than thy Justice, or Man's hate.
ODE XXVII. Meditations upon Death after the votes of Non-Addresses, and his
Majesty's closer Imprisonment in Carisbrook Castle.
THou that fill'st Heaven and Earth, O King of Kings,
In whom no Death, whence Life eternal Springs:
Who can our Souls unto the yawning Grave
Justly condemn, or mercifully save.
Better be dead to our selves, in thee survive;
Than robbed of Thee, and to our selves alive.
O let the bitter means that aggravate
My fall, thy Comforts in my Soul dilate.
If thou art with Me, fear shall not assail,
Though I should walk along Deaths shady Vale.
Weak mortal man may with his Fate contend,
But it is thy Grace must strength to vanquish lend.
Thou know as Man what it is to die with Me,
Teach me by Death to live, my God, with Thee.
Though I should die I know thou ever liv'st:
Though thou should kill, eternal Life thou giv'st.
O hold not back thy Love more wished than Breath,
O be not far, for near perhaps is Death:
All the close Snares for my Destruction set,
Thy Knowledge can disclose, thy Power defeat.
Let me thy will discover that declares,
The good of Thine, through the much ill of theirs!
As I am Man I beg Thee turn away
This Cup; as Christian I have learnt to Pray,
That not my will, but thine, my God, be done;
Mine into thine resolve, and make them One.
Let my desires Life with less fervor woe,
Than thy Commands to suffer, or to do.
As thou have pardoned all my lives frail Errors,
So thou will save me from my Deaths false Terrors.
Make me content this nothing World to leave,
That all in thee (my All) I may receive.
My Foes their Duty to us both reject,
Let not thy mindful Mercyes them neglect.
What profit by my blood can they obtain,
To loose their Souls, though they my Kingdom gain.
Though my just Power against my self they bent,
Let not themselves have their just Punishment.
Thou by thy Son thy Mercy's have allied
To those Offenders, by whom Crucified?
Whilst violence he suff'red from his Foes,
Yet for their sakes those wrongs did freely choose.
O hear the Voice of his acquitting Blood,
Then the accusing Cries of mine more loud.
Let them their sins, and thy full mercyes know,
Not their own Souls deceive and overthrow.
Tempted by unjust Power, extremes t'employ,
And by fallacious Justice me destroy.
Cruel as false their mercy's have I found,
Pretending to defend, they seek to wound.
Their bloody fraud O do not thou pursue;
But with thy Pity, and my Love subdue.
And for my Blood when Inquisition
Thou make; in that of thy beloved Son
Their Souls polluted, yet repentant die;
That thy destroying Angel may pass by.
They think my Realm's too narrow both to hold,
Let thy wide Mercy me, and them infold,
So by our Savior reconciled to Thee,
Weel' live above ambitious Enmity.
When their hard, heavy Hands press down with harms,
O let me fall into thy tender Arms.
That from my Life's sad moments what away
Is cut, thy blessed Eternity may pay.
Lord thy divine Salvation clearly I
Have seen: in Peace O let thy Servant die.
FINIS.

