A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES AT HERTFORD, March the 9th. 1682/3.

By John Standish, D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

Remove not the ancient Land-markes which thy Fathers have set, Prove. 22.28.
LONDON, Printed by Tho. Milbourn, for Robert Clavel at the Sign of the Peacock,
at the West End of St. Paul's.

To the Right Worshipful James Willymott, Esquire. High Sheriff, and one of His
Majesty's Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace for the County of
Hertford; AND To all the rest of His Majesty's truly Loyal Deputy Lieutenants,
and Justices of the Peace for the said County.
SIRS,
Diverse others Reasons (besides the Consciousness of my In-sufficiency for
these things) made me at first, unwilling to appear in Print; one of which I
shall acquaint you of, to show that my desire to be excused, was Real, and not
without some ground.

Ye know, The burnt Child dreads the Fire. I never published but one Sermon
before, and that too by His MAJESTY'S express Command, and yet, I was not only
Challenged publicly, and Animadverted upon for it, but (to make the Scene more
pleasant in exposing me) the same Ingenuous unknown Hand, tied me to the
Cart-tayle of a Nonconformist, as if I had been one of the Changelings in my
Text, a false Brother; Or, in the new Style, a Trimmer.

Indeed I did not think fit to accept his Challenge, but (know all men by these
presents) that was for the Author's sake, and Theirs that set him on work, more
than my own. And I have taken occasion to mention this now, partly, to let them
see I can forgive a wrong, without the formality of receiving Satisfaction; but
chiefly to convince You, that a man may be in some danger of censure under your
Protection, when he is not safe, or out of Gunshot, though armed with the
KINGS Authority.

After all, you see, I have performed more then I would promise, and denied my
self to gratify You. For your repeated Importunity has prevailed upon my
second thoughts to believe, That the making this Sermon public, may possibly
contribute one Mite to his MAJESTY'S and the CHVRCHES service in this nice
Juncture: And then, let the Critics show their Teeth, and Conscious Men betray
their Guilt by being angry with me, it shall not break my sleep, so long as I
have gained my Point, that is, done nothing but what was my Duty to do, as
became,

Your Obedient Servant, JOHN STANDISH.
London, April the 30th. 1683.
Proverbs, Chap. 24. Ver. 21. -- Meddle not with them that are given to Change.
SEmper Eadem is Truth's Royal Motto, She is ever the same, constant and
immutable, like that Rock of Ages from whence she was hewn, even the God of
Truth, St. James 1.1^.
in whom is no variableness or shadow of turning; but Falsehood, Error and
Vice smell of the Pit, the bottomless Pit out of which they were dug. They
are constant in nothing but inconstancy: they have more change of shapes than
Proteus himself, more colors than the Camelion, more faces than ever Briareus
was fancied to have hands; alike in nothing but their common Deformity. The
Devil ye know, is the Father of Lies, who sometimes puts on the form of a
Serpent, sometimes plays the Roaring Lion, and sometimes acts an Angel of
Light, 2 Cor. 11.14.
(as may best suit with his present design) and no wonder if his Children be
all like the Father. It Is only then for Atheists, Heretics, and Hypocrites,
those unnatural Fools, to divide Sacred Unity, affect Novelties, and prove
moral Changelings; but Wisdoms Sons who have espoused the true Religion, must
be faithful and true to their holy Consort, must never abate of their old
affection, never undervalue their Choice so much as to long for varieties, (or
in the language of my Text) not meddle with them that are given to Change.

A piece of seasonable Advise for a brainsick Age, a sovereign Amulet to
preserve us from the contagious humor of a giddy unconstant World. In
pursuance whereof, I shall endeavor, 1. To explain the Wise man's Terms; and
then 2. Apply his Pious Counsel. And

1. What He means by them that are given to Change, or Changers, as the
Original may be copied as well in little. That will soon appear, if we consider,

First, The Emphasis and significancy of the Hebrew (...) Shonim, from (...)
Shanah, to change, alter, iterate, fluctuate, vary, and never continue in one
stay: from whence is (...) Shanah, a year, from its vicissitude, various
seasons, frequent changes of weather, and circular Revolutions. Some Affinity
too it seems to have with (...) Shanan, which signifies to whet and forbish up
instruments of Cruelty, weapons of War, and (in spite of the old Prophecy) to
change plow-shares into Swords, Micah. 4.3.
and turn their pruning-books into Spears.

By all which put together, we understand, that the Royal Penman, here points
at those Plagues of mankind, who live, as it were in a Circle, ever opposite to
the Center of Rest, and Peace: those Seditious, Turbulent, and Atheistical
Spirits who study nothing but Innovations: who would fain upon every occasion
(as the toy takes them) Change their God, Religion, Princes, Government,
Fundamental Laws, laudable Rites, ancient Customs, and the whole State of a
Kingdom. The very Thing He put in a Caveat against before, by way of Allegory,
saying, Prove. 22.28.
Remove not the ancient Landmarks which thy Fathers have set.

2. By considering the Antithesis, or opposition between this and the former
part of the Verse, we shall be more fully informed what these Changers are.

[My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to Change.]

The Antithesis must needs infer, That these Changers are either, 1. Such as
would seem to Fear the Lord, but not the King; pretending a mighty Zeal for the
Divine Name and Worship, (in their own, and that commonly some newfound
singular Way) but all this while reviling his Vicegerent; for, Presumptuous
are they, 2 St. Pet. 2.10.
and selfwilled, and not afraid to speak evil of Dominions, Principalities, and
Powers. Like those Russian Eremites, Fletcher's Hist. of Russia.
and Pasquil Prophets (we read of) they think themselves inspired, and sent on
purpose into the World, to blazon their Superiors faults, quarrel their
Conduct, and find some flaw in their wisest Counsels. They would have Us
believe, that the Kingdom of Christ is indeed a Fifth Monarchy to be built
upon the Ruins of all Secular Powers, and that the Church cannot be edified,
nor Religion advanced till they pluck them down, or get above them. Or else

Secondly, It must infer, That these Changers are such as Fear the King
perhaps, but not the Lord; Men of no Conscience, Rev. 17.14.
or Religion at all, but Policy. The High and Mighty KING of KINGS, and LORD of
LORDS is not in all their thoughts; they have no Fear of God before their Eyes,
but content themselves with a formal Service to their Earthly Prince; either
out of a guilty Fear, because He bears not the Sword in vain; or else out of
flattery and design, to manage their Game of worldly Interest to the best, and
advance themselves in Wealth and Honor. Or,

Thirdly and Lastly, The Antithesis must infer (and so indeed it does) that
these Changers are such as truly Fear neither God nor the King; for that the
One does ever suppose, and imply the Other. He cannot be a Loyal Subject to the
Crown of Heaven, who proves a Traitor or Rebel upon Earth. 1 St. John 4.20
If any Man love not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he
has not seen? It is impossible in St. John's Logic: And so I argue a
Fortiori: He that knows not to reverence the Image of God in his Sovereign,
(let him make what plausible shows of Piety he will, he) is no real Servant of
God; he cannot heartily Love that invisible Being of Power and Majesty, Justice
and Mercy, which Kings (of all other Men) do most lively represent. Again, Men
cannot fear the King (as they ought) and not God, because the very Reason of
that Duty they owe Him, is, That He is the Minister and Lieutenant of the
Living God, 1 St. Pet. 2.14.
ordained by Him for the Punishment of evil doers, and Praise of them that do
well; and Authorized under the broad Seal of Heaven, to see the Divine Will
observed in all things here on Earth.

Thus we see, Who and What these Changers are: And shall now 2. Enquire into
the Force of the Caution, whereby we are warned not to Meddle with such as
these.

That Solomon should hereby intend a check for Princes, or hinder the due
execution of Justice and process of Laws against Rebellion, were a gloss fit
for none but Rebels to make, who are wont to wrest all Scriptures to their own
Perdition. The Grand-Inquest may present, the Magistrate may punish, the Law
may and ought to take hold of and meddle with these Changers in that sense, 2
St. Pet. 3.16.
as we shall show in due time.

Meanwhile his plain undoubted meaning is (in short) this; when any of your
fellow subjects study or practice Sedition, or go about to remove the ancient
Landmark in Church or State, bid them not God-speed, herd not with them, avoid
their company at your Peril, do not abett or assist them, be not of their
Accursed Councills, have no hand in their unhallowed Covenants, no finger in
their sacrilegious Associations (though their pretenses be never so popular, as
the vindication of their Religion, the defense of their Christian or Civil
Liberty) O my Soul come not thou into their secret Caballs, Genesis 49.6.
meddle not, have nothing to do with these men, from such withdraw thy self.

According to which genuine sense of the words, I now proceed. 2. To my main
Design, to urge and apply his pious Counsel, with respect to both its Objects
signified in the Text, and that 1. in general, and at large: And then 2. With
reference to this special occasion.

First, then, (to invert the order of the Text for methods sake) meddle not with
them that are given to change their KING, the Civil Government, and fundamental
Laws and Constitutions of a Kingdom. We don't deny, says a late Learned
Prelate of our Church (whose Sense I choose to speak in this weighty Point) We
don't deny, Bishp. Saunderson de obligat. Consc.
but they who are endued with sufficient Power, may Change a form of
Government, sometime for the better, as that of a Commonwealth into a
Monarchy, or any other kind, into an Hereditary Monarchy, held to be the best,
by all sober Men, as most resembling that whereby God himself Governs the
World: But then, says he, no Power on Earth is sufficient to Change an
Hereditary Monarchy into any other form, both because it were for the worse,
and an apparent Injury to all the Heirs and lawful Successors besides; for
whatever Plea may be made, or quirks used for cutting off Entailes amongst
Subjects, yet no Laws of Men can justly dis-inherit Princes, or Exclude Heirs
to a Crown, because they hold immediately from GOD, Romans 13.1.

As for particular established Laws, it is a received Maxim in Politics, that
they are not to be altered without very great and evident Necessity, whereof
the Philosopher gives these brief, Aristot, Polit. lib. 2. cap. 8.
but acute Reasons. Because

First, Frequent and unnecessary Changes weaken the Hands of Sovereignty: Both
Laws and Lawgivers would be thereby chargeable with Levity, and so lose much of
that respect and reverence the Subject owes them.

Secondly, The People will be craving, and petulant in asking a Change of Laws,
where they find a Lawgiver too facile and free in complying with their Humor,
and carving away his own Prerogative. Give them an Inch, they will roundly take an
Ell: If they can get the Royal Assent to pluck one Cornerstone out of the
Fabric, to repeal one main Foundation-Act, or Statute, then Have at All.

3. It is much better to wink at small faults in old approved Laws, nay, to
tolerate inconveniences of greater moment sometimes, than to turn all topsie
turvie for their Reformation; the Remedy in such cases being often worse and
more dangerous than the Disease.

All this while there is no question but particular Laws may and ought to be
changed, by those that sit at the Helm, when the necessity of the public Good
requires it, their ancient Reasons being now quite ceased, and the times and
men's manners requiring different, perhaps contrary Constitutions, whereof we
meet with daily Instances.

But to come up closer to the mind of my Text: Subjects may not attempt a
Change of Laws, without the consent of their Lawful Prince, which they are to
ask with all due Reverence and Submission, not by popular Murmurs, and
Clamours, not by Tumultuous Petitions (which at the best are but humble
Affronts to Majesty) much less by resisting, Romans 13.2.
and taking up Arms against Him.

It was well provided by the Locrians of old against all daring Innovators,
That whosoever propounded any new Law in Parliament, should present himself at
the same time with a Rope about his Neck, that in case his Law was found
destrustive of the public good, or tending to dissolve or undermine the
Government, he might be rewarded out of hand for his Invention. We had no such
Law to curb or restrain them, else those bold Reformers of ours had not dared
to confront the Majesty, and abuse the Mercy of the most pious Prince that ever
swayed this Imperial Scepter: K. Charles. I.
To subvert and unhinge both the Magistracy and Ministry, the two Poles and
Pillars of the Kingdom: To start New Governments, Cancel old Laws, and fall
foul upon Magna Charta it self, by straining the Liberty of the Subject so
high, as to leave their good King, neither Prerogative, Power, Property, no nor
Life. The accursed Spawn of which Lawless Miscreants, we are here cautioned
against in the Text; for they are Invaders of their Superiors Rights,
disturbers of the public Peace, and sworn Enemies to Government, Romans 13.2.
the Ordinance of God. And therefore, (to shut up this first Stage) From all
their Seditious Principles Privy Conspiracies and open Rebellions against the
Lords Anointed, Good Lord deliver Him and Us!

Secondly, Meddle not with them that are given to Change their God, their
Religion and Faith; I mean, that good old Way, those beaten Paths visible all
along to the Apostolical Age.

What Rebels are in State, Heretics and Schismatics are in the Church. By
Heretics, I mean such as stiffly and obstinately maintain, and propagate
Errors about the Christian Faith, soundly and generally held by the Catholic
Church. By Schismatics, such as scornfully separate from the received ancient
Discipline, and set up some new Model of their own.

1. Then, Meddle not with them that are given to change the primitive Faith. We
must have a special care of bartering away our precious Faith, 2 St. Pet. 1.1.
as St. Peter calls it, either for the Traditions of men, or Doctrines of
Devils. Romans 16.17.
I beseech you Brethren, says St. Paul, mark them which cause Divisions and
Offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them. And,
knowing that fair means will not always do, He has elsewhere left a solemn
Execration upon Record, to affright us from Heretical Teachers, saying, Though
We, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel, Sal. 1.8.
then that we have already Preached, let him be Accursed. His words are full of
Emphasis; it is not, though I, but -- though We -- that is, though Peter and
James, and John, and I, and all the Apostles should combine together to forge a
new Gosp^l; nay, though an Angel from Heaven should be in the Plot, let him
also be Anathema! And lest we should think He speaks unadvisedly, as led by
humane Passion, more than by any Divine Warrant; He repeats it over again in
the very next verse, As we said before, so say I now again, ver. 9.
if any man Preach any other Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let
him be Accursed.

Whereupon, Vinc. Lerinadu. Haeres.
says good Vincentius in a holy Zeal, if any man presume to teach Novelties in
the Faith, contrary to the ancient sound Doctrine, let that elect and chosen
Vessel, that profound Doctor of the Gentiles, that Trumpet of the Apostles (who
whilst he preached on Earth, was caught up into the third Heaven,) cry out in
his writings still against him, -- Let him be twice Accursed! Let him be
rejected, and Excommunicated, least the Infection of one Sheep, and much more
the Defection of one Shepherd, endanger the whole Flock of Christ. 1 Timothy 6.20.
(...).
The same Apostle charge his Son Timothy, O Timothy, keep that which is
committed to thy Trust, avoiding profane and vain Novelties, as St. Chrysostom
and the vulgar read it; which I cannot let pass without Vincentius his excellent
Paraphrase thereon; Keep the Depositum, that which is recommended to thy Charge
and Trust, Id. Ibid.
not that which is of thine own Invention: that which thou have received, not
what thou have devised: a matter not of Wit but Doctrine, not of private
Usurpation, but of public Tradition; thou receivedst Gold, free from all
mixtures of Brass or Lead, Fraud, or Feculency; and therefore be sure to pay
Gold. And again, O Timothy, O Preacher, O Priest! Show thy self if thou will,
and can, a cunning Bezaliel, in the spiritual Tabernacle: fall to work with
the Precious Jewels of Divine Doctrine: fit them faithfully, adorn them
wisely, add splendour, grace and beauty to them: Let that be understood more
clearly by thy Exposition, which was before believed more obscurely: But be
sure it be the same, of the Old stamp, and no adulterate Doctrine.

His meaning is, that such things only must be taught and held for matters of
Faith, both by Priest and People, as have been always owned by the Catholic
Church from the express Word of God; for understanding the true sense whereof,
(in case of Disputes,) we are to follow Antiquity, Universality and Consent, as
he adds afterward.

Now that our Church of England is hated by both her Extremes, 2 Timothy 1.13.
for holding fast this old Form of sound words in their primitive Purity (that
very Faith whereof our Savior is the Author, our Sovereign the Defender) and
not admitting their Novel Opinions into her Creed, will appear by and by. For
it seems not unreasonable to satisfy one Enquiry first, Heresies and
Impostures in the world from time to time, to prejudice and countermine his
most holy Truth?

I answer in the words of Moses, Deuteronomy, 13.1. If there arises a Prophet or
Dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee a sign, and the sign come to pass, and then
he entice thee to go after other Gods, thou shall not hearken to that Dreamers
words, for the Lord your God proves you, whether ye love the Lord with all
your heart, and with all your Soul. A very clear Account of the whole matter.
God suffers false Prophets to make true Predictions sometimes, and then to
entice his people to the Worship of Idols, merely and on purpose to try their
Constancy; whether they will by any means or artifices be tempted from his
service, and change their God. Now Heresy under the Gospel, bears Analogy to
Idolatry under the Law; both imply a setting forth of strange Gods. Act. 17.18.
And therefore St. Paul gives much the same reason hereof with that of Moses,
saying, (...) -- there must be also Heresies among you, 1 Cor. 11.19.
that they which are approved may be made manifest. There Must be Good and
Evil, Life and Death, true and false Religions set before men, else there would
be no Choice, no Virtue, but all Necessity, there being no such thing as
Victory without Enemies no credit in vindicating truth, were there no Error in
the World. Therefore it is that God permits men, oftimes, of subtle heads,
rational learning, eloquent speech, pleasing converse, and exemplary lives, t^
set up for Heretics in their several ages, as a Touchstone to prove his own
Servants Faithfulness, to show whether they love or flatter Him; whether they
hold their Religion by chance or choice; whether a well-contrived Fable,
learned Cheat, or specious Imposture can persuade them out of their Christian
Name, that they which are approved may be made manifest: For he only is a true
and Catholic Christian, who preferres nothing before the Catholic Faith:
Vinc. Ler. Ib.
Not any private man's Love, nor his Wit, nor his Eloquence, nor his
Philosophy, nor his Authority, no, nor that Dagon of his Infallibility; but
despising all these, is fixed, and immovable in that Faith, he finds the
Church Universal has ever held, and resolves to hold and live, and die in
That, and only That.

Meddle not then, but avoid all those that have actually changed the Doctrine
of Faith; and not to mention others now, I shall only instance in, and caution
us all against, Two formidable Parties, which are the great Temptations of this
our age, to allure and seduce men, from their received and most holy Faith.

First, Meddle not with the Church of ROME, who though she cry her self up for
the Eldest Sister among the Churches, and plead Antiquity for all her Errors;
yet they that have perused the most ancient Greek and Latin Fathers, and other
Writers; nay they that can but read their English-Bible, may easily see how
unconstant, what an Apostate she has been of latter times. Once indeed (we
grant) her Faith was famous and spoken of throughout the World, as St. Paul
witnesses; Romans 1.18.
but since she is degenerated, she has removed the old Landmark: she has
espoused corrupt Principles and Practices, and sought out many, many New
Inventions. Eccles. 7.29.


Let Her make out that new found Name of a Roman Catholic, to be better sense
(as she uses it) then a Particular Universal, and tell us, by what Logic she
arrogates to her self that Indefectibility, promised only to the Church
Catholic; Let Her once fairly demonstrate that Christ's Kingdom was indeed of
this World, St.-Joh. 18.36.
and St. Peter by Him constituted his sole undoubted Viceroy, nay, let Her
convict St. Peter Himself of Heretical Modesty at least, because he proclaims
(not Himself but) the KING SUPREME; for otherwise, 1 St. Pet. 2.13.
instead of the true ROCK, she does most manifestly build upon the Sand.

Let Her produce any manner of evidence for the POPE's Universal Monarchy in
the first five hundred years; ELEUTHERIUS, who flourished in the second
Century, acknowledges LUCIUS the first Christian KING of England (and in all
the World) to be Gods immediate VICAR in his own Dominions; Speeds Chron.
and GREGORY the Great, who lived in 570, says expressly, if any man call
himself Universal Pastor, or Head of the whole Church, he is the forerunner of
ANTICHRIST; and why are not they as Infallible as their Successors?

Let Her show any ground for Idol Worship in the Holy Scriptures, or the
primitive Writers; Tertullian, Lactantius, and several others, do plainly
condemn it, even in their own Notion.

Let Her acquit her self of the many senceless absurdities and contradictions
of TRANSUBSTANTIATION; and tell us by what warrant of Antiquity, she denies the
Cup in the Eucharist to the Laity, St. Mat. 26.27.
contrary to a palpable command -- Drink ye All of it -- [There had been more
pretense of reason for denying them the Bread, Lev. 17.11.
or Body, because the Life is in the Blood; besides, that it is no where in the
Gospel said -- Eat ye All of That -- ] She professedly edifies the People in
Ignorance, 1 Corinthians. 14.
by Praying and Prophesying in an unknown Tongue; she makes no other use or
account of CONFESSION, then what professed Drunkards do of Vomiting; She abuses
and cheats the World for filthy Lucre's sake, with that gaineful Dream of
Purgatory, and those more dangerous delusions of Indulgences; in a word, she
absolves natural Subjects from all Oaths and ties of Obedience, deposes KINGS,
and disposes of their Crowns (to mention no more) and then we will confess it
is not She, but We that are given to Change the Faith, -- but not till then.

2. Meddle not with the Enthusiast, on the other hand, whatever his Surname be,
though it be Legion, for they are Many. They will teach you strange and
desperate Doctrines; such as, Absolute Reprobation without any prospect of
man's Fall; of a Light within them, whereby they read the will of God more
certainly, then by the Lamp of this Word; of Gods being the Author of men's
sins, as that lying Greek said of Old --

(...).
(...).
That Gods Grace is irresistible to some, and equally Impossible to others;
that men may be saved by the strength of their own natural Powers, without the
special Grace of God merited by Christ; that Christ himself had no Being at
all, before he was born of the Virgin Mary; or at the best, that He was only
the Firstborn of Gods Creatures; with many more such frightsub Blasghemies.
And as the sum of all the rest, they will insinuate that Jesuitical and
Traitorous Position, of taking up Arms by the KINGS Authority against his
Person; holding it lawful to arraign and condemn Majesty it self at the Bar of
his own Subjects in a Mock-Court of Justice; such a horrid Doctrine, as I
believe, Jews themselves would never have owned or practiced, had they been
convinced that JESUS was their lawful KING.

Meddle not with them, for they have forsaken the right way; 2 St. Pet. 2.15.
yea, Woe unto them (says St. Peter) for they have gone in the way of Cain, and
followed the error of Balaam. New Lights indeed they are; but all wandering
Stars, St. Jude v. 13.
of an irregular motion, and running out of one Heresy into another, being
constant to nothing, but the incorrigible temper of mad Prophets, and Rengious
Murderers.

Thirdly and Lastly, (For yet thou lackest one thing, and if thou will be
perfect) Meddle not with Schissmaticks, St. Mat. 19.21.
that are given to change, the received ancient Discipline, for some new
fangled Model of their own; and rashly depart from the Communion of the
Established Church. Were not our Church Government legible all along in
Ecclesiastical story to the Apostles times; And did we not find the Original of
their several Projects, in the Annals of the very last Age, there might be
somewhat pleaded in their excuse.

Let one Instance serve for all; that the Cross in Baptism, that great Scandal,
and stumbling Block (as they would make it) is no new thing, St. Austine, or
St. Cyprian can tell them at large; and the old, the excellent Rule of the
Primitive Church about such Rites, was (...). Council. Nic.
Let the ancient Customs prevail. There is indeed no Prescription against
Truth, (as Tertullian observes) neither Space of Time, nor Patronage of Learned
men, nor Privilege of Countries, and our Savior calls himself the Truth, not
the Custom; but yet however in things harmless, and decent, and tending to
edification, Custom and Antiquity are like the gray hairs of old Men, Prove.
20.29.
(so far from contempt or reproach that they are) their Beauty, Crown and
Glory. And it is a very hard case, that men should be so superstitiously
afraid of Popish abuses on the one hand, as to incur a more dangerous
mistake on the other, Romans 1.16. Rev. 7.2. etc. 16.2.
and profess they are wholly ashamed of the Cross of CHRIST; and that they will
rather suffer the mark of the Beast, than the Seal of the living God to be set
upon their Foreheads.

Constantine's Name will be for ever Great, for making the Cross his Standard;
in virtue whereof He did not only conquer the World by his Arms, but made
Idolatry stoop to the Christian Faith in all Nations. And afterward, Eusebius. in
Vita.
by suppressing Factious Assemblies, and demolishing their mock Temples by his
Imperial Edict, he reduced a World of Sectaries to the Unity of the Church.

By this one maine reason of their Separation, you may judge of the rest, and
observe upon what slight and trivial grounds they set up Altar against Altar;
they tear the seamless Coat of Christ in pieces, and make nothing to renounce a
whole Article of their Creed, viz. The Communion of Saints; and consequently,
that we ought to prefer, and reverd the Churches wholesome Laws, before any
lawless Sacrifice of Fools. Eccles. 5.1.


To sum them up together then, (for they are seldom found of (...)) 1 Meadle
not with any of those ungodly men, that are given to Change Laws or Governmend
in State; Doctrine or Discipline in the Church.

The next verse to the Text gives us such a poynant reason, why we must not
Meddle with such as these, that I shall supersede all other arguments to drive
the Nail home, with a short Paraphrase only upon That. The words are these;
For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, ver. 22.
and who knows the ruin of them Both -- sudden Calamity, and certain Ruin?
the most terrible, and most effectual Topics in all argumentation: Who knows
the Ruin of them Both? That is, both Church and State- Rebels: Or, we may
construe it actively (as the LXXII. do) both GOD and the KING will make them
Examples, and pay them their wages in an untimely end of Life, and a never
ending Death.

All sins indeed of the common size (against God or man) are not presently
punished here, to assure us of an after reckoning, Arrian. Epict.
a Judgment to come. For, as the admirable old Soick observes truly, the
generality of men are apt to murmur, and Charge God, as well as his Vicegerent,
foolishly; to reckon their deadness of Trade, Dearths, and Plagues, Fires and
Wars, and other public Evils, as saults of Government; as want of Providence
in the one, and Prudence in the other; GOD knows all this (says he) nor is
CAESAR altogether ignorant thereof, but both consider, that if they should cut
off all Offenders at a blow, they would want Subjects to Reign over.

But then some Crimes, such as Murder, Treason and Rebellion, are of such a
Crimson dye, daring nature and Goliah-like bulk, that they do (as it were) send
a Challenge to speedy Vengeance; for they are destructive of Humane Society,
and strike at the Root and Foundation of all Peace, and Policy; and therefore,
least wickedness should grow outrageous, and masterless, their Calamity shall
rise suddenly; that is, they seldom go unpunished even in this World.

Time would sail me to recompt the numerous Instances in profane story to this
purpose; and I shall content my self with two remarkable ones out of the Sacred
Volumes.

The first is that of Abs^lom, and his Twenty-thousand Conspiratours against
his Father DAVID, 2 Samuel 18.
who fell all in one day by the edge of the Sword. Himself was caught and
hanged most strangely in the thick Boughs of an aged Oak, where Joah found and
slow him. Nor was the band of Joab only in all this, doubtless it was the
LORDS doing, Psalm. 118.23.
and may be so much the more mavelous in our eyes; who have since known the
same Tree become a sacred shelter to guard the LORDS Anointed, (our dread
Sovereign) from those Bloodhounds that hunted for his Life, that once proved a
Gallows or Gibbet to that usurping, unnatural Traitor.

The other, is of Ecclesiastic Rebels, that of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, who
offered strange Fire, of their own heads, resisting and invading the standing
Priesthood of Aaron, and laboring to destroy the Old, and introduce a New
Government into the Church: And what was the end of these Men? Numb. 16.29.
Why even as Moses had foretold, saying, If these men die the common death of
all men, then the LORD has not sent me. ver. 30.32.
For so it came to pass, that the LORD made a new thing, He made the Earth open
her mouth, and swallow them up; both they and theirs went down quick into Hell.

I add no more from Scripture, because he must be a great Stranger in our
Jerusalem, St. Luke 24.18.
who knows not what certain Ruin at last overtook those sometime prosperous
Rebels, who put these three Kingdoms all in a Flame, to make the more solemn
Sacrifice to their own Lusts; who first swept the Church with the Besom of
Destruction, Isa. 14.23.
and then -- (I even tremble to relate what they did not fear to Act!) murdered
their KING, took possession of his Throne, St. Mat. 21.38.
and seized on His Inheritance -- for though they exalted themselves as the
Eagle, and made their nest among the Stars, (the Peers and Princes) yet thence
did I bring them down, Obad. v. 4.
says the LORD. Maugre all their Rotas and Republican Projects, all their Arts
and Arms to perpetuate the Usurpation, GOD at length brought the Wheel of
Consusion over Them, and wonderfully settled Us upon the old and lasting
Foundation; as if He meant to fulfill that Prophecy in our times also, where he
says, -- I will overturn, overturn, Ezekiel. 21.27.
overturn, till He shall come whose RIGHT it is.

Once more; I would not judge of Persons or Things merely by the Event, because
that is often a fallible Rule: But I knew the Man, and upon unquestionable
evidence, know his story to be true; who being in quality of a Major under the
late Grand Usurper, and then about to march for Worcester, was heard to boast
and make great brags (as he was fixing his Pistols) that he was going to hunt
and pull down a Buck of the first Head: (meaning our Gracious Sovereign, whom
God long preserve?) This Man was ever after troubled and persuaded in his mind,
(as he had often complained to his own Wife and Children) that albeit he had
escaped many and great dangers in several pitched Battles, and other adventures
in the Wars, yet he must at length come to some untimely end. And so it deed
it happened about nine years since; for having ordered some of his Servants
with Firelocks, to take several Posts in the same Hedge, and charged them to
fire, if they spied any Quarry: One of the Servants (whom he had ever found
trusty, and now proved too fatally true to his commands) mistaking his Master
for a Buck in the duske of the night, and firing at all adventures, shot Him in
the right Temple, whereat he bowed and fell, and not long after, Judge. 5.27.
fell down dead. -- Now whether it was right-aiming Vengeance that found him
out in the dark, to pay him in his own Coin, for cursing the KING in more than
a Thought; Eccles. 10.20.
or whether all this was but an ordinary blind Mischance, I determine not, but
leave to God and the World to judge.

Mean while one might in reason think, that the consideration of those former
black Examples should deter the most profligate Wretches, from laying Trains
for future Disturbances; and turning the passive obedience of the first
Christians into active disobedience. For why should they court their own Ruin?
Why should they force Man to condemn their Bodies, and God to damn their Souls,
rather than part with a pievish Spirit of Contradiction? rather then study to
be quiet, 1 These. 4.11.
and to do their own business?

And yet after all our Arguments and Instances, there are and will be still
some amongst us of that Devilish Spirit; that they are desperately in Love with
that sin of Witchcraft, (as the Prophet calls Rebellion) they long for nothing
more than Changes in Church and State, 1 Samuel 15.23.
and are as it were with Child of some new Seditious Birth. These deas Adders
will not hear the Church, and therefore we must turn them over to the secular
Arm; St. Mat. 18.17.
in the

Second and Last Place, by applying the Text to this Solemn Occasion. For we
may preach our hearts out, to convince Them that Loyalty is good Gospel; but
all in vain, unless the Magistrate will lay the Law home to them also, by
giving them a word of Reproof in due season, and letting them know that He
bears not the Sword in vain. ^om. 13.4.


As for our Gracious KING, He is so far from the least Arbitrary thought, or
setting up his own Will for the standard of all Justice, (as these sinners
against their own Souls would have us suspect) that he has been most
graciously pleased to Declare to all the World, Numb. 16.38.
that He will Govern according to Law. Blessed be God for putting so Wise,
Just, and Seasonable a Thought into His Royal Heart! May it be as unchangeable
as any Decree of the old Medes and Persians! Dan. 6.8.


And give me leave to recommend this Sacred Resolution of your Royal Master to
you His Honorable Judges, and other his Ministers of Justice, as the best
Expedient to preserve and secure our Peace in this critical minute.

Sad Experience should inform us, that the Multitude is an unruly-head-strong
Beast: they are ever and anon for making themselves Rings, as the Israelites
once did GODS to go before Them; Exodus 32.23.
and they must be curbed and managed by a strait Rein, or they will kick, and
sling, and attempt to throw their Rider. They are like the raging Sea, which
requires a great deal of Power and Providence to keep it within due Banks, and
Bounds; or it over-runs, and sweeps away all before it. It is the safest way to
crush the Cockatrice of Rebellion in the Egg, and ten times easier to prevent a
Fever in the Body Politic, then it is to cure it by the wisest methods, when
once all in a flame.

To this end, the Magistrate should have a watchful eye over all those, who
make it their business to sow the seeds of Sedition in vulgar minds; who,
having imbibed Anti-Monarchical Principles from Republican Authors, think they
are not complete Ciceronians, till they can declaim loudly, and make
long-winded Speeches against the Monarchy; who are never well, but when they
are lampooning, and libelling all that is Sacred, to render it odious, and
seduce the people from their Duty and Allegiance.

Amongst these I must name the Roman Priests, and the Protestant Jesuits, as
the most dangerous Enemies of the Government. Indeed the latter are found to be
only the Tools of the former; and it seems morally impossible ever to bring
Popery into England, but by Indulging Dissenters, and giving Toleration to
those several Factions, which are agreed upon nothing, but to oppose the KING
and CHURCH as their common Enemies.

Whatever Conventicles then are suffered against Law, as they are at the best,
but Religious Tumults, Holy Riots, Spiritual fits of Spleen and Frenzy, and
Schisms in State as well as Church, so they are Destructive of the Peace of
Both; and down they must go in good earnest, or else the Government it self
that thinks it stands, Cor. 10.12.
must take heed least it fall; for thus says the Lord, a House, Church, Mat.
12.25.
or Knigdome, divided within it self connot stand.

To Conclude then, Let me beseech you All, whom in any degree it does concern,
(as ye tender the glory of GOD, the KINGS Honor, the Prosperity of the Church
and Kingdom, the comfort of your own Consciences, and Salvation of your Souls)
that Ye also in your several Spheres, will Govern according to Law; and make it
your care, that our wholesome Laws be vigorously and impartially executed: and
chiefly those that are designed signed to fence and support the Government,
against all such as are given to Change, or invade it; whether they be of the
Popish, or of the Popular Faction. For Execution (ye know) is the very Life and
Soul of the Law: without that, the best Laws are no better than a cancelled
Deed, or a dead Letter.

By this one happy Measure (as we have it from a very Authentic Hand) the
Kingdom of Scotland is already reduced to such a peaceable State; the Kings
Enemies are so confounded, and their devices so broken, that it is scarce
possible for any, save eyewitnesses, to believe it. And why may We not hope
ere long to see the same effect thereof in England also? To see the known
Friends of the Government encouraged: To see all Nurseries of Faction
suppressed: All breaches in Faith or Charity cemented and healed up: That as we
have but one God and one Lord Jesus Christ, so we may all content our selves
with one Ring, one Church, one Faith, one Baptism; and that there be no more
Division or Strife among us, unless it be this: Who should be most Zealous to
promote the Peace and Unity of Church and State; Who most forward, and
conscientious, to fear the LORD first, and then the KING, and not meddle with
them that are given to Change.

Now to the KING Immortal, 1 Timothy 1.17.
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Three Persons, One only Wise Unchangeable GOD, be
Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

