Imprimatur,

Tho. Tomkyns RRmo. in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino Gilbert. divina
providentia Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi a sacris domesticis.
Ex Aed. Lambethanis Oct. 31.
THE UNREASONABLENESS OF THE ROMANISTS, Requiring our COMMUNION With the
present Romish Church: Or, a DISCOURSE

Drawn from the perplexity and uncertainty of the Principles, and from the
Contradictions betwixt the Prayers and Doctrine of the present Romish church;
to prove that it is unreasonable to require us to join in Communion with it.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Richard Royston, Bookseller to his most Excellent
Majesty, 1670.

THE PREFACE.
AFter the Ascension of our Savior, the Apostles separated themselves for the
Publishing of the Gospel through all the World; and where they saw any
likelihood of a plentiful Harvest, they bestowed there the greatest Pains in
the Planting of the Christian Religion. Their first care was for the converting
of the Cities, for the greater would draw after it the lesser; and Religion
settled in the Cities, would sooner diffuse it self through the adjacent
Villages: By the same reason their Care was the Conversion of the Metropolis of
the Roman World, that from that head Religion might more opportunely be
conveyed into all the members of that vast Empire; And by its Authority and
Example, other Countries, subject to that City, might be moved to embrace the
Faith, Et cito pervios haberet populos praedicatio generalis, quos unius
teneret Regimen civitatis Leo Sermon. de Not. Petri ^ Pauli.
. In the Conversion of this place both the Doctor of the Gentiles, and the
Apostle of the Circumcision, and (Tertullian de praescriptionibus mentions
also) S. John bestowed their time and Labor: Here they Preached, here they
Suffered; quibus Romany Evangelium Petrus and Paulus sanguine quoque suo
signatum reliquerunt; and both founded this Church, a gloriosissimis duobus
Apostolis, Petro and Paulo Romae fundatur, and constituitur Ecclesia Tert. adv.
Marco^, li. 4.
. Both exercised here their Apostolical authority, and by Epiphanius Here Is. 27.
are both called Bishops of Rome Irenae. lib. 3. cap. 3.
; Both of them appointed Linus to that Bishopric, Fundantes and instruentes
Ecclesiam Lino Episcopatum tradiderunt Irenae. ibi.
. The Faith of this Roman Church was famous throughout the World, their
Sufferings were great, for they usually endured the first heat of the Roman
fury: Their Bishops for the first 300 years were most of them Crowned with
Martyrdom; Polydor Virgil De invent. rerum Li. 9. cap. 1.
says, that seven only of 32 escaped; the Church thus founded in the Imperial
City was most observed, and Eyed both by the Heathen, and by the Christian: By
the Heathen it was so eyed that usually it became the mark of their fury, and
their Edicts of Persecutions were first executed in the City before they were
transmitted into the remoter Provinces: The Martyrs here were so numerous that
it became the business of 7 Notaries to record their sufferings, as Platina
reports. This Church was much eyed by the Christians, being placed in the chief
City; The Faith of this Church like a Candle on a Hill was more conspicuous,
and its suffering was more observed than in Remoter places: The Bishops of Rome
were commonly the most Eminent, like the choicest Soldiers, placed in the Front
of the Battle: The Clergy here were very numerous, according to the largeness
of the City; for in Pontians time (which was about the year 231.) there were
236 Cardinal Priests, as Polydor Virgil D: Invent. rerum. ^. 4. cap. 9.
reports from Guido Archidiaconus and Franciscus Zabarella, and these he
explaines to be such who had chiefly cure of Souls. This Church being thus
advanced by the dignity of the City, the eminency of its founders, and the
worth of its members, was accounted the chief Church, the Chair of Peter, the
Apostolic See, and Valentinian in an Epistle to Theodosius says, Antiquity
has given the Bishop of the Roman City a Principality of Priesthood above
all. After that the World came into the Church, and the Ensign of Christianity
became the Banner of the Empire, the Roman Church increased in Dignity,
Revenue, and Credit; for the Christian Emperors out of their respect to
Religion, honoring the Bishops, enlarging their Revenue, and increasing their
Dignity, did show more particular kindness to the Church of Rome, where was
the Seat of their Empire, and which had gained such esteem for the merit of its
Founders. In short time the Riches of the Roman Bishopric or'e-topp'd the
neighboring places, the Pomp of their Bishops was suitable to the magnificence
of the City: Now Communion with the Roman Bishop was made the Test and Mark of
Orthodoxnesse in Religion: Now it was decreed by the Emperors, that it should
not be Lawful for the Bishops of Gallia or other Provinces to attempt any thing
without the Authority of the venerable Pope of the Eternal City Apud Baron. an.
445. n. 9.
; and in all things they hast'ned to increase the Authority and Honor of that
See, per omnia properamus honorem and Authoritatem vestrae Sedis crescere,
says Justinian L. Seder. C. de. Sum. trin.
. But now the Roman Church, which by the favor of Emperors, and affection of
Prelates, in reverence of S. Peter, and respect to the Imperial Seat, had
gained this dignity and honor, began to swell with higher aims, and to Aspire
to greater Privileges. If the Council of Calcedon would advance Constantinople
to the second Patriarchship, upon the same reason as the Fathers bad dignified
Rome; Propter imperium civitatis illius; and would now give equal Privileges
to new Rome, judging it reasonable that the City adorned with the Empire and
Senate, should enjoy equal Privileges with the elder Rome Conc. Calced. Act.
16.
. then Leo epist 58. to the Empress Pulcheria durst pronounce, Consensiones
Episcoporum sanctorum Canonum apud Nicaeam Conditorum Regulis repugnantes in
irritum mittimus, and per authoritatem Beati Petri Apostoli generali prorsus
definitione cassamus, we do make the agreement of the Bishops repugnant to the
Canons of the Council of Nice (for so he conceived the advancement of
Constantinople to be) null, and by the authority of the blessed Apostle Peter
do make them void. If the Council of Sardis Conc. Sardic. Can. 3. n. 8.
(to honor the memory of S. Peter) appoints in the case of a Bishop or Priest,
that if he think he has good reason why the cause should be examined over
again, those who heard the cause should write to Julius the Roman Bishop, and
if he think fit it should be reexamined, that it may be so, and he may appoint
Judges; and if he does not think it fit to be re-examined, then what he does
determine shall be confirmed. Or in case of a Bishop deposed, if he appeal to
the Roman Bishop, that Bishop if he thinks fit may write to the Neighboring
Bishops that they determine the cause; and in case the deposed Bishop desire
the Roman Bishop to send one of his Presbyters; it shall be in his power; and
if he will send some with his Authority to judge the cause with the other
Bishops, he may do it: This privilege shall be extended higher; that inferior
Priests may appeal to the Roman See out of any Provinces, that the causes of
Bishops may be called to Rome and heard by him alone, and this profitable
Authority of receiving Appeals was pretended by Zosimus Cod. Con. Ecl. Affr. in
Conc. Carth. 419.
from the Canons of the Nicene Council, though no such thing could be found in
any of the Copies of that Council in the Eastern Church, as Cyril of Jerusalem
and Atticus of Constantinople testified; afterward this privilege was so
heightened that all causes almost were drawn to Rome Vrsperg. in Phill. lmp.
, all jurisdiction hindered, and causes were determined more according to men's
gifts than their rights. If the Ancients did show any respect to the Roman See,
allowing it the privilege to be the first Seat, and that Bishop to be first of
all Priests, so Justinian Nov. 131. Cap. 2.
determines according to the ancient Cannons, that he be the chiefest of
Bishops and the first Patriarch, and have the first place in Councels before
the other Patriarchs; and i will add another privilege, which Pope Julius
mentions Socrat. li. 2. Cap. 13.
as an Ecclesiastical Law, that without the Roman Bishop no decrees should be
made in Councels: Now these privileges shall be extended higher, that all
other Patriarchs shall be his Subjects D st. 22. Ca de Constant.
, that by divine right the Bishop of Rome is head of the Church, Caput and
Cardo a Domino, and non ab alio Apostolica Seeds constituta est, and sicut
cardine ostium, sic hujus Apostolicae Sedis authoritate omnes Ecclesiae
reguntur Did. 22. c. Sa^r. Ecl. Romans
. That it is of necessity to Salvation for every Humane Creature to be under
the Roman Bishop, says Boniface (who lived 1294.) in the extravagant Vna. de
major. and Obed.
. If the Ancient Church allowed him the privilege to see the Canons of the
Church put in Execution, and as the first Seat to see that the Laws made by
general Consent be Observed: This Law shall be extended higher, that he may
dispense with the Laws made by general Councels, unless it be in Articles of
faith Cause. 25. Qu. 1.
; That no Council can put Bounds to his power, as Paschal the Second (who was
Pope 1099.) Bragged, that if the Council should add any Clausa irritans virt.
Should declare all dispensations to be Null, and Invallid which are contrary to
their Canons; yet the Pope has power to dispense in those cases, as Victoria
R^lact. 4. de pot. Papae N. 4. prop. 4.
says. Again if the Ancients did account the Union with the Roman Church to be
the Test of Orthodoxnesse in Religion, as Hierom tells Damasus, I following no
Chief but Christ, am joined in Communion to thy Blessedness, that is to the
Chair of Peter, and he that gathers not with thee Scatereth, that is, who is
not Christ's is Antichrist's, because the Roman Church at that time was free
from those Heresies under which the Eastern Church had groaned, and therefore
if they joined with the Roman, it was a sign that they Renounced the Errors
which afflicted the Eastern; and so it was Required by the Emperors L. cunctos
C. de Sum. trin.
, that all should profess the Religion which it appeared that Damasus, and
Peter Bishop of Alexandria follow, (i. e.) that according to the Discipline of
the Apostles and the Doctrine of the Gospel, we believe one Deity of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Now what they spoke of the present time, the Roman
Bishops pretend to be constant privileges of that See; for they lost no time
to inhanse their own greatness: Leo was hammering at it, Hactenus fides Petri
non defecit, hitherto it has not failed; and he adds, Nec defectura Creditur
in Throno suo Leo. Epist. 9. ad Pat. Antioch.
that the Roman Church neither has Erred, nor shall Err Greg. 7. li. 2. post.
Ep. 55.
: and in dissension about matters of faith, be that shall take that side to
which the Bishop of Rome adheres, shall be secure, for Christ has prayed that
Peter's faith fail not. The first ground of the privilege, was because that the
Tradition of the Christian Doctrine concerning that point, was preserved
sincere in the Roman Church: For the Emperors say they would have all the
people to profess that Religion which S. Peter delivered to the Romans, and
which it appears Pope Damasus followed; This afterward the Popes claim, as the
fruits of Christ's Prayer for S. Peter, and the privilege of their See. By
these Steps the Roman Bishop ascended to that height of Power he enjoyed, what
was either by consent or Custom, either in honor of S. Peter or Respect to the
Imperial Seat, either for the greatness of the City, the Eminency of many
Bishops, or the Orthodoxnesse in Religion (while the World groaned under
Arianisme) ascribed to the Roman Bishop, was afterward challenged to be due by
Divine right. Then the Sister challenged to be the Mother, the Fellow Servants
to be the Mistress of all Churches, and the Roman Bishop who was so often
called by Cyprian his Brother and Colleague, to be in effect the Lord and
Master: The Canons were trodden under foot, the Authority of Bishops deprest,
and all things brought into confusion, his flatterers, and those that thrived
by his greatness laboring still to advance his Power; they cried him up to
have Omnia jura in scrinio pectoris, all Laws contained in his Breast Constable.
provinc. de ^emp. ord. gloss. in C. 2. express. Lanc. init. jur. Canon. L. 1.
tit. 3. de Eccl. Constable.
, that he was above all Laws, and his bare will a sufficient Reason, and his
decretal Epistles were equal not only to the Canons of general Councils, but
they were also Reckoned among the Canonical Scriptures, and yet this
Blasphemous saying fathered on S. Augustine lib. 2. de Doctrina Christiana
Distinct 19. in Canonicis.
, is not expunged either by Thomas Manriques when he set forth the censures on
the glosses by command of Pius Quintus or by Sixtus Faber Mr. of the Apostolic
Palace, in his Censures published by command of Greg. 13th. 1580. nor did he
only challenge a primacy in Spirituals, but even in Temporals as Bonif. 8. in
the extravagant Extrar. V^^a. de. major. and obedient.
says, that in the Churches Power are two Swords, the Spiritual and the
Temporal, and so Pope Nicolas tells the Milanois, that God gave to Peter the
Keykeeper of Eternal life, Terreni simul and coelestis Imperij curam, That he
shall take the charge of the Earthly and Heavenly Empire, and from hence the
gloss Gloss. in Coelest. did. 22. omnis.
Argues, that the Pope has both the Spiritual and Temporal Sword. Or if this
Power seem to be too extravagant, yet to this day he challenges a Power
indirecte and in ordine ad Spiritualia, over Temporal things, although he do
not pretend to a direct dominion; as if all the Princes of the Earth were only
his Vassals, and held their Dominion in Fee of him; for Princes are grown Wiser
than to have their Crowns so easily spurned off their heads, yet he has as
full a power over all things by this pretense of indirecte and ordine ad
Spiritualia; and therefore Victoria Relact. 1. de. pot. 1 ecles. N. 12.
calls it Amplissimam potestatem: for he can both when, and how much he thinks
it necessary in order to Spiritual things, make and unmake Princes, divide
Empires, and do many other things of the like sort, as Victoria add's: And that
he has the supreme Power in temporal things, all grant him says Bellarmine
Risposta del Card. Bellar. a'l 3a prop. di. Giou. Marselio.
except the Heretics, tutti lo Concedono, eccetto g'l Heretici: and the only
difference in these Authors Opinions is in the manner how he has this Power;
Some think he has it as Temporal Princes have it: Others think that the Power
of the Pope is properly and in it self Spiritual, but in order to spiritual
affairs may m^dle with temporal things with most full Authority, con
pienissima Autorita; and if it be profitable for Christianity, may dispose of
the kingdoms and Empires of Christians as they have done very often; thus he
concludes the answer to the third Proposition. When the Bishops of Rome were
come to this greatness Kings must hold their stirrups, the Emperor must bring
the Water when the Pope washes, he must pour it out, he must bring the first
dish, if Princes will be ordered by their Mr. of Ceremonies Sacr. Coerem. l. 1.
tit. 3.
: then the Bishops began to use the Imperial Robes, then they ware a triple
Crown, in sign of his Empire he wears an Imperial Crown, in sign that he is
Pope he uses a Miter Durand. Ration. div. offic. l. 3. c. 17.
, and in all great processions the same Honor is showed to him which was wont
to be used to the Roman Emperors Dur. ibi in fine.
; at the mention of his Name in their Prayers for the Pope, the Priests must
bow their Heads Miss. Reform. in ritub. celeb. miss. c. 5. de Oratione. n. 2.
, His feet must be kissed both by Princes and Prelates, solius Papae pedes
omnes deosculentur is Gregory the 7th's. dictate L. 2. post. Ep. 55.
. Much more of their Pride and Vanity might be reckoned up, even while they
pretended the Humility to be the servants of servants; and what care of
Religion can be expected in them, who every day studied to advance their own
greatness, and to raise themselves above the Height of the greatest Monarchs?
How can we imagine that Tares should not be sown, when those who pretended to
be the Watchmen slept? How can we judge the purity of Religion to have been
preserved, when the piety and Learning of the Clergy decreased, and Pride,
Covetousness, and Ambition increased? The weeds were grown up though few
observed when they first peeped out of the ground, after-ages saw Tares had
almost covered the Corn, but the World was too busy in Contentions about
greatness and honor to mind the first sprouting of them: It was the frequent
complaint of Pious men, that abuses were crept into the Church, and that there
needed a Reformation in Capite and membris, they complained of the multitude of
Canons, and abundance of Ceremonies: Multae Constitutiones Praesulum, de quibus
non sine causa est publica Orbis quaerela, etc. There are many Constitutions of
Prelates, which are justly complained of by the World, there are in many
Churches superstuous, needless, and superstitious Ceremonies says Erasmus
Declar. ad Cens. Paris n. 58.
. Many complained of the vain and superstitious use of Relics and Images:
Manifestius est quam ut multis explicari verbis debeat, imaginum cultum and
simulachrorum nimium invaluisse, etc. It is too plain, that the worship of
Images had too much increased, and the affection, or rather superstition of the
People was too much indulged; so that our men did seem to omit nothing of that
high adoration given by the Pagans to their Statues, or of the extreme vanity
which they allowed in making, and worshipping of their Images, as Cassander
acknowledges Consultatio. tit. de imaginibns.
; great were the abuses which were crept into the Church in the Prayers to
Saints, in the immoderate Prayers of the Blessed Virgin, in the choosing os
particular Patron-Saints, in their processions, Pilgrimages, over-valuing of
monastical habits, in their Fasts, in their Prayers, in their Legends of Saints
lives, in their forging of miracles, Revelations, and Stories which might serve
to increase the Priests profits. Great were the Abuses in the Popes Exorbitant
power, in his provisions, reservations, dispensations, exemptions, exactions,
indulgencies, etc. It Is needless at present to reckon up all the abuses both
in Doctrine and discipline, some complaining of one thing, some of another,
most concluding there was a necessity of a Reformation: But how should it be
effected when the great disease lay as it were in the head? Little could be
expected from general Councils, when they neither could now be called without
the Popes consent, nor accounted Valid without his Confirmation; when the
Bishops styled themselves, Dei and Apostolicae Sedis gratia Episcopi: When they
had not only sworn Canonical obedience to him, which is always understood, in
Licitis and honestis, in things which were honest, and allowed by the Canons;
But an Oath of fealty as their Ceremoniale Episcoporum Cerem. Epis. tit. de
pallio.
calls it, that they would defend Regalia sancti Petri, the Royalties of S.
Peter, under which he comprehended many of his usurpations: Little could be
expected from the Bishops in their several Diocesses, since all were now
dependants on the Pope, and if they opposed the encroachments on their rights,
or the innovations stealing into the Church, the Pope presently threatened,
concutere candelabrum eorum, to shake their Candlestick, as Adrian the 4th.
William Thorn Chron. in Sylvist. Allat. anno. 1153.
Writ to Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury: Then they must answer for it at
Rome, where the usual confutation was by fire and faggot. At length the wise
providence of God opened a way to a Reformation in many Countries; if in some
places the proceedings were somewhat tumultuous, I justify not the faults of
any, but only acknowledge the blessing which God has bestowed, who can bring
good out of evil. At home the Reformation was begun by consent of the King, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, the Approbation of the Universities, the
determination of the Convocation: Thus it was carried on in the reign of his
successor Edward 6th. When it was re-established under Queen Elizabeth, it was
in a regular way, by a legal abrogation of those Statutes made in Queen Maryes
time, and the Revival of the Laws made by King Edward, with Synodical consent:
All which things are fully and Satisfactorily handled by Sir. Roger Twisden,
and Dr. Heylin; after the Re. establishment of the Reformation by Queen
Elizabeth, there were few or no Recusants known in England for many years, as
is constantly avouched by our Writers, who lived near those times, few of the
Romish persuasion (if at any time they went to Mass) refused to be present at
our service Lord Cokes ^barge as Norwich. 1606.
; and when afterward Pius Quintus by his Bull, had forbid those whom he called
Catholics to resort to our Prayers, there appeared only few who adhered to the
Romish Religion; the Popes labored hard to keep up their party here, by
founding Seminaries for the instructing of the English youth abroad, and by
frequent Missions of Priests hither, to propagate and Defend the Romish
Doctrine; yet during the reign of Queen Elizabeth, King James and King Charles
the first, Popery decayed; till the troubles of our late wars gave the Romish
emissaries opportunity to pervert many unstable persons, who either
discontented with their sufferings at home, or pinched with necessity, or
offended with the many Sects which the licentiousness of War had begot, or
couzened with pretenses of the Antiquity, unity, glory, and splendour of the
Romish Church, or perhaps allured with the pleasing Doctrine and Opinions,
whereby many Romish Casuists gratify Sinners, revolted from us; and whether
the restoration of Peace and Order may reclaim those, whose Sufferings, and
troubles alienated from us, God only knows; There is great talk still of the
increase of Popery, (the Papists striving to credit their cause by these
reports of numerous Proselites) though I hope it is not so, as I see no
reasonable ground that it should be so; yet the reports of Enemies should at
least alarm us to be as Active in maintaining our ground, as they are in
striving to gain it, and unless we are weary of our Religion, to show as much
zeal in defending, as they do earnestness in assaulting; This has Occasioned
the ensuing Discourse, in which my des^gn is from the doubtfulness and
perp'exity of the Romish Doctrine, the Superstitious vanity of many allowed
prastises in their Church, the absurdities in their public Offices, and the
contradictions betwixt their Prayers and Doctrins to dissuade the fond Admirers
of the Romish Religion, and to endeavor to reclaim them who are ready to
embrace their Errors for Catholic truth.

^^SSIVS MOLNA S. IGNATIUS LOYOLA SOCIETATIS IESV FVNDATOR. VASQUEZ ESCOBAR


Optabilir est Fur qua'm Mendax assiduus; vtrique vero Perditionis hareditatem
consequentur. Eccles. 20 verse. 25.

Pa^^

CHAP. I.
The first Consideration I propose, shall be from the doubtfulnesse, and
Uncertainty of many Doctrines in the Church of Rome.

IT is not Reasonable to Adhere to that Church, which Commands us to believe
(under pain of damnation) Doctrines which are uncertiane and dubious: But the
Church of Rome does Require such things; pro. In the Creed of Pius 4th Bulla
Pij 4th Super form. Juram Profess: fid.
There are several things Required as Conditions of Communion with that Church,
and which their Clergy are bound to swear that they truly Believe, and will
constantly defend, and that they will take Care that they be taught to, and
Believed by those who are under their Charge, and this also they Acknowledge to
be the Catholic faith, without which there is no Salvation: But now many of
these things (which they are Bound to hold according to the Letter of the
Decree (are Uncertain and Doubtful, and from their own Principles and
Confessions will apear so.

1. I instance in the Artic^e that they acknowledge the holy Catholic
Apostolic Roman Church to be the Mother and Mistrisse of all Churches: But
there is no Certainty of the truth of this Article, for it is either meant of
the Churches united under the Obedience of the Roman Bishop, or else of the
Particular Diocese of Rome: It cannot be meant of the Universal Church which
obeyes the Universal Vicar of Christ, as Suarez phraseth it: for all Churches
are supposed by them members of that Universal Church, and the Universal Church
to be the Collection of all Churches: Now it is improper to call the Universal
Church A Mother of all Churches, for all Churches are the same with the
Universal Church, and nothing can be called a Mother to it self; Again, it
cannot be a Mistrisse of all Churches, for it is only a Society of all Churches
United together; and Suppose all those Churches throughout the world, of which
this Universal Church is made, I ask what is the Mistrisse to all these
Churches? either it is the Roman particular Church which I shall show to be
otherwise, or else they must say that all these Churches United are a Mistrisse
to all Churches, when yet they suppose no other can be a Church but what is
United with these, which is absurd. If they mean the particular Roman Church,
then first, that cannot be a Mother of all Churches, which in order of time was
founded after some Churches, unless we could say the Mother might be born
after the Daughter, but the Roman Church was founded after the Church of
Jerusalem, and therefore St. Hierome Com. in Iss. 2.
says, the Church founded in Jerusalem, begat the Churches of the whole world,
Ecclesia in Jerusalem fundata totius orbis Ecclesias seminavit, and the
Synodical Letter Theodoret. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. 6. 9.
from the Council of Constantinople to Damasus and the Western Bishops calls
Cyril, the Bishop of Jerusalem, the Mother of all Churches: Again, the Roman
Church was founded after the Church of Antioch, where the Disciples were first
called Christians. Acts II. 26.
Quae prima omnium ausa est proferre Christianum nomen, atque Nascentis
Evangelij gloriam praedicare, says Polidor Virgil De Invent. rerum l. 4. c. 2.
I may ad, after the Church of Britain, for Suarez Defens. Fidei Cathol. l. 1.
c. 1.
confesses, it was from the first Rising of the Gospel, and Baronius from some
manuscripts in the Vatican affixeth it to the 35th year of our Lord, which was
near nine years before the founding of the Roman Church; If then the Roman
Church was founded after some other Churches, it is then uncertain and doubtful
how we can acknowledge it to be the Mother of all Churches, and prosesse this as
an Article of Faith without which there is no Salvation.

Secondly, If it be not de fide that the Roman particular Church shall never
err in matters of Faith, then it is absurd to make this profession always,
that she is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, for that cannot always be
the Mother and Mistress of all Churches, which may cease to be a member of the
Catholic Church: But even by their own confessions, it is not de fide that the
Roman particular Church shall always remain, or always adhere to the true
faith: for that Rome shall be the Seat of Antichrist is the opinion of many
Romanists; and if it be Ribera and Viega in Apoc. 17.
the Seat of Antichrist, it is uncertain how it can remain the Mistress of all
Churches; again, that it shall not fail, it is only pia and probabilissima
opinio Bellar. l. 4. de Romans pont. c. 4.
But not so certain that the contrary can be called Heretical, or manifestly
erroneous; yea, there is no promise (if we look on that Church precisely) that
it shall never revolt from the Catholic faith, says Suarez Desensfid. Cathol.
l. 1. 5. 5.
Now if it be not de fide that the Roman particular Church shall never err in
matters of faith, and that there is no promise to support it from failing, then
it is absurd to prosess always this Article as necessary to Salvation, That
she is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches.

Thirdly, If the Romanists shall say that the particular Church, taken
abstractly from its Bishop may err, but considered as united with its head the
Universal Bishop then it can never err, or fall away, propter Cathedram Petri
praesidentem, says Suarez Defens. fid. Cathol. etc. l. 1. c. 5. n. 6, 7.
; for the Roman Bishop is the Vicar of Christ, and Head of the whole Church,
the Father and Teacher of all Christians, to whom in St. Peter was delivered
the full power of feeding, and governing the universal Church, as the
Florentine Council determines: so that whatsoever Church is in Union with him,
by virtue of the privilege derived to him by St. Peter cannot fall into any
error, hoc habet quaelibet alia Ecclesia sub eadem ratione and Union spectata,
says Suarez Defens. fid. etc. ibi. n. 6.
: But now if the foundation of this Article be doubtful and uncertain, it will
follow that this Article it self is doubtful and uncertain also. First then,
(setting aside the question about St. Peter's universal Pastor-ship which
contains many perplexities) it is uncertain, whether there be by Divine right a
successor to that universal Pastor-ship, for there is no mention in Scripture
of a successor, no Command to appoint one, and no evident consequence that any
such was appointed; and if there can be no certain command produced to appoint
a successor, nor evident consequence that by divine Command any such was
appointed, then it is uncertain whether there be by divine right a successor to
that universal Pastor-ship. Secondly, It is uncertain whether those privileges
which our Savior obtained by his Prayer for St. Peter, are to be extended to
his Successor, for either all must be allowed to a Successor, or only some
privileges: if all privileges, then the Successor of St. Peter can neither
err in his own judgment, nor teach any error to others: But this is more then
themselves require, for the former privilege fortasse non descendit ad
postelos, perhaps it has not descended to his successors, says Bellarmine, l.
4. de Romans Pont. c. 3.
and Canus Loc. Com. lib. 6. c. 8.
gives the account of Pighius defending the Popes (by virtue of this Prayer)
being free from personal error: Quamvis in multis locis dicit satis
probabiliter de summi Pontificis autoritate, tamen non id spectandum quid
dicit, sed quid consentaneum sit ei dicere, though he speaks probably enough in
many places of the Popes authority, yet that is not so much to be regarded what
he says, as what is fit for him to say, etc. for he adds in another place, it
cannot be denied but the Pope may be an Heretic: If only some privileges were
here given to his successor, as infallibility in Doctrine, that he should never
teach error, tanquam Pontifex, whereas our Savior obtained for St. Peter the
privilege of persevering in saving faith, and also infallibility in Doctrine: I
demand then, where has our Savior distinguished betwixt the privileges here
given to St. Peter and to his Successors? Where is it said what he has
obtained for the one, and what he has obtained for the other? Where are those
words about Teaching, or Teaching others? or that a Successor should teach no
errors, any more then St. Peter could? to sum up this Argument, there can be no
pretense that the privileges procured for St. Peter belonged to his Successors
without our Saviors grant, but it is uncertain whether there be such a grant;
for either all privileges must be allowed to his Successors, which is more
then they would have: or there must be some distinction betwixt those
privileges which he procured for St. Peter, and which he obtained for his
successors; but if there be none to be found there, as I have shown, then it
follows that it is uncertain whether the privileges which our Savior obtained
for St. Peter are to be extended to his Successors. Thirdly, granting there be
a successor, yet still this Article that the Bishop of Rome is the successor of
St. Peter (I mean in that large sense the Papists take it) is uncertain and
doubtful; for there is no Command extant that S. Peter should fix his Seat at
Rome, and no Divine Testimony that the Bishop of Rome was appointed his
successor; and if there be neither Command that he should be appointed his
successor, nor Divine Testimony that he was so appointed, it follows then that
this Article, The Bishop of Rome is St. Peter's successor, is uncertain and
doubtful; if there were a Command, then either it was given before St. Peter
would have departed from Rome, or after his return thither again: if before St.
Peter's going out of Rome he received the command to fix his Seat there then it
is not likely that he would have offered to remove thence which (as the stories
quoted by Bellarmin l. 1. de Romans pon^. c. 23.
say) was a little before his Death: if after his return to Rome he received
this Command, how does it appear, yea that he received such Command either
before his offering to depart, or after his return? what Record? what
Testimony? what assurance of any such thing? if there were a Testimony that the
Bishop of Rome was appointed to be St. Peter's successor, then either that
Testimony is Divine, or Humane; if it be a Divine Testimony let it be produced;
if it be only a Humane Testimony, then it makes only a Humane faith, and
therefore it can be no Article necessary to be believed on pain of Damnation,
that the Bishop of Rome is St. Peter's successor. Again that which is not yet
agreed on by the Romish Doctors, whether it be by Divine, or Humane right,
cannot be made by them a Fundamental Article of faith: But by what ground the
Bishop of Rome succeeds to St. Peter, is not yet agreed on by them positively.
Some say it is only by Humane right, so Soto Armacanus, and Paludanus, as
Suarez de trip. Vir^. disp. 10. ss. 3. n. 9.
tells us; Some say it is not by Divine right, Sed ex facto and morte Petri
says Azorius Inst. moral. part. 2. l. 4. c. 11.
: Bellarmine speaks very perplexedly, it is not ex prima institutione quae
legitur in Evangelio Bell. l. 2. de Romans pont. c. 12. at. vero at. quoniam
Sobs. ^. 1. 4. c. 4. ss. at setundum. respondeo ss. accedit.
: not from the first institution which is in the Gospel, but then we would find
the second institution, It is not (says he) improbable that the Lord plainly
Commanded Peter, etc. Again peradventure it is not by Divine right, although it
pertain to the Catholic faith: Again it is not altogether de fide that the
Apostolic Seat cannot be separated from the Roman Church: Again Christ did not
plainly Command it, but is said to Command it, because Peter did translate his
Seat thither by Gods inspiration: Again it does not appear how Christ Commanded
Peter that he should place his Seat, pos. it is not de fide that the Sea of
Rome was established by a Divine and immutable Command: Thus they are perplexed
where to found this right of succession, and pos. this proposition the Bishop
of Rome is St Peter's successor must be even in their apprehension doubtful and
uncertain: Lastly, those who pretend a Divine right, confess that it is not
expressed in Scripture, but only virtually contained in the principles revealed
in it, for (says Suarez Defens. fid. Cathol. etc. l. ^. c 13. n. 5.
) There was a primacy given to Peter, and that primacy was to last in the
Church, and this must be a Succession of Persons in the same dignity, now the
application of this Institution and dignity to this particular Bishopric, is
sufficiently evidented by plain Tradition, and evident use. But this is wholly
uncertain; for first, where shall we find this Tradition that St. Peter
appointed the Roman Bishop his successor. Secondly, where shall we find that
the Bishop of Rome must be his successor because he died Bishop of Rome? for
there is no certainty that St. Peter disposed his Universal Bishopric to that
See where he died, nor any certainty from the Nature of the thing, that it must
fall to that place where he died; nor any certainty that the Sea which he last
held has any more privilege on this account, than the Sea of Antioch where
hefirst sat: nor any certainty that the power of naming a successor did not
fall to the Apostles who survived him, or to the Universal Church: till these
things be certainly determined, it remains still uncertain that the Bishop of
Rome is St. Peter's successor.

Fourthly, It is uncertain whether this or that particular Bishop of Rome be
the true Bishop of Rome, and pro. uncertain whether he be St. Peter's successor;
and pro. higher still, it is uncertain whether he has the privileges obtained
by our Savior for St. Peter and his successors; and highest of all, whether
the Roman Church, or any other is secured from Error by being subject to him:
It is necessary de fide (says Suarez Di trip. Virtute dis. 10. sect. 5. n. 2.
) that this man who is received by the common consent of the Church, as head of
it, to which it is bound to obey, is the true Pope and successor of St. Peter:
The reason he gives is this, For it will be impossible, otherwise to believe
certainly what he defines; the same thing Salmero In Epistalas Pauli in genero
part. 3. disp. 2. p. 133.
speaks that with same faith with which we believe Jesus Christ, we also
believe Paulus fourth to be the Pope: Non tantum humana fide cui possit subesse
falsum: But now if this be uncertain then it cannot be de fide, and that it is
uncertain appears thus. First, there may be Schisms in the Papacy, as has
been often (since the Roman Bishopric became rather a Dignity than an Office;
one Schism lasted 50 years Onuph. in Vita Urban. 6.
; sometimes three Popes together as Bened. 13. Greg. 12. John 23. all of them
pretended themselves to be the true Vicars of Christ, all of them as true Popes
created Cardinals Platina in Vita Allex. 5.
, and were allowed for Cardinals by the Council of Constance Onuph. in Vita
Greg. 12.
, and electors of the succeeding Popes, the Cardinals of Greg. 12. and
Benedict. 13, created Alexander the fifth in the Councils of Pisa; the
Cardinals of these Schismatical Popes (of which some had been made Cardinals
after the deposition of these Popes at Pisa) were electors of Martin the fifth;
either then they were all true Popes, or none of them, Onuph. ibi.
or only one of them: they were not all true Popes, according to the
Romanists, who tell us, there is but one Legitimate successor, the rest are
Rebels and Tyrants: if only one was true Pope, then those Cardinals which
the Antipopes created, could not be lawful Cardinals, nor lawful Electors of
the succeeding Popes; nay, nor according to an Ancient constitution could be
Popes themselves: and yet Eugenius the 4th was created Cardinal by Greg. 12th
whom they confess was a Schismatical Pope: if none of these were true Popes,
then for fifty years it was not necessary de fide to believe this or that man
to be true Bishop of Rome; nor was it certain that the Church of Rome was the
Mistress of all Churches, because of its conjunction with the successor of St.
Peter, since all that time it was uncertain who was the true successor.
Secondly, it is uncertain whether there be no secret impediments, which hinder
him from being true Pope, as whether the essentials required in the election
and consecration of the Pope be rightly performed, and pro. it cannot be de
fide that this particular person is the true Bishop of Rome. First we cannot be
certain, absolutely that the things required to the Election be performed:
I Will instance in two things. First, if the person be Elected by those who have
no power to Elect, then the Election is Null, for if they had no power to Elect
then they could confer no power nor privilege on the person whom they do Elect,
but it is uncertain whether the Election be performed by those who have power to
elect; for the right they have is either by divine or humane Law; but it is
uncertain that they have a wright, either by divine or humane Law, pro. First,
it is uncertain that there is any right by divine Law, for let any man produce
any divine Command or allowance; let them produce any proof that the authority
of Electing the universal Bishop who shall be endowed with the privileges
given to St. Peter, was bestowed on the Cardinals. Secondly, the Election of
the Pope was performed anciently by the suffrages of Clergy, and people, so
Cornelius was chosen electione Cleri and plebis, says Ciprian Epist. l. 4.
Epis. 2. 1.
and Gratian Distinct. 79. c. ejectionem.
quotes a saying of Anacletus, that God committed the Election bonis
Sacerdotibus, and Spiritualibus populis, to good Priests and Spiritual people.
The like we have from Onuphrius* that the Election Annot. in Plat. vita Pelag.
2.
of the Roman Bishop, more majorum was a Clero: S. P. Q. R. by the Clergy
Senate, and people of Rome. Now then if the Election by the Cardinals was Jure
divino then the former way of election was Null, and there was no true Pope
till Celestin the second, qui primus sine ullo populi interventu Papa creatus
est Onuph. annot. in Plat. vita innocent. 2.
who was the first that was created Pope without the peoples meddling in the
Election. Secondly, it is uncertain that there is any right by humane Law, for
then it must pear that a right was conferred on them by the consent of the
Universal Church, that they were appointed Proctors for the Universal Church,
to choose on their behalf the Universal Pastor; but if none of this appears,
nay, nor certainly that they are the rightful Electors of the Bishop of Rome
barely qua Bishop of Rome, then it is not certain that the Pope is truly
Elected, and therefore it cannot be de fide that this Clement the 9th is the
successor of St. Peter. Secondly, if the Pope be elected for fear or profit,
viz. if either the electors are compelled by Violence, or by bribes induced to
elect one, if they be either overawd with power or corrupted with gifts, then
the election is null: Pope Nicholas Distinct. 79. c. siquis pecnnia, etc.
determines, he shall be accounted Apostaticus non apostaticus; and the
Councels of Lateran under Julius second declares that election to be null, and
that by that election no power either in things temporal or sperituall shall
be allowed to the person elected; but now if he look into the stories of former
elections, and the Mysteries of the Conclave at this day, he will see, that it is
uncertain to us whether the Pope be rightly elected: you may read the election
of Formosus the first Largitione Potius quam Virtute Assumitur ad Pontificatum
Platina in vita foremost.
for his gifts rather then Virtue of Steph, the sixth of Sergius the third of
John the eleventh raised by the Authority and endeavors of his Mother Marocia,
says Onuphorius Annot. in Plat. in vita John. 11th.
; John thirteenth seized on the Popedom by the power of his father Albericus
Plat. in John 13th.
: John the eighteenth got the Popedom by the power of Crescentius whom it was
supposed he had bribed Plat. in John 18th
: Silvester the second obtained Symonically first the Archbishopric of Rhemes
then of Ravenna, lastly the Popedom, Majore Conatu diabolo adjuvante: Plat. in
Sylvest. 2.
: Clement the second by the Emperors Compulsion, Damasus the second by plain
force without any Consent of the clergy or people enters on the Popedom yea it
even became a Custom, that every Ambitious person might seize on Saint Peter's
Chair, as Platina Complains in: vita Clem. 2. and Damas. 2.
. What shall I say of Boniface the seventeenth who came in like a fox, and left
nothing untried by bribing and cheating that he might obtain the Popedom? or
of Alexander the sixth who was reported to have Attained that dignity by the
Ambition, and coveteousness of some corrupt Prelates Onuph. II in vita Allex. 6.
? and how can we be absolutely certain that this is a true pope, when we find
the Essentialls of a true Election may be wanting? often times the Elections were
not free, either the Electors were overawed, or their votes bought: and can we
believe it is yet better? It is Platina's wish (when he saw how men were
preferred to the Papacy, not for their piety, but for their gifts) Quem morem
utinam aliquando non retinuissent nostra tempora; but he rather fears unless
God prevented, that the elections would be worse, sed hoc parum est pejora (ni
deus caveat) aliquando visuri sumus: although the doors of the Conclave are
kept shut, yet enough flies abroad to show the factions sidings, and Policies
within, how the Cardinals are divided by their Interests, and dependencies on
Princes; how some are frighted, others corrupted; some out of fear, others out
of hatred etc. giving their Votes this way, or that way, and what certainty can
we have this is a true Bishop of Rome, lawful successor to Saint Peter when we
see so much ground to suspect that the Essentials of a true election are often
times wanting but if any reply, that Gods providence will not permit any to
pass for Pope, who is not Pope; and that if the Church do submit to him as
Pope, it is certain that he is Pope, and pro. we may still believe that it is de
fide that this Pope is lawful elected Pope. But this is saying without proving,
much confidence with little reason: I therefore add, that there have been those
who passed for Bishops of Rome and have been owned not only by their own
parties, as in a Schism, but generally have passed for the true Pope, when yet
their Elections were null; I say, have been generally owned, their names
reckoned in the catalogue, their decrees allowed, and yet the Essentialls
requisite to a right election are acknowledged by their own Historians to be
wanting. Instance in Vigilius the first who suborned witnesses against
Silverius, that he would betray the City to the Goths, and having got him
deposed, was during the life of Silverius put into the Bishopric, and did (as
Onuphrius confesses) Annot. in Plat. in Vita vigil. 1.
Occupare per vim pontificatum Romanum; and yet this man is owned for Pope,
without the least appearance of any new election after the death of Sylverius,
or any approbation and allowance from the clergy, and people by which he might
lawfully enjoy that title. Again I instance in Benedict the fifth created Pope
in a sedition by the friends and dependents of John the thirteenth against Leo
the eighth and yet he is both reckoned in the catalogue of Popes, Onuph. Annot.
in vita Bened. 5.
and the succeeding Popes who assumed that name in reckoning of themselves did
allow him to be Pope; so in John eighteenth though he came not in by the door,
but during the life of Gregory the fifth seized on the Popedom, yet he is
reckoned in the Catalogue of Popes which Platina admires Plat. in vita John 18.
. When we thus see some owned for Popes who have never been duly elected, and
do know how much tirannical compulsion may force an outward compliance, we
cannot judge the submission and silence of the Church (as Suarez holds) Can be
any certain ground that the election was lawful. The sum of this argument is
this, if it be uncertain whether the essentialls of a just and true election be
performed, then it is uncertain whether this be a true Pope and ex consequenti
it cannot be de fide that this Pope is the true sucessor of Saint Peter.
secondly we cannot be certain absolutely that the things essentially required
in the consecration of the Pope are duly performed; I do not mean of such
things in the consecration which are only required by the cannon; but I speak
of those things which they account essential, that there can be no consecration
without them. first I instance in the qualification, of the person to be
consecrated: without baptism there is no ordination and pro. who have not been
baptized cannot be ordained, nor consecrated, and are jure divino incapable of
orders, but we cannot be absolutely certain that this person has been baptized
pro. we cannot be absolutely certain that some thing essential to his
consecration is not wanting. Secondly In the intention of the consecrators, for
that is essentially necessary in conferring of orders by the Counsels of
Florence Decret. de Sacram.
and the council of Trent Sess. de Sacram. Can. 2.
requires an intention of doing, that which the Church does, but it may fall
out, that the consecrators have no intention of doing any such things either
through negligence, or malice either they may intend to do nothing or not to do
that which the church does (i. e.) to consecrate: or they may intend to do this
outward act in sport or merriment, or if then they cannot be certain that there
is either an actual or virtuall intention in the consecrators, then they
cannot be certain absolutely that the essentialls of consecration are duly
performed. Thirdly. Without intention in the person to be consecrated, there is
no true consecration; so Innocent the third determines C. majore: Extra. de
Baptisms.
; and Suarez call's it the common opinion of Divines that to the value of a
sacrament is required intentio suscipientis; but no man can be absolutely
certain, that the Pope either in any moment foregoing or during the act of
consecration, did any way intend to receive it; for it is not the bare outward
performing or doing, or receving which are required: but the intending in the
mind to do, or receive, and of that inward intention in the mind we cannot be
certain. Many more things might be added concerning the consecrators whether
they were baptized? whether they were Priests? whether there is no defect in
any thing essentially required to their baptism, or ordination? whether the
intention in the consecration was directed to that present person? for that
Filliucius Cas. Consc. tract. 1. c. 5. n. 79.
requires now in these things since it is Possible some essential may be
wanting, it follows no man can be certain absolutely that this is the true Pope,
and if he cannot be so absolutely certain that this is the true Pope: because
it is possible some essential has been wanting, then he cannot own it to be so
de fide, nor swear that the Church of Rome is the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches because of its Union with him.

Secondly, I instance in the Article of Trausubstantiation according to the
Creed of Pius 4th, they swear that in the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist
there is truly, really, and substantially the body, and blood, with the Soul,
and Deity, of our Lord Jesus Christ, and there is a conversion of the whole
substance of bread into the body, and of the whole substance of wine into the
blood, which Conversion the Catholic Church calls Transubstantiation; and in
the Council of Trent there is an Anathema pronounced against those who shall
deny that wonderful, and singular conversion of the whole substance of the
bread into the body, and of the whole substance of the wine into the blood, the
Species of bread, and wine only remaining, which Conversion the Catholic
Church most fitly calls Transubstantiation: now though according to the Letter
the Decree seems plain, and they will all cry up this wonderful miracle, this
August mystery, yet in the explication of it and of the grounds whereupon they
believe it they are perplexed; For,

First, although they pretend to derive this Doctrine from Scripture, yet it is
not certain that there is any place of Scripture which necessarily infers this
doctrine: so Scotus In 4. lib. sent. did. 11. q. 3.
says, and how the body of Christ is there, whether by Conversion of something
into it, or without Conversion the substance, and accidents of bread remaining,
non invenitur in Canone Bibliae says Gabriel Biel In Canone miss. lect. 40.
, and notwithstanding that they usually insist on the 6th of St. John and the
words of Institution, this is my body, yet others of great note among them,
conclude that it is not expressed in Scripture, so Canus Loc. Com. l. 3. c. 3.
fund. 2.
holds, and Cajetane maintains the 6th of St. John no way pertains to a
Sacramental *In 3. part. q. 80. art. vet.
eating; the same is held by Jansenius Tapperus and others, cited by Suarez and
first some of them confess, they should not have believed it, unless the Church
had declared it to be de fide, for the Church by the spirit of truth did
explain those things which were obscure in Scripture Canus Loc. Com. l. 3. c.
3. fundam. 2.
; but then it would be still in vain to endeavor to prove this conversion from
Scripture, because there is no argument from thence which can sufficiently
convince: and to argue with us from those Texts, which they think are not
sufficiently cogent without their Churches explanation, is altogether
impertinent, for we are as uncertain of the infallibility of their Church in
explaining those Texts, as we are whether those Doctrines be contained there,
it is first as to us uncertain whether this Doctrine be delivered in Scripture.
Secondly, though they affirm that by the words of institution the bread is
turned into the body, and the wine into the blood, yet they are perplexed about
the meaning of them. First, As whether there be any figure in the words or no?
For if they be construed figuratively, then they cannot certainly infer any
transubstantiation; and first sometimes they tell us there is no figure, or
trope: yea, there ought to be none in the words of Institution; but then how
can the Cup be the New Testament? there the Cup must be put for Wine in the
Cup. Again, How can the Cup be the New Testament properly? For a Testament is
the Testators disposition of his Estate; but the Wine in the Cup, or the thing
contained under the species cannot be so in any proper sense. Again, it is
uncertain how the blood in the Cup can properly be called the New Testament in
his blood? for the blood is a physical, a Testament is a moral thing: yea it is
uncertain whether Bellarmin's * Explanation of the L. 1. de Eucharist. c. 11.
words be sense; This blood under the species, is the New Testament under his
blood: so that it is doubtful when they have done all they can, whether they can
explain these words without a figure. Secondly, They are perplexed about the
meaning of these words, as what is meant by hoc est corpus meum; for if they
cannot resolve what is meant by this Pronoun hoc, then they cannot determine
what is the full meaning of this Proposition; indeed Bellarmin L. 1. de Euchar.
c. 10.
tells us, Vera est Catholicorum sententia, qui volunt illud [Hoc] non
demonstrare panem, sed rem contentam sub speciebus panis, etc. That the opinion
of Catholics was true, who say, this Pronoun Hoc does demonstrate not the
Bread, but a thing contained under it; which although it was Bread before, yet
it is now the Body of Christ: But he that consults the Romish Writers, will
find that Bellarmin only hides their quarrels, and obtrudes his own opinion for
a general Doctrine. Johannes de Rhada Controv. 5. de Sacr. Euchar. Art. 4.
acknowledges the perplexity of their Doctors; some say the Pronoun Hoc
demonstrates the species of bread, because the Pronoun must signify a sensible
thing, which exists when the designation is made, and remains when the
signification of the word is finished, but there is nothing in the Sacrament
which is sensible when the words began to be pronounced, and when they are
ended besides the accidents, first it must signify the Accidents. Some say
that this Pronoun demonstrates the body of Christ as it is in it self, or
intending the body of Christ in Heaven, which when the words are spoken begin
to be in the Host Occam quod lib. vet. q. 2.
; and so the words signify, this body is my body. Some say, it designs the
substance of bread under those accidents, and so the sense is, The bread passes
into the body of Christ; hoc est Bonavent. q. 1. Art 1. in 2. part. did. 8.
lib. 4.
, ad hujus verbi prolationem hoc totum transire in corpus. Some say, it designs
something common to the substance of bread, and the Body of Christ under this
reason of being contained under the species, and so the sense should be hoc
quod sub his acccidentibus continetur est corpus meum, that which is contained
under these accidents is my body, and this he pretends both Thomas, and Scotus
holds. But still the perplexity remains, what that is which is contained under
these accidents, when they first say Hoc* for it is not the body till the words
are ended. If it were the bread, then the Proposition is true, this bread is my
body; and that they will not g^ant. Again, the subject of the Proposition must
have a distinct sense; when first our Savior took the bread into his hand, and
said this is, there must be some meaning of that part of the Proposition, that
Demonstrative pronoun [Hoc] must refer to some thing present Bellar. l. 1. de
Sacr. Euchar. c. 11. h. ^c expl.
, and that which is evident to the senses, and not barely apprehended by the
imagination; what can that be but only bread? which they confess was existing
during the speaking of the words? Thirdly, they are perplexed, whether this
Transubstantiation be wrought by the Prayer of Consecration, or the words of
Institution: that it was wrought by the Prayer, as well as the words was the
opinion of some; that the Consecration was the same with the blessing, and
giving of thanks was the opinion of Thomas Durand, Hugo Cardinalis, etc. yet
still how this can be is wholly intricate and perplexed; for if our Savior
Consecrated by blessing, and giving of thanks, then he consecrated by Prayer:
but that they will not say, for they now conclude he Consecrated by those
words, hoc est corpus meum, as it is determined by the Council of Florence
Conc. Flor. in Instruct. Armen.
, that our Saviors words by which he made the Sacrament are the form of it,
and that by the virtue of those words the Consecration is wrought, and so it is
explained in the Roman Catechism: We are taught (says the Catechism) by the
Evangelist's Matthew, and Luke, and by the Apostle this is the form of the
Sacrament of the Eucharist; hoc est corpus meum: well, but still they are
perplexed in what sense the Priest uses these words; for some think they are
only repeated Historically Salmero tract. 13. tom. 9. Soto Art 5. q. 1. did.
11.
; but they cannot work this change, for so they only show what was done by our
Savior in the first celebration of the Sacrament; others say, that they are
spoken significatively, (i. e.) that the Priest speaking in the person of
Christ signifies the turning of that bread into the body, so says the
Florentine Council, Sacerdos loquens in persona Christi hoc conficit
Sacramentum; but this will not agree with the Canon of the Mass, where they are
repeated Historically, for after the Prayer that God would make that offering
to be to us the body, and blood of his Son Jesus Christ, it is immediately added
in imitation of the Apostles recital of the Story, who, the day before he
suffered took bread into his holy and venerable hands, and lifting up his eyes
unto Heaven to thee his Father, God Allmighty, gave thanks, he blessed, brake,
and gave to his Disciples* saying, take, eat, all of this, for this is my
body: now what connection can there be betwixt these latter words, and the
former? unless they be. joined as part of the History: or what sense in the
former words he brake and gave to his Disciples, saying, take eat all of this?
if they break off abruptly the repeating of the Story, and do not add these
words, hoc est corpus meum. Thus they are perplexed on either hand, and first
to avoid this intricacy they have divised a new way, that these words should
both be taken recitative, and significative: both as part of the Story, and as
the Priests words in the person of Christ by virtue of them turning the bread;
but still how can this be, that the same words should be both a repetition of a
former Story, and the production of the like effect? how is this intelligible
that the same word without any variation should be used for these different
purposes? both to relate what was done, and to work the same thing over again:
and further in the Consecration of the blood it is added qui pro vohis and pro
multis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum Canon miss. in missali Romans Paris.
1631.
, which shall be shed for you, and for many for the remission of sins, now if
these words be understood significatively, then they are utterly false, as
Durand argued, because the body of Christ must suffer no more, nor the blood be
shed: thus whether these words shall be taken narratively, or significatively,
or jointly their Doctors cannot agree; and are wholly perplexed to solve the
difficulties, and yet maintain their Ground. Fourthly, they are perplexed
whether this conversion be productive or adductive or Conservative; and so
Bellarmine acknowledges, that though they agree there is a transubstantiation
(i. e.) conversion of the bread into the body, and of the wine into the blood
for the authority of the Councils and Church; yet in the manner of explaining
it they differ, for they find so many difficulties in stating the manner of
this conversion, that though they maintain the decree in the terms of it yet
they are perplexed to find the sense, (i. e.) they profess to believe
transubstantiation but when they come to tell us what they mean by it, they
then confess they believe they know not what. For first, If this conversion be
productive then the body of Christ should be made by these words, hoc est
eorpus meum, but that which already has it is being, cannot by that action
receive it is being, for it is supposed to have its being before that action.
Again, Every new real action must have a new real term but there can be here
no new real term, because the term was praeexisting as Io. de Rhada In 4.
lib. sent. Con. 7. Art. 2. Concl. 3.
argues; again Albertinus Coroll. tom. 2. Cor. 3. dub. 3. concl. vins. 13.
urges this argument, if the word does produce the body, then the body of
Christ did concur as an instrument to the production of it self: but that is
a contradiction, that the body should be made substantially by it self, for
then it should be both before and after it self; before it self, for it is
presupposed to that Action by which it should be produced after it self as it
is made by that Action, and by this means the same thing would be both effect
and cause in the same kind, (i. e.) the body of Christ would be the cause of
the Action by which it was produced, and that Action is the causality or manner
by which the body is produced. This way of Conversion productive they now
dislike, though it most agree with the Letter of the Canons, for they say, the
bread is substantially turned into the body of Christ Conc. Romans sub Nicol. 2.
and Greg. 7.
: they compare this to the turning of water into Wine, but the Wine was
produced in that miracle: they have been used to say, the Priest in the
Sacrament creates his Creator; yea Pope Urban in the Roman Council makes this
his pretense against doing Homage to the Laity for Ecclesiastical honors,
because it was nimis execrabile, manus quae in tantam eminentiam excreverint ut
Deum cuncta creantem suo ministerio creent, etc. because it was abominable,
that those hands which are advanced to that honor to create God who created
all things should be the Servants of those hands which are daily defiled with
obscene infection: this way of production though it was not defined, yet was
thus publicly pleaded by a Pope in Council but is now rejected. Secondly, If
this Conversion be conservative, then it will be wholly unintelligible, for
conservation is the continuance of creation, or a continuance of that which
already has its being: either first they meant, that by the words of
Consecration was wrought a Conservation of the body of Christ which was in
heaven, or a conservation of it under the Sacramental species: it cannot be
meant that there is wrought a conservation of it under the species unless there
had been first an action creandi, for it cannot be thought that a thing is
conserved there where it is not supposed first to exist; but according to them,
before these words the body did not exist there, so it could not be conserved
there: nor can it be meant of a conservation of the body in Heaven, for
conservation is the continuance of an Action, but here is a new Action, and a
new dependence wrought by the force of the words of consecration, as Albertinus
argues Tom. 2. Corol. 3. dub. 3. n. 7.
. This pretense of conservation has few maintainers, first let us consider the
third way which Bellarmine calls communiorem and tutiorem viam, the more
common, and safe way of Thomas, and other grave Divines, I mean adductive
conversion, (i. e.) by the words the body of Christ is not made to exist
simply, but to exist under those species; that the bread ceases to be under
those accidents, and the body begins to be under them: that the body succeeds
to exist under those accidents not by having a new substance, but only a new
presence: but here they are all together perplexed; for if it succeed here,
where the bread was, it must either change place, or be produced, as Thomas
instances in fire, if it begin to be in the House, where it was not before,
either it must be brought in hither, or be generated here, that it does not
change places is plain, for then it should leave Heaven, when it was adduced
under the species of bread on Earth: if they say it must be produced here, how
can that be? how can it be produced and not have its being produced? or how can
it be said that the substance of bread is turned into the substance of the
body, when no new substance is made, but only the substance exists in a
different ubi? or that one substance passes into another, when the one only
succeeds the other? or how should it be the most perfect manner of Conversion
as Bellarmine says, when there is no change in the Nature of the body but only
it is veiled under other accidents? when there is no new substance but only a
new presence? yea Rhada says out of Scotus Part. 4. Cont. 6. Art. 1. Concl. 3.
, there is no proper change at all? or how can it be most fitly called
Transubstantiation, yea properly, and conveniently (as the Council of Trent
says) when this conversion of the whole substance of bread into the whole
substance of the body is no more then that the one existed where the other did?
and the term [ad quem] of this conversion is not any substance but an
accidentalis modus, a presence where it was not before? There are some other
inventions, wherewith they labor to solve these perplexities, but what one
thinks that he builds, another soon pulls down, and there be so many contrary
opinions in stating this conversion, that it is easy to see, they could not
satisfy others, who are so wholly unsatisfied themselves: Thirdly, there are
so many intricacies about the species themselves, where they are subjected;
what Union betwixt the body of Christ and those accidents, whether this body be
an Organical body or no? when it ceases to be under the species, if there be no
substance of bread what then is broken? what chewed? what digested? what is it
which nourishes? what is it which breeds worms, etc? there are so many
intricacies, that those who stiffly maintain this Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, know not how to wind themselves out: I instance in some
few things. First, what is it that is broken? either the body or the species:
it cannot be the body, for the body cannot be divided into parts; and first, to
say that the body is broken, and chewed by the teeth, unless they be understood
in a sound sense, in majorem incides haeresin quam ipse habuit Berengarius,
says the Gloss Gloss. in Can. Bereng. de Consecr. did. 2.
, and yet in these words Berengarius was forced to recant, panem and vinum non
solum esse Sacramentum, sed verum corpus, etc. and in veritate manibus
Sacerdotum frangi, fidelium dentibus atteri Can. ego Bereng^ ibi.
, that the body was in truth held in the Priest hands, broken, and chewed with
the teeth: which words says Serenus Cressy, are far from being justifiable,
unless they be understood Sacramentally (i. e.) for the outward species, which
yet he sees cannot be, for it is said not only is a Sacrament, but the body,
etc. and is in truth held in the Priests hand, broken and chewed, and if it be
so, then Pope Nicholas and the Council erred which prescribed this recantation,
and how will he swallow that? it cannot be the species, for no man can break or
chew color, or savor, or figure, etc. but only some substance. Secondly, what
is it that nourishes? it is either the body or the species. First, it cannot be
the body; for the body of Christ cannot be turned into our bodies, otherwise
Christ's body could not be whole, for thousands of men must have part of his
body; It is nourishment to us (says Cressy) but not after a Carnal manner;
^ut how can this be? for if it be not nourishment after a Carnal manner, then
it must be after a Spiritual, and how can our bodies be nourished Spiritually?
If there be nourishment, there must be something digested, but Christ's body is
not turned into our bodies by digestion, says he: If there be nourishment,
then something must be added to our bodies but Christ's body is not added to our
bodies: Let him first either show how bodies can be nourished Spiritually, or
confess that he speaks, what he does not understand. Some first among them say,
The body ceases to be under the species when it comes into the belly, others
say, while it is in the mouth; others, that while the species remains the body
remains; and first while the species are in the belly, the body of Christ is
there Lindwood in Con^. prove. de sum. trin. c. altiss. p. glutiant.
, but the Gloss on the Canon non iste de consecrat. distinct. 2. says, the
body does not come down into the belly, quousque vero pergulam procedat nescio;
how far it goes into the Throat I know not; yet he concludes, it is not
digested as other meats are, nor passes into the nourishment of the body, for
it is the food of the Soul, and not of the body: Well, can it be the species?
Secondly, that also is uncertain for nourishing is the reparation of a
substance, not of accidents, and first must be by a substance, and not barely
by accidents: in nourishing the food must be transmuted into the body, and how
can accidents be so? to salve all this, God must afford some matter, either
restore the former matter of bread, or produce some new matter, or which is
most miraculous to me, all this must be done without a miracle says Bellarmine
L. 3. de Euchar. c. 24. resp. ad arg. 6.
; for the Natural Order of things require it, (i. e.) when the dispositions
requisite for introducing the form are made, after the previous alteration of
the species, then the order of things requiring it, God must substitute matter:
but what assurance has Bellarmine that all these things shall be as he
fancies? that the accidents shall be disposed without matter, in which they
should be subjected? that when these material dispositions are perfected God
will substitute matter: many such things there are which will trouble him to
resolve. All this shows that this is a most perplexed Doctrine, for if the
substance of bread be gone, what can nourish? it must either be the body or the
species; and yet neither of these can they certainly fix on. Thirdly, what is
it that is corrupted? as when worms are generated of the Host, it cannot be the
body, for God will not suffer his holy one to see Corruption. If they say the
species, neither can that be, for Corruption is properly of substance, neither
can the worms be generated of bare accidents, as of color, figure, or the
like, there must be then some new matter created into which the form of worms
must be introduced, and how strange must this be? that men to free themselves
from these perplexities are forced to shelter themselves under pretense of
multitude of miracles of which not one can be perceived by our senses. Durand
mentions eleven miracles in Transubstantiation Rationale div. offic. l. 4. c.
12.
, and yet there is not the least appearance to our senses that there is one;
yea to clear themselves from the perplexities which attend this Doctrine they
are forced to fly to more, Thomas Aquinas Part. 3. q. 75. art. 8. arg. 3.
, says there are plura difficiliora, etc. more difficulties than in the
creation. And Scotus In 4. lib. sentent. did. 11. q. 3.
objects to himself, that this one opinion is the occasion of turning all
Philosophers, and those that follow Natural reason from the faith, for they
would think, that there are greater inconveniences (supposing there be no
substance of bread remaining) than in the article of the Incarnation, and
propter haec fidem patere contemptui omnium sequentium rationem; this exposes
Religion to the contempt of all that follow reason: for to believe that which
seems so much both against sense and reason, and so little appearance of
revelation to defend it, is strange to wise, and rational men, who know not how
to digest such uncertain, doubtful, and absurd opinions, unless they can bring
their faith to believe what they judge impossible. The sum of this second
argument to prove the perplexities of the Romish Church in the Doctrines she
has defined is taken from the uncertainties, intricacies, and perplexities in
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

Thirdly, I instance in the Doctrine of Invocation of Saints, the Council of
Trent Sess. 25. de Invocatione, etc.
commands all who have any cure to teach this, That the Saints reigning with
Christ offer up their Prayers for men to God: that it is good and profitable,
humbly to invoke them, and for the benefits to be obtained of God by his Son,
who is our only Redeemer, and Savior, to fly to their Prayers, help, and aid,
and it declares, that all those think impiously, who deny that the Saints
enjoying Eternal happiness are to be invoked; or who assert that they do not
pray for men; or that it is foolish to supplicate to them, either with the
voice, or the mind: Now this Doctrine is so dubious, that it is unreasonable to
make it an article of faith. for first though the Saints should pray for us,
yet it is no necessary inference, first we must pray to them: no more then if a
friend at an hundred miles distance should every day pray for us, first we must
every day say at that distance, ora pro nobis. Secondly, it is no way certain
that it is good, and profitable to fly to their Prayers, help, and aid, for if
it be not certain that they know our Prayers, it is not certain that it is
profitable to fly to their prayers; now if they know them it must be either
that they hear these themselves, or are revealed to them by God, or discovered
to them by the holy Angels. But first, it is not certain that they themselves
can hear them; for though according to Sco^us seperat souls may intuitively
see every vocal oration which they might have known if they were joined to the
body, and also mental orations, and may behold the essence, and internal
operation of our souls, yet all this must be understood nisi immoderata
distantia impediat, Io. de Rhada. Cont. 16. Art. 4. Concl. 1.
unless there be an immoderate distance, for no Agent can act but upon a
patient duly approximated to it, and an immoderate distance hinders the
approximation: first unless the Separate Soul be in its due distance, it cannot
understand these Prayers: and so Biel In Canon Missa Lect. 31.
Says that they cannot know, that way, either mental or vocal Prayers by
reason of the immoderate distance: supposing (I say) with Scotus, that separate
Souls may hear those Prayers, which they might have known, when they were
joined to the body: yet this is not certain how far this distance reaches; and
what is the Sphere of their activity; and it is far less certain, whether the
Saints in Heaven can at that distance hear the many suppliants in several parts
of the Earth; and see those secret desires which never discovered themselves in
words. Secondly, it is no way certain that the Prayers of men are discovered by
the Angels to the Saints, for it is not certain, that the Angels can know the
thoughts Bellar. lib. 1. de Sanct. Beatit. c. 20.
; or if they do, it is not certain that they do discover these things to them.
It Is not certain they do know them, yea its most certain that God only knows
them 2 Chro. 6. 30.
, and if they do know them, yet it is not certain that they are either bound by
Charity, or Office to represent these things to the Saints. Thirdly, the usual
way they pitch on is either Gods revelation to the Saints as he revealed things
which were future to the Prophets: or else that the Saints see all things in
God from the beginning of their happiness, which any way pertain to them: and
this way Bellarmine calls the more profitable opinion, but neither of these
ways is certain. For first, it is no way certain that God does reveal these
Prayers to the Saints, which are made to them. And if he should as Bellarmine
argues, the Church could not so confidently say to the Saints, Pray for us, as
rather, Pray to God that he would reveal these Prayers to them; no man can say,
that God is any way bound to reveal these things, or de facto that he does so,
and how then can we be certain that God will reveal these Prayers to them.
Secondly, it is not certain that they see these things in the word, as in a
Corporeal Glass men may see clearly and distinctly what appears, according to
Becanus Ma^^. Contr. l. 1. c. 8.. 4.
his explication. For first, it is no way necessary to the Saints happiness,
that they should see these things in God, neither from the nature of happiness,
because as Scotus and his followers argue, the proper nature of Happiness
consists in seeing God, and his Attributes, but the Prayers of Saints are
distinct from God, and his Attributes, first it is not necessary they should see
these, ex ratione beatitudinis Rhada Cont. 16. Art. 4. Concl. 3.
; nor is it a consequent flowing from their happiness, that because they may
see in his Essence those things which flow from his Essence, first they may see
the Prayers made by the Creatures: though they may see his works about the
Creature, I mean the Idea of his works which is himself, yet it does not
follow, they should see what ever the Creature himself does: and so Biel tells
us that it is no part of their Essential beatitude, nor is it certain that it
pertains to their accidental beatitude Biel in Canon Missa Lect. 31.
. Secondly, as it is not necessary they should, so it is not certain, that they
do see all things in the Glass of the Divine Essence: for either then they see
all things simply in that Glass, or only such things as God is pleased to
permit them to see; if all things simply, then they must needs know all future
contingencies, they must know the day, and hour when the Son shall come to
judge the world, and yet our Savior says, of that hour knows no man, no not
the Angels, though they always see the face of their Father who is in Heaven
Man. 18. 10.
: If they see such things only as God is pleased to discover to them, then we
cannot be certain that they know our prayers, unless we are first certain that
God will discover them to them: If this Glass they talk of discovers all
things tanquam per naturalem communicationem, then they must see all future
contingencies, if the Glass discovers things only tanquam per voluntariam
communicationem, then they know no more then he is pleased to communicate, and
without his revelation we cannot be certain what that is, which he does
communicate: and if we cannot be certain they know our Prayers, we cannot be
certain that it is profitable to fly to their Prayers. Thirdly, it is no way
certain that they Pray for us, I confess it is not incredible that they Pray
for their fellow members; none will deny that their Charity is more ardent in
Heaven, then it was on Earth, and the greater their Charity is it will appear
in more eminent effects (so far as their conditiou permits) to their Brethren.
Thus far we do not question whether they pray for us, I mean in genere Field of
the Church l. 3. c. 3.
; yea, what if I should add that it is not incredible, but that they pray for
their friends and acquaintance? and in general desire the removal of Evils, and
the granting those things which are necessary for their Salvation? yea, if I
should add further that it is not incredible, but that they pray for them whose
Conditions on Earth they remember, even this also some eminent Protestants have
thought Andrews Opusc. Posth. Resp. ad c. 20. l. 5. Repl. Card. Perron Montac.
adv. Buleng. page 21.
: yet still it is no way certain, not certain (I say) that they do pray in
particular for their fellow members, or remember in their Prayers all the
particular necessities of the faithful on earth: for if we say we are certain
that they do thus particularly pray, the question will return which way? or by
what ground are we certainly assured? and it will apear there is no certain
ground but only some guesses, and supposed probabilities, and pero. this
Doctrine must be doubtful, and uncertain.

Fourthly, I instance in the Doctrine of Indulgences, the Council of Trent
declares, That since there was a power of bestowing Indulgences granted by
Christ to the Church, and the Church from the most ancient times has used it:
The Synod does teach, that the use of them being very wholesome to Christian
people and approved by authority of Councils to be retained in the Church: and
Anathematizes them who either say they are unprofitable, or deny the Churches
power to bestow them. The same also is sworn by their Clergy in the profession
of faith made by Pius 4. Indulgentiarum Potestatem a Christo in Ecclesia
relictam esse, illarumque usum Christiano Populo maxim salutarem esse affirmo.
No more was said of this Article by the Council of Trent, whether for have of
ending the Council: or rather for multiplicity of abstruse questions, which
must have been determined as the History of the Council says, I cannot judge.
The meaning of the article must be gathered from the practice of their Church
and opinion of their Doctors: it is certain in the practice of their Church that
there are indulgences granted by the Pope in which he does absolve a culpa et
poena both from fault, and punishment. That for visiting such a Church
frequenting such a Station, Saying over at such an Altar so many times Ave
Maria or pater noster, they shall have plenam remissionem peccatorum, so it is
in the Bull of indulgence for celebrating the year of Jubilee; in the first
institution of Jubilees by Boniface the 8th. Platina in vit (...) Bonifac. 8.
he gave to those who visited the thresholds of the Apostles plenam omnium
peccatorum remissionem a full remission of all sins. Leo the 10th gave to those
who devoutly repeated this Prayer after the divine Office, (to the holy, and
undivided Trinity, the humanity of Christ Crucified, the fruitful integrity of
the most blessed Virgin be eternal praise, glory, and honor) Indulgence of all
the defects, and faults which in the performance of the office were contracted
by humane frailty. Gavant These. Sacr. Rit. in. Fine Libri.
Nothing is more common in the Bulls for the Crusadoes then pardon for half
sins, or for all sins, so in the Crusado, which Urban the 6th published against
the adherents of Clement there were given to Henry Spenser Bishop of Norwich
mirabiles indulgentiae,* by Hen. Knighton Cron. l. 5 inter script. Hist.
Anglic. Page 2671.
the authority of which he did absolve as well the dead as the living, for whom
there was a sufficient contribution from all the fault and punishment: and some
of his Commissaries affirmed, that at their command the Angels descended from
Heaven, and took the souls which were in Purgatory, out of their punishment,
and instantly carried them to Heaven. In the Crusadoes against the Albigenses,
Innocent promised to all, who either died in the way or in battle, on Gods part
and by the authority of St. Peter and St. Paul absolution from all the sins
contracted in their lives, which they had confessed, and for which they had not
done penance Rigord. 1 is it. An. 1208 Page 207.
. Sometimes the indulgence runs for penance enjoined; so for repeating the new
office of the Blessed Virgin if they be not obliged to do it, Tius 5 remits 50
days de poenitentiis injunctis, as often as they do it: for repeating the office
of the dead, for repeating the 7 penitential psalms, or the Graduals 40 days,
and so the Indulgence runs which Martin the 50 anno 1429 gave for the
Celebration of Corpus Christi day to all that were present at the Mattins and
Evensong of the feast 200 days indulgence, to all that were present at the
Prime, the third, the sixth, the ninth, or the Completory of that feast 80
days, to the Priests who said Mass for every Mass 100 days, to those who follow
the procession in which the Host is carried 100 days, etc. to endure every year
for ever, Constable. Prove. Tit de serlis gloss. In Cap. Ex ^cript. p. Corp. Christi.
Sometimes they are Indulgences pro poenitentiis injungendis, for remission of
Penance which might be enjoined, sometimes the words run, Indulgentiam in
Domino miserecorditer relaxamus: and these Indulgences are some for days; so
every Arch Bishop and Bishop at their first coming to their Cathedrals* grant
Carem. Epsc. l. 1. c. 2.
40 days: sometimes for one year as at the dedication of a Church, sometimes
for 7, sometimes for an 100 years, sometimes for 1000 So the Monastery of St.
Sebastian in Catacumbis has Indulgences of 3000 years for all that visit a
stone which has the print of our Saviors footsteps: by other Popes 7000 years
were granted on the feast of the Asoention unto the Calends of August every day
4000 years on St Sebastians day 3000 years, and 40 days of Indulgence, and all
these are doubled in Lent and in the double festivals. I could reckon up
multitudes of large Indulgences, which some bountiful Popes have bestowed, as
at Crowland Abbey a pardon of 8000 years: so the pardon procured by Thomas
Cromwell* Acts and Monum. in the life of Cromwell. Page 49.
for Boston from Julius the second, that all who are of the gylde of our Lady
in St. Botolphs Church in Boston who resort to the said Chapel on the Nativity
or Assumption of our Lady, giving to the support of the Chapel at every such
festival, shall have full remission of all his sins: or if they could not come
to that Chapel, yet if they said at their Parrish Church, one Pater noster,
and Ave Maria, they should have like remission, and those that came every
Friday to that Chapel should have as much remission, as if they went to the
Chapel called Scala Coeli, etc. Or if their Popes are sparing, yet their
Priests assure men of greater bounty for saying a prayer which begins O
Altissma Crux etc they shall have as many years Indulgence as there is gravel
in the sea, or grass on the ground. This is the practice of their Church, by
which we may see the meaning of the Article the exposition of their Doctors
reaches not so far as the practice: for they tell us, Indulgence is the
remission of temporal punishment Summa. ^(...)^. P. Indulgentia.
, or the remission of temporal punishment due by divine Judgment for actual
sins, through the application of the superabundant satisfaction of Christ and
the Saints, by him who has power to dispense it: this Doctrine of Indulgences
leans on 4 things. First, that after the remission of the fault and the eternal
punishment, there is yet a temporal punishment due. Secondly, That a righteous
man not only satisfies for himself by his own merit, but may apply his own
satisfaction to others. Thirdly, That there is a treasure in the Church made up
of the superabundant merits and satisfaction of Christ, and the Saints.
Fourthly, That there is a power in the Church appointed by Christ to dispense
this Treasure; or thus as others speak, there are temporal punishments left
unremitted, though God pardon the eternal, that these punishments must be
satisfied either in this life, or hereafter that the Penances imposed by the
Priests are satisfactions for the punishment they should undergo, that a
righteous person may by the superabundance of his own Merit, satisfy for that
which ought to be performed by another, that there is a Treasure of those
superabundant merits of Christ, and the Saints. Lastly, That there is a power
to dispense this Treasure according as it shall seem fitting. Many things are
necessary for the understanding of this Doctrine, and yet every thing in it
perplexed and uncertain: I will instance in several things.

First, The value of them, if there can be no certainty by their Doctrine that
there is any profit by these Indulgences, then we have no reason to profess
this to be an article of faith, but there is no certainty of any benifit by
them. For First, If the Indulgences do valere quantum sonat, are as much worth
as the words sound, then these Indulgences should remit the guilt of all sin.
For many Indulgences tell us of a remissio omnium peccatorum, of a remission a
culpa and poena; and this Article per passiones Sanctorum Indulgentiis
Communicatas non proprie redimi peccata nostra; that our sins are not properly
redeemed by the passions of Saints Communicated by Indulgences, was condemned
by Leo 10. and Pius 5. but now that they do not remit any is the common
opinion, yea and is certain de fide Suarez Disp. 50. Sect. 1.
and Filliucius Cas. Conscion tract. 8. p^^^. c. 7. n. 3180.
attest. Secondly, It is not certain that they remit any punishment, for the
eternal is already pardoned and there needs no farther Indulgence: and as for
the temporal punishments which (they say) remains. First, there are many
temporal punishments due to the sinner, which are not taken away by the most
plenary Indulgence. Suppose God should inflict a disease for the satisfaction
of the temporal punishments remaining unpayed, they will then tell us that this
Indulgence does not take away natural punishment which God inflicts for actual
sin, as the Plague which God brought upon the people for David's sin. Bellar. de
Indulgent. l. 1. c. 7. l. 2. c. 7.
Secondly, these Indulgences do not take away the punishment inflicted in foro
externo whether Civil or Ecclefiastical, that is also granted by Bellarmine
Bellarm. de Indulgent. ibid, etc.
Thirdly, It it is not certain that they take away the punishments which may be
enjoined by the ancient Canon^ for as Cajetan argues, nothing can be taken away
by the Indulgence, but what a man was bound to perform but the punishments
which are not enjoined by the Judge no man is bound to perform pero. for the
punishments in the Canons are only taxed to be enjoined by the Judge, pero.
till they are actually enjoined no man can be obliged to perform them.
Fourthly, It is not certain that they take away all the punishment enjoined by
the Confessor in the Court of Penance, for as Valentia Tract. de Indulg. Punct.
3.
says, the Confessor is bound for the integrity of the Sacrament to injoyne,
and the P^nitent to perform wholesome Penance, and if the Penitent is bound to
perform those satisfactions, then the Indulgence does not take them away.
Again Bellarmine says, this is the use of the Church that whosoever intend to
get any Indulgences, are wont to confess, and perform the satisfactions
enjoined, but then to what profit serves the Indulgence, if it frees them only
from those satisfactions which they have already fulfilled? they tell us
further, that we cannot be certain that we receive any benefit by the
Indulgence, and pero. for greater merit, and security, we should perform the
satisfactions enjoined; ob majus meritum and securitatem, neque enim potest
quis esse certus de Indulgentia percepta Filliuc. Cas. Consc. Tract. 8. Part.
3. c. 7. u. 176.
and since no man can be certain that he receives any benefit by an Indulgence,
pero. no wonder if he must for his own security endeavor to perform the
satisfactions imposed, and if he is still bound to endeavor to perform them by
himself, then it is not certain, that they take away the punishment enjoined.
Fifthly, It is not certain that they take away the punishment due by the
Judgment of God. Suppose there be a punishment due here, or to be inflicted in
Purgatory hereafter, yet there is no certainty that these Indulgences take away
this punishment. For, first, It is uncertain whether the power of the Keys can
extend further, than to take away that punishment, which it might inflict: but
the power of the Keys reaches not to inflict these punishments: Secondly, It
is no way certain whether the Indulgence be valuable further, then according to
the worthiness, and devotion of him who receives the Indulgence, and then it is
no way certain that there is any benefit by the Indulgence: Angelus de Clavasio
Summa. Angelica. P. Indulgentia.
tells us that quoad augmentum Gratiae and Gloriae, they are only so much
worth as is the devotion of him that receives them, and no more: but in respect
of the punishment which is to be inflicted in Purgatory, tantum dimittit
quantum sonat, remitts what it expresses: but how comes the value of the
Indulgence for the gaining an augmentation of Glory, to depend on the worth of
the receiver, and not for gaining a freedom from pain? Again, the Indulgence
requires they should be contrite, and have devoutly confessed their sins, and
without this they gain no benefit by the Indulgence; but then what certainty
whether any benefit come from the Indulgence, or rather that it comes from the
Contrition of the Penitent, which also would avail without the Indulgence?
others pero. go further, and tell us they are never so much worth as is
promised, sed aliquid valent modicum, secundum quod mereter fides and devotio,
so Bonaventure says In 4. Did. 21.
some held. Thus it is no way certain according to themselves, what the real
advantage is whether they bring any? and if it be no way certain, then we
cannot be bound to profess this as an Article of our Faith, that Indulgences
are wholesome and profitable; Indeed I will allow them to be profitable, but
it is to the Popes purse, not to the Penitents Soul: you may read the advantage
which Pope Urban the 6. made by the Indulgence published in England 1382. Henry
Spenser Bishop of Norwich gathered (says Henry Knighton Chron. Heary Knighton
page 2671.
) an incredible sum of Gold and Silver and Jewels and Rings and Dishes and
Spoons and other Ornaments, specially from Ladies and other women: and that
both men and women gave not according, but even beyond their abilities, that
their dead friends as well as themselves might receive the benefit of
absolution from their sins, which none could obtain, unless they contributed
according to their Estates.

Secondly, The matter of them, (i. e.) the Superfluous satisfactions of Christ
and the Saints, which are reserved in the Treasure of the Church, for (say
they) there can be no remission of punishments enjoined for sins, unless there
be some recompense made by some who have performed more then was due from them:
but if it be uncertain whether there be any such Treasure, then the Doctrine of
Indulgences is uncertain. First, It Is not certain that there is any such
Treasure of the Saints satisfactions reserved in the Church; First, Because
it is not certain, that they have suffered more then they have deserved.

Secondly, Though they should suffer more then they have deserved, yet it is is
not certain, that they do or can suffer more then they are bound in obedience
to God. Thirdly, It Is not certain, that if they do or suffer only, what they
are bound in obedience to God, that they can satisfy by that obedience for
another, for where they only pay that which is required of them there is
nothing superfluous, and pero. nothing to be put into the Treasure. Fourthly,
It Is not certain, but their sufferings are as much or more rewarded, then is
due or can be due to them; and if they are fully rewarded, then they cannot
discharge another man's debt: and upon this ground Franc. Mayronis, and Angel.
de Clavasio deny the satisfactions of the Saints can be put into the Treasure.
* Sum. Angelica. P. Indulgentia. N. 9:


Secondly, It Is not certain that there is any treasure made up of the
superfluous satisfactions of Christ, and his Church. For, First, If the
Treasure of Christ's satisfactions be infinite then it is not certain, that any
thing can be added to it, for an infinite cannot be increased, otherwise there
should be an infinite greater than an infinite. Secondly, It is not certain,
that there is any advantage by those satisfactions of the Saints, for if
Christ's merit be of an infinite value, then there is nothing that can be
procured by the satisfactions of Saints, which has not been already procured
by Christ's merit: nor is there any thing we can gain by the satisfactions of
Saints but we may much more receive it from the infinite merit of Christ. If
then we have no certainty, that there is any use of this Treasure, we can then
have no certainty that there is any such Treasure. Thirdly, It is no way
certain, that there is any such Treasure of the superfluous satisfactions of
Christ; because, first, It is not certain, that any thing Christ did, or
suffered, could be more than he was bound to undergo, as he became our Surety
and in obedience to the command of his Father was bound to do, or suffer, what
ever his Father required for the full satisfaction of his Justice; and if his
satisfactions were in this respect necessary, then they cannot be called
superfluous. Secondly, Though his satisfaction was infinite, yet it is not
certain, that any thing was superfluous; because all that a finite person can
do or suffer, can never satisfy infinite Justice. And it is not certain, when
the offender deserves the utmost puishment both here, and hereafter which he is
capable of undergoing, that every work or suffering, (though of an infinite
person) can be sufficiently satisfactory to expiate that debt. Thirdly, Though
his satisfaction was sufficient for more, then it was actually extended to, yet
it is no more certain, pero. some satisfactions are superfluous, than that the
light of the Sun (which would enlighten thousands more, than actually receive
benefit by it) is so: or that Gods Omnipotency is superfluous, because it may
create more worlds, than already are. Lastly, This Doctrine contains many
perplexities, and insoluble scruples, as, which are necessary and which
satisfactions are superfluous? what part of Christ's satisfactions are rewarded?
and what not? for those which are already rewarded cannot be put into the
common stock; whether the same merit, which merited Glory for himself? or that
which merited the pardon of Eternal punishment? or that there is some other
merit which only merits the remission of Temporal punishment? and how this
merit distinguished from the rest is put into the Treasure? these and many
other perplexities are so intervowen in this Doctrine that their wisest Doctors
have not yet found out a way to extricate themselves.

Thirdly, The authority dispensing these Indulgences (i. e.) The Council
suppose this for granted that there was a power left to the Church of bestowing
these Indulgences, and the Church has from all Antiquity used it: but if these
things be uncertain, then we have no reason to own this Doctrine. First, I say
there is no Certainty, that Christ left this power to the Church, they tell us,
that the Pope only has power of bestowing those Indulgences Jure Divino:
Bishops and other Prelates Jure humano: that the Pope may grant plenary
Indulgences Sum. Angel. c. 1. 10^. n. 5.
and over all the world: that his power is founded in these words, what ever
thou loosest on earth shall be loosed in Heaven; and on that text feed my Sheep
in which is included all acts of Jurisdiction, which any way conduce to shut or
open the Kingdom of Heaven, and of this sort is remission of punishment by
these Indulgences; Filliu^. Ca^. (...). ^^ct. 8. (...) 3. n. 62*
but this is wholly uncertain, and founded rather on mere guesses, than on a
rational ground: For,

First, It is not certain that he who can remit the Eternal punishment, (as
they tell us the Priest does in the Sacrament of Penance) cannot also remit the
Temporal pu^ishment: because he who can do the greater, regularly) unless there
be some restraint) can do the less. Secondly, It is not certain, that the Pope
has any power of granting these Indulgences from those texts, for it is neither
expressed in the texts, nor gathered thence by ancient Interpreters, nor is it
evident by fair consequence.

Secondly, It is not certain, that the Church has used them from all
antiquity, for where will they find the Popes divine right of granting
Indulgences. That these Indulgences were remissions of temporal punishment due
to God? that by the remission of these punishments here so much was abated as
they must endure in this life or in Purgatory; that there were Indulgences for
100, or 1000, of years? that for repeating a Prayer over hallowed Beads
visiting such an Altar praying before such an Image! there should be granted an
Indulgence toties quoties, either of all, or half or third part of their sins?
as many Bulls of modern Popes speak: and pero. Cajetane Op^^^. 15. c. 1.
will tell us that neither the Holy Scripture nor the writings of the ancient
Greek and Latin Fathers brought this to our knowledge, but only a 300 annis
Scripturae Commendatum est de veteribus patribus, quod Beatus Gregorius
Indulgentias Stationum in: stituit: it was Committed to writing about 300 years
ago, concerning the ancient Fathers, that St. Gregory ordained the Indulgences
of the Stations: some tell us there are no manifest Testimonies before St.
Gregorys time, yet we must believe (though we have no ground for it I warrant
you) says Angelus de Cla^asio that they were in use before: others confess,
there is nothing the Scripture does less plainly deliver, or the ancient
Fathers less mention, so Alphonsus de Castro: that they began when Charity
lessned, and sin increased, say others: yea some will not believe, because the
use of them seems to be late, and lately found out among the Christians, sales
Roffensis Ad Ar^. 18.
and all he Answers, is this, that there was some use (as they say) among the
ancient Romans and that many things are now found out more plainly, out of the
Gospels, and other Scriptures than were heretofore: if thus they are not agreed
who wrote before the Council, concerning the Antiquity of them, nor are there
any evident Testimonies in the Fathers or ancient Writers of such use of
Indulgences, as they now practice, it is then not certain that the Church has
from all Antiquity used them, and pero. I have no reason to assent to this
Doctrine of Indulgences delivered by the Council.

This is my first Argument to dissuade from reunion with the present Romish
Church, because many of their Doctrines, which they require to be believed as
Articles of Faith, are uncertain and doubtful.

CHAP. II.
THe second Consideration i^ drawn from the Ceremonies of the Romish Church: It
is unreasonable to adhere to that Church which commands us firmly to embrace
those for Apostolical rites, which are altogether questionable, and dubious:
and those for pious, and good, which it is doubtful, whether they be not vain,
rediculous, and superstitious: but the Romish Church commands this: pero. In
the Creed of Pius 4. it is required, That they should most firmly admit, and
embrace the Apostolical, and Ecclesiastical Traditions, and other observations
of that Church, and afterward, that they receive, and admit the approved rites
of Catholic (as they call the Roman Church) in the solemn administration of
the seven Sacraments: and its declared by the Council, that the Church has
used in the Sacrifice of the M^s^ ceremonies as mistical blessings, Lights,
^neense, Garments, and many other things from Apostolical Discipl^ne and
Tradition. But many things which they affirm to be Apostolical are at best
uncertain, and many things which they require thus firmly to be believed are
vain, and foolish, and cannot be excused from all superstition.

First, It is uncertain, that many of those ceremonies which they use in the
Mass are of Apostolical Discipline, and Tradition as they pretend. First, There
is no certainty that their mistical blessings are delivered down from the
Apostles, for though we are bound to receive the creatures with thanksgiving,
and by prayer to God they are blessed for that use which he has appointed, yet
it is uncertain whether the Apostles did leave this Tradition, that certain
things should be blessed by prayer, and the sign of the Cross to work
supernatural effects, as to cure diseases, and drive away Devils, and remit
venial sins, which things Bellarmin L. 2. d^ ^ffect. Sa^ram. c. 31. prop. 3.
makes the effect of these benedictions. In the blessing of the wax lights on
E^ster eve (this must be done by a Deacon, and he must put five grains of
hallowed incense into it after the fashion of a Cross) he exhorts all to invoke
the mercy of God, that he who vouchsafed to admit into the number of Levites,
pouring on him the clearness of his light, would enable him to perfect the
praises of that wax light, cerei hujus laudem implere perficiat: and then
prays that this taper may remain constantly to destroy the mist of this night,
and being accepted for a sweet smell may be mingled with the Heavenly lights.
In the blessing of holy water the Priest exorcizes the fact to be for the
health of believers, and to all that take it soundness of soul, and body, and
that all wickedness, and cunning of devils may fly from the place where it is
sprinkled: and he exorcizes the water to drive away the power of the devil, and
to root out the enemy with the apostate Angels: and again prays, that this
creature serving these mysteries, may receive the effect of the divine grace to
drive away devils and expel diseases, etc Missal. Romans in Bened. aquae.
. In the blessing of holy bread, he prays that God would bless it with holy
spiritual blessing, that it may be to all that receive it, health of Soul, and
Body, and a defense against all diseases, and all the snares of the enemies
Missal. Romans in Bened. panis.
. So in the blessing of Candles, he prays, that they may receive such blessing
by the sign of the Cross, that in what ever places they are lighted, the
Princes of darkness may depart, and tremble, and fly away with all his Servants
from all those habitations Missal. Rom in Benedict. Cand^l.
. In the blessing of the Cross, he prays, that God would bless that wood of the
Cross, ut sit remedium salutare generi humano, sit soliditas fidei bonorum
operum profectus, and redemptio animarum, etc. That it may be a wholesome
remedy for mankind, it may be firmness of faith, increase of good works,
redemption of Souls, and defense against the cruel darts of the devil Hospin.
de Orig. Templ. l. 4. c. 4.
. These are mistical blessings which the Romish Church uses, and which they
pretend are derived from Apostolical Discipline, and Tradition, but it is
uncertain, whether ever the Apostles did bless those Creatures for such
supernatural ends? and whether they did leave either command, or example which
should warrant the Church in after ages to bless any Creatures for the
producing such Effects? if it be certain, then they must produce some text of
Scripture, so interpreted by the unanimous consent of the Fathers, as the
profession of faith by Pius 4. requires: or some constant Tradition delivered
down through the several ages of the Church: but neither of these can be done;
for, Secondly, Their own Authors have affixed the Institution of these several
forms of blessing to the times long after the Apostles, and pero. it cannot be
said that the Church has received them from Apostolical discipline and
Tradition: the blessing of the Paschal taper is pretended to be the Institution
of Zozimus and Theodore the first, who sat anno 640; the form of blessing to
be dictated by Ambrose, and that Augustine, and Peter a Monk of Cassino
composed others which are out of use, as Durand Rasienale Div. Offic. l. 6. c.
80.
tells us; but whether the same form? or any such kind of form as is now in
use? or whether any at all? we can have no certainty from Authors, who lived
some hundred years aster. Till pero. they can certainly prove, not only that a
Paschal taper was used in the Church, but that it was used from the Apostles
times, and used for this end with such like form of blessing as is now
practiced by the Romanists, I do not see how the Council can declare this to be
an article of faith that it came from Apostolical discipline and Tradition: the
blessing of holy water was introduced (say the most of them) by Alexander the
first, so say Durand R^^ional. l. 4. c. 4
, Polydor Virgil De Invent. Rerum l. 5. 68.
, and Platina in the life of Alexander the first, and yet this higher, than we
can be certain of it: for there is no certainty of the Epistle ascribed to
Alexander, whence they fetch this Institution, nor of the Pontifical ascribed
to Damasus as Reynolds De Lib. Apoc. Pra-lect. 179, 180.
shows from the acknowledgment of many of their own authors. The blessing of
bread for driving away devils, (if we believe Abdias a frivolous Author l. 2.
Histor. Apost.) is derived from St. Peter, as Gavantus These. Sacr. Rit. Part.
4. Tit. 19. n. 19.
tells us: but what certainty have we of this Tradition, when we have no
certainty even by their own confession of the truth, and honesty of this
author? and if we believe him, when all antiquity is silent about it, he had
need be testis omni exceptione major: besides this, the first blessing which
Gavantus could bring was from Gregory's Sacramentary, about 600 years after the
Apostles times, and pero. still no certainty that it was from Apostolical
Tradition: for the blessing of candles, they tell us Sergius appointed a
procession with hallowed candles on the feast of the Purification, but supposE
the Institution higher, as Baronius In Martirelogi^.
does, who fathers it on Eligius, who died anno 665, yet still short enough of
the Apostles times: if thus their own authors who purposely inquire their
Antiquities, assign their institution after the Apostles days, then it is not
certain, that the Church received them from Apostolical Tradition: unless we
can believe that rare exposition which some Gavant These. Sacr. Rit. p. 4. Tit.
19. n. 2.
give of St. Paul's words to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1. 13. Formam habe sanorum verborum
quae a me didicisti. Sanorum, (i. e.) quae possunt sanare sensibiles and
insensibiles creaturas, that the form of sound words was the form of
blessings for supernatural effects; but such Interpretations, I suppose the
soberer Romanists will sooner deride, than believe.

Secondly, It is no way certain that they received the use of lights from
Apostolical Tradition: the Church of Rome requires at Mass the candels to be
lighted, and though it be midday, yet allows no Celebration without it: but
now, First, Though the Apostles might use lights at the time of Divine Service,
when they were forced to meet in Grotts, and Caves, and dark places, and
commonly in the night (caetibus antelucanis) as Pliny observed, to avoid the
danger of persecution: yet there is no certainty that we are obliged by that
example to light up Candles in the Day, nor any certainty that they left that
rule for after Ages. Secondly, though the Church after the times of Persecution
did use lights to show themselves the Successors of pious men, yet it is not
certain that this was a necessary but voluntary imitation. Thirdly, as for
those ancients who pleaded for the Continuance of lights it is no way certain,
that they used them to expel devils or pretended any supernatural virtue in
them but only as signs of joy, and representations of Christ, as Durand
Rationale Div O^^ic. l. 1. c. 1. tit. S.
gives us their mistical signification.

Thirdly, It is no way certain, that they received the use of Incense from
Apostolical Tradition; for, First, though Incense might have been used in the
Primitive Church either for some mistical signification, as Bellarmine mentions
three misterious reasons, or ad tetrum odorem siquis ex multudine in Ecclesia
exist teret, abigendum; to drive away those Filthy smells which might be
occasioned by the concourse of people, which is the most likely reason; for the
Christians being forced to assemble in subterranious Cells, and Caves, they
might use incense to prevent the infection, which they might fear from the
vapors in dark, and low places: but it is not certain, that they used Incense
on the same reason it is now used by the Romanists, ut omnes languores
Cunctaeque insidiae inimici odorem ejus sentientes effugiant, and seperentur a
plasmate tuo, etc. That all faintings and treacheries of the devils perceiving
this smell may fly away, and be removed from the workmanship which thou have
redeemed by thy precious blood, and that they may never be hurt by the biting
of the ancient Serpent Instit: Baptiz. etc. Se^^. usum. Satum in hened. incensi.
Though the ancients might use Incense for sweetning the places of their
assemblies, yet it is uncertain, that they used it for devotion to drive away
the devils temptations. The Romish Church requires at the Celebration of the
Mass the censing of the Altar, and the Gospels which must be done three times,
and the Elements which are to be consecrated, drawing the Censer thrice upon
the Host and Chalice together in the fashion of a Cross, and thrice round
about them (i. e.) twice from the right hand to the left, and once from the
left hand to the right Rubr. General. in offert. Missal. Pii. 5.
. afterward he must cense the Cross and the Altar again, then the Deacon
censes the Priest, afterward he censes the Quire and the Subdeacon, then the
censer bearer censes the Deacon, then the Acolites, lastly the People Rubr.
Genera^. in offert. c. 7. ^. 10.
. And all this is done to drive away devils, says Innocent l. 2. c. 17.
the third in his exposition of the Mass: and Gavantus Com. in Rubr. Missae.
part. 2. tit. 4. n. 4. l. ic. ^.
from him: but by what record? or what ground shall I be certain that the
Apostles commanded this? or that their Church in conformity to the practice of
the Apostles did thus? or Lastly, that the present Roman Church pretends no
other virtue, or efficacy in Incense, than was allowed by the ancient Church.
Secondly, I have further reason to question the uncertainty of this pretended
Tradition, for even several authors of the Roman Communion have affixed a far
latter date to the beginning of this Institution: Platina In vita Sixti. 1.
, and Polydor Virgil De Invent. rerum. l. 5. c. 10.
refer it to Leo the third who was the 98th Bishop of Rome according to Platina.

Fourthly, It is no way certain, that they received the use of Priestly
Garments from Apostolical Tradition, though we do not contend whether the
Priest may use distinct Garments in the Celebration, for the practice is
according to St. Hierome's expressions, Religio divina alterum habet habitum in
ministerio alternm in usu, vitaque communi, that their habits in their
ministration were different from those they commonly used: yet we judge these
are liberae Institutionis, which are indifferent in themselves, and not
absolutely necessary: such things as the Church may injoyne from its own
authority in things indifferent, not which it must injoyne from Apostolical
command. For, First, We are no way certain that the Apostles practiced or
commanded such things, that either at the first Institution by our Savior, or
at the Celebration of the Sacrament by the Apostles they used any such Priestly
Garments: and pero. Polydor Virgil De Invent. Rerum. l* 4. c. 7.
says, Hebraica magis quam Apostolica referunt instituta, they more resemble
the Jewish than Apostolical Institutions. Secondly, We are not certain, that
though God did appoint in the Old Testament such habits for Aaron and his Sons,
when they were to minister, the Priests pero. in the New Testament must have
such: for all agree, that nothing prescribed in the Mosaical ministration does
bind us Christians, unless where the nature of it is Moral, else we should be
obliged to observe all the Rites annd Ceremonys which Moses appointed: and
pero. it seems very strange that Bellarmine L. 2. de Mis^^^. c. 14.
should say, that the Garments of the Aaronical Priests were Figures, and Types
of those Vestments which the Christians use: for to represent and tipify
something to be used in the times of the Gospel requires a Divine Institution:
but it is no way certain that they were so appointed by Divine Institution,
pero. we cannot assert that they are Figures and Types of the Priestly
Vestments which are now used. Thirdly, If we look on the several habits which
belong to their Clergy, we shall think it very unlikely, that they were derived
from the Apostles, either if we consider the things required, or the
significations they assign to them.

First, As for the things required, there are six things required in the attire
of a Priest, but 15 several parts of the attire of a Bishop as Durand Ration.
Div. Offic. l. 3. c. 1. ^it. G. H.
reckons them: and though the High Priest among the Jews had only eight things
in his attire, yet the Bishop must have fifteen, because (forsooth) as Durand
gives the accurate reason, our righteousness must exceed the righteousness of
Scribes, and Pharisees. Nay these fifteen are not all, for besides these he
wears his Surpliss and his pluviale: now it is very improbable, that the
Apostles should require more than Moses did, or that when they imposed such
several habits, that yet neither in the Scripture nor Primitive writers, there
appear the least footstep of this injunction. Secondly, If we consider the
grounds they pretend, and the signification they give them, it will seem
altogether improbable that they should be derived from the Apostles. The
Sandals (say they) come from the Apostles who used Sandals, Mark, 6 9. But if
the Apostles example there be a sufficient argument, then they must neither
have a Staff in their Journey, nor Money in their Purse: or if they pretend our
Saviors command, Go, teach all nations, which reason Durand Rationale Div.
Offic. l. 3. c. 8. tit. A.
gives, that will never suit with the grandeur of their Bishops, nor yet with
their practice, who do not use to foot it, to Preach in their own Cures. The
Miter (says Baronius Ad annum. 34. n. 298.
) came from the Apostles, and the Bishop with his Miter represents Moses coming
down from the Mount with the 2 Tables: but if it came from the Apostles, how
comes it to have 2 Horns? because (say they) Moses when he came from the Mount
was Horned Polyd. Virgil. d^ Invent. Rer. l. 4. c. 7.
; an error which the vulgar Translation has occasioned by misinterpreting a
word. For where it should be read his face shone. That translation renders it
cornuta erat facies ejus, Exodus 34. 2. and yet here is an Apostolical Tradition
pretended to justify their mistake. But this is not all, why must it be
Horned? to note (says Durand Rationale Div. Offic. l. 3. c. 13. tit. C. D.
) the 2 Testaments: why must the Miter have two stays hanging behind? to note
(says he) the Spirit and the letter. Why must it be made high? to note the
eminency of knowledge which must be in a Bishop: the Gloves (says Durand 161.
l. 13. c. 12.
) must be put on according to the Tradition of the Apostles, next after the
Dalmatica that his left hand may not know what his right hand does. And why
Gloves to cover their hands? because works must be public, but the intention
secret Gavant. These. Sacr. Rit. Part 2 tit. 1. page 99.
: why must he sometimes put them off and sometimes put them on? because good
works must sometimes be secret to shun vain glory, sometimes public to edefy
their neighbors. (Says Durand) will ye see more of these five reasons which
their Ritualists give concerning Priestly, and Episcopal habits; and you will
then think that those who pretend to give a reason of those Ceremonies do only
insanire cum ratione, and that it is very unlike the simplicity of Religion
which the Apostles delivered. Fourthly, I add that it is so far from being
certain, that these Garments came from the Apostles, that their own authors
tell us, that at first they said Mass in their usual Garments, so Gavantus
Part. 1. tit. 18.
out of Walafrid Strabo, and that by degrees the multitude of these habits
which are now used, were brought in Gavant. ^61.
. Lastly, It Is uncertain whether the authors of the greatest antiquity assert,
what they affix to them: for some ascribe this to Clement, that he according to
Tradition from St. Peter did institute these holy Vestments, but there is no
certainty of this pretended Tradition, nor of this pretended Institution: some
ascribe it to Anaclet, antiquity enough if it could be proved, (whether he be
the same with Cletus, whom some make a Coad jutor to St. Peter, or that there
were such an one who was immediate successor to Clement) but we must be first
sure of the authority, before we believe the Testimony: Bellarmine D^ Roman.
Pontif. l. 2. c. 14.
durst not call these decretal Epistles undoubted, though he believed them
ancient: but there needs no more proof of the spuriousness of this Epistle
fathered on Anaclet; than to observe the Barberous expressions in it, and those
names it mentions, which were of a later Original Blondel. Ceus. Epist. Pontif.
in Anaclet. Epist. 1.
Thus I have handled the first part of my argument from the Rites, and
Ceremonies of the Romish Church, that for many of these things they require us
to profess, to be of Apostolical Discipline, and Tradition, it is wholly
uncertain, whether they be so.

Secondly, It is not certain, whether many Rites and Ceremonies of the Romish
Church be not vain, unprofitable, and inexcusable from Superstition: I will not
instance in the customs of particular Churches, and places. As in the manner of
the observations of Innocents day by the Episcopus puerorum in the Church of
Salisbury: in the strange custom which Mr. Gregory Opuse. Posth. in his
Discourse de Episc. puerorum.
produces from the Ritual of Osny Abbey of the foot of a Child, which was
usually kept in a Chest in the Vestry, and that day was carried about the
Church to be adored by the people. In the custom of the Be^gick Churches to
take up a man on Ascension day, thereby to represent Christ's ascension, and
send down a Dove in representation of the descent of the Holy Ghost on
Whit-Sunday, as the Antiquitates Liturgicae tells us Yom (...). in Sabbate
Sancto de Caer. Pasch. Duaci. 1065.
. I will not instance in such customs, though many may be produced, because
the Romanists will grant, the customs of particular Churches may be vain, and
superstitious: pero. the Council of Trent does only require that we should
embrace the Rites of the Catholic Church: and appoints a reformation of those
abuses which might have crept in, as in the number of Candles on Easter eve,
some (says Durand) have 72 Candles, some 24, some 15, some 12, and all these
pretend some mystery: now the Council provides against the Superstitious number
of Candles; and also by the Bull of Pius 5. prefixed before the Roman Missal,
all other Rites and Ceremonies in other Missals (unless where there is a
prescription of 200 years) are abrogated. So that my business is to prove, that
there are many Ceremonies universally practiced in the Romish Church or allowed
in some particular Churches, which are vain, unprofitable, and not unexcusable
from superstition.

First, I instance in the many Ceremonies of blessing the Font, the recital of
which is a sufficient evidence of their vanity: one Ceremony is the dividing
the water after the fashion of a Cross, and that is done that the water may be
fruitful through the holy Spirit, and the unclean one expelled Missal. Pii 5.
in Be^ed. Fontis.
: again, he must touch the water with his hand, that by the Invocation of the
blessed Trinity the water may be defended, least the devil return Durand.
Rationale l. 6. c. 82.
: again, he divides the water with his hand, and casts the water toward the
four parts of the World: another Ceremony is the changing of the Tone, which
must be done thrice, after the manner of a prayer he must speak low, then he
must raise his voice after the manner of their Prefaces, then he must let fall
his voice after the manner of reading the Lessons: but why must the voice be
changed thrice? Vt in Trinitate omnia fiant says Gavantus Part. 4. Tit. 10.
(...). 25.
: another Ceremony is the breathing on the water three times after the fashion
of a Cross, and least that should not do the work, he must blow thrice upon it
after the manner of the Greek letter (...) to denote the Trinity, that he may
join the Trinity with the Cross Gavant. 161. n. 26.
: but what will this blowing do? they will tell you (if you believe them) the
devil is blown away with a breath and they blow in contempt of him; as if the
devil could not withstand a blast: There is another Ceremony the putting the
paschal taper into the Font, which must be first a little way and the Priest
says, Descendat in han^ plenitudinem Fontis Spiritus Sancti virtus, let the
virtue of the holy Ghost descend upon the fullness of the Font: but will ye
know the reason of this Ceremony, it is to signify the spirits descending with
his fullness into the Font, as he descended at the baptism of our Savior in
likeness of a Dove Gavantus 161. (...). 27.
; this taper then must be taken out, to note the effect of baptism, which
raises from sin to glory, then the taper must be put lower into the water, and
the Priest raise his voice, the third time the taper must be put to the
bottom, and the Priest repeat the prayer (Descendat in hanc, etc.) louder. I
omit the rest of the Ceremonics, for I need not render the office more
ridiculous, by repeating more of the like nature: and if there be so little
reason for the institution of them, and such antickness in the performance of
them, we have reason to judge that it is at the best uncertain, whether they be
not vain, and unprofitable.

Secondly, I instance in many Ceremonies used in Baptism, I do not condemn
every Ceremony in it, for some of them were very anciently used, some may not
be unfit to signify either some duty, or some privilege: and these are not
condemned by us, where they may serve to a decent order, and godly discipline,
and may have any aptness to stir up the mind of man by some notable
signification to the remembrance of his duty Book of Common prayer Pref. of
Ceremonies.
, and while they are as St. Augustine advices pauc^ and salubres. I pass by the
number of their Ceremonies in Baptism, which Bellarmine says are 22, and only
consider, that many of these either have no tendency to excite us by a fit
signification, or else are used not only for signification, but extraordinary
operation: now these things cannot produce by an extraordinary operation,
unless by the virtue and influx of a superior agent: and where there is no
assurance of any assistance from such a superior agent, these Ceremonies must
be vain, unprofitable, and superstitious.

First, Some of them have no tendency to excite us by a fit signification, I
pass by the Ceremony of putting salt into the infants mouth, yet I may wonder
whence the Priest has authority to say, take the salt of wisdom, that God may
be propitious to thee unto Eternal life. Or what ground to pray that he who
tastes this food of salt may not hunger more, as if it was equal to that
Heavenly bread which our Savior promised, of which whoever eats shall live for
ever, John 6. 58. I mention the Ceremony of spittle, that the Priest must spit
on his left hand, and put the spittle into the ears and nose of the Infant
with his right thumb, saying to the right ear, Epphata be thou opened, he must
say to the nose for a sweet smell: and to the left ear be thou driven away O
devil, for the judgment of God approaches: but why must he say to the ear be
thou opened? and why does he touch the nose with spittle and put his finger
into the ears? Durand wants no reason (as he thinks he must touch the nose
that it might receive the odor of the knowledge of God, he must touch the ears
to hear the commands of God, the fingers put into the ears must represent the
words, or gifts of the holy Spirit. He must touch the ears with spittle, to
signify the words proceeding from the mouth of the highest, which enter
through the ears, and smell sweet to him: the nostrills must be touched, that
they may receive divine virtue, by which they may distinguish a good smell from
a bad, and separate sound Doctrine from Heretical pravity Durand Rational. l.
6. c. 8. lit. R.
: if we think these to be far fetched reasons, I wonder how they first invented
such insignificant, vain Ceremonies. Bellarmine will retort on us our Saviors
practice, how he touched the man's tongue, and ears who was deaf and dumb. Mark
7. 32, 33. and cured the blind man's eyes with clay and spittle, John 9. 6. and
yet he could have cured without those Ceremonies: well, but what is this
Ceremony to our Saviors practice? what he used in the curing of the deaf and
blind, they use to them who are neither deaf nor blind: if our Savior used
it in the producing a miraculous effect, is it not ludicrous for them to use it
in imitation of him, where they do not pretend to imitate him in working the
effect? if then, there is no aptness to signify nor proper reason can be
assigned of their Institution, then they are vain and un profitable.

Secondly, Let us see those Ceremonies which are used not only for
signification, but the effecting of some thing: the Child must be Crossed several
times, and in several places on his forehead, on his breast and on his right
hand, and that not principally for signification, as that they are not ashamed
to confess the faith of Christ crucified, but for the effecting some wonderful
thing, as driving out the devil, so in the order for making Catecumens when the
Priest signs him on the right hand, he says, I deliver thee the Seal of our
Lord Jesus Christ in thy right hand that thou may sign thy self, and defend
thee from the enemy, and abide in the Catholic faith, and live for ever: If
this will not suffice, there is another thing, that the Child must be anointed
with Oil on the breast, and on the shoulder bones with the Oil of Salvation in
our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou may st have Eternal Life: and the effect of
this Oil is for purging of his sins, and defense from the devil Durand
Rationale l. 6. c. 71. lit. L.
. I pass by the white garment which is put on the Infant, Or the burning taper
put into his hand, because as they are barely significative, we leave them
among indifferent things, which every Church may injoyne, as she judges them
useful for decency, and edification. But there is one rare thing behind, a
receipt against the falling sickness Inst. Baptiz. and sec. usum Sarum. in fine
Bapt^smi.
, The Priest may say a Gospel over the Child, if he will, which (the Doctors
say) is very effectual, and that is out of St. Mark concerning the curing of of
the Child, which was sometimes thrown into the fire and sometimes into the
water; and the like ground Fitz-Simon gives of the reading of the first of St.
John after the ending of the Mass, because many had found it effectual against
some diseases, with which they had been afflicted: pero. the Priest to satisfy
all men's desires used to conclude the Mass with the Gospel. Now I ask what
assurance can we have that those Ceremonies which themselves invent, have such
power to effect these things? what certainty that the first of St. John read,
which the people do not understand, is more effectual than the first of St.
John tied about their necks? and whether to ascribe such effects to them, which
are above their nature where there is neither divine command, nor promise can
be cleared from superstition.

Thirdly, I instance in the blessing of Bells out of the Instit. Baptizandi,
etc. secundum usum Sarum: when the metal is running, the Priest putting on his
Surplis, and Stole the Cross going before him with the Clergy, and people, they
sing the Himn Veni Creator: when it is finished, they sing the Te Deum, and in
the end Da Pacem, with some versicles: before it is hung, it must be blessed,
and consecrated, and pero. first he prays Inst. Bapt. sec. usum Sarum. in
Bened. C^mpan. Orat. Bened. Domine.
over the holy water, with which it is sprinkled, Vt cum hoc vasculum ad
invitandos Ecclesiae Filios praeparatum. in ea fuerit tinctum, ubicunque hoc
sonuerit tintinnabulum, long recedat virtus inimicorum, etc. that wherever
this Bell sounds, the power of enemies, the shadows of apparitions, the fury of
whirlewinds, striking of thunderbolts, calamities of tempests, and every sperit
of storms may be gone: then he must wash it with holy water, hallowed oil,
and salt, and say this Prayer, that God who Commanded by Moses silver Trumpets
to be made, which the Levites should sound at the time of Sacrifice, and the
people admonisht by their sweetness be prepared to worship thee, etc. Would
grant that this vessel prepared for the use of his Church, might be sanctified
with the holy sperit, that by the sound of it the faithful might be invited to
their reward, and when the melody of it sounds in their ears, their devotion
may increase, the treacheries of the enemy may be driven away, the sounds of
hailestones, the storm of whirle winds, and the violence of tempests may be
moderated, etc. then he must wipe it with a towel, saying the 28th Psalm,
after this he must touch it with Chrysme 7 times on the out side and 4 times on
the inside, saying O Almighty God who made Stone walls to fall before the Ark
of the Covenant, by the sound of Trumpets, pour out thy blessing on this Bell,
that the fiery darts of the enemy, the shaking of Thunder may be driven far
off, before the sound of it: and in another prayer, that the enemies army may
be affrighted, the people called by it may be comforted in the Lord, and the
holy Spirit even as it was delighted with David's Harp may descend upon them:
then the Bell must be sprinkled with holy water, and the Priest must name it,
laying his hands upon it, and so must the Godfathers and Godmothers, who must
name it after the Priest, and cover it with Linen clothes, and after this
benediction the Bell becomes so holy that no man must Tole it, unless he wear a
hallowed Surplis, says Gavantus Part. 1. ti^. 20.
from a Council of Colen. This is their strange way of blessing Bells, which
almost needs no other refutation, than bare recital of the manner of it: for
what reason of anointing within and without? or if it was no more than in
imitation of the Jews to separate this for an holy use, yet why 7 times on the
outside, and 4 times on the inside, why must this be censed, and so that it may
gather up all the smoke? and why must it be named in so solemn a manner? what
use of Godfathers and Godmothers here, of laying their hands on it, afterward
of covering it with Linen clothes, which is an imitation of that Ceremony of
the white garment they used in Baptism? and why do they pray that their sound
may drive away devils, frighten enemies, hinder storms, etc? as by the sound of
Trumpets the walls of Jericho fell down: for there was both a command that the
Priest should blow the Trumpets, and a promise of extraordinary blessing: here
is no ground to pretend either command, or promise.

I might Instance in their strange forms of exorcizing persons possessed with
devils, the vanity of which is sufficiently described by my Lord Bishop of
Down in his excellent disswasive from Popery, for they rather seem like
magical Enchantments than devout forms of prayer.

I might Instance in their consecrations of Chrysme, how it must be brought
from the Vestry to the Bishop by 12 Priests representing the 12 Apostles; and
by other Clergy men signifying the Disciples, how after it is blessed it must
be saluted by the Bishop and his Priests 5 times with a loud voice ave Sanctum
Chrysma hayle holy Chrisme; and how the Bishop must breath 3 times on it, as
Durand Rational. l. 6. c. 74.
gives us the form. I could instance in their strange forms of processions
with anticks going before them, as if they intended rather to Create laughter,
than stir up Devotion: a custom which Polidor Virgil de Invent. ^^rum. (...).
6. c. 11.
confesses was without doubt received from the heathenish Romans. I could
Instance in their acting of the passion, which turns the whole seriousnes of
religion into a mimical sport, as Ludovic Vives in August. de Civit. Dei. l. 8.
c. ult.
complained: many more of this nature I could reckon up, but these are to many.

The sum of the second argument is this: it is unreasonable to adhere to that
Church, which not only practices such ceremonies which are vain, and
ridiculous, and which is at best, uncertain, whether they be not superstitious,
but requires all to own them for good, and wholesome: but the Church of Rome
does so: pero.

CHAP. III.
MY third Consideration shall be drawn from the absurdities and untruths in
several Offices, because there are several things false, many things derogatory
from the merits of Christ, and ascribing too much to the Creature.

First, I instance in the prayers they make to the B. Virgin, the Titles they
ascribe to her, and the praises they give her. First, In the prayers to her: it
is certain that a great part of the devotion of the Romanists is employed in
the prayers to her: she has her Fices, she has her Hours, she has her
Letany, she has her Rosary, and Gregory 13. Instituted a Mass in honor of the
Rosary with Indulgences to them that celebrate it: she has her Psalter
composed by Bonaventure, which are only David's Psalms deformed, in which the
name of Lady is put for Lord, and what he said of God is ascribed to the B.
Virgin: she has 8 Festivals; and least they should fail in the performance of
their duty to her, there is a peculiar Mass i^ the Missal of Salisbury, called
Miss^ Missale sec. usum Sarum. an. 1555. in Vigil. Pasch.
recollectionis festorum B. Mariae. Let us consider the prayers themselves, in
which they do not only entreat her to pray for them, or pray that God would
grant their requests upon the intercession of the B. Virgin, but they desire
that by her merits and prayers they may be brought to Heaven Offic. B. ^irg. ad
matutin.
. And if you think they do not derogate from the Son who lean on the merits of
the Mother, you shall find them equaled in a prayer of the Mass of the most
holy Rosary, where they pray, that God who predestined Jesus Christ according
to the flesh, and chose the most holy Virgin to be his mother, would grant that
through both their merits completed by the 15 sacred mysteries of the Rosary,
we may be so for the present addicted to them, that we may continually perceive
in our selves the fruit of them in the glory of an Heavenly life, praesta
quaesumus, ut amborum meritis per sacra 15 mysteria Rosarij completis ita in
praesenti simus illis addicti, quatenus in coelestis vitae glori^ fructus eorum
jugitur sentiamus Missal. Romans in Miss. Rosarij Pari^ 1631.
; nay its well if they do not question* whether they do not owe more to the
Mothers milk, than to the Sons blood, for that was (...) only a Poetical fancy
of Carolus Scribanius, but was crept up into a Picture (which they call a Lay
man's Book) on a wall in a Church at Bosledue, and there found by the Dutch at
the taking of the Town: from intercession she is got to commanding, and she
that acknowledged in the Magnificat the lowliness of his Handmaid, is
importuned to command by the authority of a Mother: and if we consult their
Offices there is little can be desired of our Savior which they do not ask of
her, and ^o. do not only desire her intercession for blessings, but desire from
her the blessings themselves: in the Himn Ave Maris stella, which is sung at
the feast of the presentation of Mary, they say Solve vincla reis, profer lumen
caecis, mala nostra pelle bona cuncta posce, which in the Offic^ translated
into English is something minced, The guilty Souls deliver, Light to the Blind
restoring,
Drive hence our Harms for ever, all Good for us imploring;


But at the prime they go higher, Maria Matter gratiae matter misericordiae, tu
nos ab host protege and in hor^ mortis suscipe, which the English office
renders, O Mary Mother whence grace flows, who Mother of sweet mercy Art,
Protect us from our dangerous foes, receive us when we hence depart:


What tolerable excuse can be given for those words, and generous Mary obtain
pardon for us, apply grace unto us and prepare glory for us ^x curs^ Hor Beat.
Mariae.
. Or that prayer in the Sequence Missa. Recoll. fest. M^riae in Missal. Sar.
1555.
(as they call it) pro nobis obtine genitrix veniam, reatum dilue and dona
patriam in arce siderum: procure our pardon, wash away our guilt, and give us
heaven? or for that commendation of the Soul to the Virgin Office of our Lady
in English.
, O holy Mary my Lady, I recommend my self unto thy blessed trust, and singular
custody and into the bosom of thy mercy, this day, and daily, and in the hour
of my death, as also my Soul, and body, and I yield unto thee all my hope and
consolation, all my distresses, and my miseries, my life, and the end thereof,
that by thy most holy merits, and intercession, all my works may be directed,
and disposed according to thine, and thy Sons will? if we may place our hope
and confidence in the B. Virgin, in all our afflictions, both in life, and
death, what could we do more on Christ? or how could they express greater
affiance on Christ, than they do here of the Virgin? or in what fuller terms
can they resign ^p themselves to their Savior; than they use here to her,
when they commend themselves to her, that by her merits and intercession all
their works may be directed according to here is, and her sons will? where then
the Creature is drawn off from his entire confidence on Christ, and persuaded
to lean on a fellow creature, that must be absurd and impious, but it is so
in these prayers. ^o.

Secondly, In the titles they ascribe to her, and the Praises they give her: I
do not speak of those flattering expressions which some superstitious persons
have used, as Bernadinus Senensis and Bernardinus de Bustis: of whom the former
faies Berna^. ^enens. Sermon 61. Art. 1. c. 11.
. That the Blessed Virgin did more for God, or at least as much as he did unto
all mankind, and for our comfort we may say that in respect of the Blessed
Virgin God himself is after a sort more bound to us, than we to him. The other
says Bern. d^ Bustis Mariale part. 6. Sermon. 2. memb. 3.
that though the Virgin sang, he that is mighty has done great things to me,
yet he du^st say, thou have done greater things to him who is mighty. These I
will not charge on them, which may seem rather the extravagancies of private
fancies, than any allowed expressions, yet if we consult their public Offices,
we shall see those things ascribed to her, which are absurd, and unfit to be
ascribed to any Creature: to call her the Star of the Sea which seeming like
some title the Poets gave to Venus, may pass by a Poetical license, but to call
her Mother of Mercy, Queen of Heaven, Lady of Angels, Empress of the World
Offic. B. Mariae ad Lauds Festo. Purif. Him^^ Ave Regina.
. These we think are groundless Titles, which ^avour rather of a luxuriant wit,
than any true piety: for though she is blessed among women, yet we do not find
her exalted above Angels: though she was full of grace, yet here is no reason to
call her mother of grace: though she be exalted into glory, yet why must she be
called Queen of Heaven? why do they pray Queen of Angels bring us into the
kingdom of Heaven? as it is in the Breviary of York Infra Octa Assumpt. ^ar. 6.
die Be^ed. commun.
: why do they sing in the Office of the Virgin on the Purification? Hayle Queen
the Heavenly armies guiding.
Hayle Lady over Angels biding.


Enough of this is to be had in the Salisbury Missal, as that God has ^iss.
recol^. Fest. B. Mar. post oration. secre^am.
done mercifully with us, since he has appointed his mother to be our Advocate
in Heaven, and in the Sequence sung on the Feast of the Conception, that she is
the mother of Orphans, the ease of the oppressed, the help of the weak, and
they add omnibus es omnia: now what ground to ascribe these superlative honors
to her? what assurance that these are not unwarrantable Titles? but they go
further, and tell us, the rever^nce they show to the mother, is given to the
Son, and ^o. with their whole desires, and voices, they insist on her praises,
and say that she in the bearing of her Son did destroy antiquum diabolicae
seditionis Chirographum, the ancient hand writing of devilish sedition, and
opened the kingdom of Heaven to believers Breviar Ebor. commem. B. Mar. Lect. 1.
. There is a prayer to the B. Virgin, in which they call her Fountain of mercy,
Fountain of health and grace, Fountain of comfort and Indulgence, Fountain of
piety and joy, Fountain of life and pardon Offic. B. Mar. inter orationes.
: If they ascribe to her these Titles, then they give to the Creature, what is
due to the Creator, God blessed for ever; how can they call her Fountain of
grace? when it is the honor of Christ, that of his fullness we receive grace
for grace John 1. 16.
; and in him all fullness dwells Colos. 1. 19.
: or how is she the Fountain of life, when it is Christ's peculiar houour to have
life in him 1 John 5. 11.
, and our life is hid in Christ; or how can she be the Fountain of pardon? when
through Christ alone we have remission of sins by his blood. Or how can they
sing that redundancy of grace is given to the Virgin, whereby all things are
fragrant and acceptable to God. O nimia redundanti^ gratiae datae Virgini, qua
cuncta sunt fragrantia, and grata summo numini Him^. Aeterni Patris. in Pr^s.
B. Mar. Paris apud Mag^. Goursette. 155^.
, when it is by Christ alone we are made acceptable to the Father: This is the
sum of this first Instance, that in the Offices of the Virgin there are many
prayers unfit to offer to any Creature, and many Titles ascribed to her, which
are groundless, absurd, and derogating from the honor of Christ.

Secondly, I instance in the absurd expressions which they use to the Cross
for they direct their prayers not only to Christ crucified, but (if there be
any sense in the expressions) to the material Cross so in the Office of the
Cross, they say, O venerable Cross which have brought Salvation to wretches,
with what praises shall Office of the Cr^ss at Mattins in English.
I extol thee? for thou have prepared unto us the Heavenly life? at the Prime
they say, O Admirable lignum, in Coelesti curia fac nos cantare triumphum. O
Admirable wood, cause us to triumph in the heavenly Court: now this is absurd
to ascribe that to the Cross, which is only due to Christ* who by his
sufferings on the Cross purchased Salvation for us, or to direct our prayers
and praises to that which was only an inanimate Instrument of Christ's
sufferings: but if these expressions do not seem strange, there is worse
behind. At the Feast of the Invention of the Cross they sing Br^viar. ^bor.
Fe^^. Invent. Sancta Crucis.
, O Crux splendidor cunctis astris, mundo celebris ^anctior universis, etc. O
Cross more glorious than all the Stars, famous in the world, holyer than all
things, which wast only worthy to bear the price of the world: Salva praesentem
catervam laudibus tuis congregatam Br^v. Roman. in Festo Invent. and Exalt.
Crucis.
. Save this present company assembled for thy praises: but how the Cross should
be holyer than all things, how it could be called worthy to bear Christ; I
understand not: what excellency was there in that wood, which made it worthy to
bear our Savior? what worthy stock was it chosen from to touch his holy parts?
as they sing in the Himn Vixil^a Regis *: or by what propriety, and Dominica in
passione inter Himnos editos Pa^^s. 1552.
congruity of speech can they direct their prayers to that material wood to
save them, who were met to celebrate its praises? much like stuff if not worse
r^mains behind in that Himn, O Crux ave spes, unica hoc passionis tempore, auge
piis justitiam, reisque dona veniam *: ^ayle O Cross (...) Breviar. Romans Fest^
Invent. Sanct. Crucis.
our only hope in this passion time, increa^e righteousness to the godly, and
give pardon to the guilty; but how can they say the wooden Cross is their only
hope? how can they beg righteousness and pardon from it? if they tell us these
are lofty fancies of pious wits, I must still wonder how their Church can allow
such roving humors among their serious d^votions; or how these expressions
which are designed for the praises of of the wooden Cross can by any tolerable
congruity be understood of Christ; or if they be disallowed that yet they
should be retained in the Breviaries reformed by Pius 5. another of these we
have in the Breviary of Salisbury, on the Feast of the Invention of the Cross,
Ara Crucis, Lampas lucis, vera salus hominum, nobis pronum fac patronum quem
tulisti Dominum: where they entreat the wooden Cross to make Christ propitious
to them. Such kind of prayers they have in their private devotions, as to our
Ladies girdle, O veneranda Zona fac nos haeredes vitae Aeternae, and ha^c vitam
ab interitu conserva, habeamus te vires and auxilium, murum and propugnaculum,
etc. O blessed girdle make us the inheritors of eternal life, keep our present
life from destruction, O unspotted girdle of the unspotted Virgin save thine
inheritance, be thou our strength and help, our wall and defense, our heaven
and refuge: such also is the prayer to Veronica or the Picture of our Saviors
bloody face on a napkin. Salve vultns Domini imago beata, ex aeterno munere
mire decorata lumen funde cordibus ex vi tibi data; and a nostris sensibus
toll colligata, etc. here they pray that by the virtue given to that Picture
it would infuse light into their hearts: and they conclude, nos deduc ad
propria O foelix figura, ad videndum faciem quae est Christi pura, O happy
figure bring us to see the pure face of Christ: but what ground to hope for
these blessings from insensible things? or to pray to them for these ends? or
what assurance is there that such virtue is imprinted in them? and if there be
no ground for such expressions, then they are unwarrantable and absurd.

Thirdly, I instance in their most sacred office of the mass, this themselves
confess was anciently corrupted, and many things crept in (either through the
fault of times or men's negligence or wickedness) were far from the dignity of
such a Sacrifice: Cone. Trident. Ses. 22. Decr. de o^s. and evit. in Cel^b.
Miss.
and pero. the council required such things to be taken away, which either
Covetousnes or irreverence, or superstition had brought in: accordingly the
Missal was corrected by Pius the 5th and after another review published by
Clement the 8th which is the Authentic Missal at this day, now in this I
observe many things absurd, vain, or untrue I mention not the multitude of
ceremonies which clog the service distract the Priests thoughts, and reduce the
simplicity of Christianity to the Jewish Paedagogy: as in the frequent Crossing
themselves, in the very canon of the Mass the Priest is enjoined to make 25
Crosses at several times, besides the signing himself with the Patten from the
forehead to the Breast, and with part of the host he must make the sign of the
Cross thrice on the Chalice: as little reason can be given for the Pax which
must be given only to Magisttrates and noble persons Carem. Epis^op l. 1. c 24.
, or to be most eminent as Gavantus says Part. 2. ^it. 10.
, unless it were no matter to have Peace with the Poor, provided they could
have it with the rich, and so for the Priests murmuring the words of
Consecration, and when he places the Chalice on the Corporal for his saying
with a low voice, as often as ye do this do it in remembrace of me, and in the
Close of the Lords Prayer speaking low, Amen: of these things they give so
little reason that we may, with greater, judge them the fruit only of ignorance
and superstition: I shall speak only of the Prayers themselves. First, After
the Offertory, when the Priest offers the wafer which he must afterward
consecrate, he says, Suscipe sancte pater hanc immaculatam hostiam, quam
offero tibi deo vivo pro innumerabilibus peccat is and offensionibus meis
Missal Romans Paris 1631 Ordo. Missae
, receive Holy Father this immaculate host, which I thy unworthy servant offer
to thee the true and living God for my innumerable sins, offenses and
negligences, etc. now I ask what they mean by this immaculate host which they
offer for sin? either they mean the wafer, or the real body of Christ: they
cannot mean this latter for the body is not under the species till after
consecration, and the consecration (they say) is not till these words (hoc est
enim corpus meum) be pronounced, and pero. they cannot now offer the body, if
they mean the wafer, then they offer to God bread for their sins, which
themselves will confess is absurd. Secondly, There is a Prayer which begins
Suscipe Sancta Trinitas, etc. And in this the Priest says, he offers this
oblation for the memory of our Saviors Passion, Resurrection and Assention,
and in the honor of the Blessed Virgin, St. John Baptist, and the Holy
Apostles Peter and Paul that it may profit them for their Honor, and us for
our Sa^vation: now of what does the Prayer mean? take it either of the Elements
or of Christ's body yet I understand not how they can offer for the Saints
honor; how they can entreat God to receive Christ's body in honor of his
Saints; how an immediate act of adoration to God can be said to be profitable
for their Saints honor; or if it may be profitable to increase their glory,
how it can stand with their own tenants, that it is impious to pray for a
Martyr, when yet they pray for St. Peter and Paul, ut iis proficiat ad honorem,
but of this more afterward. Thirdly, After the Consecration it is said, we
offer unto thy excellent majesty of thy own gifts, a pure Host, a holy Host,
the holy bread of Eternal life, and the Cup of Eternal Salvation, super quae
propitio ac sereno vultu respicere digneris, upon which things vouchsafe to
look with a propitious and serene countenance, etc. Now this is absurd, that
we should pray that God would look propitiously on his own Son in whom he is
allwaies well pleased: or that God would accept this Sacrifice of Christ, when
it is that sweet smelling Sacrifice which God allwaies does accept. Indeed
Bellarmine gives us an excuse for the harshness of these words, and faies, the
offering in respect of the thing offered, and of Christ the principal offerer,
always pleases God, yet in respect of the minister or people who offer with
him it may not please God, and pero. they pray that God would look propitiously
on this gift as it is offered by them: but this evasion will not serve, for
they tell us, that the value of this Sacrifice is not ex opere operantis, from
the condition or worth of the minister, but ex opere operato from the nature of
the thing it self, because it is done as the Law requires Bell. l. 2. c. 4. de
Missa. ^(...)^ s^cundo.
, and pero. it pleases God though he who offer it do not please him tertium est.
; so that since the value of the Sacrifice is wholly from the thing that is
offered, pero. as it is offered by us or not, offered by us does no way alter
the acceptableness of it to God, but still the prayer must remain absurd, for
they pray that God would look propitiously on the body and blood of Christ, and
accept them, when God allwaies does accept them, and can never be displeased
with them. Fourthly, There is a fourth prayer, which begins supplices rogamus,
etc. There they pray, that God would command these things to be carried by his
holy Angels unto the high Altar in the sight of his Divine Majesty, etc. Now
what are these things? if they say, the prayers of the faithful; that cannot
be meant, for this prayer is to the thing spoken of in the former prayer, and
that was the body and blood of Christ, the holy bread of Eternal life, and the
Cup of everlasting Salvation; if they say that they are the body and blood of
Christ (as it is plain from the words that they are) then these have been long
since in Heaven, and Christ lives there to make intercession for us, how then
can they be carried up into Heaven? and pero. he fixes another sense l. 2. de
Missa. c. 24. Sect. respond^^.
, that those expressions must be understood spiritually, and signify only
this, that the Angels by their prayers commend our obedience to God; but still
he forgets, that the things here in the prayer are not our obedience, and
service, but the body and blood of Christ: that there is no mention of our
obedience and service in that prayer, but both this and the former prayer are
connected with those words, we offer to thee a pure Host, an holy Host, an
undefiled Host, the holy bread of Eternal life, and the Cup of everlasting
Salvation: for they subjoyne in the next words, upon which things vouchsafe to
look propitiously, etc. and then follows this prayer, we humbly beseech thee,
command these things to be carried, etc. it must then be meant of his body and
blood; but how unreasonable is it to desire the Angels may commend the
Sacrifice of Christ with their prayers? or that their prayers should assist to
render the Sacrifice of Christ acceptable? as if any thing should add any worth
to Christ's Sacrifice: but if this will not remove the incongruities of this
expression, Durand Rational. Div. Offic. l. 4. c. 44. ^it. E.
tells us, tantae profunditatis sunt haec verba, ut intellectus humanus vix ea
sufficiat penetrare: These are such profound expressions that humane
understanding can hardly pierce into them: well said, a good excuse for
nonsense; to call it a profound expression, or to condemn the weakness of our
understandings when it is the absurdity of their words: these are fine things to
please them, who are wont to admire every thing in the Romish Church; like
those Courtiers which cry up the Princes stammering for a grace in his speech:
a strange thing, that those expressions must pass for most Divine, which have
least reason, and sense.

Thus I have instanced in several absurdities, untruths and impieties in the
Offices of the Romish Church, which justify my third argument, That it is
unreasonable to be obliged to believe that to be the purest Church whose
public Offices are very corrupt, but the Offices of the Romish Church are so,
pero.

CHAP. IV.
MY fourth Consideration shall be drawn from the Irreconcilable opposition of
their prayers to their public Doctrine: very many prayers which are contrary
to their present Innovations are expunged, and many prayers yet retained cannot
be reconciled with their present Doctrine, pero. we have no reason to adhere to
the present Romish Church.

First, Many prayers which were contrary to their present innovations are
expunged, this is not only our complaint, but of one that lived, and died in
the Roman communion Johannes Marsillius Defesadis Gio. Marsilio. Della 4. prop.
contra i^ Card^ Bellarmino^
^aies, it is a thing known by all, that in the books of Councels, of Canons,
and of the Doctors, yea in the Breviaries and Missals those places, are
expunged, which speak in favor of the Laity, that they might see if they could
establish from Antiquity, the opinion of the Popes illimited power in
temporals; so that he who compares the Books Printed in 1530 and 1550, and
those at present (i) at the time of the interdict of Venice, will wonder that
we have found after such a vintage any gleanings in defense of our Prince: and
pero. first I will give you his Instance in the prayer concerning St. Peter in
the commemoration of St. Paul June 30. where it was anciently said, qui B.
Petro animas, ligandi and solvendi pontificium dedisti, this he says, he saw
in Breviaries which had been written above 200 years, and which had been
printed about an hundred, and yet the Reformers of the Roman breviary have left
out the word [animas]: will you see Bellarmines answer? in his reply to
Marsillius he says forsi la divina providentia ha inspirato li reformatori,
etc. Perhaps the Divine Providence has inspired the reformers to take it away?
but why must it be taken away; because (as Marsilius states the case) the Pope,
designing the advancement of his Power that he might Challinge as St Peter's
successor a power in temporals, saw that this restriction was no way consistent
with his design; for if the binding and loosing be properly of Souls, it must
be a merely Spiritual Power, and so no way consistent with that supereminent
power in temporals, which the Pope and his Courtiers claimed: a good reason
then to take this away, and a fine excuse to justify it: Gods providence must
inspire these reformers such an inspiration indeed as the Trent Fathers had,
when if we believe the Proverb, the Holy Ghost came from Rome in a clokebag:
Secondly, I will give that Instance which the Arch Bishop of Spalato De. Rep.
Eccles. (...) c. 5. n. 164.
had observed in Bertram's book, when Bertram would prove that the bread and
wine are figuratively the body and blood of Christ, and though they are called
the body and blood of Christ, yet there are such things said of them which are
Celebrated by the Church in a mystery, as cannot be said according to that
manner they are known to exist, and pero. they must be understood to be the
body and blood of Christ in a figure, he proves this by two prayers in the
Missal, which were said after the Communion, the first is, Pignus aeternae
vitae capientes humiliter imploramus, ut quod imagine contingimus Sacramenti
manifesta participatione sumamus: taking the pledge of eternal life we humbly
beseech, that what we touch in the Image of the Sacrament we may also receive
by manifest participation: from hence Bertram gathered, that a pledge, and an
Image only signifying the things which they belong to, but not manifestly
showing them, pero. that which is now made in the Sacrament is different from
that which shall be afterward manifested, pero. that which the Church
Celebrates is the body and blood of Christ, but yet as a pledge, as an Image,
and when there is no more pledge or Image the truth it self, (i. e) the body of
Christ will apear: now this Prayer is not to be found in the Missal says
Sspalato. Another he mentions, Per ficiant in nobis Domine quaesumus, tua
Sacramenta quod continent, ut quae nunc specie geramus rei veritate capiamus:
let thy Sacraments O Lord effects in us what they contain, that what we now
hold in show, we may receive in truth; from this he argues, there being a
difference betwixt species and veritas (i. e) betwixt what is in show, and what
is according to it is true nature pero. that body and blood of Christ which is
here held by the Church differs from that which shall be glorified in the
resurrection: this prayer is clipped says Spalato, and instead of specie they
read spe, (yet since that is opposed to truth in this place, it shows that we
do not receive that which is truly the body of Christ according to its proper
nature) and so it was read in their reformed Missals, in Antiquitates
Liturgicae Sabbato 4. tempotum per Balthas. Beller. 1605.
, printed at Doway 1605. which the author says he took a capite ad calcem out
of the Roman Misal, the prayer runs, ut quae nunc spe geramus, etc. but I wave
this latter, for the word [specie] is now restored in the Paris edition of the
Missal 1631. Many more alterations in their Offices might be produced, which
will evidence the innovations in the Doctrine of their Church, and which (I
hope) will be effected by by some industrious person, who has the opportunity
of variety of choice Missals and Breviaries, and their other books of devotion,
whereby to discover those alterations of their present from their ancient
Offices.

Secondly, I will rather instance in those passages yet retained, and are not
reconcilable with the grounds of their present Doctrine: As, First, I instance
in the private Masses, when the Priest communicates alone; for many are bound
by the Statutes of their foundation as the Chantry Priests to say Mass for the
Souls of their founders, many persons for affection, some by agreement (and the
highest ordinary rate in these Countries, says Fitz-Simon Of the Mass 1 book 2
part 12 chapt.
, is a shilling) say a Mass, and pero. whether there be any to Communicate or
no, yea though but one to answer the Priest, and sometime none Gavant. part. 2.
tit. 2. n. 1.
, yet he says Mass: and the Council of Trent though it wishes all who stand by
would not only communicate by spiritual affection, but Sacramental
participation of the Eucharist, yet it does not condemn those Masses, in which
the Priest communicates alone, but approves them, and commends them: now the
prayers and rules of the Mass are no way reconcilable with this Doctrine, and
practice: for, First, If there be none to communicate, how can the Priest use
this exhortation which is in the Ordo Missae after the prayer suscipe Sancta
Trinitas? Orate fratres ut meum ac vestrum sacrificium fit acceptabile, etc.
pray brethren that my Sacrifice and yours may be acceptable: this exhortation
(says the Rubric) must be said by the Priest with his voice toward the
people; and his Tone a little raised, and in their private Mass all this is
done, though there be none present: the exhortation supposes some communicating
or at least some present, why must he say Brethren, if he supposes there needs
be none, or at least but one? why should he raise his voice, when he can expect
none to answer, unless the stones say Amen? why must he turn to the people if
it suppose a Mass where there are none, or but one present? Lastly, why must he
say my Sacrifice and yours, if it did not suppose some joining in the
sacrifice? Secondly, I instance in that exhortation, lift up your hearts with
the response, habemus ad dominum: if we lift them up to the Lord, etc. so the
Priest says dominus vobiscum, the Lord be with you, the answer is, and with
thy Spirit, now if in the framing this Office, it were not supposed that others
were present to whom the Priest might direct the exhortation, and that they
should return the answer it had been foolish to have appointed the use of these
words: for its altogether vain, and rediculous to say, lift up your hearts when
there is none to hear him, or to say, let us pray, when he prays by himself,
or the Lord be with you, when he speaks to the bare walls. Thirdly, I instance
in the commemoratio pro vivis, where the Priest desires God to remember all
those that stand by, whose faith and devotion are known to thee, for whom we
offer, or who offer to thee this Sacrifice of praise, etc. Now this expression
supposes there must be some that stand by, or else the Priest should be bound
ridiculously to pray for them that stand by, when there are none at all.
Fourthly, I instance in the prayer Supplices te rogamus, etc. there he prays
that as many of us as receive the body and blood of thy Son from this
participation of the Altar may be filled with all Heavenly Benedictions and
Grace: here the Prayer supposes some receiving, or if there be none to receive
with the Priest, how can he say that as many of us as receive, etc? Bellarmin
l. 2 de Missa. c. 10. resp. ad object. 10.
thinks to solve this scruple by telling us, that these words are used for
those who communicate at present, and if there be none then it must refer to
those who are absent, who communicate elsewhere: but this will not serve, for
the Prayer refers to those who communicate here and not elsewhere: for else how
can it say as many of us? and as many as receive from this participation of the
Altar? for the words [this participation] ex hac altaris participatione,
restrain it to those who are now to receive. Lastly, I instance in the prayer
after the Priest has received, quod ore sumpsimus, etc. what we have O Lord
taken with our mouths, let us also receive with a pure mind, etc. Now how can
they say this, unless they suppose some receiving? for if they only Communicate
spiritually, as the Council of Trent says, assisting with their prayers, then
they cannot be said to receive it with their mouths, besides he desires that
what they have received with their mouths, they may receive with a pure mind.
And pero. this receiving does suppose that former receiving: so that we may
from hence judge this to have been the Primitive institution, that some should
Communicate with the Priest, and that as Walafrid Strabo says, it was only a
lawful Mass, in which there was the Priest, those that answer, and those who
offer, and communicate; sicut ipsa compositio precum evidenti ratione
demonstrat, as the frame of the prayers (says he) evidently shows: and I add
(as I have now instanced) that the expressions yet retained are contrary to
their present Practice, and Doctrine.

Secondly, I instance in the Doctrine of merit, in this indeed I cannot see
much difference betwixt the moderate Romanists and us, as Spalato De Rep.
Eccles. l. (...). c. 7. u. 8.
and Forbes Consid. Modest a. l. 5. c. 4.
observe, for they will tell us, that they account good works meritorious, not
for the value, and worth of the work it self: but from Gods acceptance,
promise, and appointment, and so Cassander Consult. ad Art. 6. de operibus
bonis.
says, that the Schoolmen and other Ecclesiastics did not differ from this
opinion, for they placed the force of the merit of their righteousness, in Gods
free acceptance, and liberal promise, and that their righteousness what ever
it was, was Gods gift, and due by right of service to him, etc. yet if we
consult the Jesuits, and rigid writers among the Romanists, they will tell us,
that our works do merit from the dignity of the work: so Bellarmine says De
Iustif. l. 5. c. 16.
, that it is communis and verissima Theologorum sententia, that there is a
meritum de condigno, that there is a strict equallity betwixt the worth of the
work it self, and the reward: and from Vasquez In 1 secundae. Tom. 2. Q. 114.
Disp. 214. (...) 5.
we have this assertion that good works of just persons are of themselves
without any covenant or acception worthy of the reward of Eternal life, and
have an equal value of condignity to the attaining Eternal glory. This
opinion they think is backed by the Council which Anathematizes Conc. Trident.
Sess. 6. Can. 32.
them, who deny that good works done by the grace of God, and merit of Christ,
do truly deserve increase of grace and Eternal glory: and the interest of this
opinion has so far prevailed, that whereas in the ordo baptizandi cum modo
visitandi, etc. Printed at Venice 1575, there was this question proposed to the
dying man, Credis non propriis meritis, sed passionis Domini nostri Jesu
Christi virtute and merito ad gloriam pervenire? do thou believe that thou
shall come to glory not by thy own merits, but by the virtue and merit of Jesus
Christ's passion? and this was also proposed to him, do thou believe that
Jesus Christ died for our Salvation, and that none can be saved by his own
merits, or by any other means, but by the merits of his passion? both these are
commanded to be expunged by the Index expurgatorius of Card. Quiroga Index.
Expurg. per Card. Quirog. Madrit. 1584. and recus. Hanoviae. 1611.
1584. and also by that of Cardinal Sandoval. 1612. This expression is also
expunged out of Erasmus Annotations, in the first Chapter of St. Luke on these
words they shall call me blessed; Then Gods name is glorified when nothing is
ascribed to our own merits, but the whole to Gods mercy: this Doctrine of merit
though disliked by the moderate sort, and hardly owned where they converse with
Protestants is yet stiffly maintained as the common opinion in those Countries
which are entirely Popish, seems to be countenanced by the decree of the
Council, and more fully by those who have been employed in purging Heretical
books, yet notwithstanding all this, the prayers which may be found in the
Offices are no way reconcilable with it; for though in their disputes with
men, they pretend the merit of their works, yet in their Prayers to God they
fly to his sole mercy: so they sing In dedi^. Sancti Mich. Archang. ad vesperas
in Hi^^. ^ib^ Christ.
mundo cord, corpore Paradiso read tuo nos sola clementia: bring us by thy
alone mercy to thy Paradise with clean heart, and body: and in the Prayer which
begins nobis qu^que, in the Canon of the Mass, they beg, that God would bring
them into the society of Saints, non aestimator meriti, sed veniae largitor,
not esteeming their merits, but pardoning their offenses: if there could be any
exact merit, which from its own dignity deserves glory, why do they then fly to
his sole mercy? and if the whole be not ascribed to Gods mercy, but man's
merits, why do they beg that God would not weigh their merits but pardon their
offenses?

Thirdly, I instance in the Doctrine of Purgatory, with their Prayers for the
dead, the Doctrine of the Romanists is, that the Souls in Purgatory are helped
by the Suffrages of the Faithful Conc. Trident. Sess. 25.
, for after Death those Souls which have not been thoroughly purged, in this
life are carried into a place of torment, where they are detained till hey are
thoroughly purged, S. C. Answer to Dr. Pierce. c. 10. Sect. 12.
and then are carried into Heaven: and pero. they pray for those that God will
forgive their sins and assuage their sufferings*, etc. for those who are very
good they give thanks, but for those who are in this middle estate they pray
for pardon and Mercy, and that not only on the day of their Burial, but also
also the on third, on the seventh, on the thirtieth, and on the anniversary of
their death they say Mass for their Souls, and by this hope to rid them quickly
out of Purgatory: now the Prayers they use are irreconciliable with this
Doctrine. For First, there are Prayers for those whom they believe to be in
Heaven, even for the greatest Saints: this S. C. Answer to Dr. Pierce c. 10
Sect. 10.
Confesses was anciently so, but then they were not such Prayers as were Made
for the imperfect (i) for remision of sins refreshment, etc. but for accession
of glory to Saints already glorified, but there is more than so: for they use
the same request for those, who (they say) are in Purgatory, and for those we
all believe to be in glory: they pray for all that rest in Christ, that God
would give them a place of refreshment, light, and peace Commem. pro. defunct.
in Can. Missa.
; now if the Saints rest in Christ then they are included in this Prayer, and
they beg for the Saints who are glorified refreshment and peace, which is the
request, (S. C. Says) that is to be made for imperfect Christians. And we
find such a prayer, that God by whose mercy the Soul's of the faithful rest,
would grant to all thy servants here and every where resting in Christ, pardon
of sin, that being absolved from all guilt, they may rest with In crationibus
pro his qui in Caemit. requiese.
thee for ever*: and there was a prayer for St. Leo, ut per haec placationis
officia illum beata retributio comitetur In festo Sancti Leonis oration secreta.
, that by these offices of atonement a blessed retribution may accompany him:
what do these words signefie? not an increase of glory, but simply that he may
have glory, not an addition of happiness but simply that a blessed reward may
accompany him: and how can the Sacrifice they offer here be understood to be a
thanksgiven for Leo, (as it must be for those who are very good) when it is
called an office of atonement Secondly, there are no prayers in their public
offices for deliverance from Purgatory that they may be quickly eased of their
pains, and delivered from torments, and if there be no prayer for speedy ease
of those pains, and quick riddance from them, then their prayers are not
suitable to their Doctrine. The Prayers are either First to prevent falling
into punishment; so in the office of burial, they Pray that God would receive
the soul returning to him, and cloth it with an Heavenly Garment, and wash it
with the holy fountain of eternal life: and in the next Prayer, they Pray in
offic. Sepult. O atio: suscipe domine.
that God would receive the ^oul of his servant, which he has called from the
prison of the body, and free it from the Princes of darkness, and the places of
punishments, that being delivered from the bond of his sins he may obtain the
blessing of eternal rest, and light: and this Antiphona is sung, when the body
is carried to the Church Offic. sepult Antiph. subvenite.
help O ye Saints, meet him O ye Angils of the Lord receiving his Soul, and
offering it in the sight of the highest: let Christ receive thee who called
thee, and carry thee into Abraham's bosom: and so in the prayer, O God to whom
all things do live, etc. they entreat that God would command the Soul of his
Servant to be received by the hands of his holy Angels, and to be carried into
the bosom of the Patriarchs: and in the prayer fac quaesumus, etc. that he may
not receive any recompense of his actions in punishments, who has in his
desires kept thy will: I Will instance in one prayer more: Deus origo pietatis,
etc. where they desire, that the Soul may endure no treacheries of the devil
meeting him, that God would free him from the infernal Gulf, and deliver him
from the cruel burnings of a hot Hell, placing it in the pleasure of Paradise:
Let it not feel O merciful Father the heat of the flames, the anguish of
punishments, or the horror of darkness, but being prevented by thy bounty may
obtain to escape the Judgment of revenge. Now these prayers are not
reconcilable with their grounds, for it is their Doctrine, that those who dye
in an imperfect state must necessarily go to that place of purgation; but now
in those prayers, they desire that God would receive the Soul when it comes out
of the body, and free it from the Prince of darkness, and places of
punishments, and that it may not feel the heat of the flames, but being
prevented by Gods bounty may escape the Judgment of revenge. They pretend in
their Doctrine, that by their prayers they free the Souls from the punishments
they feel, for they necessarily must endure punishment, but the prayers
themselves speak of preventing the falling into punishment. And pero. these
prayers cannot be reconciled with their Doctrine. Secondly, there are Prayers,
which suppose the soul as yet in it is passage, and pero. they desire, that it
may not fall into punishment, but God would place it in the land of rest and
light. After the departure of the soul out of the body they pray, that God
would receive the soul returning to him: let Michael the Angel of the testament
be present with him and vouchsafe by the hands of thy holy Angel to place him
in the bosom of thy Patriarch Abraham, that being freed from the Prince of
darkness, and places of punishments, no man may be Confounded with the errors
of his nativity or ignorance, etc. Now though this may seem suitable, when the
soul is newly gone out of the body, with those, that think there is some space
of time betwixt the Souls departure, and its receiving its particular doom:
but without such a conceit, how can they pray at the burial Offic. sepult.
Orat. Te Domine, etc.
, that God would give his servant, whom he called out of the whirlepool of this
world a place of refreshment, and light, that he may pass by the gates of Hell,
and the punishments of darkness, etc. If at the burial they pray that it may
pass by the gates of Hell, then the Soul is still in its passage: and further
they pray, that he may remain in the mansion of the Saints, and his spirit may
receive no hurt: but if his spirit was in purgatory, then it would receive
hurt: pero. by this prayer I understand, it is yet in a capacity to receive no
hurt, and pero. the Soul must yet be in its passage: and so it is plain from
the Absolution, where he says, the Lord Jesu Christ absolve thee from all the
bond of thy sins, and I pray thou may be absolved before the Tribunal of
Jesus Christ; this supposes, that the Soul is yet in its passage to this
Tribunal, or why should he pray for this absolution before the Tribunal, if he
has already received the sentence of that Tribunal? there is another prayer,
that God would receive the Soul of his Servant freed from Corporal bonds into
the peace of his Saints, that being Translated into the Region of the living,
it may escape the place of punishment, and the fire of Hell: all this supposes
that the Soul has not yet its doom, but is now in its passage: and pero. when
the body is carrying to the grave, they desire, that the Angels would meet him,
and receive his Soul, and lead him into Paradise, and the Martyrs receive him
into their assembly; and when the body is laid in the grave, still they pray,
that the Soul being prevented with the gift of thy bounty, it may obain to
escape the Judgment of revenge In Oraticne Deu^ Origo pietatis, etc.
. Nor do they end here, but they use such expressions on the Trental and
Anniversary, as in the Offertory, in Anniversario defunctorum: free them from
the mouth of the Lion, let not Hell swallow them up, let not them fall into the
dark place, but let the standard bearer St. Michael bring them into the holy
Light, etc. and the prayers in the commendatio animarum which suppose the Soul
even then in its passage are used at the Trental and Anniversary: Offic. sepult
sec. usum. Sarum. in rubrica. page 103.
but why should those words which commend it in its passage be used at these
times, if they did not suppose the Soul yet in its way? thus these prayers
contradict their received grounds of Purgatory, and prayer for the dead, for if
the prayers they use, still suppose them in this passage, and not come into
torment, then they must contradict their usual Doctrine, which concludes them
presently in torment, and that by those prayers they may be speedily delivered
from the torment they are in. Thirdly, There are other prayers which desire
that the Soul may be freed from Eternal punishments, that Hell may not swallow
them up, and they may not fall into the place of darkness Missa. ^ in die
ob^^^s Offert^r.
; and in the first prayer at that Mass they pray for the Soul of thy Servant
whom thou have commanded this day to depart out of this world, that thou will
not deliver him into the hand of the enemy, nor forget it finally, etc. and
because he hoped and believed in thee, that he may not sustain the pains of
Hell, but possess joys everlasting. This prayer anciently run that he might
not sustain paenas aeternas, but now this is altered in poenas inferni, yet
still if they take the word Hell, for Purgatory, then they pray that God would
not suffer it to come into Purgatory, which is contrary to their own Doctrine,
that every man not thoroughly purged in this life, must be purged in Purgatory.
If they understand it of the Hell of the damned, and of eternal punishments, as
there is a Prayer to be used at the funeral of a Cardinal, that by the
assistance of Gods grace he may obtain to escape the Judgment of everlasting
revenge C^. r^m. F^^l. Romans l. 1. sect. 15. c. 1. f^l. 1^ 2.
, if they understand it thus, then I ask, whether they suppose those persons
for whom they pray are very wicked, or indifferently good: if they be very
wicked, then it would be absurd to pray for their deliverance from everlasting
damnation; for it is certain (says Bellarmine l. 2. de purgatori^. c. 18.
) that the Prayers do not profit the damned, for they can not be helped: if
they be indifferently good, such as dye in a state of grace though with some
venial sins, then why do they pray that he might not fall into Hell? for this
is already certain: or that God would not forget them finally, but command them
to be received by the holy Angels, and brought into the Country of Paradise;
for it is certain, God cannot forget them finally, but the longest duration of
Purgatory is only till the resurrection: or why do they pray that they may not
sustain the pains of Hell, but possess joys everlasting, and that they may
escape Eternal^ revenge? if their only design was to free the Soul from the
torments of Purgatory, why is there nothing of ^ase in Purgatory? nothing of
quick riddance from thence? (as they pretend from the apparitions of Souls
which have been in Purgatory, and said they were freed by the Masses and
prayers of the living) yea further, there is one prayer, which refers the
pardon of sin to the resurrection: in the prayer which begins, Te Domine
Sancte, etc. Offic. sop^lt. sec. usum Sa^um.
they pray, Let his Spirit receive no hurt, but when the great day of the
resurrection comes, vouchsafe to raise him with the Saints and blot out all his
offenses and sins even unto the last farthing: now if by the prayers of the
living they can procure pardon, then there would not be a farthing to be
blotted out at the resurrection: and so this prayer would be useless All this
while we meet with no prayer to put an end to their torments, to free them
quickly from the pains they are now in: they will tell us indeed, they pray for
refreshment and pardon of sins, and where must they be for whom they pray thus,
except in Purgatory? but this does not follow; for, First, There are ancient
prayers extant, in which they prayed even to give rest to them, whom they
believed already to be in rest: and therefore this does not suppose them in
Purgatory: so in St. James Liturgy (as it is called) he prays for all from Abel
the just until this present day, that God would give them rest in the kingdom
of heaven: and so in Alcuinus Offic. per Ferias. Col. 228. Oper. Edit. Paris
1917.
, he prays for the spirits of thy servants, and handmaids which thou have
called to thee from the beginning of the world, that thou would vouchsafe to
give them a lightsome place, a place of refreshment and ease. Secondly, I
gather that they were not in Purgatory, from that commemoration of the dead,
which S. C. mentions, for those who are gone before us with the sign of faith,
and repose in the sleep of peace, and rest in Christ refreshment, light and
peace; for the Romanists suppose the torments to be greater, than the greatest
torments of this life; now how do they repose in the sleep of peace, when they
endure both a punishment of loss in the want of the sight of God, and a
punishment of sense? how do they rest in Christ, when they are perhaps in far
greater torments than they in this life? whereas Those who dye in the Lord rest
from their labors Rev. 14. 13.
. Thirdly, Though the prayer runs, that God would absolve him from his sins,
yet still there is no necessity, that there should be a Purgatory; for those
prayers may suppose as you see many do, the Soul yet to be in suspense, and in
its passage to Gods tribunal, and that they use the commendatio animae at the
burial, or Trentall which they did, when the Soul just went out of the body,
so that these prayers rather signify a prevention of punishment, than any
mitigation or ending of it: or again these prayers may refer to the
resurrection, for it is not said, absolve him from the bond of his sins, that
he may be presently released from Purgatory, but that in the glory of the
resurrection being raised among the Saints, he may breath again: and so we have
such a prayer in the Pontifical, which begins, Deus cui omnia vivunt, etc. that
God would command the Soul of his Servant to be received by the holy Angels,
and carried into the bosom of Abraham his friend and be raised at the last
day: and what ever faults by the deceit of the devil be incurred, thou of thy
pity and mercy wash away by forgiving them. Here is a prayer for pardon, but
then it is at the resurrection, and thus though there are prayers for pardon,
yet still they are no way reconcilable with their Doctrine. Thus I have
finished the considerations which at present I intend and (perhaps if occasion
offer it self (may add more: my conclusion is a request to those who begin to
entertain such fair opinions of the Romish Church, that they would not exchange
their Religion, before they consider, what they shall gain by the bargain: I
see many who did not much mind to understand the duties of their own religion,
much less to practice them, are easily drawn over to the Romish party, and when
they live like Atheists, at least to seem some body, they pretend to be
Papists: I envy them not such Proselites, who add nothing to the repute of any
side, but only number: nor do^^e loose any thing by such Renegado's whose
practice disgraced their profession: the Church is purer when the dregs are
purged out: Rome had at first wanted men to inhabit it if Romulus had not
opened an Asylum, and modern Rome would not be so much replenished, if there
were not a Sanctuary to shelter such converts: it is hardly any matter what
religion men profess if their practice be not answerable, and (...) though they
glory in their multitudes, yet many who seem to be of their religion, would
prove (if they were ^i^ted) of none at all. There are others well meaning
persons, who (as in Charity I must judge) are moved either through affection to
peace, or love to truth (as they think) to incline to the Romish Church: these
I do not condemn for their love to peace: It Is a noble design in imitation of
the good Samaritan to pour Oil and Wine into the Churches wounds and
reconcile brethren who are at od's: and God ^orbid but we should meet them for
peaces sake so far as we can without prejudice to piety and truth: but what
benefit can we expect by our concessions? when they pretend (what ever we can
judge from Scripture, reason or Antiquity) they cannot err: yea the least
concession that they have erred or can err, oreturns their foundation,
destroies the Infallibility of their Church. What hopes to reclaim them to
moderation, when those who mediate for peace are looked on as enemies? Erasmus,
Modrevius and Cassander are in their account damnati authors and if they be
not high flow'n Papists they account them (though they die in the communion of
their Church) but only close Heriticks. I do not condemn those who are
inquisitive after truth, and ready to embrace that which is attended with
suitable motives. To these (...) I offer these considerations, whether it is fit
to adhere to that Church which requires all to believe those Doctrines, as
necessary to salvation which are uncertain, and dubious? to embrace those for
Apostolical Traditions which are not such? to receive those Ecclesiastical
rites for wholesome and good, of which many are vain and foolish, and cannot be
excused from Superstition? Let them consider, whether it be fit to adhere to
that Church, whose sacred Offices contain many untruths and impieties? and
Lastly, whose very prayers do in many things contradict their avowed Doctrine?
he that can swallow down such considerations and turn Romanist, has (as I may
judge) bidden adieu to his reason, as well as Religion.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

