Medulla Novi Testamenti: THE SUBSTANCE OF THE NEW TESTAMENT, MORE ESPECIALLY
Of the HISTORICAL; WITH A brief Account of the Doctrinal Part, in each Book, by
way of Dialogue between a Divine and his Parishioner.

Designed for the benefit of Private Families.

By THOMAS STANHOPE, Preacher at the Fleet.

IMPRIMATUR,

W. Jane.

London, Printed by A.G. and J. P. and are sold by Nath. Rolls, at the Golden
Key in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1680.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Mrs. FANSHAW.
MADAM,
I Know not what excuse to make for offering so poor a Present to your
Ladyship, and (under your Name) to the World. My performance must needs make it
mean, though the Design is Great; it being a familiar Introduction to the
understanding of the New Testament. But when I consider what a Misfortune in
your Education did cast you into a Religion, that can never hope to support it
self but by Ignorance of the Scriptures, from which your Ladyship is now so
happily delivered, through the assistance of that Eminent and Worthy Dean of
Canterbury, to the Great Joy of your most Illustrious Brother the ever Renowned
DUKE of Monmouth, his Grace; and to the Infinite satisfaction of your Husband,
who never thought himself completely Happy in you, till Religion had united
your Souls, as well as Wedlock had done your Persons. When I reflect on these
things, I hope that (without accusing you) I may fear that (till of late) you
have been too much a Stranger to those Holy Writings, or rather, they have been
to you as a Sealed Book. And at the same time I may assure my self, that being
brought into that Church which has no other Rule or Standard of Faith but the
Holy Scriptures, you will now Redeem the time of your Former Ignorance, by a
stricter Application to that blessed Study, and therefore will not despise the
meanest help which can be offered to you. I now present your Ladyship with my
Endeavors about the New Testament, and hope shortly to give you an account of
what I have already finished concerning the Old. I have so perfect an assurance
of your Ladyships Goodness, that I am confident you will easily pardon this
Presumption, and accept of my Faithful Zeal, and Hearty Prayers to God, to
bestow upon you all those Blessings, which either your High Blood, or more
excellent Qualities may render you Capable of: and that you will permit me to
assume the Honor, with the hearty wish of this, and many prosperous New Years,
to own my self,

MADAM, Jan. 1. 1679/80. Your Ladyships most humble Servant, THO. STANHOPE.

THE PREFACE.
THis poor Book (long struggling under Difficulties) would willingly have showed
it self to the World in a larger Volume, and have given an account of the whole
Scripture in one piece; but through several failures, it comes out but in part,
i. e. the New Testament, which is now sent forth to try how it will be
Enter^ained. As to the promises of those that are Dead I have nothing to
mention; the feigned Endeavors of some now Living have sufficiently hindered
even this part of it. One Person assured me it should be extant the latter end
of Michaelmas Term, after that some time toward New Years tide, though nothing
of that promise was kept. However it is now got abroad, and if it takes (as I
hope it will) I shall be Encouraged to follow it with the other of the Old
Testament in a short time. Which done I shall have my End proposed, which is,
to be God's and his Church's Servant, as an helper to the Common Salvation of
Mankind. It may be necessary for Private Families. And some Judicious Persons
(particularly a most Learned Bishop) have approved it. Young People may hereby
be acquainted with the Holy Gospel, and instructed in the Book and Chapter
which they would have recourse unto. In case it be frowned upon, I have the
Confidence to believe none can blame me for my Design of doing Good. And I
thank God for that universal Charity which he has given me, that I heartily
desire the Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal welfare of every Man in the World;
whereunto I would contribute the utmost of my Endeavors, and for which, I
would spend my Dearest Blood. I have no more to add, but that I am not an Enemy
to any one upon Earth, I heartily wish the Peace and Prosperity of all true
Protestants; as the Friends of those who love our Lord Jesus; and to them I
subscribe my self an hearty Servant for his blessed Name's sake.

THO. STANHOPE.

THE NEW TESTAMENT.
P. WHy do you call this the New Testament?


D. Not only with respect to the Old, which preceded it, both in Order of
Nature and Time; but also in regard that it declares God's gracious fulfilling
the Conditions of the New Covenant (the Covenant of Grace, as the other was of
Works) so far as concerned him.


P. It seems then there were Two Covenants made with man.


D. There were so. The first (the Covenant of Works (before the Fall) the
Condition whereof was Perfect Obedience; the Second, a Covenant of Grace (after
the Fall) the Conditions whereof are Faith, and Sincere Obedience; the Mediator
of which Covenant is Jesus Christ, the Object of this New Testament.


P. How is this New Testament divided?


D. Into Four Parts. 1. The Evangelists ( i. e. their Writings.) 2. The Acts of
the Apostles. 3. The Canonical Epistles. 4. The Book of the Revelation.


P. How many are there of the Evangelists?


D. They (and the Gospels written by them) are Four, Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John.


P. Why call you those Books Gospels, and those the Four Evangelists?


D. The Greek Word (...) signifies a Good Message (and so the Evangelists are
Messengers of Good Tidings) that Name suting best with these Writings, which
contain an History of what our Lord Christ did and suffered for the Salvation
of Mankind. And the English, Gospel, is thought to be quasi Gods Spell, i.e.
Gods Charm or Power, whereby he draws men to Life Eternal; so the Apostle
explains it; I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; Minshew.
for it is the power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1, 16.


P. Why were there several of them, and the whole not contracted into one Book?


D. God in his infinite Wisdom did so order it; and more especially for Two
Reasons. 1. To confirm the Truths contained in these Gospels delivered by so
many persons. 2. That what one was not so exact in relating, the rest, or at
least some of them might supply.


P. How are these Evangelists (Prophetically) represented in the Old Testament?


D. Expositors do generally believe that they are shadowed out by the Four
Living Creatures in Ezekiel's Prophecy ( Chap. 1.10.) which had Four Faces;
one of a Man, the Second, of a Lion; the Third, of an Ox; and the Fourth, of
an Eagle.


P. Pray give me leave then to desire you would satisfy me why the several
Evangelists were thus represented; and how some small Differences in their
Writings are to be reconciled; and tell me what any one adds which is wanting
in the others.


D. This I shall willingly do, beginning with the First in Order.


S. MATTHEW.
P. HOw call you the first Gospel in the New Testament?


D. It is called the Gospel of S. Matthew, the Evangelist.


P. Why is it called by that Name?


D. Because it was written by a certain person called Matthew.


P. What account do we receive of that Person?


D. He is called by several Names: One (S. Mark, chap. 2.14.) calls him Levi
the Son of Alpheus; another (S. Luke, chap. 5.27.) calls him only Levi; but he
calls himself Matthew the Publican, (Matthew. 9.9.)


P. How came he concerned in writing this Gospel?


D. He was called by Christ from the Office of a Publican, to be one of his
Twelve Apostles, and inspired by the Holy Ghost to write this Gospel.


P. Which of the Four Living Creatures mentioned in Ezekiel's Vision,
represented S. Matthew?


D. That which had the Face of a man; because he begins with our Savior's
Genealogy.


P. How does he derive our Savior's Pedigree?


D. More generally, Abraham and David.


P. Why are these two Persons especially mentioned?


D. To assure us that Christ came not only from the Race of the Jews, of whom
Abraham was the Great Father; but likewise (according to the Prophecy, Genesis
49.10.) from the Tribe of Judah; of which David was, and also from the Princely
Line of that Tribe.


P. How is our Savior's Pedigree derived more particularly?


D. From Abraham and David, by succession all along till it terminated in
Joseph.


P. Who was that Joseph?


D. The Person (then Espoused) afterward Married to Mary our Savior's Mother.


P. But was Joseph, Christ's Father?


D. Reputedly, he was so among the Jews: but he had no Natural Father, being
conceived by the Operation of the Holy Ghost.


P. Was Joseph married to Mary before Christ was born?


D. He was only Espoused, according to the Custom of the Jews, a good while
after Christ's Conception; and Married a little before Christ was born, when
she was great with Child of him.


P. Was Mary's being with Child no discontent to Joseph?


D. Yes; so great an one, that he resolved to put her away (but privately,
because she should not be exposed to shame) till in a Dream he was satisfied by
an Angel of God to the contrary.


P. What was alleged by the Angel for his satisfaction?


D. That the Child within her was conceived of the Holy Ghost.


P. Why was his Conception and Birth ordered in this manner?


D. To fulfill Isaiah's Prophecy, That a Virgin should conceive and bear a Son.


P. What Name was given to this Child when he was born?


D. His Name (by the Angel's appointment) was called JESUS, because he should
save his People from their sins.


P. What Public Notice does this Evangelist give of JESUS's Birth being
declared to other Nations?


D. Wise men who came from the East to enquire after him, by the strange
Appearance of a New Star.


P. Under what Notion did they enquire for him?


D. As one that was born King of the Jews.


P. How did Herod ( who then Reigned over Judea) take this Enquiry?


D. It put him into a great affright; whereupon he sent for the Chief Priests
and Elders (supposing this was the MESSIAH) demanding of them, Where CHRIST
should be born?


P. What Answer did they give him?


D. An Answer according to the former Prophecy of Micah, That he should be
born in Bethlehem.


P. What course did Herod take for further satisfaction?


D. He sent the Wise Men to Bethlehem, to find out the Child, under pretense of
his own coming afterward to worship him.


P. How were those Wise Men guided thither?


D. The same Star was their Conductor, till they came to the very place where
the Child lay, and then it stood still.


P. Did they find'him as they were directed?


D. They found Him and His Mother with him.


P. How did they carry themselves toward him?


D. First they worshipped him, and then they presented him with an Offering of
Gold, Frar kincense and Myrrh.


P. Did those Wisemen return to Herod, as he desired?


D. No; for being warned of God in a Dream, they departed into their own
Country another way.


P. How did Herod take this Affront?


D. He resolved to destroy this Child; and to be sure of it, he slew all the
Children in Bethlehem, and the Coasts thereof, from two years old and under.


P. How then was this Babe secured?


D. An Angel had commanded his (reputed) Father Joseph to convey him into
Egypt, till notice was given for his Return; which was upon Herod's Death: and
then he was brought back to Nazareth a City of Galilee.


P. Did not John Baptist appear in the World about that time?


D. Yes: Preached in the Wilderness of Judea the Doctrine of Repentance, and
Baptized those that came unto him.


P. What kind of Man was John?


D. A man of a very Austere Life; for his Raiment was of Camels Hair, with a
Leathern Girdle about his Loins; and his Meat was Locusts and wild Honey.


P. By whom was Christ Baptized?


D. By John Baptist in Jordan.


P. Was any Signal Testimony given of him at his Baptism?


D. The greatest that ever was; for the Heavens were opened, the Spirit of God
descended upon him like a Dove, and God himself by open voice acknowledged him
to be his Well-beloved Son.


P. What happened unto Christ after his Baptism?


D. His Temptation in the Wilderness by the Devil, forty days, during which
time he did eat nothing; but at the end of them was an hungered.


P. How many Temptations did he meet with?


D. Three


P. Which was the first?


D. The Devil taking advantage of Christ's Hunger, Tempted him to turn Stones
into Bread.


P. What was the Second?


D. A Temptation to throw himself from a Pinnacle of the Temple, to show his
Divinity.


P. What was the Third?


D. A Temptation to fall down and worship Satan, upon promise to have all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, and the Glory of them given unto him.


P. How were all these Temptations repelled?


D. By several Places of Scripture fitted to each of them.


P. What was the Issue of all?


D. The Devil left him, and Angels came and Ministered unto him.


P. Whither did our Savior then remove?


D. He departed into Galilee, and dwelt in Capernaum.


P. Who were the first that Christ called to be his Disciples?


D. Two Brothers, Andrew and Peter.


P. Who were the next?


D. Two other Brothers, James and John the Sons of Zebedee.


P. Where did he find them all?


D. He found them following their Employment (as Fishers) by the Sea of Galilee.


P. Did not the People then begin to take notice of him?


D. Yes. His Fame was spread abroad by his Preaching, and Healing all manner of
Diseases.


P. What signal Testimony did he give of his excellent Preaching?


D.


P. Whereof does that Sermon principally consist?


D. It consists of Three Parts: of which I shall give you account in order.


P. What is the First?


D. Blessing pronounced to the Poor in Spirit, the Mourners, the Meek, those
that Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, the Merciful, the Pure in Heart,
the Peacemakers, and the Sufferers for Righteousness sake.


P. What is the Second Part of this Sermon?


D. A Confutation of several Erroneous Opinions of the Jewish Doctors, as to
sundry parts of God's Law, touching Murder, v. 21. Adultery, v. 28.
Divorcements, v. 31. False Swearing, v. 34. and Repaying of Injuries, to the
End of the Chapter


P. What is the Third Part of this Sermon?


D. Direction for the Performance of several Duties; as Almes-giving, v. 1.
Prayer, v. 5. (Christ there setting down his most Excellent Form, as a Pattern
for Prayer;) Fasting, v. 16. Dependence on God's Providence, v. 25, to the End
of the Chapter; and several other excellent things in the Seventh Chapter.


P. How was this Sermon approved?


D. So well, that he was extolled beyond the Scribes and Pharisees.


P. What happened after this Sermon was ended?


D. Several Miracles done by Christ, to be discoursed of in Order.


P. Which was the First?


D.


P. Which was the Next?


D. Healing the Centurion's Servant, who was sick of a Palsy, upon his
Master's coming and beseeching Christ to do it.


P. Which was the Third?


D. The Curing S. Peter's Wives Mother, who lay sick of a Fever, by the Touch
of his hand; and several others possessed with Devils.


P. What other Miracle is declared in this Chapter?


D. Calming the Sea, when his Disciples were in danger to be drowned, and
prayed for his assistance, which he gave them; asswaging the Tempest with a
Word of his Mouth.


P. What Effect had this Miracle?


D. His Disciples marvelled at it, wondering who he was to whom the Wind and the
Sea gave such ready Obedience.


P. What Miracle does this Evangelist next record?


D. The Casting out Devils out of Two men Possessed, in the Country of the
Gergesenes.


P. What became of those Devils?


D. At their Request, Christ suffered them to enter into an Herd of Swine
feeding thereabouts, who presently ran down a steep place into the Lake, and
perished in the Waters.


P. How was this Miracle entertained by the People of that Country?


D. They that kept the Swine fled, telling in their City what was done, and
they all came to see Jesus, and desired that he would depart from them.


P. Whither did he go from thence?


D. He went by Ship to his own City.


P. What Miracle did he work there?


D. He healed a man sick of the Palsy,


P. What happened upon this Miracle?


D. The Scribes hearing him say to the man, Thy Sins are forgiven thee, and
thinking he Blasphemed, to convince them of their Error, he bad him take up his
Bed and walk.


P. What was the next thing remarkable?


D. Christ's calling Matthew a Publican from the receipt of Custom, to follow
him.


P. How did Matthew entertain him?


D. With a great Feast in his own House where many Publicans and Sinners were
gathered together.


P. Was there no Exception taken at the thing?


D. Yes. The Pharisees quarrelled wit^ his Disciples about it.


P. What Answer did Christ make to them?


D. He declared the Reasonableness o^ what he dad done, by the End of his
Comin^ into the world, which was, not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance.


P. What other Cavil had the Pharisees against him?


D. That He and his Disciples did not fas^ as their Disciples and John
Baptist's Disc^ples did.


P. How did Christ excuse himself and h^^ Disciples in this Point?


D. By an Allusion to the Attendants u^ on a Marriage, who used not to mourn
whi^^ the Bridegroom was with them.


P. What might the meaning hereof be?


D. That he being the True Bridegroon his Disciples must rejoice while he
con^nued with them upon Earth; but when (...) should be taken away by Death,
then th^^ must be exercised with Fasting, and oth^^ Duties of Mortification.


P. How else was his Excuse made?


D. By New Pieces of Cloth not to be put upon Old Garments, nor New Wine into
Old Bottles.


P. Whither was Christ called from this Feast?


D. A Ruler of the Synagogue (called Jairus) having a Daughter very sick,
desired him to come and heal her.


P. Did any thing of Note happen in the way as he went to do this Cure?


D. Yes; for a Poor Woman having been troubled with an Issue of Blood Twelve
years, came behind him, and touched his Garment, whereby she was made whole.


P. In what condition was the Rulers Daughter when Christ came to her?


D. The People about her apprehended her to be dead.


P. Was she recovered from her Sickness or not?


D. She was recovered; for Christ took her by the Hand, and she was well.


P. What other Cures did he work?


D. He gave sight to Two Blind men, by ^ouching their Eyes; and Speech to one
that was Dumb.


P. What happened after these last Miraples?


D. Christ from among his Disciples, Twelve Apostles, whom he sent forth ^ot
only to Preach the Gospel, but to cast ^ut unclean Spirits, and to heal all
manner of Diseases.


P. What were the Names of those Twelve Apostles?


D. Peter, Andrew, James the Son of Zebedce, John his Brother, Philip,
Bartholomew, Thomas, Matthew, James the Son of Alpheus, Lebbeus (called
Thaddeus,) Simon the Canaanite, and Judas (afterward) the Traitor.


P. With what Charge did Christ send forth these Disciples?


D. Not to go among the Gentiles, but to the lost sheep of the House of Israel,


P. What Advice did he give them upon their going forth?


D. He taught them in what Meannes^ they should go, to testify their Humility
what Troubles they should endure, to encourage their Patience; and promised
then Blessings, to strengthen their Faith.


P. Was any Notice of these things give to John Baptist?


D. His Disciples gave him an Account o^ them; know he was indeed the True
Messiah?


P. What did John do to satisfy them?


D. He sent Two of them to Christ wit^ this very Question.


P. What Answer did they receive?


D. Christ bade them inform John of the Miracles he wrought; that the Blind
sa^^ the Deaf heard, the Dumb spoke, the L^pers were cleansed, the Lame walked,
t^^ Dead were raised, and the Poor had the G^spel Preached unto them.


P. What did our Savior then tell his Followers concerning John?


D. By several Similitudes he sets forth the Excellency of John; but withal,
that John came far short of him.


P. Of what did he then begin to discourse?


D. He upbraided the City (especially Capernaum) wherein his mighty Works had
been wrought.


P. How happened the next Quarrel betwixt Christ and the Pharisees?


D. About his Disciples plucking Ears of Corn as they went through the Field,
Hunger, it being on the Sabbath Day.


P. How did our Savior vindicate his Disciples?


D. By the Example of David, taking the Shewbread (in time of necessity) for
Himself and his Followers; and the Priests killing Sacrifices in the Temple on
that Day; Averring himself to be greater than the Temple, and Lord of the
Sabbath.


P. What Miracle followed after this Discourse?


D. The Healing a man possessed with a Devil who was both Blind and Dumb.


P. How did the Pharisees except against this Miracle?


D. They alleged that Christ did cast out Devils through the Prince of the
Devils.


P. How did Christ convince them to the contrary?


D. By an Argument that every House and Kingdom divided could not subsist; and
therefore Satan divided against himself, could not stand.


P. Did not Christ from hence take occasion for some further Discourse?


D. He did; and it was to acquaint them with the Sin ( i.e. the Blasphemy)
against the Holy Ghost, which was unpardonable; and to give them a Caution
against all idle and uncharitable words.


P. What did the Pharisees then require of him?


D. A Sign from Heaven.


P. Did he answer their Desire?


D. He did; but it was with a Reproof, giving them the Signs of Jonah and the
Queen of the South.


P. How lay the Reproof under these things?


D. That whereas the Ninevites repented at Jonah's Preaching, and the Queen of
the South came from far to hear Solomon's Wisdom; yet they would not be wrought
upon by him, who was Greater than either Jonah or Solomon.


P. What further Manifestations did Christ make of himself to the People.


D. By several Parables; Of the Sower and his Seed; Tares and Good Wheat; by
resembling the Kingdom of Heaven to a Grain of Mustard Seed; to Treasure hid in
a Field; to a Net which drew Fishes of all sorts out of the Sea.


P. How did these Parables and his other Instructions take?


D. The People wondered at his Wisdom, but were offended at him for the Meanness
of his Birth.


P. What Opinion had Herod of Christ?


D. Herod hearing of his Fame, John the Baptist (whom he had slain) risen from
the dead.


P. Upon what occasion did Herod slay John Baptist?


D. Herod long reproved by John for keeping Herodias, his Brother's Wife, shut
him up in prison; and at her Daughters Dancing to please him, swore to give her
what she requested; whereupon, she desiring John Baptist's Head, an Executioner
was employed to behead him in the Prison, and the Head was delivered to her in
a Charger.


P. What Kindness did John's Disciples show to their dead Master?


D. They buried his Body, and came to acquaint Jesus with what had happened.


P. How did Jesus then dispose of himself?


D. He removed from the place where he was into a Desert place; whither the
Multitude followed him, and there he healed their sick.


P. What Miracle did he work there?


D. He fed five Thousand Men beside Women and Children, with Five Loaves and
Two Fishes.


P. What remainder of Fragments was there to perfect the Miracle?


D. After they were all filled, there were taken up Twelve Baskets full of
Fragments.


P. Whither did Christ go after this?


D. He went into a Mountain to pray; and sent his Disciples in a Ship toward
the other side of the Water.


P. What kind of Passage had they?


D. A Storm arose, so that the Ship was tossed with Waves; and Christ appeared
unto them walking on the Sea, at which sight they were much affrighted.


P. What Comfort did they receive under this fright?


D. Christ comforted them with telling them who he was,


P. How would Peter be satisfied in the truth of that Relation?


D. He desired that Christ would command him to come unto him; and he
attempting to do so, was in danger of his Life, but that Christ took hold of
him to save him; and then the Storm ceased.


P. Where did they Land after the Storm was over?


D. In the Land of Genesaret; and there Christ healed several sick persons with
the Touch of his Garment.


P. Had the Pharisees any more Accusations against Christ's Disciples?


D. They accused them for eating Meat with unwashen Hands.


P. How did Christ rebuke this Challenge?


D. By telling them they insisted only upon a Tradition, and so out of the
Prophecy of Isaiah, charging them with Hypocrisy.


P. Was not this further illustrated?


D. Yes; By showing them that not the things which go into, but those which
come out of a man, defile him; which Parable he expounded to his Disciples.


P. To what Place did Christ then go?


D. To the Coasts of Tire and Sidon.


P. What Object of Charity did he there meet with?


D. A Canaanitish Woman cried to him for help on behalf of her Daughter, who
was grievously vexed with a Devil.


P. Did Christ heal her?


D. After several Discourses passed between them, the Woman still continuing
importunate; the Daughter was healed, and the Mothers Faith confirmed.


P. Whither went Jesus next?


D. To a Mountain nigh the Sea of Galilee.


P. What Remarkable things did he do there?


D. He healed several Distempered persons, and fed Four Thousand Men, besides
Women and Children, with Seven Loaves, and a few little Fishes.


P. What remained when the People had eaten?


D. Seven Baskets full of Fragments were taken up.


P. What Entertainment did Christ there meet with from his Opposers?


D. The Scribes and Pharisees tempted him for a Sign from Heaven, which he
refused; leaving them to the Sign of the Prophet Jonas, and taxing them with
Hypocrisy.


P. How did he hence take occasion to instruct his Disciples?


D. He cautioned them against the Doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadduces (under
the Notion of Leaven.)


P. What happened upon Christ's coming into the Coasts of Cesarea-Philippi.


D. Asking his Disciples what men thought of him; they told him, He was taken
for John Baptist, or Elias, or Jeremias, or one of the Prophets; but asking
their thoughts of him, Peter acknowledges him to be the Christ, the Son of the
Living God.


P. How did Christ take this Confession?


D. So well, that he pronounced Peter Blessed; gave him the Name of Peter, and
disposed the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to him (though not without the rest)
promising, that the Gates ( i. e. the Power) of Hell should not prevail against
his Church.


P. What further Discourse had Christ with his Disciples?


D. He declared unto them the Sufferings he was to undergo, his Death and
Resurrection; rebuking S. Peter for contradicting what he suffered; and taught
his Disciples the hard Duties of Self-denial, Suffering Afflictions, and
Renouncing the World.


P. By what especial Argument did he urge these Duties?


D. By the Excellency of the Soul above all that the World can afford.


P. What followed after this Discourse?


D. Christ's Transfiguration, six days after, before Peter, James and John.


P. What were the Circumstances attending that Transfiguration?


D. The Shining of his Face, the Whiteness of his Raiment, and the appearing of
Moses and Elias unto him.


P. What did S. Peter advise at this time?


D. That Three Tabernacles might be built, one for Christ, a second for Moses,
and a third for Elias.


P. Did those two continue long with Christ?


D. No; for a bright Cloud overshadowed them, and they were seen no more.


P. Was there any particular Declaration then given of Christ's Divinity?


D. There was a Voice heard out of the Cloud to own Christ as God's Beloved Son.


P. What Miracles did Christ do after his Transfiguration?


D. The first was Healing a man Lunatic; which his Disciples not being able to
do, He did it Himself.


P. What Discourse did he make upon this?


D. A Discourse (as before) of his Sufferings.


P. Whither did he go then?


D. To Capernaum?


P. What Miracle was wrought there?


D. The Tribute-gatherers coming, he ordered S. Peter to go to the Sea, and
take the first Fish that came up, in whose Mouth was found a Piece of Money,
which paid for them both.


P. What Lessons did our Savior then teach his Disciples?


D. The Lessons of Humility and Innocence, Little Children; of Inoffensiveness,
and Forgiving one another; urging this last by a Parable of a Master forgiving
his Servant a Great Debt at his Request, which Servant would not forgive his
Fellow Servants a Small Debt, when he was desired to do it; whereupon the First
Servant was punished by being cast into Prison.


P. What was the next Discourse of Note?


D. Concerning Divorces; Lawfulness of putting away Wives, permitted under the
Law.


P. How did Christ resolve the Question?


D. He told them the Original Institution of Marriage, which made it not
dissolvable; and that the Allowance of Moses was only for the hardness of the
Peoples Hearts; concluding there could be no Divorce but in case of Adultery.


P. What followed upon this;


D. Young Children were presented unto him, on whom he laid his hands, and
Bleffsed them.


P. What Visiters had he then?


D. One most remarkable; A young man coming to enquire what he should do to
have Eternal Life.


P. What Direction did Christ give him?


D. A Direction to keep the Commandments, which he named unto him.


P. Did the man observe this Direction?


D. He professed to have done it from his very youth.


P. What trial did Christ make of the truth of his Profession?


D. He gave him a particular Charge of selling his Estate, and giving it to the
poor, with a Promise of Treasure in Heaven.


P. Was this Charge well received?


D. No; the man went away sorrowful, having great Possessions, which he was
loath to part with.


P. What did our Savior draw from hence?


D. The Difficulty of a Rich man's being saved?


P. What Question did this occasion from the Disciples?


D. S. Peter asked what Reward himself and the rest of them should have, who
had forsaken all to follow him.


P. What Answer did Christ give to this Qnestion?


D. He promised them a Reward both in this and in another World.


P. Was there no Parable propounded upon this occasion?


D. There was the Parable of Resembing the Kingdom of Heaven to a Householder,
hiring Laborers into his Vineyard, at several hours of the day, and then
paying each man his Penny according to agreement.


P. Whither was our Savior's next Journey?


D. To Jerusalem; where in the way he again admonished his Disciples of the
Sufferings which should befall him to his Death, and the Certainty of his
Resurrection the Third day.


P. Whom did he meet with in the way?


D. The Mother of Zebedees Children coming to request him that her two Sons
might sit on his Right and Left hands in his Kingdom.


P. How did he answer her?


D. That they should suffer with him; but those Places must be disposed of
according to his Father's Designation.


P. Did not this vex the other Disciples?


D. Yes; They were angry at the Two Brethren for it.


P. How did Christ remove that Anger?


D. By teaching them all to be lowly minded, after his own example.


P. What particular Miracle was wrought this time.


D. Two Blind men sitting by the way side (upon their supplicating him) ha^
their Eyesight restored unto them.


P. What else happened?


D. At Bethpage near Jerusalem, he sen^ by a particular Token for a Colt, on
which he rode into Jerusalem, to fulfill a Prophecy ^f the Old Testament.


P. How was he entertained by the Com^any?


D. The Multitude spread their Garments, and strewed Branches in the way,
saluted ^im with loud proclamations of Hosannahs at his coming into the City.


P. What was his first Work in Jerusa^em?


D. An entering into the Temple, and casting out the Buyers and Sellers in it,
and there healing the Blind and the Lame.


P. How did the Chief Priests and Scribes take the Acclamations of joy which
the People made?


D. With so much indignation that they complained of them.


P. How was the Complaint silenced?


D. By Christ's alleging a place of Scripture ( Psalm. 8.2.) in the Peoples
vindication.


P. Whither went Christ from thence?


D. He went to lodge in Bethany.


P. What Miracle did he work there?


D. The next morning he cursed a fruitless Fig Tree, which Curse took effect;
for it presently withered away.


P. What Disputes happened about that that Time?


D. Several.


P. Which was the First?


D. A Dispute with the Chief Priests and Elders concerning John Baptist's
Baptism and Preaching, whether it was from He^ven or not, which Question Christ
put unt^ them, when they enquired into his Auth^rity.


P. What Answer did they give him?


D. They durst not delcare their Opinion concerning John, and he would not give
the^ an account of his Authority.


P. What was the Result of this?


D. It gave occasion for Two Parables one of Two Sons, the first pretending to
d^ his Fathers will, and not doing it; the other refusing to do it at first,
but doing it after wards.


P. What was the meaning of this Par^ble?


D. Christ compares the Jews with the^^ pretense to Religion of the first Son;
the Publicans and Sinners to the second; showing thereby, that these entered
into the Kingdom of Heaven sooner than the Jews.


P. What was the next Parable?


D. Of an Householder, who having planted a Vineyard, sent his servants to
receiv^ the Fruits, some of which the Husbandme^ beat, and killed others; at
last sending h^^ Son among them, they slew him, to mak^ the Inheritance their
own.


P. What was the meaning of this Par^ble?


D. Our Savior does hereby represen^ the hard usage which the Prophets had me^
with from the Jews; and likewise signifie^ what he expected at their hands;
whereupon would follow the taking Gods Ordi^ances from them.


P. How did this Parable relish with the ^ews?


D. They perceived he had spoken of them, and would have laid hands upon him,
^ut durst not for fear of the people.


P. What other Parable did he put ^orth?


D. One to the same purpose, of a King, Son, invited ^everal Guests, who
refusing to come, and ^^sing his Servants ill, were destroyed; and (...)
Command given to call in as many as the ^ervants could find, from the Highways
and Hedges.


P. What was the intent of this Parable?


D. It was to show the Rejection of the ^ews, and the Calling of the Gentiles.


P. What was the Second Dispute?


D. About paying Caesar's Tribute-Money; ^he Pharisees and Herodians resolving
to ^^y if by this way they could ensnare ^im.


P. How did he puzzle them by his Answer?


D. He appointed the Payment, showing was Caesar's Due, by having Caesar's
I^age and Superscription upon it; at which Answer they wondered, and left ^im.


P. What was the Third Dispute?


D. A Dispute about the Resurrection ^ith the Sadduces, which they denied.


P. How did they frame their Argument against it?


D. By an Instance out of the Law whi^^ commanded a Brother to take the
survivi^^ Widow of his Brother to Wife, for raisi^^ up Seed; and thereupon
alleging that sev^^ Brethren in order had taken one Woman they asked to which
of those Seven she shou^ belong at the Resurrection.


P. How did Christ refute this Argument?


D. By declaring their Mistake abo^^ Marriages in the other World; and
alledgin^ a Passage out of Exodus, where God ca^^ himself the God of Abraham,
Isaac an^ Jacob, who were all dead, but must ris^ again.


P. How was this Answer taken?


D. The whole Multitude did might^ applaud Christ for it.


P. What was the Fourth Dispute?


D. The Pharisees (desirous to silen^^ him) employed one to ask what was the
gre^^ Commandment.


P. How did Christ answer this Question?


D. He resolved the whole Law into T^^ Precepts; the Loving God, as the First,
an^ the Loving our Neighbor, as the Second.


P. What followed after this?


D. A Question which Christ asked the concerning the Messiah's being the Son ^^
David; and proving him to be so, when they could not answer it.


P. What did he take occasion thence to t^^^ his Disciples?


D. He gave them order to attend to the good Doctrine of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Ambition, their Hypocrisy and Cruelty in killing the Prophets of
God; bewailing the Conditon of Jerusalem upon that account.


P. What ground of Discourse did his Disciples give him at his going from the
Temple?


D. Upon their showing him those goodly Buildings, foretell the utter Desolation
of Jerusalem, and the End of the World.


P. What Duty did he urge thereupon?


D. The Duty of Watchfulness, for fear ^est that time should surprise them (and
^^us) unawares; promising a Blessing to those that do Watch, and denouncing a
Judgment against those that are negligent.


P. Did that Head of Discourse end so?


D. No; for Christ thereupon uttered Two Parables.


P. Which was the First?


D. The Parable of Ten Virgins going to ^eet the Bridegroom, Five wise, Five
^oolish; the wise took Oil with their Lamps, ^he foolish did not; who
afterward wanting, ^ould have borrowed of the wise; but they ^efused to lend;
whereupon going forth to ^uy, the Bridegroom came in the mean while, and those
who were ready, went to ^he Marriage, but the rest were shut out.


P. What does this Parable teach?


D. The necessity of having Grace at all times ready, that it may not be to
seek when it is to be used; lest at Christ's coming we be found unfit to be
received by him.


P. Which was the Second Parable?


D. A man Traveling abroad, gave several Talents to several Servants (some
more, some less) wherewith they should Trade for Advantage; Two doing so, were
rewarded; One neglecting, was punished, and his Talent given to him that had
the most.


P. What is the Design of this Parable?


D. It teaches us, That all the Gifts o^ God are to be well Husbanded; and
then he will both Increase and Reward them: but if we be careless, and bury
them in silence, he will take them from us, and punish u^ too.


P. What follows after these Parables?


D. A Description of the General Judgment, with the Eternal Blessing upon the
Righteous for their Works of Charity; with the Everlasting Curse upon the
wicked for their Incharitableness.


P. Was there any Conspiracy made by the Jews against Christ?


D. They laid a Design to apprehend an^ kill him.


P. What happened before they took him?


D. Bethany anointed him with very precious Ointment, whose goo^ work he
commended, though his Disciple spoke against it.


P. By whom was Christ betrayed?


D. By Judas Iscariot, one of his Disciples, who covenanted with the Chief
Priests to do it for Thirty Pieces of Silver.


P. What opportunity was offered for the effecting it?


D. Jesus according to his custom, keeping the Passover, did discover Judas his
Treachery unto him; and there the Occasion was taken.


P. What did Jesus at the end of the Pass-over-Supper?


D. He instituted his own Supper in Bread and Wine; and after the singing an
Hymn, went unto the Mount of Olives.


P. What did he there declare unto his Disciples?


D. Their Fear of suffering, which would be seen in forsaking him that night.


P. How was this taken?


D. Peter pretended a great deal of Courage, that though All should forsake
Christ, He would not; nay he would rather die with him than deny him: and the
rest asserted the same.


P. Whither did Christ then betake himself?


D. To Gethsemane; where choosing out Peter, James, and John to watch with him,
he went and PRAYED THREE TIMES for the removal of his Bitter Cup.


P. Did the Disciples Watch according to his bidding?


D. No. He found them asleep each time, at his return to them (for he had
withdrawn himself a little way from them.)


P. What followed shortly after these Prayers?


D. The coming of Judas, and a Multitude with him, having swords and staves for
their own defense.


P. What fign was given to know the person betrayed?


D. Judas had promised to come to him with a Kiss, whereupon Christ was
immediately apprehended.


P. Did his Disciples do nothing in order to his Rescue?


D. One of them (S. Peter) cut off a Servant's right ear who belonged to the
high Priest; whereupon Christ commanded the Sword to be sheathed again.


P. Whither was Jesus then carried?


D. To the Palace of Caiaphas the High Priest, where the Scribes and Pharisees
were assembled.


P. What became of Peter?


D. He followed afar off, and sat with the Servants to see the issue of the
Business.


P. How was Christ proceeded against?


D. By endeavoring to suborn False witnesses against him, to whose Testimony
he would answer nothing.


P. What did they do at length to condemn him?


D. The High Priest adjuring him to declare if he were the Christ, he confessed
it; which Confession they alleging to be Blasphemy, straightway he was
condemned to Death.


P. How did the Multitude then use him?


D. They spat in his face, buffetted him, and smote him with their hands.


P. What became of Peter all this while?


D. He being charged as one of Christ's Disciples, denied it three times, with
Oaths and Curses; after which (according to his Master's Prophecy) the Cock
crowed.


P. How did Peter take this?


D. Remembering the words of Christ, he went out and wept bitterly.


P. To whom was Christ carried from Caiaphas?


D. The Jews designing his Death, Pilate.


P. How did Judas speed after the betraying his Master?


D. Christ being condemned, Judas his guilty Conscience accused him; whereupon,
he confessed his Sin, brought again the Money he had received, and hanged
himself.


P. How did Christ behave himself before Pilate?


D. He would not Answer to the things alleged against him.


P. Did not Pilate use to show the Jews some particular Favor at the
Passover-time?


D. Yes. He used to release such a Prisoner as they should choose.


P. Why then was not Christ released?


D. Because the People chose Barabbas before him.


P. What warning had Pilate given him not to be concerned in Christ's Death?


D. His Wife sent him a Caution to the Judgment Seat where he sat, that he
should not meddle with him; because she had suffered many things in a Dream.


P. How did he declare his Innocence when Christ was to suffer?


D. He called for a Basin of Water, in which he washed his hands; asserting
himself innocent of his Blood.


P. How did the Jews take it upon themselves?


D. With a dreadful Imprecation: His Blood be on us and on our Children.


P. How then did they proceed against Christ?


D. He was scourged, stripped of his Robes, clothed in Scarlet, crowned with a
Crown of Thorns, and carried to Golgotha, with his Cross born before him.


P. What did they to him there?


D. They gave him Vinegar mingled with Drink, and Crucified him between Two
Thieves.


P. What Miracles happened at his Crucifixion?


D. A General Darkness over the Earth for three hours, the Vail of the Temple
rent, the Earth quaking, the Rock split in pieces, the Graves opening, and many
Bodies of the Saints arising.


P. How did this work upon the Centurion then in Command?


D. It extorted from him and those present, a Confession that Christ was the
Son of God.


P. Did no one beg his dead Body?


D. Yes; Joseph of Arimathea, one of Christ's Disciples privately, begged it of
Pilate.


P. How did he dispose of it?


D. Wrapping it in clean Linen, he laid it in his own new Tomb hewn out of a
Rock, and rolled a great stone to the door of the Sepulcher.


P. What care did the Scribes and Pharisees take that he should not rise again?


D. They desired of Pilate a Watch about the Sepulcher, lest his Disciples
should come by night and steal him away.


P. When, and in what manner did Christ rise?


D. Early on the First day of the Week, great Earthquake: The Angel of the Lord
rolling away the stone from the Sepulcher, and sitting upon it.


P. How was this Resurrection made known?


D. By the Angel, to those women who came to the Sepulcher, and found not his
Body.


P. What Influence had the Angel's Relation upon those Women?


D. They departed from the Sepulcher with fear and great joy, to carry these
Tidings to his Disciples.


P. Did not Christ himself appear to them?


D. Yes; He appeared in the way, and gave them order to appoint his Disciples
to meet him in Galilee.


P. How was this discovered in Jerusalem?


D. Some of the Watch came, and told the Chief Priests what was done.


P. How did the Chief Priests endeavor to conceal the truth of it?


D. By Bribing the Soldiers to report that his Disciples came in the night to
steal him away; which Report the Jews still believe.


P. Did Christ meet his Disciples according to his Appointment?


D. Yes; and there discoursed with them of his Almighty Power.


P. What particular Command did he give them at that time?


D. That they should go abroad Teaching and Baptizing in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; Instructing men to be obedient unto his Commands,
and then Comforted them with a Promise of his Presence to the End of the World.


The End of S. MATTHEW.
S. MARK.
P. HOw does the Gospel of S. MARK begin?


D. John's Preaching in the Wilderness, and Prophesying of our Savior Christ;
whereupon he is signified by Ezekiel's Lion.


P. What does this Gospel contain?


D. It is almost an Abridgment of the former, with some few Additions, ( six in
Number) now only necessary to be taken notice of.


P. What is the first considerable Addition?


D. John Baptist's being slain by Herod; where several Circumstances are
mentioned, which the other Evangelists take no notice of.


P. What be those Circumstances;


D. The great Opinion which Herod had of John, as a just man and an holy: The
time when his Death happened, when Herod upon his Birthday made a Feast to the
great persons of his Kingdom; and the particular Direction Herodias gave her
Daughter of asking John Baptist's Head.


P. What is the Second Addition?


D. The Miracle which Christ (...) upon a man that was Deaf, and (...)
^^pediment in his Speech, by putting his (...) into the man's Ears, spitting
and touching his Tongue.


P. What is the Third Addition?


D. Bethsaida who was Blind.


P. How was he cured?


D. Christ spat upon his Eyes, whereupon he saw men as Trees, walking; and
putting his Hands upon them again, the sight was perfectly restored.


P. What Charge did Christ then give him?


D. Neither to go into the Town, nor to tell it in the Town.


P. What is the Fourth Addition?


D. Rebuke to his Apostle John, upon forbidding a man to cast out Devils in
Christ's Name, because he was not of their Company: Assuring him that whosoever
was not against Christ was on his part.


P. What is the Fifth Addition?


D. particular Account of the Scribe who enquired of Christ, which was the
First and Great Commandment.


P. What is there considerable in this Evangelist's Relation of the Story?


D. The Approbation which the Scribe gave to our Savior's Answer;
acknowledging for a Truth the Unity of the Godhead; that the Love of God and
our Neighbor was beyond all Offerings and Sacrifices: whereupon Christ for his
discreet Reply, took a Love to him, and declared that he was not far from the
Kingdom of God.


P. What is the Sixth Addition?


D.


P. What is the Particular Matter?


D. The Comfort especially sent to Peter by Name (who had before denied him)
concerning his Resurrection; and his first appearance to Mary Magdalen, a great
Sinner.


P. What are the General Things?


D. His Disciples not believing their Master's Resurrection when it was told
them by Mary, nor by Two walking together; he appeared to them All; upbraiding
them with Unbelief; after which, He Commissionated them to go forth Preaching
to All Nations; enduing them with Gifts for their Office, and Power against
unclean Spirits: after which, he gave them an Account of his Ascension into
Heaven.


The End of S. MARK.
S. LUKE.
P. HOw does S. LVKE begin his Gospel?


D. With an Account of John Baptist, who was our Savior's Forerunner, and
declared him to be the MESSIAH.


P. What Account is given of him?


D. An Account of his Parentage, miraculous Conception and Birth; upon which
score he is likened to Ezekiel's Ox.


P. Who were John Baptist's Parents?


D. Zacharias and Elizabeth, both of the Tribe of Levi; and Zacharias a Priest,
of the Order of Abias.


P. What Character is given of them?


D. That they were both Righteous, walking blamelesly before the Lord.


P. What is declared concerning his Conception and Birth?


D. The Miraculousness of them, by reason of his Parents Age, and the Discovery
of that Miracle by an Angel.


P. Of what Age were his Parents?


D. They were both stricken in years, and Elizabeth had no Child.


P. To whom was the Discovery made of John Baptist's Birth?


D. To Zacharias, who (according to his office) was then to burn Incense in the
Temple.


P. Under what Notion was this Discovery made?


D. That his Prayers being heard, his Wife should bear a Son, who was appointed
an Instrument of converting many Jews unto God.


P. Who made this Discovery?


D. The Angel Gabriel.


P. How did Zacharias entertain this Message?


D. with much Unbelief; for which he was punished by being stricken dumb; and
so to continue till the accomplishment of that Message; to the admiration of
the People who waited for him upon his long stay in the Temple.


P. What was the next Errand whereupon this Angel was employed?


D. An Errand to the Blessed Virgin Mary, to acquaint her that she should be
the MOTHER of our Savior, by the miraculous power of the Holy Ghost, because
she had never known man.


P. What particular Taken was given to confirm her Faith herein?


D. An Account of her Cousin Elizabeth's having conceived John the Baptist
about six Months before, or thereabouts.


P. What course did the Virgin Mary take to be further satisfied in the truth
of this Relation.


D. She went to her Cousin Elizabeth; upon whose Visit the Child leaped in
Elizabeth's Womb for joy; and she acknowledged Mary as the Mother of her (and
our) Lord; pronouncing a Blessing upon her for her Faith.


P. How did Mary entertain this Salutation?


D. With her Magnificat, a Song of Praise.


P. Did Elizabeth bear a Son according to this Prediction?


D. She did.


P. What was his Name?


D. His Name was called JOHN.


P. How came he be so called?


D. His Friends would have Named him Zacharias, after his Father; but his
Mother called him John: which Name (upon their Dislike) was confirmed by his
Father's writing it, though he could not speak.


P. Was his Father's Speech restored unto him?


D. Yes; for immediately after these Signs made, he spoke plainly.


P. What was the first use he made of his Tongue?


D. The Blessing God in his Benedictus, or Song of Praise.


P. At what time happened our Savior's Birth?


D. In the Days of Augustus Caesar, when he set forth a Decree to Tax all
Persons under his Government.


P. Where was Christ born?


D. In Bethlehem, according to the Prophesies which went of him.


P. How came he to be born there?


D. Because Joseph (his Reputed Father) went with Mary his Mother thither to
obey Caesar's Command, near the time when she was to be Delivered.


P. Where was he laid upon his Birth?


D. He was wrapped in Swadling-cloaths, and laid in a Manger, in the Stable,
because there was no room for his Parents in the Inn.


P. To whom was the first Declaration of his Birth made?


D. To Shepherds in the Field, who were watching their Flocks by Night.


P. By whom was it made?


D. By an Angel of God; with a Sign where and how they should find him.


P. How was this Message accompanied?


D. With a Divine Anthem, sung by the Heavenly Host.


P. Did the Shepherds find the Relation given them to be true?


D. Yes; for according to the Command, they made Enquiry, going to Bethlehem,
and finding it to be as the Angel had told them, they noised it abroad.


P. Did Christ after his Birth submit to the Ordinances of the Law?


D. Yes; for upon the Eighth day he was Circumcised, and called Jesus; and his
Mother at the appointed time was Purified in the Temple, presenting her Son
there unto the Lord according to the Law; and offering what the Law required.


P. Who was then to meet with them in the Temple?


D. Simeon, an Holy man; who (having a Divine Revelation that he should not die
till he had seen Christ in the Flesh) came at that time, by the Spirit, into
the Temple.


P. How did Simeon entertain this sight?


D. He took the Child (JESUS) in his Arms, blessed God with a Song (his Nunc
Dimittis) and Prophesied of that Child's Sufferings.


P. Whom else did they there meet with?


D. Anna a Prophetess, a constant Attender in the Temple, of almost an Hundred
Years old; who thanked God, and Prophesied of the Redemption which that Child
should work.


P. Whither did JESUS his Parents go after these things were done?


D. To Nazareth, the place of their Abode.


P. At what time was Christ publicly taken notice of?


D. When at Twelve Years old, being in Jerusalem, at the Feast of the Passover,
he went into the Temple, and Disputed with the Doctors.


P. When did John Baptist begin to Preach and Baptize?


D. In the Fifteenth Year of Tiberius Caesar.


P. What became of him afterward?


D. He was cast into Prison by Herod, whom he had reproved for Uncleanness with
Herodias his Brother Philip's Wife.


P. Of what Age was Christ when he was Baptized, and began to Preach?


D. About Thirty years of Age.


P. What other things are remarkable in this Gospel, which are not found in the
Rest?


D. Several things, which shall be noted as they come in order.


P. What is the First?


D. Christ's Preaching at Nazareth (where he had been brought up) upon a
passage of the Prophet Isaiah; fulfilled in himself: and the effect that Sermon
had upon the People.


P. What was that Effect?


D. In some it wrought an Admiration; in others so much Wrath that they thrust
him out of the Synagogue, and would have thrown him headlong down the Brow of
the Hill (whereon their City was built) had he not miraculously escaped from
them.


P. What was the Second?


D. The Miracle by the Lake of Genesareth; where entering into Simon's Ship,
toiled all the night for Fish, and catched nothing, Christ commanded him to
launch out, and that the Net should be cast out for a Draught; whereupon such a
multitude of Fishes were taken, that the Nets brake, and that Ship with another
were so filled, that they both began to sink.


P. What influence had this Miracle upon Peter and his Partners?


D. They were astonished at the sight; and Peter in an Ecstasy, desired Christ
to depart from him, for he was a sinful man.


P. How did Christ comfort all of them?


D. With an Assurance that (as Spiritual Fishers) they should after that time
catch men: and then they followed him.


P. What was the Third Thing considerable?


D. After a Repetition of his Sermon (in short) mentioned by S. Matthew, Naim,
who was upon carrying forth to be buried; comforting his Mother, and touching
the Bier; upon which Touch, the young man arose alive.


P. What was the Fourth Thing?


D. The Story of Mary Magdalen in a Pharisees House, washing Christ's Feet with
her Tears, wiping them with the Hairs of her Head, kissing and anointing them
with Ointment.


P. What use did Christ make hereof in his Discourse?


D. He reproved the Pharisee (in whose House he was) for a Miss-conceit of his
suffering this from so great a Sinner, by a Parable of Two Debtors, one owing
little, the other much, and both forgiven; since he to whom much was forgiven
would love most; and she having much forgiven her, did this to express the
Greatness of her Affection.


P. What follows next in course?


D. An Account of our Savior's going to Jerusalem, Village of the Samaritans,
where they would not receive him, he denied the request of James and John,
about calling for Fire from Heaven to consume them (after the example of Elias)
teaching them that the Design of the Gospel was not to destroy, but to save
men's Lives.


P. What comes in order after this?


D. The Lawyer's tempting Christ upon the account of the Commandments,
Neighbor.


P. How did Christ explain this unto him?


D. By the Parable of a man Traveling from Jerusalem to Jericho, who was
stripped and left wounded by Thieves; whom a Priest and Levite passed by; but a
courteous Samaritan took upon his Beast, carried to an Inn, bound up his
Wounds, and paid his Charges.


P. How was this Applied?


D. Christ thereupon asked the Lawyer which of these Three was the Man's
Neighbor; upon whose Answer [He that showed Mercy] Christ directed him to do
accordingly.


P. What ensued hereupon?


D. The Entertainment which Christ had in Martha's House; whom he commended for
welcoming him, but her Sister Mary much more, for hearing his Word, and so
choosing the better part.


P. To what does our Savior then proceed?


D. Upon the Request of his Disciples, who desired he would teach them to pray,
as John taught his Disciples, he gave them [His most excellent Prayer] not only
as a Pattern of Prayer, but as a Form of Prayer, teaching them to say, Our
Father, etc.


P. But what particularly did he tell them after the recital of this Prayer?


D. The necessity of being importunate in Prayer, by the Parable of a man in
need, to supply a Friend, coming to borrow some Loaves, and gaining them upon
the account of his earnestness; showing that in the same manner God will deal
with us.


P. What occasion did Christ take to dissuade his Followers from
worldly-mindedness?


D. He did it upon the account of the Request of a man entreating that he would
divide the Inheritance between him and his Brother; in which dealing he
acknowledged himself to be no Judge.


P. What particular Argument did he use upon that occasion?


D. To beware of Covetousness; because a man's Life consists not in the
abundance of the things which he possesses.


P. How did he urge this?


D. By a Parable, and by Reasons.


P. What was the Parable?


D. Of a Rich man whose Grounds bringing forth plentifully, he resolved to
build greater Barns for the bestowing his Fruits, and promised himself a great
deal of Pleasure, having Goods laid up for many years; but that very night God
took his Soul from him.


P. What Application did Christ make of this Parable?


D. The Application is ( so, i. e. a Fool) is every one that lays up Treasure
for himself, and is not rich toward God.


P. What were the Reasons?


D. Several; partly drawn from a Consideration of the Inferior Creatures,
Ravens, and Lillies, for whom God provided; partly from God's knowing our need
of Outward things: but especially from a Consideration of the Heavenly Kingdom
which he would give us, and consequently that we should not want any Necessary
Outward Blessing.


P. To what Head did Christ then turn his Discourse?


D. To the Doctrine of Repentance, Galileans, whose Blood Pilate mingled with
their Sacrifices, and the Eighteen slain by the Tower of Siloam's falling upon
them.


P. Wherein lay the strength of this Argument?


D. That men should not think the persons upon whom those Judgments fell, to be
extraordinary Sinners; but that without Repentance all should perish.


P. What particular Miracle happened after this Doctrine delivered?


D. The Curing of a Woman of an Eighteen years Infirmity, by his Word, and
laying his Hands upon her.


P. How was this Miracle taken?


D. The Ruler of the Synagogue was angry, and chode with the Woman, because it
was done on the Sabbath Day.


P. What Answer did Christ make to this Rebuke?


D. He taxed the Ruler's Hypocrisy by an Argument of doing Works of Necessity
to an Ox or an Ass; that this work of Charity was justifiable on that day, to
a Daughter of Abraham.


P. What was his next Discourse?


D. Upon a Question asked, showing the Fewness of those that should be saved;
that men should strive for the Kingdom of God.


P. What was hereupon urged against him?


D. A Relation of Herod's Design to kill him, that he might be fearful.


P. What Miracle did he then do?


D. He healed a man of a Dropsy on the Sabbath; for which he gave those
Reasons which the Pharisees were not able to answer.


P. What Parable did he then speak to them?


D. Being at a Feast, to retrench their Ambition, and engage them to Humility,
he propounded the Parable of Indecency in men's choosing the uppermost Seats in
the Room, lest they should be desired to sit lower; but rather the lowest, that
they might be exalted higher.


P. What especial Direction did he give to the Inviter?


D. That when he made a Feast, he should not choose his Rich Friends and
Neighbors, but the Poor and Impotent, to assure his Reward at the Resurrection.


P. What great Duty did he then urge upon All that would be his Disciples?


D. The Duty of Self-Denial; to quit all their Interests for him.


P. How was it urged?


D. By proposal of a serious Consideration how they undertake his Service, in
allusion to a Man's building a Tower, who who would first compute the Charge,
lest he should be laughed at for his Enterprise; and by one King's making War
against another of double strength, who would certainly overcome him.


P. What occasion was given to Christ for his next Parables?


D. The Publicans and Sinners coming to hear him;


P. What Parables did he then make use of?


D. Four. The First was indeed Two in One: That of the lost sheep; over which,
the Owner, when he finds it, rejoices more than over the other Ninety nine
(when he had an Hundred:) and of the Woman's lost Piece of Silver, over which
(when found) she joyeth more than over the others which had not been lost at
all.


P. What was the Second Parable?


D. Of a Prodigal Son; who having wasted his Portion in Riotous Living,
returned to his Father, and was kindly received by him; at which, his Envious
Brother being angry, the Father pacified him with a Declaration of his
Brother's sad condition, the Bettering whereof, was a Joy unto him.


P. What was the Third Parable, and to whom spoken?


D. It was spoken particularly to his Disciples; Steward, who having wasted his
Master's Goods, and being accused for doing so, endeavored to work Favor for
himself with the Debtors, by bringing them to Easier Terms.


P. What Application did Christ make of this Parable?


D. Partly to inform them, That the Children of this World are wiser in their
generation than the Children of Light; and partly to teach us that we should
make to our selves Friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness.


P. What was the Fourth Parable?


D. The Historical Parable of the Rich man, and Lazarus the Beggar.


P. What is the Substance of that Parable?


D. That the Rich man being sumptuously arrayed, and deliciously fed every day,
had a poor man came begging to his Door, to whom he denied the Crumbs from his
Table; the Dogs licking his Sores; but the Beggar dying, was carried by Angels
into Abraham's Bosom; the Rich man dying, was buried, and went to Hell.


P. What then happened to this rich man?


D. Being in Torments, he lift up his Eyes, and seeing Lazarus in Abraham's
Bosom, he desired a drop of Water to cool his Tongue, because he was tormented
in Flames.


P. Was his Petition granted?


D. No. Because that rich man had received Blessings in this Life; for the
missimprovement whereof, he was then tormented.


P. What was his next Request?


D. That Lazarus might be sent to his five Brethren, lest they should come to
the same place of Torment where he was.


P. What Argument did he use for the obtaining his Desire?


D. That though Abraham told him they had the Scriptures, yet a Message
delivered by one from the Dead, might work more upon them.


P. Was this Request of his granted?


D. It was not, Abraham assuring him, That if they believed not the Scriptures,
they would not believe the Relation of One from the Dead.


P. What Direction did Christ then give to his Disciples?


D. A Direction to avoid Malice against their Brethren,


P. What Miracle followed upon this?


D. The Cleansing Ten Lepers.


P. What was considerable in this Miracle?


D. That though Ten were cleansed, yet there was but One that gave Thanks to
God for his Cure; and he was a Samaritan.


P. What other Discourse happened?


D. Upon the Pharisees Question, when the Kingdom of God should come, Christ
admonished his Disciples against Security; from the Instance of the Old World,
in the Days of Noah, destroyed with a Flood; and the People of Sodom, in the
Days of Lot, destroyed with Fire and Brimstone.


P. What other Duty did Christ teach his Disciples?


D. The Duty of Fervent and Importunate Prayer.


P. How did he teach it?


D. By the Parable of an Unjust Judge, who was wrought upon by the importunity
of a poor Widow, to revenge her of her Adversary.


P. How did Christ apply this Parable?


D. That if a Man could thus be prevailed with, much more would God be so, to
take care of his Elect.


P. What else was taught them?


D. The shaking off all Self-Confidence?


P. In what manner was this done?


D. By the Parable of a Pharisee and Publican going to Pray in the Temple; the
Pharisee boasting of his good Deeds; but the Publican humbly confessing his
sins; whereupon He was justified, but the Pharisee was not.


P. What person do we read of that next entertained Christ?


D. Zacheus the Publican.


P. How did he manifest his inclination to entertain him?


D. Being Low of Stature, he climbed into a Sycamore-Tree to see him, as he
passed along.


P. Was this kindly taken by our Savior?


D. So kindly, that espying him in the Tree, he called him to come down, and
proffered to be a Guest at his House.


P. What Repentance did Zacheus then show for his former sins?


D. Not only the Receiving of Christ joyfully, but declaring his Readiness to
give Half of his Goods to the Poor, and restoring Fourfold to any one whom he
had wronged by false Accusation.


P. What Compassion did Christ show to Jerusalem, whither he was then going?


D. No sooner did he see the City, but he wept, lamenting the Desolation which
should come upon it.


P. What Particulars are here recorded concerning Christ's Passion?


D. The Exhortation which he gave to his Followers, weep for him, but
themselves; the Praying for his Enemies; and the Conversion of the Penitent
Malefactor, who justified Christ's Innocence when he died with him.


P. What followed after his Fassion, which is not elsewhere declared?


D. His Discoursing with the Two Disciples going to Emaus, known unto them in
Eating with them.


P. Did he not likewise discover himself to the rest of the Disciples?


D. Yes; for he appeared to them when they were together; making them to feel
his Body; and Eating in their presence.


P. Did he not at that time give them some Promise?


D. He gave them the Promise of the Holy Ghost's being sent, commanding them to
stay at Jerusalem till that Promise was fulfilled.


P. What was there remarkable in Christ's Ascension?


D. That leading his Disciples as far as Bethany, he Blessed them, and while he
did so, was carried from them into Heaven.


P. What did the Disciples do after his Ascension?


D. They worshipped him; returning to Jerusalem with great Joy; continuing in
the Temple, and praising God.


The End of S. LUKE.
S. JOHN.
Who was the Writer of this Gospel?

D. S. JOHN, Christ's Beloved Disciple.


P. Does he write of the same things with the other Evangelists?


D. No; for his principal Business being to convince those of his time
concerning Christ's Divinity, he purposely relates such things as gave the most
evident Proofs of it; whereupon he is compared to Ezekiel's Eagle.


P. What does S. John 's First Chapter contain?


D. A Declaration of Christ's Divinity, 1. his Humanity, V. 14. His Office, of
being the Light of the World, V. 9. The Testimony given of him by John Baptist;
the Calling of S. Andrew and S. Peter, Philip and Nathanael.


P. What is the first Miracle of which this Evangelist speaks?


D. The turning Water into Wine at a Marriage in Cana in Galilee, First of all
the Miracles he wrought.


P. How did he next discover himself?


D. By going into the Temple at the Passover, and driving out the Sellers of
Sheep and Oxen, with a Scourge of small Cords.


P. What notice did the Jews then take of him?


D. They required a Sign from him to show his Authority.


P. What Sign did he give them?


D. The Sign of his own Passion and Resurrection after three Days, with
allusion to the Destroying the Temple (meaning the Temple of his Body) which he
in that time would rear again.


P. What Favor did he gain with the People?


D. Many Believed on him upon the Account of his Miracles.


P. Who is particularly mentioned?


D. Nicodemus, Jewish Rulers, who came by night to discourse with Christ.


P. In what things did Christ principally instruct him?


D. In the necessity of Regeneration, Salvation by Faith in Him, the
unexpressible Love of God in sending Christ into the World; and the great
ground of Condemnation by Unbelief.


P. What Account did John Baptist give of Christ?


D. Some of his Disciples acquainting their Master what Followers Christ had
gained, John told them Who he was, and how he should increase.


P. Whither did Christ then take his Journey?


D. Out of Judea into Galilee; Sychar, a City of Samaria, where Jacob's Well
was.


P. What happened there?


D. A Discourse which he had with a Samaritan Woman.


P. Upon what occasion did this Discourse begin?


D. Upon her coming to that Well to draw Water, he instructs her about the
Water of Life; telling her likewise what her Conversation was in living with a
Man who was not her Husband.


P. What thoughts had the Woman of him upon this Relation?


D. She apprehends him to be a Prophet.


P. How did his Disciples take this Discourse?


D. They having been employed about buying Meat in the City, were surprised at
their return, to see Christ and the Woman talking together.


P. What way did this Woman take to make Christ more known?


D. She divulged him to the men of the City, as one that had told her all
things she had done; whereupon the People went out to see him, and by his
Discourse with them, many believed on him.


P. What is the Second Miracle mentioned?


D. The Healing a Nobleman's Son at Capernaum, who was sick of a Fever.


P. How was it known that Christ cured him?


D. Because the Father of the Child desiring this Favor from Christ, had his
promise for the Cure; and by the Relation of his own Servants, at the very hour
when the Promise was made, the Fever left him.


P. What is the next Miracle recorded by this Evangelist?


D. The Curing a Lame man,


P. Upon what occasion was this Miracle wrought?


D. Christ coming to one of the Solemn Feasts at Jerusalem, saw him lying at
the Pool of Bethesda, and there Cured him.


P. Why did the man lie there?


D. Because an Angel coming at such a time, moved the Water, and gave it such a
virtue, that whosoever first stepped in, was cured.


P. When was this Cure wrought?


D. On the Sabbath Day.


P. What happened hereupon?


D. Two things. 1. The Jews chiding with the man for being healed on the
Sabbath. 2. Their endeavoring to kill Christ for healing on that Day.


P. What Answer did Christ make to justify himself?


D. Besides his solemn Reasoning to their Cavils, he plainly proves himself to
be the Messiah, appealing to the Testimony of John Baptist, V. 33. To the
Miracles which he wrought, V. 36. To the Voice of his Father, owning him, V.
37. and to the Scriptures; V. 39. Referring them to Moses, in whom they so much
trusted.


P. Does not this Evangelist mention the Miracle of the Loaves and Fishes?


D. Yes; Barley Loaves; and that the Miracle was wrought at the Sea of Tiberias.


P. What followed upon this Miracle?


D. The Peoples Resolution to make him King; whereupon he departed to the other
side of the Sea.


P. Did any thing befall the Disciples as they crossed the Seas?


D. They being got into another Ship by themselves, and being also in Danger,
because it was dark, were very much afraid; till Christ made himself known unto
them, and so was received into their Ship.


P. How was it with them when they came to Land?


D. The People which had seen the former Miracle, following him, he took
occasion from thence to discourse with them about the true Living Bread, which
was Himself.


P. How did this Discourse take?


D. It made a great many of his Followers depart from him, because he spoke of
his Death, and Ascension into Heaven.


P. Where do we next meet with Christ?


D. At Jerusalem, where he made another excellent Speech to the People.


P. What Influence had this Speech upon them?


D. It made many persons acknowledge him to be the Christ.


P. Did the Pharisees take this well?


D. No. For they then sent Officers to apprehend him; who being much affected
with his Words, returned without him; which occasioned a great Debate.


P. What Project had they then against Christ?


D. They brought to him a Woman taken in Adultery, and setting her before him,


P. Did Christ pronounce any sentence against her?


D. No. He writing upon the ground, that whosoever was without sin, should cast
the first stone at her ( stoning being the usual Death for such Offenders) all
her Accusers departed; and they being gone, he dismissed her with a Charge to
[SIN NO MORE.]


P. What arose in controversy upon this Dismission?


D. A long Discourse between Him and the Jews, till at length in Anger they
designed to stone him; which he prevented by hiding himself, and passing
through the midst of them.


P. What further proof did Christ give of his Divinity?


D. The curing a man blind from his Birth, Eyes in the Pool of Siloam, after he
had anointed those Eyes with Clay, made of Spittle.


P. Did not this make the Neighbors of that man to wonder?


D. Yes. Whereupon the man told them who had recovered him of his Blindness.


P. How did the Pharisees take this Miracle?


D. They took the man into examination, and found fault with him for being
healed on the Sabbath Day.


P. How were they satisfied in the truth of the Miracle?


D. Not upon the man's Relation only, till they had called his Parents, who
asserted that he was their Blind Son.


P. What fell out upon that Miracle?


D. A Discourse between the Pharisees and the man that was cured; whereupon
they excommunicated him, for defending Christ in his Cure.


P. Did any injury happen to the man by this Sentence?


D. No; for Christ hearing of it, did thereupon discover himself to the man,
that he was the True Messiah; and the man becoming one of his Disciples, Christ
entertained his Hearers with several Speeches.


P. What was the First of those Speeches?


D. A short Account of his Coming into the World for Judgment, and convincing
them of wilful Blindness.


P. What was the next?


D. A Parable of the Good Shepherd, Sheep, which the Hireling would not do.


P. What did he mean by this Parable?


D. That all Pretenders to the Messiah-ship before Himself, were no better than
Hirelings (men led by worldly Principles) but He was the True Shepherd (or
Messiah.)


P. Had this Parable no further reach than only with respect to the Jews?


D. Yes; It related also to the Gentiles; because he speaks of the other Sheep
which he must bring into his Fold; prophesying of his Resurrection that should
be the means of bringing both Jews and Gentiles together.


P. What effect had these Speeches upon the People?


D. There was a Division; part of the People adhering unto, part dissenting
from him.


P. At what time did this happen?


D. At the Feast of the Temples Dedication, when it was Winter.


P. What Question did the Jews then ask him?


D. Whether he was the Christ or no?


P. What Answer did he give them?


D. Declaring his Miracles, he asserted himself to be One with the Father.


P. How did the Jews take that?


D. They threatened to stone him, till he proved the Reasonableness of his
Discourse by a Quotation out of the Old Testament, which he argued to his own
Advantage.


P. After Christ's escape from them, whither did he go?


D. To the other side of Jordan, where John had Baptized, and to which place
many of the Jews resorted to visit him.


P. What Acceptance had these Speeches at the last?


D. Different among the Jews; for some derided, and others believed on him, by
reason of the Miracle; till at last there was an attempt to stone him.


P. What Evidence did he receive from those Jews that he was the Messiah.


D. They were so far convinced, as to acknowledge that though John did no
Miracle, yet whatsoever John had said of him, was true; whereupon many believed
on him.


P. What Miracle do we find recorded after these Speeches?


D. The raising Lazarus out of the Grave.


P. What Circumstances attended this Miracle?


D. Several: There being an exact Historical Narration of it.


P. Pray declare the Particulars from the beginning.


D. It begins with the Account of Lazarus his being sick, who was beloved of
Christ (to whom his Sisters sent word of his Illness) and then proceeds to his
Death.


P. What notice did Christ take when he heard that Lazarus was sick?


D. It is said, that upon hearing thereof, he abode two days in the place where
he was, before he went to visit Lazarus, for the Glory of his Majesty; and then
he told his Disciples that Lazarus was dead.


P. How did Christ then dispose of himself?


D. He visited Martha ( Lazarus his Sister) and comforted her with hope of her
Brother's Resurrection; but she (and her Sister Mary) not contented therewith,
after he had wept over Lazarus his Grave, He raised him from the dead, by the
word of his Mouth, when he had been four Days buried.


P. How did Lazarus arise?


D. With his Grave-cloaths about him.


P. How did this Miracle work upon the Jews?


D. Some believed; but others made it matter of their Discourse to the
Pharisees, for the rendering him odious, lest by his means the Romans should
increase their Power.


P. What followed upon this Information given by those Jews?


D. A Consultation was held to put Christ to Death (and not only Him, but
Lazarus also) whereupon they sought for him at the Feast of the Passover.


P. Who gave Counsel for the doing of this?


D. Caiaphas the High Priest; alleging that it was more expedient one man
should die, than that the whole Nation should suffer.


P. Whither did Christ then go?


D. Unto a City called Ephraim, near the Wilderness of Judea.


P. How did Christ manifest himself at the Passover?


D. Greeks desiring to see him, which they did by the Interest of Andrew and
Philip, heard his Discourse, and a Witness was given to him by a voice from
Heaven.


P. Did this work upon them?


D. No. They still persisted in Unbelief; whereupon he testified against them.


P. What signal favor did Christ show to the Disciples before his suffering?


D. He took a Basin of water ( after Supper) and girding himself with a Towel,
washed their feet, to teach them Humility and Condescension one toward another.


P. Did he then give them any particular Command?


D. Yes; the Command of Mutual Love, whereby they might testify to the World
their being his true Disciples.


P. How did he conclude all his former Sayings and Miracles?


D. Farewell Sermon; exhorting them to Piety, Charity, Fruitfulness and
Patience; ending with a fervent Prayer, both for his own Glorification, and the
Salvation of all those, who should believe on him to the end of the World.


P. Whither went he when this Sermon and Prayer were ended?


D. To the Brook Cedron, into a Garden, whither he often resorted, and there he
was betrayed by Judas; and delivered into the hands of the Jews.


P. Whither was he then carried?


D. First to Caiaphas, afterward to Pilate's Judgment-Hall; by whom he was
condemned, and then crucified with an Inscription over his head in Greek, Latin
and Hebrew [Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews.


P. What was done to him after his Crucifixion?


D. One of the Soldiers with a Spear pierced his side, out of which issued
Water and Blood.


P. What Particulars does this Evangelist relate about his Resurrection?


D. Peter's and John's running to the Sepulcher, and there beholding the
Grave-cloaths left behind, with the Napkin which had been about his Head, lying
in a place distant from the rest.


P. To whom did Christ first appear after he was risen?


D. To Mary Magdalene, who took him to be the Gardner, till he discovered
himself by his voice; afterward she proffered to embrace him; for which
attempt she was reproved.


P. Did he not likewise appear to the other Disciples?


D. He appeared to them the same day at evening, and there with his Breath
bestowed upon them the Holy Ghost; giving them power of remitting and retaining
sins.


P. Were any of the Disciples then absent?


D. Thomas was not there; nor would he believe the Relation, without satisfying
himself by feeling the print of the Nails which had pierced him.


P. Was this satisfaction afforded him?


D. It was. For Eight days after, Christ appeared again, and allowed Thomas the
liberty of feeling his Hands, Feet and Side; whereupon he cried out [My Lord
and my God]


P. Did he after this appear to his Disciples any more?


D. Yes. He appeared to them again at the Sea of Tiberias.


P. What Circumstances attended that Appearance?


D. Peter, and some other Disciples, going a Fishing, and catching nothing all
night, in the Morning Jesus stood on the Shore, and commanded them to cast the
Net on the Right side of the Ship, whereupon they caught such a multitude of
Fishes, that they were not able to draw the Net to shore.


P. Did this make any Discovery of him?


D. S. John hereupon declared to Peter, that it was the Lord; which Peter
hearing, swam unto him; and the rest of the Disciples came in a little Ship,
dragging the Net with Fishes.


P. What Miracle followed this?


D. No sooner were they come ashore, but they found a Fire of Coals with Fish
laid upon it and Bread.


P. Did they eat of the Fish?


D. No. For at Christ's Command, they dressed of the Fish which they had taken.


P. What Number of Fishes were taken at that Draught?


D. An Hundred Fifty and Three Great Fishes; yet was not the Net broken.


P. To whom did Christ then particularly address himself in Discourse?


D. To Peter, three times questioning his Love; which, when Peter professed, as
the best evidence thereof, Christ commanded him to feed his Lambs and Sheep;
declaring also the Martyrdom that he should suffer.


P. Did Peter propound any Question at that time to his Master?


D. He asked what should become of John.


P. How did Christ answer this Question?


D. That if he pleased to have John live till his coming ( i. e. till his Power
was manifested in the Destruction of the Jews) it was nothing to him; whereupon
the Disciples fancied that John should not die.


P. How does this Gospel conclude.


D. With John's asserting the Truth of those things which are delivered in it.


The End of S. JOHN.
ACTS.
P. What Book follows next after the Gospels?


D. The Acts of the Apostles.


P. Why has it that Name?


D. Because it contains an History of the Eminent Acts (beside the Sufferings)
of the Apostles of Christ, especially those Two more greatly employed, S. Peter
and S. Paul.


P. By whom was this Book written?


D. It is generally believed to be written by S. Luke.


P. What reason have we to believe so?


D. Several Reasons; particularly these Two. 1. Because the Style of this Book
is the same with that of his Gospel; (as those who understand the Greek Tongue
well, Reference it has to the End of his Gospel formerly written; and both of
them are dedicated to the same Theophilus.


P. Wherewith does this Book begin?


D. With a particular Account of Christ's Ascension into Heaven, in the sight
of his Apostles, after he had conversed with them forty days from his
Resurrection.


P. What was the first Work of the Apostles after Christ's Resurrection?


D. They and the rest of the Believers being assembled together, chose one out
of the other Disciples, to succeed Judas in his Apostleship, from which he fell
by his Transgression.


P. Who were appointed to stand for the place?


D. Two. Judas called Barsabas, and Matthias.


P. How were they to be chosen?


D. By Lot, and Prayer adjoined.


P. Upon whom did the Lot fall?


D. Upon Matthias; who was thence-for-ward reckoned among the 11 Apostles.


P. When was the Holy Ghost given to the Disciples?


D. Upon the Feast of Pentecost,


P. How was He given?


D. With the sound of a rushing mighty Wind, in Cloven Tongues like Fire, by
which help they spoke in several Languages.


P. How was this great Gift entertained?


D. By some with scorn, as if the Apostles had been drunk; by others with
wonder.


P. How were the Apostles vindicated from the Aspersion of being drunk?


D. By a good and eloquent Sermon of S. Peter's making.


P. What especial Argument did he use to vindicate them?


D. He declared that hereby was fulfilled a Prophecy of Joel; and thereupon
proved Christ to be the True Messiah.


P. Did this Sermon work effectually upon the People?


D. Yes; for they were pricked at the heart, and three thousand Souls were
converted.


P. In what manner did those Converts live?


D. In great Unity among themselves; in great Devotion toward God, and such
Charity to one another, that they had all things common; insomuch that they who
had Possessions, sold them for the relief of their Brethren in necessity.


P. What was the first particular Miracle wrought after Christ's Ascension?


D. The Cure of a Lame man at the Beautiful Gate of the Temple, by the Word of
S. Peter.


P. What followed upon this Miracle?


D. The People being amazed, S. Peter made another Sermon to convince them of
their Duty in repenting for their Murder of Christ, and to receive him by a
true Faith.


P. What else followed?


D. The Chief of the Jews hearing this, put Peter (and John his Companion) into
Prison.


P. What Number of Converts was already gained?


D. About Five Thousand.


P. What Course did the Chief Priests and Rulers take with the Two Apostles?


D. They enquired by what Name and Power that Miracle was wrought.


P. What Answer was given to this Question?


D. S. Peter (who made the Answer) told them the Miracle was wrought in the
Name of Christ; asserting him to be the true and only Savior.


P. How was this Answer taken?


D. The Rulers marvelled at the Boldness of the Apostles, and putting them
aside consulted together what to do with them.


P. How ended this Consultation?


D. They let the Apostles go with threatenings, that they should not spread the
Name of Christ.


P. Of what Age was the man that was healed?


D. About Forty years old.


P. What did the Apostles do upon their Dismission?


D. At their return they reported what had happened; whereupon followed a
general Praising of God, and an entire Love among themselves, manifested in the
Relief given to those who wanted, by selling their Possessions to supply one
another Necessities.


P. How was the Money disposed of for which those Possessions were sold?


D. It was brought and laid at the feet of the Apostles.


P. Was this Order justly observed by All?


D. No. Ananias and Saphira his wife kept back part of the Money for which
their Land was sold.


P. How went it with them for doing so?


D. S. Peter taxed them with Hypocrisy; and they were both punished for it by
sudden Death.


P. Did the Apostles work any more Miracles?


D. Several: In Curing Sick People who were laid upon Beds and Couches in the
Streets as they passed by; being brought to Jerusalem from many places in the
Country.


P. Were not the Jews angry at these Miracles?


D. The Sadduces (especially) among them were; and put the Apostles into the
common Prison.


P. How were they delivored out of Prison?


D. By an Angel of God opening the Prison-Doors, and commanding them to preach
in the Temple, which Command they obeyed.


P. What course was taken when they were gone out of Prison?


D. The Council met, and they were sent for; but not being found, the Officers
informed how close the Prison-doors were shut, and how carefully the Keepers
were attending; upon which the Council hearing of their being in the Temple,
brought them back to the place where they were, by Officers, but without
violence, for fear the People should stone them.


P. What Answer did the Apostles make for themselves, having received a charge
not to Preach any more?


D. S. Peter (in the Name of the rest) urged God's Command in their Vindication.


P. What Punishment was then allotted them?


D. Nothing less than Death.


P. How was that Punishment prevented?


D. By the wise Counsel of Gamaliel; and then they were only beaten.


P. How did the Apostles take this Punishment?


D. With a great deal of Joy and Constancy in their work of Preaching, both in
the Temple, and in private Houses.


P. What further settlement was then made of the Church?


D. Seven Deacons were chosen to take care of the Poor, whilst the Disciples
attended upon Prayer, and Teaching the People.


P. What were the Names of those Seven?


D. Stephen, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenor and Nicolas.


P. What Character is given of Stephen?


D. That he was a man full of the Holy Ghost, and that he wrought great
Miracles.


P. What Adversaries were raised up against him?


D. The Synagogue of the Libertines, and others, disputing with him; though
they could not withstand the Power by which he spoke.


P. How did they then contrive against him?


D. They set up False Witnesses to accuse him of Blasphemy against the Law, and
the Temple, upon which score he was brought before the Council.


P. How did he there defend himself?


D. His Defense was by a long Speech; Jews, from Abraham's time to Solomon's,
in an Historical Relation of what happened: impleading them on this very score
for not believing in Christ.


P. Did they take this well from him?


D. No. They were cut to the heart, and they gnashed upon him with their Teeth.


P. What Punishment did they inflict upon him?


D. They stoned him to death, whilst he prayed for them; (as well as himself)
and they laid down their clothes at the feet of Saul.


P. In what case was the Church after his Death?


D. A great Persecution began; several places.


P. Who was mainly instrumental in this Persecution?


D. Saul; who made havoc of the Church; imprisoning diverse both Men and Women.


P. What Place did first receive the Gospel?


D. The City of Samaria, by the Preaching of Philip; together with the Miracles
which he wrought in casting out unclean Spirits, and healing the Diseased.


P. Upon whom especially did he show this miraculous Power?


D. Upon Simon the Sorcerer (commonly called Simon Magus) mightily esteemed by
the people, bewitched with his Sorcery; for he Believed and was Baptized.


P. How did the Church at Jerusalem entertain the News of Samaria's Conversion?


D. They sent the Apostles Peter and John to lay hands upon them, that they
might receive the Holy Ghost.


P. What advantage would Simon have made of this Power?


D. He seeing such a Miracle wrought, would have bought the same Power with
Money of the Apostles; upon which, S. Peter cursed his Design, and declared his
wickedness.


P. What became of Philip after this Conversion of the Samaritans?


D. He was by the appointment of an Angel directed toward Gaza, where he
Instructed and Baptized an Ethiopian Eunuch, employed in his Chariot with
reading the Prophecy of Isaiah; and then (being caught away by the Spirit)
passed from Azotus, preaching in the several Cities till he came to Cesarea.


P. What happened to Saul the great Persecuter of the Church?


D. As he went to Damascus with Letters for persecuting the Believers, he was
struck down to the earth, and had a Discovery of Christ, who declared the
Persecution to be made against himself.


P. How was it then with him and his Company?


D. The rest were struck speechless, he blind for three days; and commanded
into the City, where Ananias was sent to him, who restored his Sight to him.


P. Upon what account did Ananias go to him?


D. God appearing to Ananias, sent him to Saul, (notwithstanding his Excuses)
upon whose coming, the Scales sell from Readiness eyes, and being declared God's
Chosen Vessel to the Gentiles, he received Meat, and was strengthened.


P. How did Paul employ himself upon his Conversion?


D. In Preaching Christ boldly, to the admiration of all who had formerly known
him.


P. Were the Jews pleased with this alteration in Saul?


D. No; for they consulted to kill him; but the Design was prevented by the
Disciples letting him down in a Basket from the Wall of Damascus.


P. Whither did Saul go from thence?


D. To Jerusalem; where the Brethren knowing what he had been, were unwilling
to entertain him, till Barnabas made way for it, by declaring his Conversion;
upon which Relation, he was received, and sent to Tarsus.


P. What Miracles were about that time wrought by S. Peter?


D. One upon Aeneas at Lydda, who had kept his Bed Eight Years with a Palsy,
and immediately cured; another at Joppa upon Tabitha (otherwise called Dorcas)
whom he raised from the Dead.


P. What Message (for further Service) did he receive at Joppa?


D. A Message from Cornelius, Angel, and dispatched by Two of Cornelius his
Servants.


P. How was this Message first signified to Peter?


D. Cornelius being a Gentile, it was signified by a Vision (in Peter's Trance)
of a Vessel wherein were several Creatures, unclean as well as clean, with a
Command to eat of them; and this was showed three times.


P. What was this Vision to signify?


D. The Conversion of the Gentiles, at that time thought the unclean of the
World.


P. How came Peter thus to understand the Vision?


D. While he thought upon it, the men from Cornelius enquired for him, with
whom he went to Cesarea, through a Divine Inspiration.


P. What entertainment had he there?


D. Cornelius meeting, would have worshipped him, which he denied; declaring
the Vision (upon the account whereof he came.) And at his Preaching Christ, the
whole Company had the Holy Ghost fell upon them, and were Baptized, with whom
he stayed certain days.


P. How was this Action taken by the Jewish Converts?


D. They were angry at his going to a Gentile, Vision, with the occasion of it,
and then they glorified God for his Mercy to the Gentiles.


P. What became of the Disciples scattered abroad upon the Persecution raised
at Stephen's Death?


D. They traveled through several Countries, settling at last at Antioch, where
many were converted.


P. What care was taken of these new Converts?


D. The Church at Jerusalem sent Barnabas to strengthen them in the Faith, who
afterward went to seek Saul at Tarsus, and brought him thither.


P. Had the Disciples any particular Name given them in that place?


D. They were in that place first called Christians.


P. What particular Prophecy do we then meet with?


D. A Prophecy from Agabus, concerning the Dearth which happened in the Days
of Claudius Caesar, whereupon the Disciples sent Relief into Judea, by Barnabas
and Saul.


P. How did King Herod behave himself all this while?


D. He being an enemy to the Church, James the Brother of John, and put Peter
in Prison, designing his Death also.


P. By what means was Peter delivered?


D. By an Angel, carrying him past several Watches through the Iron Gate into
the Street, where he was left; and went to the House of John called Mark.


P. What Punishment afterward befell Herod?


D. Making an eloquent Oration one day, for which he was highly applauded, the
Angel of God smote him, and he was eaten up of Worms, because he gave not God
the Glory.


P. Cornelius being converted, was no care taken of the other Gentiles?


D. Yes. Barnabas and Saul (afterward called Paul) were by God's command,
separated for the employment of converting them, with Fasting, Prayer, and
Imposition of Hands.


P. What was the first opposition these Two Apostles met with?


D. It was from a Jewish Sorcerer at Paphos; Elymas by Name.


P. What Punishment befell him?


D. He was according to Paul's word, struck blind for a certain time.


P. What influence had this Miracle upon others?


D. It particularly made the Deputy of that Country to Believe.


P. What else happened remarkable?


D. They Preaching Christ at Antioch, some Jews and Gentiles also Believed, and
desired the same Discourse might be delivered to them the next abbath; which
the other Jews opposing, the Apostles left them, going among the Gentiles to
Iconium.


P. What befell them there?


D. The unbelieving Jews stirred up the people against them, Lystra.


P. What happened there?


D. Paul healed a born-Cripple; whereupon the People would have Sacrificed to
him and Barnabas, which they refused; but afterward by the instigation of the
Jews who came thither, Paul was stoned; yet after his miraculous recovery, they
both returned to Antioch.


P. What other Troubles did they meet with at this time?


D. Some Teachers would have imposed upon the Disciples a necessity of
Circumcision,


P. What was resolved upon when this Question was started?


D. That Paul and Barnabas with others, should be sent to the Apostles and
Elders at Jerusalem, to have their Opinion about it.


P. What did those Elders declare upon the hearing it?


D. Being assembled together in Council, they declared that Circumcision was
not necessary; and only commanded an abstinence from certain things, sending
Letters to the same purpose throughout the Churches.


P. What were those things to be abstained from?


D. Four: Meats offered to Idols, Blood, Things strangled, and Fornication.


P. Did Paul and Barnabas continue together after this?


D. They did for some time, but at length a Quarrel happening, they parted.


P. Whither did Paul go then?


D. He was called into Macedonia by a Vision, Philippi, where he converted
Lydia, and cast a Spirit of Divination out of a Damosel; upon which, he and
Silas (his Companion) were put into Prison.


P. What Miracle was wrought during their Imprisonment?


D. They singing Praises to God at Midnight, there happened a great Earthquake,
which threw open the Prison-doors; whereupon the Jailer was affrighted, and
ready to kill himself, fearing he had lost his Prisoners.


P. How was he hindered from that purpose?


D. By Paul's calling to him, and preaching Faith in Christ; whereupon he
believed; and himself with his whole Household was Baptized.


P. How long were these Persons kept in Prison?


D. The Magistrates of the Town entreated them the next day to depart.


P. To what place went Paul next that is of Note?


D. After some Journeys he came to Thessalonica, where he Preached, and some
persons Believed.


P. How was he entertained there?


D. The unbelieving Jews occasioning a Tumult, assaulted Jason's House, and
alleging they were enemies to Caesar, persecuted Paul till he went to Berea.


P. How did the Bereans carry themselves?


D. Hearing Paul preach in the Jewish Synagogue, they searched the Scriptures,
to try the Agreement between them and his Doctrine.


P. Whither did Paul journey from Berea?


D. To Athens; where he encountered with the Epicureans and Stoics.


P. What observable thing did he there meet with?


D. The Inscription upon an Altar, To the Unknown God; upon which occasion, he
Preached Christ, and the Resurrection from the Dead.


P. How was this Doctrine entertained?


D. With Scoffs by some; and with Faith by others.


P. Whither did Paul go from Athens?


D. To Corinth; Aquila, a Jew (banished by Claudius the Emperor from Rome) and
his Wife Priscilla, lately come from Italy.


P. What Encouragement had Paul at Corinth?


D. God told him in a Vision that he should not be disheartened, because there
were many people belonging to God in that City.


P. What Troubles began then to fall upon him?


D. He was accused before Gallio the Deputy of Achaia, but dismissed; whereupon
the Jews being enraged, fell to beating Sosthenes the Ruler of the Synagogue.


P. Whither journeyed he from Corinth?


D. To Cenchrea for the paying his Vow, and thence to Ephesus.


P. What Company did Paul meet with at Ephesus?


D. One Apollos a Jew, eloquent, and well read in the Scriptures; who disputed
with the Jews, and being further instructed by Aquila and Priscilla, strongly
asserted that Jesus was the Christ.


P. What other Company did he meet with?


D. Some Disciples (about Twelve in Number) who not knowing any thing of the
Holy Ghost's being given, were Baptized in the Name of Jesus, and by the
Imposition of Paul's hands, had the Holy Ghost given unto them.


P. How did the Jews there entertain his Doctrine?


D. With ill words; insomuch that he took his Disciples into the School of
Tyrannus, where he continued for Two years, working several Miracles upon Sick
Persons.


P. What particular opposition did he there meet with?


D. Certain Exorcists, pretending in his Name to call upon Evil Spirits, were
assaulted by those Spirits, and fled for their security; whereupon followed a
Confession from them, and the burning their Conjuring Books to a great value.


P. Whom had he else to deal with there?


D. With Demetrius a Silver-Smith, and several others, who made an Vproar in
the City, finding their gains were gone; their employment being to make Shrines
for their Goddess Diana; which Uproar, by the persuasion of their Town Clerk,
was at length appeased.


P. Where do we meet with Paul's next Miracle?


D. At Philippi; for there he raised Eutychus to life, who had fallen down dead
as Paul was long Preaching.


P. Where did Paul make any stay after he went from Philippi?


D. At Mil^^us; where sending for the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, he gave
them a Godly Exhortation, to attend their Duty; Prophesying what Troubles
should arise, and declaring his expectation not to see them any more; which
occasioned a great deal of Sorrow among them.


P. Whither did Paul then go?


D. To Jerusalem; from which Journey he was much dissuaded.


P. What particular discouragement had he from undertaking that Journey?


D. Coming to Cesarea, into the House of Philip the Evangelist, Agabus a
Prophet met him there, who binding himself with Paul's Girdle, prophesied how
the Jews should bind him, whose it was, at Jerusalem.


P. What did the Disciples say to this Prophecy?


D. They did with Tears renew their Request to Paul, that he would not go
thither.


P. Was he wrought upon hereby?


D. No. He flatly denied them, professing his willingness not only to be Bound,
but to Die also at Jerusalem for the Name of Jesus; upon which, they rested
content.


P. Who bore him company to Jerusalem?


D. Mnason, an old Disciple, with whom he was to lodge.


P. To whom did he apply himself at his coming thither?


D. To the Disciples, whom he informed of the Gentiles Conversion by his means.


P. What Advice did they give him?


D. That to show his Obedience to the Law, whereof the Believing Jews there
were very zealous, he should purify himself in the Temple, with other men who
were under a Vow.


P. What befell him upon the following this advice?


D. When he came to do it, the Jews assaulted him, and attempted to slay him,
after he was sorely beaten.


P. How was he rescued?


D. By the Chief Captain (with his Soldiers) who bound him with Chains, and
carried him into the Castle; where (upon the Stairs) he had liberty to speak in
his own defense.


P. What Defense did he make?


D. He spoke to the Jews in their own Language, declaring his Conversion; which
they patiently heard till he told of his being sent to the Gentiles; and upon
that word, they made an uproar against him, as one not fit to live.


P. What then became of him?


D. He was remanded to the Castle, and Charge given to examine him by Scourging.


P. How was this Punishment avoided?


D. By his declaring himself to be a Freeborn Roman; upon which account he was
eased of his Bonds, that he might have a new Hearing?


P. Before whom was that Hearing?


D. Before Ananias the High Priest, to whom he professed his Innocence in all
things.


P. How did Ananias receive that Profession?


D. He commanded Paul to be smitten on the Mouth.


P. What Party did Paul make in the Multitude then gathered together?


D. Perceiving some to be Pharisees, and some Sadduces, he declared the Cause
in question to be a maintaining the Doctrine of the Resurrection; upon which
the Pharisees adhered to him.


P. Why did they only adhere to him?


D. Because the Sadduces believed not any Resurrection, nor Angel nor Spirit.


P. How was this Commotion between the Two Parties appeased?


D. The Chief Captain fearing lest any Injury should befall him, sent Soldiers
to bring him by force into the Castle.


P. What encouragement had he at that time?


D. God's Angel comforted him, and told him he must bear the same witness of
the Doctrine of Christ at Rome, as he had done at Jerusalem.


P. Were the Jews quieted herewith?


D. No; for more than Forty of them made a Conspiracy against Paul's Life,
pretending to desire a further hearing of his Cause, and laying wait to kill
him in the way as he should come to his trial.


P. How was this Plot prevented?


D. Paul's Sisters Son, hearing, discovered it to Paul, by whom he was sent to
the Captain to inform him; and for Paul's security, the Captain sent him by
night to Caesarea.


P. What course did the Jews then take against him?


D. The High Priest and Elders came down to accuse him before Felix the
Governor, which they did by the Tongue of Tertullus an eminent Orator.


P. Had not Paul liberty to defend himself?


D. Yes; and did so, by giving an Account of his Life and Doctrine.


P. Did he Preach any more before Felix?


D. He did; for Felix's Wife Drusilla (being a Jewess) desired to hear him; and
before them both he discoursed of Righteousness, Temperance, and the Judgment
to come.


P. How did this Discourse work upon Felix?


D. It made him tremble; but he dismissed Paul till a more convenient season.


P. Why would not Felix release him?


D. Because he expected a Bribe; which failing, he delivered over Paul as a
Prisoner to Festus, who succeeded him in the Government.


P. Did the Jews still persecute Paul?


D. Yes; they incensed Festus against him.


P. What Reply did Festus make when they charged him?


D. He commanded Paul's Accusers to charge him at Caesarea, where he was
brought before the Judgment Seat, and made his Appeal to Caesar.


P. Before whom did he next defend himself?


D. Before Agrippa and Bernice his Wife who came down to visit Festus; to whom
h^ declared Paul's Case; and Agrippa desire^ to hear him.


P. What was the Substance of Paul's Discourse?


D. A Relation of his Life from his Childhood; the Miraculousness of his
Conversion and his acting according to the Command he then received from God.


P. What Influence had this Discourse upon the Hearers of it?


D. A different Influence; for Festus charged him with Madness, and Agrippa was
almost persuaded to be a Christian; declaring withal that Paul might have been
freed if he had not appealed unto Caesar.


P. What then became of Paul?


D. He was shipped for a Voyage to Rome; severe Storm fell upon the whole
Company (his foretelling it not being believed) insomuch that they were all in
danger of being cast away.


P. How were they comforted in this extremity?


D. Paul related to them the Appearance of an Angel, who assured him of all
their Lives, only that their Ship should be lost; upon which, after Fourteen
days Fasting, they were persuaded to eat.


P. How many were there in the Ship?


D. Two Hundred Seventy and Six persons.


P. Where did they Land when the Ship was broken?


D. In an Island called Melita.


P. What Entertainment did they there meet with?


D. They found a great deal of Respect; for the Barbarous People treated them
with Fire because of the Cold.


P. What Accident happened there unto Paul?


D. As he was gathering Sticks, a Viper fastened upon his Hand.


P. What did the People think when they saw it?


D. They supposed him to be a Murderer, whom (though he had escaped the Sea,
yet) Divine vengeance would not suffer to live.


P. Did the Viper do him any harm?


D. No; he shook it off into the Fire, and felt not any hurt.


P. What did the People then think of him?


D. They changed their minds, and said that he was a God.


P. What especial Miracle did Paul work there?


D. He healed the Father of Publius (a Great man in that Island) of a Fever and
a Bloody Flux; and after him, others also who came unto him.


P. What did he do when he came to Rome?


D. He called together the Chief of the Jews, to whom he declared the Cause of
his coming thither, and at their appointment Preached Christ one day unto them.


P. How was his Preaching received?


D. Some believed, and others did not; whereupon he dismissed the Assembly.


P. How long did Paul dwell there, and how was he employed?


D. He dwelt there two whole years, Preaching the Kingdom of God, and declaring
the Doctrine of Christ.


The End of the ACTS.
The EPISTLES.
P. HOw many are there of the Canonical Epistles?


D. One and Twenty.


P. By whom were they written?


D. St. Paul wrote Fourteen, St. James One, S. Peter Two, St. John Three, St.
Jude One.


P. What were those of St. Paul's Writing?


D. One to the Romans, Two to the Corinthians, One to the Galatians, One to the
Ephesians, One to the Philippians, One to the Colossians, Two to the
Thessalonians, Two to Timothy, One to Titus, One to Philemon, and one to the
Hebrews.


P. Were these Epistles written in the same Order as they are placed in our
Books?


D. No; it is generally believed they were not.


P. In what Order then were they written?


D. In the Order following, viz. The Two Epistles to the Thessalonians, the
First to Timothy, the Two Epistles to the Corinthians, the Epistle to Titus,
the Epistle to the Romans, the Epistle to the Hebrews, to the Galatians, to the
Ephesians, to the Philippians, to the Colossians, to Philemon, and last of all
his Second Epistle to Timothy a little before his Martyrdom.


P. With which do we begin?


D. With the Epistle to the Romans.


ROMANS.
P. What does this Epistle contain?


D. This (as most of the rest) begins with a Civil Salutation, and then
proceeds in Points both Doctrinal and Practical.


P. What are the Principal Points of Doctrine contained in it?


D. The Doctrine of Justification by Faith, without the Deeds of the Law, Chap.
3, 4. The Doctrine of Original Sin, Chapter 5. And (as some think) The Doctrine of
Gods Election, Chapter 7. Together with the Rejecting the Jews, and Calling the
Gentiles, to Chap. 12.


P. What are the Points of Practice?


D. Duties of Piety toward God, and Justice toward men. Chap. 12. Of Obedienc
to Authority, Chap. 13. Of Charity, by a mutual forbearance between Brethren in
things of Indifferency, Chapter 14.


P. How does the Epistle conclude?


D. With some good Exhortations, and a Commendation to several Persons eminent
for their Christian Profession.


The End of the Epistle to the ROMANS.
I CORINTHIANS.
P. HOw does this First Epistle to the Corinthians begin?


D. After the usual Salutation, Dissentions which were among them in point of
Religion; showing that S. Paul's Preaching, though not in excellency of Speech,
Demonstration of the Spirit and Power; showing them also in what Account the
Ministers of God should be among them, notwithstanding the scorn which the
Apostles then met with.


P. What particular sins does the Apostle reprove among them?


D. The Incest committed by one, Fathers Wife; for which they did not
sufficiently mourn; and therefore he took order for the man's punishment by
Excommunication, in order to his Amendment, teaching them thereby how to deal
with great Offenders.


P. What else does the Apostle reprove?


D. A Fault common among them, going to Law before Heathen Judges; and the Sin
of Fornication, so much against a Man's own Body.


P. How does he then proceed?


D. To discourse about points of Marriage, in answer to some Questions which
the Corinthians had sent to him.


P. What Answer does he give to those Questions?


D. That persons should marry to avoid Fornication; and when they are so
married, that there should be a mutual performance of all Duties between
Husband and Wife; giving likewise particular Directions to the unmarried, to
have them so continue, if capable of doing it; and to the Married, that they
should endeavor the Conversion of one another for their Good on both parts.


P. Upon what Point does he next insist?


D. Concerning Meats offered to Idols; Christian Liberty be not abused, but
care taken for preventing any Offense to our Brethren.


P. Has he no Discourse in this Epistle concerning the Ministers of the
Gospel?


D. Yes; Liberty, and the Justice that every Minister has to require a
Livelihood upon his Employment; and that though himself was not chargeable to
the Corinthians, yet he might have been so; only he was willing to become all
things to all men, that by all means he might gain some.


P. What Doctrines does he teach from what related to the Jews of old?


D. He shows how Typical their Sacraments were of Ours; their Disobedience,
were recorded, that we might take example by them, and not fall into the same
sias; urging again the duty of Caring for our Brethrens Consciences in points
of Indifferency.


P. What does he take notice of relating to Faults among them?


D. Their Indecent Carriage in Holy Assemblies, the wearing long Hair, Abuse of
the Lord's Supper.


P. How does he endeavor to rectify this last fault?


D. By setting before them the First Institution of that Holy Sacrament, the
Dangers of unworthy coming to it, and the means of Preparing for it by
Self-Examination.


P. Has he no Discourse concerning the Spiritual Gifts of the Holy Ghost?


D. He shows the Diversity of them, but that they still proceed from the same
Spirit; and propounds their Serviceableness to the Church, by an Allusion to
the several Members of the Natural (as that is a Spiritual) Body.


P. What does he urge thence?


D. The necessity of Charity, particular Properties; exalting it above all
other Seize and Gifts whatsoever.


P. What other Doctrinal Point does he write of?


D. The great Doctrine of the Resurrection; proving it from the Resurrection of
Christ; and showing in what manner it should come to pass; whence he concludes
the Reasonableness of being industrious in our Christian Service.


P. How does he end the Epistle?


D. With directing a Charitable Collection for the Christians in necessity; to
be done by laying apart a proportion the First day of each Week, according to
every man's ability; and then gives his particular Salutations to several
Friends.


The End of the First Epist. to the CORINTHIANS.
II CORINTHIANS.
P. IN what manner does S. Paul begin this Epistle?


D. With an encouragement against Afflictions,


P. What other Subjects does he treat of?


D. The forgiving the Incestuous person, eternal advantage which comes by
Preaching the Gospel; everlasting Glory after Judgment, which should be a Spur
to the Service of God; the Dignity of Preachers in being God's Ambassadors,


P. What particular Directions does he give in point of Duty?


D. He disswades from Marriage with Infidels (which he calls being unequally
yoked) persuades to Purity and Holiness, Charity by the example of the
Macedonians, and the Advantage which would follow it;


P. What way does he take to prove himself above those false Teachers?


D. By the Sufferings which he endured for the Gospel's sake (whereof he gives
a particular account) and the Revelations he had.


P. What happened upon those Revelations to keep him humble?


D. A very great Temptation (called a Thorn in the Flesh,) which upon his
Prayer, he was assisted against.


P. How does this Epistle conclude?


D. With threatening to be severe against incorrigible offenders; Faith, prays
for the increase of their Strength and Love, and so pronounces a Blessing upon
them.


The End of the Second to the CORINTHIANS.
GALATIANS.
P. What is the Substance of this Epistle?


D. The Apostle reproves the Galatians for being drawn from the True Doctrine
of the Gospel, Conversion; as a proof whereof, he mentions his former enmity to
the Gospel, and afterward his opposing S. Peter for not walking according to
the Rules thereof, that he might the more oblige the Jews.


P. But what account gives he of his Apostleship to the World?


D. This: That He and Barnabas were designed to Preach unto the Gentiles, as
Peter, James and John were to the Jews.


P. What Doctrine does he particularly insist upon in the Epistle?


D. The Doctrine of Justification by Faith without the Deeds of the Law;
Abraham; and showing that the Law was but a Schoolmaster to bring us unto
Christ.


P. How else does he prove it?


D. By Two Allusions.


P. What is the First?


D. A comparing the Estate of Man under the Law, Heir in his Minority, whilst
under Tutors and Governors; which was at an end when God sent his Son into the
World.


P. What is the Second?


D. A Comparing the Law which contained the Covenant of Works, to Hagar the
Bondwoman, of whom came Ishmael; and the Gospel, which contains the Covenant
of Grace, to Sarah the Freewoman, of whom came Isaac the Son of the Promise;
likening us and all Believers unto him.


P. What Duties does he urge?


D. A maintaining that Liberty which Christ has bestowed upon us, walking in
the Spirit.


P. How must that walking in the Spirit be known?


D. By not fulfilling the Lusts of the Flesh; for the better Discovery whereof,
he sets down particularly what are the Lusts of the Flesh, and what the Fruits
of the Spirit.


P. What other Duties are mentioned?


D. Tenderness toward an offending Brother; Preachers of the Word;
Unweariedness in doing good, particularly in the exercise of Charity; and then
he declares how much he Gloried in suffering for Christ.


The End of the Epistle to the GALATIANS.
EPHESIANS.
P. What is the Beginning of this Epistle to the EPHESIANS?


D. The Apostle praises God for their Election and Adoption, exhorting them to
endeavor after a sound knowledge of the Christian Faith.


P. What way does he propound to bring them to this Knowledge?


D. He shows them their condition by Nature (as Children of wrath; and by
Grace, quickened from the Death of sin in Christ;) teaching that this Blessing
was bestowed to make them full of good Works; to which they were the more
encouraged by being made Fellow-Citizens (with the rest of the Saints) of the
Heavenly Jerusalem.


P. What else does he declare unto them?


D. The great and mysterious Calling of the Gentiles, whereunto he effectually
ministered, notwithstanding his Troubles; and thereupon extols the great Love of
Christ toward Mankind.


P. What does the Remainder of the Epistle contain?


D. Duties of Two sorts; Personal and Relative.


P. What are the Personal Duties.


D. Peace and Love urged upn the account of Christ's Love, constant Ministry
for the edification of his Church; a putting off the Old man, and putting on
the New; an abstaining from Lying, and Corrupt Communication, Anger and
Maliciousness; Fornication, Uncleanness, and Covetousness; the walking
circumspectly, and avoiding Drunkenness; with Thankfulness to God, manifested
by singing Psalms.


P. What are the Relative Duties?


D. The submission of Wives to their Husbands, and the Love of Husbands to
their Wives (by the example of that mutual carriage between Christ and his
Church) the Obedience of Children to their Parents, Kindness of Parents to
their Children; the Faithfulness of Servants to their Masters, and the
Gentleness of Masters to their Servants.


P. What is the Conclusion of all?


D. That every man in whatsoever capacity, should put upon him the whole Armor
of God for his Spiritual Defense, to enable him to withstand all his enemies,
and to stand in the evil day.


The End of the Epistle to the EPHESIANS.
PHILIPPIANS.
P. IN what manner begins this Epistle?


D. With a Profession of S. Paul's Love to the Philippians, manifested by his
constant Prayers for them; and a desire that they should not be too much
concerned at his Sufferings, whereby the Gospel of Christ was advantaged;
complaining of some among them, who Preached Christ out of Strife and
Contention.


P. What does he declare concerning himself?


D. A readiness to Glorify God either by Life or Death, which should be most
suitable to his infinite Wisdom.


P. What particular Charge does he lay upon them respecting his own Condition?


D. That whatsoever happened unto him, they should live according to the Rules
of the Gospel, without being terrified by their Adversaries, because it was
their especial Privilege not only to Believe in Christ, but likewise to suffer
for him.


P. What Exhortations does he give them for the leading of their Lives?


D. He exhorts them to Humility, Example of Christ, who took our Nature upon
him. 2. To an industrious working out their Salvation, from God's readiness to
assist them. And, 3. To a Blameless walking, considering themselves to be the
Children of God.


P. What other things are mentioned?


D. A particular Caution against false Teachers, who would draw them to the
observation of the Law; showing his own Privileges above others in that
respect, which yet signified nothing to him in comparison of the Righteousness
of Christ, which he endeavored after; and a proposal of his own Example for
them to walk by.


P. How did he urge this Proposal?


D. By two Arguments; One drawn from the evil Lives of those who were Enemies
to the Cross of Christ: Another, from the Heavenliness of his own Conversation,
assuredly knowing that Christ from Heaven will appear to make even our very
Bodies like unto his Glorious Body.


P. What Duties are drawn from this Consideration?


D. Five. Stedfastness in the following him. 2. A Constant Rejoicing in God. 3.
A Christian Moderation. 4. An avoiding too much Carefulness for the things of
this World, employing our selves to God by Prayer. 5. (To close up all) a
Following those things which are True, Honest, Just, Pure, Lovely, and of Good
Report.


P. What particular occasion of Thankfulness does he take toward them?


D. Upon the account of the Present they sent to him in his Necessities.


P. Was this done for his own sake, or for theirs.


D. Not for his own want (because he had learned in all conditions to be
content) but because it testified their Fruitfulness under the Gospel.


P. What Promise does he make them hereupon?


D. That God would supply all their Wants; to whom he gives Glory, and so
concludes the Epistle.


The End of the Epistle to the PHILIPPIANS.
COLOSSIANS.
P. WHat is the Substance of the Epistle to the COLOSSIANS.


D. It begins with a Prayer for their Establishment in Grace; a Description of
the True Christ, as the Head of the Church; and an Encouragement thereupon to
receive,


P. What is the best way propounded to do these things?


D. By being careful to avoid the Heathen Philosophy, and the Legal Ordinances
of Meats, Drinks, Days, and other Superstitious Rites.


P. What Duties does the Apostle urge upon them?


D. The Duties of Heavenly-mindedness, Mortification, avoiding such Sins, as
Anger, Wrath and Malice; using themselves to the exercise of Meekness,
Forbearance, and Charity; to a Familiar conversing with the Word of Christ:
Whence he proceeds to the Relative Duties between Husbands and Wives,
Continuance in Prayer, and walking wisety toward the unconverted.


The End of the Epistle to the COLOSSIANS.
I THESSALONIANS.
P. WHat are the Contents of this First Epistle?


D. An Acknowledgment of the Thessalonians Faith, and other Graces, with an
Exhortation to walk worthy of that Grace which was given them, and an
Expression of that Love which the Apostle did bear to them.


P. What Instructions does he give them?


D. An endeavor to abound in Love; Fornication, that they should not despise
the Gifts of God's Spirit in his Teachers; and instructs them to Quietness, and
minding their own Business, without intermedling with others Concerns.


P. What else?


D. The not sorrowing immoderately for the Dead in Christ, because they were
sure of a Resurrection and Eternal Life with God.


P. What does he take occasion to discourse of from this Subject?


D. The Uncertainty of the Day of Judgment, giving a Caution of Constant
Watchfulness, for fear they should be taken upon a Surprizal.


P. What other Duties follow?


D. To love their Teachers (as deserving it upon the account of their Work)
warning the unruly, comforting the feeble, supporting the weak, carrying
patiently toward all, rendering Good for Evil, constant rejoicing, continual
Prayer, Thankfulness in all things; not quenching the Spirit, nor despising
Prophesies; and a retaining (among all things) that which is good; to which he
adds the avoiding of all evil.


P. How does this Epistle end?


D. With a Prayer for their Through-Sanctification, a Declaration of God's
Faithfulness, and a Desire of their Prayers for him.


The End of the First Epist. to the THESSALONIANS.
II THESSALONIANS.
P. What is the Beginning of this Epistle?


D. It begins much like the First, with giving Thanks for their Graces, and
comforting them under their Troubles, by a consideration of the sure Reward
which they should have hereafter, and the certain Punishment of their
Adversaries at the Coming of Christ in his Power and Glory.


P. Does the Apostle give them no particular Caution?


D. Yes. stedfastness in the True Religion, he cautions that they should not be
be drawn aside by the Instruments of the Man of Sin; whom he there describes by
his Pride and Irreligion.


P. Is there no Judgment to fall upon those who should be drawn aside?


D. Such an one, that their not receiving the Truth, should expose them to the
Embracing Lies for their future Condemnanation.


P. What Particular Directions does he give them?


D. The holding fast those Traditions which he he delivered to them; the
praying to be delivered from wicked men; the avoiding those who walked
disorderly, upon the account of such as were Busy Bodies among them; welldoing.


P. What else does this Epistle contain?


D. A Prayer of Peace for them from the God of Peace.


The End of the Second to the THESSALONIANS.
I TIMOTHY.
P. WHo was Timothy to whom this Epistle was directed?


D. It was the Timothy whom S. Paul took to be his own Son, of whom we read,
that his Mother was a Jewess, Greek.


P. Whereof does this Epistle consist?


D. Of certain Directions given to him for the managing his Office of a
Preacher.


P. What is the first thing wherein he was instructed?


D. The right use and end of the Law, which is good, if a man use it lawfully.


P. What occasion does the Apostle then take to speak of himself?


D. To recount his own sins; as a Blasphemer, Persecutor, and Injurious;
whereby he extols the Great Mercy of God in his Conversion; and upon that,
breaks out into a Thanksgiving to God for his Goodness.


P. What particular Charges does he give unto Timothy?


D. These following. 1. The holding Faith and a good Conscience, from the evil
example of Hymeneus and Alexander, who had reliquished them. 2. Prayer for all
in Authority; as a thing acceptable unto God, who desires the Salvation of
Mankind. 3. The Modesty of Women in their Apparel.


P. What else was charged upon him?


D. To know that the Office of a Bishop of Souls (by giving his Character) was
to be in every point unblameable, Deacon, that they might be sober and grave,
with ability to Teach, both publicly, and by good example at home; and as
they, so their Wives, to behave themselves in Gravity and Sobriety.


P. Does not the Apostle give Timothy some particular Caution?


D. He cautions Timothy concerning the sins of the latter Times; Lies would be
spoken, Marriage and Meats forbidden; of which he shows the great crime, and
exhorts him unto the example of true Godliness, diligent Study, and taking heed
both to Himself and his Doctrine.


P. Having showed his Duty as a Preacher, how is he taught to behave himself as
a Ruler in the Church?


D. By certain Rules: As, 1. Elder, but with great meekness. 2. To take care of
Widows for their Maintenance, if old; if young (for fear of further
Inconveniences) appointing them to Marry; showing at what Age they should be
taken into the Churches Provision. 3. To provide for the support of those
Elders who were diligent in their Work for the Churches Good. And 4. The not
Laying Hands suddenly on any man, nor being Partaker of the Sins of others.


P. What further Directions does he give?


D. He teaches Servants to be obedient to their Masters, shows the Danger of
immoderately loving the World, exhorts Timothy to fight the good fight of
Faith, to the careful keeping his Commands; charging him also to teach Rich men
Charity toward the Poor, for their own eternal Good; and so ends with Advice
that he should not concern himself with Nice and Foolish Questions.


The End of the First Epistle to TIMOTHY.
II TIMOTHY.
P. What does this Second Epistle to TIMOTHY contain?


D. The Apostle begins it with a Commendation of the excellent Faith in
Timothy's Mother and Grandmother; exhorting him to stir up the Gift of God
which was given him, Persecution, and to continue in the True Doctrine, as a
good Soldier of Jesus Christ.


P. But besides this as a Christian, what is he exhorted to as a Preacher?


D. To Preach well, and not to give way to erroneous Opinions; such as those of
Hymeneus and Philetus concerning the Resurrection (as if already past) to flee
youthful Lusts, and exercise the Graces of Meekness and Gentleness.


P. What Account does the Apostle give concerning the latter days?


D. He gives an account of several sins which should then be rife; particularly
a Pretense of Religion where there is nothing of it in reality.


P. How is Timothy encouraged to avoid this and other Inconveniences?


D. By Three Arguments.


P. What is the First?


D. S. Paul's Example in the enduring of Afflictions?


P. What is the Second?


D. The increase of those wicked men in their Proceedings; which should work
upon him to continue in the good Doctrine he had learned.


P. What is the Third?


D. The Divine Inspiration of the Scriptures, designed to render him, and every
man of God accomplished for all Good Works.


P. Are there no other Directions given him as a Preacher?


D. Yes; God, Christ, and his Holy Angels) to be industrious in Preaching the
Gospel.


P. What Arguments are used to enforce this?


D. The arising of False Teachers in the Church, to whom several persons having
itching Ears, would be inclined; and the drawing near of this Apostle's own
Martyrdom, upon which he expected a Crown of Righteousness.


P. What else does this Epistle contain?


D. Some things particularly relating to the Apostles own Concern, but
especially an account of his first deliverance from Nero; whereupon he grounded
an expectancy of God's delivering him from every evil way and work.


The End of the Second to TIMOTHY.
TITUS.
P. WHat is the Substance of this Epistle?


D. S. Paul having left Titus to order the affairs of the Church in Crete,
Character of a good Bishop; and recommends several things to his Care and
Practice,


P. What is the general Direction?


D. To speak the things which become Sound Doctrine.


P. What are the Particulars?


D. To teach the Duties of Sobriety, Temperance and Soundness of Faith in old
men; a sober behavior in Aged Women; Obedience in the Younger Women to their
Husbands, and Care of their Families; Discretion in the Younger men; Justice in
Servants toward their Masters.


P. What Argument is used for these Duties?


D. The Grace of God appearing, which teaches us to deny all Wickedness, and
to live in Holiness, Righteousness and Sobriety.


P. What else does the Apostle command?


D. Obedience to Authority; Titus himself) foolish Disputes, and that he should
warn the Christians to Carefulness in good Works.


The End of the Epist. to TITUS.
PHILEMON.
P. WHat is the Substance of this Epistle?


D. S. Paul's Joy to hear of Philemon's good Life, whom he desires to encourage
Onesiphorus in his Conversion, and receive him with all kindness,
notwithstanding his former faults, being willing to repay all things wherein
Onesiphorus might have done Philemon injury.


The End of PHILEMON.
HEBREWS.
P. WHy is this called the Epistle to the HEBREWS?


D. Because it was written to the Jews, so called from Heber, one of Abraham's
Progenitors.


P. Who was the Author of this Epistle?


D. Several persons are named, but it is generally believed to be S. Paul.


P. Is there no Difference between this and the rest of his Epistles?


D. Yes; not only in the Matter, but in the Form too.


P. What is the Difference in point of Form?


D. The omitting that constant Salutation (the Beginning with his Name) which
is used in all the others.


P. May not this be the reason why it is supposed not to be his?


D. Most probably it may, from a Passage of his own: The Salutation of me Paul
with mine own Hand, 2 These. 3.17.
which is the Token in every Epistle; So I write.


P. Why was that Salutation omitted in this, rather than in any other Epistle?


D. Because the Jews having a grand Prejudice against S. Paul, upon the account
of his forsaking their Religion, might by seeing his Name in the Front, give
less entertainment to the Doctrines delivered by him.


P. What is the Subject Matter of the Epistle?


D. A Declaration of Christ in his Person and Offices; Messiah.


P. Wherewith does it begin?


D. With his Person; Divinity and his Humanity; Man for the Good of Mankind,


P. What follows next?


D. An Account of his Offices, Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly.


P. What Account is there of his Prophetical Office?


D. He is compared with, and preferred before MOSES, the Great Prophet of the
Jews; Moses being but a Servant, Christ a Son.


P. What Duties are hereupon urged?


D. The great Duty of Faith, which the Israelites wanting, were not suffered to
enter into God's Rest, i. e. the Land of Canaan.


P. What other use does the Apostle make of this?


D. Transferring his Argument from the Earthly, to the Eternal Rest in Heaven,
he engages the Hebrews to Carefulness, lest they should fall short of it, by
quoting a Passage of David's; and from the particular Text declaring the
Powerfulness of God's Word, and the Comfort we have in our Savior.


P. What Account is given of his Priestly Office?


D. In General, That he was not a Priest after the Order of Aaron, but of
Melchizedek.


P. How is this Melchizedek described?


D. By his being King of Salem, and Priest of the most High God; (where
Christ's Kingly Office is suggested) as also by his Relation (in point of Time)
without Father without Mother, etc. and that He was the person to whom Abraham
gave Tithes.


P. What is the particular Argument which the Apostle draws from this?


D. That Perfection could not come by the Levitical Priesthood. 1. Because then
there had been no need of another Priest after the Order of Melchizedek; which
he confirms by our Savior's being of another Tribe, viz. of Judah. 2. Because
those Priests died, but He (according to the Oath of God) endures for ever. 3.
Because those Priests were Many, he was but One. 4. Because they were
Imperfect, he was Perfect.


P. What Inference is drawn from hence?


D. A Conviction to the Jews, Levitical Priesthood was abrogated, and the First
Covenant come to an end; which is proved by an Instance in several Rites and
Ceremonies of the Law, which could signify nothing of themselves, but as
Types, were made good in Christ.


P. In what things does the Apostle especially instance?


D. In the Priest's accomplishing the Service of God by entering into the Holy
Place with Blood, Bloody Sacrifice, had completed, entering then into Heaven,
the Holy Place made without Hands, and in their daily offering Sacrifices for
themselves and the People, which he did at once when he made himself a
Sacrifice for Sin.


P. What does he then take occasion to show?


D. The Weakness of the Law, Services, in respect of those which are ordained
under the Gospel, with the necessity of Obedience to Christ, as being above
Moses, by the dreadful Punishments inflicted upon those who would not comply
with Moses his Institution?.


P. What is the Result of all he had delivered?


D. The real need and excellency of Faith, encouraging all men unto it.


P. How does he prosecute that Subject?


D. By a Description of Faith, The Substance of things hoped for, the Evidence
of things not seen; the great Commendation it procured those who exercised it,
and how necessary it was for the pleasing God.


P. What Persons does he name eminent for Faith?


D. Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Rahab, Gideon, Barak,
Jephthah, Samson, David, Samuel, and the Prophets?


P. What did they do by their Faith?


D. They did wonderful things, and endured great Sufferings.


P. What does the rest of the Epistle contain?


D. Some especial Duties to be performed by all who profess themselves
Christians.


P. What Duties does he mention?


D. 1. Pattern of those Worthies in suffering, considering above all, the
Example of Christ Jesus; and then that this suffering is designed for the
Portion of God's Children. 2. The following Peace and Holiness. 3. The not
failing of the Grace of God.


P. What other Duties?


D. 1. Brotherly Love. 2. Hospitality. 3. The Sympathizing with our Brethren in
Affliction. 4. Contentedness in their Condition. 5. Obedience to their
Spiritual Guides and Rulers. 6. Offering up the Sacrifice of Praise. And
lastly, Not omitting charitably to dispense toward the Necessities of their
Christian Brethren.


P. How does this Epistle conclude?


D. With an Hearty Prayer, that God through Christ, would make them perfect in
every good Work to do his Will.


The End of the Epistle to the HEBREWS.
S. JAMES.
P. WHat are the Principal Parts of this Epistle?


D. The Apostle beginning with an Exhortation to Patience under Crosses,
Spiritual Wisdom where it is wanting; proceeds to clear God's Innocence, from
them who would make him the Author of Sin, by declaring that the Prevalency of
Temptations is from our selves.


P. What Duties does he urge?


D. Carefnlness to Practice the Word of God delivered unto them, by the
unprofitableness of mere hearing without doing; comparing it to a man's
beholding himself in a Glass, and presently forgetting his own Face.


P. What is the Second Duty?


D. A not respecting Rich men more than the Poor, Law to command an Obedience
to it in its full extent.


P. What Doctrine does he then insist upon?


D. The unprofitableness of a pretended Faith without Works, cleared by the
Instances in Abraham and Rahab.


P. What else does he instruct us in?


D. Several things in the Three following Chapters.


P. What Particulars in the Third Chapter?


D. The Vanity of arrogant reproving others; Tongue, and the peaceableness of a
true heavenly Wisdom.


P. What in the Fourth Chapter?


D. The Danger of loving the World, and of Envy and Pride; the necessity of
Submission to God, Repentance and Humiliation; the evil of Backbiting, and
promising our selves long Life.


P. What in the Fifth Chapter?


D. The Danger of Covetousness, Patience under Afflictions, by the Example of
Job; a charge to forbear all Profane Swearing; a Direction for Sick Persons to
have the PRAYERS OF THE CHVRCH, and make a Mutual Confession of their Sins; and
the great Charity of Reducing a Straying Brother from his Errors.


The End of the Epistle of S. JAMES.
I. S. PETER.
P. What are the Contents of this Epistle?


D. S. Peter (after a Salutation to the Converted Jews, Eternal Inheritance in
Heaven;) Propounds the Excellency of the GOSPEL MYSTERIES, and thence takes
occasion to press several Duties upon them.


P. What are these Duties?


D. Some Personal, some Relative, intermingled with one another.


P. What are the Personal Duties?


D. 1. Malice, and whatsoever is a Breach of Charity. 2. The Abstaining from
Fleshly Lusts, with the leading an Honest Life toward the Gentiles for Gods
Glory. 3. The Submission to Authority.


P. What follow after these?


D. Relative Duties between Servants and Masters, between Husbands and Wives.


P. How does the Epistle return to the former Sort?


D. By teaching the Duties of Unity, and Patience under Sufferings; from the
Example of Christ suffering for Sinners; the avoiding a profane Conversation,
Offense our care to do so gives to the World, and the maintaining Hospitality.


P. What particular Advice is given as to the Preaching of the word?


D. That they should diligently feed the flock of God; Incorruptible Crown of
Glory for their reward.


P. What other Duty is urged as Relative?


D. The Respective carriage of Youngers toward their Elders.


P. What more in General?


D. Humility, Confidence in God for his care of us, and a sober vigilant
Resisting the Devil.


P. How does the Epistle End?


D. With an Holy Prayer for their being strengthened in Faith; with some
particular Salutations.


The End of the First Epistle of S. PETER.
II. S. PETER.
P. WHat is the beginning of this Epistle?


D. An exhortation to labor after the Increase of Grace.


P. With what Argument is that exhortation backed?


D. With an assertion of the Truth of the Christian Doctrine, it being divinely
inspired by the Holy Ghost to the Prophets.


P. Does not speaking of the true Prophets, give occasion to speak of the false
ones?


D. Yes, describes what they were by bringing in Damnable Heresies, and several
other Characters of them; showing the Danger of the adhering to their
pernicious principles.


P. How does this Epistle End?


D. With a Caution to Avoid their Tenets; and in order thereunto to grow in
Grace, Knowledge of Christ Jesus our Savior.


The End of the Second Epistle of S. PETER.
I. S. JOHN.
P. WHat are the Contents of S. John's first Epistle?


D. The Apostles assuring believers of their Fellowship with God the Father and
the Son; etc.
and the Exhortation he gives to Brotherly Love throughout the whole Epistle,
as the Argument of our Conversion, the Assurance of the Holy Spirit of God
dwelling in us; in opposition to the false Spirit of Error Reigning throughout
the World.


The End of the First Epistle of S. JOHN.
II. S. JOHN.
P. WHat does this Epistle Contain?


D. It being written to an Honorable Lady, the Apostle exhorts her and her
Children to continue steadfast in the Faith, for fear of losing the good Work;
and the reward for them, to all that are sound believers; and gives a Caution
to avoid all seducers.


The End of the Second Epistle of S. JOHN.
III. S. JOHN.
P. WHat are the Contents of this Third Epistle?


D. It is directed to Gaius an Holy and Hospitable Man; for which Virtues he is
Commended; Diotrephes blamed for his Ambition in the Church; and Demetrius
Applauded for his kindness.


The End of the Third Epistle of S. JOHN.
S. JUDE.
P. WHat things does this Epistle Treat of?


D. It begins with an Exhortation to continue Steadfast in the Faith, argued
from the entering in of several who endeavored to Corrupt it; by whose
untoward Doctrine a great many were led aside, whose wickedness the Apostle
there Describes, encouraging all the Disciples of Christ not to be moved; and
so concludes with a Thanksgiving to God for his Grace to all believers.


The End of the Epistle of S. JUDE.
REVELATION.
P. What is the last Book of the New Testament?


D. The Revelation of S. John the Divine.


P. Why is it so called?


D. Because it Reveals what God had showed by an Angel, unto S. John,
concerning things which should come to pass.


P. To whom was this Book directed?


D. To the Seven Churches in Asia.


P. Where, and when was this Revelation made to S. John?


D. It was made in the Isle of Patmos; Lords Day.


P. How was it conveyed unto him?


D. He heard behind him a great Voice as of a Trumpet.


P. What did that Voice direct him to do?


D. To write what he should see in a Book, and send it to the seven Churches of
Asia; viz. Ephesus, Smirna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and
Laodicea.


P. What was the first Vision?


D. The Vision of Seven Golden Candlesticks, in the midst whereof walked One
like the Son of Man, who had in his Right hand Seven Stars.


P. What were those Golden Candlesticks and Stars?


D. The seven Golden Candlesticks Represented the seven Churches: and the seven
Stars the Angels of those Churches.


P. With which of these Churches does S. John begin?


D. With the Church of Ephesus.


P. Of what Nature is the Message sent to that Church?


D. It contains a Commendation for the sufferings she had endured; a Reproof
for the Abatement of her Zeal, and an Exhortation to Repentance; with a Promise
of Reward to him that should overcome.


P. What is the Message to the Church of Smyrna?


D. That to Smyrna and most of the rest are of the same Nature with the former;
convincing the People of what was blameworthy; Commending them for what was
good, Exhorting them to Piety and Virtue.


P. In which Epistles is there a Difference from the rest?


D. In those two, to Philadelphia, Laodicea.


P. What does that to Philadelphia contain?


D. Only a Commendation of her Goodness, with promises thereupon.


P. What does that to Laodicea contain?


D. A Reproof of her Luke-warmness; with a Threatening upon it, and good
Counsel to turn unto God by Zeal and Repentance.


P. What else does this Book inform us of?


D. Certain Predictions concerning the State of the Church in this World, World
to come.


P. What are these concerning the Church in this World?

A Discovery of things to happen in the several Ages of the World, together
with the Conquest of the Churches Enemies, but the way of this Discovery is
very Abstruse and Mysterious.


P. What concerns the State of the Church in the World to come.


D. The full Description of the New Jerusalem, ever happy, set forth by some
Mysterious Resemblances.


P. How does this Book conclude?


D. With a Confirmation of the Truth of this Prophesy, second Coming to
Judgment.


The End of the REVELATION.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 15. line 7. read Cities. P. 26. l. 18. r. of Religion to. P. 41. l. 27.
dele about. P. 42. l. 13. r. he to be. P. 64. Marg. add chap. 9. P. 68. l. ult
Marg. add chap. 18. P. 69. l. 7. Marg. add chap. 19. P. 70. l. 17. Marg. add
chap. 21. P. 74. l. 10. add chap. 3. l. 26. chap. 4. P. 77. l. 17. r. Parmemas.
P. 80. l. 15. r. Sau P. 122. l. 1. Marg. add chap. 3. l. 12. chap. 4. l. 21
chap. 5. l. 30. chap. 7. P. 126. l. 5. Marg. add chap. 4


