A SERMON Preached at the TEMPLE, THE SUNDAY After the CHURCH was Opened; being
then newly Repaired, Adorned and Beautified at the Joint Expense OF THE TWO
Honorable Societies.

By JOHN STANDISH, D.D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

How Dreadful is this Place! Surely this is none other but the House of GOD,
Genesis 28.17. LONDON, Printed by Henry Clark, for Robert Clavel at the Sign of
the Peacock at the West End of St. Paul's, MDCLXXXIII.

To the Honorable SR ROBERT SAWYER KNIGHT, THE KINGS Attorney General.
SIR,
THis Discourse was meant honestly, (at least) and so far from the least
thought of giving just Offense, that an awful regard of God, and a due respect
to man, are the two main wheels it moves upon, for it was designed chiefly to
assert, and maintain that Reverence which Men of all Nations and Languages have
ever with one consent agreed to be due to the House of God, the Place where his
Honor dwells; and next to that, to congratulate and applaud the the
voluntary, seasonable, and exemplary Zeal of those two Honorable Societies,
who being grieved to see their Sion lying (somewhat) in the dust, spared for no
cost or charges to renew the Youth, and add more Grace and Beauty to that
incomparable Monument of ancient Piety.

Before I made one step toward drawing the Platform thereof, I considered with
my self that the Subject was a little nice, and the Age we live in not a little
captious; and therefore resolved to take better Judgments than my own along
with me, lest I should be new and singular in my Notion, or be thought to lean
wholly to my own understanding, against Solomon's express and safe Caution. For
this end and reason I consulted and perused some of the best Authors thereupon,
and of our own Church, and chose to speak their sense (and that in their own
very words sometimes) that I might neither stand nor fall alone, nor want
sufficient Bail in case of an Arrest upon an Action of Scandal.

This abundans Cautela notwithstanding, some of my Hearers (as it should seem)
were offended at me, and others more by hearsay, as if I had gone beyond my
line, stretched a point of the Divine Law, and transgressed the bounds of
Modesty, Truth, and Soberness.

I must confess Sir I do hold Sacrilege to be not only a Sin, but one of the
first Magnitude, and if any man be contentious, whose interest bids him think
otherwise, we have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God.

I acknowledge further (if that be my crime) that I do restect upon those late
goodly Reformers of ours, who presumed to buy and sell our Churches with their
appurtenances, as guilty of that sin; but that, not so much to rub up an old
sore, as to prevent a new wound, and dishearten allwise men from invading the
Churches patrimony for the future.

Bolder Strokes then these, or more unwary Passages I do not find in the whole
Piece; and therefore least a groundless noise should grow into credit to mine
and my Functions prejudice, as unpolished as it is, I am forced to make it
Public, without any manner of alteration, diminution, or addition of one
syllable therein, excepting only the marginal Quotations.

And now Sir, since You were pleased to give your self the trouble of reading
over my Notes, and to declare you found nothing in them but what might admit of
a very fair construction, I take the humble boldness to send them abroad under
your Patronage; not doubting but that, as it is the business of your high
Place, and Royal Trust, sometimes to implead and prosecute the Guilty, (as you
are Procurator Caesaris, in the old Roman style) so you are ever at leisure to
acquit and protect the Innocent.

In the number of which I presume to reckon,

Sir, Your Unworthy Servant, JOHN STANDISH.

St. JOHN, X. XXII. And it was at Jerusalem the Feast of the Dedication, and it
was Winter.


IT was great Insolence in those modern Jews to make the House of Prayer a Shop
of Merchandise, St. Mat. 21.13.
a Den of Thieves; and yet they have been quite outdone in Profaneness of late
years by some professed Christians, who turned the TEMPLE of GOD, St. Paul's
Land.
not only into an EXCHANGE for men, but a STABLE for horses too: as if they
meant to fulfill that Prophecy over again in the Literal sense, St. Mat. 24.15.
of the Abomination of Desolation standing where it ought not.

Sacrilege (however condemned by Divine, Civil, Saxon, Canon, Statute and
Common Law) was then thought a piece of Religion, an infallible sign of a Godly
man; and he was strongest in the faith, who believed no after-reckoning for it;
they went for the strongest Christians, who could swallow down, and without the
least reluctance of Conscience, digest the Fattest Consecrated morsels; it was
then deemed no more robbery to strip the Spouse of Christ both of her Dowry and
Beauty, than for the Israelites of old to borrow Jewels and earrings of the
Egyptians though by Gods express Command. Exodus 11.2.
They made no more scruple of pillaging Churches, than Dionysius did of the
spoiling the Temples of Idols; who said pleasantly of Aesculapius his golden
Beard he had cut off, Lactant. De Div. Instit. L. 2. c. 4.
that it did not become him by any means, because his Father Apollo wore none;
and then stripped Jupiter himself of his Vest of Gold, saying, that was to heavy
for Summer, and too cold for Winter; and one of Broad-Cloth would better serve
him for all weathers.

Nor may we suppose the Rapes then committed were only the extravagant heats of
some vulgar Fools; for (not to mention that face of Authority, those higher
Powers, or forces rather, that set them on work) the Wise Assembly of Divines
at Westminster, seem to be much of the same opinion in their Annotations upon
the Bible: wherein we do not find a syllable of any such sin as Sacrilege
under the Gospel; they either did not believe it, or else thought it not
seasonable to declare it, (when never more need) how loudly soever Saint Paul
makes the challenge, Romans 2.22.
thou that abhorrest Idols do thou commit Sacrilege? The Argument seems to
proceed a Minori, and then the Latter must be the greater sin of the two; for
Idolatry is at the worst but worshipping a false Deity, whereas Sacrilege is an
owning indeed, but withal, a contemning, invading, and robbing of the only true
GOD.

In the mean while they thought much to allow our Temples any more Holiness
than their common Kitchens, or Parlors at best: they turned God and his Service
out of possession to make room for Baal Berith, Judges 8.33.
that Idol of the Covenant: they profaned our Altars with the unhallowed
Sacrifices and strange fire of the Sons of Corah, and furiously decryed all
reverence in the house of God for Superstition.

But blessed be Almighty God, who has long since miraculously confuted their
abominable Principles, and Practices, and vindicated the Honor of his own
Reverend Name; Psalm. 111.9.
who has signally approved the pious bounty of such as loved our Nation, St.
Luke 7.5.
and built us Synagogues, by driving those zealous Mony-changers out of his
Temple, and restoring the Holy Place to that Primitive use, those sacred
Offices for which it was at first designed and set apart by solemn Dedication.

Now from these words of the Evangelist, I shall endeavor to resolve these
three Enquiries. 1. What Feast of Dedication is here spoken of? 2. By what
warrant the Jews did of old, and Christians do since, Dedicate Places to Gods
Service? 3. How far forth, and in what sense places thus Dedicated are to be
esteemed Holy?


I. I begin with the first, What Feast of Dedication is here spoken of? the
reason of the doubt is, because we read of three several feasts of Dedication
kept by the Jews at diverse times, and different occasions. The first was at the
dedication of Solomon's Temple, the solemnity and magnificence whereof you may
see at large, 1 Kin. 8. The 2d. was, of the second Temple rebuilt out of the
Ruins of the first, by Zerubbabel, after the Jews return from their Captivity
at Babylon, the story whereof is recorded, Ezra, chapter 6. and then besides those,
we read of a third Dedication of the Temple and Altar by Judas the Maccabee,
after Antiochus Epiphanes had defiled and profaned them with Idoll-sacrifices
and all uncleanness, 1 Maccab. c. 4. Now that the Feast of Dedication here
spoken of, was the last of these, that by Judas, is most evident by these two
Reasons.

1. It no where appears that either of the two former Feasts were annually
renewed, or observed any more then once; but of the last we find expressly that
Judas and his Brethren ordained that the days of the dedication of the Altar
should be kept in their season, (...) from year to year, by the space of eight
days, 1 Macc. 4.59.

2. Admitting (though we need not) that the dedication of the first or second
Temple, or both, might be commemorated by an annual feast (notwithstanding all
records are silent in the case) yet that this Feast here spoken of, must needs
be meant of the dedication of the Altar, is further evident from the
circumstance of time, not omitted by our Evangelist. [And it was Winter.]

Which punctually accords with the first Institution hereof in the forecited
place, 1 Macc. 4.
where it is said to be in the Month Casleu, their ninth Month, answering to
our December; whereas Solomon's Temple was dedicated in Autumn, in the Month
Ethanim, near our September, 1 Kings 8. And the second Temple in the Spring, in
their twelfth Month, called Adar, (as we read, 1 Esdras 7.5.) that is about our
March.

The first, and least material Enquiry being t^^s briefly, and fully resolved,
I proceed to the Second.

II. By what Warrant the Jews did of old, and Christians do since, Dedicate
places to Gods service?

And in order to our resolution hereof, it will not be amiss to premise and
observe, that both Jews and Christians did and have all along de facto erected
and dedicated certain Places for GODS Public Worship.

1. It is without dispute, and generally acknowledged, that the Jews had many
other places dedicated to Gods service, (besides the Temple) which, from their
religious Assemblies there held, they commonly called Synagogues. Of these
their own Writers tell us, there were 480 in Jerusalem, and as many with
proportion, in other Cities. The Temple was as it were, the Cathedral, or
Mother Church, Synagogues much like our Parish-Churches, or Chappells of Ease.
and this only difference is to be noted between them, that the Ceremonial
Service of God, by Sacrifice, Oblations, etc. was confined to the Temple, and
unlawful any where else; but his Moral service was common to all Synagouges,
as well as the Temple. For there the Law was solemnly read and expounded to the
People, and the Peoples prayers offered unto God. The only mention made of
Synagogues in the old Testament, Ps. 74.7, 8, and 84.13.
is in the Psalms, where they are styled Sanctuaries; though the
Talmud-Doctors extend that Precept to them also, Levit. 19.30.
Ye shall observe my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary. Whereupon Philo
calls them places of secondary holiness, to wit, in respect of the Temple, by
virtue and in imitation whereof, they were set apart and dedicated to an holy
use. But then the new Testament is so plain and frequent in telling us that
they had diverse Synagogues in all their Cities, and daily paid their reverence
thereto, as also of our Savior's often resorting thither to expound the Law,
and teach the people, that it were superfluous to enlarge further on this
Particular.

Whether in imitation of the Jews, or from a Principle of their own natural
Law, teaching them, that whatever God they worshipped, they must have some
convenient place to do it in, is uncertain: but this is most certain, that the
very Heathen themselves did generally erect Magnificent Temples and Altars, not
only at Rome, Ephesus, and Athens (where one we find inscribed TO THE UNKNOWN
GOD) and other famous Cities, but almost every where throughout the World. Only
some wandering Scythians are said to have none; the reason was because they had
no Houses of their own, but like salvage creatures, rambled daily from one
place to another. And of all other Sects of Philosophers, only the Stoics
forbad building of Temples, either out of derision of that vulgar error, that
Deities were kept prisoners and confined within those Walls; or else out of the
singular dissenting humor of that Sect, whereby they counted the general
practice of others a laudable and sufficient ground for their contrary opinion,

But then, 2. The practice of Christians is most clear from the best
Historians, that they built and separated places for Gods public Service from
time to time, when the persecutions of the Age did not restrain them.

Saint Luke observes that in the Apostles days they broke Bread, Acts 2.
that is, celebrated the Holy Sacrament from house to house. Beza may be my
Author, that He there means Houses set apart to that purpose: And yet Dr.
Hammond has more probably conjectured, that the Phrase (...), is no more than
(...). in the House, that is the House of God, the Temple, where (the same
Saint Luke had said before) they were continually; St. Luke 24.
and that the (...) or upper room where the Apostles were assembled, Acts 1.13.
was one of those Chambers belonging to the Temple (spoken of in 1 Chronicles.
28.11.) which they devoted to the public exercise of their Religion, till the
Jews maliciously turned them out. However it is reasonable to believe that
those vast sums of money laid down at the Apostles feet were not so wholly
expended upon the poor, Acts 4.35.
but a competent part was reserved to maintain the Decency of Gods Service in
the Sanctuary. It is more then probable from Saint Paul's words, that there was
a Church built at Corinth early, 1 Cor. 11.22. Have ye not houses to eat and to
drink in? or despise ye the Church of God, and shame them that have not? for
not only the opposition between private Houses and the public Church, but also
the difference between shaming the poor, and despising the Church, seems to
require, that Church there signifies the Place, and not the People; the most
that can be urged to the contrary is, that the Tyranny of those times would not
probably suffer them to erect many Churches, but that they were necessitated to
make use of some convenient Room in an ordinary House some times for their
Religious Worship. What then? it does not follow, but that those Rooms were
presently separated from all former and common uses, and thenceforth became
Holy Places.

That succeeding ages, were never without decent places for Divine Service, is
questioned by none but a few Enthusiasts that cite Arnobius and Lactantius
their writings in defense of Christianity against the Gentiles, because they
say, the Christians had then no Temples: but the fallacy lies in the word
Temples signifying Stately Fabrics, built to magnify their religion, which
they were not in a condition to compass then, their purses running low, and
their Profession being discouraged by the hi^^ Powers. But all this while they
can be no more supposed to have wanted places for their Assemblies, than to
have been no Christians. And yet by these men's good leave, the Christians had
their Basilica or Temples long before Constantines time, as Eusebius and others
do assure us, which were demolished under Dioclesian. Nay Lactantius himself
somewhere speaks of such an one in Nicomedia; Ego cum in Bithynia oratorias
Literas docerem, contigit ut codem tempore Dei Templum everteretur -- that is,
in the same persecution. He that would be further satisfied in this matter, may
consult Eusubius his Eccl. History; Lab. 10. chapter 3.
where he will find, that when that dreadful storm was blown over, and the
Churches had rest, and peace, Temples were presently rebuilt out of the ruins
of their old Foundations, and high Festivities appointed at their Eucoenia, or
new Dedication, which by the tenure of his relation appears to have been a most
ancient Custom, being in all places (as it were) naturally observed. No cost
was spared to show their cheerful affection, no thing was thought too dear to
part with for so laudable a work; the whole World seemed to triumph in having
occasion to pour out their gifts for so blessed a purpose. That forward
devotion, 1 Chronicles. 29.
those free will offerings which David once rejoiced exceedingly to behold in
the Jews on such an account, was then every where visible amongst the
Christians. The same Author tells us, that when Constantine had finished a
magnificent House for Gods Service at Jerusalem, the greatest part of the
Bishops in Christendom met together, at his summons, for the more solemn
Dedication thereof. As it greived David's royal heart to think, that Himself
should dwell in an House of Cedar, and the Ark of God still remain within
Curtains; 2 Samuel 7.2.
So this pious Emperor convinced the World by his Example, as well as Edict,
that it was a ridiculous fancy in men to think that God should delight to dwell
beggarly, and took no pleasure in their services, unless performed in some
ordinary Barn, or thatched Cottage. And certainly it is most suitable, decent
and fit for the greatness and Majesty of Jesus Christ, (who is now no longer in
the form of a servant, Philip. 2.7.
but Lord of all) and the sublimity of his Gospel, to worship Him in the beauty
of holiness, 1 Chronicles. 16.29.
unless we think as meanly of him, as the Apostate Julian's Officers did, who
when they saw the vast price of the vessels belonging to his service, said
blasphemously, what a deal of do and charge is here for the honor of Mary's
Son? or are content (which David scorned) to serve God with that which costs us
nothing. 2 Samuel 24.


Now the matter of fact being so fully evident, it will be no great difficulty
to resolve the Question de Jure, by what right and warrant both Jews and
Christians have in their several times devoted and set apart places for the
divine worship? supposing there be no express Command in Gods Law for it,
either in the Old or New Testament, what then? That there is no Caveat put in
against it, is sufficient to authorize an action laudable in it is self, nay
directly tending to the advancement of Gods Glory, and necessary to the
preserving of the well-being of his Church; and to scruple the lawfulness of
such an act for want of a positive command, were to question whether God gave
his Law to reasonable or unreasonable creatures. Besides there is an implicit
command at least, and God would never have enjoined all the Jews to reverence
his Sanctuaries, were they to have but one, that is, the Temple; nor can it be
imagined that an Ocean should be contained in a narrow Bucket; I mean that the
Children of Israel who were as the Sands of the Sea for multitude, Isai. 10.22.
could all find room in one Temple, of no great confines: or be reasonably
expected to have recourse thither from the remotest parts of Canaan to pay
their daily devotions. No; they were required to be at Jerusalem only at some
high Feasts, (such as that of the Passover) for they had Synagogues at home
wherein to celebrate their ordinary service; and therefore, we may observe that
when the veil of the Temple was rent in twain, to let out the ceremonial Law,
St. Matt. 27.
as now become useless, and the Temple it self at length destroyed by Titus,
Synagogues for Gods moral service remained still, and they were the true, and
more immediate Exemplars of our Churches. Thus the Communion of Saints being
one Article of the Christian Faith, they believe themselves bound to assemble
together frequently for the exercise of their common Christianity, consisting
chiefly in public prayers and the Eucharist, which they can no more perform
without convenient places for those holy uses, than a man can be supposed to
walk without legs, or fly without wings. And hence they Judge themselves
obliged to found and consecrate Churches to maintain and credit their Religion,
as well as provide for the poor members of their own Body, those living
Temples. S. Chrysostom truly construes the reason why our Savior would not
suffer Mary Magdelen to be reproved for her sumptuous expense upon his Body and
Person, St. Matt. 26
which might have done much good among the Poor, to be this, that his Disciples
might understand themselves to be bound to maintain the means and decorum of
Gods service as well as the Poor that attend upon it; wherefore the manner is,
and ever has been, to warm the House of God in a full body with solemn
Prayers, when it is newly finished, and Dedicate it to his worship, to maintain
in the minds of men a due reverence to those sacred Offices which ever after
shall be performed therein.

Places and Things after their Dedication and Consecration (which are both Acts
of Man) become presently Holy? I answer,

Persons solemnly deputed to minister and attend upon Holy Offices, are thence
denominated Holy.

2. Places and Things so qualified, are holy, because thereby the property is
altered, they are no longer men's, but Gods own Houses and Goods; we can no
longer call our selves Masters of those things we have already passed away
freely by deed of Gift. If it be urged, that all these things were Gods before,
as he is universal Monarch, and we cannot properly be said to give Him what was
already his own. I Answer,

3. That God indeed is absolute Lord of all, yet he has given the Earth to the
Sons of Men, and granted us a particular propriety to the use of those things;
and this is that we out of pious ends return to God again, receding from that
Right, and freely and solemnly excluding our selves and all other men from any
future title thereunto. But,

4ly, and Lastly, as under the Law, St. Matt. 23.19.
the Gift was sanctified by the Altar, so amongst Christians; all their acts of
Piety and Charily, whether public or private, are sanctified and accounted
holy by God through the Cross of Christ typified by their Altar, but more
lively represented and commemorated in our Sacrament of the Eucharist, which is
the chief part of Gods Service under the Gospel, and proper only to Christians;
and so I pass on to the third and last Enquiry.

III. How far forth Places so Dedicated ought to be esteemed Holy? In answer to
which I say,

1. There is no man so absurd and ridiculous as to think Churches capable of
that Holiness whereby Christian Souls are made Holy. For Holiness in men is a
part of the Image of God, once defaced, but since renewed and stamped again
upon his reasonable creatures; and to imagine Wood and Stone capable of
receiving the least Impression of the Divine Image, the darkest resemblance of
his Infinite Perfections, were the ready way to Idolatry. And therefore,

2. The Holiness we ascribe to the Houses of God, (common to all other
consecrated Things, Times, and Persons) is merely Relative and Ecclesiastical;
the formal reason whereof, is, their deputation to the Holy Ordinances of
Divine Service. For here daisy Prayers are made to the Father of Mercies; here
Thanks and Praise are solemnly offered for all his Benefits; here his Holy Word
is read and preached for our edification and comfort; here that Tremendum
Evangelii Mysterium (as St. Austine calls the Sacrament of our Lords Body and
Blood) is often celebrated; and in reference to these Spiritual Duties, the
Place it self is deservedly reputed and styled Holy.

Now this Holiness and Majesty of the Place has, in regard of us, great
virtue, force, and efficacy.

For 1. It requires of us a negative reverence due thereto, that men should
abstain from all light, vain, or secular businesses therein, from which it was
sequestered by its first Dedication.

As for things morally evil in themselves (such as lying, stealing, killing,
blaspheming, etc.) they are unlawful to be done in any place, but most of all
in Gods House, the profanation whereof adds a new circumstance, an eminent
aggravation to the Sin. One fearful instance of this nature, our Savior
charge those Jews, as answerable for; namely, the death of Zacharias, not
only a Priest, a holy Person, (but to add more weight to the fact still) slain
between the Temple and the Altar too, St. Matt. 23.35.
in an holy place, And I doubt amongst other circumstances of the late Scottish
Covenant (besides that it was peccant in the matter and substance) that will
one day be found to be none of the least, that it was generally taken in
Churches. But I must vindicate these sacred places not only from sinful and
unworthy actions, but from such as are of an indifferent nature also, lawful
enough elsewhere, but profane, if done in the House of God, set apart for holy
offices. And our Savior's own Example is my warrant for it, St. Matt. 21.12.
who drove all the Buyers, and Sellers, and Trapezytes out of the Temple;
thereby intimating, that even civil traffic and commerce (though in order to
sacred ends, for the Sheep and Oxen, sold there, were for Sacrifice) defiles
his House of Prayer.

2. Besides this Negative, there is also a positive reverence due to the House
of God. Our Church has well provided, that by the reverence of our outward
gestures at the divine service, our inward and hearty duty to God and his
ordinances, should be expressed and maintained. And so much is implied in St.
Paul's own precept, Glorify God in your Body and in your Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.20.
which are Gods. They are a little too superstitious, who will allow the Church
to be no longer an holy place, than whilst the Saints are in it; as if they
carried away the Holiness thereof home with them. Ye know, all men stand bare
in the Chamber of Presence, though the King be absent; how much more reason
then have we to express our humility and subjection to the supreme MAJESTY of
Heaven, who is never absent, but always present here, even in the Intervals of
his daily Service.

To all this I add, that the Holiness of consecrated Places and Things is such,
that it is no less than Sacrilege to apply them to any profane use. Quod semel
dicatum est Deo, amplius ad profanos usus transferri non debet; -- was once
current Law amongst Christians. And Things given to the Church, were said of
old to be consigned in manus mortuas; to intimate, that the Clergy had no more
power to alienate them de Jure, then a dead man has de Facto. Dr. Bas. of the
Sacr. page 86. Hag. 1.6. Dr. Bas. p. 118. Sr. H. Spelm. de nov. tem. Eccles. p.
88. and Cl. Spelm. to the Reader. p. 45. Reyner. fol. 127.
So that let modern projectors (says one) build Babels never so high, if they
be reared on the ruins of Sion, it is putting their Gains into the Prophets Bag
with Holes; both Fabric and Founder will sink together at last, and come to
nothing. And it is observed by Him and other modern Authors, that many of those
Families who purchased Abbey-Lands, are since extinct, or their Lands sold to
buy Bread. However thus much I am assured of, Levit. 27.28.
that men were free by the old Law, to devote their Lands to the Lord, or keep
them to themselves; but when once they had devoted them, they themselves could
not call them back, under a Curse. Nor can I find any great difference between
the sin of Achan, Josh. 7.21. and that of Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5.3. for
they are convicted by the Apostle there, not only for lying to the holy Ghost,
but for keeping back part of the price of the Land, given to maintain the
Church in the communion of Gods Service. From whence it follows, that, that
which is consecrated to Gods Service under the Gospel, is Anathema, for the
same reason as under the Law, because the thing is accursed to them that
withdraw, and rob God thereof.

And now what remains, but that we make some practical Inferences upon this
whole matter. And,

1. From the first Enquiry resolved, I infer, That if the Temple and the Altar
were Dedicated by Judas and his Brethren, and commemorated by an Annual Feast,
and that approved also by our Saviors own presence as it, though it pretended
to no more than humane Institution: then let no man charge us with
superstition, if we upon occasion follow their Example, to maintain and cherish
in the minds of men that reverence due to Places consecrated to God Almighties
Service, and to the holy Offices to be performed therein.

2. From the Second, I infer, That if the piety and Bounty of others have
built, repaired, and adorned Places for our Religious Assemblies, we should be
beyond parallel Ungrateful to them, (not to say contemptuous to God, should we
not remember them concerning this, Prove. 31.31.
and suffer their own works to praise them in the Gates. Say not thou (says
Solomon) what is the cause that the former days were better than these?
Eccles. 7.10.
for thou inquire not wisely concerning this. Times have sometimes changed
for the worse; but that they must needs do so always, is no good consequence;
for I must observe (in spite of all popular murmurs and clamours to the
contrary) that the former days we spoke of, P. 1.
were far worse than These, as in many others, so in this respect also, that
the sober and wiser part of men amongst us now do not only abhor Popish Idols,
but detest Fanatic Sacrilege too. They take more solid pleasure and
satisfaction in building and adorning Churches, than any of those blind Zealots
did in plucking them down as cumbering the ground. And this Kings Reign is
likely to be as famous to after-ages for their Repairing, and Restoration, as
that Rebellion was for their ruin. And blessed be the Lord God who has put it
into your Hearts also vindicate the Honor of his House and Name, and to
Dedicate part of your substance to his Sanctuary (of your own mere motion, and
good will) in restoring this Sacred, Ancient, Curious Pile to, yea and beyond
its primitive Luster, that your Second Temple also might be more glorious than
the first, even in the literal sense. Hereby all the world may see, and know
that you have a due and just sense of Gods discriminating Mercy, in sparing
this his House out of two several consuming Fires, that more than threatened it;
as if He had said to them both, thus far shall ye go and no farther; and to the
destroying Angel, It is enough, stay now thine hand! 2. Sam. 24.


And may this goodly Structure be still Armor of proof against all future
Casualties to transmit your Praise and Bounty to all posterity; but chiefly to
preserve Gods Glory and Worship in the beauty of Holiness, even till that
general Conflagration of all things, when this great Machine of the World shall
be dissolved, and Time it self shall be no more, but go out like Fire, and be
extinguished in the bottomless Ocean of Eternity!

3. And lastly, from the last Enquiry resolved, I infer, that, if these
consecrated Places be Holy, then let us beware of polluting or profaning them
in any wise. Put off thy shoes from thy feet, (says God to Moses) for thou
stand on holy ground. Ex. 3.5. And his Command by Solomon, reaches us also,
Eccles. 5.1.
Keep thy foot when thou go into the House of God. A Motto generally written
over the door of the Synagogue, says Buxtorf. The very Heathen Idolaters were
not without some sense of this; for when the Ark of God was by the Philistims
set in the Temple of Dagon, Dagon fell down; and because by that mischance
Dagons head and hands were cut off by the threshold of the door, therefore
neither Priest, nor People durst ever tread on that threshold more. 1. Sam. 5.
And of the many typical precepts in Leviticus, that the Israelites should wash
and cleanse themselves by diverse cenemonies before they enter into the
Sanctuary, we ought to make this Moral, that Christianity requires us to wash
our Souls from all that filch of lust and passion before we presume to enter
into the Holy Place. Be we therefore more ready to hear (says Solemon) than to
offer the sacrifice of fools, Eccle. 5.1.
who are rash, heady, and presumptuous, and think their Sin is expiated for,
though they never think to change their wicked minds. For they that come hither
with malicious hearts, and polluted hands, and bring their Gift to the Altar
with so little St. Matt. 5.
Charity that they are ready (like Cain) to sprinkle it with their Brothers
Blood, do make the House of prayer a Den of Thieves indeed, and turn the Church
of God into the Devils Chapel, Revel. 3.9.
the Lords Sanctuary into the Synagogue of Satan.

-- Procul, O Procul ite prophani. -- But let us all rather approach the Holy
Place with holy and humble hearts, and pay our Devotions to Almighty God, not
in word and tongue only, St. John 4.23.
but in Spirit and Truth, as becomes those who are living Temples of the Holy
Ghost; that so our daily Sacrifices may be as sweet Incense, our Sins pardoned,
our Prayers, Alms, and Persons accepted, and all our hearty performances
Crowned at the last day with an Euge -- well done good and faithful Servants,
St. Matt. 25.23.
enter ye into the Joy of your Lord: even that Sanctum Sanctorum, that
everlasting Temple not made with hands, there to sing eternal Halelujahs to the
Holy Blessed and Glorious Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and all
through the mercy and Merits of our only Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, to whom
with the Father and Holy Spirit be all the Dominion, Power and Glory now and
ever, Amen,

FINIS.

