THE Mutual Duties OF Elders and People.

Delivered in a DISCOURSE AT Beckles in Suffolk, October. 13. 1697.

At the setting apart of Mr. John Killinghal, to the Office of an Elder, over a
Church of Christ there.

By John Stackhouse, Elder of a Church of Christ in NORWICH.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Snowden, for Edward Giles, Bookseller in Norwich, near
the Marketplace, School.

To the READDR.
THis Sermon was preached upon a special occasion, at the setting apart of an
Elder over a Church of Christ; the Elders of the Churches, and the People there
present, did earnestly desire our Reverend Brother to print his Sermon, they
were so affected with it; and so they might well be: The Sermon is so
Judicious, so Quick, and Powerful, that I hope the Lord will make it of great
Use to many.

Here you have the Duties of Ministers and People, set forth so excellently,
and fully, that those that read this Sermon will see, That this Servant of
Christ is mightily in the Scriptures, an able Minister of the New Testament,
and full of the Knowledge of the Lord.

When I read over this Sermon as it was written, by one that took it in
Shorthand, I encouraged the Author all that I could, to satisfy the Desires
of those that were so earnest for the printing of it. I have often in public
and in private praised God for the Grace and Gifts bestowed, upon this Reverend
Brother; and now that I am old, and under such great Pains, walking in the
Valley of the Shadow of Death, it is a great satisfaction to me, to leave this
Church of Christ with one so able, and faithful to take Care of them. The Lord
continue his Life, and Strength, pour out of his Spirit upon him more and more;
and grant that the Congregation may esteem him highly for his Works sake; and
be at Peace amongst themselves; which is my hearts Desire, and Prayer of,

Martin Fynch.
December. 27. 1697.
To my Dear and Reverend Brethren, in the Work of the Gospel, who desired the
Printing of this Sermon.
WHether you may like this Sermon in reading it, as well as you did in hearing
it, I (who am conscious of the meanness of it) should greatly doubt, if I were
not well satisfied concerning your Love and Candor. My design and desire was
therein (as it is in all my weak Labors) to profit, more than to please; and
the profit of many was, I believe, your aim and hope in pressing me to the
Publication thereof; I have therefore yielded, that your Request should
overruled my own Aversness to the Press.

The Text discoursed on led me to speak of so many several Particulars, that
they could not be fully discussed by me in one Discourse, (though long enough for
the Occasion.) What I have briefly hinted to explain, how Elders are over the
Church, I have read more largely declared, in the Writings of Dr. Owen, Dr.
Goodwin, and others, (as I suppose you also have) where such as desire more
full satisfaction, concerning that, or other Points, may find it; I follow them
so far, as I understand they follow the Word of God, the only infallible Rule.
Now that the Father of Lights, and the God of all Grace, would teach Us, and
the several Churches of Christ, over which he has set us, so to walk, as is
here plainly declared; and much more abundantly, according to his Holy Word;
and that he would strengthen our Hands in his great Work, against all
Discouragements, and that the Word of the Gospel may greatly prevail, and that
this mean Discourse may be somewhat subservient thereunto, is the earnest
Prayer of,

Dear and Reverend Brethren, Your Brother and Companion, in the Kingdom and
Patience of Jesus Christ, (though most unworthy,) J. STACKHOUSE.
Norwich, Dec. 17. 1697.
The Mutual Duties of Elders and People.
1 Thessal. V. 12, 13. And we beseech you, Brethren, to know them which labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them
very highly in Love for their Works sake. And be at Peace among your selves.
THE Exhortation is very suitable, and seasonable for you now; and, Oh! that
the Spirit of God would set it home upon your Hearts; the Light of the Spirit
is a more powerful Teaching, than the Words of a poor Worm.

Above other places it pleased God that the Gospel preached had a very sudden
and great success at Thessalonica, a chief City in Macedonia: You read in Acts
17. That Paul Preaching to them three Sabbath days, some Jews, and many
Greeks, and devout Women, not a few, were converted: And a Church was gathered,
(for so he directs both these Epistles, Unto the Church of the Thessalonians,)
and Officers were set over them, as appears from the Text. And because they
received the Word of God with much affliction, the Apostle was very solicitous
for Chap. 1. v. 6^.
them, and he sent Timothy from Athens, that he might establish them; and
comfort them, that they might not be moved by their afflictions, Chap. 3. ver.
2, 3. And upon Timothy's return, he wrote from Corinth this first Epistle, and
afterward the second Epistle, and all within the compass of the first Year of
his Preaching to them. Having in this Epistle declared the Truths of the Gospel
to them, and variously instructed them, he comes to exhort them to those
Duties, that might make their Communion comfortable and edifying, Chap. 5. v.
11. Wherefore comfort your selves together, and edify one another, even as
also ye do: He would have them to consider those comfortable Truths, and to
observe those holy Precepts which he had laid down in this Epistle, and so to
comfort and edify one another; and he urges it, and encourages them
thereunto, by commending them, that already they did so practice, and that
therefore they ought to abound yet more and more. All Exhortation does not
imply a Reproof, as if People did not do what they are exhorted to, but that
they should yet abound more and more.

Hereunto he adds in the Text, an Exhortation to these necessary Duties that
they owed to them that were over them, their Pastors or Teachers; for howsoever
careful they might be in the discharge of those Christian Duties of mutual
Exhortation and Comfort, yet they must not think their Ministers needless.
Brethren are to watch over one another, and exhort and comfort one another in a
way of Love; but Elders do it in the Authority of Christ, as sent by him; and
as you may expect God's gracious Blessing upon your admonishing, and comforting
one another, so much more may you expect it from the Ministry of them that are
set over you, Heb. 10. 24, 25. Let us consider one another, to provoke unto
love, and to good works; this is the Duty of every particular Member of the
Church; but then it follows, not forsaking the assembling of your selves
together. Every Servant must watch over one another, that nothing be done
contrary to the Master's Will and Interest; but the chief Steward does it with
Authority. Christ will not have his Children fed only with uncertain and
slender Supplies, from their Brethren, to whom he does vouchsafe Spiritual
Gifts; which, as there is occasion, they must make manifest for the profiting
of others; but he does also appoint such as should give every one their portion
of Meat in due season; that shall preach the Word in season, and out of season;
that shall give themselves wholly to those Things, and make it their main
Business whilst they live. Christian love and faithfulness in exhorting one
another, should help forward the Work of the Ministers, and not tempt any to
despise them that are set over them, as useless. So much for the Connection, it
being joined by the copulative Particle, and.

In the Text observe, First, A loving and earnest Compellation, we beseech you
Brethren; and oh that we could at this time so beseech you, as that we might
prevail.

Secondly, You have a description of the Persons, to whom the Duties, mentioned
in the Text, are to be performed.

1. They are described from their Work, they labor among you, they labor in
the Word and Doctrine chiefly. So in 1 Timothy 5. 17. They labor among you. The
Greek may be rendered in (...).
you; they labor in you, as a Builder labors in the House that he builds,
they labor in your Hearts and Souls. That (Beloved) is our desire, and the end
of all our Labor, to make suitable impressions of the Word of God upon your
Souls, by the power of the Spirit accompanying our Labors, that we might be
able to say as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 9. 1. Ye are our Work in the Lord.

2. You have their Dignity: They are set over you; that is, To rule you, and
govern you, (...), such as stand before you, (that is the first signification
of the word) such as do excel you, or that rule you. So the word is rendered, 1 Timothy 3. 4, 5. One that Rules well his own House, having his Children in
subjection with all gravity; for if a Man know not how to Rule his own House,
how shall he take care of the Church of God? The same word, in both Verses, is
rendered to Rule, which in the Text is rendered by being over. Though it is not so
absolute a Rule, as the Rule of a Father is in his Family, yet it does import
somewhat of ordering and governing; he that knows not how to rule his own
House, how shall he take care of the Church of God? The Elder is not a mute
Person in the Church of God; but as a Father has more to do to order his
Family, than any other person has in the Family, so the Elder has more to do
to order the Church, than any private Brother has.

And unto this the Apostle does subjoin a limitation, it is in the Lord; it is
not a Civil Dominion, but it is a Spiritual Rule, it is according to the Lord's
Institution and Laws, it is in his Name and Authority, and it is for his Glory
only; it is in the Things that belong to Religion, and the Worship of the Lord.

Thirdly, These Persons are described from one special instance of their Work,
they admonish you.

The third Particular is the Duty of the People to their Ministers; and the
manner of proposing it, does carry great enforcement to it; they to whom these
Duties are to be performed, being so described as before, there is great
Evidence that those Duties must be performed to them.

I. They must know them: Now to know does signify more than barely the being
acquainted with them, and giving them an opportunity of being acquainted with
you, (though some Church Members are very much guilty of neglecting that) and it
implies more than barely to know their Gifts; for, according to the Hebrew
Phrase, words of Sense do connote the Affections and the Effects thereof: As
not knowing signifies neglecting, as it was spoken to Christ, in Isaiah 55. 5.
Thou shall call a Nation that thou know not, whom thou had neglected for
so many Ages. Acts 14. 16. and 17. 30. as the poor Gentiles were neglected. So,

1. Knowing does signify, First, acknowledging them to be such as they are,
and should be accounted by you to be. So 1 Cor. 16. 18. Acknowledge ye them
that are such; acknowledge them, own them. I will not know a wicked person,
says the Psalmist, Psalm 101. 4. He explains it in the 6th Verse; He shall not
stay within my House, I will not own him for my Servant. There arose a King in
Israel that knew not Joseph; surely Joseph, and his Benefits that he had
procured to Egypt, and the Kings thereof, could not be forgotten in fifty Years
time; but he would not own that he was any way obliged to the Memory of Joseph,
to show Kindness to his Posterity, and Kindred; but he used them cruelly: Thus
also I understand that in Acts 23. 5. I knew him not to be God's high priest; I
did not own him, (...).
and acknowledge him, to be God's High Priest, he being but a base Intruder,
and the Office it self being determined by the Sacrifice of our great
High Priest Jesus Christ, who has accomplished all that was tipified by that
Office, which was now become nothing but a matter of Traffic for Gain, and
worldly Grandeur.

2. Know them; that is, mind them, and consider them; as in that passionate
Lamentation of our Redeemer over Jerusalem, Luke 19. 42. Oh that thou had
known in this thy day, the things that belong to thy peace. That is, Oh that
thou had minded them, and had considered them: So Paul knowing that one
part of the Counsel were Pharisees, and the other Sadduces; Acts 23. 6. (...).
that is, considering it.

3. Knowing imports caring, and providing for them: Lord, what is Man that thou
take knowledge of him? Psalm 144. 3. that thou do care for him, or provide
for him. The righteous man regards the life of his beast, Prove. 12. 10. In
the Hebrew (...)
it is, he knows it; and much more should you regard the Life of your Elders.

4. Knowing imports loving; the Lord knows the way of the righteous, Psalm 1.
6. Depart from me, I know you not, Matthew. 7. 23. If any man love God, the same
is known of God, 1 Cor. 8. 3. i. e. If any Man love God, the same is beloved of
God; for we love him, because he first loved us. That is the first Duty; you
must know them, you must acknowledge them, you must mind and consider them, and
what they say; you must care and provide for them, and love them.

II. But, Secondly, You must esteem them very highly, (...), superabundantly;
Oh be not afraid that you should abound too much in your esteeming them.

III. And, Thirdly, You must love them, esteem them highly in love; hereunto is
added the true Motive of your esteeming them, and loving them; that is, for
their Works sake. That is the third part of the Text, the Duties that are
required from the People to their Ministers.

IV. He exhorts to another Duty; that is, that they should be at Peace one with
another, and with their Elders: It seems to have connection with the former
Duties, either as an effect, and then you must understand it thus; in your
conscientious knowing, esteeming, and loving your Elders, your mutual Peace
will be best maintained and preserved: But if any do despise their Elders,
Schism and Division will presently arise. Or else this, Be at Peace among your
selves, may be joined to the former as a means, and then you may understand it
thus, mutual Peace will help you to carry it to your Elders according to your
Duty; but if you are divided one from another, you will fail in your Duty to
your Elders, and quarrel with them also. From these Verses I propose these
Points of Doctrine to you.

I. That such as are set over a Church of Christ, must labor among them, and
admonish them.

II. That it is the Duty of the whole Church, and of every particular Member of
the Church, to know, esteem, and love, most abundantly, them that are over
them, in the Lord.

III. That the Elder's faithfully attending to his Work and the Peoples
conscientious discharge of their Duty to their Elder, and mutual Peace, are
strictly joined together.

I will make what haste I can, a little to open, and apply these Doctrines to
you.

Doct. I. That such as are set over a Church of Christ, must labor among them,
and admonish them.

Give me leave to open unto you their Dignity and their Duty, and so to apply
it.

I. For their Dignity. First, They are set over a Church. Secondly, In the Lord.

1. They are set over a Church of Christ; we are not set over many Churches,
but each over that particular Church where Christ does place us; it is an human
Device to set one Man over many Churches; but Elders are over particular
Churches: And in the right Execution of their Office, and the Duties of their
Office, they are over the whole Church, and every Member thereof, though as to
their Persons they may be under them. As Luther said, In regard of my Person I
will fall down before any Man; but in regard of the Truth of Christ, which I
administer, I look upon even the Kings of the Earth to be but as Dust. Whatever
weakness, or darkness may be in an Elder, yet in his Holy Administrations he is
over even all the People. As the Master of a Ship, whilst he guides the Ship
aright, in the work of guiding the Ship, is over all that are in the Ship; Mr.
Shepherd*s Cav^^^.
though a King were in it, yet it belongs to the Master to order and guide the
Ship. It is true indeed, that the Elders are the Servants of the Church for
Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4. 5. But you are not from thence to argue, that they are
properly your Servants to be commanded by you; but they are Servants; that is,
they are to lay out themselves wholly in seeking the profit, and edification of
the Church, according to the Duty of their Office. And A^ Acts 13. 36.
they are also the Servants of Christ, to do his Work to the Church: Thus in
Col. 4. 12. Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ, saluteth you,
always laboring fervently for you in prayer, etc. So the Apostle says, The
servant of the Lord must not strive; but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach,
patient; in meekness instructing them that oppose themselves. 2 Timothy 2. 24.
And, being the Servants of Christ, they must not persuade any to believe Men,
or please Men: Do I now persuade men or God? or, do I seek to please men? for
if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10.

In the same Sense they are called Men of God, 1 Timothy 6. 11. dedicated to his
service, in an especial manner; they are instituted by Christ, they receive
their Authority from Christ by the Church, they depend on Christ for the
faithful discharge of their Work; and their Authority is not to be taken from
them, unless they forfeit their Calling by such Errors and scandalous
Enormities as deserve Excommunication; till then they are over you, and are
your Rulers.

2. They are over the Church, in the Lord; it is not an earthly Dignity, no
Magisterial Dictatorship, no rigid Authority, no Secular Grandeur belongs to
them. So our Lord told his Apostles in Luke 22. 26. ye shall not be so; i. e.
ye shall not exercise Lordship and Authority in a rigid way; but he that is
greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, (it is the
same word that is rendered Governor, Matthew. 2. 6.) (...).
as he that does serve. We are not to lord it over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 3.

The means of the Elders executing their Office are not carnal means, but
Spiritual; not carnal Force, nor carnal Policy, but the Word of God, the Sword
of the Spirit. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. Elders must not make their own Will, but the Will of
Christ, the Rule of all their Actings in the Church of Chirst: It is in the
Lord.

I design briefly to open unto you how they are over the Church in the Lord.
First, In General. And, Secondly, In Particular.

I. In General I shall show you, That all the Names and Titles that are given
to the Ministers of Churches in the Scripture, do both speak Authority;
entrusted to them by Christ, and to be exercised by them in the Name of Christ,
and for his Glory; and do also import a tender Care, Kindness, Compassion, and
Watchfulness, that they ought to have of the Flock. 1 Timothy 3. 5. How shall he
care for the House of God? They do also import their faithfulness, and
subjection to their Lord Jesus Christ.

1. They are called the Messengers of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2. 7. They are
called the Angels of the Churches; Angels sent The word here used, (...) is
often rendered Angel, As 2 Samuel 14. 17, 20.
by Jesus Christ unto the Churches, Rev. 1. 20. They are called Ambassadors to
treat with Sinners in the Name of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 20. And they must not
speak their own Words, but their Lords Words; they must not seek their own
Will; or their own Glory, but his that sent them; and they are compassionately
to entreat poor Rebels to seek Peace with Christ; and they are carefully to
watch to preserve Peace between Christ and poor Souls.

2. They are called the Fathers of the People: So Elijah was called, My Father,
my Father, 2 Kings 2. 12. Even Idolaters did own this Title. Micha in Mount
Ephraim, Judges 17. 10. desired the Levite to be a Father to him; the Men of
Dan told the Levite, That it was better for him to be a Father to Judges 18. 12.
a whole Tribe, than to a private House. Joram called Elisha, my Father, 2
Kings 6. 21. So also did Joash, 2 Kings 13. 14. And especially such Ministers,
as Christ makes use of to be Instruments of the conversion of Sinners, are
their Fathers: Therefore 1 Cor. 4. 12.
they, being Fathers, must travail in birth, that Christ may be formed in the
Hearts of those to whom they minister; as the Apostle tells the Galatians, Gal.
4. 19. he did on their behalf; and they must also be tenderly affectionate, and
solicitous for the good of their People: As ye know, says the Apostle to the
Thessalonians, how we exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of you,
(as a Father does his Children,) 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11. They are Fathers that must
comfort, and exhort, and charge the People. But withal, they must not pretend
to such an absolute Paternal Power, as to require any to believe what they say,
or to do what they command, without showing from the Word of God, that thus God
reveals his Mind, and that thus God commands us to do: For any such Paternal
Power is forbidden by Christ, call no Man Father on Earth; for one is your
Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 23. 9.

3. They are called Guides, or Rulers, or Leaders, Heb. 13. 7, 17, 24. The word
(...) signifies Guides or Leaders, and so you may find it in the Margin of your
Bibles, and it does import guiding with some kind of Authority, in the Name of
Jesus Christ: It is the same word that is attributed to Christ, Matthew. 2. 6.
when it is said, that out of Bethlehem should come a Governor, that shall rule
my People Israel. Christ is a Governor and a Guide, Isaiah 55. 4. And being to
guide, they are to go in and out before their People: It is true of the chief
Shepherd, and proportionably of under Shepherds, each of them, that their Sheep
must hear his Voice, and he leads them out, and when he puts forth his own
Sheep, he goes before them, and the Sheep follow him, for they know his voice,
John 10 3, 4. But being Guides, they must not be blind Guides, woe be to them if
they be such. They must direct the Church, especially in all weighty Affairs
that concern the common Good of the Church; but they are to guide with Counsel,
with good Reason, and with Scripture, not with Self-will, and with Rigor.

4. They are Stewards, 1 Titus 7. A Bishop must be blameless, as the Steward of
God. 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a Man so account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ,
and Stewards of the Mysteries of God; therefore they must be faithful: So it
follows in the second Verse. It is required of Stewards, that a Man be found
faithful; and they must be diligent and careful, to give every one their
portion of Meat in due season, Luke 12. 42, 43. Who then is that faithful and
wise Steward, whom his Lord shall make Ruler over his Household, to give them
their portion of Meat in due season? Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord
when he comes, shall find so doing. And they must remember, that they must
give an account to their Lord when he comes; and if they shall not be able to
give an account with Joy, Oh how great will be the Terror of that Day!

5. They are Watchmen, Ezekiel. 3. 17. Son of Man, I have made thee a watchman
unto the house of Israel, therefore hear the words of my mouth, and give them
warning from me. Faithful Watchmen must receive the word from God, and must
give warning from God; and let not any think that we are severe in our Warning,
for it is from God that we give Warning. My Lord, I stand continually upon the
Watchtower in the day time, and I am set in my Ward whole nights; so the Duty
of a Watchman is described, Isa. 21. 8. Let none say in mockery, Watchman, what
of the Night? Watchman, what of the Night? We tell you in the Name of the Lord,
(Ver. 11, 12.) the Morning comes, a bright Morning of National Peace; but if
you repent not, the Night also comes of some dismal trouble, or thicker
darkness than what ever yet you have felt; if you will enquire, then enquire
seriously; and if you will return, return with unfeigned Repentance, and come
to Christ by a lively Faith; if you do not, it will be an uncomfortable
reflection, that Conscience will make in a day of Evil: This Evil comes upon us
because we did not hearken unto the Voice of our Watchmen warning us, we obeyed
not the Voice of our Teachers, and despised Instruction.

6. They are called Overseers or Bishops. Feed the Church of (...).
God, whereof the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, Acts 20. 28. If a Man
desires the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good work, 1 Timothy 2. 1. But
hereby is not to be understood, as some do groundlesly suppose, any superior
Order, or Degree of Preheminency that some Men have in the Ministry over
others: No, it imports no more than the common Work of all Elders, to oversee
the Flock that is committed to them, and to take heed to them; which requires
great Care and Diligence. Titus 1. 5. The Apostle tells him, he left him to
ordain Elders; and at the sixth Verse he gives the Character of an Elder; If
any be blameless, etc. and he proves it in the seventh Verse; for a Bishop must
be blameless. They are to oversee the Flock with great Care, and with great
Diligence; therefore they must take the oversight of them, not by constraint,
but willingly; not for filthy lucres sake, but of a ready mind, 1 Pet. 5. 2.

7. They be (...), Shepherds or Pastors, and they must feed the People with
Knowledge and Understanding, Jer. 3. 15. It is true of Christ the chief
Shepherd, and proportionably of each under Shepherd, that the People must hear
his word, and follow him; a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from
him; for they know not the Voice of strangers, John 10. 4, 5. They are to give
them wholesome Food, wholesome Doctrine; and the People must distinguish between
sound Doctrine and the Voice of Strangers. But still it must be remembered, that
Christ is the chief Shepherd of our Souls, 1 Pet. 2. 25. and 5. 4. And all Men
that he does set over one or other of his Churches, they are but under
Shepherds; all that they deliver truly and soundly, they have it from Christ,
that one Shepherd, Eccles. 12. 11. And they must, being under Shepherds,
imitate the Example of our Great Shepherd, of whom it is prophesied in Isa. 40.
11. He shall feed his Flock like a Shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his
Arm, and carry them in his Bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with
young. Thus must Shepherds in the Churches do, they must care for the tender
Lambs, they must care for those that are oppressed with Infirmities, they must
not over-drive the Flock, and they must diligently know the state of their
Flock, whether increasing, or decaying in grace. They must be very careful to
avoid that reproof that God gives by Ezekiel against the Shepherds in that day,
Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4. Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel, that feed themselves;
should not the Shepherds feed the flock? Ye eat the fat, and clothe you with
the wool, ye kill them that are fed; but ye feed not the flock. The diseased
have ye not strengthened, nor healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound
up that which was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven
away, neither have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with
cruelty have ye ruled them. Oh this is a severe Reproof, a dreadful Charge to
be given in against any that are called to be Shepherds or Pastors; it behooves
us all to keep our selves unspotted, and to be faithful.

8. They are called (...), Teachers, or Doctors, Isa. 20. v. 30. Thine eyes
shall see thy Teachers, they shall no more be removed into corners. 1 Cor. 12.
28. God has set some in the Churches, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets,
thirdly Teachers: Therefore they must be apt to teach. Therefore that is
inculcated as the qualification of a Bishop, 1 Timothy 3. 2. He must be apt to
teach. And they must hold fast the faithful Word, and be able by sound Doctrine
to exhort, and convince gainsayers, Titus 1. 8. They must exhort, instruct,
and comfort the Church, with all Authority; these things command and teach, 1 Timothy 4. 11. Charge them that are rich in this World, cap. 6. 17. They must
reprove publicly such as do sin publicly; they must give an open reproof for
open sins. 1 Timothy 5. 20. Them that sin, rebuke before all, that others also may
fear; and they must take heed to themselves, and to their Doctrine: There must
be great care and great solicitousness 1 Timothy 4. 16.
in us, that what we speak in the Name of the Lord, be indeed the Mind of the
Lord, and cordially believed and submitted unto by our selves as such.

9. And lastly, They are called (...), Elders, or Presbyters. If any Man be
sick, let him send for the Elders of the Church, James 5. 14. The Elders that
are among you, I exhort, who am also an Elder, 1 Pet. 5. 1. But with Elders
there must be Wisdom, and an Ability to give Counsel, and Gravity; they must
not be Novices, they must Rule well, and be Examples to the People.

Thus in general, from their Names and Titles, I have showed you that they are
over you, in the Lord.

II. I shall show you a little in Particular what you are to understand by this
being over you, in the Lord.

1. It is a Power communicated by Christ's Word of Command, or Institution; the
Constitutions of the Gospel do prescribe it, Matthew. 28. 20. teaching them to do
whatsoever things I have commanded you: And if any do assume more than Christ
does grant and command in his Word, such are Usurpers, Thieves, and Robbers,
vainly pretending to what they do not receive and derive from Christ by his
Word.

2. The Rule that Chrst has entrusted and committed to them by his Word, is
the guidance of the Church, in all things belonging to the Worship of God; for
the ordering and disposing of all things in the Church, for Christ's Glory, and
the Churches Edification; they are to care for all the Spiritual Concernments
of the whole Society that is committed to them; they are to care for the House
of God, 1 Timothy 3. 5.

3. They have their Power immediately by the Church, but not from the Church;
Christ does apply the Office, though the Church designs the Person: The Church
chooses them, and the Holy Ghost makes them Overseers, Acts 20. 28. They are
sent by Christ, John 13. 20. He that receives whomsoever I send, receives me;
and he that receives me, receives him that sent me: They are Ambassadors for
Christ; they do act in his stead, and by the Authority that he has committed
to them. As a King in his absence, may appoint Officers to wait upon his Queen,
and to manage the Affairs of his Kingdom; and may also give Rules, that upon
the death of any of them, she should Dr. Goodwin's Government of Churches.
choose new ones; yet still their Authority is such as the King has vouchsafed
in his Commission to them, not what the Queen gives them by choosing them.

4. The Obligation of the Members of the Church, to a free, and voluntary, and
uncompelled Obedience to them, does arise from the Authority of Jesus Christ,
which the Elders exercise according to his Laws. Your Obedience, I say, must be
free and voluntary, yet you are obliged to obey them, because they exercise the
Authority of Christ, according to his Laws. They do not act by the Authority of
the Church, when they declare the consent and determination of the Church in
the common Affairs of the Church. The Church does in consenting exercise their
Liberty, and their Privilege, according to the order of the Gospel, (for the
order of the Gospel is such, that no act can take place in the Church without
their own consent) but whilst the Church does thus exercise their Liberty, and
the Elders do declare the consent of the Church; yet still they act by the
Authority of Christ, and in his Name, Matthew. 28. 3 last Verses. All Power is
given to me in Heaven and in Earth. Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations,
baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you. Note
here, That because all Power is given unto me, therefore I do authorize you to
disciple and baptize all Nations, and to teach them to observe all the
Institutions of Worship that I have commanded you. All Gospel Ministrations are
grounded upon the Power that is given to Christ; and that not only with respect
to the Apostles themselves, but also with respect to ordinary Elders, that are
their Successors; for so it follows, Lo I am with you always, to the end of the
World. So in Tit. 2. 15. These things teach, and exhort, and rebuke with all
all authority; let no Man despise thee. They must not act Imperiously, nor
Precariously, but they are to act in their Ministration with all Authority; and
this Authority is not their own Authority, but Christ's; and the Authority of
Christ must be be freely owned; no Man must despise them. Thus I have spoken to
their Dignity, they are over you, in the Lord.

II. Consider their Work; they labor among you, and admonish you: And here let
me show you Summarily, First, What their Work is. And, Secondly, That it is a
labor.

I. As for their Work, the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 12. For the perfecting of
the Saints, for the work of the Minstry, for the edifying the Body of Christ:
There seems to be a transposition of these words, for the work of the Ministry,
which lies in (...).
those two things here named, the jointing in of the Saints into Christ, and
into Church Fellowship, and the edifying of the Body, that such as are not
Saints, may become Saints by the Power of the Word, and be jointed into the
Church; and after that they are jointed in, that the Body might be edified.
Particularly.

1. They are to preach the Word of God, and they are to administer all the
Ordinances of God; and they must do it diligently and faithfully. This charge
is given, 2 Timothy 4 12. Preach the word, be instant, in season, and out of
season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering, and doctrine. They
must speak like the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4. 11. with clear Evidence of
Scripture Light, that God in all things may be glorified. They must not corrupt
and mingle the pure Word of God, with the sophistical Notions and Errors of
Men, 2 Cor. 2. 17. They must not lay wood, and hay, and stubble upon the
foundation; if they do, their Work shall suffer loss, and themselves be saved
with great difficulty; so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 12, 15.

2. They must watch for your Souls, Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the Rule
over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your Souls. They must
watch with great care, and great diligence; though thereby they be exposed to
great trouble, and great danger: They must warn the People of their
Backslidings, and of their Wanderings, and they must charge them, that they
keep the way of the Lord; they must exhort them to their present Duty, and they
must exhort them to lay hold on their future Reward. They must be very
watchful, lest by some means the Tempter should tempt any, and their labor
should be in vain, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. They must warn them when any danger
approaches; as God charge Ezekiel in Chap. 3. 18, 19, Verses; When I say
unto the wicked, Thou shall surely die; and thou give him not warning, nor
speak to warn the wicked from his wicked ways, to save his life; the same
wicked Man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thy
hands, etc.

Bear with us, Beloved, if we seem unto you to be too earnest, and too warm in
our Admonitions and Reproofs; we speak for the life of your Souls, and it is
for the life of our own Souls also; we must show you the good way of the Lord,
convince you of the Equity of it, and labor to impress you with a sense of
your Duty, and excite you by the most powerful Motives we can use, to a
cheerful, even, and constant walking in the ways of the Lord.

3. The Elders are to exhort and comfort all the Members of the Church, (yea,
and all that desire to receive Instruction from them) as their Condition and
Necessities do require: They must do this with great gentleness and compassion,
with simpathizing Bowels, and condescending Love; such the Apostle tells the
Thessalonions was his Carriage toward them, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 7, 8. We were gentle
among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her Children: So being affectionately
desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted to you, not the Gospel of God
only, but also our own Souls, because you were very dear unto us. So also he
charge us, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.

Brotherly Love does oblige all to attend unto this Duty; but the Office
committed to the Elder does much more oblige him to it; he is to be patient
toward all, (2 Timothy 2. 25.) and in meekness to instruct them that do oppose
themselves; if peradventure God may give them repentance, that they may escape
out of the snare of the Devil. They are to do this generally in their public
preaching of the Gospel, and also particularly from House to House: Thus the
Apostle declared his diligence, Acts 20. 20. I have kept back nothing that was
profitable to you; but I have showed you, and taught you publicly, and from
House to House.

4. They are to defend, and maintain the Truth, against all Corruption and
Error, 2 Timothy 1. 13, 14. Hold fast the form of sound words, in Faith and Love,
which is in Christ Jesus. That good thing that is committed to thee, keep by
the Holy Ghost which dwells in us. And they are not only to keep it
themselves, but they must by sound Doctrine, exhort, and convince Gainsayers;
the mouths of gainsayers must be stopped, who subvert whole Houses, speaking
things they ought not, for filthy lucre's sake, 1 Tit. 1. 11. And in Chap. 2.
v. 8. it is required of them that they have sound speech, that cannot be
condemned; that he that is of the contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil
thing to say of them. It is that which requires great Wisdom, that we do keep
close to the Word, that we hold fast the Form of wholesome Words, according to
the Scripture, and that all that we speak in the Name of the Lord, be sound
Speech, that cannot be condemned; we must contend earnestly for the Faith which
was once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. v. We must watch against grievous
Wolves entering in amongst us: This is the Charge given to the Elders in Acts
20. 28, 29. The Churches, and especially the Angels of the Churches, Rev. 2. 2.
must try them that say they are Apostles, and are not; and find them to be
liars.

5. They that are over the Church must be exemplary in yielding Obedience to
all the Commandments of Christ. Whosoever therefore shall break one of the
least of these Commandments, and shall teach Men so, shall be called the least
in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5. 19. If you teach it not in your Preaching,
and teach it in your Example, that any of the Commands of Christ are too little
to be regarded; you incurr the Threatening of being excluded from the Kingdom of
Heaven: Oh what cause of trembling have we! So the Apostle charge Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. v. 12. Be thou an example of the Believers, in word, in conversation, in
charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. And in 2 Timothy 2. 22. Flee also
youthful lusts; but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that
call on the Lord out of a pure heart. Elders are set up in a golden Candlestick
to be Lights, and they must be pure Lights, they must be burning and shining
Lights; if there be any filthiness in them, it will lessen the Light, and make
the Light offensive, which they hold forth to the People: They are set upon a
Hill, the Eyes of all Men are upon them; and their not walking in exemplary
Holiness, brings a great reproach upon the Gospel and Truths of Christ which
they preach. But it is honorable, if they can say, as Philip. 3. 17. That is
the first thing they must labor.

II. This is labor; to do this is labor (Beloved) even unto weariness: As
(...), the Greek word, signifies: The same word is translated, being weary,
John 4. 16. Thus sat Jesus (...).
weary on the Well. We have toiled all night, and caught nothing, (...).
Luke 5. 5. The work of the Ministry, my Beloved, is a go^d work, and it is a
work that may be desired, 1 Timothy 3. 1. But it may not be desired for Honors
sake, nor for Maintenance sake, but for Works sake: But, as it is a good and
desirable Work, so it is a painful and laborious Work; it is hard toilsom
Labor, so that they need to give themselves wholly to it.

1. There is the labor of the Brain; there is a giving attendance to Reading,
Meditation, and Prayer, which is commanded them, that so they may faithfully
discharge the Duty of their Office. 1 Timothy 4. 13. Till I come give attendance
to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine: And Verse 15. Meditate on these
things, give thy self wholly to them. 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to show thy self
approved unto God; a workman that needs not to be ashamed; rightly dividing
the word of Truth: There needs continual Study, Reading, and Meditation; which
is hard Labor, and does greatly exhaust the strength of their natural Spirits:
The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words; and that which was written
was upright, even the words of truth, Ecccles. 12. 15.

2. Their Work is Heart labor; in their Work they must labor hard with their
own Hearts, and with the Hearts of those that God has set them over. They
labor with their own Hearts, for in their Hearts are like Passions as other
Men have; they have many times unbelief vexing them, despondency casting them
down; without are fightings, and within are fears, as the Apostle speaks, 2
Cor. 7. 4. They are to serve God with their spirits in the Gospel of Christ;
sincerely and heartily, Romans 1. 9. But their Spirits are sometimes discomposed,
and disquieted, and cast down; and at other times their Spirit is willing, and
their Flesh is weak. They labor with their own Hearts, for they must be
careful of their own Souls, 1 Cor. 9. 27. If they be keepers of others
Vineyard, and do not keep their own Vineyard, if they do not take heed to
themselves, that they may save themselves, as well as others, they shall be
found Fools in the Issue of their Labors. And as they have hard labor with
their own Hearts, so they have also hard labor with the Hearts of those whom
they teach; and if God does not help them, to work on the Hearts of them whom
they teach, they can do nothing. Thus the Apostle expresses his Labor,
Coloss. 1. 28, 29. Whom we preach, warning every Man, and teaching every Man,
in all Wisdom, that we may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus; whereunto
I also labor, striving according to his working, which works in me mightily:
If that the Spirit work with us mightily, then our Labor is pleasant, though
it is hard: But if we be put to lament, who has believed our report, and to
whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? It even breaks our hearts with grief.

3. It is Labor for which they many times have little thanks given them. Thus
the Apostle tells the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12. 15. I will very gladly spend, and
be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be loved. So
great an Apostle, met with so mean a requital, from those whom he had by his
preaching Converted; and other Elders do many times meet with a discouraging
requital, the more abundantly they love them, the less they are beloved by
them: they are many times counted enemies, because they tell the people the
truth, as the Galatians did account Paul; whereof he complains, Gal. 4. 16.

4. It Is hard Labor, wherein many times they have little success. They are
made Fishers of Men, Mat. 4. 19. and they are put many times to complain unto
the Lord, as Luke 5. 5 Master we have toiled all Night, and have caught
nothing. Many times they see no fruit of their labors, before they are called
home; and they that come after them, reap the harvest of the seed which they
did sow. So our Lord told his Disciples, Jo. 4. v. 38. Other Men labored, and
ye are entered into their labors.

5. It is a toilsome Work, which is usually attended with great Sufferings,
whilst they do faithfully discharge their Ministry. Wicked Men hate them,
because they cannot speak good to them in a way of sin; and the frowardness of
their Brethren does many times occasion great trouble to them. The Apostle
frequently makes mention of his Sufferings, 2 Timothy 1. 12. For the which cause I
also suffer these things, nevertheless I am not ashamed, for I know in whom I
have believed. So also, 2 Timothy 2. v. 9, 10. and 2 Cor. 11. 23. -- 27 v. They
that are called to this Work, must endure hardness as good Soldiers of Jesus
Christ. So we are commanded; 2 Timothy 2. 3. And we must not be moved by any
sufferings and troubles whatsoever, so as to leave our Ministry because of
Sufferings, Acts 20. 24. None of these things move me, neither count I my life
dear to me, so I may finish my course with joy, and fulfill my Ministry which I
have received of the Lord Jesus. It is then, you see, hard Labor; labor of
the Brains, labor with the Heart, labor that they have little thanks for,
labor that they have often little success in, labor in which they many times
suffer great and hard things. Yet thus we must Work, and thus we must Labor; a
necessity is laid upon us, (1 Cor. 4. 9.) and woe to us if we preach not the
Gospel. Thus must we take heed to save our own Souls, and those that hear 1 Timothy 4. 16.
us; and we must take heed that we be faithful, that the blood of none be
required at our hands. I call you, says the Apostle, to witness that I am free
from the blood of all Men, Acts 20. 26. If the blood of any, to whom we preach,
should be required at our Hands, how shall we answer it to our Lord?

By way of Application.
1. The good Lord pardon all the Failings and Miscarriages of us, who minister
the Word, and Doctrine; all our coming short in so great a Work: It was a great
thing the Apostle said, I know nothing by myself, I know nothing wherein I have
failed in the work of my Ministry to you, yet am I not hereby justified; for
Christ knows my Work more perfectly than Man does, 1 Cor. 4. 4. But as for us
poor sinners, we dare not say, that we know no thing by our selves; we have
many Miscarriages that we are guilty of; but we hope and believe, that we shall
be saved by the Blood of Christ, even as ye.

2. Who is sufficient for these things? The Apostle puts the Question, 2 Cor,
2. 16. No Man, no Angel, is sufficient for this great Work; except we have a
fresh anointing of the Holy Spirit, except we have full communications of Life,
and Love, and Holiness from the Holy Spirit. We are not sufficient of our
selves, to think any thing as of our selves, our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor.
3. 5. Elders must walk humbly with their God, on whom they depend for all their
Supplies; their Office, and all their Abilities for their Office, are freely
given them from the Grace of Christ: And they must also walk humbly with them,
that they are set over; remembering that themselves were by Nature also Rebels
against the Majesty of Heaven; and they must walk humbly, considering their
many Defects and Weaknesses that they are conscious of to themselves: Even the
Apostle Paul says, 2 Cor. 10. 1. Now I Paul my self beseech you, by the
meekness and gentleness of Christ: And if Paul himself did, how much more must
we, beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ? Elders must not lift
up themselves above their Brethren; they must fear, lest being lifted up with
pride, they should fall into the condemnation of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3. 6.

3. Let us who are called to this Work and Labor, give thanks unto Jesus
Christ, who calls and helps us; and let us give all the glory unto him. I
thank God, says the Apostle, who enabled me, and counted me faithful, putting
me into the ministry, 1 Timothy 1. 12. It is matter of Thanksgiving from us, that
God should count us faithful, and make us faithful; and that God should enable
us to labor, and make us able Ministers of the New Testament; not of the
Letter, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. We receive all from him, that we may
give all the glory unto him; To me, who am less than the least of all Saints,
is this grace given; that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable
riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8. So we may also say,

4. Let us who are called to this Work and Labor, stir up our selves to
Labor: As the Apostle exhorts Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 5. Watch thou in all things,
endure affliction, do the work of the Evangelist, and make full proof of thy
Ministry: So let us watch in all things, endure Affliction, do the work of
Elders, and make full proof of our Ministry; let us make full proof to others
of our Ministry, and of our Faithfulness in this great Work, whereunto we are
called: We have a great Example given us by the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 6. 3, 4,
5, 6. Giving no offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed; but in
all things approving our selves as the Ministers of God. This was the Apostles
Care, this is to be our Care; in all things to approve our selves as the
Ministers of God, in much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in
Distresses, in Labors, in Watchings in Fastings, by Pureness, by Knowledge, by
Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by Love unfeigned. This ought
to be the care and resolute endeavors of our Souls; and that we may be enabled
so to do, we must seek to abound more in love to the Lord Jesus Christ, John 21
15. and in love to the Souls of the People, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 8.

Lastly, You who have called Elders to watch over you, (for there are not only
of this Church, but other Churches present,) do you, I say, strengthen their
Hands, and encourage them in their Work, as much as possibly you can; do you
countenance and comfort them; and, as the Apostle gives charge concerning
Timothy, see that he may be with you without fear; for he works the work of
the Lord, 1 Cor 16. 10. So let your Elders be with you without fear, for they
work the Work of the Lord; do what you can to strengthen their Hands in such
hard and laborious Work: And that leads me to the

II. Doct. That it is the Duty of the whole Church, and of every Member
thereof, to know, esteem, and love, most abundantly, those that are over them
in the Lord, and that for their Works sake.

I shall speak a little in the first place to the Duty, and in the second
place, to the Motive, for their Works sake.

I. As to the Duty that you owe to your Elders; in short, it is Love; as Love
is the fulfilling of the Law; and all the other Commandments are briefly
comprehended in this Saying, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: So give
me leave to say, That Love is the fulfilling of all the Duties that you owe to
your Elders; and all other Duties that you owe to them, are briefly
comprehended in this Saying, Love your Elders unfeignedly; love them that are
over you in the Lord without dissimulation; Love will make you doubly diligent
in performing every good Office to to them: Whatever you do to, or for them, if
Love be wanting, it is not valuable; if you do it for fear of Men, or from any
mean or sordid Principle, it is not acceptable. But, Particularly,

1. You must honor and reverence them; you must highly esteem them, for they
are worthy of double Honor. The Apostle tells the Galatians, that they had
once such an esteem of him, Gal. 4. 14. My temptation that was in my Flesh ye
despised not, nor rejected; but received me as an Angel of God, even as Christ
Jesus: Though his bodily Presence was mean, though he was exposed to many
Sufferings, and many Infirmities, yet they did highly esteem his Doctrine, as
if an Angel from Heaven, or Jesus Christ had preached it; and they did in like
manner esteem him for his Doctrines sake; they did greatly esteem him. Thus we
read, Romans 10. 15. How beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad tidings?
The Feet are the meanest Members, and liable to soil; but yet because they
bring the glad Tidings of the Gospel, you should esteem that in them, which is
meanest, to be beautiful; you should esteem them to be worthy of Honor and
Reverence. The Apostle tells us, that so the Corinthians carried it to Titus, 2
Cor. 7. 15. His inward affection is more abundant toward you, whilst he
remembers the obedience of you all; how with fear and trembling you received
him: Ye were afraid lest any thing in your carriage might grieve him, or offend
him. And let not any that have more years than their Elders that are set over
them think, that therefore they are not obliged to honor and reverence them,
being younger; the Scripture charge is, Let no Man despise thy youth, 1 Timothy 4.
12.

2. You must obey them, and submit to them, in all things, that they speak to
you in the Name of Christ, and from the Word of the Lord: So in that
before-named place, whilst he remembers the obedience of you all. So, 1 Cor.
16. 16. That you submit your selves to such, and to every one that helps with
us, and labors. Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and
submit your selves: Obey their Teachings, and submit to their Admonitions,
Reproofs, and Government; do not you do as the stubborn Israelite did, when
Moses came to part two that were quarrelling, the faulty Person thrust him
away, and said, Who made thee a Ruler, and Judge over us? Acts 7. 27. When your
Elders would persuade you to Peace, or Holiness, don't fly in their Faces, and
say, Who made you Rulers over us? But yield gently to their guidance, so far as
they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. Be ye followers of us, as we also are of
Christ Jesus. It is sad to consider, how foolishly we are apt to run into
Extremes; some Elders are for taking all to themselves, and they will be
Absolute, and Arbitrary, and will allow the Church no Power, Liberty, nor
Privilege; and on the other side, some People are for taking all to themselves,
and will have their Elders to be no more than Ciphers, or Tools among them;
they will not understand how their Liberty can consist with obeying, and
submitting to them that are over them, in the Lord. There are some that are apt
to have a great opinion of their own Sufficiency, Wisdom, and Authority, and
that they have little need of their Elders: But Christ will not bear it, that
his Messengers should be so slighted; and they that are humble, and wise, and
sincerely desire the public good of the Church; will submit themselves to them
that are over them in the Lord, and they will be afraid of following their own
Will, lest in so doing they should mislead others; they will seek the Law of
Christ from the Mouth of their Elders, that all things may be done orderly,
according to the Word of God; and that their Elders may be with them, without
fear and trouble of Spirit.

3. You must believe and practice the sincere Word of God, being preached unto
you, by them that are over you in the Lord: The Apostle does greatly commend
the Thessalonians for this, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6. Ye became followers of us, and of
the Lord, having received the Word with much affliction, and with joy in the
Holy Ghost. And cap. 2. 13. When ye received the Word of God, which ye heard of
us, ye received it not as the Word of Man, but as it is in truth the Word of
God, which effectually works also in you that believe. If that you do not
believe; and obey the Word that is preached to you, as the Word of God; if you
accept Men's persons, if you judge according to the Flesh, as your Ear, and as
your fancy is pleased, and your humor is gratified; you do not show that love
to your Elder that God requires of you. Desire earnestly the sincere Milk of
the Word, that ye may grow thereby; let the Word of the Lord be precious unto
you, not only (as the manner of some is) when there is no open Vision, but also
when it is plentifully dispensed. Let your growth be answerable to your
feeding, let not fatness breed loathing, and nauseousness in you, being glutted
by the Word. Do not despise the Stewards of Christ that minister it unto you;
do not grow weary of the Ordinances of Christ, because you enjoy them
peaceably; come not under that reproof, Mal. 1. 13. Ye have said also, behold
what a weariness is it? and ye have snuffed at it, says the Lord of Hosts. Oh
be not you so guilty; lest God should judge you, and send leanness into your
Souls, and make you to wander from one Sea unto another, seeking the Word of
the Lord, and ye shall not find it, as he speaks, Amos 8. 12. Be not all Ear,
do not content your selves with hearing many Sermons, and talking of them, that
it is a good and a seasonable Word; do not content your selves without
practicing them: If you know these things, happy are you if you do them: Be ye
the Epistle of Christ, ministered by us, written not on Stone, or with Ink, but
in the fleshly Tables of your Hearts by the spirit of God, 2 Cor. 3. 3.

Surely, Beloved, if you profess never so much Honor, and Reverence, and
Obedience, to us, in your outward Words and Actions, yet if the Word of Christ,
which we preach, does not dwell richly in you, if it be not by you highly
valued, and rightly improved, and you do not bring forth the fruits of it, in
your conversation, you do not what pleases Christ, nor what satisfies us; it
is not that love which we desire from you, but you send us mourning to our God.
As the Lord tells Ezekiel, cap. 33. 32. Lo thou art unto them, as a very
lovely Song, of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
Instrument, for they hear thy words, and will not do them. So we too often find
it; and you make us weep bitterly, and cry out, because our Labors are
successless. Oh take heed that you do not turn your backs on the Rod of
Christ's Power, the Word of his Grace, and take heed also that you do not hear,
with an unbroken, and unaffected, and unbelieving heart; for if you do either
of these, you are guilty of casting off Christ.

4. You must pray earnestly for your Elders, Heb. 13. 18. Pray for us, for we
trust we have a good Conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. Pray
that their stores, of the gifts and graces of the Spirit, may be increased;
pray that they may be helped by the Holy Spirit in their great work; as the
Apostle calls upon the Ephesians, cap. 6. 19. Pray for me, that utterance may
be given unto me, that I may open my mouth b^ldly to make known the Mystery of
the Gospel; do not you stop your Ministers mouth; do not you say that he grows
dull, whilst you neglect praying for him that God would open his mouth. So to
the Colossians the Apostle says, cap. 4. 3. Withal, praying for us, that God
would open a door of utterance, to speak the Mystery of Christ; and to the
Thessalonians, 1 These. 3. 1. Finally Brethren, pray for us, that the Word of
the Lord may run, and be glorified, even as it is with you. Pray for us that we
may have success in our work, and pray that we may be delivered from wicked and
unreasonable Men; for all Men have not Faith; as it follows in the next verse.
And in Romans 15. 30. Now I beseech you, Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's
sake, and the Love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me, in your
prayers to God for me, that I may be delivered from them that believe not in
Judea, and that my Service that I have for Jerusalem, may be accepted of the
Saints: Oh pray that their Labors may be acceptable; for though their Work ought
to be acceptable, yet many times it is not. Pray for them that all their
afflictions, dangers, and troubles, may be sanctified to them, for the working
out of their own Salvation: This shall turn, to my Salvation, through your
prayers, and the supplies of the Spirit of Christ, Phil. 1. 19. Pray also that
God would send forth more Laborers into his Harvest, Luke 10. 2.

5. You must communicate to them in all good things, that so (if possible) they
may live free from care, and from the cumber of the World, that they must not
have their minds perplexed, or diverted, from their Studies, by outward
straits, or worldly entanglements: Yea, you may supply them so, that they may
be able to show Hospitality, and Charity. The Scripture is very express for
this, 1 Cor. 9. 7. Who goes a Warfare any t^me at his own charge? who planteth
a Vineyard, and eate^h not of the fruit thereof? or who feeds a Flock, and
eats not of the Milk of the Flock? verse. 14. Even so has the Lord ordained,
that they who preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. So Gal. 6. 6. Let
him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that teaches in all good
things, Matthew. 10. 10. The Labourer is worthy of his Hire. It was Jeroboam's
policy to make Priests of the lowest of the people, and many do account it
policy to keep their Ministers bare, that so they may still be the lowest of
the people; but herein they do not take counsel of God. And as Elders must not
be Hirelings (they must not be such as take care only for the profit, and are
not willing to expose themselves to hazard, and loss, and danger; they must not
every one, look for his own gain from his quarter; a Bishop must not be given
to filthy lucre, Isa. 56. 11. Titus 1. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 2.
but must take the oversight of the Flock, not by constraint, but willingly;
not for filthy lucres sake, but of a ready mind; as I say Ministers must not be
Hirelings) so when you given them a little, you must not any of you think that
you may treat them as if they were Hirelings; you must none of you expect to
command them in their work, and if they will not truckle to all your humors,
you must not say that you will give them nothing; it is a just Debt you owe
them, and gratitude obliges you, to supply your Elders, according to your
ability; so that they may have a comfortable subsistence among you, 1 Cor. 9.
11. If we have sown to you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall
reap your carnal things? The Apostle tells the Romans in cap. 15. 27. that the
Churches of Greece were Debtors unto the Saints at Jerusalem, because from them
first came the Gospel Ministration and Ordinances, and much more are the people
Debtors to their Ministers, by whom the Word and Ordinances, are continually
ministered unto them.

6. You must own your Elders in their Sufferings for the sake of Christ, and of
his Gospel; as in 2 Timothy 1. 16, 17, 18. The Apostle mentions One siphorus with
great praise, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my Chains; and
when I was at Rome sought me out very diligently, and found me; and in many
things he ministered unto him at Ephesus; and he mentions it as a sad charge
against other Brethren, in cap. 4. 16. At my first Answer no Man stood with me,
but all Men forsook me; I pray God it be not laid to their charge: Oh! do not
you in a time of distress, when your Shepherd is aimed at, run away according
to the Proverb, I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered:
And do not think this is unseasonably moved, for you know not what evil may be
in the Earth, therefore hear for the time to come. This then is the Duty that
you owe to your Elders; you must honor and reverence them; you must obey them,
and submit to them; you must believe and practice the sincere Word of God that
they preach; you must pray earnestly for them, and communicate to them in all
good things; and you must own them in their Sufferings for Christ.

2. The second thing is the Motive, why you must do this, and that is, for
their works sake: The work beloved is toilsome to them, and profitable for you,
therefore you are to love them for their work's sake. See that he may be with
you without fear, for he works the work of the Lord, as I also do, 1 Cor. 16.
10.

You must love Saints, as Saints; and you must love Ministers, as Ministers;
Matthew. ^0. 41. You must show kindness to Prophets, in the name of a Prophet, to
Elders, in the name of an Elder. Jehoram honored Elisha, because he helped him
against his Enemies; he sent him word of the Ambushes, laid by the Syrian King
against him; and when he brought the Army of the Syrians into the midst of
Samaria, Jehoram cried out, My Father, my Father, shall I smite them? 2 Kings
6. 21. but when Elisha did not help Jehoram against the Famine, so soon as he
expected, then he vowed he would take off Elisha's Head, v. 31. so that the
honor he gave him, was not for his works sake, but because he had some great
benefit by him. The people followed Christ, but it was for the sake of the
Loaves, wherewith he fed them; Job 6. 27. but when they did disgust his
spiritual Doctrine, then they forsook him, v. 60, 66. and when they could not
bear his close reproofs (he told them, they did the work of their Father the
Devil) then they took up Stones to stone him, Joh. 8. 39, 40, 59. Beloved, if
you do limit your respect and kindness to your Elders, by such low Motives, as
their natural gifts, learning, fine pleasing language, popularity, pliableness
to your humors, and will, or any other carnal respect, you do not show that
true love to them, that you owe them: But you must perform faithfully, the
Duties that you owe them, for their works sake, that must be your chief Motive.
It is a most excellent work; it is a work whereby your greatest good and
happiness is promoted, your faith and joy is helped, and strengthened; and your
salvation furthered; you must love them for their work sake, for their
laborious diligence, and honest plainness, in exhorting, admonishing,
reproving, and comforting you as the case does require; this must be your
Motive, and if you do not act from a true Motive, you do not act acceptably.

I shall add three Reasons, why you must thus love them, and thus carry it, to
them that are over you in the Lord.

For Christ's sake, for your own sake, and for your Elders sake.

1. You must do thus for Christ's sake, for they are sent by Christ, and he
has a tender regard to them, and he gives charge concerning them, do my
Prophets no harm: Whatever you do to them, he takes it as done to himself,
Matthew. 10. 40. He that receives you, receives me; and he that despises you,
despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. So again
Luke 10. 16. Christ is concerned in all your carriages, in all your kindness,
or unkindness, that you show to his Messengers whom he sends unto you. As Moses
answered in the behalf of Aaron, Thou and all thy company are gathered together
against the Lord, and what is Aaron, that ye murmur against him? Numb. 16. 11.
All your quarrels, all your contendings, all your murmurings, are against the
Lord; and what are your poor Elders that ye murmr against them? if you cast
off your Elders, you cast off Christ; if you discourage your Elders, you
displease Christ.

2. You must thus carry it to them for your own sake; it is for your good; it is
profitable for you, to know them that are over you in the Lord; but if you
break Christ's Cords, and will not know them that are over you in the Lord,
this is not liberty, but licentiousness. It is for your Edification, for the
Edification of the whole Church, that you should love your Elders: The Church,
the body edifies it self in love, Ephesians. 4. 12, 16. It is foolish for any to
think that the Church can be increased, by lessening of the Elders; your Elders
are the Instruments, by which the Lord does usually dispense spiritual
blessings to you, things that accompany Salvation; if you despise and vex the
Instruments, you may thereby obstruct the communication of those graces to your
Souls; your Elders are persons, on whose welfare, the common good of the Church
depends, and therefore ought to be preferred in all kinds and degrees of love;
they are given for this end, that Christ may dwell among you, by his Spirit and
Faith, Psalm 68. 18. That he might fill all things, Ephesians. 6. 10. That he might
fill the Members with more Graces, and the Church with more Members. You may be
tempted to think that you shall get by neglecting your Elders, but it is
unprofitable for you, both here and hereafter: Your Elders may perhaps have the
present Burden, and trouble of your weakening their Hands in their Work, but
the sad consequence will be to your selves; it will be to your own
disadvantage, Heb. 13. 17. They must give an account; that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you: It is unprofitable
for you, if you grieve their Spirits.

3. For your Elders sake; because it is for their good, that they may go on
cheerfully in their laborious Work, and that they may be strengthened against
those Temptation, wherewith their Work is attended. If you do not show a Gospel
Spirit in all your carriage to them, you sadden their Hearts, and make them to
do their Work feebly. Consider, I beseech you, they are frail Men like your
selves, and that the Wicked do daily vex their righteous Souls, that they have
much difficulty in keeping their own Spirits, that they be not overcome by
Temptation; and if you add further unto this, their Brethrens dealing roughly
with them, Oh how will this pierce and grieve them? Consider, I beseech you,
they are daily giving an account to the Lord Jesus of the Flock committed to
them, if their Flock be a thriving Flock, a growing Flock, if they see the
Graces of the Spirit abounding in them; then they with Joy praise Christ, for
his Spirit and Grace bestowed on them: As the Apostle in the behalf of the
Philippians, Chap. 2. 16, 17. and Chap. 1. 3, 4, 5. That I may rejoice in the
day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, nor labored in vain; yea, and if I
be offered up, upon the sacrifice and service of your Faith, I joy and rejoice
with you all. So likewise to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 8, 9. Therefore,
Brethren, we are comforted over you all, in all our afflictions, and
distresses, by your Faith; for now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord; for
what thanks can we render to God again for you, for all the joy, wherewith we
joy, before God for your sakes? But if the Flock be diseased and weak, and
unthriving; and if the fat ones of the Flock do thrust with the Side, and push
with the Horn; then your poor Elders give their Account with sorrow, and mourn
before the Lord, and make known their complaints to him, who will hear them.
Was it not a sad thing, that Elijah should make intercession to God against
Israel? Romans 11. 2. And is it not a sad thing that you should stop the Mouths,
and straiten the Spirits of your Elders, when they pray for you? But the
Apostle says, We were comforted in your comforts; and exceedingly the more we
joyed for the joy of Titus, because his spirit was refreshed by you all, 2 Cor.
7. 13. Let your Elders be comforted in your Comforts, let them be refreshed by
you all. That is the second Doctrine. That it is the Duty of the Church, and
every particular Member, highly to esteem, and love, and honor them that are
set over them, in the Lord.

By way of Application.
1. If any faithful Elders do meet with a contrary carriage from any that are
in the Church, let them not despond: They have the Example of their Lord and
Master, who suffered the like, Isaiah 49. 4. Then, said I, I have labored in
vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain; yet surely my judgment
is with the Lord, and my work with my God. God is Witness of your Faithfulness
and Diligence, in your Work; and though you meet with nothing but contempt and
hard usage, God will give Judgment for you, God will reward you in due time.
Let us consider the Hand of Satan is in it, who is the great Enemy to the
Gospel, and to those that are commissionated to dispense it, and the Ordinances
of it: Should we expect Peace with Satan? Can we expect any otherwise, but that
so far as his Devices can prevail, he will do us all the mischief, and cause us
all the trouble he can? I would have come unto you once and again, says Paul,
1 Thessalonians. 2. 18. but Satan hindered me; he will hinder so far as God permits. Let
us also consider the hand of God in it; it is to humble us, to stir us up to
Prayer, (they have rewarded me evil for good, but I give my self to Prayer,
Psalm 109. 4.) and to stir us up to greater diligence in our Work; and consider
that he takes notice of all your Labor, and all those Difficulties that you
are under; Thou have born, and have patience; and for my Name's sake have
labored and have not fainted, Rev. 2. 3. Remember the eye of God is upon you,
observing how you behave your self, and that he takes gracious cognizance, of
your going on courageously under such discouragements.

2. Let me apply this by way of Exhortation; We beseech you Brethren, to know
them that are over you in the Lord, and that you esteem them highly in love,
for their Works sake: Let me beseech you by the meekness and gentleness of
Christ to do so. Let not any say I, over-do in pressing you, I have the great
Apostle giving me an example in my Text, most seriously and most affectionately
pressing this Exhortation. We had rather be altogether silent in this matter,
but there is danger lest you should be unmindful of your Duty: The Apostle saw
it to be needful, and we find it to be needful, to exhort you, and stir up your
minds, by way of Remembrance; and if we should be totally negligent in this
matter, it would be such a piece of Modesty and Self-denial, as would turn to
your loss: Therefore I beseech you, that you would thus love, and show the
Effects of your love to your Elders. And in order hereunto,

1. You must understand aright, and be convinced of your Duty to your Elders;
be not willingly ignorant of your Duty; let not prejudice turn away your minds
from the consideration of your Duty; and let not your hearts be resolved
against it. Know and lay to heart, that the station wherein Christ has set
your Elders, calls for those Duties at your hands: let not evil Customs, desire
of Reputation, or of Domination, or desire to obtain the Favor of any, lessen
your due respect to your Elders, but get a deep impression on your Consciences,
that this is your Duty; strive not against the conviction of it.

Consider Christ commands you, and their work does greatly oblige you, that you
should so carry it to them; put your Consciences under the awe of Christ's
Command, and love them for their work sake; if this Motive affect you, you will
do your Duty with more delight to your selves, and with greater acceptance to
Jesus Christ.

2. Do not watch for the failings of your Elders, that so you might have
somewhat whereby to confirm your prejudices, and to justify your murmurings
against them; be not like Flesh F^ies, that love to dwell upon the sore place;
they are Men subject to like Passions with your selves; they are Angels in
Office, but they are not yet Angels in perfect Holiness; therefore do you cover
their Infirmities with a Mantle of Love; never take pleasure in discovering the
nakedness of your spiritual Fathers.

3. Let your Love be constant; do not you fall under that reproof, which the
Apostle gives the Galatians, Gal. 4. 15, 16. Where is then the blessedness ye
speak of? for I bear you record, that if it had been possible, you would have
plucked out your own Eyes, and have given them to me; am I therefore become
your Enemy, because I tell you the truth? Let that Love, that appeared warm in
your first joining in this Relation, be still increasing; let it not presently
decay: Be not like Children that are never pleased but with new things; be not
of an unstable mind, always affecting changes. I am afraid that I have tired
you, in speaking to these two Doctrines, I will say therefore but little to the

3 Doctrine. That the Elders faithful discharge of their Duty, and the Peoples
conscientious discharge of th^^r Duty, and mutual Peace, are strictly joined
together.

Do not expect that you shall find the one without the other, and when you see
these joined together, then do you see Zion in her Beauty, then will you
rejoice in the Lord, and say, Look upon Zion, the City of our Solemnities,
thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet Habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not
be taken down, etc. Isa. 33. 20.

Briefly let me mention every part of this Doctrine.

1. The Elders discharge of their Duty, is a means to oblige the People, to a
Conscientious discharge of theirs, and to promote mutual Peace. Therefore, Say
to Archippus, take heed to the Ministry which thou have received in the Lord,
that thou fulfill it, Col. 4. 17. You may not expect Love nor Reverence, if you
do not faithfully fulfill the Ministry, that you have received in the Lord. If
Elders be proud, and haughty, and self-willed, they loose their hold of the
Peoples Love. 2 Cor. 1. 24. We have not dominion over your Faith, but are
helpers of your joy. If Elders do not themselves, Practice, and teach the
Church to Practice, all things that Christ has commanded; If Elders Mat. 23. 4.
be Sloathful and Dronish, they may not expect the People should highly esteem
them in Love; Mal. 2. 9. Therefore have I made you contemptible and base before
all the People, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in
my love; If Elders do not faithfully Advise the Church, if they addict
themselves to the pleasing of some particular Men, and do not consult and aim
at the general good of the Church; then there is not like to be mutual Peace in
the Church.

An Elders carriage in the Church, must be like that of Mordecaies, Esther 10.
3. who was accepted of the multitude of his Brethren, seeking the wealth of his
people, and speaking Peace to all his seed; So if an Elder expect to be
accepted of his Brethren, he must seek the wealth of his people, and speak
peace to all the Flock.

2. That Peoples Conscientious Discharge of their Duty, is a means to encourage
the Elders, to be faithful in their Duty, and it is a means of mutual Peace. If
the People behave themselves proudly and contemptuously against their Elders,
if they strive with them, and obstinately resist their Admonitions, and
Reproofs, they will weaken their Hands, and sink their Spirits, and give
occasion for Strife and Division in the Church. For consider how great a matter
a little fire kindles: But if the People carry it lovingly to their Elders,
and say, Thine are we, peace be to thee, and to thy helpers, for thy God
helps thee; then shall the Elders succeed in their Work and Labor; having a
free access to the Spirits of their People; then shall all offense and occasion
of Division be greatly prevented.

3. Mutual Peace does in an eminent manner, tend to help the Elders in the
discharge of their Duty, and help the People in the discharge of their Duty.
Peace does promote ^ll Godliness, and all Honesty, and does promote the
Edification of all, Romans 14. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things that
make for Peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. And in Cap. 15. v.
2. Let every one please is Neighbor, for his good to Edification: Behold, how
pleasant, and good a thing it is for Brethren to dwell together in unity; there
the Lord commands the blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133. But if a
Spirit of Division does prevail in a Church, then the Devil gets Advantage, to
hinder the good success of the Ministry, to obstruct the Elders in doing their
Duty, who cannot live comfortably, nor labor industriously, if they be in a
fire, and a flame of Division; and the Devil gets advantage also, to alienate
the People from their Duty, and to bring all Mischief into the Church, James 3.
14 If ye have bitter envyings and strifes in your hearts, glory not, and lie
not against the Truth; for where envy and strife is, there is confusion, and
every evil work, Verse 16. If ye bite and devour one another, take heed lest ye
be consumed one of another, Gal. 5. 15. I have showed you shortly the Truth of
the Doctrine.

And I would only repeat the Exhortation; be you then exhorted, I beseech you,
Brethren, to undissembled love, and unfeigned Peace; let Love be the Principle,
and let Holiness be the Bond of Peace among you: Hear how pathetically the
Apostle presses the Exhortation, Ephesians. 4. 1, 2. 3. I therefore, the Prisoner of
the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the calling, wherewith ye are
called; with all lowliness, and meekness, with long-suffering; forbearing one
another in love; endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit* in the bond of
Peace. So in 2 Philip. 1. 4. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels, and mercies;
fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind; let nothing be done through strife or vainglory; but in
lowliness of mind; let each esteem others better than themselves; look not
every Man on his own things; but every Man also on the things of others. Are
you Christians? Do you believe this to be the Word of God, that does contain
the Evidences of your Salvation? And can you easily forget such pathetical
Exhortations? Let not the Elders, nor let, I beseech you, any of the Brethren,
have cause to complain: As Psalm 120. 6, 7. I have long dwelt with them that
hate Peace; I am for Peace; but when I speak, they are for War.

By way of Direction.
1. Avoid Pride, and an overweening esteem of your own Wisdom and Worth. Prove.
13. 10. Only by Pride comes Contention; i. e. Chiefly and eminently by Pride
comes Contention; and if there is any thing of another cause, that causes
Contention, yet Pride mingleth therewith, and blows up the Flame more
vehemently: Therefore avoid Pride; yea, do you count your selves to be nothing.
Consider that Parable Ecclesiast. 9. 15, 16.

2. Seek not your own Interest and Advantage; prefer the public good of the
Church, before your own private convenience, 1 Cor. 10. 24. Let no Man seek his
own, but every one another Wealth; do not insist stiffly upon your Right; do
not continually resolve that you will not abate a Pin, but be of a yielding
Spirit. The Promise of the Land was made to Abraham; but, says he to Lot, Let
there be no strife, my Brother, between me and thee, (Genesis 13. 8, 9.) do thou
take thy choice; if thou go to the right hand, I will go to the left, etc.
Therefore if you stiffly insist upon any thing of your own Will, and Interest,
consider that your Father Abraham did not so.

3. Be not busy Bodies, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. That ye study to be quiet, and to do
your own business, (...), love this Honor; It is your honor to be quiet; you
cannot so easily do your own Business well; don't you think it belongs to you,
to do the Business of others, and that nothing is well done but what you have
the ordering of; don't you think that you must be the doers of all. I shall
conclude with these two Scriptures; the first in the two Verses following the
Text. We exhort you, Brethren, warn them that are unruly, comfort the
feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient toward all Men. See that none
render evil for evil unto any Man: But ever follow that which is good, both
among your selves, and to all Men. And I shall add the other thereunto, and
conclude, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally, my Brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good
comfort, be of one mind, live in Peace; and the God of Love and Peace shall be
with you.

The Lord impress this upon all our Hearts.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Edward Giles
Bookseller in Norwich, near the Marketplace.
SEveral Discourses concering Actual Providence. A Word in Season. Defensive
Armor against four of Satan's most Fiery Darts. Sermons upon the whole first
and second Chapters of the Canticles. Thirteen Sermons upon several Useful
Subjects. The Happiness of Brethren dwelling together in Unity. All published
by John Collings, D. D. of Norwich. The Way of the Spirit in bringing Souls to
Christ. The Glory of Christ set forth, with the Necessity of Faith, in several
Sermons; both by Mr. Tho. Allen, late Pastor of a Church of Christ at Norwich.
Enoch's Walk with God, and Christ a Christian's Gain: By Mr. Timothy Armitage,
late Pastor of a Church of Christ at Norwich. Precious Promises the Portion of
Overcomers. By Mr. John Lougher, Minister in Norfolk. The Saints Ebenezer: By
Mr. Francis English, late Minister in Norwich. Directions to Spell English
right. The History of the Protestant Reformation, as it was begun by Luther.
The Dead Saints Speaking; being a Sermon Preached upon the Death of Mr.
Newcomb, in Essex. By Mr. Fairfax. The Ordinary Matter of Prayer drawn into
Questions and Answers. Two Treatises; the first of, Rejoicing in the Lord Jesus
in all Conditions. The second, Of a Christian's Hope in Heaven, and Freedom
from Condemnation by Christ. Both by Mr. Robert Asty, late Minister of Jesus
Christ in Norwich. Obedience to Magistrates recommended, in a Sermon Preached
Sept. 9. 1683. By Jonathan Clapham, Rector of VVarplingham in Norfolk. Two
Discourses; one of Spiritual Blessings, the other, that God has an high
account of the least Grace in the Saints: By Mr. John Cromwell, late Pastor of
a Church of Christ in Norwich. In^ant Baptism of Christ's Appointment: By Mr.
Samuel Petto, Pastor of a Church in Sudbury in Suffolk. Of the Conversion of
Sinners of God in Christ. ^^e Necessity, Nature, Means and Signs of it; with a
Concluding Speech to the Unconverted. An Answer to Tho. Grantham's Book, called
A Dialogue between the Baptist and Presbyterian. A Sermon Preached upon the
death of that Pious and Learned Divine John Collinges, D. D. All by Mr. Martin
Finch, Pastor of a Church of Christ in Norwich: Sincerity, or the Upright Man's
walk to Heaven, delivered in several Sermons, in the Parish Church of St.
Michael, in Long Stratton in Norfolk, by Mr. James Olfield, late Minister
there. Alexipharmacon Spirituale: Being a Defensive against the poison and
sting of death; or the great expedient how to make the Bed of the Grave so
easy that we may lay down in peace and take our rest. A Plea for Abatements in
Matters of Conformity. A Sermon preached upon the 30th. day of Jan. 1695. All
by Mr. Sam. Snowden Minister of the Gospel in Newton in Norfolk. Christ set
forth in several Sermons, upon the 7th. Chapter to the Hebrews, by Mr. Rob.
Ottee, late Pastor of a Church of Christ in Beccles in Suffolk. Sacramental
Discourses on several Subjects: To which is added; A Discourse of the Life of
Faith, by Christopher Ammarant, Pastor of a Church in Southripps in Norfolk. A
Discovery of Audacious Insolence against the Doctrine of the Church of England,
vented in a Malicious Pamphlet, by Thomas Grantham. A Practical Discourse upon
the 8th. of the Romans. A Brief and Plain Discourse upon the Decrees of God;
both by Nath. VViles. The right way of seeking God, in a Sermon preached at
Great Yarmouth, by Mr. James Hannot, Pastor of a Church of Christ there. The
History of the Birth, Life, Sufferings and Death of our blessed Savior, by Mr.
Henry Brett, of Pulham in Norfolk. The exceeding abundant Grace of God
displayed, in the Conversion of William Gymer, a Penitent Malefactor and
Murderer, who was executed on the Castle-Hill of Norwich, September 4. 1696.
Written by John Lucas.
FINIS.

