FOUR SERMONS Preached upon Solemn Occasions. I. The Troubler of Israel.
Preached before the Judges. II. The Righteous Man's Concern for the Churches
Misery. Preached before the Judges. III. Caesar's due Honor, Preached before
the Mayor and Aldermen of Leicester, May 29. 1669. IV. David's Work and Rest,
Preached before the Election of the Mayor.


By Tho. Stanhope A. M. Vicar of St. Margarets in Leicester.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun, at the West End of St. Paul's,
1670.

Imprimatur,

Rob. Grove R. P. Dom. Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of LINCOLN.
My Lord,
THese Sermons now published, do (pardon the expression) challenge your
Lordships Name to be praefixed before them, as yours in point of Right. They
were preached in your Diocese, where I now reside; and are the First Fruits of
my poor Labors exposed to the World, and upon that score, ought to be offered
into your Lordships Hands. It is not a curious Itch of Popular Applause which
has drawn me into Print, (I could never fancy any thing of mine deserved any
Persons notice.) Nor will I allege the Importunity of Friends as a Ground of
this Undertaking; (though sometimes sufficiently solicited.) But to say truth,
The Auditors were so ingenuous as favorably to accept them when Preached,
which makes me hope they may be serviceable from the Press, as they seemed to
be from the Pulpit. Such as they are, I humbly present them to your Lordship,
as a real Testimony how much I am

My Lord, Your Lordships most faithful Servant, Tho. Stanhope.
Leicester Novem. 9. 1669.
THE TROUBLER OF ISRAEL: A SERMON Preached before the Judges at St. Mary's
Church in Leicester, March, 18. 1668/9.

By Tho. Stanhope A. M. Vicar of St. Margarets in Leicester.

The Troubler of ISRAEL.
1 Chronicles. 2.7. Achar the troubler of Israel, who transgressed in the thing
accursed.
WHen Reuben by default, forfeited the right of firstborn, that privilege was
shared between J^seph and Judah. Genesis 48.22. Genesis 49.8.
Joseph had the double portion, Judah the dominion over his Brethren for the
Scepter was not to depart from him, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet,
until Shiloh came. His Tribe therefore has the first place among the twelve,
where the Israelitish pedigree is drawn down from Adam, to the times of Ezra;
who (if not the Author of) may well be conceived an additional supplier to this
Book. Three Sons he had by Shuah, but his Family multiplied most by Pharez and
Zarah, begotten upon Tamar, one of the four wicked women, mentioned by St.
Matthew in our Saviors Genealogy; to show that descending from, he came to
save sinners. And the Progeny of these is slightly passed over with a bare
naming, till Achar comes in play; whose life being more notorious, his
Character is delivered more at large. Achar, the troubler of Israel, who
transgressed in the thing accursed.

If the Judge be set upon the Bench, it is no marvel to see a Prisoner at the
Bar. You (my Lords) appear by this solemnity, ready to sit upon your
Judgementseat; my Text presents a Malefactor to be tried, and draws an
Indictment against him: wherein after the usual form, you may please to
observe, 1. His Name, 2. His Crime. His Name Achar. His Crime declared more
generally, more particularly. More generally; He was the troubler of Israel:
More particularly; He transgressed in the thing accursed.

I. His Name. Achar, says the Text; Achan, says the Book of Joshua. An easy
alteration by only changing the last Letter, Josh. 7.1.
to express the evil ensuing upon his Wickedness, Nabal is his Name, and folly
is with him, so the Scripture of that fottish dolt. 1 Samuel 25.25.
Achar is his name and trouble comes by him. (...). Gods Spirit loves sometimes
to be Rhetorical. (...), Romans i. 29.-31.
within 3 verses together. (...) Gilgal shall go into Captivity, Amos 5.5. Once
more out of either Testament. Fear, the pit and the snare are upon thee, Isai.
24.18. (...) Not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to
think soberly. (...). Romans 12.3. With several such Paranomasia's. Nor are we
Ministers always blameworthy, if scattering some Flowers of Elegancy in our
Sermons. Discourses from the Pulpit, may as well be nauseous when slovenly
worded, as when starchedly delivered. All men have not the Gift of neat
Elocution; where God has bestowed it, why may it not be employed to take men's
ears for the gaining their souls?

But to leave this Criticisme. The Person was Achar, Great-granchild to the Son
of Judah, Genesis 32.28.
descended from Jacob, who as a Prince had power with God, and with men and
prevailed. Piety we see, is not hereditary. Men may bequeath Lands, and Houses,
and Goods; but they cannot draw a Conveyance of Grace. We may from our Parents
derive the Features of their Faces, Tertull. Apolog. cap. 18.
not the Endowments of their Souls. Fiunt Christiani non nascuntur. For being
men, we thank our fathers on earth, for being Christians, we thank our Father
in Heaven. Who knows not that faithful Abraham begat a scoffing Ismael? Acts
13.22.
that from Holy Isaac proceeded a profane Esau? David, the man after Gods own
heart, saw among his Children a rebellious Absalom, and an aspiring Adonijah.
Yea, Elies Sons (though he a religious Priest) were sons of Belial, 1 Samuel
2.12.17.
and through their sin, men abhorred the offering of the Lord. Look among the
Kings of Judah, at an exact checker-work in four immediate Successions. Vzziah
is followed with a good Jotham, that Jotham with a wicked Ahaz, that Ahaz with
a pious Hezekiah, that Hezekiah with a notorious Manasseh. So free are the
dispensations of Grace, without confinement to places or families. Our virtuous
Progenitors could not entail Holiness upon their Posterity. All are not Israel,
that are of Israel: neither. Romans 9.6.7:
because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children. As Jeroboams
wicked house may yield one in whom is found some good thing toward God: 1
Kings 14.13.
so from the root of Jacob, may grow such a luxuriant putrified branch, as this
Person in the Text, Achar, the troubler of Israel.

But as he derived his pedigree from Jacob, so from the first house of his
race, the eminentest of the Tribes, that of Judah. Genesis 49.8^
On whom Father Israel bestowed the ruling-power, as his deathbed Legacy: thy
Fathers children shall bow down unto thee. A Tribe appointed by God as Captain
over the rest in the Canaanitish War. Judge. 1.2.
A Tribe, Heb. 7.14.
out of which came his chosen King David, and afterward the son of David,
Christ Jesus our Savior. Hereby ennobled above them all, like the Lion (its
ensign of honor) above the beasts of the field. Great men are not always good,
nor can the best extraction warrant the best condition. Especially of late,
sinning is become a piece of gallantry, and our Age has brought it into a
great deal of credit. Formerly perhaps the son of a King might rebel against
his father; now he is a puisny in wickedness that dares not draw sword against
his Sovereign. In Moses his time a Korah would engage against King and Priest;
but the rabble in our days have learnt to hector out both Prince and Prelate,
and force them to compliance by seditious tumults. They that are drunk are
drunk in the night, says the Apostle, 1 Thessal. 5.7. Now it is gentile to
stagger at the Midday Sun, and he is a bungler in his art that is sober at
Noon. One Achan under Joshua, might plunder at the siege of Jericho: but he is
no body with us, who fills not his house with the goods of his brethren; or the
spoils of the Temple. I would these faults were only to be imputed to the
meaner sort; that persons of quality might acquit themselves from the least
suspicion of being guilty. But alas! the very Tribe of Judah is corrupt, the
honor of our Nation is too much stained, and they that should defend their
Nobility, by virtue do frequently prostitute it to the grossest vices. Not that
I charge this upon all Gentlemen; God forbid! We know there are some whose
spirits are more raised: whose ingenuity scorns to admit a soil with, or give
countenance to any open wickedness. And (God be blessed) this Country wants
not its share of such excellent men. But sure impiety was never so generally
favored by Great ones, nor the commission of sin so much in fashion as now it
is. We are fallen into the licentious times of the World. Quicquid libet,
licet. And when so many Achars are abroad, no marvel if they prove pestilential
to the Kingdom. Such men carry trouble in their Name, and the troublers of the
Country shall be their Character; Achar the troubler of Israel: Which leads me
from the Malefacior, to 2. His Indictment, and therein to the First Branch of
the Second General.

1. The troubler of Israel. The Scripture uses not to complement with sinners.
When the World dares not open its mouth, and a carnal friend lays his finger
on his lips, Gods word will speak plainly. The greatest shall have no better
than they deserve, and the meanest shall not want their just commendation. A
charity of two mites shall be recorded from a Widow. A box of ointment shall be
known through the World, if brought by Mary Magdalen to her Savior: and the
poor Sareptan shall be registered in Gods volumn, for well entertaining her
guest Elijah. This may encourage us to do good. But on the contrary, if we
deviate from the paths of righteousness, if we stain our souls with impiety,
no marvel if our Names be blotted with disgrace. Great sinners (though eminent
in the World) have not escaped their (...), their brands of infamy: Witness
Ahab, and Ahaz, and Manasseh. 1 Kings 21.25.
The first is said to sell himself to do wickedness. The second is mentioned in
a strange phrase: This is that King Ahaz. 2 Chronicles. 28.22. 2 Chronicles. 33.9.
And the third could not readily deserve above what he had: he made Judah to do
worse than the Heathen, whom the Lord cast out before the children of Israel.
Add to these, Jeroboam, constantly named with this scurvy addition, who made
Israel to sin: And withal remember what Achar is styled in the Text, Achar, the
troubler of Israel.

Methinks the very odium cast upon sinners should make us averse to the
Commission of sin. Were it a thing would render us honorable in the World,
would it perfume our memories in the nostrils of men, and make them fragrant to
future generations; we might have some encouragement to court and embrace it.
But quite otherwise: It lays a blemish upon our greatest glory, it renders us
despicable in the eyes of God, it soils our very ashes in the grave, and
causes our names to rot upon the earth: enough to stir up our hatred unto, and
resolutions against it. Especially, You the Worthies of the County, Stain not
the goodness of your Birth, with the badness of your lives. Sin is
discreditable in any, most in Gentlemen. They were grievous times of which
Salvian complained, Salvian. de Gubernat. Dei lib. 3.
Volunt sibi id Majores quasi privilegium vendicare, ut jure suo crimina
committant. The Nobles of that Age pleaded a privilege to act wickedness, as a
piece of State. May that strange spirit never disturb our Generation, nor make
the least essay upon our Gentry. Do you therefore prop your Honorable Title by
Virtuous Actions, and uphold the repute of your Families by exemplary goodness.
This will endear you to all sober persons: This will prove a blessing to your
Country, and perpetuate your fame beyond brass and marble; when the profane
and wicked shall have no better a remembrance than He in the Text, Achar, the
troubler of Israel.

Troubler of Israel. The phrase relates to a passage in Joshua 7 25. Why have
thou troubled us? the Lord shall trouble thee this day; and that passage to a
story recorded in the Chapter, take it briefly; when the Israelites besieged
Jericho, God charged them to abstain from the plunder of the City. Achar
transgressed the command, and the people (hitherto victorious) assaulting Ai,
v. 5.
were repelled by the inhabitants of that place, so that their hearts melted,
and became as water. Joshua their Leader, sensible of this disaster, pleads
with God in an humble prayer. But the Majesty of Heaven was provoked; Divine
Justice must be satisfied. If Israel sin, why should not Israel smart? The Lord
said unto Joshua, Get thee up, v. 10.11.12.
wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned, therefore they
could not stand before their enemies. To evince the truth, all the Tribes must
be assembled, that the Malefactor might be detected. What is the issue? A
fatallot discovers Achan to be the man. Joshua arraigns him, he pleads guilty;
the prize in his possession witnesses against him, besides his own
acknowledgement. The committing that sin caused the peoples defeat; and thus
was Achar the troubler of Israel.

What misery may One man's sin bring upon a whole multitude? The Hebrews call
ungodly men (...). Those that be irreligious toward God, and debauched in
their manners, are troublesome to the Commonwealth. If the World be a Sea,
these raise the storms, which make our Voyage turbulent and unquiet. They want
peace in themselves, and disturb the peace of their Neighbors; wresting Gods
judgments out of his hands, and forcing his wrath upon the place of their
abode. These Bees have their strings. Psalm. 118.12. Isal. 57.20.5.
These troubled waters cast up their dirt. These thorns prick the fingers of
such as are about them. Phineas (as Ambassador) expostulating with Reuben and
Gad for their newframed Altar, fears their supposed sin would prove injurious
to the whole multitude; it shall be, seeing ye Rebel to day against the Lord,
that to morrow he will be wroth with the whole congregation of Israel, Josh.
22.18. Here was a case beyond fear, put out of doubt by the sad event. Eccles.
9.18.
One sinner destroys much good: occasioneth much mischief. The whole army
suffers by a particular person, Achar the troubler of Israel.

What shall we say then? Romans 3.5, 6.
Is God unrighteous, that takes vengeance? God forbid: But if one man sin and
wrath come upon more, can this be reconciled with equity and justice? 1 King.
21.29.
yes, well enough. Ahabs son may smart for Ahabs fault, the iniquity of the
fathers may be visited upon the children. Chams curse may be entailed upon his
posterity: Exodus 20.5.
nay, the Israelites may be beaten for Achars transgression. Observe therefore
that the Almighty proceeds otherwise in temporal than eternal punishments. The
last come wholly and singly for our own impieties: Ezekiel. 18.4.
The soul that sins it shall die. The first may overtake us for the
impieties of others, but still with respect to our particular guilt. Thereby we
are liable to the strokes of Divine vengeance; only an opportunity is taken to
punish when some notorious offense is committed by another, our own wickedness
is the impulsive cause deserving, theirs the occasion bringing down these
judgments. A company of boys by some untowardness displease their Master, but
at present no noise is made of it: Their fellow-scholler runs into a fouler
crime, and the Master lays hold of that season to correct them all. Had not
this one boy done amiss; all might possibly have escaped that whipping: yet is
not the Master unjust, in taking so fair an occasion of giving them their
deserts. Sic parvis componere magna solemus. The application of this simile is
clear, I would it might affeci our hearts as well as convince our
understandings. God has visited our Kingdom with beavy judgments; An
unnatural war broke out in its bowels, and the sword was made drunk with the
blood of our Brethren: Men's rights were invaded by the Keepers of their
liberties. The Church was spoiled by pretended Patrons of the state: and the
Defender of the faith murdered under disguise of securing Religion. The force
of Law was interrupted by the violence of power, and some men would own no
authority but what hung by their side. Whence came these troubles? from sin,
without question. And though the best cannot excuse himself from contributing
too much to the common calamities, (each one heaping fuel upon the fire) yet
might we not plainly see there was a viperous brood among us, lay gnawing at
their Mothers heart; Men who by heinous wickedness, became so many Achars,
troublers of our Israel? In mercy to the land, a period was put to the dismal
days. Heaven smiled upon us afresh: and the joy of our hearts was legible in
the cheerfulness of our looks: when Church and State obtained a resettlement by
the restoration of our Sovereign. But have not these Achars been at work
again? Causes are best known by their effects, and those effects, have been
felt to purpose. The sheathed Sword was drawn through the rage of our insulting
adversaries. Nay the Almighties Sword slew our people by thousands. Our Royal
City became a burnt-offering: and as the dreadful pestilence swept away men
from their dwellings: so the devouring fire swept away their dwellings from the
surviving men. The inhabitants were reduced into dust, and their houses turned
into ashes. Yet all this while God was just. But is it not time then to find
out these disturbers of our peace, these occasioners of our troubles, these
provokers of his wrath? They will soon be discovered upon a diligent enquiry.
For therefore are they troublers because transgressors, Achar the troubler of
Israel, who transgressed in the thing accursed. And thus I am come to the
particular part of the indictment, who transgressed in the thing accursed.

2 A command (as you heard there was that no hand should be laid upon the
spoil of Jericho: ye in any wise keep your selves from the accursed thing,
lest ye make your selves accursed, when you take of the accursed thing, and
make the camp of Israel a curse, and trouble it, Josh. 6, 18. It was the
Almighties charge; who not only prohibited the people from meddling, but
reserved it for his own treasury. All the silver, and the gold and vessels of
brass and Iron, are consecrated unto the Lord, they shall come into the
treasury of the Lord v. 19. Achan through a greedy humor, disobeys, He saw, he
coveted, he took a Babylonish garment, 200 shekels of silver, and a wedge of
gold. These he hid, to pass undiscovered; and undiscovered he was, till the lot
fell upon him: that lot extorts a confession from his mouth; the prize is found
by the searchers of his tent and laid before the multitude. Whence we gather
that this person was guilty of a double crime: Theft, and sacrilege. Theft, in
taking what was not his own: Sacrilege, in taking what belonged unto God.

Theft, in taking what was not his own. It is one precept in the moral Law,
Exodus 20.15.
Thou shall not steal: the ground whereof is a propriety given to every man in
his own goods, to Keep and use them at his own pleasure. Nay, the same God who
has tied up our hands from stealing, 17.
has restrained our hearts from desiring: Thou shall not covet thy neighbors
house, nor any thing that is his. He allows no grasping the possessions of our
brethren, nor carving our selves a share of their wealth. We have nothing to do
to leap into their houses, or seize upon their estates; yea we sin if our very
riches be irregular, which sin will bring a disquietment upon our selves; for
if Ahab by force took Naboths vineyard, the threatenings of God shall make him
tremble: and occasion a trouble to the place where we live; for if Achar steal
he is the troubler of Israel, by transgressing in the thing accursed. Time was
during the Gospels infancy, when all things were had without distinction.
Neither said any man that ought of the things which he possessed was his own;
but they had all things common, Acts 4.32. But as St. Hierome well; Distingue
tempora and concordabunt scripturae; observe the difference of times, and no
difference will be found in the scriptures. The persecuted believers were drawn
to such exigence that for support of those professing the same faith; there was
need of sharing in the same possessions. Besides, the distribution they made
was voluntary, not constrained: no force of Law compelled, but only freeness of
heart inclined them. I add the owners of estates had then such a right, as
admitted no dispute, till parted with by their own consent. They had (if the
distinction may be pertinent) jus ad rem, they afforded their brethren jus in
re. Whiles it remained, was it not thine own, and after it was sold, was it not
in thine own power? says St. Peter to Ananias about the sale of his land, Acts
5.4. But when those necessities were no longer pleadable; when the Gospel, and
its favorers began to flourish, this temporary community was turned out of
doors; men's rights and properties were not only preferred, but stricter
enclosures made about them, by severe edicts of pious Princes, against all
violence and theft, under grievous and heavy penalties: and stealing as a
palpable breach both of Divine and Humane laws, made the offender liable, not
only to the wrath of God, but to the sentence of the Civil Magistrate: as
before the Gospels publishings, such men escaped not a condign punishment. We
see it in the example before us; Achar was stoned, his stolen goods were
burnt; because he transgressed in the thing accursed, the second Branch of his
Crime.

2. Sacrilege. As he stole, so he stole from God, who had passed a
consecration upon the goods of Jericho, and designed them for his own
Exchequer. It is ill making too bold with the Almighty. If the Eagle snatch a
coal from the Altar, in all likelihood she burns her nest; and if Achar be too
busy with the hallowed spoil, it may bring a mischief upon his own head.
Therefore (I presume) called the thing accursed, ab effectu, by laying him open
to the curse of God, and to the vengeance of men. Nor can they who commit
Achars fault expect any better than Achars reward. Will a man rob God? yet ye
have robbed me: but ye say, wherein have we robbed thee? In Tithes and
Offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me, even this whole
Nation, Mal. 3.8.9. And not without good ground. Things are commonly devoted to
God cum Anathemate, with an Anathema against such as shall convert them to
private uses; (We see it in the precedents of ancient Dedications) whereby he
becomes strongly invested in the right to and possession of them: so that a
sacrilegious person is not only a Thief in the highest degree, but a direct
contemner of the eternal Majesty; who is neither so weak that he cannot, nor so
tame that he will not punish the violations of his own interest. Those that
would not believe have to their cost, experienced the truth hereof; and they
who by such examples, will not be persuaded, shall hereafter pay at a dear rate
for their incredulity. If they lose not their souls, (for repentance and
restitution may secure them) yet many times they lose their estates: one
generation often sees the beginning and end of their wealth. Sacrilegious gain
proves a Canker in the fairest Inheritance, and eats out the profit of our
justest incomes. Nay, many times it costs men their lives. King Rufus his story
need not be mentioned: there is an authentic instance in the Text, of one
examined, convicted, condemned, and executed; Achar, the troubler of Israel,
who transgressed in the thing accursed.

You have seen the prisoner arraigned, his Indictment drawn up with an account
of the Crimes laid against him. But this Honorable Assembly challenges some
further tribute of duty, which shall be confined to the sands in the glass, for
fear of interrupting the concerns of the Country.

And I hope the presumption will be pardoned, if my first address be made to
your Lordships, whom God and his Vicegerent have employed in this Circuit, to
search out these Achars, who trouble our Israel. No hopes England should be a
Land of Peace till it be a Land of righteousness. No thoughts it should be free
from vexatious troubles, so long as it is full of notorious sinners. We humbly
beseech your Lordships to knit your brows, to sharpen your tongues, severely
to frown, strictly to chide, und auntedly to punish such wicked persons: yea
though Achar-like, descended from the noble stock of Judah: well considering,
that if Great men be not Suns to enlighten, they will prove Comets to infect
their inferiors. Let not prophanness escape, though in a gentle habit, nor the
rustling of an offenders Silks plead for an exemption from your just censure.
He, whom you represent, is (...), no accepter of persons. And so shall you show
yourselves Gods indeed, when thus taking pattern from God himself.

Nor do we question, but those Honorable, and Worthy Persons, Assistants on
the Bench, will contribute their help to so pious a work. Besides those
arguments which might be drawn from several Topics, (and all of them
sufficiently persuasive) Gods Glory, Religions Credit, your own Eternal
Reputation, let the honor and safety of your Country prevail upon your
generous spirits, which else must be sadly hazarded; (I had almost said utterly
lost) for every Achar will be a troubler of Israel, if allowed to transgress in
the thing accursed.

But before such men can fall under the Courts severity, I presume they must
pass the test of, or at least be presented by the Grand Jury. And of those
Gentlemen in the Name of God, I entreat this favor, that as the Countreys-eye,
they will discover these offenders, who are like to prove the Countries
trouble. It Is fit an employment of so so high importance, should be managed by
persons of great worth: men of such sagacity, that Achar may not lurk in his
Tent; and of such integrity, that neither his silver shekels, nor his wedge of
gold may render him secure. This County is happy in the Gentries undertaking
the toil of this work, which indeed they are best to be concerned in. They
need not fear the displeasure of a vicious Landlord, or a malicious Neighbor,
which strikes terror into the hearts of ordinary persons. They are out of the
reach of these promises and threats, which will either allure or terrify
inferiors. And such (I hope) will be employed in the business of this Assizes;
impartial representers of (Achars) faults; theft and sacrilege. Theft; that
men may enjoy what God and the Laws have made their own: that their estates be
not seized, nor their just interests exposed to the rapacious hands of Thieves
and Robbers. And truly (Gentlemen) there is another theft might be worth your
consideration, Theologi detractionem furto pejorem statuunt; uterque tenetur a^
restitutionem, latro scil. et detractor; sed multo facilius satis fit pro furto
quam detractione; quia in illo quantitas damni cognosci et estimari potest, in
illa non potest. Episc. Davenant in Coloss. cap. 1. v. 7 Machiavel. Aquin. 2.2.
qu. 99. Art. 3. (...) conc.
the stealing from a man his good Name and Credit: Reputation is one of the
greatest blessings upon earth, which if once assaulted, the Scars thereof are
carried to our Graves. That Hellish Politician was too cunning in his Maxim,
Calumniare audacter, aliquid adherebit: Strike home in your slander, and if the
blow do not kill, be sure it will wound. It is certain our laws have provided
against this evil, it is your care the offenders be known.

But when God is engaged as well as man, your diligence must be singular to
vindicate him True, he is a patient in every Crime, (as all sins strike against
his law) but more especially in some than in others; and in none more than this
of Sacrilege. A word of as large a comprehension, as the thing is of a
pestilent nature. It is usually reckoned of three sorts; with relation to
things, to places, and to persons. The last Ages have had Wide throats, and
greedily swallowed many holy Morsels. What is past lies not within your power
to remedy; but if any ravenous Harpie be fastening upon that which remains, be
so just to God to beat him off, and pluck it out of his Claws. Secure his
Portion, and rest satisfied he will secure your estates. Cast an eye upon the
Holy places, and let them partake a little of your care, suffer not our
Churches to be excommunicated, nor our Congregations to be gathered into Barns,
whilst the Houses of God stand too too empty: Certainly there is a relative
holiness in them, by their solemn dedication to Gods service: if so, this
offense is Sacrilege; unless Aquinas was mistaken, by whom it is defined,
Sacrae rei violati^, Aquin. 2. 2. Q. 99 Art. 1. resp. ad arg. 3. Gravius
peccatum est sacrilegium quo peccatur contra personam sacram, quam quo peccatur
contra locum sacrum Aquin. 2. 2 qu. 99. Art 3. Exodus 15.11.
and that violatio interpreted by quaecuncue irreverentia. But the Schools
agree, the hainousest Sacrilege is against a Person, and what person greater
than God? All holy things challenge a reverence by Virtue of their holiness, He
most of all who has styled himself glorious in holiness. Do not thou overlook
any thing which may reflect upon Him. If you find that his Name be blasphemed,
that his word be profaned, that his Ordinances be contemned, that his day be
unhallowed (and alas! these sins are too common among us) for Gods sake let
them not escape an especial remark from you, nor the offenders some serious
rebukes from your Lordships. Pardon my zeal in these passionate wishes; Gods
honor must be regarded if ever we expect to be happy.

I fear being tedious, and therefore will contract. May all who are concerned
in the affairs of these days, either as Jurors, or Witnesses, beware of Achars
faults. If once forsworn, you are guilty of them both. In case you are employed
between party and party, you rob your neighbor of his goods, either by
procuring or confirming an unjust title. If between the King and the prisoners,
you either rob your Sovereign of a subject by condemning the innocent, or you
steal from justice by acquitting the guilty. Besides God has stamped holiness
upon an Oath. Therein men use his name, they call him to witness the truth of
their words; therefore Perjury is a branch of Sacrilege, Exodus 20.7.
and as such it shall be rewarded; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless,
that takes his Name in vain.

Once more I return to your Lordships; and present Achar not as standing at the
Bar, but as lying in his Prison. Places of that nature were certainly designed
to be houses of instructions, as well as of correction: that however the body
might suffer, the soul might be bettered: that however the guilty might smart
for their faults before men, they might be drawn to repentance before God. That
if the Crimes they committed deserved death, helps might not be wanting to
prepare them for it: and if through the laws clemency, they came off with life,
their former restraint might be a daily Monitor to warn them against such
ungodly courses. But experience proves Goals are Goals in a double sense;
fellons are held as fast in the fetters of sin, as in the fetters of Iron: and
it is hard for a man to enter the Prison a child of hell, but he leaves it ten
times worse. It might not be unworthy of your Lordships to think of this
particular along your Circuit. Here (God be blessed) through the charity of
Benefactors a provision is made for teaching the prisoners: in some other
places I am sure it is not, where at this time it needs sufficiently. D^yl^.
Be pleased therefore to consider the condition of those poor creatures; that
your sentence from the bench speak not death both to body and soul. It will
certainly be an act of the highest compassion, and an imitating the example of
that good Joshua, who endeavored to work so effectually with Achar, that the
same stones might not kill him and damn him. Let them suffer under your justice
here, so they meet not with Divine vengeance hereafter. The sum of all is, God
must not be dishonored, Israel must not be troubled, Laws must not be
infringed, Achars must not be spared. And then will our land enjoy peace and
tranquillity; the blessing of the Almighty will rest upon our heads; we shall
partake of his present favor, and in due time of his future Glory. Which God
grant we way all do, through Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom with the Father,
and the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Praise, and Dominion, henceforth, and for
evermore. Amen.

THE Righteous Man's Concern, FOR THE Churches Misery. A SERMON Preached before
the Judges at St. Mary's Church in Leicester, July, 22. 1669.

By Tho. Stanhope A.M. Vicar of St. Margarets in Leicester.

The Righteous Man's Concern for the Churches Misery.
Psalm 11.3. If the foundations be destroyed, what can the Righteous do?
HOly Men have usually met with their share of troubles. The way to heaven is
paved with flints, and strawed with Roses. Our world is a Sea, and the best
sail through it, with the wind in their faces. That Royal Prophet to whose
composure this psalm pretends, though by the infallible spirit, declared a man
after Gods heart, Acts. 13.22. 18 am. 26.20.
was sufficiently sensible how dear a rate his piety cost him with a wicked
Saul, who sought his life, and endeavored his destruction. Hunted he was like
a Patridge, and then no marvel his enemies should say, flee as a (...) to your
Mountain V. 1. Saul and his Parasites had knit their brows, and then no wonder
if they bent their bows; they shot forth their bitter words, a sign they made
ready their Arrows upon the string: and all this preparation was to wound that
good man, and those who were like him: privily to shoot at the upright in
heart. V. 2. Yet as pious souls prefer the public concerns before their
private interests, he values not what related to himself, in respect of what
referred to the Church of God. If she fared ill he could not fare well. And
apprehending her foundations in danger of being overturned, he breaks forth
into the question before us: if the foundations be destroyed, what can the
righteous do?

In which words you may please to observe two general parts 1. A Supposition.
2. An Interrogation. A Supposition, if the foundations be destroyed. An
interrogation; What can the righteous do? In the Supposition there is the
matter, and the form: or the Suppositum, and the modus supponendi. In the
Suppositum, the subject, and the predicate: the subject the foundations; the
predicate destroyed. In the modus supponendi; take notice of three things, for
the word if will bear them al; 1. the possibility of it, the foundations may be
destrayed. 2. the iniquity of it. It is a very wicked thing to destroy them. 3.
the miseny or calamity which attends it: it will be a sad thing if the
foundations be destroyed. The Second general is the Interrogation; What can the
Righteous do? or according to some translations, What has the Righteous done?
both may be taken in under three notions; 1. as vox reflectentis. 2. as vox
deplorantis. 3. as vox inquirentis. The firstagrees especially with the old:
the second with both: and the third with the new reading; of these parts in
their order. I begin with the first, the Supposition; and therein with

1. The Subject or matter of the suppositum, the foundations. I may spare the
pains to tell you that the word is by some rendered snares or nets: as if David
had particularly intended Saul's designs against him. We have nothing to do with
it in that notion, suiting perhaps as little with the sense as with this
occasion. Thus far I shall use it and no further. May destroying the
foundations prove as great a snare to all who endeavor it, as could correspond
with Saul's batred, without prejudice to David's innocence. Omitting therefore
the variety of translations, we fix upon the English, where the Metaphor is
drawn from a building, to which the Church and State are here compared: And not
here only but in other places too. St. Paul calls the Church, the house of God
1 Timothy 3.15. Jerusalem is builded as a City that is compact together, says the
Psalmist, Ps. 12.3. Jerusalem, where God had his Temple, and the King had his
Throne. And thus we shall see these foundations are either foundations of
Doctrine, or foundations of Government, Take away the one, and the building
will totter, for want of its Jachin, which does establish it: Take away the
other and it will reel for want of its Booz, for in it is strength.

1. There are foundations of Doctrine. Those points which comprize the
substance of Christian Religion; We ordinarily call them fundamentals. And the
Scripture uses the term in the text, Heb. 6.1. not laying again the foundation
of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God: which in the beginning
of that verse is said to be (...), the principles of the Doctrine of Christ,
such are the being and attributes of God, the divinity and humanity of our
Savior, the infallibility and authority of the Scriptures, the immortality of
the soul, the resurrection of the body, and the like: for upon these we build
our Religion; and the building can never stand unless the foundation be firm.
Admit men once to deny these principles or to be persuaded into a disbelief of
them, and never expect to find their actions savor any thing of piety or
honesty. It is evidently plain, that a practical conviction of these grand
truths has the greatest influence upon our souls, to make us good scrvants to
our God, and good subjects to our King. True, the Gospel primarily aims at our
piety, yet does it withal design our Allegiance: that with equal conscience
we pay the duties owing to the powers on earth, as we do to the almighty power
of heaven, I had almost forgot to mention St. August. in loc.
Augustines exposition in his. Hoc dicit contra omnes Hereticos. For then the
Psalmist by foundations must mean doctrinall truths, if Heretics who pervert
these truths be destroyers of the foundations.

2. There are also a second sort of foundations, those of Government; which we
suppose to be the fundamental laws in a nation grounded upon the Maxims of
natural and Civil Policy. Thus St. Hierome expounds the words, Hierom. in in
loc.
si leges dissipatae sint, if the laws be dissolved. It Is well known there is
no civilized, much less Christian Kingdom, but has its national constitutions
(if that be not too low a word) whereby the people are governed. God himself
would not let the Israelites be without them as a means to uphold societies,
and keep every person within his due bounds. Now as Laws are virtually lodged
in the supreme Magistrate, so as by his consent (Le Roy. le veult) they receive
there sanction; so in an especial manner He may be intended in the text. David
as a King, speaks of himself at the same rate; the earth, and all the
inhabitants thereof are dissolved, I bear up the Pillars of it. Ps. 75.3. And
certainly there cannot be a greater shake given to any nation than an
infringing the just Authority of the Prince, or of those to whom he commits
either Ecclesiastical or Civil Jurisdiction, I say Ecclesiastical, for some
of the Rabbis have been so favorable as to name the very Priests for these
foundations. I dare not plead to so much reading, but a worthy Author asserts
it to be Rabbi Solomon's gloss: fundamenta i.e. Vicaris decapla in loc.
Sacerdotes, super quos fulciebat se populus the Priests, who were the peoples
prop and support. Wonder not, I speak for our own order. It is pity we should
lose those privileges, which the bounty of God and his Vicegerents have given
us. These then are the foundations of doctrine and of Government, the subject
of the proposition, whose predicate follows.

2. The predicate destroyed if the foundations be destroyed? Where the Psalmist
still prosecutes his Metaphor; for the word signifies a demolishing of
buildings. Not only a picking some stones out of the wall, which yet might be
incomvenient: nor beating down the higher stories and upper rooms, though that
would spoil the houses beauty; but the laying it level with the ground, which
must render it perfectly un-inhabitable. Thus when the doctrines of
Christianity are boldly denied, and the laws of a Kingdom insolently epposed,
when the people seditiously refuse either to be led by Moses or Aaron; then may
we woefully complain of the foundations being destroyed. And so I pass from the
first thing, the suppositum, to

2. The modus supponendi, the manner of the supposall, in the word (if) If the
foundations be destroyed: And here we are first presented with

1. The possibility of it. That these foundations MAY BE destroyed: for de
impossibilibus non est supponendum, no wise man, much less the All-wise God
would suppose impossibilities. And indeed the truth hereof does but too plainly
appear. No sooner did the Son of righteousness begin to shine, but clouds arose
to darken his light. Truth was no sooner sprung out of the earth, but errors
began to peep out of hell. The Church in her infancy was pestered with
Herefies, and the tares grew up as fast as the wheat. There was a (...) among
Satan's followers, as there was among Christ's disciples. A Simon Magnus to
oppose Simon Peter: from whom all the Heretics of later date derive their
pedigree. He, to raze the foundations, while the Church was but yet in
building, contradicts three main points of Christian faith; The Trinity of
persons, Christ's passion, and Man's future resurrection. In Domitians time,
Elion and Cerinthus broached their pernicious opinions against the Divinity of
our blessed Savior: the occasion (if good Authors may be credited) why St.
John (then alive) published his Gospel. The Gnostics had already got head, men
of such abominable principles, and flagitious practices, that a modest tongue
and a chaste ear cannot with Civility, admit the naming them. In following ages
these Heretics became more numerous, and thereby more mischievous. How
mightily the Arrian blasphemy prevailed, all Church-Histories witness: St.
Hieromes expression though it savor of Rhetoric may be allowed without any
great Hyperbole; Ingemuit totus mundus, et miratus est se factum esse Arrianum:
The world groaned under its burden, and admired to see it self devoted to
Arrius. Nay, so far were the Doctors of the Church seduced, that Athunasius
alone stickled considerably for the Orthodox Doctrine: there was Vnus
Athanasius contra totum mundum, et totus contra unum Athanasium. It would be
tedious to trace the footsteps of these destroyers to our days: Were all books
burnt, were all records of former times lost, could we betray our selves into
such incredulity that nothing which our Fathers have delivered would gain our
belief; yet if we will take up short of the madness to distrust our eyes and
ears, we shall soon perceive a possibility of this mischief. Which of us are
strangers to the Quakers plea of perfection, and preferring Enthustasticall
revelations above the Holy Scriptures? Who knows not that the Anabaptists to
defend their not baptizing infants, implead the doctrine of Original sin? Some
have taken pains to rob the soul of its happiness immediately after death, and
to lull it asleep with the body till the general resurrection. Others would
disprove the sufficiency of Christ's sufferings, and a third sort would divest
both Him and the Holy Ghost of their Godhead. These things through the
licentiousness of the Press are exposed to public view and made too manifest
to be concealed.

Pass from the foundations of doctrine, to those of Government. And have we not
seen a possibility of their destruction. We have lived in those days when the
voice of laws could not be heard for the clashing of armor; when men defended
their Sovereign by invading his Authority, and fought for their King with
Swords drawn against him: when they put Him in prison, to establish Him in his
throne, and to make Him glorious, cut off his head. And how came these things
to pass? Satan's agents are subtle, they do (...) in St. Judes phrase v. 4.
furtim intrare, steal in among well meaning Christians, and with good words and
fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple. St. Austin declaring how
Heretics destroy the foundations, says it is done, In conventiculis suis, ubi
parvulos et interioris lucis ignaros non lacte nutriunt, Romans 16.8. Aug. in loc.
sed venenis necant. In their Conventicles, and private meerings, where these
crafty chapmen instead of nourishing their ignorant hearers with the sincere
milk of the word, poison their souls with erroneous doctrines. Whether or no
our miseries have happened by the same means let sober men judge; and if these
courses be continued what the issue will be, all lovers of peace and truth
tremble to think. Certainly the foundations destroyed, we can neither hope to
be holy nor happy; not holy, for this very supposition does imply.

2. The iniquity of it. It is a wicked thing if the foundations be destroyed.
Can any thing be more notoriously evil than the destroying that faith which
Christ and his Apostles preached to the world; the truth whereof those Apostles
sealed with their blood, and for the defense of which we ought (...), summis
viribus certare, Jude. v. 5.
earnestly to contend for the faith, which was once delivered to the Saints?
Besides corruption in Doctrine is usually attended with debauchedness in
conversation. Truth and Holiness stand or fall together; some Arch-Hereticks
indeed seemed very pious for a while, till their opinions met with considerable
entertainment. Devotion like a Crutch, must support them while weak; when their
legs are strengthened, they throw it away. The first, and main opposers of
truth were known to be men of flagitious lives: Witness the laseivious carriage
of Simon Magus with his Helena; of Montanus with his Prisca and Maximilla, the
strange uncleaness of the Nicolaitans, and the abominable obscoenity of the
Gnostics particularly recorded by Epiphanius. And no marvel if our practices
are irregular, when our Judgments are perverted; if we turn Gods grace into
lasciviousness, when we come to deny the Lord that bought us.

Look we upon the foundations of Government, and the derstoying them will
appear a manifest wickedness: God has implanted in man's nature an inclination
to live sociably. Without laws there can be no societies, because there can be
nothing of order and rule. He is the Author of power and dominion; By me Kings
reign Prove. 18.15. God sets the Crown upon a Princes head, and puts the Scepter
into his hand; to whom thus exalted, he has commanded our subjection and
reverence ( Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13.1.) and
charged upon us a conscientious obedience in all things lawful: ye must needs
be subject, not only for wrath but also for conscience sake. v. 5. so that
hence it follows; They who endeavor the subversion of laws or resist the
Authority of their Kings, (whose the laws are;) sin expressly against the word
of God: Which shows the iniquity of destroying the foundations. And then no
doubt we shall soon find

3. The misery, or calamity which attends it: employed also in this supposition,
if the foundations be destroyed. And truly what can we expect from sin, but
misery? Heresies have done the Church more harm than persecutions. The one has
scratched her face, but the other has gnawed her bowels. The one has
sometimes put her into a feavour, the other has preyed upon her like a
Gangreen: it is the Apostles word 2 Timothy 2.17. But among those mischiefs which
are inseparable attendants upon the prevalency of errors, there is none more
injures Christ's mystical body, than the schisms and factions they directly
occasion. Truth is the parent of peace and concord; while there is one faith,
there will be one spirit. Error is the unhappy Mother of strifes and divisions.
Experience convinces, that difference in judgment will breed distance in
affection, and distance in affection will interrupt brotherly Communion. As
schism disposes to Heresy, so does Heresy to schism: nor can we imagine
there should be a closu^e in devotions, where there is not an agreement in
opinions. What grievous confusions happened in the Church, when the Arrians
were favored above the Orthodox? One party separating from the other, and the
fautors of that blasphemy persecuting the true believers with unchristian
cruelty. I need not mention the lamentable broils which ruined Germany by the
rage of the Anabaptists. These calamities have, and do, and will follow, if the
foundations of doctrine be destroyed.

And no doubt, the like evils must be expected upon destroying the foundations
of Government. It was well said men had better live where nothing is lawful,
than where all things are: and a bramble Government is better than none.
Tyranny makes any Kingdom a kind of Purgatory, but Anarchy makes it a very
Hell: nay, what if I say, even Hell abhors it; for that place of torment admits
of some order, and there we meet with a Prince of the Devils. Take away the
exercise of Authority, and you introduce confusion. Bring down the Sovereign
power, and every Peasant will make himself King. The ordinary rabble are so
mad-headed, that if affairs be left to their management, piety, and honesty
will both suffer; Religion and justice will be turned out of doors. It Is not in
vain the Scripture four times repeats, In those days there was no King in
Israel: Since the reason of recording it so often may be gathered from the
places where it is found. When that people had no settled Government, every man
was a Lawgiver to himself, and never did they Commit more wickedness, or endure
more misery. Micah steals his Mothers money; part whereof when restored, is
made into an Image, and the man gets an housefull of Gods: what is the reason?
In those days there was no King in Israel, Judge. 17.6. Micahs house is robbed
by the Danites, and those Children of Dan worship this Image: How came this
Idolatry? In those days there was no King in Israel. Judge. 18.1. The Levites
Concubine is abused to death: when was this gross uncleanness? In those days
when there was no King in Israel, Judge. 19.1. Israel and Benjamin quarrel,
because the adulterers escape unpunished; 40000 Israelites are slain, and the
tribe of Benjamin reduced to 600, and that calamity proceeded from the same
ground: In those days there was no King in Israel, every man did that which was
right in his own eyes. Judge. 21.25. But what need we travel as far as Canaan,
when poor England has experienced these fatal mischiefs? It is not beyond the
reach of our memories to recollect sad Evidences of this truth. Our Kingdom was
once the wonder of its friends and the terror of its enemies: and so continued,
while the foundations were unshaken: but violent hands were laid upon them by
Ambition and Faction. A company of Malcontents (like so many Jehues) drove on
their designs with such fury, that the Sword prevailed above the law, the
people (I am sorry to say it) were preached into rebellion: Loyal subjects
were the only Malignants, and God could not be served if Caesar were obeyed.
How many lives and estates were sacrificed to the popular fury? Lords and
Commons fell by thousands, till at length, that Incomparable Prince and Blessed
Martyr laid his neck upon the block. -- Infandum jubeo renovare dolorem. The
body of the Kingdom had surfeited of peace and plenty, and our state-empyricks
knew no cure, but to cut off the head. Possibly there were some grievances to
be redressed, some corruptions had perhaps crept into Church and Commonwealth,
was this the way to give ease for the one, or to root out the other? It is
strange that the shrinking of a Beam, or the jutting of a wall can no way be
helped but by pulling down the house? This is to avoid a lesser evil by
admitting a score of greater. A score did I say? that number is too small their
name is Legion, for they are many. So we found them, and groaned under them for
several years, till the Almighty providence repaired our ruins, and set up
our pillars in their places again. God grant they may stand firm against all
the attempts of dangerous underminers. But since there is a possibility of, an
iniquity in, and a misery follows the destroying these foundations, no marvel
if each pious soul bethink it self of its own duty, and often ask the Psalmists
question, If the foundations be destroyed what can the righteous do? And so I
pass to the second general part of the text;

2. The Interrogation, which may be looked upon

1. As vox reflectentis. The voice of one searching into the true grounds of
this dreadful misery. Which seems more probable, because several translations
render it in the praetertense (...) so the septuagint, and our Liturgy-Psalms,
what has the righteous done? David was satisfied, Gods Judgments are
deserved, before they be inflicted. The vapors of sin cause the showers of
sorrow. Lament. 3.33.
He does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of men. And because we
may sometimes read malum in malo, the evil we do in the evil we suffer, it is
worth a serious search how our fault and our correction suite, that the Quaery
may be soon resolved, if the foundations be destroyed what the righteous has
done.

Why should not we then who have shared in the misery, be as diligent in the
duty? The task will be easy: For if our calamities were written in blood, our
sins have been graven with the point of a Diamond. Disobedience to Authority,
in Queen Elizabeth's days, 1 Kings 18.44.
was like the cloud seen by Elijahs servant, about the bigness of a man's hand,
which in process of time growing greater and greater, Eccles. 11.3.
overspread the face of our heavens: and if the clouds be full they will empty
themselves; these did, and in so violent a manner, as to beat down all before
them. Little shelter could be found from that storm. Nor could it be otherwise
imagined, when our own hands by uncovering the house had exposed it to the
weather, well might the posts be rotted, and the building fall. And when we
have thus enquired into the cause, how can we reflect upon it without aching
hearts, and moistened eyes, bewailing our misery, sinfulness, and imprudence;
which leads me to the second notion

2. As vox deplorantis, the voice of a Mourner. And this will agree with both
Translations. With the old, what has the righteous done? so it is vox
deplorantis peccaium: with the new what can the righteous do? so it is vox
deplorantis impotentiam.

1. Vox deplorantis peccatum, a Lamentation for the sin. The best grieving for
the afflictions of Joseph, is first to grieve for the sins of Joseph. Men can
never be truly affected with their punishments, till they be rightly
apprehensive of their wickedness. And observe the phrase, it is what has the
righteous done? not what has the righteous suffered? To convince us, the
Psalmist had an eye at the malum culpae, as well as the malum paenae; that he
wept for the crime committed, as well as for the misery inflicted. In these
terms the Scripture expresses our penitential mourning: no man repented him
of his wickedness, saying what have I done? Jerem. 8.6. And sure while we know
not our sins, so as to be humbled, while we understand not our transgressions,
so as to be sorry for them; well may we fear that all the foundations of the
earth will be moved out of course.

This also instructs us in a necessary duty. That whenever the foundations
are in danger to be destroyed, instead of persisting in those enormous crimes
which may cause their utter downfall; we should rather sadly lament our sins
already committed, whereby God is provoked so dreadfully to appear against us.
And oh! that our heads were waters, and our eyes a fountain of tears, that we
might weep day and night, for those errors, schisms, factions, secular
designs, and seditious practices, whereby the pillars of this nation have been
made to reell, and the props both of Church and state so terribly shaken. Psalm.
79.3.
And happy may we think our selves thus to wash away the stain of that blood,
which has been shed like water about our Jerusalem. Whereas if we go on
without remorse, if there be no relentings in our bowels, no expressions of
sorrow in our outward carriage, we shall find our miseries increased to that
height, as to render us altogether helpless: for if the foundations be
destroyed, what can the righteous do? and in that reading, the question is

2. Vox deplorantis impotentiam, a lamentation of our inability to help our
selves. Miseries are much sooner occasioned than removed. It is in our power to
bring them God only can withdraw them. A stately fabric is easily demolished,
but care and skill must both contribute to its reedification. A pernicious
Heretic may destroy the foundations of doctrine; A seditious Rebel may shake
the foundations of Government: but when these wicked pranks are played, it is
hard to establish them again. So little must we look to our selves, and so much
to God, acknowledgeing his help alone in our petitions for it with David, Ps.
60.11. Give us help from trouble, for vain is the help of man.

And if ever the world be engaged to subscribe this truth, Englands hand must
go with the first. How desperate a condition we were in, our selves can give
the best account: torn with continual experience of running from bad to worse,
become the reproach of those who hated, and the pity of those who loved us. Nor
did the wisest know what course to steer, till an overruling providence set
all things right, reducing us both for doctrine and Government to our ancient
happiness. The blessed restoration of our Sovereign, and in him of Authority,
made all persons (howsoever dissatisfied in point of interest) acknowledge a
digitus Dei, that the finger of God was in it. Never were people redeemed from
slavery with a more omnipotent hand. Never had nation more cause to say this
was the Lords doing. However we forget, posterity will remember it, and (I
hope) redeem with thankfulness what we have forfeited by ingratitude. And for
our selves, supposing our deserved Judgments fall upon our heads, if according
to our demerits, the foundations should be, or near to be destroyed; let us at
last be wise, and look upon this question.

3. As voxin quirentis, an enquiry what we are to do in such an extremity. And
so we take it directly according to our own translation, what can the righteous
do? If calamitous miseries may not be prevented, it is prudence to consider how
we should bear up under them, that they may neither crush our backs, nor break
our bearts: that by an holy policy, we may at present alleviate our burden, and
in Gods good time, obtain a Gracious reliease from it. And methink the next
words direct us to an excellent expedient for this work. Immediately after the
question, what can the righteous do? follows (as if the Psalmist made answer
to himself) The Lord is in his Holy Temple, the Lords throne is in Heaven v. 4.
wherein is insinuated our duty of fiduciall waiting upon, and supplicating God
for redress from those grievances. A fiduciall waiting upon him. In the Lord
put I my trust v. 1. Notwithstanding the wicked contrivacnes of men,
notwithstanding the malicious designs wherein they are engaged; yet since Gods
overruling power can disappoint their purposes, it is best for us to confide
in, Psalm. 131.3.
and rely upon Him. Thus let Israel hope in the Lord from benceforth, and for
ever. Psalm. 46.1.2.
And then he will be our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble:
so that we need not fear though the earth be removed, and though the Mountains
be carried into the midst of the Sea. But our fiduciall waiting must be
accompanied with fervent supplications. The Lord is good to them that wait for
him, to the soul that seeks him Lament. 3.26. and seeking in Scripture is as
much as praying. To him therefore must we lift up our hands and hearts,
devoutly bewailing those sins which have proved an inlet to our distresses, and
humbly imploring his gracious favor to vouchsafe us a joyful deliverance from
them.

And when we have paid these duties to the God of heaven, our next service must
be to the Gods upon earth: those who are appointed his Vicegerents, and
deputed to rule for and under Him. It is Englands happiness to enjoy a gracious
King; so exact a model of Government as few if any nation in the world can
parallel; such wholesome laws as (if duly observed) would prevent, and (if
vigorously executed) would punish all manner of wickedness. Nor wants she a
Benjamins portion of spiritual blessings. She glories in a Church ( maugre the
spiteful tongues of her adversaries) reformed according to the
Scripture-Canon, and pattern of the purest times: the doctrines of the Gospel
sincerely preached, and the three Orders so celebrated by Antiquity, maintained
against the humor of our factious Levellers. On these foundations, Church and
State are built, but if the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?

My Lords and Gentlemen, you who are entrusted by his sacred Majesty to manage
the important affairs of this County; You who represent the person of your
Sovereign; On you must we rely, and to you do we make our earnest addresses,
that by your vigilant care, prudent counsels, authoritative commands, and
impartial justice the threatening destruction of our foundations may be
hindered. I say, the threatening destruction. For what man sees not the danger
we are in The prevalency of Atheism, Blasphemy, Profaneness; the Wild errors,
and Heretical opinions which openly show themselves abroad, bidding defiance
to whatsoever is religious; work in us a dreadful apprehension that our
foundations of doctrine are ready to fall. The visible contempt of known laws;
a stubborn opposition to the commauds both of Givill and Ecclesiastical
Governors; the keeping up of factions; the principles of rebellion imbibed in
our unhappy times, and not sufficiently rooted out of men's hearts; the se t ng
up altar against altar; barns against Churches; new models of worship to cross
the presribed form: put us in fear that the foundations of Government are in a
tottering condition. For had these things no relation to Religion, yet as
thwartings of the Civil power they must needs bode mischief to the King and
Kingdom. Yet though these Pillars be so shrewdly shaken, your seasonable
assistance may not only secure them from quite falling, but also establish them
firm and unmovable. Let but men be thoroughly discouraged when they offend in
this nature; let them but a little feel your severity, who have thus long
contemned your clemency; and they will either be reduced into good order, or
however become less irregular. It is possible my words may be accused of
cruelty; sure there is no reason for it. We judge it prudence, if a fire happen
rather to uncover the roof, to throw away the tiles, and break down some of the
rafiers, than suffer the house to be burnt to the ground. And certainly it is
better that some particular men (especially when refractory and contumacious)
be curbed by those penalties which laws have provided, than an whole Kingdom
should either become a nest of Heresies, or a field of blood. But my zeal may
perhaps make me presumptuous in offering to prescribe to your Lordships or
these Gentlemen. It is time to have done, and I end all with this prayer. God
Almighty direct and guide you and all concerned in the public affairs before
you, to His own Glory, the Kings Honor, the Kingdoms happiness, the settling
us upon those firm foundations of truth and peace; Isai. 63.7.
that we who are members of the English Jerusalem, may see it a praise in the
whole earth, and after we have served our Generations may be admitted into the
new Jerusalem, Heb. 11.10.
that City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God: there to
reign in everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Praise, Dominion, and Power, henceforth
and for evermore. Amen.

CAESAR'S DUE Honor. A SERMON Preached at St. Martins Church in Leicester, May,
29. 1669. before the Mayor and Aldermen.

By Tho. Stanhope A.M. Vicar of St. Margarets in Leicester.

CAESAR'S DUE Honor.
1 Peter 2.17. Honor the King.
THese few words conclude the Epistle appointed for this Solemnity; and the
Church having chosen them for the occasion, they cannot but be suitable for a
discourse upon it. The Day we celebrate in remembrance of those signal
blessings it has brought to us in a King, 29. May, 1630.
as he was natus and renatus upon it, born into the World, and reborn to his
Kingdom; 29. May, 1660.
whereunto though he had a right before, yet after a compelled exile, now nine
years ago he took possession of his Royal Palace. And in the midst of our
rejoicing for him, it is but fit we should learn our duty to him, which the
Apostle has shortly summed up in the Word Honor. Honor the King.

At the 13. verse of this Chapter is propounded a due Christian carriage
toward Magistrates: probably enough there set down for some extraordinary
reason. It seems those early days of Christianity were tainted with the
strange error that a dutiful Subjection to Authority could not consist with,
but was an abridgement of our Gospel liberty. This is intimated verse 16. As
free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the
servants of God. A freedom indeed is granted, but then that freedom must be
rightly used: not to encourage sedition, or dis-obedience, to make it (...), a
cloak of maliciousness, to cover faction, ambition, sinister designs, or any
thing of that nature: but that men should duly and rightly use it, (...), as
the servants of God. Upon the mention of which Word, the Apostle (as it were)
recapitulates, and draws the whole service into a narrow compass, verse 17.
With relation to four Objects thereof. 1. Mankind in general: Honor all men.
2. Christians in particular: Love the brotherhood. 3. God as the principal:
Fear God. 4. Our Prince, as immediately under him. Honor the King.

It may not be amiss to draw some few observations from the placing these two
last together, which shall only be done in a few words before I fix upon my
main Subject. And here let us note

the same infallible Spirit which has declared a duty to be owing unto God,
has likewise declared a duty to be owing to our King. That very Scripture, nay
that very verse which calls upon us to fear God, calls upon us also to honor
the King. It is a gross mistake if we fancy our selves any more at freedom
from the one than we are from the other.

The same infallible Spirit which has declared the duty owing unto God, and
the duty owing to the King, has linked these two duties together. There is
nothing between to part them, but as soon as the one is delivered the other
follows: Fear God, Honor the King. Nay, as if this were not sufficient,
Solomon connects them together with a copulative Particle, Prove. 24.21. My Son
fear thou the Lord, and the King. Now, Quae Deus conjunxit, etc. What God has
joined together let no man put asunder. In vain do we think ever to be truly
pious toward God, till we be truly loyal to our King,

The same infallible Spirit which has in a large comprehensive word, declared
the duty we ow unto God, has in a like comprehensive word declared the duty we
owe unto the King. That our returns to neither of them may be narrow and scant.
Fear has sometimes that full signification to include all acts of piety. This
do and live, for I fear God, Genesis 42.18. Honor so large an acceptance, as to
comprehend all service and duty. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, Exodus 20.12.
Now as the first of these is used here with respect to the Lord, Fear God: so
the latter with respect to our Sovereign, Honor the King.

In which Words there are two parts. 1. The Act, Honor. 2. The Object, the
King: both which with a consideration of the persons to whom this Epistle was
written, viz. the believing Jews converted to Christianity, make it plain that
the duty has relation to us, as a Christian precept, delivered by Christ's
Apostle, to those who were then Christ's followers: and so we also stand engaged
to Honor the King.

A truth which will appear as if written with a Sun beam, when we have enquired
into the nature of this Honor, and the grounds whereupon it is called for. In
the dispatch whereof (for methods sake) because the word Honor is (...), and
admits of several significations, under each of them I shall subjoyn the
reasons for it, warranted by Scripture, whence we have the best direction for
our duty: and confirmed by the testimony of the Primitive Fathers, who were
likeliest to know the meaning of such commands in Scripture: to let the World
see that we exact no more of men, for our Christian Princes, than they were
willing to afford the very Heathen Emperors. And when it appears the duties we
require to be paid them are challenged by the Word of God, and the Doctrine of
the Ancient Church; let any sober man judge whether we be blameworthy for
preaching, or others for refusing to practice them.

First then, for the Nature of this Honor. It is (as I said) a word of large
extent, and D^vines bring all under three Heads. 1. Honor in cord. 2. Honor in
ore. 3. H^nor in opere. Honor in the heart. Honor in the tongue. Honor in
the Act. And according to this distribution, I shall here take notice of it,
for there is no one of these three but a Prince may claim it as his due.

1. Honor in cord, Honor in the heart, by which is meant a reverent
estimation of the person to whom it is born. Thus the word is used by the
Apostle, Romans 12.10. in honor preferring one another. And thus we are called
to give it unto Kings, Romans 13.7. Render therefore to all their dues, tribute
to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to
whom honor; the putting these together, as well as the discourse foregoing,
shows the Supreme Magistrate is here intended. Mean and low thoughts are not
fit to be entertained of those who are exercised in high employments. Whom God
has raised in the World, those should we raise in our esteem. This indeed
ought to be the fountain whence all other duties flow; the foundation whereon
the rest of our services are built: for without an bearty value for them, none
of our outward performances will be sincere toward them. Nay, suppose God
should at any time set over us such a King, as is a wicked man, we must look
upon his public station abstracting from his personal faults. David owns Saul
for Gods Anointed, and pays him a reverence accordingly. Christ shows no
dis-respect either to Pilate, or Herod Their failing in not honoring God, is
no warrant for us to fail by not honoring them. Punished they shall be for the
one, and punished we shall be (if faulty) for the other. And certainly this is
plain enough from the Text. For this direction given to these Christian
converts of honor ing the King, had either relation to Claudius or Nero; and
the better of them was a man bad enough. This then is the first kind of honor:
and there are two reasons, why it should be paid to all Kings.

1. Because of those honorable titles which God himself has given them,
Persons who have titles of honor conferred upon them by earthly Princes
challenge an esteem proportionable thereunto: how much more they who have these
from God? Where he affords his marks of honor, there should we yield our
testimonies of honor, as closing with his dispensations, and making his
providence in disposal of the one, our rule for a disposal of the other. Among
those titles I shall name no more than that of Gods, Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye
are Gods. It is true, that name does point at their duty, that as Gods they
should excel in holiness, in justice, and such like virtues; not fearing the
face of men, or consulting only their interest with men; but withal it points
at our duty, that we should honor them as we honor God: Not by sacrificing or
performing any divine worship to them; (after the Idolatrous custom of the
Heathens) no, nor by yielding them an unlimited obedience; (as will appear
hereafter) but by affording them a real and high esteem in our hearts: to show,
that as we are bound to entertain no thoughts of God, but such as are suitable
to his Majesty, so no thoughts of them, but such as are agreeable to their
quality.

2. Because of the honorable place wherein God has set them, He has made
them caput populi, the head of the people: and as all the members honor the
head, so should we honor them. They are his immediate Vicegerents; a quo sunt
secundi, post quem primi, ante omnes and super omnes Deos, in Tertullians
phrase: the very next to him before all, and above all feigned Deities. Now as
the nearer any person is to the King the greater honor he may claim: Apolog.
cap. 30.
so the nearer the King is to God, the more honor does his place confer upon
him. Magistracy is not only Gods ordinance, but particular Magistrates are of
his appointing. Promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor
from the South: but God is the Judge, he puts down one and sets up
another, Psalm. 75.6, 7. And this I am sure was the sense of the Primitive
Church. Witness Theophilus of Antioch about 170 years after Christ: (...), Lib.
1. ad^ Autolycum page 76. Edit. Morell.
(...). The King indeed is not a God, but he is a man appointed to his office
under God. Irenaeus about ten years after him. Cujus jussu homines nascuntur,
ejus and jussu Reges constituuntur. Adv. Haereses lib. 5. cap. 20.
By whose word men are born, by his word Kings are appointed. We have seen two
plain testimonies for the Greek, let us see two more for the Latin Church. One
is from Tertullian, about 200 Years after Christ. Apol. cap. 30.
Inde est Imperator, unde and homo antequam Imperator. Inde potestas illi, unde
and spiritus. The same God who made the man, makes the Emperor. Thence has he
his power, whence he receives his soul. And as if that had not been enough, he
goes on more fully. It is necessary we look upon the Emperor -- ut eum, quem
Dominus noster elegit, etc. as the person, whom our Lord has chosen: So as I
may well say, Noster est magis Caesar ut a Deo nostro constitutus Apol. cap. 33.
Caesar is the more Ours because appointed by our God. To him I add St.
Austin, Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 4 cap. 33.
Deus terrenum regnum and piis and impiis dat sicut ei placet, etc. God
according to his own pleasure, disposes of earthly power to the righteous, and
to the wicked. Lib. 5. cap. 21.
He that promoted Marius, did likewise promote Caesar: He that gave the Scepter
to Augustus, gave it to Nero: He who committed the Empire to both Vespasians,
committed it also to Domitian: and He who exalted Constantine the Christian,
exalted Julian the Apostate. If this doctrine be not embraced now, it is a sign
men are fallen from what was admitted before. Nor is it only the doctrine of
the Fathers, but theirs because the doctrine of the Scripture. Christ owns
Pilates power, to be from heaven: Thou could have no power against me, unless
it were given thee from above, John 19.11. and St. Paul says of the Roman
Emperors, The powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. One thing more
before I leave this Point. If the Scripture and Fathers own this designation of
Princes by God, how horrid is the insolency of the Papists, who would subject
Kings to their Bishop, and make their swords stoop to his Keys? And on the
other side, how abominable is the wickedness of some pretended Protestants,
who would set up the power of the people above the King? What followed
thereupon we cannot but remember; and to terrify us from the like hereafter,
God grant it may never be forgotten.

2. The second sort of Honor is Honor in Ore, Honor in the Tongue. We are to
employ our Tongues for them, speaking good of, and bespeaking good for them;
which last is best done by prayer and supplication to God. It is the Apostles
charge, that first of all, supplications, and prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for all men. For Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. And sure this charge was never more observed by any
Church: Each of our constant Litugy services having a prayer for the King in
it. Nor can it be denied, but this was a duty paid by the ancient Christians.
Lib. 1. ad Autolicum page 76. Edit. Morell.
I appeal to Theophilus mentioned before, (...). I will honor the King, not by
affording him any divine worship (that they decryed in the Heathens) but by
praying for him. And Tertullian speaks fully in the Name of all. Apolog. cap.
30.
Precati sumus omnes semper pro omnibus Imperatoribus. We all of us do always
pray for all our Emperors: delivering there the matter of their prayers, a long
life, a safe Kingdom, a quiet house, valiant Armies, faithful counsels,
honest Subjects, a peaceable world: And as if these had not been good wishes
enough, he adds, Quaecunque hominis and Caesaris vota sunt. Whatsoever he can
farther desire, either as Man or Emperor. And sure if this were a piece of
service due from them, it is no less due from us, and from both upon a
threefold account 2 ex part Dei, 3 ex part nostri, 3 ex part sui.

1. Ex part Dei. A reason there is for it on Gods part, as it is a thing
wherein he takes pleasure. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God
our Savior, 1 Timothy 2.3. The command before had testified his good-liking, this
motive further argues his approbation. Hereby we own him as the fountain of all
blessings. When the most potent persons upon earth are not relied upon, but God
Almighty invocated for them; He desired to guide, protect, and preserve them:
the greatest glory must redound to him, his Sovereignty being acknowledged over
them as theirs is over us. And surely this delights him much more than the
calumniating, reproaching, or raking into any faults whereof they may be
guilty. That man after Gods own heart, holy David knew well what would please
him, and therefore in composing a Psalm for Solomon next to succeed in the
Throne, he begins it with that excellent petition (to acquaint us with our
duty) Give the King thy Judgments O Lord, and thy righteousness unto the Kings
Son, Psalm. 72.1.

2. The reasonableness hereof appears Ex part nostri, with respect to our
selves: because it is a thing which leads to our own advantage. This we have
also from the Apostle: That under them we may lead quiet and peaceable lives in
all godliness and honesty. The blessings which Princes receive tend to the
peoples good. They are custodes utriusque tabulae, and the better each of the
tables is kept, the more is the Subjects benefit. What can we desire but the
establishment of holiness and righteousness? that God may be served and moral
duties may be observed: and this happiness must be obtained by our prayers.
Yea, I doubt not to assert, that our own advantage is mainly neglected, when we
neglect to pray for our Governors: and it is but just that God should withdraw
his blessings from us, when we forsake his prescribed way for the keeping them.
Histories will sufficiently acquaint us what good the very Heathen Emperors
reaped by the prayers of their Christian Soldiers, which tended many times to
the furtherance of the Gospel, by a greater indulgence to the professors of it.
Nay look at the Princes themselves, and so you will see

3. There is reason Ex part sui, with respect to Them; because they stand in
need of our prayers. Their Employment must needs be burdensome, and a great
many cares are put on with the Crown. All the concerns of the Commonwealth are
upon them as the head manageth the concerns of the body. There are variety of
temptations to which their greatness renders them liable. Their pleasures may
incline them to voluptuousness: and their power to tyranny: the rather because
unaccountable to their Subjects for what they do (however this doting age has
taught the contrary.) And then certainly there is a necessity we should pray
for them; considering that God only has the hearts of all men. particularly of
Kings in his own hand: ( The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the
rivers of water, he turns it whither so ever he will, Prove. 21.1.) that our
supplications and intercessions may prevail with him to incline those hearts to
good rather than evil. So much for the second sort, honor in ore, honor in
the mouth.

3. The third is honor in opere: an honor manifested in outward act. And this
will best testify the truth of that esteem we bear in our hearts, and the
sincerity of those prayers which proceed from our lips. Such an outward honor
is due to Kings: and may be of two sorts; 1 an honoring them with our Goods. 2
an honoring them with our Bodies.

1. An honoring them with our Goods. Thus Solomon uses the word. Honor the
Lord with thy substance Prove. 3.9. It is a point of duty to pay what Kings
impose. We know who reckoned this One of the (...), The things which are
Caesar's: Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, says our Savior
Matt. 22.21. And the occasion of those words was a dispute about tribute money.
And thus the Primitive Christians judged it. Tatianus (about 180 years after
Christ) speaks plainly (...). In Orat. cont. Gracos page 144. Edit. Morell.
Does the King command me to pay tribute? I am ready to obey that command. I
know it is a thing men will hardly be persuaded unto, especially when payments
grow heavy, and purses grow Light: when they have layen long, and continue
still. But then consider the engagement upon us from God, and that will serve
to answer all objections. Our Savior in that place, does not say (...) but
(...), jus suum date, render him that which is his own: for a right to it he
has. Nay voluntary date to render it him willingly and freely for this
difference some Critics make between (...) and (...), the one takes in
whatsoever the other includes, and adds to it a frankness and cheerfulness in
the Giver. Our money has the Kings stamp upon it, and that vindicates his
right to it. Two main motives there are which may encourage us in the paying
this honor.

1. Christ's example in the very same case. He (says St. Peter 1 Pet. 2.21.)
has left us an example that we should follow his steps: and the Scripture has
remarked his example in the perf ormance of this duty when in his Mothers Womb,
a kind of Poll-money was laid by Augustus upon all his subjects, Luke 2 3, 4.
The blessed Virgin with her husband Joseph, went to their own City to be
taxed. Yea, the Divine Providence so ordered it, that while she attended this
payment, the Savior of the world was born into the world. It cannot be denied
but afterward he submitted in this nature, when the Collectors came to St.
Peter with that question; Does not your Master pay tribute? He answered yes,
Matt. 17.24, 25. It seems he had formerly done it, and that was not the only
time: though then he was willing to work a miracle rather than give offense by
his backwardness (...), Notwithstanding lest we should offend them go thou to
the Sea and cast and book, and take up the fish that first comes up: and when
thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece of money; that take, and
give unto them for me and thee, verse 27.

2. The Equity there is for it. Kings are Gods Ministers, employed for the
Common good, and therefore it is just they should be well maintained by the
common purse. They are preservers of peace, providers for wars; neither of
these can be done without contributions. They attend the good and service of
their Kingdoms, and (...), (it is the Apostles argument) for this cause pay you
tribute also, for they are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very
thing, Romans 13.6. But I presume there is enough (if not too much) said upon
this subject: Therefore

2. There is an honoring them with our bodies: Whereby I mean a yielding
obedience to their commands. Thus the Apostle uses honor for obedience.
Children obey your Parents: For which he cites the fifth Commandment, Honor
thy Father and Mother, Ephesians. 6.1, 2. This is the same with St. Paul's
subjection; Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13.1. and St.
Peter's submission; submit your selves to every ordinance of man, for the Lords
sake, 1 Pet. 2.13. What the Ancient Doctors of the Church thought of this
honor, we shall soon discern. Let one witness for all; Athenagoras, who
flourished about 150 Years after Christ. In Legate. pro Christianis ad Imp. Romans
ad finem.
(...). We do willingly obey your Magistrates in all things which are commanded
us. What those all things are, we shall enquire presently. In the mean while
observe the (...), Your Governors, speaking to the Heathens: So that they
concluded it a duty to live in subjection to the Emperors, though not owning
the Christian Faith. And methinks, this speech of his comments excellently upon
that charge to Titus, as a dispenser of the Gospel: put them in mind to be
subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates, Pit. 3.1. I know
obedience to Princes is an unpleasing doctrine, a morsel, which some men's
throats are so narrow (not to meddle with their consciences) they have much
ado to swallow: yet when all is alleged, it will appear their duty: whereto I
could charitably hope, they might more easily be persuaded, when once truly
informed in its due latitude and extent. For the discovery whereof, let me lay
down four Rules: having first premised in the general that obedience is of two
sorts; active, and passive: so that in some cases the one, in some the other
may concern us: Therefore

Rule 1. Where the commands of Princes are lawful, all Subjects are bound to an
active obedience: which must be yielded heartily, and conscienciously. Nay, I
doubt not to assert that a passive obedience only in such cases renders us no
better than transgressors. Magistrates should find the people as ready to
obey, as they are to enjoin. And take notice I say, this obedience should be
yielded heartily and conscienciously: because the command of God herein lays
an obligation upon the conscience. Ye must needs be subject, not only for
wrath, but also for conscience sake, Romans 13.5. It is expressly a duty of the
fifth commandment. They are our Civil Parents, and Children are bound to obey
their Parents, though against their own inclinations, in things which be
lawful. The only difficulty will be wherein this lawfulness must be placed.
For the understanding of which word, I affirm, that all things are lawful which
are not sinful: and sin can only be known by a violation of some
Scripture-precept, either in direct terms, or by necessary consequence. This is
the Apostles definition; sin is a transgression of the law, 1 John 3.4. If
their injunctions prove in convenient, they are accountable to God for them;
but that inconvenience does not discharge us from our obedience. That this was
the judgment of the first Christians, I appeal to Ignatius, born before our
Saviors crucifixion. Epist. ad Antioch.
(...). Be obedidient to Caesar, in those things where your obedience may be
without danger (and those of that time valued nothing as dangerous which was
not sinful.) Provoke not your Governors to wrath, that you give no occasion to
those who seek occasion against you. Now sure this Holy Martyrs Testimony
reaches as far as my Rule, and further I persuade no man: For

Rule 2. Where the commands of Princes are unlawful, We are not to obey
actively. It is possible there may be such commands, and in such cases we must
take up a resolution of not obeying. The reason is because we are first and
mainly obliged unto God, and no other obligation can lay a force upon us,
further than it comports with that which we owe unto Him. It is therefore worth
observing, that fear God, and honor the King are put together; as if the first
were not only a direction to, and an argument for, but a limitation also of
the latter. Thus when the Primitive Christians were called by the Heathens to
offer sacrifice in their Temples, they gave this reply as Justin Martyr relates
it: In Apolog. 2. pro Christianis page 64. Edit. Morell.
(...). We worship God alone, but in all things else we joyfully serve you.
This was the case of the Dan. 3.17, 18.
three Children required to adore Nebuchadnezzars golden Image, and refusing;
the case of Dan. 6.9, 10.
Daniel, when Darius decreed that no petition should be made to God for so many
days, and still he continues in the course of his devotions: the case of the
Acts 5.40, 42.
Apostles, when prohibited to preach Christ Jesus, yet were they not afraid to
speak boldly in his name. But then we must remember those things were simply
unlawful. Worshipping Images a plain breach of the second Commandment:
neglect of prayer a sin both against the first and second: and the not
preaching contrary to the very precept given to those particular persons: Ye
shall be witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, etc. Acts 1.8.
So then before we deny our active obedience, it is fit we be well satisfied the
things are indeed unlawful, for which we deny it. Fancy or opinion will not
serve the turn; Nay, a misinformed conscience will not secure us from guilt:
because that misinformation is in it self a sin. But if upon good ground we
find they are such, then

Rule 3. In case unlawful commands be laid upon us, we must quietly submit to
those penalties which are appointed by the Laws of our Princes. And this is the
true passive obedience. As sin must not be committed, so suffering must not be
declined. It is true, shall God afford a way of escape, so as liberty or life
may be secured without violating our conscience, we may thankefully accept it:
but if not, we are engaged to submit unto bonds, imprisonment, and death it
self, Thus the three Children though they would not worship the Image, Dan.
3.21.
Dan. 6.16.
refused not to be cast into the fiery furnace: Thus Daniel, though after the
decree, continuing his supplications; submitted to be thrown into the Den of
Lions: and the Apostles though they desisted not from preaching, Acts 5.41. In
Orat. cont. Gracos page 144. Edit. Morell.
yet took they their punishment patiently, rejoicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer shame for his Name. (...), was Tatianus his answer, when
commanded to deny his God. It is the only thing I shall refuse to do; but
though I must not be persuaded to it, I can be content to die for it. And
Tertullian discoursing how the Christians entertained those severe sentences
pronounced against them; In Apolog. cap. 50.
Sententiis vestris gratias agimus; cum damnamur a vobis, a Deo absolvimur. We
thank you (says he) for them: because when condemned by you, we are absolved
by God. And certainly this is the true way of learning our Saviors lesson,
Luke 21.19. In your patience possess ye your souls. Which will make way for the
fourth Rule.

Rule 4. We are not upon the account of any unlawful commands, to rebel against
our King. God has not in any case, allowed it: and it is directly contrary to
that passive obedience which we are engaged to exercise. Solomon tells us of a
King, against whom there is no rising up, Prove. 30.31. For him we may, and
ought to rise; against him we may not. Wars, tumults, seditions, or the
fomenting these, upon what pretense soever, by Subjects against their
Sovereign, are utterly against the word of God. The peoples duty is subjection,
and Princes are accountable to God alone: it is not for us to usurp his place
to correct or punish them at our pleasure. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the
King, and meddle not with them that are given to change, Prove. 24.21. cum
seditiosis, so some Translations render it, with the seditious. Rebellion is a
most grievous sin, and it is impossible a Rebel should ever be reconciled to
God without a very great measure of repentance. The Apostle has entailed
damnation upon them: Whosoever resists the Powers, resists the Ordinance of
God; and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation, In Apolog.
cap. 37.
Romans 13.2. Tertullian applauding the quietness of Christians under their
Heathen Governors, shows plainly that if they durst be Rebels, they might
easily be Conquerors; or if not Conquerors, the Prince would have so many fewer
to defend him, they filling the Streets, and Cities, and Armies; and concluding
against such pernicious practices, tells how willingly they were slain, that
they durst not have a thought of rebelling; but on the contrary, nunc pauciores
hosts habetis prae multitudine Christianorum. Now (says he) the number of our
enemies is so much the less, by how much the number of Christians is the
greater. I have run through the doctrinal part of the Text, and showed you
wherein this Honor to the King consists, and upon what grounds it is due: with
some Rules to direct you in your obedience to their commands: Let me conclude
all with a short Application.

And the use I insist upon shall neither be a reproof of former neglects, sore
places rubbed too hard) nor of humiliation for former errors, (God knows that
is too proper for a 30 of January) but of exhortation to duty, and to the duty
in the Text: If you be Christians, you are obliged to this which is the duty of
Christians: if the servants of God, you are bound to be ruled by the word of
God. Yea let me say we have greater reason than those who lived in the infancy
of the Church. Their Princes were persecuting Heathens, ours is a Christian
King. Nay we have a stronger engagement upon us than to an ordinary Christian
King: if we reflect upon what God has done for him and for us in him. And here
let me but remind you of two things.

1. He is a King whom God wonderfully preserved to bring unto his Throne:
Covering him from the dangerous attempts of his enemies, under the shadow of
his own wings. It is not fit we should forget what snares were laid to entrap
him before the barbarous murder of his Royal Father, what tempting offers were
made to betray him after his escape from the defeat at Worcester, How
particular a Brovidence attended him in foreign Countries during his tedious
exile. But with all imaginable thankfulness are we to commemorate the
wonderful goodness of God, who kept him unchangeable in his Religion amidst
the plausible allurements of his Popish friends, and the detestable ingratitude
of his pretended Protestant Subjects. Large promises were made by the one in
case he would countenance their Superstitions: and the cunningest contrivances
were laid by the other to support their unjust interests. Yet God kept him
untainted by the first, and rendered him secure from the latter: disappointing
them in our own devices. For

2. He is a King after such preservation, brought to his Kingdom by Gods
miraculous power. It is true the hand of heaven may be seen in all things, but
in some more visibly than in others. I could almost say, few passages of
Providence have been more strangely remarkable than this whereof we speak. To
give you a short account of it. Notwithstanding the variety of interests abroad
in the Kingdom; notwithstanding the multitude of foes we may easily imagine he
had, some drawn to be so for fear of losing their estates, some of their lives:
notwithstanding the several attempts for his restoration which had proved
fruitless, and the various projects which had been dis-appointed; yet God
wrought his own work in his own way, at his own time. He stirred up a
Noble-Hearted Subject our renowned General, (whom God long bless, for bringing
such a blessing to us) directed him in the management of his affairs, made him
successful in his enterprises, by whose wisdom, courage, and faithfulness, our
King was brought home quietly, and peaceably, without the shedding one drop of
blood. 1 Kings 6.7.
I was going to say, his return was like the building of Solomon's Temple,
without noise; but that the Solemnities of this day proved it otherwise: when
the Canons in the Tower, the Bells in the Churches, and the acclamations of the
people vied one with another, which should loudliest proclaim his welcome to
London. Certainly, God did herein outdo our very expectations. It is a day we
have reason to remember, it brought us a mercy we have reason to prize. To sum
up all, Let us be sure to honor that King, whom God by such a miraculous
preservation has honored. Psalm. 118.24.
And since this is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be
glad in it: blessing and praising the great worker of wonders for this his
wonderful mercy vouchsafed unto us. For which, and all other benefits bestowed
upon us, To the Eternal, and Glorious Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be
continually ascribed Glory, Praise, Dominion, and Thanksgiving, now henceforth,
and for evermore. Amen.

David's WORK AND REST. A SERMON Preached at St. Martins Church, in Leicester,
September 21. 1669. Before the Election of the Mayor.

By Tho. Stanhope A. M. Vicar of St. Margarets in Leicester.

TO THE Right Worshipful The Mayor and Aldermen of the Borough of Leicester.
Right Worshipful,
I Here present to your Eyes what formerly was delivered to your Ears, God
grant it may make a deep impression upon your Hearts. It is a Sermon preached
by Command, and was at the preaching, favorably entertained by the persons
principally concerned in it. To prevent the trouble of giving several Copies
desired by some good Friends, (which I thought might be attended with sundry
Inconveniences) I have chosen this way of publishing it in Print, that it may
be ready at hand to do God, his Church, and your selves a further service. I
must ever thankfully remember the kindness received by an unanimous vote in
your Hall, at my first settlement among you; and the continuance of a fair
Respect, which as I still experience, so I desire to declare it to the World.
My capacity will not reach to a better acknowledgement than the offering this
Token of Gratitude into your hands. God Almighty bless it to the good end for
which it was designed; that by following David's example in serving your
Generations, His Holy Name may receive due Honor, you may be Instrumental to
do much good, and your Corporation (being Governed with Care and Conscience)
may flourish in Peace, and Plenty, while the Sun and Moon endure. This is and
shall be the fervent Prayer of

Your Humble Servant in Christ Jesus, Tho. Stanhope.
Leicester Novem. 9. 1669.
DAVID'S Work and Rest.
Acts 13.36. For David after he had served his own Generation by the Will of
God, fell on sleep.
IT is no new thing in Scripture to meet with Articles of Faith confirmed by
force of Argument. Rational proofs make the deepest impression upon rational
creatures. Thus St. Paul spends a whole Chapter in proving the Resurrection of
our bodies, 1 Cor 15. And here great part of a Sermon in proving the
resurrection of Christ's body. The medium he uses is a passage of David's, which
that Prophetic Psalmist had long before sung, in his name, upon a foresight of
his triumph over death, Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not leave my soul in bell,
neither will thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. Now that these words
were a praediction concerning Christ, the Apostle makes out Syllogistically:
one part of the Argument being implied, the other part expressed. That implied
is the ground or foundation of the rest, and may thus be formed. Either this
place must be understood of David, or of Christ: But it cannot be understood of
David: Therefore it must be understood of Christ. Where the Minor being only
liable to exception, is strengthened by that which we find expressed. The two
propositions are in two verses. David after he had served his own generation by
the Will of God, fell on sleep, and saw corruption, in this; But he whom God
raised up (meaning Christ) saw no corruption, in the next. Whence the
conclusion naturally follows; Therefore the Psalmists words of not seeing
corruption must be understood not of David, but of Christ. And thus the Text
stands in its relative consideration: as it respects the business our Apostle
was then managing, and the Article of faith he was then confirming. But I pass
from that, to take it absolutely; as it neither looks backward nor forward, yet
contains in it self those truths which may be seasonable for this occasion, for
this Auditory.

For David, after he had served, etc. To entertain you with any tedious
discourse of David's person, or Criticisones upon his Name, would be ill
husbandry both of your patience and my time. His Character is so exactly given
by the Spirit of truth, and his life so largely written in the Scriptures of
truth, that he who runs may read, and he who reads may understand them. I shall
confine my self to what is here mentioned. After he had served (...); the
Substantive whence the Verb comes properly signifies an Vnder-rewer, ab (...),
sub remige, qui remum in navi agit; he that tugs at the oar in the Ship; a
Work of constant and extraordinary pains. And it is commonly (if not always in
the New Testament) used of serving in Public Employments: a sign that men when
called to the Management of great Offices, are called to a great deal of
trouble. The Mace and the Scarlet do not more naturally bring bonour and
respect, than care and toil along with them. No marvel then that honos and
onus sound so like, or the Hebrew (...) translated honor should be derived
from (...) which signifies to be burdensome. Men will scarce believe that King
spoke his thoughts, when he told the Woman applauding his happiness: Knew
thou what cares are wrapped up in a Crown, ne ex luto quidem, thou would not
take it up out of the dirt: but he that wore it, felt how heavy it sat upon
him, and made both his head and shoulders to ache. That by the way. After he had
served his own Generation (...), To understand this word aright, you must know
that Generation is especially taken two ways: either for the whole time one
lives, the duration of a particular man's life, as Deuteronomy. 1.35. Surely there
shall none of the men of this evil Generation see that good Land, i.e. none of
the Israelites at that time living and grown up. For the best Comment upon that
Text is, the Execution of the Judgment according to the threatening: And we
know that execution was general, none escaping but those two excepted by God
himself, Caleb and Joshua. And so our learned Doctor Hammond explains these
Words; Paraph. on the Text.
David having lived his space, or term of natural life: Or else it is taken for
the people living together in some one Age, as Heb. 3.10. Wherefore I was
grieved with that Generation, i. e. with the Israelitish people living in that
Age: And thus we may understand the words of Solomon, Eccles. 1.4. One
Generation passes away, and another Generation comes, i.e. one body of men
who have lived together, die, and another rises up in their stead. And if we
close with this sense (as very well we may do, taking in the other also) then
the Text refers to David as a public person, and thus far it may be
paraphrased on this manner. David, having whilst his term of life endured,
discharged the duties incumbent upon him toward the people of his time, as a
King or Magistrate. By the will of God. The omission of Praepositions in this
place has made it capable of two different readings. Either with some, David
in his own Generation having served the counsel of God ((...)) or with us,
David after he bad served his own Generation, by the will of God. And say this
were none, there is another difficulty remaining, whether the (...) should be
joynd with the praecedent or subsequent words. The will of God is ordinarily
distinguished into his voluntas occulta, and his volunt as revelata: his
secret, and his revealed will: if you understand this place of the first, then
it will fitliest join with (...), thus: David having whilst he lived, carefully
discharged his Magistratical office: according to the Decree of God he fell
asleep. If you understand it of the second, then it will best be annexed to the
(...), thus: David having on this manner discharged his duty, according to the
will of God revealed unto him, he fell on sleep, (...). It is ordinary to find
death in Scripture expressed by sleep, for this cause, many are weak, and
sickly, and many sleep, 1 Cor. 11.30. And our Churchyards the usual
burying-places are called (...), sleeping-roomes. The reason of it (in short)
seems to be this, that as our sleeps are but for a night, from which we awake
in the morning; so the resting of our bodies in the grave, is but till the
morning of the great resurrection day; when the trumpet shall sound, 1. Cor.
15.52.
and the dead shall be raised and we shall be changed.

The words thus explained, do naturally divide themselves into two parts: 1.
Here is David's work; after he had served his own Generation, by the will of
God; 2. Here is David's rest; he fell on sleep.

1. Here is David's work: He served his own Generation by the will of God. It is
but reasonable to believe, God knows best where to choose those may do him the
most service. He that employs men can tell who are fittest to be employed: so
that himself pitching upon David, at the rejection of Saul, and having said, I
have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him, with whom my
hand shall be established, mine Arm also shall strengthen him. Psalm. 89.20, 21.
No marvel if he fulfilled all his will: if he fed his people according to the
integrity of his heart, Acts 13.22. Psalm. 78.72.
and guided them by the skilfulness of his hand. For though he be an excellent
pattern in his personal, yet he is signally remarkable in his politic
capacity. Infirmities questionless he had in both, and so will all Kings and
Governors, while they carry flesh and blood about with them; but those eminent
qualifications wherewith he was endowed, those admirable virtues which shined
in his soul, the constant management of public affairs, with piety and justice
(however wanting in some particular acts) have gained him this Encomium from
the Holy Spirit, that he served his own Generation by the will of God.

The work wherein we are now employed was certainly designed as a preparative
to that which follows, and wherein you are most concerned. And I doubt not but
the text will answer that design. We are now considering David as a Magistrate,
and how as a Magistrate he served his Generation: The issue whereof (I hope)
will be the showing you that are Magistrates already, your duty; and the
informing others who shall succeed you; what God and his people expect at their
bands. It is needless to spend time in generals, and therefore I pass to
particulars.

1. David served his own Generation, etc. by his zeal for the worship of God.
The main object of his pious care was the furtherance and flourishing
settlement of Gods service. The Ark that token of the Divine presence, had been
taken by the Philistines at the fatal battle, wherein Elies Sons were slain;
and though they were forced to send it out of their borders, by reason of the
Plagues among them, yet it remained in an obscure place. But no sooner was
David settled in his Kingdom than he takes order for its conduct to Jerusalem,
and sets it in its place in the midst of the Tabernacle he had pitched for it,
2 Samuel 6.17. Nor would that content him, 2 Samuel 7.2, 3. etc.
Loath he was while himself dwelt in an house of Cedar, that the Ark of God
should dwell within Curtains: and therefore he purposes to build a Temple:
which though not permitted to raise, yet he provides materials to a vast
quantity: 1 Chronicles. 24.25. etc.
and sets the Priests in their courses, appointing them their solemn services.
And indeed, if the Magistrate help not in this great work who should? He by his
office is custos utriusque tabulae, both tables of the Law are committed to
him, and he must be zealous for the due observance of both. Does he deserve the
Name of a God, who neglects the concerns of that God whose name he bears? Look
through the stories of the Kings, and you shall still find the best of them
most sollicitous in this point. Witness those solemn Passovers in the times of
Hezekiah and Josiah, the pulling down the brazen serpent, the idolatrous
temples and groves, taking away the Priests of Baal, and the high places,
effected by those two pious Princes. I wish all in Authority would imitate such
excellent examples. It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing,
says the Apostle, Galat. 4.18. And I am sure the worship of God may challenge
that term upon the greatest reason. Good, as an acceptable homage to our good
God; and good, as the ready way to procure good to our immortal souls. This
then I desire to charge upon all in public offices. Let those that are about
you discern your vigor and activity for His service by whom you are advanced.
Spare no pains in furthering it, neglect no means conducing to it. And remember
that when you act for him you act for your selves, when you endeavor his glory
he will be sure to enhaunce yours: according to his promise, 1 Samuel 2.30. Them
that honor me, I will honor; but they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed. But Gods worship is a word of large extent, and camprehends many
things under it: I humbly crave leave to be your remembrancer of these two.

1. Let no false worship be countenanced within your Jurisdiction. Let not
Dagon be set so near the Ark, nor an Altar for Baal be reared by the Altar of
the God of Israel. Zeal (against the rules of Grammar) begins to decline at the
ablative, as well knowing that a true worship can never be advanced, till all
false worships be suppressed. Whilst like the Samaritans, 2 Kings 17.41.
we fear the Lord, and worship our graven Images; we are party-per-pale,
Christians and Idolators. The first work of good Hezekiah was to throw down the
high places, and to make the brazen Serpent Nehushtan, 2 Kings 18.4. If any
enquire whither this advice tends, my answer briefly shall be, Luke 23.33.
Every Considerative man may easily discern that the Church of England like
Christ its husband is crucified between two malefactors: The Papist on the one
hand, and the Separatist on the other: both these would have their worship in
contempt of and opposition to ours: which brings an Odium upon our Religion.
And certainly if those who have power in their hands improve not their power to
vindicate that Church whereof they are members, their account will be heavy,
when the greatest must appear before one greater than they: and receive a
reward according to the discharge of their places. No matter how foolish people
spend their Lungs, and strain their throats to cry up liberty of conscience. It
is a thing which once admitted would make our England an Amsterdam. And if
arguments will not convince us, sad experience may, that nothing is more
intolserable than a toleration of opinions.

2. Take care that the Lord's Day be kept holy. That God may be worshipped it is
necessary some time be set apart for his worship; and what time fitter than
that which is already appointed? wherein then can Magistrates more promote Gods
worship than by providing that this day be spent in it? How vigorously did
Nehemiah appear in sanctifying the legal Sabbath, chiding with the Nobles of
Judah, shutting the Gates in the evening, before the day declined, and not
opening them till the Sabbath was ended, nay, setting his own servants to watch
the gates, and not suffering the Merchants) and Tradesmen to lodge within the
City Nehem. 13.17, 19, 20. I argue not for a Jewish Sabbath, Omnes dies
dominicos cum omni veneratione decrevimus observart, et a servili opere
abstineri, et ut mercatus in eis minime sit, nec placitum ubi aliquis ad mortem
vel ad poenam judicetur Council. Mogunt. can 37. Vid. Zanchuin in 4 Precept.
Exodus 20.8.
but a Christian Lordsday; which had we nothing else, the argument a fortiori
would engage us unto, If they under the law must set apart one day: in seven to
remember the great work of Creation; well may we under the Gospel to
commemorate our redemption, without which creation had done us no good. And
truly I am sorry there is so much reason for this advice. Men generally,
forbear bodily labor, and suffer themselves to be worse employed: giving the
least part of that day to him, whose due the whole of it is. It is a shame that
an usurped power should bring people into better order than all the commands of
lawful Authority. It is not many years since a strict Proclamation came forth
for keeping this day Holy, and frequenting Church both evening and morning. I
hope you will see that so Religious a Command be observed. And forget not that
the fourth Precept of the Law is directly charged upon the head of a Family
(and by the same reason reaches) the head of a Corporation. Remember that thou
keep holy the Sabbath day: as if the duty were only his, or the omission of
inferiors should be set upon the superiors score. It is (through Gods
blessing) in your hand to rectify all abuses of this nature: your Authority
will force men to Church, keep them both out of Alehouses and Idleness, when
our Sermons cannot. And therefore we humbly beg your help, that God be not
provoked to curse the work of our days because we despise the work of his: and
blast all our diligence on the six, for our profanation of the seventh.

2. David served his Generation and by punishing contumacious offenders. I will
early destroy all the wicked of the Land, that I may cut off all wicked doers
from the City of the Lord Psalm. 101.8. When the Amalekite came with the news
that he had slain Saul, David slew him: 2 Samuel 1.15. When Baanah and Rechab had
killed Ishbosheth, he killed them: 2 Samuel 4.12. yet the one was his persecutor
and the other his competitor for the Kingdom. Afterward, when Joab had
sinitten Abner and Amasa; (of whom (I mean Joab) it might be said as once of
Origin, ubi been nemo melius, ubi male nemo pejus: Where he did well no man did
better; and where he did ill no man did worse) and when Shimei had cursed
David, though his Reign was so troublesome that he could not take vengeance on
them in his life; yet he leaves it in charge to Solomon 1 Kings 2.5, 6, 8, 9.
Punishments of such high nature possibly fall not within your compass; yet
herein it is fit you imitate David, and hereby also you shall serve your
Generation, in not suffering any guilty persons which come before you to glory
in impunity. Pity and lenity do well become a Magistrate where they may do
good; but if the sore will only rankle with plasters, it is time to apply
tents and corrosives. Comerarius apud Godwinum de Antiquit. Roman. lib. 4. cap.
2. Bonum est cum puniuntur nocentes. Quis hoe nisi nocens negabit? Tertul. de
spectaculis cap
The Consuls of Rome had both rods and axes carried before them: Rods, as
ensigns of mercy, if the offenses were less, and the offenders penitent, axes,
as tokens of severity, if the offenses were greater, and the offenders
incorrigible. You know who has said, To acquit the wicked, and to condemn the
righteous, both of them are abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15. Nay, let me
tell you that a sparing those who are evil, is a discouragement, a wrong to
those that are good. Magistratus qui de malis paenas non sumit, bonos injuria
afficit, said old Pythagoras; That Magistrate who corrects not the faulty,
injures the blameless. I add further, it enfeoffes you in the same guilt with
them. It is a known story how tart, yet how true an answer was made to the
Judge, who expostulating with a Malefactor, and pleading for how many crimes he
had been pardoned, was told, that those crimes were not the man's, but his,
because he had forgiven him, and not punished him according to his deserts. And
the best of us have sins enough of our own, that we need not grasp at those of
others. The truth is, God has directly pointed you to this duty in the Name he
has given you, Romans 13.4. (...).
He bears not the sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil.

3. David served his Generation; and by his courage and resolution in the ways
of God, All the difficulties which attended him, all the affronts he met with,
all the afflictions through which he waded, could not damp his resolute spirit
from retaining his integrity, or draw him from his God. Michal scoffs when he
danceth before the Arc, and he tells her, I will yet be more vile than thus,
and will be base in mine own sight, 2 Samuel 6.22. The Grandees and Princes
thereabouts, sat and spoke against him, yet did he meditate in Gods statutes,
Psalm. 119.23. Nay, notwithstanding he endured some causeless persecutions, yet
his heart stood in awe of Gods word verse 161. He could not be daunted with the
face of the greatest: I will speak of thy testimonies before Kings, and will
not be ashamed verse 46. A Lions heart is not more requisite in a Chyrurgion
than in a Magistrate, that he firmly and steadfastly purpose with himself, not
to be discoueaged at whatsoever happens; that nothing terrify or affright him;
that neither threats nor frowns, neither f^wnings nor flatteries withdraw him
from God, or sink his Spirit. One would wonder what kind of man Jeshua was that
hears him so often charged to be courageous. Be strong, and of a good courage,
(says God) for unto this people shall thou divide for an inheritance the Land,
Josh. 1.6. Have not I commanded thee? (says God again) be strong, and of a
good courage, be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed verse 9. All that thou
command us (say the people) we will do, only be strong, and of a good
courage verse 18. Not that he was either a Coward, for want of valor, or weak
and flexible for want of resolution: but having to deal with a stubborn people,
it was necessary to whet and set an edge upon his courage, for preparing him
against all trials. Certainly, there is no person in Authority, but he must
expect to grapple with some hardship, to meet with some severe encounters, and
perhaps when he does best to hear worst: nor is there any thing to buoy him up,
and bring him safely off, but arming himself beforehand, with a serious resolve
that nothing shall be of force to move him out of the ways of God. This
therefore God expects from you in order to the serving your Generation, that
you valiantly maintain his truth, and when any thing comes in contest between
God and Man, that you shrink not from him, nor turn to the right hand or to the
left. It is not for you to swim with the stream, but to strike against it, be
it never so fierce; and if you cannot beat sin down, yet at least to keep from
the infection of it; to determine as Joshua did when he took his farewell of
Israel: If it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you
will serve: But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15.
And that leads me to the next Particular.

David served his Generation, and by an exemplary life and conversation. Which
was so great a part of his service, that our English Annotators have made an
especial remarke upon it: and thus give the sense of my Text, after David had
lived uprightly toward God, in his appointed times he died. Indeed so exact
was his walking, that all the good Kings after him are said to walk in his
ways, or to do as he did. Of Josiah we read he did that which was right in
the sight of the Lord, and walked in all the ways of David his Father, 2 Kings
22.2. and of Hezekiah, he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord,
according to all that David his Father did, 2 Kings 18.3. And the wicked
Princes are said not to walk in his ways, or to do like him. So we read of
Abijam, his heart was not perfect with the Lord, as the heart of David his
Father, 1 Kings 15.3. The truth is he was a man, though not without
infirmities, yet of a most excellent life; therefore called the man after Gods
own heart, Acts 13.22. And the Character of him is, He did that which was right
in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded
him, all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite,
1 Kings 15.5. And truly this is an eminent part of your duty in serving your
Generation: and that which will have a very great influence upon all about you.
Believe it there will be many eyes upon you; some out of a good, some out of a
bad intent; some out of love, some out of envy: And every slip in you will be
so much the greater, as your place is higher: for he that enters upon a Public
Office, puts off the man, and puts on the Magistrate. Nor is there a likelier
way to make others good than your being so. Philosophers tell us that the
inferior orbs are carried about by the motion of the primum mobile. And we
know the Proverb, Regis ad exemplum, etc. 'T s true of a Borough or Town, as
well as of a Kingdom, such as the Rulers are, such will the people be. We see
it in the case of Israel. While Joshua and those with him, who were exemplary
for piety lived, the people was pious too: Israel served the Lord all the days
of Joshua, and all the days of the Elders that outlived Joshua, Joshua 24.31.
And you cannot at present imagine what a comfortable reflection it will be
hereafter, that by your good conversation, during the time of your employment,
you have contributed toward the promotion of piety and holiness. In short, men
advanced to more than ordinary height, most certainly prove either Stars or
Comets, and either enlighten or infect our lower World. For we are most what
led by practice, praecepta docent, exempla trabunt; precepts instruct us, but
precedents more forcibly encliue us: and as a Divine of our own expresses it
wittily, though the words of the wise be as nails fastened by the Masters of
Assemblies, Fullers Holy State in the Character of a good Parent.
yet Examples are the Hammers to drive them in, that they may take the faster
hold. You see then briefly, wherein David did, and conformably to him, wherein
every good Magistrate should serve his Generation. Four things I have mentioned
as points of duty, let me add four more as grounds of encouragement to these
duries; and they are these. The serving your Generation on this manner will 1.
Make your life honorable: 2. It will make your memory precious: 3. It will
make your people happy: And 4. It will make your death comfortable: All which
you shall see exactly proved in David himself.

1. It will make your life Honorable. A Magistrate never acts with more policy
for himself, than when he acts with the most piety toward God; Nor can he
devise a readier way to compass his own honor, than by designing the honor of
God. I appeal to the person in the Text, Psalm. 89.27. I will make him my
firstborn, higher than the Kings of the earth. So much more honorable than
all others as the firstborn is above his brethren: that the Kings and Princes
about him shall stoop to him as one of a more raised dignity and renown. Nor
was it only so in his time, but in Solomon's too. So well was God pleased with
his request for a wise and understanding heart, that he might discern between
good and bad; that he grants what he had asked, and gives what he asked not:
both riches and honor, so that there shall not (says the Text) be any of the
Kings like unto thee, all thy days, 1 Kings 3.13. It is needless to produce
more instances. Do you your part, and be sure God will do His. He who
distributes his judgments by a tantum and quantum, distributes his rewards so
too: And if you expect a greater measure of honor, God will expect a greater
measu^e of duty. This is the way to raise your Names, to advance your fame far
above that parchment Nobility (as Charron calls it) which consists only in
purchased titles, without the supplement of virtuous actions. In a word, God
will honor you, good men will honor you, and for the wicked it is no matter
whether they do or not: though should they malice, and intend mischief against
you, it lies not in their power to hurt you: for when a man's ways please the
Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him, Prove. 16.7.

2. It will make your memory precious. Your honor shall not die when you die,
but live many years, many Ages after you. I need no more particular proof of
this in the case of David, than the preserving his Name, and that excellent
Encomium of him conveyed in the Bible to succeeding Ages, there to continue
while the World endures: that the Genera^ions after him might see, such a man
there was, such a life he led, and such a memorial he left behind him. So that
methinks this Divine providence comments upon, and confirms what he wrote by
Divine inspiration, Psalm. 112.6. The righteous shall be in everlasting
remembrance. Nor was it happiness singly. We read that when Moses dyed, God
himself took care to bury him privately, Deuteronomy. 34.6. He buried him in a Valley
in the land of Moab, over against Bethpeon; but no man knows of his Sepulcher
unto this day. And the Rabbis give this reason of it, lest the Israelites who
had so great a reverence for his memory, should have idolized his Grave, had
they known where it was. Most certainly Moses his fame reached much further
than his own time, by that Character given him in after-ages: (...) That
excellent Lawgiver of the Jews, and more than a man. And indeed, Psalm. 149.9.
This honor have all his Saints. If you carry your selves in your places with
the same faithfulness as they did, the very remembrance of you shall be
grateful to those that come after you; and your virtuous actions will preserve
you longer in memory, than any Epitaph upon your Grave-stones. I leave it to
your own deciding, whether a commendation written in the hearts of men, be not
much more durable than in pillars of marble: And who may more justly expect, or
more rationally hope for it, than he that discharges a public trust
religiously, faithfully, conscientiously?

3. This will make your people happy. (I call them yours, whilst under your
Government) Magistrates actions reach further than their own persons: and tend
extremely either to the advantage or disadvantage of the places where they
live. We see it in the case of David: (for I still keep him in mine eye) Whilst
he lived, Israel flourished in times of peace, and conquered in times of war.
Nay, when he was dead, Jerusalem fared the better for him. Sennacherib invades
Judah some 300 years after David's time; Ahaz had provoked God to anger by his
Idolatry, yet notwithstanding that provocation, God thinks of David, remembers
his piety, and resolves for his sake, Jerusalem should be defended: I will
defend this City to save it, for mine own sake, and for my servant David's sake;
2 Kings 19.34. And truly this is but what elsewhere we learn from the
Scripture, Prove. 28.2. For the transgression of a land many are the Princes
thereof, but by a man of understanding the state thereof shall be prolonged: it
shall be made healthful, as health is a great means of prolonging life. And I
know not well how to use a stronger Motive. What greater comfort has the Nurse
than to see the Child thrive at her breast? And what greater satisfaction to a
good Governor, than to see the Town happy under his Government, nay to lay a
foundation (as much as can be) to perpetuate its happiness many years after
him? Pardon me if I urge this with some earnestness, out of the honor I bear
to this place. May all the blessings of heaven continually rest, and the tender
mercies of the most High descend upon it. May all the Inhabitants find Grace,
Plenty, and Peace; and the Town flourish while the Sun and Moon endure. To
which Petitions God Almighty say Amen.

4. This will make your death comfortable. Death makes no difference between
Magistrate and People, between Prince and Peasant. The Mortal Sithe is Master
of the Royal Scepter, and mowes down the Lillies of the Crown, as well as the
Grass of the Field. Die you must, be you never so great, be you never so
virtuous: only your virtue will be a good preservative against the terrors of
death, and will cheer up your hearts in the deepest Agony. Cansin (I remember)
compares it to the Geometrical Cube, Holy Court, in the life of Theodosius.
cast it on what side you will, it always finds its Basis. Whether we live or
die, it affords us comfort when nothing else in the world can do it. With what
Tranquillity did David go to his Father? When he had done his work he lies down
in peace to take his rest; whereupon his death is called a falling on sleep.
David after he had served his own Generation by the will of God, fell on sleep;
which is the second part of the text:

2. David's rest: he fell on sleep. A Metaphorical word, though very apposite
and significant. Sleep is a short death; Death is a long sleep: when the earth
is our bed, a winding sheet our cloths, the great resurrection-day our morning
to awake in, and the Archangels Trumpet our Monitor to arise. It is a sleep
for its refreshment. A nights rest recruits that strength which was spent in
the days toil: and our bodies shall be raised in a far better plight than we
laid them down. For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal
must put on immortality 1 Cor. 15.53. But I dare not prosecute this Parallel
any further. Let me therefore entreat you as you expect comfort when all
earthly Comforts forsake you; as you value Peace of Conscience at your last
hour; and a pleasant passage into eternity: as you would have the King of
terrors presented less dreadful, and be ready to give up your accounts with
joy: See to what I have charged as your duties. And think but with your selves
how it will revive your spirits to say with the Apostle 2 Cor. 1.12. Our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in all simplicity and
godly sincerity, we have had our conversation in the world. How merrily you may
sing a Nunc dimittis, Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, when
you can appeal to God both as Christians and Magistrates with good Hezekiah,
Isai. 38.3. Remember O Lord how I have walked before thee, in truth, and with a
perfect heart, and have done that which is right in thy sight. To shut up all:
Remember who it is that sets you in your station, what he requires from you,
that you are but Servants, and as Servants must be accountable: that a time is
coming for your appearance before the great Tribunal, where you shall be
questioned for the management of all your offices. Let these things sink into
your hearts, and direct you in your actions; that doing David's work, serving
your Generations by the will of God, you may enter into David's rest. your
bodies may rest securely in the grave, and your souls enjoy that eternal rest
which remains to the people of God. Heb. 4.9.
To which rest God of his mercy bring us all through Jesus Christ. To whom with
the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be Honor, Praise, Power, Dominions and
Thanksgiving, now henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
The Authors absence from London has occasioned some mistakes, especially in
the two first sheets of this Book. Such as are less material, whether
mis-pointing, or mis-placing of Marginal Quotations, the Reader is desired
courteously to pardon: Such as are of greater concernment be these following,
which be may correct with his Pen.

PAge 7. line. 25. for (...) read (...). p. 10. l. 11. for from r. for. p. 11.
l. 1. for Reepers r. Keepers. l. 15. r. legible. l. 32. for thy r. they. p. 12.
l. 32. for riches r. wishes. l. ult. for took r. take. p. 13. l. 26. for
preferred r. preserved. p. 15. l. 29. for gentle r. gentile. p. 18. l. 7. for
thou r. then. p. 19. l. 12. for Goals r. Gaols twice. p. 23. l. 8. for and r.
not. p. 25. l. 23. for 12. r. 122. p. 27. l. 20. marg. r. Vicars. p. 28. l. 17.
for Son r. Sun. l. 22. for (...) r. (...). l. 30. for Elion r. Ebion. p. 29. l.
15. after totus add mundus. p. 38. l. 3. r. release. p. 56. l. 9. for (...) r.
(...). p. 62. l. 22. for our r. your.


