A DESCRIPTION OF FRANCE IN ITS Several Governments: TOGETHER With the most
considerable Cities, Seaports, and Rivers of that Kingdom; as also the
Distances, with the Longitudes, and Latitudes of each Place, etc. With many
other Remarks, necessary to the Knowledge of that Kingdom.

By J. S. Gent.

Illustrated with a Map.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Minors in the Inner-Temple-Lane, 1692.

Licensed,

July the 18th. 1692. R. M.

To the Illustrious Mainard Duke of Leinster.
May it please your Grace,
THE following Treatise would not be so familiar, as to presume upon so high a
Patronage, were not your Grace so immemediately interessed, and concerned
therein. Neither was it without some serious Reslexion and Debate, that I could
resolve to make this Present to your Grace: For though Dedications are lately
grown so Epidemical, that no Person of Quality, either sooner or later can
avoid the Infection, yet, methought, your Grace was as much above the common
disturbances that attend your Quality, as you are exalted above the common
Level of it. But, my Lord, you are now going General of an Expedition, in whose
very Name encounter an admirable Policy, and a certain Glory; for the Service
of which was principally intended this ensuing Description. This it is which
made me conclude I should have done a great Injustice, had I put this Tract
under any other Protection than yours. And indeed at whose Feet can a Subject
of this Nature be so fitly placed as at your Grace's, You being so experienced
a Commander, and about to perform such vast important Actions?

My Lord, it would but argue me of the meanest Impertinence to pretend here an
Harangue of those Encomiums you deserve: For he who acquaints the World whose
Son you are, has said enough to those who do not know you: Your Grace being the
best Panegyric upon your self: The Son of the Great, the Immortal Schomberg,
whose stupendous Actions, and invincible Courage, together with his unspotted
Zeal for the most rational Religion of the World, at a time when the Thorns of
Persecution forced him from his Estate and Dignities, have rendered him even
above the Turennee's, the Montecuculli's, and the Condees, that is to say, the
Caesar's of our Age.

Go on, my Lord, and prosper; And whilst your glorious Father's Blood inheres
in you, where is the considering Man that questions Victory, ordares dispute
Success.

Methinks, I hear the Men of Gaul declare, amazed upon the Notice of your
Landing, He comes, it is Schomberg's Son, why do we defer to yield?

We read in English History of the prodigious Actions of the Mighty Talbot,
whose very Name at last was of sufficient force to defeat whole Armies: The
Case being parallel to the great Exploits of your Renowned Father, of whom your
Grace is a complete Resemblance, how can it be, that we should fear a Victory?

The Present that I make bold to send your Grace, is a Geographical Description
of France, considered in its several Provinces, the most considerable Cities
and Sea Ports, their Distances one from another, their Longitudes and
Latitudes, what they are most remarkable for, together with many other
observable things, that necessarily occur in a Treatise of this Nature.

But lest I prove tedious, I will conclude this Epistle with assuring you, that
not only this Book, but the Author of it are both Dedicated to your Grace's
Service, (with hearty Prayers for the Success of your Expedition) by him, who
in all imaginable Humility, subscribes himself,

My Lord, Your Grace's Most Obedient Servant J. S.

ERRATA.
PAge 25. line 19. after Besanson read and Cambray; p. 27. l. 15 for Boulonis
r. Boulonois. p. 35. l. 4. r. Vexin Normand. p. 37. l. 23. before King r. the,
and l. 26. for Government r. Governor. p. 47. l. 8. for Rhetelor r. Rhetelois.
p. 52. for Bree r. La Brie. p. 57. l. 10. for more r. most. p. 58. l. 19. r.
Families. p. 61. l. 10. r. Poitou. p. 65. l. 11. r. Bretagne. p. 66. l. 1. r.
covered with Slat. p. 83. l. 14. r. Charente and l. 26. after Guyenne r. is. p.
90. l. 3. after Modern r. Authors. p. 93. l. 2. r. advancing p. 101. l. 14. r.
It should not be. p. 108. l. 5. r. in one part p. 109. l. 18 after Ven^issin r.
which encircles. p. 112. l. 1 r. most. p. 115. l. 9. r. Roman.

map of France.

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE Geographical Description OF FRANCE.
THE Romans gave the Name of Gaul to that extent of Land, which is between the
Alps and the Pyrenaeans, the Mediterranean-Sea, the Ocean, and the Rhine: At
present, with an exception of the Low Countries, and some other Parts, which do
as it were depend upon the Empire of Germany; it is called France, from the
Name of the French, who made it subject to their Power. Julius Caesar had
finished his Conquest of it about Forty Eight Years before the Nativity of
Jesus Christ; insomuch that when the French had absolutely established
themselves therein, it had been near Five Ages under the Laws of that Empire.

Now without reckoning the Country which the Gauls had subdued beyond the Alps,
from these Mountains, as far as the little River of Rubicon, and which was
named Cisalpine Gaul, in respect of the Romans: It was first divided by
Augustus into Four Parts, Narbonoise Gaul, which they called Province, because
they had subdued it first, and reduced it into a Province; Aquitanick Gaul,
Gaul Celtick, and Gaul Belgic. To these three last, they gave the Name of Gaul
Cheveliie, and when Gaul was absolutely spoken, Celtick was understood. Then by
Succession of time, and under diverse Emperors, it was divided again into
Seventeen Provinces, to wit, Five Viennoises, in which number were computed the
First and Second Narbonoise; Three Aquitains; Five Lyonnoises, comprehending
the Sequanoise; Four Belgic, Two of which were called German, because some
People of Germany had long since inhabited those parts; and Two Belgic,
properly so called.

Each of these Provinces had its Metropolis; to wit, the Five Viennoise,
Vienna, Narbonne, Aix, Tarentaise, and Embrun; the Three Aquitains, Bourges,
Bourdeaux and Eaulse; the Five Lyonnoises, Lion, Rouen, Tours, Sens, Besancon;
The Two German, Mentz and Cologne; the Two Belgic, Triers and Rheims.

Under these Seventeen Metropolitans, there was above a Hundred Cities or
Towns, Heads of People, in which the Church has since constituted Episcopal
Sees. Under these Cities, there was a much greater number of other Towns, which
they called Oppida. When the Romans conquered Gaul, there was no less computed
than Twelve Hundred with Walls; but they pulled down the Enclosures of the
greatest part, or let them fall to ruin.

As to the Governments of these Seventeen Provinces, Six of them were Consular,
and Eleven under Presidents, commissioned by the Emperor. Constantine the
Great, put Counts into the Cities, and Dukes into some of the Frontier Towns;
Judiciary matters were performed according to the Roman Law, but some Municipal
Customs it is probable were kept up. They were not much disturbed by the
Soldiery, because the Legions lived with sufficient order, and besides there
was hardly any but in the Adjacent Provinces. Yet as the Country was agreeable
and fertile, and the People extremely subject, they were imposed upon by all
manner of Exactions, insomuch that their Abundance^ increased their Misery, and
their Obedience heigthned their Oppression.

In the Year 330, when Constantine the Great divided the Charge of Prefe^du
Pretoire into Four, Gaul enjoyed one, who had under him Three Vicars one in
Gaul it self, one in Spain, and one in Great Britain. The First who had this
Charge, was the Father of St. Ambrose, bearing the same Name as his Son. This
Prefect usually resided in the City of Triers, which for this reason was the
Capital of the Gauls, till having been Four times sacked by the Barbarians, the
Emperor Honorius would transfer this Prerogative to the City of Arles; which
was at length taken off from Vienna, and made up the Eighteenth Metropolis.

From Augustus to Galien, the Peace of these Provinces was disturbed by. Two
Revolts that of Sacrovir and Florus in the Twenty Third Year of Jesus Christ,
and that of Civilis, Tutor and Classicus, which was much more dangerous in the
Year 70. After the Death of the Emperor Decius, the Barbarians began to torment
them by frequent Incursions. For the First Hundred Years there were none but
French and Germans that were concerned in them on this side the Rhine; but
afterward the Misfortune was redoubled by the horrible Devastations of
Vandals, Bourguignons, Sueves, Visigoths and Huns, which did not end but with
the ruin of the Empire in the West.

As to the Original of the French, the common opinion is, that they are natural
Germans, and that France is the name of a League, which in their Language
signified Free, or as others say, Fierce, Insuperable. It Is certain that the
Authors of the Third and Fourth Ages by the name of German, almost always mean
the French. As for the time in which they began to appear, it was exactly Two
Years after the great Defeat of the Emperor Decius in Mesia, which happened in
the Year 254, by the Goths and other People of Seythia, The Goths had begun to
make themselves known but Twelve Years before they went out of their own
Country, which was European Scythia, between the Euxin Sea and the River
Tanais,) to ransack the Provinces of the Empire. They were divided into
Ostrogoths and Visigoths; that is to say, according to, some Eastern Goths and
Western Goths.

After this Defeat, all the Fences of the Roman Empire being ruinated on that
side, there broke out Torrents of all sorts of Barbarians, who had not been so
much as heard of till then. It Is for this reason amongst others, and because
the French had also much of the Behaviors and Customs of the Scythians, (as to
use Darts, to exercise Hawking, etc.) that one is apt to conjecture that they
are originally Scythians. But it is not po^ible; and it would be super uous to
say of what Place, because all the Scythians were Vagabonds, and that in a
little time they were found Two and Three Hundred Leagues distance from the
Country, which they inhabited a little before.

The First time then that there is mention made of them, is in the Year 256,
under the Empire of Gallus and Volusian, when they passed the R^ine near Mentz;
and when Aurelian who was yet but Tribune of a Legion, killed Seven Hundred of
them in an Encounter, and made Three Hundred Prisoners, who were sold at the
public Sale.

From this first Irruption, to the time when they conquered or besought of the
Romans the Possession of some Lands in Gaul, to wit, in the Countries of
Cologne, Liege, and the Neighboring parts, there passed near 180 Years, which
was in the Year 416. There was lodged a Party in Brabant in the time of Julian
the Apostate, toward the Year 358; but it is not known, whether they were
permitted to establish themselves there.

During these Two Ages they continued their Incursions with diverse Successes,
always retiring with their Booty into Germany. They possessed there the most
part of those Lands which are between the Mein and the Rhine, the Weser and the
Ocean; sometimes more, sometimes less extended, according as they were weak or
powerful, and as the^ were pressed by other Nations, particularly by the
Germans toward the Mein, and the Saxons toward the Sea.

These last proceeding from a Coun^try, which we now call Holstein, seise^ upon
Friesland, and the Marine part^ on this side the River Elbe; then a^ the French
established themselves i^ Gaul, they succeeded in the possession of the
greatest part of those which they had enjoyed beyond the Rhine.

The French Nation was divided into several People, West-Friesland.
Great and North-Holland.
Little Frisons, Zeland.
Salians, Bishopric of Munster.
Brucheri, Bishopric of Osnaburg.
Angrivarians, Bishopric of Minden.
Chamaves, Duchy of Westphaly.
Sicambres, and Hesse.
Catti: And it had, as I suppose, diverse others in its Alliance, and others
also under its Dominion.

Oftentimes the Romans went to assault them in their Woods and Marshes, and
thought to extirpate them Two or Three times, particularly Constantine the
Great; but they repulsed them always.

They had several Captains or Commanders, Kings, Princes, Dukes or Generals,
who had no absolute Authority but in War.

Sometimes they served as Stipendaries to the Romans, sometimes became their
Subjects; but as soon as the time was changed, and that they found an occasion
to pillage, they supposed themselves no longer obliged to entertain^ Treaties;
for which Reason the Authors of those times accuse them of Inconstancy, Lying,
and Perfidiousness: So that we at this time need not give our selves the
trouble of admiring at their Treacherous Practices and unmanly Attempts, since
they have them from their first Original, and since they seem to be carried on
thereto as it were by Natural Instinct, deriving their Unworthy Qualities from
their Predecessors.

The last Day of the Year 406, the Alains and Vandals seducing along with them
the Bourguignons, the Sueves, and several other Barbarous People, passed the
Rhine, and made an irruption into Gaul, which was the most furious and severe
that had been yet seen.

These Barbarians having ransacked all the First Germany, and the Second
Belgic, transferred themselves into Aquitain: In the Year 409, some Bands of
Vandals and Sueves, passed from thence into Spain. Two Years after, the others
being consternated at the March of Ataulfe King of the Visigoths, who came from
Haly, took the same Road, and followed them. There remained notwithstanding
some of the Alains in Dauphine, and upon the Banks of the Loire, who enjoyed a
Succession of Kings for above Sixty Years together, but in the end they
underwent the Dominion of the Visigoths and Bourguignons.

The Vandals and Sueves seized upon la Galice, the Silinges la Betique, and the
Alains part of Lusit ania, and the Province of Carthagene. Sixteen Years after,
the Vandals passed into Africa, but in the mean time Vallia King of the
Visigoths who fought for the Romans, utterly extirpated the Silinges, and
reduced the Alains to that extremity, that being unable to subsist any longer
by themselves, they went and submitted to Gunderic King of the Vandals. The
Sueves maintained themselves near Two Ages in Spain; and at length their
Kingdom was also extinguished by Leuvilgild King of the Visigoths in the Year
588.

All these Barbarians were divided into several Bands or Parties, who had each
their Captain, and made Incursions and Ravages without intermission. So far
they proceeded, that there was seen at the same time People of the same Nation
in Places far remote one from the other, and in Interests directly opposite.

In the Year 408 Stilicon, Honorius's Lieutenant, who was accused for
introducing them, is massacred by the Order of Honorius the Emperor. Alaric
King of the Visigoths his good Friend, to revenge his Death, besieged the City
of Rome Three times, and the last takes it by Treason, on the Twentieth Day of
August, in the Year 410. About the end of the same Year, he died in Calabria,
as he was preparing to pass into Africa. Ataulfe his Cousin succeeded him, and
espoused Placidia Sister of the Emperor Honorius, whom he had taken in Rome.

In the Year 412, Ataulfe passed into Gaul Narbonnoise, and makes himself
Master of Narbonne. He remained there but Three Years. The Count Constantius
who was since Emperor, and married Placidia his Widow, compelled him to go into
Spain, where he was killed by his own People in Barcelone, toward the Month of
September, in the Year 415. They elected Sigerick in his Place, and gave him
the same entertainment on the Seventh Day. Vallia his Successor was remanded
into Gaul by Constantius, who gave him the Second Aquitain, with some Cities in
the adjacent Provinces; amongst others, that of Toulouze, where he established
his Royal Seat in the Year 419. But he died in few Months after, and Theodorick
succeeded him. Under this King, and under Evaric or Eurick, the Visigoths
became Masters of all the Three Aquitaines, and the Two Narbonnoises.

During the great Revolt of the Maritime People, to wit, those upon the Coasts
of Flanders, Picardy, Normandy, and Bretagne, which happened in the Year 412,
the French being joined with them, seized upon that part of Second Germany,
which was called Ripuaire, and the people Ripuarians or Ribarols. The Romans by
Treaty or otherwise, left them the free possession of it: A little after which,
Faramond began to reign. We find in the Historians of those times, that the
French had enjoyed several Kings before him, as Genebaud and Alec, in the Year
288, who came to Treves, to sue for a Peace of Maximilian; As also Ascaric and
Radagaise, in the Year 307, whom Constantine took Prisoners in War, and exposed
them to Wild Beasts in the Arena, for having taken up Arms, notwithstanding
their Faith given to Constantius his Father. In the Year 374, one Mellobaudes,
who being great Master of the Militia, and Count of the Palace of the Emperor
G^ian, killed and subdued Macrian King of the Germans, and rendered many other
Services to the Empire. Toward the Year 378, one Richemer who had such another
Charge near Gratian, as Mellobaudes had. In the Year 382, one Priam or
Priarius, whom some would have to be the Father or Grandfather of Faramond;
besides Marcomir and Sunnon, Brethren in 397, the First of which Stilicon
banished into T^scany, and made the other be Massacred by his own Creatures,
when he attempted to be ^ motion to revenge the Exile of ^ Brother. And in the
Year 414 or ^ one Theodemer Son of Richemer, wh^ had his Head cut off with his
mothe^ Ascila, for some Undertakings again^ the Empire.

Notwithstanding the common Op^nion has always begun to reckon t^ King's of
France by Faramond, whether ^ be because his Predecessors had not the^ fixed
residence in Gaul, or that he est^ blished Royalty amongst the Frenc^ In
effect, it seems that the Romans ha^ in some fashion subdued this Nation, an^
since the entertainment of Marcomir^ Sunnon, and Theodomer, they would no^
longer permit them to have their Kings.

Faramond began to reign in the Year 418, according to the common Opinion, a
Year very remarkable by a Great Eclipse of the Sun: From whom to Lewis the
Fourteenth, the present King of France, are computed no less than 65 Kings.

THE Geographical Description OF FRANCE.
FRANCE then, Name.
which was heretofore called Gaul, has received its Name from that of the
ancient People called Franks, who came from a part of Germany, to inhabit there
in the time of its first Kings.

It is Situated in the midst of the Temperate Zone, Situation.
between the Forty Second and Fifty First Degree of Latitude, extending it self
from the Fifteenth Degree of Longitude, to the Twenty Ninth, insomuch that it
may be computed to have 460 Miles English from South to North, from the
Pyreneans to Calais upon the Channel, and 600 in its greatest extent from East
to West, Extent.
from the point of Conquet in Bretagne to Saralbe in Lorrain.

It is bounded in the North by the Channel and the Low Countries; Bounds.
in the East by Germany, Suisserland, Savoy and Piedmont, from which it is
separated by the Alps; in the South by the Mediterrancan Sea, and the Pyrenean
Mountains, which separate it from Spain; and in the West by the Ocean.

The Air is recreative and wholesome; Quality.
the Soil extraordinary Fertile in Corn, Wines, Fruits and Hemp. One meets
there with Delicious Medows, Pleasant Forests, and most agreeable Plains, in
which one may observe a great number of Cattle and Wild Fowl, as Horses, Oxen,
Sheep and Goats, Stags, Wild-boars, partridges, Woodcocks, Plovers, Quails, and
other Volatils. Several Authors, as Strabo and Botero, speak of its Mines of
Gold and Silver. If they are rare, those of Iron; Lead, Coals and other
Minerals are frequent enough. There are Quarries of most Beautiful Stone and
Slat, exceeding proper for Buildings. Toward the South there are several
Fountains of Hot and Mineral Waters, very relieving for many Distempers. Upon
the Coasts is made a great quantity of very good Salt. Botero says, that France
produces Four Load-stones, which have the virtue to attract the Gold and Silver
of Strangers: These Four Load-Stones are Corn, Wine, Salt and Hemp. In a Word,
there is all that can be desired in order to pass ones Life after a most
agreeable manner.

Amongst the great Number of R^vers which fructify this Country, Rivers.
Four are particularly observed, to wit, the Loire, the Seine, the Garomne, and
the Rhone; all of them take their rise herein; but the last, which proceeds
from the Mount St. Gothard, in the Country of the Grisons, and passes through
the Lake of Geneva.

France is divided according to the Twelve great Governments which appeared to
the General Assembly of the States held in 1614, Division.
after the majority of Lewis the Thirteenth; but we must now make an addition
of Lorrain and the French-County, which are in its dependence, so that we will
divide it in Fourteen principal parts. Four of these Governments, to wit,
Picardy, Normandy, the Isle of France and Champagne, are Situated to the North
of the Loire, and about the Seine, except the First, which is more Northerly
than the other Three. Those of Bretagne, Orleanois, Bourgogne, and Lyonois, are
about the Loire; and the other Four are to the South of the same River, to wit,
Guyenne and Languedoc, about the Garomne, Dauphine and Provence, to the East of
the Rhone, one toward the North, and the other toward the South. Lorrain and
the French-County are directly Situated to the East of this Kingdom.

The Capital City of France is Paris, Capital.
seated in the midst of the Isle of France, upon the River Seine. It passes for
a Vast, Rich and Populous City, one of the Noblest in Christendom, and a
Parliament City, subject to the king of France and his ordinary Seat. It is an
Archbishops See, and is adorned with a Famous university and Three illustrious
Academies, embelished with a great number of Magni^cent Churches and Stately
Buildings, about Two Hun^^^^ and Eight Miles almoit S. E. of (...)

The French are full of Spirit, Manners.
active and ingenious enough in Arts and Sciences, polite and agreeable in
Convrsation, complaisant to the Ladies, and courteous to Strangers, but withal
very unconstant, and very rash, (ut sunt subita Gallorum ingenia,) is one of
the Remarks of Caesar. A French Gentleman was one Day speaking advantagiously
of the Free, Genteel Humor of his Countrymen to an Italian, and said, that
there was no Nation could deny, but that the French were the most tractable and
sincere People in the World; to which the Italian answered, that the thing from
which he pretended to draw all his Advantages, passed with them for a weakness,
and an effect of their imprudence. I don't admire, replied the Frenchman
coldly, that you make so disadvantagious a Judgment of our best Qualities,
because your Politics believe, that without being a Cunning Knave, one can
never make a Gallant Man.

As to the Persons of this People, they are commonly of a Middle Stature, and
for the most part of a slight making; their Complexion being generally hot and
moist, which makes them very subject to the heats of Lust, and easily
inclinable to those Diseases which are its Concomitants.

Their chief Exercises are Tennis and Dancing; Exercise.
to the last of which they are so generally affected, that were it no^ so much
exclaimed against by their rigid Ministers, it is thought that many more of the
French Catholics had been of the Reformed Religion. For so extremely are they
bent upon this Diversion, that no interruption whatsoever, neither Age,
Sickness, nor even Poverty shall retain their Heels when they hear the Music.

Their Language is very smooth and pleasant, Language.
but rather Elegant than Copious, and therefore much troubled for want of Words
to find out Periphrases; besides, that a great deal of it is expressed in the
Action; the head and Shoulders move as significantly toward it, as the Lips
and Tongue; and he that pretends to speak it with a good grace, must have
somewhat in him of the Buffoon. It is enriched with variety of Proverbs, which
is a great help to the French Humor of Scoffing; a Language so naturally
disposed for Courtship, as makes all the people Complemental.

The Laws of this Kingdom are either Temporary, Laws.
and alterable at pleasure; or Fundamental, which neither King nor parliament
(as they say) can alter. Of this last fort, the Principal are the Salick Law,
and the Law of Apennages. By the Salick Law the Crown of France may not descend
unto the Females, or fall from the Lance to the Distaff, as their Saying is,
which Law one undertaking to justify out of Holy Writ, urged that Text of St.
Matthew, where it is said, Mark the Lillies, (which are the Arms of France,)
and see how they neither labor nor spin. By that of the Apennage, the younger
Sons of the King are not to have a share in the Kingdom with their Elder
brother; which Law was made by Charles the Great, before whose time we find the
Children of the Kings stated in their several Thrones, and the Realm divided
amongst them into many Kingdoms. But by this Law, they are to be entitled to
some Duchy or County, with all the Rights and pro^ts belonging thereto; all
matters of Regality (as Levying Taxes, Coynage, and the like,) excepted only;
which upon the failing of the Masculine Line, return again to the Crown. The
Name thereof derived from Abannage, a German Word signifying a Portion.

The King of France has the Titl^ of Most Christian King, and Elde^ Son of the
Church; the Eldest Son o^ the king is called the Dauphin, and i^ the
presumptive Heir of the Kingdom^ The Dutchies of Orleans, Anjou, Alencon and
Berry, as also the Earldom o^ Evreux, have been the ordinary Titles of the
other Sons of France.

The number of the Peers of France, formerly consisted but of Twelve, viz.

The Archbishop and Duke of Rheims. The Bishop and Duke of Laon. The Bishop and
Duke of Langres. The Bishop and Earl of Beauvais. The Bishop and Earl of Noyon.
The Bishop and Earl of Chaalons. The Duke of Burgundy. The Duke of Guyenne. The
Duke of Normandy. The Earl of Toulouse. The Earl of Champagne. The Earl of
Flanders.
The Six First were Ecclesiastics, and the rest Laics, each with his
particular Function. The Institution of these Twelve peers, is attributed by
some to Charlemain, by others to Hugues-Capet; the Number of them is at
present, no more in use, except on the Coronationday; and that of the Laick
Peers, is much greater than it was.

France is governed by an Absolute King. Government.
The Crown is hereditary to his Family, and is so far Particular, that the
Legitimate Males alone can pretend to it, by the Institution of the Salick Law,
which absolutely excludes Females; as we have intimated before.

One may reckon at present, Twelve Paliaments in the States of France,since the
Conquest of the French County. One may also reckon Twenty Three Generalties, or
Offices of the Exchequer; Twenty Five Mints, and Fourteen Universities: Whose
Seats I shall observe in the particular Discourse of each City, where they are
established.

It is pretended that the Parliament of Paris was Instituted by Pepin, Paris.
Father of Charlemagne, and that it was ambulatory, till Philip the Fair, made
it fixed in 1302. The Courts of Justice of the Isle of France, Champagne, the
whole Government of Orleanois, and all Lyonois are under its Jurisdiction.

That of Toulouse, Toulouse.
was Instituted b^ the same Philip the Fair, in the sam^ Year, and was not
fixed till under Charle^ the Seventh, in 1443.

That of Rouen, Rouen.
was Instituted by the same Charles the Seventh, in the sam^ Year, and was
fixed in 1503. under the Reign of Lewis the Twelfth.

That of Grenoble, Grenoble.
was Instituted sedentary, by the same Charles the Seventh, in the Year 1453.

That of Bourdeaux, Bourdeaux
was Instituted by Lewis the Eleventh, 1462.

That of Dijon was Instituted by the same King, Dijon.
in 1476.

That of Aix, Aix.
by Lewis the Twelfth, in the Year 1501.

That of Rennes, Rennes.
was Instituted by Henry the Second, in 1553.

That of Pau, Pau.
by Henry the First, King of Navarre, in 1519.

That of Metz, Metz.
was Instituted by the late King Lewis the Thirteeenth, in the Year 1633.

That of Tournay, Tournay.
which is called Sovereign Council, was Instituted firxt by Lewis the
Fourteenth, the present King, in 1669.

That of Dole, Dole.
was Instituted in the Year -- and rendered sedentary, by Philip the Good Duke
of Bourgogne, in ^he Year 1422. It is at present trans^erred to Besanson.

These Parliaments have in their Ju^isdiction, the Courts of Justice of those
Cities, which are in the Government where they are established. That of Pau,
extends it self into Bearn, the lower Navarre, and the Country of Labourd. And
that of Tournay to all the Conquests of France, in Flanders and Haynault.

The Roman Catholic Religion, Religion.
is exactly followed in France, yet the Reformed was Tolerated there not long
since, but with this Circumstance, That all their Temples were situated without
the Cities.

There are computed in France Eighteen Arch-Bishopricks, 18 Arch-Bishopricks,
106 Bishoprics.
since one may add those of Besanson^ and 106 Bishoprics, which shall be
observed in their due Places.

1. Of the Government of P^CARDY.
THis Province heretofore made part of the ancient Gaul Belgic, Name.
an^ there is not an Author that could certify to us, from whence this Name
(...) Picardy proceeds, which is notwithstanding new.

It extends it self 132 Miles from Ea^ to West, Extent.
from between la Capelle an^ Rocroy; to the Mouth of the River Br^sle, which
separates it from Normand^ and 102 from South to North, from Beauvaisis to
Calais.

It is bounded in the East by Champagne, Bounds.
in the South by the Isle of France in the West by the British Sea and
Normandy; and in the North by the sam^ Sea, and the Low Countries.

Its Soil is very fertile in Corn, Quality.
Pasturage and Fruits; but it produces little or no Wine.

Its most considerable Rivers are the Oise, Rivers.
which receives the Serre, the Sum, Authie and Canche. The two first are
toward the East, and the other three run to the West, where they discharge
themselves into the Sea.

In this Government are comprehend^^ Picardy and Artois, to which one ^ay at
present add the Conquests of the King in Flanders, Haynault, Duchy of
^uxembourg and Cambresis.

Picardy is divided into Seven little Provinces, Division.
which keep the following Order in their Situation. First la Tie^ache lies
about the Rivers Oise and ^erre; le Vermandois, Santerre, l' Amie^ois, which is
Picardy properly speaking, and Ponthieu may be observed following the course of
the River Sum. Then ^e Boulonis, to which is added the Pais^econquis, with
the Principality of Ardres, which is more advanced toward the North, between
the Sea and Artois.

Amiens.
AMiens upon the Sum, Capital.
is the Capital of all the Province. It Is a ^ery ancient, fair, and well
fortified City. ^t is also honored with an Episcopal See under the Archbishop
of Rheims, a Mint, a Generality, and a Presidial; subject to the French King.
It stands in the Road from Paris to Calais, about 70 Miles from each. Lon.
21.26. La^ 49, 44.

Abbeville.
Abbeville is a Modern City, divide^ by the River Sum, Capital (...) the
County of Ponthieu, which deriv^ its Name from the great number (...) Bridges,
which are to be seen full (...) Water, Lakes and Marshes; which d^^ charge
themselves into the Sea, near S^^ Valery, which is a very ancient Monastery.
About 84. Miles from Pari^ Lon. 21.00. Lat. 50.9.

Boulogne.
BOulogne is a fair and large City, d^ vided in two parts, the one is cal^ed
the Upper City, and the other (...) Lower; because it is built in a Plain ad^
joining to the Sea, where there is ^ Haven. The Upper is well Fortified and has
a considerable Castle. The en^ trance of the port is a little dangerou^ and
there is more difficulty in bringing Ships in secure, than in that of Calais^
The River Liane washes its Walls, and then goes to discharge it self into the
Sea near Dunefort. It is a Bishopric under the A. of Rheims, about 17 Miles
from Calais, 40 from Abbeville, and 125 from Paris. Lon. 20.46. Lat. 50.47.

Calais.
CAlais in the County of Oye, is a City so important to the Kingdom of France,
that it is as it were, the Key of France on the Seaside. Its Situation is in a
curious Plain, and the Ditches filled with the Sea. The Port is very commodious
and secure, by reason of two Towers that defend it from all Opposers, It stands
on the Sea, about 19 Mile off Dunkirk; 96 off London, and 140 off Paris. Lon.
21.4. Lat. 51.2.

Arras.
ARras upon the Searpe, is the Capital of the Country of Artois. It is a large,
fair and strong City; an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Cambray,
subject to the French King. about 15 Miles off Doway, 20 off Ca^bray, 92 off
Paris. Lon. 21.55. La^ 50.20.

Saint-Omer.
SAint-Omer a Bishops See upon (...) Aa, and Air upon the Velule, bo^^ in
Artois, were yielded to the King (...) Spain by the Peace of 1659. But find the
French are become Masters of the^ by the Peace of Nimeguen. Lon. 21.2^ Lat.
50.52.

Tournay.
TOurnay upon the Scheld, is an Epicopal City of Flanders, which Lew is the
Fourteenth, has honored with ^ Sovereign Council; under whose Juri^diction are
all the Courts of Justice i^ the Low Countries, depending upon France. About 20
Miles off Doway, and 32 off Mons. Lon. 22.36. Lat. 50.43^

Cambray.
CAmbray upon the Scheld, is the Capital of Cambresis, an Archbishops See,
Fortisied with one of the best Citadels of all the Low Countries; which has a
long time served as a Bulwork against the Spaniards. Within 34 Miles of Mons,
40 off Amiens, and 94 off Paris. Luxmbourgh Capital of its Province, and
Valencienne upon the Scheld, are also very considerable Places. Lon. 22.24.
Lat. 50.51.

Ypres is a strong City of the Low Countries, in the Earldom of Flanders, a
Bishopric under the A. of Mech^^n; subject to the French. It stands in a
fruitful Plain, within 18 Miles off Newport, 23 off Dunkirk, and 35 off Ghent.
Lon. 22.3. Lat. 50.57.

Dunkirk is a strong Seaport Town and Castle in the Earldom of Flanders,
subject to the French; about to Miles from Graveling, 16 off Newport, 19 off
Calais, and 24 off Ostend. Lon. 21.30. Lat. 51.7.

Mons or Bergen, a very strong and rich City of the Low Countries, Capital of
Haiuault, subject to the French, and taken in 1691, about 27 Miles from
Brussels, 37 from Namur, 120 from Paris. Lon. 23.12. Lat. 50.28.

2. Of the Government of NORMANDY.
THis Province has lost much of its ancient Luster, Advantages.
and the Authority which it had in the time of its ancient Dukes, who were
Sovereign Princes so Powerful, that they have often sustained long and
impetuous Wars against the Kings of France, England and other Princes, with
whom they have many times contracted Alliances.

It was formerly called the Western Neustrie, Name.
and the name of Normandy was given to it upon the account of the Northern
People who came to inhabit there; for Nord-man in High Dutch, signifies Man of
the North.

It is Situated upon the Channel, Extent.
and may extend about 186 Miles from East to West, from Aumale to the Western
side of Coutantin; and 129 from South to North-east, viz. from Alenson, to the
City of Eu.

The British Sea, or the Channel, Bounds.
bounds it in the North and West; toward the East, it has the Isle of France,
and the Country of Perch, with that of Maine toward the South.

The Soil is Fertile enough in Corn, Quality.
Pasturage and Hemp, and abounds in Wood and Fruits; it produces but little or
no Wine, Cider and Beer being the most usual Liquors. There is to be found also
several Mines of Iron. Fish is so common there, that it is as it were given
away. There are very good Quarries for Structure, and also your Marble, Slat,
etc. not slightly to be esteemed of. As for Mineral Waters, they are to be met
with in diverse Places; those of Forges are of the greatest Repute, and most
frequented. The Country excels in many agreeable Forests, in number of
Fir-Trees, and a great quantity of White Salt, which is conveyed to Paris. The
Inhabitants it is said are so disposed to plead one against another, and so well
versed in all the Tricks of the Court, that they esteem much rather to go to
the extremity of Justice, than to reconcile matters by Civility and Sweetness,
and without having recourse to Process, which is the reason that the very
Rusticks are almost all Lawyers. I have read a Story of Two Neighbors, tha^
quarreled to that Extremity about a Mag-Py's Nest which was built upon one
Man's Tree, and inclined over the Land of the other, that they reduced
themselves to the very brink o^ Ruin.

Its chief Rivers are the Seine, Rivers.
i^ which the Eure discharges it self and the Rille, which hides it self under
ground for the space of a League nea^ B^aumont le Roger; the Orne which goes up
to Caen, and the Vere which passe^ by St. Lo, and separates the Bishoprich of
Coutance from that of Bayeux.

The Government extends it self no further than this Province, Extent.
which is divided into Upper and Lower: The Upper comprehends the Bayliwicks of
Rouen, Evreux, Caux, and Gisors: The Lower those of Caen Alenson, and Coutance.
It is again divided into Seven Diocesses, whose Episcopal Cities are Rouen,
Lisieux, Bayeux, Coutance, Auranche, Seez, and Evreux. The Four First are to be
found in order upon the Channel of England, going from East to West; the Three
others are to the South of them, and meet in their turn from West to East.

The Diocese of Rouen comprehends Four little Countries, which are called Caux,
Bray, Vexin, Normand, and Roumais: In that of Caux, there is the Land of
Yvelot, which certain Authors Misinformed, have pretended to have been raised
to a Kingdom by King Clotaire: But this Opinion is of no credit, and it only
bears the Title of a Principality.

To the West of the Bishopric of Coutance, one finds the Isle of Jersey, under
the 18 Degrees. 10 Min. of Longitude, and the 49.30 Min. of Latitude; and the Isle
of Garnsey, under the 17.40 Min. of Longitude, and the 49.30 Min. of Latitude,
and several other little Adjacent Isles.

These Islands are in the Authority of the King of England, and these Two may
have each about 24 or 30 Miles of Circuit, and were heretofore a part of
Normandy. The most considerable Cities take as follows.

Rouen.
ROuen or Roan, upon the River Seine, is the Capital of Normandy, a very large
and stately City, one of the best of France, and most advantagiously Seated for
Trade, by reason of the Flux and Reflux of the Sea; it has an Archbishop, a
Parliament, and a Seaport, which are Three things that will at any time make a
City recommendable; and also a Mint and a Generality. Its Situation is in a
delightful Plain, bordered on one side with several agreeable Mountains covered
with Trees, and on the other side, washed with the River Seine; to which are
adjoining many pleasant Meadows. The Cathedral Church is a very stately
Building, in which there are Three Towers, whereof one is covered with Lead,
which Time seems to have changed almost into the color of Copper, and whose
Height is above 550 Steps: The Tombs of the Dukes of Normandy, and the
Archbishops of the Place; the Statue of Charles the Fifth in White Marble; its
Organs of an extraordinary bigness, the Body of it supported by Twenty One
Pillars, but more particularly the Choir and Sacerdotal Ornaments, presented by
William King of England, and the Cardinal Amboise, as also its Treasure, which
^s very curious to see, upon the account of the Splendor and Riches of the
Vessels, Mitres, etc. all embossed with Gold and Stones of Value; but
principally a Sacred Mantle of Needle Work, representing Jesus Christ amongst
the Doctors, in the middle, receiving Baptism by St. John, all which is very
glorious and remarkable; besides many other Curiosities, which it would be too
tedious to insert. There is one thing very observable upon the portal of this
Church, which is a Triumphant Arch, representing Henry the Fourth, who chases
the Lions and the Wolves from his Flock, and encourages his Sheep; whilst on
the other side he sees the Ligue bound in chains, and King of Spain who is near
a Clock, pensive and Melancholy at the sight of so many illustrious Actions.
The Government of the Province makes his usual residence at Rouen, which is
within 60 Miles of Amiens, 69 of Paris, and 145 of London. Lon. 20.2. Lat.
49.26.

Caen.
CAen upon the River Orne, passes for the Second City of Normandy, both as to
its Extent, Antiquity. and Situation. It Is said that this City became s^ Rich
and Powerful by the residence o^ the English during their Wars with France, and
also by reason of the great Privileges it is invested with: For besides the
University, founded by Charle^ the Seventh, it is honored with a Generality, a
Presidial and a Bayliwick Moreover it is enriched with Nineteen or Twenty
Churches, besides a great number of Religious Houses; about 70 Miles from Rouen
Lon. 18.12. Lat. 49.19.

Diepe.
DIepe is a Town of Reputation, by reason of its noble Haven, and the great
quantity of good Merchandise and the vast Traffic it makes in all Places of
Europe. The River Argue^ on which it stands, renders it exceeding pleasant; and
the Inhabitants have the glory of making the best Compasses, and most exact
Quadrants of the World, as also all other Instruments necessary to Astrology,
as well as the Sea. It is about 35 Miles from Rouen, and 62 from Hastings in
England. Lon. 20.4. Lat. 49.59.

Havre de Grace.
HAvre de Grace, is a Fortress built by Francis the First, to oppose the
English, and to make a Haven of, to serve as a Retreat for the Merchants of the
Nation, and a Magazine of Ships of War. It Is said, that it is capable of
holding 2000 Sail and more; if so, it must be one of the most considerable
Ports in Europe. It has a strong Castle, and stands nigh the Mouth of the River
Seine, about 48 Miles from Rouen. Lon. 28.44. Lat. 44.42.

Bayeux.
BAieux (the Civitas Baiocassium of Antoninus) remarkable of a long time for a
Bishops See. One of the Bishops whereof called Odo, Brother to William the
Conqueror by the Mothers side, was by him created Earl of Kent, and afterward
upon some displeasure made Prisoner; for which, when reprimanded by the Pope,
(the Clergy being then exempted from the Secular Authority,) he returned this
Answer, that he had committed the Earl of Kent, not the Bishop of Baieux; by
which distinction he avoided the Pope's Displeasure. It stands nigh the Sea,
about 16 Miles off Caen, 45 off Coutances, and 84 off Rouen. Lon. 17.49. Lat.
49.28.

Coutances.
COutances and Auranches are both memorable upon the account of their Episcopal
Sees; from the former, the Country thereabouts has the Name of Coutantin. The
latter is Situate upon a Rock, with a fair prospect over the English Channel,
within 28 Miles of each other. The Lon. of the former is 16.45. the Lat. 49.9.

Evreux.
EVreux and Lisieux, are Bishops Sees, the former being the Mediolanium of
Ptolomy, and still a rich and flourishing Town, being the Third in estimation
of all this Province. The First is about 27 Miles from Rouen, and 58 from
Paris. The last about 45 from Rouen and Evreux. Seez also is an Episcopal See,
and stands on the Fountains of the River Orne, about 13 Miles from Alenson, 33
off Lisieux, and 64 off Rouen. The Lon. of the former is 20.4. Lat. 49.2.

What the Revenues of this Dukedom might amount to in former times, is not
easy to affirm. That they were very fair and large, appears by the Testimony
of Philip de Comines, who says that he had seen raised in Normandy 95000 l.
Sterling, which was a Prodigious Sum of Money in those times. Now they amount to
as much as the King's Toll-Masters are pleased to exact.

3. Of the Isle of FRANCE
IF this Government is the least exte^sive of the Twelve, which we ha^^
observed in the Division of France, y^^ it is without contradiction the most
a^^vantagious and charming, not only u^^ on the account of its natural Beau^^
and the stately Houses of Pleasure whi^^ are to be met with therein, but also
(...) the advantage of enjoying for the m^^ part the Presence of the King a^^
Court.

The Isle of France, to speak wi^^ propriety, is comprised between the P^^ verse
of Seine, Marne, Oise and Aisne^ but there is added to in some parts (...) the
adjoining Provinces whereof i^ Government is composed to accompan^ somewhat
better the Metropolis of the Kingdom. It is (...) the Isle of France to
distinguish it from the main Cont^nent of (...) and is made to exten^ 10 (...)
from East to West, viz. from (...) upon the Aisne to Gison^ and as many from
North to South from beyond Noyon to Courteny in G^stinois.

It is bounded on the North with Picardy, Bounds.
on the East with Champagne and la Brie, on the South with Gastinois and la
Beausse, and on the West with Normandy.

The Soil is very Fruitful in excellent Corn, Soil.
and produces a sufficient quantity of Wine and Fruits: A Country generally
very Delectable, and so Fertile withal, that the Hills are equal to the Valleys
in most Places of Europe.

Amongst the Rivers are remarked the Seine, which receives the Marne, Rivers.
and the Oise, which is increased by the Waters of the Aisne, which runs by
Soissons, and the Terrain, which washes the Walls of Beauvais.

It was formerly part of the Province of Belgica Secunda, and Lugdunensis
quarta, Division.
and is now divided into Four parts, namely, 1. The Dukedom of Valois; 2.
Gastinois; 3. Heurepois; and 4. That which is properly called the Isle of
France, by some the County of Paris.

Paris.
PAris in the Isle of France, properly so called, is the Metropolis not only of
this Government, but of the whole Kingdom: It is in Compass about Eigh^ Miles,
of an Orbicular Form, agreeabl^ seated on the Divisions of the Seine, a Fair,
Large and Populous City, but fa^ short of the Ostentations of the French one of
whose Authors coming to mention London, says, that it is (with as Emphasis.) as
large as Paris, the Subur^ comprehended. Whereas if the trut^ were impartially
delivered, Lond^^ would be found to exceed the other. (...) was thought in
Lewis the Eleventh time time, to contain 500000 People (...) all sorts of Ages,
which must be considerably increased since that King^ time. The Fortifications
are of n^ good assurance, insomuch that when once a Parisian bragged that their
Town was never taken by Force, an Englishman replied, that the reason of i^
was, because on the least Calamity i^ used to Capitulate. It has the
convenience of Boats and Barges served by the River Seine, as the Them
Westward does London. It has an^ Archbishop and an University of great repute,
consisting of 52 Colleges, whereof 40 are of little use. It is a^ Parliament
City, and the usual Seat of the French King, when absent from Versailles. It is
about 170 Miles from Antwerp, 208 from London, 250 from Amsterdam, 600 from
Vienna. Lon. 21.30. Lat. 48.45.

Soissons.
THE City of Soissons is very ancient, and was heretofore of great Repute: It
is seated upon the River Aisne, in a very agreeable Plain, encompassed with
Fruiful Mountains. Ptolomy calls it Augusta Suessonum; and before him, Caesar
in his Commentaries speaks of Galba, one of its Kings, and says, that in his
time it was very powerful, commanded Twelve Cities, and could set our an Army
of 50000 Men.

It is easy to judge that it was the most considerable of Gaul Belgic, since
the Praetors made it their residing Place. It is a Bishops See, a Generality, a
Bayliwick, a Presidial, etc. about 28 Miles from Rheims, 33 off St. Quintin,
and 48 off Paris. Lon. 22.32. Lat. 49.19.

Laon.
LAon is an Episcopal City, the Bishop whereof is one of the Twelve Peers of
France, and Earl of Laon, in Latin Laodunum; situated upon a Mountain of
difficult access, about 24 Miles from Rheims, 15 from Soissons, and 66 from
Paris, Long. 22.48. Lat. 49.30. Noyon near the River Oyse, Beauvais upon the
Terrain, and Senlis on the River Nonette are also Bishops Sees.

4. Of the Government of CHAMPAGNE.
THis Country was heretofore famous through the Grandeure of its ancient Earls,
who were Sovereign Princes, and withal so powerful, that they have sustained
long and vigorous Wars against the Kings of France and Burgundy, and so nobly
esteemed of, that those Kings have not disdained to seek their Alliance. They
bear the Title of Earl and Pear of France.

Its Name undoubtedly proceeds from the delightful and spacious Plains that are
therein, particularly about Rheims and Chaalons.

It extends it self above 138 Miles from West to South-East, from Lagny in Brie
to Bourbonnecls-Bains in Bassigny: and 162 from South to North, from Ravieres
in Senonois to Rocroy in Rhetelo. It is bounded on the North by the Duchy of
Luxemburg and Haynault: on the East by Lorrain: on the South by Burgundy: and
on the West by the Isle of France.

The Soil is for the most part white and chalky, bearing no other Corn but Rye:
yet it produces most excellent Wine. There are but few Forests toward the
South; but in the Nothern part they are more frequent, where also is to be
found several Mines of Iron.

Its principal Rivers are the Seine, which receives the Ionne and the Aube; the
Marne; the Aisne; and the Vesle.

This Government comprehends Champagne and Brie. Champagne is divided into
Upper and Lower. The first comprises the Territories of Chaalons and Rheims,
Pershois, Rethelois and the Principality of Sedan and Raucort with the
Provostship of Donchery. The other comprehends the Territory of Troyes Vallage
and Bassigny, together with Senonois. The chief Cities are

Troyes.
TRoyes upon the Seine, is the Capital City of the whole Province. It was the
Habitation of the ancient Earls of Champagne, whose Tombs it still preserves;
it does now enclose many Jurisdictions, being one of the best of the Kingdom,
very populous and rich, upon the account of its Fairs, inhabited by a great
number of substantial Merchants. Among other things they make here a vast
Quantity of Paper. It is adorned with an Episcopal See, a Mint and a Presidial.
About 32 Miles from Sens, 68 from Rheims, and 80 from Paris, Longitude 23.17.
Latitude 48.7.

Rheims.
AN Archbishops See, who is the first Duke and Peer of France, seated upon the
River Vasle. At this City the Kings of France are usually crowned, that so they
may enjoy the Unction of a sacred Oil preserved in the Cathedral Church here,
which they say, came down from Heaven, and never decreaseth, the Truth of which
I leave to the Reader's Judgment, to determine, especially if he has read
Gregory d' Tours, who is so prodigal of his Miracles, and yet does not mention
this. The Archbishop hereof has the Glory and Privilege of anointing the
French Kings. It is a Presidial See, and an University of no small esteem,
wherein there is a College appointed for the Education of young English
Fugitives. The first Seminary for this purpose was erected at Doway, in the
year 1568. A second at Rome by Pope Gregory the Thirteenth; a 3d. at Valladolid
in Spain by King Philip II. a fourth in Lovain, a Town of Brabant; and a fifth
here by the Dukes of Guise, about 72 miles from Paris, Longitude 23.18.
Latitude 49.13.

Sens.
BEtween the Rivers Yonne and Seine stands the City of Sens, (Civita^ Senonum
in Antoninus) renowned for the ancient Senonois, who made great Conquests in
Italy and Greece. The Cathedral Church has Ornaments of an immense value, the
Appurtenances of the Altar being of Massy Gold, garnished with Pearls. It has
an Archbishop, who styles himself Primate of the Gauls; also a Bayliwick and a
Presidial. About 30 Miles from Troyes, 28 from Auxerre, 60 from Paris, Long.
22.29. Lat. 48.2.

Langres.
THe Capital of Bassigny seated very advantagiously near the River Marne, and
not far from the Head-Spring or Fountain of the River Seine. One may see here
Marks of a great Antiquity; it is very strong, and has the Reputation of being
never taken. Its Bishop is a Duke and one of the twelve ancient Peers of
France; He is also a Marquis, Earl and Baron: It has also a Presidial See.
About 40 Miles from Dijon, 56 from Troyes, Long. 24.32. Lat. 47.44.

Chaalons,
UPon the River Marne is famous for the great quantity of Woollen-Cloth it
conveys to Paris by way of the Marne. In the year 453. there was a memorable
Battle fought in the Neighboring Plains, where Attila King of the Huns, who
qualified himself the Scourge of God, was defeated by Merouee, assisted by
Theodoric King of the Visigoths, who was slain, and Aetius Lieutenant to the
Emperor Valentinian the Third; 180000 Men were left upon the place. It is a
Bishops See, who is an Earl and Peer, and has a Generality and Presidial. About
24 Miles from Rheims, 50 from Troyes, Long. 23.38. Lat. 48.54.

Rethel.
BEtween the Aisne and the Meuse lies Rethel, which communicates its Name to
the Duchy of Rethelois, and which is at present called Mazarin. Few Cities
have been so often taken, as this has been in the last Wars. There was an
expectation in these Quarters of Seeing the Conjunction of the River Aisne with
the Meuse, by the means of the little River Bar, and so to have the
conveniences of Navigation by Rivers from Paris to Holland; about 22 Miles from
Rheims, and 24 from Chaalons, Long. 23.42. Lat. 49.29.

Brie.
THis Province is situated between the Seine and the Marne, and its Extent from
East to West is about 30 or 36 Miles, from North to South much the same
distance.

Its Soil is not every where alike; for near Champagne and toward
Chateau-Thierry it produces tolerable Wine; and toward the Isle of France, as
also about Meaux, the Wine is much grosser. There is every where good store of
Corn, delicious Fruits, and good Pasturage. The Country is very fine, and very
agreeable for the diversion of Hunting.

Meaux.
UPon the River Marne is the most considerable of the Cities of the Upper Brie.
It is very ancient, honored with a Bishopric and a Bayliwick; about 24 Miles
from Paris. Chateau-Thierry upon the same River bears the Title of Duchy, and
passes for the Capital of the Upper Brie. It is adorned with a Bayliwick, and a
Presidial See. Provins upon the little River of Vouzie, is received by some for
the Metropolis of all Brie, seated in the Lower, and is sufficiently known for
the excellent Conserve of Roses, which is made there.

5. Of the Government of BRETAGNE.
AFter that Maximus had usurped the Empire, and that the Army which he
commanded in England, had proclaimed him Emperor, Conan, one of his most
famous Captains, who had been very assistant to him in that great undertaking,
soon obtained a Recompense for his Services. The Emperor gave him the
possession of Bretagne, whereof Conan took the Quality of King, in the year
300. His Successors quitted this noble Title in 878. under the Reign of Lewis
le Begue King of France, to take the Quality of Earls. At length they were made
Dukes and Peers in 1520. and became very powerful by their great Alliances. The
last of its Dukes dying, left only a Daughter, who was married to Charles the
Eighth, and afterward to Lewis the Twelfth, Kings of France. Thus this Dukedom
was united to the Crown, from which it has not been dismembered since.

Bretagne was anciently called Armerique, Name.
as being situated along the Sea. Some pretend that its new Name was given to
it by some People of Great Britain, who came to inhabit there, or else from
Brutus King of the Gauls; but there is more probability, that this Name
proceeds from an old Gaulish word called Brit, which signifies painted, because
its ancient Inhabitants used to paint their Beards and their Hair.

This Province has about 180 Miles from East to West, Extent.
from beyond Vitrey to the Point of Conquet; and 120 from South to North, from
the Isle of Bouin to the Mouth of the River Couonon, toward St. Michael's
Mount.

It is bounded on the East by Anjou and Main, Bounds.
advancing it self toward the West like a Peninsula, to the Ocean, which
confines it on the other sides.

The Soil abounds in excellent Pasturage and Cattle, Quality.
from whence they furnish themselves with very good Butter: They have good
store of Corn, some Wine, Linen, and Fruits in a great quantity. They make
Salt upon the Coasts, and abound in excellent Fish. Here also are the best
Seaports of the whole Kingdom.

Amongst the Number of Rivers which water this Country, Rivers.
is observed the Loire; the Villain, which receives the Ouste: Those of
Blavet, Auffen, Trieux, and Rance. Yet these laft are no where considerable,
but at their Mouths.

The Government of Bretagne is limited in this single Province, Division.
which is divided into Upper and Lower, this toward the West, and the other
toward the East. They that consider the different Languages of the Province,
divide it into three parts; they attribute to the Bishoprics of Dol Rennes and
St. Malo the use of the French Tongue; they say that the British Tongue, which
is a remainder of the Gaulish, is received amongst the Inhabitants of the
Bishoprics of Cornouaille, St. Pol de Leon* and Trequier: They give a mixed
Language to the Bishoprics of Nantes, Vennes, and St. Brieux. These Nine
Bishoprics are under the Archbishop of Tours.

Rennes.
UPon the Villain is the largest City, Capital.
and Capital of the whole Province, the usual Residence of a Bishop, and
Parliament. It is seated in the Upper Bretagne, and has the Privilege of
coining Money; about 50 Miles from Nantes. 115 from Rochelle, etc. Long. 16.30.
Lat. 48.3.

Nantes,
UPon the Loire, is the strongest, and more commodious for Traffic by the
means of the Loire, over which it has a very fine Bridge, and by reason of the
Flux and Reflux of the Sea. Under the Name of Cardivicum, and Corbilo it is
esteemed one of the three most ancient Cities of (...) has a Generality, a
Mint, and (...). It was the Habitation of (...) Dukes of Bretagne and (...) of
their Eldest Sons, under (...) of Earls, as also Dinan^ (...) of their
Youngest, It is a Bishops (...) as St. Malo, Dol, and St. Brieux; about 44
Miles from Angers, 68 from Rochelle, Long. 16.48. Lat. 47.13.

St. Malo.
THe strong Situation of St. Malo upon the Sea, and its vast Correspondence in
Foreign Countries render it one of the most considerable places of the Kingdom.
It is guarded at Night by very fierce Dogs of an English Breed, which go the
Rounds of the City. The Discovery of Canada is owing to one of its Inhabitants,
called James Cartier. In the year 1661. it suffered a great Loss by a Fire,
which consumed a part of the Houses; about 12 Miles from Dol, and 42 from
Rennes, Long. 16.8. Lat. 48.40.

Dol.
IT stands in a Marshy Ground, and is said to contain some Family, who bear the
Name of Devils, perhaps because they are the Remainders of the ancient People
Diablintes, Some Dukes of Bretagne had a design to have erected the Bishopric
of Dol into an Archbishopric. About 33 Miles from Rennes, Long. 16.22. Lat.
48.34. St. Brieux a Bishops See, was the only City, which preserved it self
during the Wars between the Families of Blois and Mont fort; it stands on the
Sea about 55 Miles from Rennes. The Five foregoing Cities are in the Upper
Bretagne.

Breast.
IN a Gulf, where the Sea makes Four different Entries, is esteemed one of the
best Seaports of Europe: Indeed the Ships are always afloat there, were they
of Two Thousand Tun. It is the principal Magazine of the Admiralty of France
for Vessels, which go upon the Ocean; seated in the Lower Bretagne. About 125
Miles from, Rennes, 120 from St. Malo, 320 from Paris, Long. 13.18. Lat. 47.58.

Blavet.
BLavet, alias Port-Louis, was formerly given to the Spaniards by those of the
Ligue: and during the War against those of the Reformed Religion, the Sieur de
Soubise had a design to render himself Master of it. This and Breast bear the
Laurel from all the rest by reason of their strong Fortifications together with
the Goodness and Greatness of their Ports. It stands in the Lower Bretagne
about 82 Miles from Rennes, and 60 from Breast, Long. 14.42. Lat. 47.23. In the
Sea of Gascogne under the 17th Degree of Latitude there is an Island, which is
called Bell-Isle, which extends it self about 21 Miles in Length, 9 in Breadth,
and about 54 in Circumference. It is considerable for the Passage of Ships
along its Coasts; and for its strong Castle which the Hollanders attak'd in
vain An. 1674. notwithstanding their puissant Naval Army for that Effect.
Ouessant, a little Island nearer the Shore, toward the West, has the Title of
Marquisat, as well as Bell-Isle.

6. Of the Government of ORLEANOIS.
THis is one of the best and most agreeable Countries of France, as also the
most extensive of its Governments: for it comprehends Fourteen or Fifteen
Provinces or Countries. It is called the Government of Orleanois, Name.
because Orleans is the most remarkable among the Cities.

It has near 300 Miles from East to West, Extent.
from beyond Chinon-Castle in Nivernois, to the Extremity of Poisou; and near
204 from South to North, from Monbrun in Angoumois to Nonan-court in Normandy.

It is bounded in the East by Burgundy and Champagne; Bounds.
in the North by the Isle of France and Normandy; in the West by Bretagne and
the Sea; and in the South by Saintonge, Perigord, la March, and Bourbonnois.

The Soil is very fertile in Corn, Quality.
Wine, Cattle, and in a word, all things that may conduce to the satisfaction
of Life. Amongst other Woody parts, it to be seen the Forest of Orleans, that
contains 70000 Acres; an^ it is said that in the time of Francis the First, it
contained 140000. There i^ no Country in France, where one mee^ with so many
Paved Ways as here.

It is watered with a great number o^ Rivers, Rivers.
amongst which the Loire is the chief. The Indre, the Cher, and Vienne; swelled
with the Waters of the Creuse, come to discharge themselves here, between
Monsoreau and Langest i^ Touraine. The Main after having received the Loire,
joined to the Sarte be^low Angers, discharges it self also above this City. The
Charante takes its Rise in Angoumoy; which it waters with a part of its Course,
after having passed in a corner of Poitou.

Here is observed 13 or 14 Countries or principal Provinces, Division.
whereof Four one finds on this side the Loire, seated in the following order,
going from West to East, le Maine, le Perch, the upper Beausse, or Country of
Chartres, and part of Gastinois. Five upon the Loire in following its Course,
Nivernois, Orleanois, or Lower Beausse; Blaisois, Touraine and Anjou. Fore
beyond the same River, viz. Berry, Poitou, with the Country of Aunis and
Angoumois, which is yet more advanced toward the South.

Orleans,
SItuated upon the River Loire, is the chief City of this Government. It is
very Beautiful, of great Trade, and was heretofore the Metropolis of a Kingdom
that bore its Name. It used to be the Residence of Strangers, who were drawn
hither by the Magnetic Courtesy of the Inhabitants, and the Politeness of the
Language they speak here, which is as highly esteemed, as the Castilian is in
Spain; the Tuscan in Italy: And as the Attick Tongue was formerly in Grecce. It
is a Bishops See, who at his first Entrance, has a Privilege to examine, and
pardon Offenders: Five National Councils have been held here. It has a
Bayliwick, and a very ancient presidial See; but its Generality is Modern. It
likewise has a famous University. Three memorable Sieges, which it happily
sustained, has made it renowned in History Under the Title of a Duchy, it is
the Appennage of the Second Son of France. About 68 Miles from Paris. Lon.
20.42. Lat. 47.44.

Nevers,
FOrmerly called Noviodunum Adu^rum, the Capital of Nivernois, is so
commodiously Situated, that Julius Caesar chose it to make a Garrison of, and a
Magazine. It shows no less Antiquity in its Churches, than in its Walls; and
although it has no Suburbs, it contains notwithstanding, Eleven Parishes: It
has a Noble Castle, Ditches full of Water, and a Stone Bridge composed of 20
Arches over the River Loire, which receives the Nievre in this place. They have
in their Neighborhood, the convenience of the Medicinal Waters of Pougues,
which is a Town where several Parsons go for the Advantage of their Healths,
and where the most substantial Men of the Province, have built stately Houses
for that purpose. It has a Bishop, and was erected into a Duchy, by Francis the
First. About 30 Miles from Moulins, 80 form Orleans, and 125 from Paris, Lon.
22.2. Lat. 40.44.

Tours.
THe City of Tours, heretofore Caesarodunum, pleasantly seated upon the Loire,
the Capital of Tourane, is without contradiction, one of the first of France;
if one considers its Situation and its Prerogatives. Under the Roman Emperors
it was the Metropolitan of the third Lyonoise in Celtick Gaul: Its Archbishop
has for Suffragans, the Bishop of Angers, that of Man's, and all those of
Bresagne. It has a Generality, a Presidial, and a Mint. The Silk-Trade which
they drive here, is very advantageous to them. About 48 Miles from Poitiers, 60
from Orleans, and 115 from Rennes and Paris. Lon. 19.18. Lat. 47.23.

Angers,
THe Capital City of Anjou, seated upon the Mayenne, between its Mouth in the
Loire, and its Confluence with the Sarte, joined to the Loire. It has a
considerable Castle, and the Houses covered with which makes it be called the
Black Ci^ It is renowned for its University, a^ the fine Procession upon
Christmas Day which every Year draws many Stran^ers to this City. It has a
Bishop und^^ the A. of Tours, a Bayliwick, a Presidial, and a Mint. About 60
Miles fr^^ Tours, and nigh 160 from Paris, Lon. 17.48. Lat. 47.27.

Poitiers,
THe Capital of Poitou, upon the River Clai^, is one of the largest (...) the
Kingdom; for it yields to none b^ Paris in bigness. It contains a great many of
the Roman Antiquities; 25 Parishes, and is adorned with an Episcopa^ See under
the A. of Bourdeax; a Generality, Mint, and an University famous for the Civil
Law. The Batte^ of Poitiers was very unlucky to the French, and the English
were doubl^ Victorious, by the taking of King John Charles the Seventh, King of
France transferred hither the Parliament of Paris, which made its Residence
here, for the space of 18 Years, during the English Wars. About 48 Miles from
Tours, ^5 from Rochelle, 94 from Orleans. Lon. ^9.00. Lat. 46.34.

Man's,
THe Capital City of Maine, is most agreeably seated upon the Sarte, ^arge,
ancient, and very populous; with the Title of a Bishopric, under the A. of
Tours. It is observed from this City, that the English laying Siege to it in
the Year 1425. first put in use the great Artillery, which had not as yet been
seen in France. About 48 Miles from Tours, 52 from Angers, and 78 from Orleans.
Lon. 18.42. Lat. 48.5.

Nogent-le-Rotrou passes for the Capital of Perch, and yet is but a
Burrough-Town, but one of the finest Buroughs of all France; and very rich
upon the account of its Manufacture of Serge, Linen, etc. About 37 Miles from
Man's, as many from Alenson, and 30 from Vendome.

Chartres,
UPon the Eure, is the Capital of ^ausse, and the Country of Chartr^ It once
had its particular Kings, a^ has now the Title of a Duchy, a^ preserves the
Ruins of a Temple bu^ before the Nativity of Jesus Chri^ It Is said the City was
built before (...) Deluge, and 'twas there the Druids (...) ciently Assembled.
Its Cathedral Church which is a Bishops See, passes for o^ of the Ancientests
of Christendom; the two Bells whereof are the finest, and the largest in
France. The Bishop has mo^ Parishes in his Jurisdiction, than any (...) there of
the Kingdom. About 42 Mil^ from Paris, and 43 from Orleans. Lon. 20.23. Lat.
46.26.

Bourges.
THis City is the Capital of Berry Caesar speaks of it as a very ancien^ and
powerful City, under the Name o^ Avaricum Biturigum; seated upon the River
Eure. It has seven great Gate^ as many Suburbs, 17 Parishes, and a ^reat number
of other Churches. It is ^onoured with an Archbishopric, an University, a
Generality, a Bayliwick, ^ Presidial See, and a Mint. Its Arch^ishop qualifies
himself Patriach and ^rimat of Aquitain; but that of Bour^eaux disputes this
Title with him. It (...) about 35 Miles from Nevers, 55 from ^rleans, and 80
from Tours, Lon. 21.14. Lat. 40.55.

Rochelle.
THe Country of Aunis has nothing recommendable, but Rochelle, which is the
Capital thereof. It has an Episcopal See, a Presidial, and a Mint. A City
naturally strong, by reason of the Marshes. But its noble Fortifications are
absolutely resed. It was often besieged, taken and retaken by the English and
French. But the most memorable Siege that ever was laid to it, is that of the
Year 1627, where Cardinal Richlieu ordered the Erection of that famous Bank in
the Sea, which has served as an Admiration to the whole World. The remainders
of it are yet to be seen, when the Sea retires. It stands on the Ocean, where
is an excellent Bay. About 68 Miles from Nantes, 80 from Bourdeaux, and 230
from Paris. Lon. 17.17. Lat. 46.7.

Angouleme.
THe Capital City of Angomois, very ancient and strong, both together Francis
the First, erected it into a Duchy for his Third Son. This King was Earl of
Angouleme when he came to the Crown. The Bishop styles himself Arch-Chaplain to
the King, and Baron de L^ Pain; which is a Lordship within the City. It has
this advantage, as well as Poitiers, that its Mayor and Sheriffs are enobled
with their Descendents, by the Privileges which King Charles the Fifth has
granted to them. It stands on the River Charente, 65 Miles from Rochelle, and
210 from Paris. Lon. 18.14. Lat. 45.46.

7. Of the Government of BURGUNDY.
THis is but the Eighth part of the Ancient Kingdom of Burgundy, although this
alone has vulgarly retained ^he Name. This Kingdom compre^ended Savoy,
Suisserland, the Duchy of Zeringhen, Provence, Dauphine, Lyonnois, the Duchy
and County of Burgundy, known under the Name of Franche-County. Now there is
but Two Provinces that bear the Name of Burgundy, both which are at present
French Dominions, viz. that which belonged to the Spaniard, which is called
Franche-County, Upper Burgundy, and even Imperial Burgundy by the Germans; and
French Burgundy, which has born the Title of Duchy, time out of Mind, and is
called the Royal and Lower Burgundy. The Name of Burgundy proceeds from the
Burgundiones, Name.
a People of Germany, who took the place of the ancient Adui, the sincere
Friends of the Romans in this Province. Some Etymologists make it come from the
Town of Ougne, which is to be found toward the Source of the River Tille.

It Is of the Duchy, and la Bresse which is annexed to it, that I design (...)
speak. Its ancient Dukes were formerly very powerful, and able to sustain long
and vigorous Wars against their Neighbors. They possessed this Province for
almost Six Hundred Years The last was killed before Nancy, in 1477, and left no
other Issue than a Daughter, who was Married to Maximilian, Archduke of
Austria, who since was Emperor. So Lewis the Eleventh King of France reunited
this Flower to his Crown, as a Masculine Fee.

It extends it self from East to West above 90 Miles, Extent.
from Fontaine-Francoise, toward the Franche-County, to Guaine in Auxerrois;
and about 135 from South to North, from Semeur in Briennois, to Chaleau-Villain
in Champagne, without comprehending la Bresse, which yet advances near 30 Miles
more toward the South.

It is bounded in the North by Champagne, in the East by Franche-County, Bounds.
and Savoy; in the South by Dauphine, and Lyonncis; and in the West by
Bourbonnois, and Niverneis.

Its Situation makes it one of the Largest, most Fruitful, and most Populous
Province of the Kingdom. The Wines are incomparable, Quality.
and the other Conveniences of Life are so considerable here, that it is
called the Mother of Corn, Wines, and Waters. There are also many pleasant
Woods and Forests, where there is most excellent Hunting. The delicious Medows,
and sine Pasture-Grounds nourish a sufficient number of Cattle. Here is to be
found some Mines of Iron, etc.

The most considerable of its Rivers is the Saone; the Yonne passes by Auxerre;
Rivers.
the Ain through Bresse; the Seine, Armenson and Arroux, take their Originals
from hence.

Dijon,
UPon the River Ouche, Capital.
is the Capital of the Province. It Is a very ancient City, adorned with a
Parliament, a Generality, and a Mint; but it has no Bishop, and depends upon
that of Langres in Bassigny, for the Spirituality. Near this City is to be seen
the Village of Fontanes, where St. Bernard was Born; amongst the chief Edifices
o^ Dijon, they make great account of ^ Holy Chapel, and several Halls, bui^ in
the time of the Dukes of Burgundy for the Lords of the Neighborhood It is
about 40 Miles from Autun, 55 from Besanson, 146 from Paris. Lon. 24.5. Lat.
43.37.

Autun,
UPon the River Arroux, is an Episcopal City, very ancient, and that of all
France, which has the finest Relics of Antiquity: It is also famous for the
Institution of the Order of the Fleece. Its Bishop presides over the States of
Burgundy, which are held every Three Years. Near this City Julius Caesar
overcame the Switzers, who designed to establish themselves in Gaul, about 32
Miles from Challon, 50 from Nevers, and 145 from Paris. Lon. 23.20. Lat. 46.38.

Auxerre, Chalon, and Mascon, are considerable for their Episcopal Sees, the
first renowned for its excellent Wines.

La Bresse, to which I will add the Bayliwick of Gex, is bounded on the East
with Savoy, on the West with Lyonnois, on the North with Charolois in the
Duchy of Burgundy, and some part of the Franche-County; and on the South with
Dauphine. The Country is very Fruitful and pleasant, embraced between the
Rivers Saone and Rhone, with which it is plentifully Watered.

Bourg en Bresse.
THE Capital of the whole Province was heretofore a Bishops See. Its Citadel
was so strong a Fortress before it was demolished, that it was esteemed little
inferior to St. Katharines or Montmeillan in Savoy. The Church of Brou is an
Admirable Structure. It contains the Tombs of several Dukes of Savoy; it stands
on the River Resouse, about 34 Miles from Lions, and 48 from Geneva. Lon.
24.31, Lat. 45.54.

Bellay,
THE Capital of Bugey, is a Bishops See, who styles himself Prince of the
Empire, and Temporal Lord of his City. One of its late Bishops has been one of
the most Copious Writers of France. It stands on the River Rhone, 18 Miles from
Chambery, and 40 from Lions. Lon. 25.8. Lat. 45.28.

The Principality of Dombes lies within the bounds of Bresse. Mademoiselle
d'Orleans, to whom it belongs, has coined Money in the City of Trevoux, upon the
Saone, which is the Capital thereof.

8. Of the Government of LYONNOIS.
BEhold the ancient Celtick Gaul, or at least the greatest part, whereof M.
d'Vrfe, has said so many Wonders in his Romance of Astraea. Its Druids, and the
exactness wherewith they observed here the ancient Religion of the Gauis, has
rendered it famous in these remote ^^es.

One comprehends in this Government Lyonnois in particular, Beaujolois, Forez,
l'Auvergne, la March, and Bourbonnois.

It extends it self from East to West, Extent.
about 210 Miles from Lions to the extremity of La March, even beyond the
River Vienne, and above 150 from South to North, from the extremity of
Auvergne, to Neron de la Guierche toward Berry.

It is bounded in the North by Berry and Nivernois, Bounds.
in the East by Bresse and Dauphine, in the South by Cevennes, and Rouergue,
and in the West by Quercy, Limosin, and Angoumois.

The Soil is not generally Fertile, Quality.
by reason of the great Number of Mountains and Forests, which are to be met
with in some of its Provinces.

The Rhone, the Saone, the Loire, Rivers.
and the Allier are the most celebrated Rivers that water the extent of this
Government.

Lyonnois is one of the most agreeable Countries of France, being diversified
with Plains and delicious Hills, which produce very good Corn, excellent Wines,
and great store of different Fruits, particularly Chestnuts, which ar^
transported all over Europe.

Lions,
ONE of the most ancient and celebrated Cities of Gaul, is a Noble City, since
its Situation is exceeding pleasant; its Climat very Healthful, its Places and
Edifices most Magnificent. It is at present one of the Richest and most
Populous Cities of the Kingdom, in Merchants Trading in several Places by means
of the Loire, the Saone, and the Rhone: There are Banks and Correspondencies
for Africa, Asia, and all the principal states of Europe, all sorts of
Manufactures, and Impressions of Books, It was formerly a Colony of the Romans.
Its Mayor and Sheriffs are ennobled, and transmit their Honor to their
Posterity. The Canons of the Cathedral Church are to be Noble in the Fourth
Race, and bear the Title of Earls. It has an Archbishop, who qualifies himself
Primat of the Gauls. There is also a Generality, a Mint, and a Presidial See.
It is seated on the Confluence of the Rhone, and the Saone, about 16 Miles from
Vienne, 70 from Geneva, 150 from Turin, 200 from Orleans, and 230 from Paris.
Lon. 24.8. Lat. 45.24.

Beaujeu,
UPon the Ardiere is the Capital of Beaujolois. There is nothing recommendable
in this City, but a very ancient work of Embroidery, which represents the
Sacrifice of a Hog, a Sheep, and a Bull, which is to be seen over the Portal of
the Principal Church. The Romans called these Sacrifices, Suovetauralia. It
stands on the Brow of a Hill, about 30 Miles from Lions, and 14 from Mascon.
Lon. 23.50. Lat. 45.50.

Mont-Brison,
UPon the Vezise passes for the Capital of Forez. It is famous for an Admirable
Piece of Clock-work, about 43 Miles from Lions. Lon. 23.10. Lat. 45.14.

Clermont.
THis City is not only the Capital o^ Lower Auvergne, but of the whole
Province: It is renowned in History for the holding of several Councils. Under
King Philip the First, the Voyage of the Holy Land was here resolved on. Here
is said to be a Fountain which has the virtue to Petrify, for with the single
course of its Waters, which seem to be thick and bituminous; it has made a Wall
200 Yards long, and 4 yards high, with a Bridge, which they are obliged to cut
down sometimes to prevent its too great increase. King Charles the Ninth had
the curiosity to go and see it in his Journey to Bayonne. It is an Episcopal
See, and stands on a little Hill about 50 Miles from Moulins, 90 from Lions,
and 200 from Paris. Lon. 22.00. Lat. 45.28.

Saint Flour, is the Capital of Upper Auvergne, remarkable for its Bishops See,
about 45 Miles from Clermont.

Riom, Capital of the Duchy of Auvergne, holds the Second Rank after Clermont.
It is adorned with a Generality, a Mint, Presidial, and other Prerogatives;
about 7 Miles from Clermont.

Moulins.
THis City is the Capital of the Province of Bourbonnois, accompanied with a
Castle considerable for its strength and building. It has likewise very sine
and large Suburbs, where is made the best sort of Knives and Scissars, which
are Transported from thence. It has a Generality, upon which depend the
Elections of Montlucon, Gannat and Esvaon, and some others of Nivernois, and
the Upper March. The Inhabitants have the reputation of being Civil and
Officious. It stands nigh the Center of all France, on the River Allier, about
28 Miles from Nevers, 96 from Lions, and 90 from Dijon. Lon. 22.14. Lat. 46.16.

Gueret with its Royal Jurisdictions, is the Capital of the Upper March, it
stands on the River Cruse, about 32 Miles from Limoges. Dorat is the Capital of
the Lower March, about 26 Miles from Limoges, and 47 from Poitiers.

9. Of the Government of GUYENNE.
THis Country was anciently called the Kingdom of Aquitain, ab Aquis, because
of the great number of Springs and Fountains of Hot Water. Eleanor, Inheritrix
of this Province, and Wife of Louis the Young King of France, having been
Divorced, espoused Henry King of England, to whom she brought for a Dowry this
Guyenne, which Louis had rendered to her. This was a Firebrand that kindled
between the Two Crowns a War, which lasted near 300 years, and finished but in
1443.

The Government of Guyenne is full as spacious as Orleanois, Extent.
since it extends it self from East to West above 240 Miles, from St. John de
Breuil, Frontier of Languedoc, to the Sea; and from South to North above 225,
from the Port of Albe in Cominge, to Niort in Poitou.

It is bounded in the North by Poitou, Angoumois, Bounds.
and la March; in the East by Auvergne, and Languedoc; in the South by the
Pyrenaean Mountains, which separate it from Spain; and in the West by the Ocean.

The Air is generally wholesome enough, Quality.
the Soil fertile in Corn, Wine and Fruits, except in the Lands toward the
Coasts, and the Pyrenaeans, where it produces nothing, but Broom and Pasturage,
which feed a good number of Cattle. Fountains of hot Water are generally to be
found here.

It is watered with a great Number of Rivers, Rivers.
amongst which is remarked the Garomne, the Lot, the Dordonne, l'Adour, and the
Charnte. The Confluence of the Garomne and the Dordonne, which is made at the
Mouth of Ambez is very dangerous.

It is to be observed, that from the Mouth of Ambez to the Sea, this River is
called Gironde, and not Garomne, as Sanson has marked in all his Maps.

It is divided into two principal Parts, whereof one, that is toward the
North, retains the Name of Guyenne, and the other, which is toward the South,
is called in general Gascogne.

Guyenne distinguished into Eight little Countries. First of all, one observes
observes Guyenne (properly so called) and Bazadois about the Garomne; Agenois,
Quercy, and Rouergue, which are to be found in order upon the Lot in ascending
to its Rise; on the Northern side, Limosin is seated to the North of the
Dordonne; Perigord, about the same River; and Xaintogne, about the Charente,
and upon the Coasts of the Ocean.

Gascogne is likewise divided into several little Countries. First, Armagna^ is
distinguished in the midst, which extends it self to the Pyrenaean Mountains,
and is subdivided into several little Jurisdictions, as the Upper and Lower
Armagnac, the Countries of Riviere, Verdun, Lomagne, etc. toward the North
Condommois and les Lands, toward the West, the same Lands, and the Land of
Labourd; on the South, one meets with in order along the Pyrenaeans, the lower
Navarre, with the Vicounty of Soul, Bearn and Bigorre; after which one rejoyns
the upper Armagnac; and toward the East one ^^nds le Cominge, to which may be
joined le Conserans.

Bourdeaux,
UPon the Garomne, is the Capital of the Government of Guyenne, a very ancient,
large and beautiful City, wherein is made a very considerable Commerce, by
reason of the conveniences of its noble Port. It has all the Qualities, and all
the Prerogatives that may render a City remarkable. It is the Sea of an
Archbishop, who qualifies himself Primate of Aquitaine; it has a Parliament, a
Gonerality, a Mint, an University and Admiralty. It is one of the most noted
Empories of all the Kingdom, and used to be very much frequented by the Dutch
and English for Gascoign Wines. About 84 Miles from Rochelle, and 120 from
Toulouse. Lon. 17.50. Lat. 44.50.

Again,
UPon the River Garomne, the Capital of Agenois; holds the first Rank after
Bourdeaux, and is situated in a Soil, whose Fertility makes the Inhabitants
idle; It is a Bishops See, (...) bears the Title of Earl, but he has (...)
other Lordly Right in the City. (...) Lords of Exale descended from (...)
Princes of Verone have had their R^dence in Again. About 20 Miles (...) Condom,
and 35 from Aux. Long. (...) 12. Lat. 44.13. Bazas upon the V^sane is the
Capital of Bazadois, a ha^som City, and stands about 25 M^^ from Bourdeaux.

Cahors.
THE River Lot during its course (...) this Province, forms Six or Se^
indifferent large Peninsula's, in one (...) which stands Cahors, the Capital
(...) of all Quercy: Henry the Great ga^ here some Testimonies of his Condo^
and Valor by a Battle, which he o^ stinately fought during three days (...)
cessively, to render himself Master (...) the City. Some look upon it as (...)
ancient Vxelodunum which defended ^ self a long time against Julius Caesa^ Pope
John the 22d. was born he^ who was called before James of C^hors. It Is a very
ancient City, honor (...) with an Episcopal See, a Presidial (...) a famous
University; It has also (...) Remainders of an Amphitheatre. (...) Bishop takes
upon him the Title of ^arl. Near to Cahors, is to be seen the ^sidue of an
Aquaeduct, which was ^eretofore above Nine Miles in Length. About 38 Miles from
Alby, and 55 from Toulouse. Lon. 20.6. Lat. 44.23.

Rhodez,
UPon the River Aveyron, is received for the Capital of all Rouergue; It is a
very ancient City, but has lost much of its Grandeur and Beauty by the Prisals
and Reprisals which the Goths, Sarrazens and French have made in different
times. It has a Bishop, and a Presidial, and stands about 48 Miles from Mende,
74 from Toulouse, and 80 from Narbone. Long. 21.20. Lat. 44.7.

Perigueux,
UPon the River Lille, the Capital of Perigort, is more ancient than it is
fine, as one may judge by the Remainders of an Amphitheatre, which is (...) be
seen there, with many other Mon^ments of Antiquity. In its Neighbou^ hood Pepin
the Short obtained a sign^ Victory over Gayfer Duke of Aquitai^ Anno 768. It is
honored with an ^ piscopal See, and a Presidial. It is mo^ sweetly situated in
a pleasant Valle^ about 42 Miles from Limoges, and 6^ from Bourdeaux. Longitude
19.18. Latitude 45.12.

Limoges.
UPon the River Vienne is the Capita^ of all Limosin, with a Bishopric and a
Generality. The City is very populous and rich by reason of it Trade: Its
Artisans are particularly famous for curious Enamel-Work. 'Ti^ a neat, but no
large City, inhabited by a People of so great Industry, that they compel every
one to work, and is there fore termed by the French, the Prison of Beggars. At
the taking of it, when revolted, Edward the Black Prince could by no means be
allured to pity the unfortunate Citizens, till pursuing his Enemies, he saw
Three French Gentlemen oppose his whole Army; the consideration of whose
Courage and Bravery induced him to Compassion, whereas before, he had vowed
Revenge. About 68 Miles from Poitiers, and 100 from Bourdeaux. Lon. 20.00. Lat.
45.40. Tulles, seated in a rough and hilly Country, is a Bishop's See; it
stands about 33 Miles from Limoges.

Saints,
BY Ptolemy called Mediolanium, seated upon the Charente is^ the Capital of
Saintonne; it is a very ancient City, and is honored with an Episcopal See, and
a Presidial. It is about 32 Miles from Rochelle, and 40 from Angoulesme. Lon.
17.44. Lat. 45.42.

Aux,
UPon the River Gez, anciently called Augusta Ausciorum, an Archbishops See.
The Income whereof is said to be greater, than any Prelates of France, reckoned
at no less than an Hundred Thousand Livres per annum. It stands about 38 Miles
from Toulouse, 80 from Bourdeaux, and 320 from Paris. Lon. 18.50. Lat. 43.40.

Lectoure.
A Bishops See, called in our Mode^ Lectodurum, of old Lestoracium. ^ Town so
well fortified, when in the possession of the Earls of Armagnac, tha^ it
maintained it self three Months against the Strength of France: But since i^
came into the Power of the French Kings, so strengthened according to the
Modern Art of Fortifications, that it (...) esteemed the strongest Bulwork of
the Kingdom on this side, and securest Fortress against Spain. It stands upon
a^ Hill, about 14 Miles from Condon, (...) from Again, and 20 from Aux.
Longitude 19.4. Latitude 43.58. Air upon the River Adour is an Episcopal City,
and stands about 38 Miles from Dax, and 44 from Condom.

Condom,
SItuated on the Confluence of the Rivers Baise and Gele, is the Capi^^l of
Condomois. It is an Episcopal City, whose last Bishop has been acnowledged as a
Person of an extraor^inary Merit, insomuch that he was ^hosen for the Dauphin's
Tutor by the King. It has also a Senechalsy, and a Presidial. About 20 Miles
from Again, and 22 from Aux. Long. 18.48. Lat. 44.00. Dax and Bayonne are also
Bi^^op's Sees, seated upon the River A^dour, within 32 Miles of each other; the
former being the Capital of LesLandes, the latter of the Country of Labourd.
There is a Mountain near Bayonne, from whose top, it is said, one may discern
three Kingdoms, to wit, France, Spain and Navarre.

Pau,
THE Principality of Bearn, is situated at the Foot of the Pyrenees where they
join to Languedoc, and has the Glory of giving Life to King Henry (...) Great.
Pau upon the River Gave is (...) Principal of all the Province, honou^^ with a
Parliament or Court of Judic^ ture for all the Country, and a fair P^lace built
by Henry of Albret King (...) Navarre, and Lord of Bearn. It stan^ 26 Miles
from Air, and 86 from Bo^deaux. Lon. 17.40. Lat. 43.23. Oler^^ mounted upon an
high Hill, and Lase^^ upon the Gave are also Bishops Sees.

Gathe,
UPon the River Ardour, is the Capital of the Earldom of Begorre. It is
honored with a strong Castle, and Episcopal See, and the Senechalsy for a^ the
Country of Begorre. It is about 24. Miles from Pau, and 26 from Au^ Lon. 18.14.
Lat. 43.18. Saint Be^trand upon Garomne, Capital of Cominge^ is also a Bishops
See, as is likewise Saint Lizer upon the River Salat, and Lombez upon the Save;
this last but of late erection.

10. Of the Government of LANGUEDOC.
CAEsar after the Conquest of Provence still advances into Gaul, distinguish^d
the Province which we call Langue^oc, by the Name of Gaul Narbonoise: ^n the
declining of the Empire, it was ^surped upon the Romans by the Goths, who gave
it the Name of Gothia, establishing therein, the Kingdom of the Visigoths,
whereof Toulouse was the Capital; and which was absolutely extinguished since
Charles Martel. Some Authors pretend, and not without cause, that Languedoc
took its Denomination from the Goths, who reigning long in the Country, left
behind them a smack of their Language, and therefore it was called Languegotia,
Name.
and now Euphoniae gratia, termed Languedotia, or Languedoc; that is, the Goths
Language. Ortelius conjectures this to be the reason; whereas the other
Frenchmen in an Affirmation, say Ouy, these of this Country say Oc; and
therefore called Languedoc.

The Government of Languedoc, Extent.
which comprehends les Cevennes, extends it self from East to West, about 210
Mile^ And near 240 from South to North-E^^ from Aiqs in the Earldom of Foix, ^
Annonay toward Lyonnois.

The Rhone separates it toward the East from Dauphine and Province: Bounds.
^onnis, Auvergne, Rouergue and Quer^ bound it toward the North: Gascog^ that
is to say, Armagnac and le Coming toward the West; and Catalonia, wit^ the
Mediterranean Sea toward the Sout^

Languedoc passes for one of the mo^^ agreeable and fertile Provinces of the
Kingdom, having the Advantages o^ Olives, Raisons, Figs, Oranges and other
Fruits; not ordinary, but here and in the adjoining Province. Quality.
The People have somewhat in them of the ancien^ Goths, and come nearer to the
Humon^ of the Spaniards, than any other of the French; as being esteemed very
devour great Boasters of themselves, affecting Gallantry above their Estates;
not caring how they pinch it on Workydays, or at home in private. provided they
may make a Figure in the Street, and be fine on Holydays. The Temper of the
Women too, but in them it is more excusable.

The Soil of Cevennes is very moun^^inous, and infertile in many places. ^n
others it poduces Wine, Millet, Ches^uts and other Fruits. Its greatest
Fer^ility is in Pasturage, which makes the Country abound in Cattle, especially
in ^heep and Mules: Here is a great store of Wildsowl, etc.

Besides the Rhone, which I have al^eady mentioned, there are several other
Rivers, amongst which, one observes the Tarn, which passes by Montau^an, and
mingles its Waters with those of the Garomne beyond Moissac: The Ariege, the
Aude which passes by Careassone, in which the Tresquel discharges it self,
which is joined by a Canal with the little Lers, which goes to discharge it
self into the Garomne. It Is the Canal of Languedoc, which has been so much
talked of for the Communication of the two Seas, the Ocean and the
Mideterranean. Mr. Du Val has made a particular Map thereof.

Languedoc is divided into upper and lower, the one toward the West, Division.
and the other toward the East; upon the Mideterranen Sea. The first
comprehends Toulousan, Albigeois, Lauragais, and the Earldom of Foix. The other
is distinguished into Three Parts, to w^^ Narbonne, Beziers and Nismes; which
are to be found thus in order, going from West to East.

Les Cevennes, which is seated to the North of the Lower Languedoc, is also
distinguished into Three Countries, which are Gevaudan, Vivarais and Vellay.
The First is toward the West, the Second toward the East, along the Rhone,
and the Last to the North of these Two.

Cholouse.
SEated upon the Garomne, is the Capital City of this Government. It passes for
one of the ancientest, and finest Cities of all France. It was the Seat of the
ancient Tectosages, wh^ made so many Conquests in Asia and Greece. It was one
of the Colonies o^ the Romans, and since that, Capital of the Kingdom of the
Visigoths; and afterward that of Aquitain, then of a particular and very
powerful County, whose Titular, was Peer of France. It is now adorned with an
Archiepiscopal See, a Parliament, a Seneschalsey, a Generality, a Mint, and a
University. It enjoys several Monuments of Antiquity, as a Capitol, an
Amphitheatre, Aqueduct, ancient Temples, and many other Curiosities; several
Churches here, and most part of the Houses are built with Brick. It is about 21
Miles from Montauban, 42 from Aux, and 54 from Chaors. Lon. 19.48. Lat. 43.29.

Alby,
SEated upon the Tarn, is the Capital of Albigeois. It was erected but of late
to an Archbishopric, by Pope Innocent the Eleventh. Its Archbishop is Lord of
the City: Remarkable in Church History, for those great Opposites to the
Corruptions and Errors of the Church of Rome, called the Albigenses; against
whom the War was made under Philip Augustus, Louis the Eighth, and Saint-Louis.
It stands about 35 Miles from Rodes, and 42 from Toulouse. Lon. 20.40. Lat.
43.43.

Narbon,
SEated on the Mouth of the River Aude, the first Roman Colony, after Carthage)
out of Italy. This Narbon was in the Infancy of the Roman Empire, the greatest,
and most populous Town of all France: Insomuch that from it, all this part was
called Galli^ Narbonensis; a Province, of which Plin^ afforded us this Censure,
that for Fettility of Soil, and Civility of People, it was inferior to none in
the Roman Empire. It had formerly a Capitol, an Amphitheatre, and several
ancient Monuments; whose Remainders are to be seen at this day. It is an
Archbishops See, who presides over the States of Languedoc, and is at present
well Fortified, as a Town of War; frontiering Catalonia, and the Land of
Rousillon. It is about 35 Miles from Perpignan, 60 from Mompelier, and 88 from
Toulouse. Lon. 21.35. Lat. 42.48.

Nimes.
IN Latin Nemausus, anciently a Roman Colony, now a Bishops See; where there
remain some Marks of the Roman Greatness, especially the Ruins of a spacious
Palace, built by the Emperor Adrian. It was very much esteemed by the Emperors.
Between Nimes and Vsez, is to be found the Bridge du Guard, upon the River
Gardon, which passes in this place, betwixt two Mountains, which are joined by
this Bridge. It Is one of the noblest Monuments that is left us of the Romans.
It has Three Stories of Arches one upon another; and the last was an Aqueduct.
Its Structure imprints Horror and Respect at the same time.

Nimes stands about 18 Miles from Arles, 22 from Avignon, and 24 from
Mompelier. Lon. 22.25. Lat. 43.16.

Mompelier.
THis City was scarce any thing 700 Years ago, but now it is one of the fairest
of France; seated on a high Mountain, as the Name imports, some 12 Miles
distant from the Sea. It is honored with an Episcopal See, a Generality, a
Mint, a Presidial, and a famous University; where Physic holds the first Rank,
and for that very happily seated; the Country round about affording great
variety of Medicinal Herbs. The Royal Garden of Plants, is a great Curiosity:
Of late, one of the strongest Holds, which those of the Reformed Religion
possessed in this Country; and remarkable for the notable Resistance it made
against the whole Forces of Lewis the Thirteenth, in the last Civil Wars
concerning Religion. It is about 37 Miles from Arles, 5^ from Orange, and 60
from Narbon. Lon. 22.52. Lat. 43.8.

Le Puy,
IS accounted the greatest City of Languedoc, after Toulouse. The Bishop who
styles himself Earl of Vellay, where of it is Capital, depends immediately o^
the Pope, and is subordinate to (...) Archbishop. It stands on the River Loyre,
about 30 Miles from Mende, 56 from Viviers, and 68 from Lions. Lon. 22.58. Lat.
44.33.

Mende and Viviers, in the Province of les Cevennes, are remarkable for nothing
but their Episcopal Sees, the Bishops whereof, are styled Earls.

11. Of the Government of DAUPHINE.
THis Province, which made part of the ancient Allobroges, was afterward
comprised in the Kingdom of Burgundy, which Charlemagne joined to the other
Members of France. The Emperor Henry the Fourth, being at Variance with Pope
Gregory the Seventh, was so persecuted by his own Children. that diverse Lords
taking the Advantage of their Divorce, and deriding him as a deprived King,
carried away each a Piece of this Kingdom. O^^o, Earl of Flanders had
Franche-County: Berald of Saxo^y possessed himself of Savoy: Provence fell to
B^enger, and Dauphine to the Occupation of Guigue le Gras, who gave to it this
Name, Name.
upon the account of Dauphin Earl of Viennois, whose Daughter had espoused his
Son.

It should be incongruous, methinks, Original of the Name of Dauphin.
to intimate here the original of the Name of Dauphin, which has been the Title
of the Eldest Son of France, for above 300 Years. Imbert, or Humbert, Earl
Dauphin of Viennois, having lost his Son in the faral Battle of Crecy, and
unhappily let his last Child fall out of a Window, of which he dyed, seeing
himself insulted by Amedee Earl of Savoy his irreconcilable Foe, and finding
himself unable to resist him, resolved to procure him a more powerful
Neighbor. For this effect he offered his Country to Philip of Valois, King of
France, for him and his Successors, upon condition that the Eldest Son of
France should bear the Title of Dauphin, and that his Arm^ should be quartered
with those o^ France: Which Proposal was accepted of by the King, to the great
Displeasure of the Savoyard: So Charles the Fifth, the Grandson of Philip, was
the first that bore the Name of Dauphin in the Year 1350.

Dauphine extends it self from East to West, Extent.
about 129 English Miles, from Pignerol to Valence: And 111 from North to
South, from Lanieu upon the Rhone in Bresse, to le Buis in las-Baronnies.

It is bounded in the North by Bresse and Savoy: Bounds.
In the East by Piemont: In the South by Provence: And in the West it is
separated by the Rhone from Languedoc and Lyonnois.

The Soil, Quality.
although very Mountainous, produces excellent Wine, and very good Corn in some
Places, as in those Parts about Greenoble and Die, and along the Rhone; but in
general, it brings forth Rye, Oats, Barley, and a little Wine. There is one
thing here particular enough, in respect of a certain Hol^ which is in a great
Rock near Nions; There goes out a Wind, which one is scarce sensible of when
near it; and even boisterous at 20 or 30 Paces distance.

Its greatest Rivers are the Isere, Rivers.
which receives the Drac below Grenoble; and the Durance, which takes its Rise
from hence, and runs toward Provence.

Dauphine is divided into Upper and Lower. The First, Division.
which is toward the East, comprehends Gresivaudan, Diois, les-Baronies,
Gapensois, Ambrunois and Briansonois. The other, which extends it self toward
the West along the Rhone, comprises Viennois, Valentinois, and Tricastin.

Grenoble.
UPon the River Isere in Gresivandan, is the Capital City of the whole Country,
in Latin, Gratianopolis, the chief Seat heretofore of the Accusiani. It Is a
very ancient, populous and well built City, embellished by the Emperor
Gratian, who gave it its Name: It is much resorted to by the Noblity, upon the
account of the Court of parliament erected here in the Year 1453. It has been
an Episcopal See for above 1200 Years, and has besides, a Generality and a
Mint. Equally distant, viz. abou 30 Miles from Vienne, Die and Valence. Lon.
25.4. Lat. 44.54.

Ambrun.
THE Capital of Ambruncis, an Archbishops See, seated upon a very high Rock,
in the midst of a pleasant Valley, surrounded with Mountains, under which runs
the River Durance. The Arch-Aishop here, shares the Jurisdicton with the King,
insomuch that their Judges in the Bayliwick, are alternative. The hilly Country
hereabouts, is the highest of France: About 48 Miles from Pignerol, 46 from
Susa, etc. Lon. 26.5. Lat. 44.10.

Vienne,
SEated upon the Rhone, is a famous and very ancient City, as one may see by
diverse Monuments of Antiquity, whose Vestigia are still in being: It is
honored with an Archiepiscopal See and a Bayliwick. It had a Bridge over the
Rhone, which is broken, and whose Passage is very dangrrous for Boats. It is
situated in the lower Dauphine, and stands about 17 M. from Lions. 43 from
Grenoble, and 68 from Geneva. Lon. 14.8. Lat. 45.7.

Valence,
UPon the River Rhone, is a handsome and populous City, the Capital of
Valentinois: Its Bishopric is united to that of Die. The Bishop qualifies
himself Bishop, and Earl of Valence and Die, and the Bayliwick is depending
upon this Prelate. It has given honorary Title to two Persons of more Fame than
Honor: The first of which was Caesar Borgia, the Son of Pope Alexander the
Sixth, who was made Duke of Valentinois by Charles the Eighht. The other Madam
Diana, the Mistress of Henry the Second, who governed the Affairs of France
under him, and honored with the Title of Duchess hereof. About 38 Miles from
Vienne; and 43 from Grenoble. Lon. 27.12. Lat. 44.32.

Brianson,
THE Capital of Briansonpis, is seated upon a very high Mountain. It is a
Bishops See, and a Bayliwick. It stands about 22 Miles from Ambrun, and 36 from
Pignerol. Lon. 26.22. Lat. 44.30. Saint-Pol-Trois-Chateaux, is the Capital of
Tricastin. It is a flourishing City, seated in the lower Dauphine, upon an
advanced Cliff near the Rhone. It is a Bishops See, who styles himself Earl
under the Archbishop of Arles. It stands about 16 Miles from Orange, and 72
from Grenoble. Lon. 24.2. Lat. 43.53.

Gap,
THe Capital of Gapensois, is adorned with an Episcopal See and a Bayliwick.
Its Bishop is qualified Earl: It has a very strong and noble Citadel. It
stands about 18 Miles from Ambrun, and 23 from Sisteron. Lon. 25.40. Lat. 44.6.
Die upon the Drome, was an ancient Colony of the Romans, heretofore the Sea of
a particular Bishop, but at present joined to that of Valence. It is seated in
the lower Dauphine, and stands about 36 Miles from Grenoble. Le Buis, upon the
Aurese is the Principal City of les Barronies, and a Bayliwick.

12. Of the Government of PROVENCE.
THis Province made part of Gaul Narbonois, and was the First Conquest of
Caesar in Gaul. He called it the Province (...), by excellency, Name.
over the other Parts, which he had reduced under the Obedience of the Romans.
It was the First of the ancient Kingdom of Burgundy, some of whose Kings have
born the particular Title of Kings of Arles,

It extends it self from East to West above 150 Miles, Extent.
from the Mouth of the Var to the Rhone: And from South to North, near 120.
From the Cape Ceerchiez toward Toulon, as far as the Durance, 9 Miles beyond
Ambrun.

It is bounded in the North by Dauphine; in the East, in part, by Piemont,
Bounds.
from which it is divided by the Alps and the County of Nice; and in part by
the Mediterranean Sea: In the South by the same Sea; and in the West by the
Rhone, which separates it from Languedoc.

The whole is much of the same nature with Languedoc, Quality.
but is one part thereof; to wit, between Marseilles and Arles, different from
all the rest of France. By the French usually called le Crau, by the elder
Writers, Campi Lapidei; because all in a manner, overspread with Stones. In
this Province is said to be made the best Oil of the Kingdom; and very good
Salt at Berre and Pecais.

Besides the Rhone, Rivers.
one observes amongst its Rivers, the Durance, which receives the Verdon, and
the Hubaye; the Argens, the Var, and the Arc, which take their Original all
Three from hence. Here are also several Gulphs, as that of Marseille, Hyeres,
Grimaut, Lerins, etc. Between la Crau and the Durance, is to be found Five or
Six Lakes. The Mouths or Channels of the Rhone, are called Graus in the
Language of the Country. Upon the Coasts, one meets with the I^ands of
Martegue, Pomegue, Hyeres, or Stecades; the Isles of Lerins in their Gulf,
which were heretofore renowned by the Conquest, which the late Earl of Harcourt
made here with a handful of Men.

Although Provence is divided into Upper, Middle and Lower, Division.
yet it will be better distinguished by its Diocesses, which I will endeavor
to put in the easiest order imaginable. First of all, in the Middle one finds
the Diocesses of Aix, Riez, Senez and Digne; the First about the Durance, the
other Three about the Verdun, in ascending to its Spring, which is in the last.
Upon the Coasts, the Diocesses of Arles, Marseille, Toulon, Trejuls, Grace and
Vence; which are to be met with thus in order, going from West to East: The
Diocese of Glandeve is about the Var. Toward the North, those of Sisteron, and
Apt, with the County of Venaissin, with the Principality of Orange.

Aix,
Near the little River of Arc, is the Metropolis of Provence, and was that of
Narbonensis Secunda, and at that time called Aquae Sextiae, from Cajus Sextius;
who brought hither a Roman Colony, and the Hot Baths here. It is now, and has
been of a long time, an Archbishops See, and adorned with a Court of Parliament
for this Country, An. 1501. also a Generality, and a Mint. It is a very neat
and populous City, memorable in History for the great Defeat of the Cimbri, by
C. Marius: Ea victoria visus meruisse, ne ejus nati, Rempublicam poeniteret; by
this Victory and this alone, obliging the Romans (as Vellejus has it) not to be
sorry for his Birth. About 14 Miles from Marseille, and 36 from Toulon. Lon.
24.40. Lat. 43.4.

Arles,
UPon the Rhone, by Ausonius, called the Rome of France, and in those times so
highly valued, that Constantinus Flavius, being chosen Emperor by the British
Legions in the declining times of the Western Empire, designed to have made it
his Imperial Seat. It is a very ancient City, where the Romans established
their Sixth Colony. It has yet the Remainders of an Amphitheatre, an Obelisk
all of Stone, and some other Monuments. Its Bridge of Boats over the Rhone,
passes for a very Noble Work: It has a low and marshy Situation, which natural
Strength, seconded by the new Works of King Henry the Fourth, have made it one
of the most assured Bulworks of France, on this side the Kingdom. It has been
the Regal Seat of the French Kings of Burgundy, who from hence were styled
Kings of Arles. Between this City and the Sea, but on the other side of the
River, runs a deep Channel cut with infinite Charge and Industry, by C. Marius,
for Conveyance of Victuals into his Camp, in his War against the Cimbri before
mentioned. It is an Archbishops See, etc. about 44 Miles from Aix, as many from
Marseilles, and 16 from Nimes. Lon. 33.38. Lat. 43.5.

Marseille,
A Known Port on the Mideterranean, and a very ancient City, which flourished
in the time of Caesar, by whom it was forced, and made a Colony. It was
governed as a Republic, and had a famous Academy. It is an Episcopal See, and
one of the Admiralty. Its Port passes for one of the securest of the
Mediterranean See; the Ships of France retire hither for the mosh part; it is a
place of the greatest Resort by the Levantins, and has a very considerable
Traffic: For which reason it must be very populous. It stands about 14 Miles
from Aix, 38 from Toulon, and 44 from Arles. Lon. 24.35. Lat. 42.47.

Coulon,
IS also an Episcopal City, by Ptolemy, called Tauroentium, and by some,
Tholone; beautified with a fair and capacious Haven, one of the best of the
Mediterranean, which serves also for a Retreat to the French Ships of War,
Galleys and many other Vessels. It is well stored with Oil, great quantity of
Salt conveyed hither from the Isle of Eres, about 9 Miles off; and a sort of
Almonds called Provence Almonds; made by this means, one of the most frequented
Ports of the Miditerranean. About 38 Miles from Marseilles, 43 from Aix, etc.
Lon. 25.22. Lat. 42.34.

Salon.
A Little City, which is renowned for being the Birthplace of the famous
Nostradamus, whose Tomb is still to be seen here enclosed in the Wall of the
Church, with his Pourtraiture upon it.

Of the County of VENAI SIN.
THis Country has been in the Dependence of the Holy See, ever since the Year
1228. Pope Clement the Fourth having translated the Pontifical See to Avignon
in the Year 1305. Clement the Sixth, purchased this City 38 Years after,
together with the County; and his Successors made their Peaceble Residence
here, to the year 1380. when Gregory the Eleventh, returned again to Rome.

Avignon,
UPon the Rhone, is the Capital of the County, the ordinary Seat of the Popes
Vice-Legat, an Archbishop, a^ Inquisition, and an University. In this City are
said to be Seven Palaces, Seven Parish-Churches, Seven Monasteries, Seven
Nunneries, Seven Inns, and Seven Gates. There is one thing remarkable in
Relation to this City, and very necessary to be known by Travelers which is
very incommodious about Avignon. Namely, that the Gates of this City are
exactly shut at Sunset. Neither is there any Sububs, or place of Entertainment
hereabouts; no Farmer daring to sell a Taste of Wine. It is about 16 Miles from
Orange, 20 from Arles, and 40 from Aix. Lon. 23.54. Lat. 43.22.

Orange,
WIth the Title of Principality is a very ancient City, where was the Second
Colony of the Romans. It is an Episcopal See, an University, which would by
right appertain to King William the Third, but now to the French King. It is
famous for many rare Antiquities, Marks of the Romany Grandeur, but of most
note in Church History, for a Council held here against the Semi-Pelagians in
the Year, 444, called Arausic anum. It stands on the River Ligne, about 47
Miles from Aix, 55 from Mompelier, and 105 from Lions. Lon. 24.3. Lat. 43.37.

13. Of LORRAIN.
THis Province was the Southern part of the Kingdom of Austrasy, whose Name it
bore, and which Lotharius, Name.
Second Son of Lotharius the Emperor, changed into that of Lother-Reich, from
whence comes the World Lorrain: Charles his yougest Brother, thinking that he
had not justly dealt with him in the Division of his Territories, cast himself
into the Arms of the Emperor, Otho, who protected him against Lotharius, and
gave him the Investiture of Lorrain, with the Title of Duchy upon condition
notwithstanding, that it should depend upon the Empire. Thus Charles made
himself German, and renounced France, against which he proceeded with so much
Animosity, that the States of this Kingdom looking upon him not only as a
Stranger, but as an odious Enemy, excluded him from the Crown after the Death
of Louis (called le Faineant) his Nephew, and elected in his place Hugh-Capet,
Mayor of the Palace, and Earl of Paris, the Chief of the Race of the Present
Kings.

It extends it self from the 27th Degree 30 Minutes of Longitude to the 29th,
Extent.
and from the 47th, 30 Min. of Latitude as far as the 49th, 40 Min. insomuch
that it may have from East to West about 120 Miles from beyond Biche to the
River Aisne, beyond Saint Menehou; and near 180 from South to North, from the
Mount of Forks to beyond St. Vendel.

It is bounded on the North with Luxemburgh and the Diocese of Triers; Bounds.
on the East with Alsatia, and the Palatinate of the Rhine; on the South with
Franche-County; and with Champagne on the West.

The Air is temperate enough, the Soil sufficiently fruitful in Corn, Wine,
Hemp, Quality.
and Pasturage. It affords also diverse Metals, as Silver, Copper, Tin, Iron,
Lead, and in some places Pearls: Cattle and wild-Fowl are also very common
here. There are your Salt-Houses, which bring a very considerable Revenue. The
Rivers abound with Fish, especially with Trouts. The Lake of Lindre is said to
be 14 miles in compass, which produces wonderful Carps, some of them three Foot
long, of excellent taste, and in so great qantity, that it has been farmed at
20000 Livres per annum.

The Rivers of chief note are, Rivers.
the Mosa, Muse or Maes, the Mosselle, the Sare, the Meurte, and the Saone,
which takes its Original from hence.

This Seat is divided into two Duchies, to wit, that of Lorrain, and that of
Bar. The first is toward the East about the Mosselle, the Sare, and the
Meurte; the, other is toward the West, about the River Meuse.

The Duchy of Lorrain is subdivided into three Bayliwicks, namely, that of
Nancy, Vauge and Vaudrevange, without comprehending the three Bishoprics of
Metz, Toul and Verdun, which don't properly depend upon Lorrain, but are still
enclosed within it.

Nancy.
NEar the River Meurte is the Capital of the Province. It is not very large,
but has a pleasant and convenient Situation: It is divided into the Old and New
City; both one and the other were very well fortified after the Modern way. As
soon as the King had rendered himself Master hereof, he demolished its
Fortifications; but it is said, that he has repaired them since, and put them in
a much better condition than ever: It used to be the Dukes Seat for the most
part, and famous for the Overthrow, which Charles Duke of Burgundy here
underwent with the loss of his life. It has never a Bishop; but here is a
Primate, who has the Privilege of wearing a Mitre. It is about 15 Miles from
Toul, 27 from Metz, and 41 from Verdun. Lon. 25.40. Lat. 48.40.

Metz,
BY Ptolemy, called Divodurum, is a very ancient City seated in a pleasant
Plain at the Confluence of the Rivers Moselle, and Seille, well enough
fortified, and commanded by a good Citadel. It was in former times, the Royal
Seat of the Kings of Austrasy, from hence called Kings of Metz: It is a
Bishop's See, adorned with a Parliament, and Bayliwick, established by the late
King Lewis the Thirteenth, 1633. It was once an Imperial City, but is now
subject to the French King. It is about 26 Miles from Luxembourg, 34 from Toul,
and 78 from Philipsbourg. Lon. 25.38. Lat. 49.15.

Toul,
THE Tullum of Ptolemy, the Civitas Leucorum of Antoninus, so called from the
Leuci the Inhabitants of it, and the Tract about it: It is pleasantly seated on
the Moselle, and anciently honored with an Episcopal See. It was formerly in
the Number of the Imperial Cities of Germany, whose! Bishop is still
subordinate to the Archbishop of Trier^ but is now French. It is about 14 Miles
from Nancy, and 30 from Barle-Du^ Lon. 25.20. Lat. 25.20.

Verdun,
SEated on the River Meuse, an ancient Bishops See, formerly an Imperial Town,
but now subject to the French. The Bishop whereof, as also those of Metz and
Toul, (being the only ones of this Country of Lorrain) acknowledge the
Archbishop of Triers for their Metropolitan: All of them heretofore Imperial
Cities, but taken by Henry the Second of France, Ann. 1552. during the Contests
between Charles the Fifth, and the Protestant Princes of Germany, under
pretense of aiding them against the Emperor. Since that they have been always
under the subjection of France. It stands about 30 Miles from Metz, and 41 from
Nancy. Lon. 24.48. Lat. 49.11. Bar-le-Duc, a neat and beautiful City, Capital
of the Duchy of Bar, stands on the River Ornaon about 50 Miles from Metz. The
late Duke of Lorrain died about three years since, and lest a Son the present
Duke.

14. Of the FRANCHE-COUNTY.
THis Province is a part of the ancient Cisjurane Burgundy, which entered in the
dependances of the House of Austria by the means of Mary, the Heiress of
Burgundy, and Wife to the Emperor Maximinian. The present King of France, who
never wanted Pretensions to any thing, when he found it consistent with his
Ambition and Advantage, has taken it twice even with Expedition. He restored it
once in favor of a Peace, say the French Geographers; but say they, now he
keeps it as his Right and Conquest. And to demonstrate, that it is with
Justice, pursue they, the King of Spain resigned it to him by the Peace of
Nimiguen in 1679.

It is situated between the 46 and 48th Degree of Latitude, and extends it self
from the 26.20 Min. of Longitude, to the 28.20. Min. insomuch that it may have
from South to North, about 120 Miles from Chavannes to St. Ann's Mount nigh the
River Saone, and near 90 from East to West from the River Doux near Franquemont
in the Bishopric of Basle, to French-Fountain in Burgundy.

It is bounded in the North by Lorrain; Bounds.
by Suisserland in the East; in the South by Bresse; and in the West by the
Duchy of Burgundy with Champagne.

It is very populous and fertile in some places, Quality.
where is produced most excellent Wine, Corn, and store of Cattle. The Country
in some parts very Mountainous; but those Mountains yield excellent Vineyards,
and in lieu of a little Barrenness, you have an intermixture of most delicious
and fruitful Valleys: There are here, as well as in Lorrain, some very
considerable Salt-Houses, from whence one City has taken its Name. One finds
herein several Quarries of black Marble, Jasper of diverse Colors, and very
fine Alablaster.

Amongst the great Number of its Rivers, Rivers.
is remarked the Saone, the Doux, the Longnon, and the Louve, which are stored
with incomparable Fish.

The Province is divided into Three Bayliwicks: That of Vesoul is in the upper
part; that of Dole in the middle, and that of Poligny is in the lower.

Dole,
UPon the River Doux, is the Capital of the whole Province, considerable too
for its Riches, Strength, and Beauty. It is very ancient, and Charles the Fifth
Emperor fortified it after he had rebuilt it almost entirely new. Formerly it
was an University for the Study of the Civil Laws, but now it is devoured, as
it were, by a College of Jesuits, who have expressly forbid the People all
Protestant Books, and even to talk of God, either in a good, or bad sense: So
extremely fearful are they, left the Reformed Doctrine should creep in amongst
them. It was also a Parliament City and once, a Baily wick. It is about 30
Miles from Dijon, 34 from Besancon, and 66 from Geneva. Longitude 24.44.
Latitude 46.54.

Besancon,
UPon the same River, is also a ve^ ancient City, called by Caesar Vesontio,
then the chief City of the Sequani, as afterward the Capital of the Province
called Maxima Sequanorum; and an Archbishops See, who styles himself Prince of
the Empire. The Fortifications, which have been added to it, make it very
strong by Art; and it Situation between two Mountains, almost encompassed by
the River Doux, makes it so by Nature too. The Parliament, which was a Dole has
lately been transferred hither. About 51 Miles from Montbeliard, 55 East of
Dijon, 65 from Geneva, and 73 from Basil. Lon. 25.28. Lat. 47.7.

FINIS.

