An Antidote AGAINST DISTRACTIONS: OR, An Endeavor to serve the Church, in the
daily Case of WANDERINGS in the Worship of GOD.

By Richard Steel M. A. and Minister of the Gospel.

Judges 16.15. How can thou say, I love thee, when thy heart is not with me?

Psalm 119.10. With my whole heart have I sought thee,
O let me not wander --
Basil. con. 9. de Oratione. (...).

Bernard. de inter. Domo. c. 29.33. Non cogitando cogito, cogitata recogito,
and eadem iterum iterumque replicare non cesso, -- in choro sum corpore, and in
aliquo negotio mente -- Aliud canto, and aliud cogito, psalmodiae verba
profero, and psalmodiae sensum non attendo: vae mihi, quoniam ibi pecco, ubi
peccata emendare debeo.

LONDON, Printed for Elizabeth Calvert, at the Black-spread Eagle in Barbican.
1667.

TO THE Most Holy TRINITY.
THese first fruits I humbly lay at thy blessed footstool, being ambitious of
no other Patron but Thy self; for, Thou alone can attest the sincerity of my
aim herein, which will plead with Thee for the imbecillities thereof: Thou
alone art the right Author of every valuable line and word in this ensuing
Tract. The Errata's only are mine, but the Honor's Thine. Thou have the
strongest hand, and truest heart to protect, both the Writing and the Writer
from all the malicious or unkind usage, that we may meet with. Thy approbation
chiefly I humbly crave, and then I am sure to have all good men on my side.
Against Thee, Thee only have I offended by my Distractions, and done these
evils in Thy sight; and therefore am bound to seek the destruction of them, in
all the world for Thy sake. Thou have so infinitely obliged the unworthy Writer
of these lines, that he rejoices in this opportunity to tell the world, That
there is none in Heaven or Earth to be compared to Thee. Thou only can make
my Endeavors herein succesful, and bring that to the heart, which I could only
present to the ear or eye. Unto Thee therefore do I dedicate both this and my
self, with this earnest Prayer, That this Essay may both please Thee, and
profit thy Church! That Thou would take this Rod into Thy hands, and
therewith whip these buyers and sellers out of Thy Temple! That Thy great Name
may hereby be magnified, though the Writers were never known! To Thy heavenly
blessing, do I most humbly recommend this mean work, and worthless workman,
with a Resolution to remain, while I have any Being,

Thine own Richard Steel.

To the serious Reader, especially the first Hearers thereof.
Christian Reader,
YOU have here an Antidote against the most common distemper of God's people in
his Worship. My own disease caused me to study the cure; the general complaint
of good people against these Egyptian Flies, moved me to preach it; and the
common good of God's Church (not without solicitations thereto) has now
persuaded me to publish it. Be not offended, that so much is written of so
minute a point; greater Tracts of the Fever, Stone, or Toothache (whereby they
might be certainly cured) would not be thought too long, by such as are sick
thereof. Indeed, this had never seen the light, but that the disease is so
general and that so few, if any, that have thoroughly, and on purpose handled
it. However, this may serve (as the Learned L. Verulam Letter to the E. of
Salisb. concerning his Advancement.
has it) to awake better spirits, and to do the Bell-ringer's office, who is
first up, to call others to Church. This being my first Essay, riper Judgments
will (I believe) observe diverse defects and superfluities therein, but Candor
is a common debt, which we all owe one to another; and one poor mite may be
accepted by men, when two mites can please Christ himself. It is my Request To
you especially, that were the first Hearers hereof, that ye be not Hearers or
Readers only, but Doers of the Word. The world knows, you have been constant
hearers, let the world see, that you are careful doers. The indubitable truths
and duties, that I have still laid before you, will undoubtedly convert you, or
else undoubtedly condemn you; and therefore I beseech you, in the bowels of
Christ, that ye receive not the Grace of God in vain. For now I live, if ye
stand fast in the Lord. And my earnest request for you, is, that Divine Power
may accompany Divine Precepts. If you reap any benefit, let God have all the
praise, and put the poor Instrument into some corner of your prayers. I have
chosen a dialect and phrase familiar, for the advantage of the matter, rather
than the applause of the Writer, being contented to be ranked among those,
Ambro^. lib 8. ^p. 6^.
qui non secundum artem scripserunt, sed secundum gratiam; you will excuse the
unevenness of the style, and other imperfections, when you understand that I
had more studies than books in the composing hereof, being distant from my
Library, and variously distracted in the writing about Distractions. But my aim
being a solid cure, not a starcht discourse, I have chosen a Divinity dress,
and not preached my self [who am the chief of sinners] but Christ Jesus my Lord
[the chief of Goods] and my self

Your Servant for Jesus sake, R. S.
May 10. 1667.
The Contents.
CHAP. I.
Sect. 1. THe Text propounded. page 1. Sect. 2. An Observation.. Sect. 3. The
words of the Text opened. 6. The Doctr. It is a Christians duty to attend upon
the Lord without Distractions. 7. Sect. 4. A Distraction described. 8.
CHAP. II.
Sect. 1. The kinds of Distractions distinquished. 1. From the Fountain of
them. 12. 1. The Devil. ibid. 2. The Mind. 14. 3. The Fancy. ibid. 4. The
^^tward Senses. 16.
Sect 2. 2. By the Master whereof they consist. 18. Being Good, Bad,
Indifferent. 19. Sect. 3. 3. By the Adjuncts of them. 21.
CHAP. III.
Sect 1. That it is our duty to attend upon the Lord without Distractions.
Proved, 1. From the Possibility of it, by four Arguments. 25. Sect 2. 2. From
the Necessity of it. 29. 1. To the Being of a Duty. ibid. 2. To Comfort in a
Duty. 30. 3. To the Prosperity of a Duty. 31. 4. To Communion with Christ in a
Duty. 32.

CHAP. IV.
Sect. 1. Reasons of the Doctrine. 1. From the Nature of God. His 1. Greatness.
35. 2. Holiness. 36. 3. Omniscience. 37.
Sect. 2. 2. From the Nature of his Worship. Being 1. Reasonable. 40. 2.
Spiritual. 41. 3. Sweet. 42.
Sect. 3. 3. From the Nature of our Condition here. 1. We cannot live without
God. 43. 2. Our only way of communion is by Ordinances. ibid. 3. All our heart
and strength is too little for this work. 45.
Sect. 4. 4. From the Nature of Distractions. 1. They divide the Heart. 46. 2.
They frustrate the Duty. 47. 3. They contract more Guilt. 48.

CHAP. V.
Sect. 1. Objections answered. 1. About its Impossibility. 50.
Sect. 2. 2. About its Difficulty. 53. Sect. 3. 3. From their Commonness. 58.
Sect. 4. 4. From Gods accepting the will for the deed. 61.
CHAP. VI. The Causes of Distractions in God's Worship.
Sect. 1. 1. Secret Atheism. 64. A Remedy thereof. 67. Sect. 2. 2. The
corruption of our Nature. 68. Its Remedy. 72. Sect. 3. 3. Vnpreparedness unto
holy Duties. 76. A Case of Conscience answered, viz. What measure of
Preparation is necessary before our ordinary Duties of Worship. 77. Sect. 4. 4.
Lukewarmness. 82. Its Remedies. 84. Sect. 5. 5. Worldy-mindedness. 88. Its
Remedy. 91. Sect. 6. 6. Weakness of love to Christ and his Ordinances. 95. Its
Remedies. 99. Sect. 7. 7. Want of Watchfulness. 104. 1. Before Duties. ibid. 2.
In Duties. 105. 3. After Duties. 107. The Remedy thereof. 108.
Sect. 8. 8. A Beloved sin. 110. Its Remedies. 113. Sect. 9. 9. Satan. 115. A
Remedy. 118. Sect. 10. 10. Vain Thoughts at other times. 121. These 1.
Displease and dis-ingage the Spirit of God. ibid. 2. Dispose and naturalize the
soul to these Thoughts. 122. 3. Discourage us to the conquest, and encourage us
to the sin. 124. 4. Infect the Memory. 125. 5. Provoke God to give us up. 126.
The Remedies hereof. 127.
Sect. 11. 11. A divided heart in four respects. 133. Its Remedy. 136. Sect.
12. 12. An opinion that there is no great evil in them. 139. Its Remedy. 142.
CHAP. VII.
The Evil of Distractions 145. 1. In their Nature. Sect. 1. 1. They are sins
against the first Table. ib. Sect. 2. 2. They are heart-sins. 147. Sect. 3. 3.
They are sins in the special presence of God. 148. Sect. 4. 4. They are sins
about the most serious business. 151. Sect. 5. 5. They are sins of hypocrisy.
153. 2. In their Effects. Sect. 6. 1. They alienate the heart from holy duties.
156. Sect. 7. 2. They much affront the Majesty of God. 158. Sect. 8. 3. They
hinder the benefits of an holy duty. 160. Sect. 9. 4. They deprive the soul of
comfort. 162. Sect. 10. 5. They grieve away the Holy Ghost. 164.
CHAP. VIII.
The Cure of Distractions. 166. Sect. 1. 1. Dispel the Causes before specified.
167. Sect. 2. 2. Bewail your former failings herein. 169. Sect. 3. 3. Engage
the Spirit of God in your assistance. 174. Sect. 4. 4. Believe the Presence of
God. 178. Sect. 5. 5. Lay a Law upon your senses. 184. A Note about whispering
during the Worship of God. 186. Sect. 6. 6. A watchful reflection and
ejaculation. 39^. Sect. 7. 7. Strength of Grace. 195. How it should be gotten.
201.
CHAP. IX.
Encouragements under the burden of Distractions. 204. Sect. 1. 1. They are
consistent with Grace. 206. Sect. 2. 2. Your case is not singular. 208. Sect.
3. 3. Christ's Intercession is without Distraction. 209. Sect. 4. 4.
Distractions may make us humble. 211. Sect. 5. 5. God can make some sense out
of such Prayers. 213. Sect. 6. 6. There is grace and strength in Christ to help
against them. 215. Sect. 7. 7. A perfect riddance of them, is the Happiness of
Heaven. 217.
CHAP. X. Inferen^es from this Doctrine.
Sect. 1. 1. We have ^ause to mourn over our best duties. 220. Sect. 2. 2.
Omissions of duties are extreme dangerous. 223. Sect. 3. 3. The grand Necessity
of Watchfulness. 226. Particularly in 1. Prayer. 2. Hearing God's Word. 3.
Reading. 4. Singing Psalms. 5. Meditation. 229.

Sect. 4. 4. Great cause to bless God for freedom from Distractions. 232. Sect.
5. 5. That Religion is an inward, difficult, and serious Business. 234.
Reader, if you will read sense, you must first correct these more material
mistakes of the Press: For points and accents, and some literal faults, common
indulgence is desired.
PAge 2. line 22. read no part, p. 11. l. 9. r. smell, p. 24. Margin r.
cedrenus -- Phorbante, p. 25. l. ult. r. sincerity, p. 26. l. 13. after weak,
r. child, p. 35. Marg. r. (...), p. 39. l. 8. r. Ordinance, p. 43. l. ult. r.
every brea^h, p. 71. l. 3. r. subtlest, p. 86. Marg. r. nam si, p. 137. l. 18.
r. disturb, p. 141. l. 4. r. caso, l. 13. r. mere, p. 148. l. 19. r. awake, p.
158. l. 8. blot out of, l. 23. r. stale, p. 163. Marg. r. that reads, p. 164.
l. pe^ult. r. heavily, p. 165. l. 12. r. somewhere, p. 171. l. 2. r. our
hearts, p. 172. l. 20. positively, p. 173. l. 9. r. poenitere, p. 193. l.
penul^, r. these, p. 195. l. 17. blot out, all, p. 197. l. 19. r. nor^^, p.
201. l. 18. blot out, as, p. 205. l. 4. r. ensnare, l. 12. r. by, l. 26. r.
displease, p. 207. l. 18. r. gadding, p. 218. l. 2. r. unison, p. 219. l.
penult. r. tenth, p. 224. l. 21. r. (...).

CHAP. I. The Text explained, The Doctrine proposed, and a Distraction
described.
SECTION I.
1 CORINTHIANS. 7.35. -- That you may attend upon the Lord without Distraction.
(...).



THe Apostle is a Casuist in this Chapter,. 1. The dependence of the words.
and the present Case is about Virginity and Marriage; wherein I. He determines
for the former, [ verse. 26.] when the Church was in the bonds of Persecution,
it was not safe to be in the bond of Marriage. II. He prevents mistakes, [
verse. 27, 28.] though the single man be fittest to suffer, yet there is neither
that sin nor misery on the married, as to dissolve the sacred knot. III. He
offers Reasons for this Resolve. 1. One, from the crosses and troubles then
attending the state of Marriage, [ verse. 28.] Thorns as well as Roses. 2. The
other, from the Cares that always accompany it [ verse. 32.] For the Man, now
is his heart (...).
divided. Before, if I can but please the Lord, and and contrive how to live
comfortably with my God Si orationem facit ad Dominum, prope est Coelo,
Scripturis incumbit, totu^ ill^c est. Si Psalmum canit, placet sibi. Tertul. de
exh. cast. p. 670.
; this is all my care and ambition. Now, the stream of my thoughts and
affections is parted; I must please and provide for my Wife, [ verse. 32, 33.]
For the Woman, now is her task doubled. Before, her whole aim was to please her
Husband in Heaven. Now must her designs and respects be for her earthly Husband
also. [ verse. 34] Not that these several Relations are inconsistent, but to
provide for these new Duties and Temptations will distract the mind, especially
in the days of Trial. Tu de castitate canis^ illae somniant etiam viros,
flammas patiuntur and saciunt, ubi decorum? ubi adhasio Domini? ubi finis a
Paulo positus? sublato fine, tolli debent ad illud destinata. Are^ius in loc.
IV. He qualifies his Counsel, and explains himself, [ verse. 35.] It is no^
part of my meaning, either to obtrude the Doctrine or Duty of Coelibate upon
you, that to avoid a strait, you should run upon a sin; but my motion is, 1.
For your profit; my office, and so my counsel is rather to profit, than to
please you, 2. There is a comeliness or So the word is used. 1 Cor. 14.40.
convenience in it; both states are always lawful, but the one may sometimes
be more convenient. And 3. My ultimate design is, that you may choose that
state, wherein you may best Attend upon the Lord without Distraction. This the
occasion and tendency of these words.

SECT. II.
FRom the general import of these words flows this Annotation,. 2.


That condition should be chosen by all, An Observation.
that is best for their souls. Your outward condition must serve your inward
condition; and this life must be subservient to another life. If single-life do
every way better qualify you, to serve the Lord, and save your souls, this is
the best life for you; and if Marriage be better for your souls, no state is
better.

For if the soul prosper, All prospers; and if tha^ miscarry, All Is lost. If to
be a Prince were dangerous for the soul, 'twere better to be a Beggar: If a
poor state do enrich the soul, it is the best estate.

This needs not to be proved unto Christians, that will be granted by Heathens?
some of whom have so powerfully discoursed of the immortality and excellency of
the soul, that their Auditors have posted to death by self-destruction, for the
happy state thereof. If Pagans would choose to dye, as a condition best for the
soul, well may we choose that condition of life, which best serves the soul;
lest those Acts which were unable to justify them, prove able to condemn us
with a witness.

Let this Axiom come in, when you are disposing your children or your selves;
being confident, when you are most sollicitous about the soul, God will be most
careful for the body, and you will meet with least distress, when you flee the
least Distraction.

. 3.
SECT. III.
The Explication of the Text.
THe words of the Text present us with a Design, that Believers as often aim at,
and yet miss, as any in the World; and which is so excellent a rare attainment,
that the Holy Ghost even makes two words on purpose to express it by, no where
else found in the New Testament; Quod intenie facit servire Domino sine ulla
distractione. Hieron. lib. 1. contr. Jo. vin.

By comparing whereof with the present vulgar you may easily see the Vulgar was
none of Hieromes. For thus the Vulgar, Quod facultatem praebeat sine
impedimento Dominum obsecrandi, miswritten for observandi, as Beza thinks^ But
Erasmus says the oldest Translation was, Domino observiendi, after turned into
observandi and by some obsecrandi.


To Attend on the Lord without Distraction. Hierome confesses that the Latin
can hardly express the Emphasis of the Greek in this clause, and that thereupon
it was wholly omitted in the Latin books. In the words we must consider, 1.
The Matter What, [ Attend upon the Lord.] 2. The Manner how, [ Without
Distraction.]


1. The Matter what, [ Attend upon the Lord] The Greek word for [Attend] in our
Copies has a notable elegancy in it. 1. That you may be Some Copies read (...)
some (...) acceptab^le, This way the Arabic speaks ut confortemini quam
proxime secundum Dominum. But the truest is our own. (...) de^omposit^m of
(...) sedeo from which the Syriack differs little.
Fit and ready for Gods Service, That Religion and religious Duties may sit
fitly on you, that you may be ready to serve the Lord in Duty or Suffering. A
most sweet frame of soul, to be always bent and strung for the Service of God.
That man is meet for the Masters use, that is prepared unto every good work, 2 Timothy 2.21. How many choice opportunities for instruction, for reproof, for
charity, for prayer do we hazard, yea and lose for want of a Soul quick and
ready to our duty. 2. That you may be Assidere, apie adhaerefcere Legh.
Assiduus in aliquo negotio. Stephan.
Fix^ and settled in his Service. The word intimates such an Indivulse
adhaerens. Budaeus. Quasi a latere alicujus nunquam discedens. Stephan. Ut
sitis seduli more fidorum servorum qui a latere domini sui non discedunt. Bez.
e Sir.
inseparable cleaving, such a marriage of the mind to the work of God, that we
have in hand, as can by no means suffer a divorce. It should be as hard a
matter, to break off the heart from God in his service, being married to him,
and settled in holy duties, as it is to abstract the misers soul from the world,
to which it is glued.

2. The Manner how, [ Without Distraction] The sense hereof is almost
prevented, by the Emphasis of the former word. Yet this Word is not without its
great weight: And it speaks a (...) of (...) Trabo, immobilis, inconcussus,
quietus, and qui distrahi nequit Budaeu^ Stephan. Usus est hac voce Plut. de
Curiosit. (...) appellans, ^ffiduum studium sapientiae, nullis negotiis ali^
mentem avocantibus.
quiet unshaken and immovable frame of Soul, which cannot be whirled about
with vain trifles. The soul is never at that holy quiet, as when it is directly
ascending and communing with the Lord; and therefore Satan exceedingly envies
this Celestial happiness of the Saints, and if he cannot distract them from
duty, be sure he will distract them in it; and this he does very much Ut fitis
seduli erga Dominum vestrum, cum honestate decora non cogitantes de mundo.
Tre^ull.
by the World and the business thereof. And therefore ( says the Apostle)
guide your condition so, in this suffering season, as that it may not misguide
your hearts, in your attendance on the Lord; that you may not attend on your
selves, nor on others; but Ut srequens sit oration. Sedulius.
on Him, who is the Center of an Ordinance, and your All in All.

Take the sum of all in this Assertion, the main Doctrine from the Text.

It is a Christians Duty to attend on the Lord without Distractions. Doct.


And that I may from this Text and Doctrine profitably handle the Case, and
attempt the Cure of Distractions, I shall proceed to show these things, 1. The
Nature of a Distraction. 2. The Kinds of Distractions. 3. That it is our Duty
to attend upon the Lord without Distr^ctions. 4. The reasons why we must attend
on the Lord without Distractions. 5. Answer the Objections. 6. Describe the
Causes of Distractions. 7. The Evil of them. 8. The Cure of them. 9. Propound
some encouragements under the burden of Distractions. 10 Draw some Inferences
from this Doctrine. And first of the first, viz. the nature of a Distraction.

SECT. IV.
4 The first general Head. viz. The description of Distractions.
THE first Head will be to describe a Distraction. A Distraction is a secret
wandering of the Heart from God, in some Duty in hand.

1. It is a wandering, As the remisness of our Devotion shoots short, so
Distraction shoots awry. It Is said, Prove. 27.8. As a bird that wandereth from
his nest, so is a man from his place. Primum argumentum compositae mentis
existimo esse, consistere and secum morari. Senec. Epist. 2.
Its commonly known, the ready way to destroy the young in the shell, is
discontinuance of heat; and to wander from our heavenly work, produces the dead
offspring of unprofitable Duties. It would be almost as easy to trace and
follow the Bird in her vagaries, as the volatile and intricate imaginations of
the heart The same word (...) signifies the Soul, and a Butterfly, because our
wandering imaginations make our wavering spirits like wagling Butterflies puffed
up and down with every blast of vanity. Mr. Pagets Primmer.
It is a digression: you that are curious to observe the Minister in his
digressions; how much more necessary is it to observe your own?

2. It is secret, in the Heart. And this contracts the guilt and nature of
Hypocrisy upon a Distraction; for we have a short and clear description of
hypocrisy, which agrees too well with distractions. Matthew, 15.7, 8. This
People draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips:
but their heart is far from me. To have a bended knee, a craving eye, are
choice Expressions of Duty: but without the Impressions and attendance of the
heart, In the Sacrifices of the Law, the Inwards still were offered to God, the
skin was for the Priest.
are double iniquity and flat hypocrisy. How empty would our Congregations be
sometimes, if no more bodies were present, than there are souls: And what
abundance of sorry service has our God, that no body sees?

Yet how unknown soever these triflings of the mind are to others, or to our
selves, yet are they most palpable to the Lord, who sets our most secret sins
in the clearest light of his Countenance; Psalm. 90.8.
and though these primo-primi motus may antevert the use of Reason, and
therefore seem small Peccadillo's yet they fall under the rebuke of Religion;
and are as sinful as they are secret: Good in secret is the best Goodness; and
secret sinfulness, the worst sinfulness.

3. This wandering of the Heart is from God, for God is the Object of Worship.
To pray aright is, Zech. 8.21. To pray before the Lord. To give thanks aright
is, Dan. 6.10. To give thanks before his God, not in his sight only, for so you
are, when your hearts are worst; but they did look on God when they spoke to
him, as we do look on men, when we speak to them. Melancthon says, he has
heard Luther in his secret prayers so pray, that one would verily think, there
were some body in the room with him to whom he spoke.

4. This wandering is, while some Duty is in hand, to desert Duty is Nihil
agere, to do divine duties to Diabolical ends is Male agere, to divert the Soul
is Aliud agere. Hoc age must be the Christians motto, in the Worship of God.
That was a good answer, Neh. 6.3. of Nehemiah to his false friends, I am doing
a great work, so that I cannot come down, Why should the work cease while I
leave it and come down to you? He that is in a Duty to God, is about a very
great work, And that work stands, or goes backward every moment the heart is
away; and why should a When King Ethelbert was at his Devotions, news was
brought of the Danes invasion at Essenden, but he neither omitted nor
abreviated his prayers, he would hear no suit on Earth, till he had made his
requests in Heaven, and afterward he bravely vanquished them. Dr T. Fuller.
temporal vanity set back, and perhaps quite unravel your eternal concernment?
How will that Spartan youth rise up in judgment against us, that holding the
Censer during Alexanders Heathen Sacrifices, would not stir his hand from its
duty; though the burning coals fell thereon, and made his flesh to fry and
s^ell in the presence of all the Spectators?

CHAP. II. The Kinds of Distractions.
SECT. I.
Cap. 2. The second general Head, viz. The kinds of Distractions.
THE second Head will be to take a view of the kinds or sorts of our
Distractions, And they are Diversified, 1. From the Fountain whence they flow.
2. From the matter whereof they Consist. 3. From their Adjuncts. For the first
of them,. 1. Their several Fountains.
you will find

1. Many of our Distractions may justly be fathered on the Devil. He is a
spiritual substance, and is most properly conversant in spiritual sins; He is
completely skild in all thoughts whatsoever, and therefore what he imparts
here, is of his own. Zech. 3.1. The High Priest Joshua could not be at his
Prayers for the Israel of God, but as Christ the Angel of the Covenant was on
one hand, Satan was standing on the other, and he was got at the Eccles. 10.2.
A wise man's heart is at his right hand. i. e. His heart is ready and prepared
to every good work. Annot. in loc.
readier hand the right hand, the hand of action, that he might hinder him more
dexterously in his Devotion. When we are most serious before the Angel, The
Devil is whispering at our Elbow, and who can be dull and watchless, when God
is on one hand, and Satan on the other?

The Devil is afraid of a serious lively prayer at his heart; he knows, That
can pull down in a minute, what he has been contriving a thousand years; and
therefore if he cannot withhold us from holy Duties, he will do his utmost to
disturb us in them. Hence the vision of that Holy man who in the whole market
saw but one Devil busy, (for there Self was at hand, Satan had no need to
bestir him) but in the Non enim unquam dormitat vigil ille Synagoga suae
Episcopus. Amama.
Congregation there were multitudes of them, all their skill and power being
little enough to stave off poor souls from Jesus Christ. Alas! we pray, and
hear, and live as securely, as if there were no Devil at all.

And His suggestions in Religious duties are usually more Impetus Diabolici
fortiores affectibus naturalibus. Ioab could hinder David from weeping for
Absolon, not from numbering the people to which Satan stirred him up. D. Arrows.
violent and impetuous, more dreadful and impious than they of our own
breeding; called therefore Darts, and fiery Darts of that wicked one; Though he
lay these brats of his at thy door, yet they will be counted in the number of
his sins, and of thy afflictions.

2. Our Distractions proceed from the mind and understanding. The Vanity of the
mind alienates us from the life of God, and from communion with him. When a
present and seasonable petition or instruction is conveyed through the ear into
the understanding, It wantonly plays therewith, and taks occasion to run out
on some contiguous notion, and from that to another, and at length rests and
dwells on some alien and unseasonable point, till the gales of the good Spirit,
and the present Matter be overpast. And thus by a default in the understanding
we seek not God, Psalm. 53.2.
nor find him as we might; And that excellent faculty, that would penetrate
into the Divine Mysteries, and should guide the will and heart unto God, by the
Ignis fatuus of its unmortified Vanity, misleads us from the chief Good, and
intangles us in distractions. We read 2 Cor. 7.1. Of a filthiness of the
Spirit, whereof surely this is a part, and must be cleansed in them, that will
perfect holiness in the fear of God.

3. Some Distractions proceed from the Fancy, a most busy faculty, that is most
unruly and least sanctified in an Holy man. Sometimes by the help of memory,
stepping back into things past, she brings into the most solemn worship a
thousand passages that are past and gone, and rolling them in the head, carries
soul and all quite away from God: hence it is, you often hear the say, Cum
reresupini jacemus in lectulo, nihil tale cogitamus. Sed cum venimus ad
Orationem cogitationes avocant and sine fructu efficient. Chrysostom. de not. Dom.
Hom. 17.
such a thing came into my mind at Sermon or Prayer that was forgotten weeks or
months before: yea daring to re-act former sins by contemplative wickedness in
the very sight of God, which doubles the guilt of repetition, and makes your
former sins Non-nunquam vero quod egi in corpore, hoc importun^ verso in mente.
In cord enim servo dedepicta qua vidi and feci: torpeo abutili opere quoniam
fagi^or illicit ^ cogitatione. Bern. denit. Dom. cap. 30.
exceeding sinful. In this sense that Eccles. 6.9. is true, Better is the
sight of the eyes, than the Heb. The walking of the soul.
wandering of the Desire; there is something more of evil in these second
contemplations, than in the first Commissions. Sometimes the Fancy will create
a world of figments and notions out of nothing, and multiply impertinent
thoughts upon no ground and to no purpose; and can sally out of the present
matter to every adjacent business, and make a great ado to bring nothing to
pass. Job 27.8. There is a path which no fowl knows, and which the Vultures
eye has not seen, the fancy can find out such a way; thus God is not in all
(hardly in any of) our thoughts, when we pretend to treat him with the greatest
solemnity.

And sometimes the Fancy breeds Distractions by fore-casting things to come
Thus Praecedentia peccata sunt sequentium causa, sequentia sunt praecedentium
poena. Aug.
: So many a man can most easily, on the Sabbath, contrive his business for all
the Week after; and the poor woman in the corner of a Prayer order the business
of all the house for a day. Hence may an affair is cursed to our hands, by our
unhappy contrivance thereof in the time of worship. Thus we have some saying
(in their hearts no doubt) Amos 8.5. When will the New Moon be gone, that we
may sell Corn; and the Sabbath, that we may set forth Wheat? And it is well, if
they have no fellows in this Assembly that are making their Hay, measuring
their Corn, counting their Coin, if not providing for their Lusts, while they
seem earnest with the Lord negotiating for Eternity.

4. Our Distractions in Gods Worship are sometimes occasioned by our outward
Respexit ocusus and sensum mentis evertit; audivit auris and intentionem
inflexit; inhalavit odor and cogitationem impedivit, o^ libavit, and crimen
retulit, tactus contulit and ignem adolevit. Intravit mors per fenestram:
Fenestra tua est oculus tuus. Ambr. de fug. seculi. c. 1.
Senses. Most frequently by the Eye; a wandering Eye mostly has a wandering
Heart; for when the Eye discovers any new, pleasing, or ridiculous object, it
presently brings news thereof unto the Heart; and that debates and studies upon
it, to the grieving of Gods Spirit, and cooling of our own: and when that is
over, a fresh sight presents it self, and the Eye is ready for that again, and
leads the Heart into a maze of Follies. We read, Lam. 3.51. My Eye affects my
Heart, because of all the Daughters of the City, that is with grief for their
Calamity. their is a reciprocal working it seems; the Heart at first affects
the Eye, and the Eye can affect the Heart with Grief: Even in like manner, when
the Sons or Daughters of the City enter the Assembly, the There was once a
contention between the Eye and the Heart, whether of them was the cause of Sin:
after long arguing it was concluded that the Heart was the Cause, the Eye the
Occasion. The most vicious Sense, and therefore soonest decays, and made the
seat of Tears.
Eye affects the. Heart; stirs, diverts, kindles the Heart; and the Heart
corrupts, stains, and transmits its follies by the Eye; the precious Soul (that
while) suffering between them, and the holy God and his Service woefully
slighted.

You resolve in this duty, I will not swerve from God, nor step aside into the
least Distraction; but you bolt the door, and let your Enemy in at the window
Si per auticam ejicias, per posticam denu^ solent irreper^.
. The thoughts that are shut out at the Street door, steal in at the back door,
if you do not as well make a Covenant with your Eyes, as keep your Feet, when
you enter into the House of God. In this sense the Woman and Man also, had need
of the Covering of an holy and constant Watch, because of the Angels; the
wicked Imps of Hell, that ride abroad in the air, to carry away our Hearts from
God.

SECT. II.
. 2. The matter of Distractions.
SEcondly, Distractions are distinguished by the matter whereof they consist;
which is sometimes,

Bernard makes three sorts of them, Impertinent, Worldly, Sinful. He compares
the first to lutum simplex, the second to limus, that stick to the heart, the
third to coenum, that are stinking and noisome in the sight of God. Bern. de
tr. genesis Cogit.
1. Good. It is Satan's ambition and triumph, when he can affront God with his
own matters; As to bring in shreds of Sermons in the heat of Prayer; and long
passages which you have read, to keep out material points, that you should be
hearing: He will hold your Husbands Picture before you, while you should look
on your Husbands face, and at length delude you with Shadows instead of
Substance. A good thing in its nature, may become a bad thing in its use, when
it is out of season. Jewels mis-placed may grow worthless; a Diamond on the
Finger is an Ornament, but in the Bladder a Torment: And God dislikes his own
things in the Devil's way, little less than the Devil's things themselves.

As when one is playing in consort, (it is Mr. White's comparison) if we stay
on any Note, while they who play the other parts go on; that which at first
made excellent harmony, becomes now harsh, and spoils the Music: So those
thoughts that were sweet and musical, while they were suitable and pertinent to
thy prayer, become harsh by dwelling unseasonably upon them.

2. Sometimes our wanderings are made up of things Sunt en^m nonnullae
cogitationes penitus ociosae and ad v^m non pertinentes quas tam facile
abjicere quam recipere facile possit anima dummodo sit secum habitans in cord
suo, and assistens dominatori vniversae terrae. Bern Sermon. de tr. genesis cogit.
Indifferent in themselves; and these things by miss-timing them, are
debauched, and made very evil and offensive unto God. As to talk with, or to
see a Friend, is in it self indifferent; but to perform this in the heat of
Harvest, may be folly. There are an hundred harmless thoughts both of things
and persons, which crowding into the sacred presence of God, and interposing
between the Soul and its Maker, while the matters of Eternity are debating and
concluding, is a great offense, and deserve to be whipped, and posted, and sent
away.

3. The matter of them sometimes is absolutely Bad, proud, wanton, malicious
Thoughts: Blasphemous thoughts, as whether God is, when we are praying to him,
and the like. Able to sink us at any time, but sins of a double dye in the
Worship of God; because there the special and piercing Eye of God is upon us:
As Theft therefore is penal in all places, by reason of its intrinsecal evil,
much more criminal is it, before a Judge in the Court: Even so are these
thoughts guilty and base any where, but when they shall dare to intrude into
the presence of the Judge of Heaven and Earth, as it were daring a jealous God,
this is prodigious Sin, and greatly provokes him. So Ezekiel. 33.31. They come
unto me as the People comes, and they sit before me as my People; with their
mouths they show much love, but their Heart goes after their Covetousness.
What more sweet than a religious Mouth? What more bitter than a covetous Heart?
Especially when the Heart goes out after Covetousness, pursues and follows it
in the sight of God: Oh dreadful! God, he is pursuing and following the Sinner
with Christ and Mercy in his Arms, and the Sinner (the while) with his very
Heart, is going after his Sin. And thus that House which God calls the House of
Prayer, we make a Den of Lust, Malice, Covetousness, and Sin.

SECT. III.
THirdly, Distractions are distinguished by their Adjuncts.. 3. The Adjuncts of
Distractions.
For,

1. Some are sudden. As the Church, Cant. 6.12. Or ever I was aware, my Soul
made me like the Chariots of Aminadab; and happy is that Soul, that is so
sweetly and suddenly carried after Jesus Christ. So sometimes These are
cogitationes onerosae quibus resistere vult and tamen non potest, sed velit
nolit, irruit in oculos mentis massarum pestilentia and perstrepunt ranae in
penetralibus cordis ejus. Bern. lib. de Consc. c. 5.
our treacherous Soul, ere we know or are aware of it, makes us like those
hasty Chariots; which misery comes about through want of watchfulness, which
like a Porter should keep the door, and turn all straglers away: A thought is a
sudden motion, and by it we may quickly step into Heaven or Hell; Now these
Thoughts do steal in so suddenly, that we fall to muse how they came in, by
what door they entered, and so are entangled in more Distractions by tracing the
former, and commit new Errors by discovering the old.

But now other wanderings are more premeditate, and whereinto the soul falls
more leisurely, and wallows therein either of choice, or without much
interruption; and these have much more guilt and mischief in them.

2. Some Distractions are Unwilling, quite praeter intentionem agentis Of these
Mr. Capel thus: While thy prayer comes out of a spiritual habit of grace, and
be set on work at first by an actual intention of the mind, a vertual intention
may serve all along after though there be some roving thoughts, I say may serve
to make them current at the Throne of Grace, and in the Court of Conscience. p.
121.
; when the Heart like a good Archer aims directly at Communion with the Lord;
aims at this, but Satan or his Corruptions jog him at the elbow, and make him
to miss the mark. This indeed is a sad disappointment, for a Noble Soul to
embrace the Dunghill instead of the Sun of Righteousness; for a man to lose
those sweet words and minutes which might be had with God; it is a sad
mischance indeed, but which is common with man, wherein if the Soul cry out as
the forced Virgin, Deuteronomy. 22.27. it shall not be imputed to her, especially when
there was neither previous provocation, nor subsequent consent. And this is the
case of blasphemous thoughts, which are like Lightning cast into a Room, which
carries horror, but springs from no cause thereof in the Room: So these
thoughts come in upon thee, amaze and terrify, surprise thee against thy will:
But be of good Comfort; neither leave off thy Duties, (thy Prayers will do thee
more good, than these can do thee harm) nor hasten from them to gratify Satan;
for if God be not able to protect thee in the discharge of thy duty, it is time
to think of another Master; but complain of Satan to God, parley not with them,
but divert thy thoughts, and cry up that God the more, whom he tempts thee to
blaspheme.

But others are willing Distractions, which are the ordinary effect of an
unspiritual and unprepared Heart: To such an Heart the whole Duty is a
Distraction: When a vain and earthly Soul like a truant Scholar, keeps out of
his Masters sight out of choice, and with content, and is any where better than
at his Lesson: What little Rest would such a Soul find in Heaven? Or what true
delight can he take in the most holy presence of God above, that can find no
rest and sweetness in his presence below?

3. Again, some Distractions are long, and do consist of a concatenation of
vain thoughts, when they do lodge in the heart. The Lord still calling at the
door, and saying, How long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? These do much
alter the complexion of the Soul, and argue too deep an habit of vanity
therein. It is a true saying, Though we cannot hinder the Birds from flying
over our heads, yet we may disturb their roosting or making Nests in our hair.
So though we cannot well hinder the sudden suggestion of a vain thought, yet we
may trouble its quiet resting in the Soul. Yet such strange subtilty is there
in us, that we can keep God in play a long time (yea when our selves are
employed in a Prayer) and be tampering with the world or sin all the while, the
soul never coming in, till the Amen of a Prayer do awaken us Cerenus writes of
Theophylact a Patriarch of Constantinople that he kept 2000 horses fed with
Dates and Almonds and watered them in Wine, And being on a time, (while he was
performing his Office in the Temple of Sophia) told in his Ear that his Mare
Pha^bante had foal'd, he broke of his Service went home to see it, and then
came and set in again. What was ill done by him in Person, is not well done by
us in spirit.
. But other Distractions are but short, only a step out of the way, and in
again, and the soul catches the faster hold of God. And indeed when the soul
does follow hard after God (as every one should do in his service.) though it
stumble, as it often happens to the most earnest in the way, yet it recovers to
its advantage, being more zealous after; The fall of the former being like that
of the Swine, who lies still in her mire; The fall of the latter, like the
Sheep that falling rises, and runs the faster. And thus you have seen the
several kinds of Distractions, which was the second general Head.

CHAP. III. To Attend on the Lord without Distraction, is our Duty.
SECT. I.
IN the third place I shall prove, Cap. 3. Proves that it is our Duty to Attend
on the Lord without Distraction.
that to Attend upon the Lord without Distraction is our Duty, which will
clearly follow by demonstrating, 1. The Possibility of it. 2. The Necessity of
it.

First, It is Possible thus to serve our God: the sluggard,. 1. The possibility
of it.
it is true, finds a Lion in his way to every Duty, and nothing is possible,
because nothing is welcome. There is no Duty so easy, but can pose the
negligent; none so hard, but is facile through Divine grace to the diligent.
Perfection herein I assert not, but that we may attain it, in the substance and
security thereof is proved.

1. From the Precept of God, The wise and merciful God commands nothing, but he
finds or makes it possible; He most truly says, Viam aut inveniam aut faciam.
His commands are not snares but Rules, yea and Helps. When a Master commands,
power and assistance wait not on his Commands; the Servants strength must
perform the Masters will: but here are the commands of a Father, which when
they outstrip his child's strength, are still accompanied with his own
assistance; and the chair which the weak cannot bring in, he helps to fetch
himself. Now behold the Divine Precept, 1 Samuel 12.24. Serve him in Truth with
all your Heart. What truth is there, while we appear to serve the Lord, and
indeed do not think upon him at all! Or how is that with all the Heart, while
there is not half, nor any thereof many times! while we can pray, and plot, and
think, and look, and begin our Devotion only at the end of the Duty. Our
merciful Father will not impose an impossible Law upon us. Imperat mihi Deus ut
praebeam illi cor meum, and quia imperanti Deo non sum obed e^s, mihi sum
rebellis and contrarius, idcirco plura machinatur cor meum uno momento, quam
omnes homines perficere possunt uno anno Bern. med. c. 8.
It may by accident become impossible, but it is not so in it self.

2. In regard of the Power of God it is possible. Ours is the Duty, but his is
the strength. God and his servant can do any thing. When you look on a hard
task, and your heart fails you, advance your eye of Faith, and you will find
God the strength of your heart, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ
that strengthens me; lo here the omnipotency of a worm! If all things, (that
is all my duty) then this among the rest. But you will say, This was an
Apostle, a Person of great strength and Grace: yet still the Acts were from the
man, but the Strength was from Christ; for the same person says, 2 Cor. 3.5.
Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves,
but our sufficiency is of God. Who though he be at the same time Terrible out
of his holy places, and darts his Curses on them that do his work negligently,
yet the God of Israel is he that gives strength and power to his People,
Blessed be God, Psalm. 68.35. He gives, that is, he is ready to give it out, but
alas his stock lies almost dead by him; and none sues to him in good earnest.
His Power is at your service, and therefore serve your selves of it.

3. In regard of the Promise of God, This is Possible. To every command there
is a Promise Compare Deuteronomy. 10.16. with Chap. 30.6. And so 1 Ioh. 2.27, 28.
. The command finds us work, the Promise ^inds us strength. As to this, some
think that clause in our Magna Charta, Ezekiel. 11.19. of One Heart is intended
this way; wherein the Lord promises an united heart to his servants. An
hypocrite has more hearts than one, an heart for his pleasures, an heart for
his pride, here and there his affections are straggling, now says God I will
give one heart. There is another Promise, Jer. 32.40. I will put my fear into
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me; neither in whole nor in part,
unless fault be in your selves. Now these promises are Amen in Christ, and do
belong to every soul that is in Christ; who may claim and have the benefit of
them.

4. Add hereunto the Experience of many servants of God, who by an habit of
holy watchfulness, have attained to considerable strength against these
Wanderings. Hope of relief makes many complain of their Distractions, when fear
of Pride hinders them from divulging their seize; And that which by the
grace of God is possible for others, with the same grace is possible for you.

SECT. II.
SEcondly,. 2. The necessity of it.

Read Gersons Distinction of Habitual, Actual, and Vertual Attention of the
heart, and consider it well. Gerson de Oratione. p. 612.


It is necessary, and therefore no doubt our duty to Attend on God without
Distractions. It not only may be done, but must be done, You will say, They are
happy that can do it, but they may be safe enough that cannot; Thus the inside
and substance of Religion is counted an high attainment, but not Duty. I shall
show therefore that this soul-attendance on the Lord is necessary.

1. It is Necessary to the Essence or Being of the Duty; As the soul is
necessary to the Being of a man, the body is no man, but a Corpse without it;
even so a solemn Duty with a wandering heart is but the Corpse of a Duty. Lam.
3.41. Let us lift up OUR HEARTS with our hands to God in the Heavens. The
elevation of the hands signifies nothing, without lifting up the heart with
them. If prayer be the (...). Damasc.
lifting up of the heart, what are words without the heart? Ubi Duo vel ^res
congregati in nomin: meo, etc. qui sunt isti Duo; nisi anima and corpus.
Ambros. de instit. virg. c. 2.
A man may spend the same time and the same words, in a serious and in an
heartless Duty, and yet the latter stand for nothing, for want of intenseness
and attention. Isa. 64.7. There is none that calls on thy name, because none
stirs up himself to take hold on thee. If a man come to the service of God
and do not (...).
excite and stir up his soul to exercise grace, as a man will blow a dull fire;
his faith, zeal and humility, if he do not blow them up, but suffer his Heart
to run at random, the holy God counts all the rest, as a Cipher without a
figure it stands for nothing. Tunc Veraciter oramus, quando al^^nde non
cogitamus. Bern. de int. Domo. c. 48.


2. It is necessary to comfort in the Duty. The service of God is a most sweet
pot of ointment of a most refreshing odor, The gracious soul is refreshed
therein, as in a bed of Spices. Distractions are the dead flies, Eccles. 10.1.
that dropping into this sweet ointment, cause it to send forth a stinking
savor, displeasing to God, and unpleasing to the soul. Where can the soul be
better than with God? what sweeter company, than that which Angels keep; or
pleasant employment than conversing in Heaven? till a sort of wandering thoughts
arise, and like a black cloud quite hide the sweet beams of that Sun of
Righteousness from the soul, and then your comfort is gone. The sweetness of
music consists in its harmony, when the strings are out of tune, or untuneably
touched, it is but a harsh sound, there, is no music: wandering thoughts are
like strings out of tune, there is no music in that Duty; the Holy Ghost goes
away and likes it not; Nequ^ enim agnosci pot^ri^ a spiritu sancto spiritus
inquinatus -- aut impeditus a libero^ nemo adversarium recipit, nemo nisi
comparem suum admittit. Tert. de orat. p. 135.
and the soul likes it not, is weary of it, there is no sweetness in that Duty.
It is a tried Maxim, The more seriousness, the more sweetness; the nearer to
God, the warmer and merrier is the soul, which inward comfort is some reward to
the heart of a Christian, when his particular suit is denied; so that IN
keeping of Gods Commandments there is a great reward. The choicest of the
Spirits sealing comforts, are bestowed in the lively service of God.

3. It is necessary to the prosperity of a Duty. Psalm. 66.18. If I regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my Prayer. In Gods service the
soul should be regarding God alone. If I regard a Corruption instead of Christ,
If when some vain object presents it self, I turn my back on God to treat with
vanity, the Lord will not hear me, nor regard me. We read 1 Samuel 1.13. of that
gracious Hannah, that she spoke in her heart, only her lips moved not, her
voice was not heard; yet this wordless prayer did the business; Lip-labor, if
no more, is but lost labor, Deus autem non vocis, sed cordis auditor est,
sicut conspector. Tert. de oratione p. 154.
The sweating and laboring of the heart prevails. The Lord our God has a book
of remembrance for them that think on his name, while he turns the deaf ear to
them that cry Lord, Lord, and do not inwardly adore him. In short, thus says
the Lord God, Ezekiel. 14.4. Every man (Child or not Child) that sets up his
Idols in his heart -- and comes to the Prophet, (sits demurely before the
Preacher) I the Lord will answer him that comes, according to the multitude of
his Idols. He that sets his heart on vanity, vanity shall be his recompense; If
he will not affect his own Heart, he shall never affect mine. As long as Moses
h^ld up his hand, Israel prevailed, and no longer.
He that withdraws his Heart in asking, will find the Lord to withdraw his Hand
in giving what he asks.

4. It is necessary to communion with Jesus Christ in a Duty. Which though it
be a Riddle to unregenerate men, yet is the very business and next end of the
Worship of God; which if you lose, that Duty is lost. Jesus Christ calls, Cant.
2.14. O my Dove -- let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet
is thy voice and thy countenance is comely. Now if, when he waits thus to be
gracious, you wait not for his grace, and watch for the blessed appearances of
the Holy Ghost, you will lose that happiness, you will lose your labor, and at
length your souls. How are you troubled, that you are abroad, when some Morn.
Lect. p. 467.
good customer comes to your shop, It troubles you when that is bestowed with
another, that was intended for you. O Sirs, the spirit of God is a good
Customer, and when he comes and you are away, you are absent to your loss; and
therefore keep at home the next time.

How unmannerly would it be for the Subject to knock at his Princes Chamber,
and (knowing he is within, and waits for him) step away about some frivolous
trifle, when he has done? The Prince appears, opens his royal door, and
calls; but the Clown is gone. How fairly may he shut his door against such a
guest, and make him dance attendance long enough, before he see his face
Curramus igitur non passibu^ corporis sed affectibus sed desideriis, quia non
^olum Angeli, sed and Angelorum Creator nos expectat. Bern. Med. c. 6.
? Ah how seldom do we see the face of God in an Ordinance, or much endeavor
it? Psalm. 63.8. My soul follows hard after thee, The Hebrew (...)
agglutinavit.
is glued to thee. That soul and that alone that follows hard after God by the
earnest intenseness of zeal and love, that cannot be content without him, that
heart shall cleave to him, and have rare communion with him.

Thus you may plainly see, that to attend on the Lord without Distraction is a
Duty, which is the Third Point to be handled.

Cap. 4. Reasons of the Doctrine.
CHAP. IV. Reasons why we ought to Attend on the Lord without Distraction.
SECT. I.
. 1. From the Nature of God.
THe fourth Point is to show the Reasons for the Doctrine and Duty of Attending
on the Lord without Distraction. And they are drawn 1. From the Nature of God.
2. From the Nature of his Worship. 3. From the Nature of our condition. 4. From
the Nature of Distractions.

The first reason is taken from the Nature of God, each of his Attributes plead
for this, especially,

1. The greatness of God. The greater the Personage, the greater the Reverence,
and the more solemn your attendance is. Qui apud Caesarem dicere audent,
magnitudinem ejus ignorant; qui non audent, humanitem.
Hence Elihu cries, Job 37.19. Teach us what we shall say to him, for we cannot
order our speech by reason of darkness (...), etc. Atqui illa bona est oration,
quae manifestam Dei notionem in animis nostris ingenerat. Deus vero in nobis
inhabitare dicitur, cum eum intu^ insedentem memoria complectimur. Basil. conc.
9. de Oratione.
. It is a bold adventure to speak to him, what is it then to trifle with him?
will thou speak to God, nay pray to God, and not so much as look that way when
thou speak to him? This is to put on him the robes and title of a King and
use him like a slave. A Prince may converse with two or three of his servants
at a time, but its Impudence for a servant to talk to two or three Princes at a
time. The great Jehovah can speak with thee, and a thousand more, and do all
your errands at a time, but alas! thou art too poor a worm, to entertain the
great Jehovah, and other matters at once. We are his Creatures, Isa. 45.11.
Thus says the Lord the holy one of Israel and his Maker. If a servant must not
be frivolous before his Master, when he is receiving his commands, who dares be
so before his Maker, who can as easily reward or ruin us as I can turn over a
leaf in this Bible? This Himself gives for the reason of that dreadful curse,
Mal. 1.14. upon the Deceiver, that having a Male in his flock, offers to God a
corrupt thing. For I am a great King says the Lord of Hosts, and my name is
dreadful among the Heathen. Which of you will be thinking of your wives, or
children, or ground, when you are offering a Petition to a great King, or run
after Feathers, when he is saying his mind to you? Thou take God to be such a
one as thy self, or else thou would never do it. Remember a great God must
be worshipped with profound veneration, and the most serious affections. A man
must worship God, as if he were in Heaven; Oh if thou were there among those
myriads of Saints and Angels, with what care, and humility, and instance,
would thou pour out thy heart to him, or hear his words to thee Qua^ta
humilita^e accedere deb^t e paludi sua repens rananculus vilis? quam supplex --
quam soli^itus and ^o^us animo in^entus. (...). de erat. mot. ^^and.
.

2. The Holiness of God is another Reason, who is so sacred, that an unholy
Thought is abomination to him; most especially in his holy Service. Who can by
an eye of Faith behold the Lord sitting on a throne high and lifted up, and his
train filling the Temple, And the Seraphinis crying one to another, and saying,
Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 6.1, 2. Nec ab ^^ a solumm^^do, se^
omni omni^ no confasione a ^mi libera debet esse oration^^ in^entio, de ^ali
spirit^ em^ssa qualis est spiritus ad quem mittitur. Tertul. de Orat. p. 153.
and suffer his heart to be ravished away with transitory toys in such a Sacred
presence? Are the Seraphims amazed at his holiness, and we untransported? Their
thoughts are continually terminated upon him, And should ours be always
flinching from him? The Holy Lord of Hosts will not brook it. If you will not
sanctify him, he will sanctify himself. If you that worship him, will not
bear witness by your serious attendance to his Holiness, He must bear witness
to it by his Judgments on You: which indeed are not always visible, but ever
certain; not a man in the Congregation, but the Holy God is Sanctified by him,
or upon him. Little do we know, what invisible dreadful effects there are of
this, daily in our Congregations. And if our dear Redeemer did not stand as a
skreen between us and his wrath, the best of us would quickly feel the effects
of his Displeasure.

3. The Omniscience of God is a valid reason against Distractions. Heb. 4.13.
All things are naked and opened to him, with whom we have to deal, not only
naked on the outside of us, but cut up and anatomised in the inside. That sharp
and piercing Deus est ^otus oculus, videt omnia, Generaliter sine exceptione,
evidenter sin^ dubitatione, immutabiliter sine oblivione.
eye looks through and through us, and neither does or can look beside us.
Whither can I go from thy spirit? and whither can I flee from thy presence?
shall the Husband fix his eye on his Wife, and she (that while) dart her
glances on her Paramour? Is this reasonable or tolerable? Get out of his sight,
and trifle on. Steal into some corner where he sees you not, and be truants and
spare not. Be but an Eye-servant to God, and we will ask no more. Be serious
while He sees you; dally not while he holds you the candle. A curious Eye
requires a careful servant Quid potest ab homine aliquid esse secre^um, nihil
Deo clausum. Interest animis nostris and cogitationibu^ med^is intervenit,
Seneca^ For which saying Zuinglius calls him ^irum Sanctissimum.


Object. But this is spoken gratis, I see no body but the Minister and People,
seeing is believing, I know no body that sees me.

Answ. 1. No more do thou see that faculty by which thou see. Is there
therefore no such faculty? Is there no spirits, because thou never saw them?
when did you see the wind, and yet you doubt not of it. Nay has not he
declared to thee, what is thy thought, Amos 4.13. in many a Sermon?

2. There is another eye by which Gods Ordinary-Presence is seen, which thou
have not. That is an eye of Faith, which if fixed in thy heart would quickly
make thee cry, How dreadful is this place? This is no other, than the house of
God, and the Gate of Heaven. If an hundred credible persons affirm, they saw a
Great man in the Congregation, you would believe them, though not seen by you,
and would conclude it your own inadvertency. Hundreds there daily are, that do
avouch, they saw, felt, heard, embraced the gracious presence of God, and
therefore conclude it your Blindness, not his Distance that you saw him not.

SECT. II.
. 2. From the Nature of his Worship.
THE second Reason is taken from the Nature of his Worship,

1. It is Reasonable Worship; not only consonant to the Rules of Reason, and
backed by the most Rational Principles, but must be managed as a Oration est
o^is ratio Hierom. ad Cypr. p. 98.
Rational Act. Now it is a most irrational thing to converse with God without
an Heart; This is a silly thing, as Hos. 7.11. Ephraim is called a silly Dove,
without Heart. A Dove, without spirit; and a silly Dove, without reason or
judgment. God had rather hear the roaring of a Lion, than an heartless prayer:
He delights more in the chirping of birds, than in singing of Psalms without
understanding; for these do what they can, and so are accepted, but brutish
service from a reasonable Creature is intolerable. Is it The Egyptians chose
among all fruits the Peach to offer to their gods, because the Fruit is like a
man's Heart; the leaf like his tongue. Heart and tongue should go together, Er.
reason you should cry out for the spirit, and think on the flesh? be harkening
about another world, and ruminating on this? your eyes directed to Heaven, and
your Heart in the ends of the Earth? the tongue busy, and the soul idle? the
knee devout, and the thoughts loose? there is no coherence, no reason in this.
When ye work, work, and when ye pray, pray, and do it with understanding, 1
Cor. 14.15. What it is then! I will pray with the spirit, and will pray with
the understanding also; I will sing with the spirit, and will sing with the
understanding also. Habes ubique cubiculum tuum. Cubiculum tuum men's tua est.
Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 6.


Consider, Mr. White of Thoughts. p. 93.
that else thou art as a mad man before God, and God has no need of mad men:
if one should come to thee about business of life and death, and after a word
or two therein, should run from one impertinent thing to another, would you not
think him mad? If thy thoughts were put into words and mingled with thy
prayers, what strange mad prayers would they be?

2. It is spiritual-worship, and therefore you may not be distracted in it.
Joh. 4.23, 24. The true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in
Truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him. Ubi putas Sacrisicia
justitiae Sacrisicari nisi in templo mentis and cu^ tilibus cordis? Deus enim
in ipsis rationalis animae secretis (qui homo interior vocatur) and quaerendus
and deprecandus est. Aug. lib. de magistro.
Others may seek to worship the Father, but the Father seeks such to worship
him, to wit, that worship in Spirit and in Truth, In Spirit, and so not like
the formal Jews, In Truth, and so not like the ignorant Gentiles. And then
verse. 24. God is a Spirit, and must be worshipped. Here Is Must and Shall, and
Reason for it. As a spirit can do nothing at eating, so a carcass can do
nothing at praying. The elegantest tongues on earth cannot take one stroke at
prayer; no, the soul must be in it, and the soul must be busy too (...), etc.
neque erum ipsa orationis verba per se solaque prosunt quidpiam: at ita demum
juvant, si ex animo ac studioso mentis affectu emittantur. Basil. conc. 9. de
oratione.
. If we had only an Idol to serve, the body were enough, but God is a spirit
and cannot be conversed with without the spirit, yea and the whole spirit also.
Fond man, that thinks with his narrow soul to deal with God and somewhat else,
who alone is immense and beyond our greatest capacity. He must be taken up, and
go out of the world in a sense that will get into Heaven. The soul on the lip,
and the soul in the ear, do rid work in the service of God.

3. It is sweet work. Psalm. 138.5. Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the
Lord, for great is the glory of the Lord: mark [ shall sing] their spirits
shall neither droop nor step aside. He that attends on the Lord has a most
sweet employment: now the mind uses not to straggle at most rare music, or
under an enchanting song. Alexanders great soul, yet is said exilire e convivio
under the charms of Music. O the gracious presence of God! his sweet smiles!
and blessed love tokens, that can transport Angels, sure they may engage the
heart of man, and sufficiently fill it.

Read the Canticles and say then, Is not converse with God an Heaven upon
Earth? and how far is Heaven from distracted thoughts? sad and severe things
afflict the mind, It would flit from such subjects; but sweet employment
ingages all the heart: next dwelling in Heaven, is the soul flying to Heaven in
an Ordinance; Our dryest Duties yield us least comfort: The nearer the Sun, the
warmer. More close to God more sweet you will find him, and never more joyful
than in the House of Prayer.

SECT. III.
THe third reason is taken from the Nature of our Condition,. 3. From the
Nature of our condition.
and that is this,

1. We cannot live without God. In him we live as to our natural life, every
(...) is fetched from Him; so in our spiritual life, the life of the soul is He
that made it. A world without a Sun, is dark; a body without a soul, is dead;
but a soul withont God, is dark, is dead, is damned: Its true, men feed, and
sing, and make a shift without God in the World, but he that lives truly lives
by faith; the other life Beasts live, they eat, and drink, and work, but know
not God; but if you will define the life of a soul, God must be in the
beginning, in the midst, and in the end of it.

2. Our only way of communion with God is in an Ordinance Non magis competit
animalibus perfecti respiratio, quam Oration Christianis, qui vivunt per fidem,
spirant per preces. Dr. Arrowsmith.
. This is the River, the streams whereof make glad the heart. Were a City
besieged by mortal enemies round about, and no relief to be conveyed, but by
the River that waters it; how fatal to the City would the stopping of that
River be? that City must starve, or yield: The ordinary supplies that a
Christian cannot be without, come swimming down from Heaven through the
Ordinances of God; Distractions stop the River, hinder Prayer from ascending to
God, hinder instruction from descending into the heart, intercept commerce and
starve the soul. The zeal of the Jews was eminent this way, of whom Josephus
relates, that when Pompeys Soldiers shot at the thickest of them in the siege
of Jerusalem, yet amidst those arrows, did they go and perform their rites, as
though there had been peace: why, thy Prayer is the Ambassador, Distractions
cut off the feet, and Prove. 26.6. He that sends a message by the hand of a
fool, cutteth off the feet, and drinks damage. A wandering Prayer is a message
by the hand of a fool, and that man is like to drink damage that uses it: A
man is a poor thing without God, and God is not ordinarily met with but in an
Ordinance.

3. All our strength and Heart is too little for this business. All our
understanding too little to apprehend his rare perfections; All our affections
too weak and shallow, to love, embrace and delight in him; hence, Mark. 12.33.
we are obliged to love, and so to serve the Lord our God with all our heart,
and with all our soul, and with all our strength, Vnusquisque ergo cum in
oratione, vel Psalmos -- decantat, diligenter consideret cui affectui serviant,
and ad illum affectum Toto Nisu cor suum excitet, ad quem id, quod loquitur,
magis pertinere videt. Hugo de S. Vict. de modo orandi. c. 5.
that is, with every faculty of the soul, and with the utmost strength of every
faculty. Now if it be hard enough to climb the hill unto God with wings; how
shall we ascend with these weights about us, or think to please with half an
heart, when the whole is too little? for he is a great King and his name is
dreadful among the Heathen; when all the water in the pool will but turn the
Mill, that Miller is a fool, that by twenty Channels lets out the Water other
ways: The intense and earnest heart is little enough to converse with God, all
the water in our Pool will but turn the Mill. What then can the remiss heart
bring to pass, and how unlikely are we to obtain with the great God, with the
negligent approaches of a trivial spirit, with a little part of a little heart
Fieri autem non potest ut aliquando cum Deo loquatur, qui cum ^oto mundo etiam
tacens fabulatur. Bern. Med. c. 6.
?

SECT. IV.
. 4. From the Nature of Distractions.
THe fourth Reason is taken from the Nature of Distractions.

1. They divide the Heart, Hoc est vigilare oculis and Cord domire cum debeat
Christianus and cum dormit oculis cord vigilare sicut Sponsa Cant. 5. Cyprian
de Oratione.
and disable it wholly; now a divided heart can do nothing at all, Hos. 10.2.
Their heart is divided, now shall they be found faulty; If one heart divided
from another make a fault, much more faulty is one heart divided within it
self. Hence it comes to pass, that Satan offers, as the false Mother did about
the living Child, 1 King. 3.26. Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide
it, If he cannot block your way to the presence of God, and make good his claim
to the living Child; as She would have done, then with might and main, he
furthers all imaginable diversions to part the Soul; and cries, Lord let it be
neither thine nor mine, but divide it; well knowing that (as the Child, so) the
heart while entire, is a living and lively heart, but divide it and destroy it;
As he that runs at once after two Hares, catches neither, so two businesses at
once, spoils both. He that thinks to treat the Creator and the creature at the
same time, enjoyes neither of them: And thus the vain heart of man by
over-doing, undoes it self, and reaching at two matters, spoils them both.

2. These Distractions frustrate the Ordinance; and cause the great name of God
to be taken in vain. Instead of forcing the Hearers, these do but beat the air,
and cannot reach the Heart of God, Vis esse Deum memorem tui cum rogas, quando
tu ipse memor tui non sis? Quomodo te audiri a Deo postulas cum te ipse non
audias. Cyprian. de Orat. Dom.
because they never reach your own. And this is one of the follies of a roving
heart, that it consumes as much time in a senseless as in a serious Duty, and
yet does nothing in it, brings nothing to pass. And so the Holy God stands over
the heedless sinner with Jobs words, Job. 16.3. When shall Vain words have an
End? I am weary with this tinkling Cymbal, either pray in earnest, or pray not
at all; hear in earnest, or hear not at all: As good not at all, as never the
better. The service of God requires a man, not a shadow, yea all a man, and
more than a man, our spirits, and Gods spirit also. Those that tremble at the
profane man's taking Gods name in vain, should make a Conscience, lest they do
it themselves; lest They be damned for their Oaths, and You for your prayers;
because you wrong Gods Majesty under the pretense of serving him, and so
affront him with more solemnity.

3. They contract more sin upon the Soul. We read, Levit. 10.1. That Nadab and
Abihu, the sons of Aaron took either of them his Censer, and put fire therein,
and put incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the Lord. And the Lord
took it in high disdain, and with strange fire consumed them Sua offerunt Deo,
seipsos Diabolo. Bern.
Sins of Ordinances are often extraordinary sins; as Sacrilege is a greater
sin, than plain theft, because it is a purloyning of what is consecrated; so a
sin in worship has this aggravation, that its in a place and presence and
business, that is set apart for communion with God. Hence it comes to pass,
that many of Gods ^hildren have had grievous pangs and ^errour of Conscience on
their deathbed, for ordinance sins. He that should be scoring out his sins,
and instead of that, scores on more, makes his sin exceeding sinful. O what
need then have we to pray, Psalm. 119.39. Turn away mine eyes from beholding
Vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way.

And these are some of the Reasons, that confirm and enforce this Practical
Doctrine, That we should attend upon the Lord without Distractions; and so you
have the fourth general Head.

^ap. 5. Objections answered.
CHAP. V. Objections Answered.
SECT. I.
. 1. Its impossibility.
BUT because there is no Duty so clear, that our sinful hearts will embrace, if
any show of contradiction can be produced; I shall wipe away all Possible
Objections against this Duty, which is the Fifth general Head to be handled.

Object. 1.
It is impossible thus to Attend on God without distractions. Such is the
Variety of objects, such the imbecility of our Nature, such the weakness of
our Graces, such the suddenness and swiftness of a thought, that none but
Angels can do this. You press impossibles, it can never be.

Answ. 1.
Though this objection has been prevented before, yet seeing it recurs again, I
answer,

1. Perfection herein is impossible in this life: not but that a prayer or
other Ordinance may be attended with that intenseness, as to exclude every
wandering thought that would step in; but to be perfectly free in every Duty
from them, is rather to be wished, than hoped for in this life. That Angelical
perfection is Reserved for Heaven, This Evangelical perfection may be here
attained, which is the prevalence of grace against them; and not only a will
but a watch and an endeavor to be utterly rid of them.

2. And in this sense, Answ^ 2.
there is no divine precept impossible: Though our Lord Jesus says, Joh. 15.5.
Without me ye can do nothing, yet the Apostle finds, Phil. 4.13. I can do all
things through him, that strengthens me. If all things, then why not this!
Though it were impossible ex part Rei, in its self, yet is it possible ex
part Dei, with Gods help, we are prone to think that we can compass easy
things by our own strength, and that difficult things are too hard for God.
Have you ever tried to the utmost what God and you can do! could you not have
heard a Sermon better, if a naked sword had hanged by a single twist over your
bare heads; and have prayed more cordially, if you had seen every word you
prayed, written down by the hand of God. The same circumspection that keeps a
Distraction out of one sentence, might (were you faithful therein) keep it out
of two or ten or twenty, and he that can be temperate for a day, might be
temperate every day, if he did his best. Mr. Io. Ba^^ would often say, He would
undertake to prove, That a Moral Heathen might possibly by his circumspection
secure himself from uttering one froward word all his life long.


3. It is a mixture of cowardice and sloth, that makes it impossible. It is an
argument of a slothful heart to say, There is a Lion in the way, O there is a
Lion in the streets, Prove. 26.13. yet if there were a Lion in the way to
Heaven, thou must rather run upon him, than run from God. There is a worse Lion
will meet you in the way to Hell. No, no; its not the danger without, but the
dullness and slothfulness within, that Creates the impossibility. How many
hundreds out of fearfulness and idleness, have restrained Prayer before God;
till being soundly awakened they set about prayer; and found it both feasible
and delightful? Religion in the power of it, is a work of pains. If you will
not sweat for Heaven, you must never have it: try but the next duty with your
best Diligence, and you shall find it possible to the power of Grace, which
looks impossible to the strength of Nature.

SECT. II.
Obj. 2. It is difficult:. 2. Its Difficulty.
if it be not impossible, yet its very hard, Its a lesson for the upper form in
the School of Jesus Christ. We mean scholars need not attempt it, because we
cannot attain it: as good to sit still, as rise up and fall. This is too hard
for us.

Answ. 1. Answ. 1.
This argues the excellency of it, the more hard, the more honorable, and
therefore this should rather whet, than dull thy courage. If you except all
hard points out of the practice of piety, you will leave but few to be
practiced; It is the idle Scholar, that skips over the hardest words of his
lesson, but the rod must fetch him back unto them: neither must you expect that
God will take any notice of your easy duties, if you turn off the hard; he
could have servants enough to do his easy work, but Religion must go all
together, and almost Christianity will not serve the turn.

2. The way to Heaven is hard, Answ. 2.
and this you were told at first: Mat. 7.14. Because strait is the Gate and
narrow is the way, that leads unto life. If you like it not, let it alone,
but see you exchange for the better. To get a Kingdom is not easy, its easy
to lose one. Who gets a race without sweating, or a victory without bleeding,
or Heaven without striving? Hence Mr. Latimer to one that objects against the
duty he was pressing, (which was that Landlords should send for their Tenants
and end differences among them) that this were a good work indeed, but
mavelous hard. O says he, my friend, It is an hard matter to be a Christian.
Heaven was never gotten yet without violence, and there is no new way found of
coming there. But if Christ Jesus had not done harder work than this for thee,
thou must never have come there.

Answ. 3.
3. And is there no hardship in attending upon sin? Is it an easy thing to
serve the Devil? Wise Solomon says, Prove. 13.15. The way of Transgressors is
hard. Our love to it blinds our eyes, or else he serves an hard service, that
dances attendance on any sin; The Lascivious man swallows many difficulties,
perhaps weeks and months together, to continue the pleasure of an hour. How
many dark nights does the Drunkard walk, and hard words endure, and hard shift
make to feed that senseless lust! who would digest the life of a covetous
worldling? hard fare, hard work, hard journeys, for what may be consumed in two
hours; to say nothing of the life of the envious, the ambitious, the malicious
man, whose daily bread is mingled not only with sweat, but gall and bitterness;
and yet who hears them complain of difficulty, or throw off their designs for
hardness. And is it not far better to conquer difficulties for Heaven than
Hell, and venture upon hardship for Christ and thine own soul, than for Satan
and thy damnation? especially when Love to the service of God would make this
yoke as easy, as transgressors labor is to them.

4. Though it be hard to keep off these Distractions, Answ. 4.
yet it is necessary, It must be done. Good Mary would not by any business be
Distracted in her attendance on Christ, Luke 10.42. and He resolves therein,
that she did the One needful thing. Poor men find it hard to work six days
together, but there being a necessity of it, there is no excuse; they could find
twenty put offs, but it must be done, work or starve. We have the same Dilemma,
Pray or perish, and that is not half a Prayer, that is filled with Distractions.

Answ. 5.
5. Though it be hard, yet it is sweet, Prove. 3.17. Her ways are ways of
Pleasantness; and this is one of them. You shall ever observe, the more
wandering the heart, the more wearisome the Duty; a Divided heart can taste but
partial comfort, and fullness of joy follows, where the full bent of the soul
goes before. Our common experience tells us, what peace, what joy, what
confidence, what suavity fills the heart, when we have (though with some
difficulty) approached the Lord, enjoyed him, and attended on him without
Distraction The fineness which a Hymn or Psalm affords

Is, when the Soul unto the lines accords. Herbert.


. What is more hard to the brain and body, than study? for pains, a Scholar
would choose the Plough before it; the brain, the back, the heart and spirits
are pained and spent: yet no employment so sweet, the mind and brain and heart
refreshed, and a right Scholar would hardly change employments with a Prince;
so sweet; so ravishing is this hard employment. Even so it is with Prayer or
any holy Ordinance, the sweetness of a watchful serious frame, does fully
compensate the difficulty thereof.

6. Custom and Practice will make it much easier Answ. 6.
Non quia difficilis est non audemus, sed quia non audemus, difficilis. Seneca.
; He that executes the law on vagrants, though at first he were pestred with
them, will after a while with ease be delivered of them: so that resolved
Christian, who keeps up his watch and ward awhile, shall find it each day
easier than other, to attend on God without these vagrant thoughts. Use and
custom makes the hardest things easy. As a wise man that converses in the
midst of his observing enemies, by use is inured to all caution, and can easily
avoid all dangerous words or behavior; though it be hard, he is used to it; so
practice will wonderfully facillitate this hard duty. You once thought it
impossible for you to Pray, but practice has made you perfect. The same
spirit, by the same help, can and will perfect you in this. This is one of
those Infirmities the spirit of God will help.

SECT. III.
Object. 3. THe Commonness of these Distractions;. 3. Their Commonness.
No man but is full of them, All serious Christians complain of them. What is
so ordinary cannot be very evil, these vanities that every one has, I cannot
expect to be without, and therefore must be content.

Answ. 1.
Answ. 1. This must be answered with Grief. Every man is full of them, and
every Good man is sick with them. If every man's body were gone after his soul,
this would sometimes be an empty Congregation. Every solemn look has not a
serious heart, and there are but few that make a business of Prayer; And this
is a lamentable thing, that we can hold a discourse with man, or crave a
kindness, or drive a bargain without a wandering thought: till our face be set
toward God, and that we begin a duty of Worship, and then or ever we are
aware, our Soul is slipped off her Chariot wheels, and our sight of God is lost.

Answ. 2.
2. And yet some watchful Christians (as we observed before) have got a good
riddance of them, to accuse others is a poor excuse to you. As their humility
teaches them to complain of the worst, so your charity should cause you to
think the best: no doubt they that are sick of them, do by degrees get Physic
against them, and grow better.

3. By this Plea all sins might be justified; Answ. 3.
Thus swearing might be advanced before Praying, for it is more common than
Prayer; Revenge is more common than Forgiveness, but this is no excuse for it.
He that will do as the most do, must go whither most go, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall
not follow a multitude to do evil, no nor to think evil. If thou will be
Christ's Disciple, thou must be serious and attentive, though the whole
Congregation trifle. True sanctity is not grounded on men's practice, but on
Gods precept. Make no apologies but such as you can stand to before the face of
God. What a poor plea will it be to say, I was drunk for company, I stragled
from God for company, Get thee to Hell for company; that which will be no
mitigation of your pain, is no extenuation of your crime. If many displease the
Lord, you have more need to please him, if many play, you have more need to
work, and rather choose to be saved with a few, than damned with a crowd.

Answ. 4.
4. In such an universal loytering, thy care will be more acceptable; Loyalty is
doubly valued and rewarded, where Rebellion is general; and one dutiful Child
is cherisht among many disobedient. Isa. 66.2. To this man will I look, to him
that is poor and contrite and trembles at my word. The Great Iehova there
overlooks Heaven and Earth, and the House of his rest, to fix his blessed eye
on this man or woman, that when he comes to a Sermon does not, dare not trifle,
but trembles at the word, and that feels every sentence at his heart. When
Gallants come into the Congregation then Man looks, but when the poor trembling
Hearer comes in, then God looks; The Angels gaze at such guests, as vain people
do at Silks and Fashions. O its a rare sight to see a Christian in earnest, to
behold an humble man converse with God, the Host of Heaven rise up and are
taken with it. If therefore it be so common to be distracted in Duties, do thou
disdain to be in the common fashion, get quickly into the Mode of Heaven.

SECT. IV.
Object. 4. GOd will accept the will for the Deed;. 4. Gods accepting the Will
for the Deed.
I would be free from these temptations, but in this life I cannot, and
therefore shall sit down content. God is merciful, though you are strict. And
he has said, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man has, and not according to that he has not.

Answ. 1. Answ. 1.
This axiom and Scripture were never intended as a pillow for the lazy, but a
support to the weary; nor to exempt us from our duty, but to comfort us under
our weakness. What Parent will accept this answer from a negligent Child? or
what Master will be content of this excuse, from a slothful servant? offer it
now to you Governor, and imagine not, it will pass with God, which would be
counted a mockery with men.

2. God never accepts the Will for the Deed, Answ. 2.
when the Deed may be done; when the Idem cannot be paid, the Tantundem shall
serve; yea and so far as the Deed can be done, the will without it, is but a
mockery unto God. But wherein an upright heart has done its utmost in the use
of all means, and would do more, this will is accepted for the Deed, even as if
thou had perfectly obeyed; And so that Scripture cited is express in the case
of charity; It is accepted according to that a man has. So that a man must
give according to that he has, or else his willing mind stands for nothing.
Now have you done your utmost against Distractions! can you do no more? If
Death stood at the end of the Duty, you could double your watch. Plead not this
till you have done your best. He who craves all the Mind And all the Soul and
strength and time If the words only rhyme Justly complains that somewhat is
behind To make his Verse, or write a hymn in kind. Mr. Herbert.


3. It is far from the quality of grace, to sit down content in any defect or
sin, Answ. 3.
or to vouch the mercy of God to secure the soul in any transgression; who when
he is dressed in his richest garments of mercy, Exodus 34.7. Yet will not by any
means clear the guilty. No, it is the Genius of true Grace to be restless under
his de^ects, if he cannot be rid of them: to roll up the stone, though it
tumble still upon him, and cry out and roar under those diseases that are
uncurable. After the Apostle had told us, Romans 7.19. The good I would, I do
not, but the Evil that I would not, that I do. He lies not down, and resolves
to let it run, but fights, and strives, and cries, O wretched man that I am.
Verse. 24. Si dixisti sufficit periisti. If thou once sit down, be content, and
say, I Will strive no more, thou give the field. The Spirit withdraws with
tears, and Satan goes away with triumph.

4. The Great Jehovah is so far from being content with such a frame, Answ. 4.
that he has plainly cursed all such as do the work of the Lord negligently,
or deceitfully, Jer. 48.10. Though you neglect not the work of the Lord, yet if
you do it negligently, you are in danger of the curse. Every Distraction is a
neglect, in each wandering you deal deceitfully with God, and for every of these
in a Duty, Gods Law pronounces a Curse. And is the Divine Curse inconsiderable
with you? who could digest an hundred curses, though pronounced at your door by
a provoked neighbor? O how much more intolerable is it, to be obnoxious to an
hundred Curses from Heaven, justly deserved and infallibly inflicted, if
Repentance prevent not. It is not the work of the Lord will excuse you; Nadab
shall perish with his strange fire, as well as if he had offered nothing at
all. Take heed of forgiving your selves, when God forgives you not, A negligent
Duty is abomination to God.

And thus you have the most material Objections answered, which is the fifth
Point handled.

CHAP. VI. The Causes of Distractions, Cap. 6. The Causes of Distractions.
with their Remedies.
SECT. I.
. 1.
WE shall now proceed unto the more Practical part of this Subject, namely to
find out and sum up the causes of this Epidemical Disease, which is the Sixth
Point to be handled.

The First Cause of Distractions in Gods service is, Secret Atheism Secret
Atheism. (...). Basil, in reg. brev.
. There is an Atheism of the Head, Atheism of the heart, and Atheism of the
Life. In the first, The Fool has said in his Head, There is no God, Psalm.
14.1. Mark, it is not, He has thought in his heart, but says it by rote to
himself; rather as what he would have, than what he does believe. And of him
this is truly said, That the speculative Atheist is the greatest Monster in the
world, except the Practical. And our late Divisions, by the help of our corrupt
Natures, have proselyted a considerable number to this desperate Opinion: As if
the different opinions about the ebb^ng and slowing of the Sea, should render
it doubtful whether the Sea did ebb and flow; or the disputes about the manner
of Vision, should call our Sight it self into question: You would think it a
fond conclusion to say, Because Philosophers argue much about the sensitive and
vegitative Faculties of the Soul, that there is no rational Soul at all, in
that these very velitations and debates do argue a rational Soul, by and with
which these points are disputed: even so it is notorious madness to conclude,
from the variety and diversity of Opinions about Religion and Government, that
there is no God; seeing you are supported by him, while you dispute and argue
about him.

Atheism of the Heart, is, whereby the Fool says also in his Heart, There is
no God; that is, either secretly questions, or but coldly assents to the
existence of God, or heartily wishes there were none at all. And it is worth
observation of both these, that they are such as are obnoxious to the Divine
Majesty by some misdemeanor: The Felon wishes there were no Judge at all, and
even these are forced in some pangs to acknowledge him, at some fright by
thunder, under some horror of Consci^nce, or in the point of death, they are
forced to give Jehovah his due. And they also in any sudden fright, or great
extremity, use to cry out, O God, O Lord, as earnestly as others.

Atheism of the Life, that is described, Tit. 1.14. They profess that they know
God, but in works they deny him. Now both these latter do breed of the first,
and this last is most visible in our Distractions: For if thou did as verily
believe God present in an Ordinance, as he that sits next thee, durst thou
trifle so egregiously as thou do? The Minister looks at you, and you dare not
talk; if you saw him that looks at you from Heaven, you durst not straggle: And
therefore the more or less strong our belief is of God, the more or less lively
are we in our applications to him. Oh the patience of God! that he can endure
the Worm to doubt of him, yea implicitly to deny him, and not demonstrate
himself by a Thunderbolt! But the Countrey-man's ignorance of the Primum
Mobile, does not nullify it; no more does the Athiests Infidelity degrade the
Primus Motor, the Majesty of Heaven, Heb. 11.6. He that comes unto God, must
first believe that he is.

The Remedy of this Cause, is, Humbly to read the Scripture, which is the most
clear, certain and convincing way to work Faith herein. One in Gerson that
studied against Atheism, and could not get the better of it, at last fell to
Prayer, and thereby grew as really persuaded of the truth of unseen things, as
of the Chair he sat in.
Prayer and the Bible have convinced more than any other Reasons, and recommend
me to Moses above Plato, for the demonstrating a Deity. All that Reason can
suggest, might be written by an Infidel; and more Infidels (I trow) have been
convinced by reading and hearing the Book of the Christians, than have
Christians been settled by reading the Books of Infidels. And therefore
although holy David, Psalm. 19.1. appeals to the Heavens, and the Host of them,
as a most strong Argument to declare God, and so it is; (for what reason but
the hand of a God, can be rendered, that the Planets being all of one matter,
should have contrary motions, seeing things of the like matter have by nature
like motion?) yet laying that Topic aside, he pitches upon the Law of God,
verse. 7. as the most perfect and sure way to demonstrate a God, and convert and
enwise a Soul. Then go to God in prayer, and beg him to touch thy Heart, and
open thine Eyes, and thou shall quickly see him that is not far from every one
of us.

SECT. II.
. 2.
II. The corruption of our Nature.
THE second Cause of Distractions in the service of God, is, The corruption of
our Nature, that is, of Soul and Body; so that our inward faculties do act our
outward senses, and they infect our inward faculties in this business, Hoc
disco m^a experi e^tia^ quod non habeo t^m magna^ causam timendi extra me qua^
intra me. Luth.
Mat. 15.19. Out of the Heart proceed vain and evil thoughts; are not forced
out, as sparks out of a Flint, but come out thence of themselves, as sparks out
of a Furnace: View the mind, and its accident is Vanity, and how can a vain
Mind be serious with God without a great deal of grace? The Heart its name is
Deceitful, and makes a trade of juggling and purloining in the solemnest Duties;
and when the ear receives the word as a lovely song, she runs after
covetousness the while. Now is she without, now in the streets, and l^eth in
wait at every corner, like the lewd woman, Prove. 7.11. The eye that should be
fixed on Heaven, is in the ends of the earth, and gathering a straggling notion
from every object. The ear by every noise calls off the soul from its great
business, thus woefully the old man is bent against the new man. Romans 7.23. The
law of the members war against the law of the mind, and leads us into captivity
to the law of sin that is in the members. When the mind it self is set in its
most hearty purposes to wait on God, and offer him a faithful sacrifice, then
comes in the law of the members, and either suggests within, or admits from
without some roving notions, and these lead the poor soul like that young man,
Prove. 7.21, 22. forced with flatteries, like the ox to the slaughter or the
fool to the correction of the stocks. And he that began in Heaven, ends on
earth, if not in hell. M^ns humana propter infirmitatem naturae diu s^are in
Alto non potest. Aquin. 22. q. 83. a. 13.
Thus the good he would do, he cannot. O wretched man that must lead his life
with such an heart!

As if a man were tied still to shoot in a warping bow; he settles himself in
his right postures, aims directly at the White, but his warping bow still
carries the arrow quite besides the Butt, and his skill is rendered ineflectual:
so the poor upright Christian in a duty, orders his business and his heart, as
well as ever he can, and aims at the glorifying of God, and getting good to his
soul; but the corruption of his nature diverts him, and perverts him from his
purpose. This hinders the elevation of the soul, which would fix it in God's
service, like one that has a light heart, and an heavy body; the light heart
would fly, the heavy body clips her wings, and will hardly creep. O, says the
soul, now will I arise and soar into heaven; I must, I will, speak with my God;
my wants are pressing, my sins increase, Eternity approaches, who will give me
the wings of an Eagle? I Will never live so far from God, I will away. Thus this
Bird of Paradise takes wing, when behold the stone of her corrupt nature hangs
at her leg, and weighs her down: she flutters a little, but cannot fly, for
her heart she cannot fly, indeed because of the heart she cannot fly As a
Fuller and a Collier living in one house, what the one whites the other blacks;
so is Grace and Corruption in our hearts. M. Strong.
.

And not only the dullness, but the deceitfulness of our corrupt nature furthers
our distractions. For though the heart be deceitful from the beginning to the
end of the year, yet her prime and subtled sleights are showed in the service
of God; where she is put hard to it to shift hard for her self, and therefore
uses her finest notions and sliest fetches to evade the presence of God, A man
that has the Palsy, his hand shakes, but it is against his will.
and powerful influences of the holy Ghost. Like some subtle Thief, that joins
himself to the unwary Traveller, and gives him pleasant company a while, till
when he watches his time he draws him with him out of the way, and takes his
purse; before he is aware he is in a wood, and his purse is gone. Even so, the
heart of man takes on to be very willing to prayer, or other good duties, and
goes with us a while; but ere we have stepped twenty sentences into our work,
this deceitful heart turns us aside, brings us to feed upon ashes, and binds up
the faculties, that we cannot deliver our souls, nor say, Is there not a lie in
my right hand? Isa. 44.20. Now is it not an hell upon earth to live with such a
heart, to cross a man in the midst of his greatest business, disappoint him in
his highest expectations, and make him lose his labor, if not his soul?

The Remedy against this corruption of our Nature is hard. To divert a stream
is easy, but to dry up a spring is hard, stop it here, and it breaks out
there. So to divert and discharge a wandering thought is easy in comparison,
but the womb of the heart is pregnant; kill one Viper, and there is an hundred
more ready for the birth. As the Ivy, though stump, body and branches be cut
off, yet some sprigs will sprout, till the wall be pulled down So it is with us.
We think our worldly business is the only cause of them, but the most retired
Hermites tell us, that an unsanctified or half-sanctified heart can find matter
enough of diversion in a naked Cell. And that the corruption of the subject, as
well as the bewitching of the object, makes us trifle in Gods worship. As
Hierom tells of Hilarion Oravit semel sixo in terram capite and ut natura sert
hominum, abducta ab oratione men's nescio quid aliud cogitabat: insiliit dorso
ejus sestinans gladiator and latera calcibus, cervicem flageilo verberans: eja
inquit, cur dormita^? carbinnansque desup^r, cum desecisset, an hordeum vellet
accipere, sciscitabatur. Hieron. in vita Hilar. p. 243.
, whose heart roving from God, was soundly scourged for his labor by an Angel.
And therefore the only cure of this is, to get a true and greater degree of
sanctifying grace.

You that have no grace, can never pray well, till your hearts be changed, a
new heart can only sing this new song well. I never knew Beggar that wanted
words to express his wants. B. Hall.
You complain that you want expressions, ah! it is impressions you want, and
nothing else; if you had that sense of sin, that makes the soul to ache and
mourn, you would find words sufficient to express it, and you would not be
playing with your fingers, when you are in danger of falling into hell fire;
nor smil^ng at one another, when God is frowning, and thundering against you. He
that feels the Stone to torment, has few wandering thoughts, while he is
telling his grief, and seeking help. The condemned prisoner is not sleeping, or
fooling at the Bar. Dionysius his Flatterer had little mind of his Music,
seeing the naked sword hang by an hair over his empty head; neither would a
poor sinner, if he were enlightened to see his guilt and danger, so commonly and
senselesly trifle before God, when his matter is debating, and terms of life or
death proposing. Alas! there is no hope of your cure in this, till your
fundamental disease be healed, your whole life is a long distraction from the
true end, and main business of life; and therefore it stands you upon, if ever
you would perform a pleasing duty unto God, to get grace, whereby you may serve
God acceptably, Lydia did then attend unto the things spoken by the Lord, but
it was when he had opened her heart. Act. 16.14, 25.
for without that you cannot do it.

And to counterballance that corruption of Nature in you, you that have some
sanctification, must get more. This sweet wood cast into that bitter water,
will by degrees render it more wholesome. The more sanctification, the more you
will be mortified to the world, and all the business and vanity thereof; and
then its thoughts and cares will not rush in, with that violence upon you, but
stay to speak with you at your better leisure; or if they be invading the
heart, you will have more vigor of grace to expel them, and more repentance
for them; you will be more lively, and spiritual, and fervent in Religious
duties, and so less room for these wanderings; for he that is hot in his
business, prevents the assault of the most importunate diversions; and a lively
serious Christian runs on his errand, like Elisha's Servant, 2 King. 4.29. If
thou meet any man, salute him not; and if any salute thee, answer him not
again; and Satan cannot fasten discourse on such a man: yea, and generally, the
more holy the heart is, the fewer of these wandering thoughts; forasmuch as
sanctity being his frame and element, heterogeneous by thoughts do put him out
of his temper, and so displease him, and cause some smart to the soul; and the
sin that really molests a man, will hardly ever prevail over him; and finally,
the more holiness you attain, the more afraid will you be to displease God. For
to be amended with a little cross, to be affected with a little mercy, and to
be afraid of a little sin, are certain arguments of a great deal of grace. And
therefore an holy Christian is more troubled at a vain thought in a duty, than
a slight Christian is at the total neglect of a Duty.

It follows therefore, that all means be used and improved to the utmost, for
the increasing of the grace of God in your hearts, there being as much duty to
grow in grace, as to get it, and no greater argument of sincerity, than
endeavors to grow better. Turn therefore those many thoughts you spend about
the truth of your grace, into all possible care to advance and increase it, so
will you best clear your doubts, and in particular clear your distractions.

SECT. III.
. 3.
III. Unpreparedness.
THe third Cause of distractions in the Service of God, is, unpreparedness unto
it. Job 11.13. If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands to hins
-- If iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away -- Then shall thou be steadfast.
First, prepare the heart, then stretch out the hands. He that keeps not his
foot, when he goes into the house or service of God, a thousand to one he
stumbles, and offers but the sacrifice of fools. He that is unfitted for any
work, must needs be unfixed in it Hence David, Ps. 57.7, 8. So Deborah, Judge.
5.12.
. As holy Mr. Dod used to say of Afflictions, when we are prepared for them,
they are like a sword that only strikes upon our Armor; but when we be
unprepared, they be like a sword striking on our bare skin: Even so, when the
heart is well fixed and prepared for the Lord's service, an impertinent thought
or suggestion falls on our Armor, but when we come unprepared, it meets with
our very hearts, and runs away with them. If a man chop into a Prince's
presence undressed, unbrush'd, or without his band, you may easily imagine how,
when he is aware of the feathers or dirt up and down, he is distracted: so is
the Soul woefully carried off, when approaching to God, the follies of sin, and
vanities of the world disfigure and divert it from a close converse with God;
and therefore a serious Christian does not only pray, and watch in prayer, but
watches unto prayer. We so eat our meat (says Tertullian of their primitive
Supping) as remembering we must go pray before we go to bed Ita satura^tur, ut
qui m^ minerint etia^ per noctem adorandum D^um sibi esse -- Ita fabu^a^tur, ut
qui sciant Dominu^ audire: a co^v viis disceditur -- ut qui non tam coenam
coen^verint quam disciplinam. Tertul. Apol. p. 36.
. And here I shall answer a necessary Question, viz.

Q. What kind of Preparation is necessary before our ordinary duties of Worship?

Answ. 1. The light of nature teaches us to prepare for every weighty action.
Approaching to the Lord of Heaven and Earth is such. Who teaches the Client to
consider his case, when he comes to state it to his Advocate? or the
Husbandman to prepare himself for his tillage, or the poor suitor to weigh his
request, that he makes to a Prince? Why, the light of nature teaches this; and
the light of Scripture distinguishes an upright man from an hypocrite hereby.
2 Chronicles. 19.3. There are good things in thee -- in that thou have prepared
thine heart to seek God: there was Iehoshaphat. Again, 2 Chronicles. 12.14. Rehoboam
did evil, because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord. He sought God,
its likely, as many will do, but he cared not how he did it, and so though he
did a good thing, yet, says the Scripture, He did evil.

Answ. 2. Most certainly the Lord is a great God, who can raise or ruin thee
in a moment, and whom the Angels approach not without a profound respect: and
so likewise Duties of Worship are great and weighty Duties, wherein you
transact for a Kingdom, and plead or hear the cause that is for life or death.
You drink a cup that will either mend or end you, and who is sufficient for
these things? And it is manifest, that we are naturally unprepared, and to
every good work reprobate. The positure of our hearts is inverted, and now they
are open downwards, and shut toward Heaven; all which if you lay together, it
must needs follow, that some preparation is necessary, even for the ordinary
duties of God's Worship.

Answ. 3. The hearts of men are of a different temper, and so are their
occasions; the hearts of some are always in heaven, or else within a Call: they
are, as the Apostle speaks, Tit. 3.1. Ready to every good work. When a duty of
Piety is offered, they are ready; when an object of charity is proposed, they
are ready to distribute. And this present Spirit is a great blessing, when
Holiness is so rooted and framed upon the heart, that God's Worship is their
Element: the hearts of others, through custom and supine negligence, abide at
great distance from God; no little ado will raise them, nor will they be
fetched in with many calls; like a great Bell, hard to be raised: and as these
have a greater unhappiness, so they have need of more pains to fit them for
God's service. In such case Meditation, like a dish of water, may set the Pump
a going; yea, foul water may bring up fair water. B. Hall.


The occasions of some men will give them time enough to set their hearts in
order, to state their souls condition, and chafe themselves into an holy heat;
and for them to come with cold and dead hearts into Religious duties, cannot be
answered. The occasions of others are so urgent and continual, that they have
much ado to redeem time, for Prayer, but can hardly set apart time for a set
and formal Preparation; especially when a man is surprised with an holy duty,
or in prayer at meals, or the like: and therefore one Last may as soon fit all
feet, as one particular Rule suit with every good Christian.

Answ 4. The least measure of Preparation that is necessary for the ordinary
worship of God, is, That the heart be recalled, and recollected out of the
world Prove. 18.1.

If thou can not always have separating time betwixt other occasions and
God's worship, ^et have some separating thoughts ere thou enter upon the duty M
Angier, p. 197.


, and made apprehensive or sensible of the Nature of that God, and weight of
that work, that you are about; which, if you can attain in a minute, or are of
necessity straightened or surprised, you will be welcome to Heaven: but if you can
easily order your time, or not easily order your hearts, and remand your
thoughts, you venture on your peril; and if God be not merciful, and you
penitent, you will carry away a curse instead of a blessing. And so I conclude
this Answer with Heb. 12.28, 29. Let us have grace (not only a gracious habit,
but a gracious frame) whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and
godly fear, for our God is a consuming fire. Illotis manibus precari nihil
refert: illota conscientia, hoc maximum malorum. Chrysostom. Sermon. de Joseph.


Think it not much therefore, to keep or get an heart prepared for the Worship
of God. When Ringers set not in together, there is little but jangling in that
Peal, but when they start all together, there is sweet music; and so it is,
when all the Congregation set ^out, and take wing at once, it is Music for
Heaven: whereas the heart that is unready for the duty, mostly rings discords
in it, and spoils the harmony When you have prepared your hearts, God will pass
by great imperfections, 2 Chr. 30.18, 19. and you may then do much in a little
time, Psalm. 10.17. Thou have prepared their hearts, then thou will cause thine
ears to hear. M. Buroughs.
. And indeed, this unpreparedness of the soul does make the duty ungrateful to
the Worshipper; When a friend comes upon you, and you are unready, no provision
or rooms in readiness, how (comparatively) unpleasing is his visit, and
distracted his entertainment? when as to him that keeps a constant table, or
has made set preparation, the sight and conversation of his friend is very
sweet: So it is between our God and us; when the rooms of the soul are
prepared, and at our gates (ready) are all manner of pleasant fruits, new and
old, laid up for our beloved, how can we welcome our Maker on his own cost into
our souls? whereas Christ himself has but cold welcome, and distracted
entertainment in an unprepared soul. Lift up therefore thy heart in the porch
of a duty, with Psalm. 119.37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and
quicken me in thy way.

SECT. IV.
. 4. Luke-warmness.
THe fourth cause of Distractions in God's Worship is Luke-warmness This n^ght
past as I wakened out of my sleep, the devil came and intimated, that God was
far from me, and heard not my dull prayers: So I said, Well then, so will I cry
the louder. Luth. Colloq. And when he found his spirit out of frame, he would
never give over praying, till he had prayed his heart into that frame he prayed
for.
. He that is intense in any thing has few thoughts to spare. Distractions are
but the idlings of the heart, he that runs, looks at nothing but the goal;
though he meet passengers, or pass by Palaces, he is in earnest, and stops at
nothing: it is he that walks at leisure, that turns his eye to every trifle,
and descants on every object, he is not in haste at all. Even so the zealous
Soul, though he forgets not those things that are behind, yet reaching forth to
the things that are before, presses toward the mark, he has business in hand
that concerns Eternity, he cannot stand to whisper with every passenger, nor
trifle with every object. It is the lukewarm heart that is prone to that. He
can pray to God, and dress himself at once, he can hear God and talk with men,
speak about heaven and contrive about the earth, and, in a word, serve God and
Mammon at a time. Good Jacob was little troubled with wandering thoughts, Hos.
12.3, 4. when he had by his strength power with God, yea, he had power over the
Angel and prevailed, for he wept and made supplication. Tears are the best
charms to chase away Distractions. While you sweat, and weep, and pray,
wandering thoughts will flee away Birds w^ll not light nor stay on flaming
Sacrifices. M. White.
.

As there can be no reason given for any sin, (called therefore folly) so for
this in special; for if the holy work you are about, be worth the consuming of
your time, (which passes in every duty, and is most precious) sure it is worth
the spending your pains and diligence. He that loses his time in the duty, and
loses his soul by his luke-warmness in the duty, makes a mad man's match. For
if the Sermon, Prayer, Chapter, be not worth thy labor, never attempt it; and
if it be, never shrink, nor be indifferent about it. When you see a man freez
at his work, it invites a passenger to entertain him with talk. And a frigid
attender upon God tempts the Devil himself to tempt him. Wherefore the Apostle,
Romans 12.11. directs us to be fervent in spirit, Where could a wandering thought
get into that most zealous Prayer, Dan. 9 19?
while we are serving the Lord: not drowsy, but fervent in spirit, or boiling
hot, as the word signifies. The busiest flies will not meddle with the scalding
honey; though the sweetness entice them, yet the heat affrights them. The base
flies of thy distractions will not molest thy heart, if it keep boiling hot in
the service of God. A warm and weeping Prayer is the right Holy Water, that
scares away the devil.

Now the best remedy against this Luke-warmness is, 1. Consideration, and 2.
Practice.

1. Consideration of the ineffectualness of a frozen duty, which seldom
reaches the Heart of God when it reaches not our own Tu non audi^ orationem
tuam, and Dominum vis audire precem tuam? Chrysostom. de Not Dom. Hom. 17.
. That the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent only take it by
force; that such duties neither please God, nor our selves, they mock God, and
rather deceive than delight us. That some Prayer or Sermon must be thy last,
and perhaps this present may be it. That it is an irrational thing, to bring a
dead Sacrifice to a living God. That one serious and lively duty does you more
good, and leaves a more sweet, blessed and active frame upon the soul, than an
hundred heartless services; and, in short, That the Majesty, whom you serve,
loves Adverbs Nihil enim, nihil inquam, precatione ignita and sincera validius
est. Chrysostom. ad Phil.
, and narrowly observes the How Is and Why's of Sacred Worship: That it is not a
vain thing that you are about, for it is your life. Deuteronomy. 32.47.

2. Practice is the other remedy. To cure this luke-warmness in God's service,
frequent those Lights that are burning as well as shining. Let Us go to Dedham
(said the Godly in that time) to fetch fire, when famous M. Rogers was there.
If you cannot hear a warming Divine, then read them, and be sure to have some
Books for the rouzing and ^eating of your heart, as others for clearing and
instructing your judgment, unless the work of Sanctification be perfect already
in your heart and affections, while it remains imperfect in your mind and
judgment. Associate also with zealous Christians, borrow some of their heat,
and lend them some of your light; and be not ashamed to talk of God, Heaven and
a Soul when you are together; we lose the benefit of men's graces, for want of
broaching those blessed Vessels of grace you converse with. Especially read the
Scripture, which will inflame thee, and mold thee (being rightly used) into its
blessed nature. I have known some, that before their private duties would
meditate on a O^ationi lectio, lectioni succedat oration. Hieron. ad Laet.
verse in the Psalms, Can^icles, or the like, and then run hot and lively into
the presence of God. And chose rather to be Non si s^rmonem in longum
extenderis, in negligentiam frequenter lapsus, mul^^ Diabolo subrependi
facultatem dederis, and supplantandi ^ abducendi cogitationem ab his quae
dicuntur. Chrysostom. Hom. 79. ad pop. Antioch.
frequent and fervent, than long and roving in a duty. Shorter prayers may
sometimes inflame, when long ones tire the spirits; and that way the ancient
Christians Dicuntur fratres in Egypto crebras quidem habere orationes, sed ea^
tamen brevissimas and raptim quodammodo jaculatas. -- Ne per productiores moras
evanescat atque hebetetur intentio. Absit enim ab oratione mul^a locutio sed
non desit multa precatio. August. Epist. 121.
in Egypt used to take. And, lastly, do as holy David did, that carried such a
nature as thou do, be ever calling to God, (as, He who is at it eight or nine
times in Psalm. 119. Quicken me in thy way, quicken me, and I will call upon thy
name: and if He had need thus to fetch fire from Heaven, how much more have We?

Q. Were it not better to omit the duty, than attempt it with such a dull
heartless frame as this?

A. 1. Omission of a duty will never fit us for the better performance of a
duty. Luther was used to say, The oftener I neglect, the more unfit I am: this
is nothing but a shift of the Devil.

2. If thou do endeavor with thy utmost strength^ and sincerity, though thou
be dull, it is better than to leave it undone: for as one sin prepares for
another, so one duty prepares for another. Oration debet continuari, quandiu
devotio potest conse^vari. Aquin. 22. 983. a. 14.
Fall therefore to work, and then God is engaged to help thee; never think
neglects will mend it; one sin never cures another.

By the upright use of these means, you will find the holy Ghost, as it were,
stretch himself on your cold hearts, and infuse life and heat into you. And
when you are soaring aloft in the Spirit, that cunning marksman cannot shoot,
and fetch you down by his distracting Arrows.

. 5.
SECT. V.
V. Worldly mindednes^.
THe fifth cause of Distractions in God's Worship, is, Worldly mindedness. An
heart in earth, and an heart in Heaven, are far asunder Adhaerere Domino
indivulse and non subi^de m^ndanis curis interpelli and negoti^s a^ist ahi ut
vix dum sinita spirituali ilia action in qua jam versatus est, statim ad
terrena anxie curanda t^ansvolet and carnalibus e^us ita se pen^tus immisceat
ac si Insidelis esset. Mort. in 1 Cor. 7 35.
. As long as the Lark soareth upward, she sings without danger of the Net; but
stooping to gaze on the Foulers deceitful Glass, she is quickly ensnared. So is
it with us, while we live aloft, we are safe; but when the heart stoops down,
and grows worldly through the false glass Satan puts upon it, then are we taken
in these snares. Ezekiel. 33.31. With their mouths they show much love, but their
heart goes after their covetousness. Their faces look one way, but they row
another; their eyes are up toward heaven, their hearts set on the earth, and
grasping two affairs they prosper in neither. How should he set his affections
on the things above, that has set them chiefly on things below? when as these
two are directly opposed, Col. 3.2. How should the Soul, that Bird of Paradise,
fly up to heaven in a duty, when it is not only weighed down with the lead of
natural corruption, but entangled in the lime-twigs of earthly mindedness? they
can never write on their duties, Holiness to the Lord, that stamp upon their
coin, God with us M. Wills of. perilous times.
. Hence it comes to pass, that the heart is loath to come to an Ordinance, and
then longs to go out again: how heavily do they go to Church, how lightly to
the market? for here the heart goes with them, and there it is left behind; and
being forced into a duty, because its treasure is in the world, the heart
hastens to be there again, and sicut piscis in arido, is out of its element
when in an Ordinance See a plain instance hereof in that hearer, Luke 11.13, 14.
.

We read of the world set in a man's heart, Eccles. 3.11. and of an heart set on
the world, Ps. 62.10. Now how should God have any of such a heart? No, no, he
that is of the earth is earthly, and speaks of the earth; there he can rest
without weariness; of that he can discourse without distractions: but when he
should turn to God, and flee to heaven, this care knocks at door, and that
business whispers him in the ear, and there the carcass is left, but the heart
is gone. The Prophet, Hosea 4.11. tells us, that whoredom, and wine, and new
wine take away the heart. It were very unlikely, that any man in the heat of
those sins should pray, or hear, or meditate aright; and it is much what as
likely, for an heart that is taken away with the cares of this world, and
drowned therein, to converse with God, without innumerable wanderings Curvasti
quidem genua, sed men's tua foris vagabatur: os quidem loquebatur, sed men's
usuras cogitabat, possessionem, reditus supputabat. Chrysostom. Hom. 17. de Not.
Dom.
.

Mistake not, it is not the world, but worldly mindedness that is taxed; not
the increase of riches, but the heart set upon them Water under a ship helps
it, but water in the ship drowns it.
: And so no doubt a poor man may have his part of distractions, through his
want of worldly things, as well as the rich through his abundance. He may have
many a distracting thought what to do for the world, as the rich has what to
do with the world. And thus we see, those things which were given for our
welfare, prove our snare; and what should hire us to serve God, keeps us from
him. Which shows, what good reason the wise man had to crave neither riches nor
poverty, but convenient comforts, seeing the weight of the world distracts one
sort, and the want of the world another sort in the very immediate service of
God. Howbeit for the most part, the heart that is fullest of the world is
emptiest of God.

Now the best remedy against worldly mindedness, is Mortification. O get a chip
of Christ's Cross, Gal. 6.14. whereby the world will be crucified to you, and
you to the world. So was Paul. As says one of the Ancients Chrysostom.
, Paul and the world were like two dead bodies, that neither embrace with
delight, nor part with grief from each other. You must be dead, I say dead, to
the world, if you mean to live to God, or live with him. A drunken prayer, and
a worldly prayer, are alike devout. Therefore Let not the world be your
familiar friend, familiar friends will come in without knocking. M. White of
Thoughts.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world, for so long the love of the
Father is not in you; and if you love him not, how should you pray to him? It
would be an ill favored sight, to behold all this Congregation in their
work-day clothes here; how unpleasing a sight to God is it, to see us all with
our work-day hearts? Now that you may be rid of an earthly heart, faithfully
make use of these directions.

1. Get faith, to believe the report God has given of the world, that all that
is in it, is but the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eyes, and the pride
of life; a poor vain thing, not able to give the soul a breakfast When we shall
have reigned hereafter many millions of years in Heaven, what thoughts will
remain of this little inch of time upon earth, etc. M. Bolton, Discourse of
true Happiness. page 143.
: this all that have tasted it, and Christ also, do aver, and can thou find
that in it, which none ever found? will it do more for thee, than ever it did
for any? Believe its vanity upon God's Word, ere thou try it by thy sad
experience.

Get faith to suck virtue out of Christ's death to vanquish it. For this is our
victory, 1 Ioh. 5.4. that overcomes the world, even our faith. Lay thee down
with Christ in the grave by faith, and say then, What is the world? Get faith
to believe that eternal happiness, which being once seen by that piercing eye,
would so disgrace the world, that all the comforts of it would not weigh a
straw in comparison of it Let their money perish with them, that esteem all the
Gold in the world worth one days society with jesus Christ. Galeacius to a
Nobleman, tempting him to Apostat^ze with a great sam of money.
If a man lived in the Sun, what a poor mote would the whole earth look? He
that lives in Christ, in Heaven, by faith sees all the glories of the earth
with a disdainful eye, and cries, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

2. You shall be helped against this disease, by deep consideration of the
folly and misery of such a frame of heart. It Is folly, for all that is gotten
of the world, with the neglect of the soul, invasion of holy duties, or by a
carking worldly heart, comes to thee in wrath, will sink thee deeper in hell;
or if thou repent, is (most commonly) some way consumed, and vix gaudet tertius
haeres, thy grandchild will rue it. If we could penetrate the method of God's
providence, usually those losses you have in this beast, or the other house, or
the like, are the just value of what you have gotten by immoderate care, hard
dealing with others, or unseasonable contrivance, when your heart should have
been better employed. And then the misery of worldly-mindedness, that it
pierces the heart through with many sorrows. Sorrow and pain in getting,
sorrow and care in keeping, sorrow and grief in losing. The heart is never at
perfect rest. A man would not use his horse, as a worldling does his heart,
gives it no quiet or ease, and all this to no purpose at all. Hab. 2.13. The
people labor in the very fire, and weary themselves for very vanity. and may
not the consideration hereof be an effectual means to hate this humor? and
when it is once hated, it is more than half discharged.

3. Have recourse to God by prayer, and therein see and bewail thy former
madness; solemnly vow to restore their right to every man thou have wronged;
rather part, like Zacheus, with half thine estate, than with thy whole soul and
body; and earnestly cry to the Lord, to incline thy heart to his testimonies,
and not unto covetousness, Psalm. 119.36. Entreat your heavenly Father, to give
you an heavenly heart, and if it come not at first asking, it is a gift worth
going for again; humbly tell him, by virtue of that Covenant, wherein you
promised to forsake the world, (which you are now resolved to stick to) his
Majesty is bound to give you a mortified and heavenly heart, and you will never
leave him, till you have obtained it.

4. Cogitatio omnis secularis and carnalis abscedat, nec quicquam tunc animus
quam illud solum cogitat quod precatur. Cypr. de Orat. Domin.
Charm your hearts from worldly thoughts, when you go to the worship of God.
Prove. 16.1, 3. The preparation of the heart is from the Lord -- Commit thy ways
to him, and thy thoughts shall be established. The Heathen left their shoes at
the Temple doors, to intimate, that all earthly affections must be left behind
you when you go to speak with God. Do as that great Statesman used, who would
lay off his Gown, wherein he administered his Office, when he went to worship
God, and say, Lie there, Lord Cecil; implying, he would take none of the cares
of his Office into the presence of God: So when you go to prayer, reading or
hearing, lay aside the world, and say, Lie there house, ye fields lie there;
lie there my cares, till I have done with God. So Abraham left his servants and
asses, Genesis 22.5. below the hill, and took up nothing but an holy heart, and
the materials of his Sacrifice with him thither. Keep still an eye upon your
hearts, and both watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation Exemplum legimus
de Quodam qui volens Rusticum conviacere de cordis instabilitate dum fi^
O^atio, pollicitus est se daturum sibi Asinum si posset Orationem Dominicam,
nihil aliud actualiter cogitans, persicere. Qui mox ut a^ orationem divo^tit,
securus de Asini lucro, coepit distrahi in hanc cogitatio ^m, si Sellam
habiturus erat cum Asino: qui tandem ad se reditus and se redarguens
instabilitatem sui cordis confessus est. Gerson. de Orat. p. 611.
.

SECT. VI.. 6.

THe sixth cause of Distractions in the Worship of God is, VI. Weakness of love
to Christ and his Ordinances.
Weakness of love to Jesus Christ, and consequently to his Ordinances. Love
unites the soul to its object: as Faith is the bond of our mystical, so Love is
the bond of our moral union with Christ. The more love to Christ, the more life
in his service. Cant. 8.6. Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thy
arm: for love is strong as death. Were your love more strong, it would seal up
both soul and body, and unite them firmly unto Jesus Christ. Love marries the
heart and eye to the object; hence it is, there is not a distracting thought in
heaven, for there love is perfect: they see, and love, and sing; and praise,
and see, enjoy, and love, for ever and ever. The three Disciples, Matthew. 17.4.
had but an half-quarter glimpse of that state, but their love to their dearest
Lord and his presence was so heightened, that the world was forgotten, Jerusalem
below, and all their friends and fellow-Disciples forgotten, and they undone to
abide there. And if we could by the eye of faith see him that is invisible, and
perfectly love him, O how hardly could we spare a by-thought in his presence
and service! no, all the world would be forgotten, comforts and crosses all
sleep together, while God and our soul were conversing in an Ordinance Dat
mi^ifraena Timor, dat m^hi calcar Amor.
.

Whence is it that most men can work and care perpetually, and no distractions
divert them? discourse their business most orderly, without one alien thought?
drive on a bargain an hour together, and think on nothing but what is pertinent
to their present business? Why, they love what they are about, they like it
well, and so tongue and heart go together, are wholely taken up therewith. The
jovial knot like their company, and nothing shall distract them; the servant
comes about necessary business; the master fumes that they will not let him
alone; the child comes, and then the wife, but he frets, he rages. And why all
this? why, he loves his company, it is his delight, his heaven: Even so, the
Soul that has a strong love to a precious Christ, and his Ordinance-presence,
does most heavily bear a distracting thought. The devil cannot pluck him from
Christ, but the soul smarts, and when there is this smart at parting, that soul
will part but seldom. You have sometimes seen a sucking child, that loves the
mother and the breast most dearly; how loath is it to leave it, while it is
hungry? how eagerly and angrily it seeks, and cries, and catches hold again?
Here Is love Omnes igitur ^od^ distract^ones and men is fluctuationes in unum
collige, in sol^ Deo totum desiderium tuum fige, and ibi sit cor tuum ubi est
thesaurus tu^s d^siderabilis ^^ultumque amabilis. Bern. de inter. Domo, c. 5.
. Christ Jesus is the spring of all happiness, and his Ordinances are his
breasts, and he that loves the Lord Jesus with all his soul, and all his
strength; there he lies, and sucks at the breasts of consolation. This business
knocks at door, that trifle tempts him; yet there he sticks and frowns away all
his temptations. His love is ardent, Psalm. 1.2. His delight is in the Law of
the Lord, and then it follows, in that Law does he meditate day and night. When
prayer is your delight, and not your task, then you will dwell therein with
complacence, Psalm. 43.4. Then will I go unto the altar of God, unto God my
exceeding joy. Children are subject to look off their books, because they
delight not in them, but when they are playing, they do hoc agere. But now when
thy love is cool, and weak, thou love Christ, and that is all; alas, there is
little heart to him, the soul comes heavily to him, and having little delight,
and heavenly complacence in him, is most easily drawn off with any distraction:
for where the treasure is, there will the heart be also; where God and Christ
are a man's treasure, his heart is with them. He wakes, and travels, and cares,
but his heart is with them; he runs through his business with all the haste,
that may stand with good speed, that he may retreat to his heart, which he left
with God, and then holy duties are the rest of his soul. And where the world,
or sin, are a man's treasure, his heart is with them also; he reads, and hears,
and prays, but his heart is away: the least noise, business or whisper can
fetch him away, alas, his love is cool, and a drop of water will quench a spark
of fire Judge of the Divinity of the Jesuits.

Q. When is a man obliged to have actually an affection for God? Ans. Any time
before he die; others, at the point of death; others, at least every year: in
fine, it is sufficient if we hate him not. Sirmond of virtue. p. 16, 19, 24.


.

The Remedies of this weakness of love to Christ and his Ordinances, are,

1. Know him better, and meditate more on his real excellencies. Ignoti nulla
cupido. Cant. 5.9. What is thy Beloved more than another beloved? Why, ver. 16.
His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely; or, as the Heb. (...)
all of him is delights. And then mark the reply, chap. 6.1. We will seek him
with thee. The pure and orient Sun is no more than a glowworm to the blind,
nor the fairest face than a Skeleton. It is the eye that must affect the heart.
Come then, open the eye of Faith, and gaze on this heavenly object: sit down,
and meditate who, and what he is; open but the sacred Cabinet of his
Attributes, every box full of most sweet perfumes: each of his offices pregnant
with true and transcendent comfort. His actions, his passion, his words, his
works, and above all, his heart, as full of Heaven as ever it can hold, and
full for thee: the breast full running into the open mouth of faith, the
Fountain opened for thy sins and uncleanness. The treasures of his grace free
for thy supplies, what heart can freez under such discoveries? Nay stay, and
look at him on the cross calling thee, arms stretched out to embrace thee,
heart opened to let thee in, and deny him thy love if thou can. And if once He
loves thee little, O Lord, who loves any thing with thee, which he loves not
for thee. Nil preter te, nisi propter te. Aug.
your hearts be inflamed with his love, no small businesses shall keep you from
his presence, nor distract you in it.

2. Get communion with Christ in his Ordinances. As he said on another
occasion, Ioh. 4.10. If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is -- thou
would have asked, and he would have given thee living water. So I say, if
thou knew what communion is with Christ, thou would ask after prayer, and
long for such opportunities. Why, what is communion with Christ? Why, for thy
spirit to fly up into heaven, among the celestial spirits, and for Christ's
Spirit to descend into thy heart. And this makes an heaven upon earth, it is
inexperience in this, that makes us cool to Christ and holy duties: strangeness
makes company burdensome. A King and a beggar, a scholar and a clown, cannot
make company of one another. So when there is a distance between God and the
soul, there is little longing for his Ordinance, nor true delight in it.
Communion with Christ increases love, and love to him promotes communion. Cant.
8.1. O that thou were my brother, (says the Spouse) the son of my mother,
(there is ardent love) when I should find thee without, I would kiss thee,
(there is communion) yet should I not be despised. If you did but see his power
and glory Mouns. de Renty said of himself, that when ever he pronounced the
name of God, he tasted such a sweetness upon his lips, as could not be
expressed. In vita.
, your soul would be filled as with marrow and fatness, and your mouth would
praise him with joyful lips. Psalm. 63.2, 5. One beam of his holiness, love or
mercy, would so charm your hearts, that you would be loath to part, and long to
meet again; for how can it choose but transport a finite heart, to see and feel
the sweetest properties of the infinite God displayed before, and graven on it?
When Moses was in near communion with God on the Mount, no thinking of meat, no
cares about his tents below, but there he is swallowed up, and is content to
melt in that Sun of light and heat, and come down no more; easy to count his
distractions in the Mount. O who can see the face of God, and not be ravished
therewith^ who can behold the beauty of the Lord, and not choose to dwell in his
presence all the days of a man's life? It Is communion with Christ Jesus, that
will warm your love to him, and when the King brings you into his chambers, you
will be glad and rejoice in him, you will remember his love more than wine.

3. Believe verily that you can be no where better, no where so well as in an
Ordinance: this will content and please your minds in the Lord's service, when
you can be no where better; for what company can be better than God's? The
chiefest Good must needs afford the choicest company, who can impart such rare
delights and sweet content as he can? and where does he communicate himself, as
in an Ordinance? Say, the world knocks at door, and would have thee away; can
vanity entertain you like felicity? can the world produce higher pleasures,
than he that made it? Would sin come in, and steal your hearts away? can the
chiefest evil create thee sweeter entertainment than the chiefest Good? No, no,
you are best where you are. If the world could find you such another Deity,
somewhat might be yielded; or give you security, like God, of the reality,
satisfaction and duration of its toys, quarter-contents: but alas, there is no
show for this, you are best where you are. I am conversing with the Lord of
heaven and earth, who can reward or ruin me in a moment. I am sucking at the
breast of the chiefest Good. I am in the next employment to heaven, in a corner
of heaven, I cannot look off yonder lovely One, I will not leave, I must not
come down. And this experience would enamour you of an Ordinance, and deliver
you from diversions in it; you will sit down under his shadow with great
delight, when his fruit is sweet to your taste.

7.
SECT. VII.
VII. Want of Watchfulness.
THe seventh cause of wandering of the thoughts in the worship of God, is, want
of watchfulness. Matthew. 26.41. Watch and pray Qui enim sic vigilans orat,
illius exauditur oration; hoc enim significat dicens, Vigilate and Orate ut
primum vigilemus and sic vigilantes oremus. Origin. Tract. 35. in Matthew.
, are most necessary companions, else shall we fall into temptation. In those
sad times of plague, the faithful Guard stands at the City gates, and the
dangerous passenger for all his importunity is stopped and turned again: Why?
perhaps the plague comes with him, and therefore the Halbard salutes his
breast, he comes not there; the neglect of this care would soon lay waste the
land. So if any straggling thought, perhaps with the plague in it, shall enter
at pleasure into the soul, especially while the Lord's service is in hand, no
wonder that soul lies waste, Lord have mercy may be written on that door.

1. The neglect of watchfulness before holy duties causes distractions; and
that is, by not heeding to order your affairs with discretion for God's service
Prove. 18.1. Through desire a man having separated himself, se^keth and
intermedleth with all wisdom.
. When you involve your selves in too much business, too much for your head,
too much for your time, or too much for your strength, then worldly thoughts
will get place, you cannot help it. Or, when men are unadvised in their
business, in not choosing a fit time for duties, and thereby your business and
God's shoulder one another, and neither is done well. And therefore we are
commanded, 1 Pet. 4.7. to watch unto prayer. As Satan watches to cross and
indispose us, by throwing some diverting and cooling occasions, so is it our
wisdom to counter-watch him. Clarissima soror, audi qu^ dico: Ante tempus orare
est providentia; I^ tempo^e constituto o^a^e, est obedientia, Tempus orandi
praeterire, est neglige^^^. Bern de de modo been vivendi. Sermon. 40.
Endeavor to time your businesses, and especially your duties. It is the
character of a good man, Psalm. 112.6. that he orders his affairs with
discretion, and renders every thing beautiful in its time For its a true
observation, that an indiscreet ordering of Saturdays business, has great
in^luence into the unprofitableness of the Sabbath's Ordinances.

2. Neglect of watchfulness in holy duties. Our hearts, so far as unregenerate,
are fetched into holy duties, as a pressed soldier into the field: he is brought
in against his will, no principle of courage, or love to his country: he had
rather be digging or idling at home. Now such a soldier, what trust can you
repose in him, if he be not watched? he steals away at every lanes end, and in
the midst of the battle, you shall be sure to miss him; a constant eye must
keep him, or you lose him. It Is just so with our naughty hearts, if there be
not a predominant principle of grace, it is not choice but use that brings them
in, they would rather be carking or trifling about any thing, than busy in
prayer, and therefore if you neglect to watch them at every turn, no sentence
end but they will steal away. For I^^ ^ssi^ax petitio est, cum precatur Deum
sterilis oration. Quia Deus no^ vocis sed cordis est auditor. Cyprian. de Orat.
Dom.
prayer without watching is but a mere complement. Where the tongue goes one
way, and the heart another, that is a complement, and such is a watchless duty.
It is said, the Nightingale in her sweetest notes is apt to fall asleep; to
prevent which, she settles her self on a bough, with a thorn at her breast,
that when she begins to nod, that sharp monitor may awake her. The holiest
Bonum est sanctorum precibus frui, sed quando and. ipsi seduli and vigiles
fuerint. Chrysostom. in 1 Thessalonians.
Saint is apt to nod, and steal away in the midst of his solemnest duties; if
God's Spirit do not aurem vellere, quicken his watch. Christ's own Disciples,
even just after a Sacrament, were overtaken for want of this, Matthew. 26.40.
What, could ye not watch with me one hour? And if they fell asleep at prayer
for want of watching, how can you keep close to God without it, that have
neither so good a monitor without, nor so good an heart within?

3. Neglect of watchfulness after duties causes distractions in the next that
follow; people use to let loose their hearts, when the Duty ends, and unlace
themselves for ease; and then their thoughts take liberty As men are out of
prayer, so will they be ^n prayer. Morn. L^ct.
. Which our deceitful hearts fore seeing, no cords will bind them to a good
behavior in the very duties themselves; whereas, were there a constant watch
kept up after our duties were done, and conscience made of our thoughts all the
day long, we should contain our hearts in better order, while God's worship
lasts. The foresight, and especially fore-tastes of liberty approaching, sets
the soul madding, thereupon, and we cannot keep it in. Besides, Religion is
concatenated, has a dependence one thing upon another, and it is unsufferable
to take and leave where we will. If vain thoughts lodge with you at other
times, they will visit you at your business, and if they be entertained when
you have a mind, they will press in when you have no mind.

The Remedy against this neglect is, To be thoroughly convinced of the absolute
necessity of constant watchfulness, Prove. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all
diligence, as a castle is kept from scaling, an house from robbing, or a Jewel
from defacing, so the Critics; and all these are kept constantly, one hours
negligence would hazard any of them Let us imagine a City not only begirt with
a strait siege of bloodthirsty enemies, but also within infested with lurking
Commotioners, how much would it stand that City upon to stand upon its guard,
etc. M. Bolton's discourse of true Happiness, p. 146.
-- And then with all diligence, Heb. with all keeping, or as some, above all
keeping. The eye we watch from harm all the day, the vitals we defend and guard
with constant care; we know that a touch there is mortal; but above all keeping
keep the soul: Be persuaded, that watchfulness is as necessary as prayer; you
think, without prayer you shall go to hell, and I aver, that without
watchfulness you cannot go to heaven. Man's life in this sense is a continued
Ordinance. Hos. 12.6. wait on thy God continually; not only at thy prayers, but
at thy plough; while on your knees you are waiting on God, and when you rise
from your knees, you are going to wait on him in your calling, and an
unbecoming thought is displeasing to him every where; he is sensible of an
affront in the kitchen as well as in the parlour, and hates vanity all the day
long. 1 Pet. 4.7. Be sober, and watch unto prayer. Sober and watch, as if they
that do not watch are mad. To watch unto prayer is duty, as well as to watch in
it. He that watches not to duties, does not do his duty: a wise Christian
should have always something in store for God; work and look at God, eat, and
drink, and talk, and still look at God, and at the soul You see the Angels sent
about God's messages to th^s earth, yet never out of their heaven, never
without the vision of their Maker; and so should you strive when you are up and
down in your business, yet be within sight of God. D. Hall's Contemp.
. This is to w^lk with God all the day long. As the careful Be must needs
leave her hive, and fly abroad, but she dwells no where else, she lights on
this ^lower, and then on that, exhausts their sweetness, deflowers them, and
gets away; she never rests till she return to her hive, there she rests and
enjoys her self. So an holy heart must needs out into the world, and business
must be done, but he rests at nothing, till he return to the enjoyment of God
again, no flower gives him content, no business, no company satisfies, but he
retires to God, looks at him, and is lightened, and steps out again. This, Sirs,
this is the Religion of Religion. Its a thousand times easier to keep the
floudgates shut, than to drain the lower grounds when they are overflown. Idem.
I know it is hard, but it is possible, the ice is broken for you, and the way is
trodden. Act. 24.16. Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience
void of offense. It Is my daily trade and business to keep my soul, that I
neither offend God nor man. If you will make a trade on it, you may do it. God
never calls for duty, but helps in it. Phil 4.13. I can do all things through
Christ. God and his servant can do any thing.

. 8.
SECT. VIII.
VIII. A beloved sin.
THe eighth cause of distractions in holy duties is Observe, that some make a
difference between a beloved sin, and a reigning sin; a beloved sin rules over
our sins, not over our graces; a reigning sin rules over both.
, A beloved sin. When the soul has espoused some bosom lust, the thoughts (be
you never so busy) will be warping toward it, though God himself look on.
Ier. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, -- how long shall vain
thoughts lodge within thee? When wickedness is in the heart, vain thoughts will
be in thy duties; they will enter, yea, they will lodge within thee. A beloved
sin is like a bias on the bowl, though you throw it out never so straight, yet
the bias will draw it off that way, do what you can: so is a beloved sin unto
the soul; aim you with utmost skill, yet there is a secret load stone in it,
that attracts the heart, and makes that prayer to end in hell, that began in
heaven. Either sin and you must be at a distance, or God and you will. The soul
that is in league with sin, dare not come at God, dare not look at him, dare
not think on him; and what must that man think on in a duty, that dare not
think seriously on God? As that penitent Father speaks in his confessions. An
unmortifi'd soul (like the husband of a scolding wife, had rather be any where
than at home, and makes many a sad bargain abroad, because he has no comfort
at home with his wife; so such an heart) chooses to be thinking of any thing
rather than God Gravi namque men^ nostra orationis suae tempore confusione
deprimitur, si hanc aut sua adhuc operatio inquin^t, aut alienae malitiae
serva^us dolor accusat. Greg. in Job. l 10. c. 18.
; alas, matters are not straight between them, the poison of sin is in him, and
he hugs that abominable thing which God hates; the Thief had rather go forty
miles another way, than come near the Judge; God is an offended Judge to a
wilful sinner, and he cares not for ever coming near him. Hence, Heb. 10.22.
Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our
hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience. He that comes to God with a true
upright honest heart, being sprinkled from an evil conscience, may draw near to
God in full assurance of faith; whereas guilt clouds, clogs and distracts the
soul. So that you see both the gu^lt and power of a bosom sin, furnish us with
too much cause of distractions. Ita mala quae seci, cogitationi meae suis
imaginibus impressa, in ipsa mea oratione me conturbant. Caeterum quanto
graviore tumul^u cogitationum carnalium premor, tanto ardentius orationi
insistere debeo. Bern. de inter. Domo. c. 49.
Sin, That would have all the heart; and God, He will have all or nothing. It Is
such an offering, that is a whole burnt-offering, that the Lord delights in. As
no subject is capable of two contrary qualities, in the intense degree, (as
heat and cold may be both in the same hand, but not in their intense degrees)
so the heart of man cannot entertain Christ and corruption, light and darkness,
except the one be loved and served superlatively above the other. Psalm. 66.18.
If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. Look as it is with
a boiling pot, the scum of it will be rising up, together with the meat
therein; so is it in prayer. M. Cobbet of Prayer, p. 396.
God first stops his ear above, and then the sinners mouth below, that regards
iniquity, that likes, loves, approves, or gives it rest and quiet in the soul.
Indeed God neither regards him, nor does such a soul regard God. He must love
God, that is lively in his service. Job 27.10. Will he delight himself in the
Almighty? will he always call upon God? will he always? he may now and then
send a thought that way in his special need, but not always: there is difference
between converse and communion. One may have converse or traffic with a
stranger upon occasion, but communion is with a friend, there is visits of pure
kindness: an hypocrite may have some converse, or trading with God for
necessaries, but sweet communion, constant calling on God, and serious duties
he can never enjoy and follow, that loves any sin before the chiefest Good.

The Remedies against a beloved sin are briefly these two.

1. Consideration: sit down and think what real good, this sin has ever done
thee. Think what hurt it has done thee and others: and what fruit but shame
and death it brings to any. Thy dearest sin is but sin, which is the worst
thing in the world, and its masks and disguises being laid aside, more ugly
than the devil, more horrid than hell it self. And think, the more thou love
it, the more God hates it, and his rage and jealousy is increased with the
increase of thy desires. Think how many prayers it has lost thee, how many
mercies it has poisoned to thee, how many smiles it has clouded, besides what
unutterable sufferings it has inflicted upon Christ, and is preparing for thee
in hell. Consider, that thou may have as much joy, happiness and true comfort
without it, and all converted sinners confess, that Jesus Christ has been
better to them than all their sins; and if you may have as good enjoyments, or
better, to have Christ with them, and Heaven after them, will not make them
worse. 2. Supplication Ille laudatur, qui (...) coeperit cogitare indida,
statim in^^^ ficit cogitata and allidit ad p^tram. P^tra autem est Christus.
: Kneel down and pray with faith, in the uprightness of your hearts, for
strength from above. All the strength of Heaven is engaged by prayer. He that
heartily sets himself against his sin by prayer, cannot but dislike it, and
when it is truly disliked, its heart is broken.
Augustine complains, that when he in his unconverted estate begged a divorce
from his sin, his heart was afraid, lest God should hear his prayers. Beware
lest your hearts secretly cry Spare, when your tongues openly cry, Lord, kill
and crucify my corruption: but do thou bona fide pull on earth, and the Lord
will bono Spiritu, pull from Heaven, and rent thy sin and soul asunder.
Otherwise, as the Poets tell us of Hippomanes, Ov^d. Met. (...). c. 11.
that running with Atalanta for victory, he conquered by throwing golden apples
down; which Atalanta stooping to take up, lost the prize; so Satan seeing the
soul running heavenward in God's service, will throw down the gilded
temptations of a beloved sin, stop it in its carreer, and hazard the prize of
eternal glory.

SECT. IX.. 9.

A Ninth cause of Distractions in the Worship of God, IX. Satan.
is, Satan Diabolus cum sit astutas, scil. quoniam in tempore orationis grandia
postulemus and saepius impetremus, impedire sestinat improvidas mentes. Chrysostom.
in Matthew. Hom. 16.
. And this he does sometimes more remotely, by throwing in some cross business
before Duties, whereby the soul is unhinged: some body, or Letter with
business, just before prayer; or some passionate distempering passages in the
family, whereby to lay matter ready for our discomposure, and wanderings in the
following duties. Sometimes he approaches nearer, and by presenting and
occasioning objects to our senses in God's Worship, draws off the heart: He can
stay One long from the Congregation, that Another may be distracted in
observing him coming in, and so wounds two, and sometimes twenty at a blow:
Satan is not idle, when this and that child are restless and unquiet in the
family; whereby perhaps all in the family lose the passages that would most
profit them. He can create a further distraction by every pillar and part of
the structure, and every person in the congregation; and can be content you
read sentences on the walls, to hinder and divert your s^uls from the sentences
in the pulpit. Yea, he often approaches nearer, and works immediately upon the
Fancy, upon which he can imprint a thousand notions, most strange and
incoherent many times, to steal the heart from God, for we are not ignorant (
the more is our sorrow) of his devices. Hence we have him, Job 1.6. When the
sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, coming also among them.
And being questioned, tells his business is to go to and fro in the earth, and
to walk up and down in it; as if he walked only out of curiosity, or for some
charitable end. But as our Lord Jesus went up and down, doing good; this was
his work from morning to night: so the Devil walks up and down, doing evil. He
is in every pue, at every elbow, throwing in his fireballs, and enticing poor
souls to commit folly with him; and when God is treating with the soul about
Heaven and Hell then comes He Satan cares not how heavenly our words be, if our
thoughts be earthly. While, of vain thoughts.
and thrusts the World between, or some vanity therein, to break the treaty,
and spoil that sacred conference; so that of all roads, no road is so full of
thieves as the road to Heaven.

And though to give the Devil but his due, we can make shift to be bad enough
in an Ordinance without him, yet he waits there no doubt to make us worse: what
else should bring thoughts then into our head, that have never come there, in a
month or year before? who else should suggest such horrid atheistical thoughts,
when we are pinched with convictions, and move us to question all, when any
thing pursues us? Ephesians. 6.12. We wrestle against spiritual wickedness in
heavenly things or (...).
employments. The devil is wickedness in the abstract, when we are about
heavenly work. Never did the crafty Cheat watch and spy, how to defraud and
slur the innocent Merchant, while he is receiving his cash, as Satan lies at
catch in the Worship of God, to purloin from us the true treasure, that should
make the soul rich. Especially The high-way-ground-hearers had the word taken
from them by the devil, that is, by such wandering tho^ghts a^ he immediately
casts in. Mr. Angier, p. 148.
that Prayer, or Chapter, or Sermon, that should do thee most good, or most
destroy his Kingdom, will he be most busy in. When the High Priest was
interceding for the poor Church, then Satan stood at his right hand to resist
him: hence our solemnest Duties, often have the saddest Distractions, and such
as have no coherence nor reason for them; but arrows, fiery darts, shot out of
the Devils own quiver. What a sort of them have I in the very writing hereof,
and what long parenthesis between every sentence, and you perhaps will not
want, while you are reading, yea, it may be, (as the body, when the humors are
stirred by Physic, is worse, so) he will be busiest to divert and trouble your
hearts, while the cure is working. But when your heart is prepared before, and
watchful in your Duty, though yours be the sorrow, that you have the womb that
bare them; yet his will be the guilt, because he is the father that begets them.

The Remedy against Satan's distracting us in God's Worship, is, that of
Christ's own prescribing, Matthew. 26.41. Watch and Pray, lest ye enter into
temptation. Stand upon your guard, give no heed to his suggestions. As you run
to the water with the bucket, to quench a spark of fire in the thatch; so drop
a tear of contrition upon this spark of temptation. Nam ipsum advertere and
examinare istas cogitationes, evagari est. Itaque te babeas quosi eas nod
aspicere dig^^^is. Alvarez.
Treat not with these thoughts, but dismiss them unregarded, and by some short
ejaculation call in thy friend, to countermine thine enemy. And still watch and
pray. And pray and watch, and always remember, that we have as much need of the
strength of Christ for assistance, as the merit of Christ for acceptance in
every duty. And be sure to cast out his injections with disdain and hatred. Nam
superbus est spiritus, Luther.
and non patitur contemptum. He is a very proud piece, and cannot endure
contempt. The stronger is your resistance, the longer will he stay away; and
the more you hate his motions, the less mind he will have to offer them. The devil
is like that Sanballat, Nehem. 6.2. etc. that sent to Nehemia, who was busy in
the work of the Lord; And I (says Nehemia) sent messengers unto them, saying,
I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down; why should the work cease,
whilst I leave it and come down to you? Yet they sent messengers unto me four
times after this sort, and I answered them after the same manner. Come, says
Satan, let us meet and confer, here is a notion and here is a business, you must
needs discuss this. Nay, say thou, I am doing a great work for Eternity. As
that gallant Painter, being demanded a reason of his exact curiosity in his
work, answered, Pingo eternitati, I paint to last for eternity. So, I am doing
a work for eternity, I am pleading the cause that runs for life or death; so
that I cannot hearken to thee. Why should my great work cease, while I leave it
and come down? Alas, this business will go no farther than it is lifted at. I am
rowing upon a River, if I trifle or nod a little, I go down again It is said,
Genesis 15.11. when the fouls did light, Abraham drove them away; not when they
were sitting or feeding upon the carcasses, but as soon as ever they lighted.
We must not give place to these thoughts, no not for a moment. Mr. White, of
vain thoughts.
. I have a business on the wheel, that cannot be le^t a minute. If I look away,
my iron burns, and I suffer loss. Yet he will send messengers over and over again,
as Sanballat did; but still answer them after the same manner. Discourage him,
and break his heart with thine obstinate resolution; Resist the devil, and he
will flee from you.

SECT. X.
THE Tenth Cause of Distractions in our Lords service is,. 10. Vain thoughts
out of Duties.
Vain thoughts at other times. For,

1. These displease and disengage the spirit of God; without whose help these
Infirmities will crowd in upon us. If you should lodge your noble friend, whom
Love only moves to visit you, in the same room with a nasty beggar, may not he
take it for a plain affront, and refuse to come near or help you in your need?
even so the holy Ghost, your Noblest Friend will take it ill, to be pack't into
a room with base and beggarly thoughts, and may justly deny that presence and
assistance, which we have need of; and without Gods spirit helping us, we
cannot pray as we ought, nor keep out Distractions with all our skill. Romans
8.26. The spirit helps our infirmities, and these wanderings are some of those
infirmities, which the spirit must help us about, yea and will, if he be not
disobliged, but it is far from likely, that we should have that sacred Spirit
at our beck in Duty, whom we have distasted all the day long. How justly may He
say, as it is Jer. 11.15. What has my beloved to do in my house? or, as the
Margent, what is to my beloved in my house, seeing she has wrought lewdness
with many? As if he should say, I know not what to do with thee in my house, or
what thou have to do with me, having roved so extremely with thy heart from me,
and been lewd with many. Remember it is the Holy Ghost, who hates a sinful
thought any time of day. That man must walk with God in the Day, that will have
God draw nigh to him at Night.

2. These dispose and naturalize the soul to roving. Habit is a second nature
Hereby holy Thoughts become tedious and painful, for we strive against two
natures, one that sin has brought and another that Custom has wrought. Mr.
Angier p. 141.
, and it is almost as hard to wash an Ethiopian white, as to break an evil
custom. Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots, then may ye also do (or think) good, that are accustomed to Evil. If a
man be used to ill company, and linked in with them, though he sometimes
resolve better, yet when they come, away he must go with them against his
purpose. Perhaps you have resolved against these vain wanderings in Gods
service, but being used to them, they call at door, and take you captive away
against your intention. And therefore set up a constant watch against them, for
Religion is linked together in the power and practicals of it. So that you must
take all, or leave all; be a Christian always and altogether, or not at all.
It is said of that accursed Mahomet that he had used a Dove to come to his Ear,
and thence to eat her commons, And so when the falling sickness surprised him,
his pigeon presently came to her repast, which he feigned to be the holy Ghost
or an Angel, that told him the mysteries of his Religion: my beloved, if these
fowls, these evil Angels be used to your ear or heart, they will come even in
your most celestial employments, and divert and distract you: and hereby they
become less strange, and things that are familiar to us, though ugly, are not
started at; nay treble diligence will not dispel them, if you give them
ordinary entertainment. If a way be made over your corn or ground, and people
used to come that way, it must be an higher hedge than ordinary, that must keep
them off. If vain thoughts have made a road over thy heart, and use to come
that way without control, it must be a very high and strong watch and
resistance, that will turn them by, in holy Duties. Prove. 35.28. He that has
no rule over his own spirit, is like a City that is broken down and without
Walls.

3. These vain thoughts at other times make us apprehend it more impossible to
conquer, and less sinful to be conquered by them. And when Distractions appear
so powerful that there is no resisting them, or so harmless that they are not
worth our trouble to resist them, then is a floodgate opened to let them in:
when once our courage is conquered, or our Conscience is feared, we are quite
undone. And thus you see that one sin ushers in another, and the looseness of
our heart at one time, prepares it to be so another. Even as you observe your
Children ('it is the comparison of one that has the skill of simile^s) they are
more unruly before strangers, or at times when they should be most demure, than
at other times: and you are then, more aware and troubled at their shrewd words
and gestures, than the whole year besides: Alas, It is not merely, that they
are worse then, but then you take more notice of it, it is then most
observeable and apparent, though their carriage be much at one: So it is with
your Hearts; O ( cry you) I am more pestred with foolish thoughts in Prayer or
Sermon, than all the day or week besides^ Then my Heart is worst, when it
should be best. Alas! its naught all along, it does but as it is used to do,
only you observe it not at other times, and now observe it a little and find it
out, but its always so.

4. These do infect the memory Sed cum s^^mens ad studium orationis erexerit,
earum rerum imagines reverberata patitur, quibu^ libenter prius otiosa
premibatur. Greg. in Job. l. 10. c. 16.
, and imprint such species and notions there, as offer and produce themselves,
when we are in the service of God And so when a good man out of the good
treasure of his heart should bring forth good things. He stumbles upon the vain
and unprofitable trash, before laid up in his memory, to the grie^ of Gods
spirit, and hazard of his own. The memory, you know, will most easily retain an
impertinent story, a filthy or foolish imagination a long time, and then when
an Idle heart hits upon it, (though God himself looks on) that will run away
with the heart, and give both matter and strength to a long, woeful, and
wandering Distraction.

How does the Hence cogitatio a cogendo, quia voluntas cogit memoriam ut
proferat materiam, cogit etiam intellectum ad formandum, Bern. Ep. de vlt.
Solit.
active Fancy in our sleep sometimes light upon some sorry thoughts we had in
the day, and take them by the end, and spin them out into a very sinful Dream?
and this, Casuists say, we are responsible for though it seem involuntary:
because we administered matter for it, and remotely promoted it: so we shall be
found guilty before God, even of our unwilling wandering in Gods service,
because we laid up for them before. If we brew for them, Satan will be sure to
broach them.

5. These idle thoughts, at other times, provoke God to give us up to our own
inventions. As that dreadful word, Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let
him alone. Seeing he will be married to them, and forsake me, let him take
them. If a man be resolved upon Idols or any other sin, God will not hinder
him. So when he finds the heart joined, taken up, and pleased with vain
thoughts; Good motions knock and wait, but are not accepted or heeded; come and
knock again with double earnestness, How long shall vain thoughts lodge within
thee? but are not regarded, sin and the heart are making merry within; come and
try once more, open now or never; And no answer, nay, now the Soul is joined to
these things, let him alone. Sleep on now, and take thy rest. Trouble him no
more in his vain inventions. So I gave them over, Psalm. 81.12. To their own
hearts lust, and they walked in their own counsels. If they choose Hell before
Heaven, let them take it. My Spirit shall not always strive with man. And now
when the Soul is given up to a vagabond frame, then thy weak purposes, and
faint watchfulness over it stand for nothing, but are broken like Sampsons
cords; and a deluge of all manner of impertinencies breaks in, and the Heart is
prostituted to all temptations.

The Remedy against these idle thoughts out of Duties is,

1. A right understanding what a vain thought is. Though it sound somewhat
harsh, that all thoughts are either good or bad, the matter of some being in
itself indifferent; yet if we consider the Principle and Tendency of them, we
shall hardly light upon one individual thought, but it has either the stamp of
Good or Evil upon it. It is certain, that a wicked man's thoughts are all vain,
as they come from him, neither flowing from a sanctified heart, nor being
directed to a Divine end. Ah poor sinners, your hearts are little worth, the
imaginations of them are materially or formally or finally evil, only evil and
that continually. The sweetest words from corrupt lungs do stink in the
nostrills of them that stand by, and so your best thoughts coming from corrupt
hearts, cannot be right in the sight of God.

And then for a gracious man, it should seem every thought comes either from
the old man or the New, the regenerate or unregenerate part, especially if we
consider that there is hardly a thought but it may be resolved ultimately
either into Christ or Self, Let it therefore be concluded, that every thought
that is not suggested, or directed by the Spirit of God, and that no way
conduces to the glory of God, the good of your neighbor, nor the good of your
own soul or body, is a vain thought, vain or void, it might be spared, it
stands for nothing, its worse than nothing.

2. Be thoroughly convinced that vain thoughts are Sins The greatest Good and
Evil that ever was in the world, was first but a little thought. Mr. Angier p.
171.
; They are not free from the Law of God, though they be free from the lash of
man. The Rabbis had a strange exposition of that, Psa. 66.18. If I regard
iniquity in my heart, God will not hear me; they read it thus, If iniquity do
but remain within the heart (be not produced into act) God will not regard it;
and so the Pharisees of the Decalogue, as if God had only forbidden the outward
acts of sin; but there is nothing more contrary to the nature of God, or of his
Law, or of the souls of men than this. I wonder how they could overlook all
these direct passages in the Old Testament, Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate
thy Brother in thy heart. -- Thou shall not say in thy heart, and innumerable
such. No, no thoughts are words before God, Quod agunt hominibus dicta, eadem
Deo cogita^iones. Bern. formul. hon. vitae.
Ezekiel. 11.5. I know the things that come into your mind, every of them. What is
sin^ but a deviation or transgression of the Law of God? and this is a woeful
thing. Sin even in a thought is a woeful thing; Nay, words and actions are as it
were sins at second hand; the very first life, See Mr. Bolton's discourse of
true happiness p. 126.
and freshest vigor of all ill, is immediately inspired into the thoughts.
Hence it is that Peter advises Simon Magus to pray to God, if it were
possible, that the thoughts of his heart might be forgiven him; as though there
lay the greatest guilt, and deepest stain before God Sicut enim vipera a filiis
in venire adhuc positis occiditur, ita nos occidunt cogitationes nostrae intra
nos enutritae. Bern. de modo been vivendi. Ser. 29.
. Alas, one vain thought would bring down the highest Angel into the lowest
Hell: and that which would damn an Angel, will damn thee, except thou repent.
If millions of Angels have fallen by a sinful thought, and yet thou stand
under the guilt of many, thank Free Grace, and the Death of Christ for that;
but yet thy sin is still as bad, and thou had need to cleanse the filthiness
of the spirit, as well as of the flesh.

3. Daily wind up your spiritual watch, and renew your Covenants with God in
prayer. Draw all your parts and faculties into Covenant, Job 31.1. I made a
Covenant with my eyes. Why then should I think upon a Maid? Behold the blessed
purity of this man's heart! Neither eye nor thought of his should wander after a
Maid; and this he vows. Though good purposes are the shifts of Hypocrites,
whose Covenants to God are like ropes of Sand, broken as soon as made; yet when
they are accompanied with repentance for former falls, and hearty endeavor for
future performance, no better sign of an upright Christian. Know, that constant
watchfulness is a duty; that as Nature has provided a cover for the eye, so
Grace has prepared watchfulness for the soul; and as it would be a fearful
sight to see an eye without a lid, it would soon be put out; so it is a fearful
and dangerous thing to keep a soul without its case, without its watch, Prove.
23.17. Let not thy heart envy (or imitate) sinners: but be thou in the fear of
the Lord all the day long; not only at prayer-times, but all the day long. Be
sure that every morning you sincerely and solemnly relieve your watch, by new
purposes and prayers, and then when vain thoughts offer to come in, you may
say, I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
Judgments. And labor, that all your thoughts may hold weight with that
excellent Scripture, Phil. 4.8. Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things.

4. Repent thoroughly and heartily for them. For as Humiliation without
Reformation, is a foundation without a building; so Reformation without
Humiliation, is a building without a foundation, which the next wind of
temptation will throw down. To wash the heart, (mark, it must not be swept
only) in the brinish ^ears of Repentance, is the way to dislodge vain thoughts
from within you, Jer. 4.18. If you felt the smart and bitter pangs of true
Repentance to night for your vain thoughts, it would affright and mortify the
heart from them to morrow; you would have no mind to tamper with the vanities
that cost you so dear: The burnt child would dread the fire, and the fresh
remembrance of the heart-ach you had for these guests last day, would bolt them
out from coming in to day. If our sins did cost us in David's sense, broken
bones, we should not so easily sin again. If the Scholar, after his truanting,
stole to his place unobserved and uncorrected, he will easily venture on his
freaks again to morrow; but if he tasted the Rod, the smart he felt, will
somewhat warm and keep him from such follies again. Ah Sirs! our Repentance is
easy, and our confessions complements; we forgive our selves, ere God forgive
us; we can lick our selves whole, without the cost of a tear or sigh, and then
we are ready for a sin again: He that finds it easy to repent, will not find
it hard to sin. Verbal Repentance will never cure you of real sins. It is your
sad thoughts that will prevent your vain ones, Quia e^im semper cogitamus,
exquir^nda sunt nobis bona, ne mala cogitemus. Greg. in 1 Reg. c. 14.
and idle thoughts are best excluded by keeping the heart full of good ones.

SECT. XI.
THe Eleventh Cause of wandering thoughts in the Ordinances of God,. 11. XI. A
divided heart
is, a divided heart, James 1.6.8. For he that wavereth, is like a wave of the
Sea, driven with the wind and tossed. The forlorn picture of a roving heart,
carried up and down, as the wind of any temptation pleases: The Cause, ver. 8.
A double mind: A double minded man is unstable in all his ways. The word
signifies (...).
one that has two souls; one that speaks with a double heart, Psalm. 12.2. Like
that profane Piece, that bragged he had two souls in one body; one for God,
the other for any thing that came. This man is the unstable man in God's
service, off and on with God, unfixed to his business, knows not what he would
have, prays and unprayes, wants faith for the ballast of his soul, and so is
carried at the pleasure of every wave; and then ver. 7. is the misery o^ this
frame. Let not this man think that he shall obtain any thing of the Lord; that
is (as some) though God may answer such requests out of his superabundant
mercy, yet such a man can look for nothing. Though a distracted prayer may
receive something, yet it cannot expect any thing from God; when a man's
supplication is a provocation, there is little hope: He that puts treason into
his petition, has little reason to hope for a good answer.

How an heart may be said to be divided in a duty these ways: 1. When all the
heart is not engaged therein; as when understanding or conscience without the
will or affections. This opens a door unto distractions, Ephesians. 6.6. Doing the
Will of God from the heart, with good will doing service as to the Lord, and
not to men. Half an heart can do nothing with God. A man may as well with one
eye observe the stars, and with the other measure the Earth at the same time,
as at once dispatch affairs with God and man. Hereby both businesses are
spoiled: Conscience of God hinders from any discreet and serious contrivance of
any thing in his presence; and tampering with the world, provokes God, and
hinders the affairs above. Our Lord Christ is most peremptory in that case: Ye
cannot serve two Masters, the one will be over-served, ye cannot serve God and
Mammon. 2. The heart may be said to be divided, when it is unfixed and
indeterminate; wavering and unsettled. A duty to God is shooting at an hairs
breadth; if a man be uncertain and unsteady, how shall he hit the mark? Psalm.
57.7. O God, my heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give
praise. Now the work is likely to go on. You cannot (it seems) so much as sing
a Psalm, or give the Lord praise without this fixedness of heart. As you have
seen the Needle in a Compass, waver up and down perpetually, till it point
toward the North, then it is fixed and stands still: so until the soul be
composed, and bent directly toward God, it wanders, and trifles everlastingly.
3. The heart is divided by Hypocrisy, James 4.8. Purify your hearts, ye
double minded. As he speaks to open sinners to cleanse their hands, so to close
Hypocrites, to purify their hearts, that is, be sincere: An Hypocrite is a man
of two hearts, and both little worth; one good one is worth a thousand pair of
double hearts. Hence holy David, Psalm. 86.11. Unite my heart to fear thy Name,
else I shall have one heart to move me toward thee, and another heart to fetch
me back again. One heart for God, another for Baal, and so shall halt between
them. 4. The heart is divided, when you perform not his service with all your
might and strength, Ier. 48.10. Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently, loosely, that unbends his bow, that unstrings his heart in the
Lord's service (...), etc. Nostram ad D^um oration^m non syllabarum numeris
absolve^c nos oportet, sed sincera potius animi voluntate. Basil. conc. 9. de
oratione.
. He that is studying with all his might, the least noise or word distracts
him, and troubles him^ he cannot admi^ or abide the least diversion: So he that
is intent with all his might in God's service, cannot give room for the least
by thought. No, I am before the Lord, and I can do but little, but I Will do what
I can, Psalm. 103.1. Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me, praise
his holy Name. And this leads us to the Remedy for this Cause.


The Remedy for a divided heart is, get sincerity and seriousness. And indeed
the soul that is sincere, is serious. The real Beggar begs in good earnest, he
cries, he weeps, he heeds not the playing of the children, the barking of the
dogs, not he; his wants pinch him, his stomach pulls and craves, nothing but
meat will please him: There Is music perhaps within, and company without, but
all is one to him, he is not concerned therewith, he is hungry in good earnest,
and therefore still he cries for bread: So it is with the upright and serious
heart, he is really and deeply pressed down with sin, and needy of grace and
comfort; he sees the reality of invisible things; he fears the anger of God,
and feels his broken bones, and therefore let the Devil, or the world,
distribute what they can, or suggest what they will, he plyes this (...) must
have pa^don and grace^ and the light of the Lord's countenance: It is not the
stirring of a feather can unhinge him, for he is in good earnest, Ier. 30 21.
For who is this that has engaged his heart, to draw, nigh to me, says the
Lord. Where sits that man, that gives a heart to God? the Lord cries, who? O
let every one that hears or reads this, cry out, Lord, it is I; and when the
heart, the whole heart is engaged in a duty, then work goes on. There Is a vast
difference between the pleading of an Orator, and the pleading of a Malefactor:
The former has perhaps a more smooth, elegant and starcht discourse, but he
handles it with a light finger; a friend, a fee would take him off; but the
Malefactor that pleads for his life, he sweats, he cries, he begs, the Judge
interrupts him, but he goes on; the Jailer stops his mouth, but he will
proceed; all the Court cannot distract his mind from his business, his heart is
wholly in it. And so it is with a sincere and serious Saint: He can truly say,
Lord, thou have more of my heart, than ever any creature in the world had; my
heart is fixed, I am set upon this affair Gregor. Nazidnz. tells of his Sister
Gorgonia, being sick of an incurable disease, prostrated her self at the Altar,
minantem se non prius Altar dimissuram quam nacta esset sanitatem: And cries
out, O honest^m impudentiam^ And she went whole away.
: The great matters I am about, I neither can live, nor dare die without them,
and therefore blame me not to be busy. It is the dear prayer that prevails,
the prayer that costs us dear.

SECT. XII.
THE Twelfth Cause of wandering Thoughts in God's Worship, 12.
is, XII. An opinion of no great evil in them.
an opinion that there is no great evil in them; which partly proceeds from
that Notion, that thoughts are free, or at least, that no sin is really sin,
except it be voluntary, and these are without consent; partly from our being
used to greater sins, which do widen the conscience to digest these lesser
ones, without any staying: And partly from the commonness of them, being the
snares wherein we are most frequently taken; and the oftener they walk through
the heart, the less strange are they there; the more familiar they are, the
more apology we have for them; and so usually it becomes no sin, that we have a
mind unto Non feci; si seci, non male feci; si malee, non multum male; si
multum male, non mala intention. Bern.
.

And now, when there is bred in the soul, an opinion that there is no evil, or
next to none therein; the heart is pleased with th^^, and merrily plays with
those baits, till by the hidden hook it is caught in the hidden snare of the
Devil. To rectify this mistake,

1. Somewhat must be granted. The evil in these wandering thoughts, is not so
great, as in many other sins: these do not vastare conscientiam, lay the
conscience waste, as some others, especially these roving thoughts, as are
rather injected, than contrived; the matter whereof is good, not evil, and
which are short and sorrowed for: But who will swallow a Spider, and say, there
is not so much poison in this as in a Toad; or break his leg, and say, there
is not such danger therein, as in breaking the neck? even so, it is a poor plea
to say, these peccadillo's, trivial things are not like oaths, and murders, and
oppression, etc. But these are great enough to displease God, to bind guilt
upon the soul, to prepare for greater, and bid fair for Hell.

2. Something must be answered, as namely, 1. That though our thoughts are free
from the notice of men on Earth, or Satan in Hell, further than they are
imprinted in the body or actions; though they are free from the punishment of
humane Laws, yet are they not free from the eye, nor Law, nor wrath of God, as
you heard in diverse instances before, and particularly in the case of Simon
Magus, Act. 8.22. And 2. That other Notion is corrupt, that nothing is culpable
that is involuntary: It Is true, this does extenuate a fault, but this does not
extinguish it: it is a less fault in that ca^se^ but it is a fault Nay, in some
respects, the more involuntary any sin is, the more strong and natural it is;
and the more natural, the more horrible; as a natural thief is worse than a
deliberate thief, who sometimes steals: and in this respect, involuntary sins
may be worst of all. Shepherd Select cases.
, for the understanding may be depraved, as well as the will; and we are really
guilty in Adam's sin, though we had no previous consent therein. It is a fault,
that we are capable subjects for such sinful injections, though we yield not to
them; for there is something in us that incourages those attempts: the Angels
met with none of these. The will lies dormant when we are asleep, and yet
Aquin. 22 ae. q. 154. act. 5.
Casuists say, there wants no sin, even in our dreams; for the fancy and the
memory may be corrupted, as well as the will; and therefore it follows, these
wandering thoughts may be against God's Will, though they be besides our own.
And 3. For our accustomedness to greater sins, and frequency in those, that
signifies little herein: for crimes do not excuse faults. The Stars are the
same in the firmament all day, though while the Sun shines, they appear not;
when the Sun is retired, they will show themselves: while your greater staring
sins appear, these are nothing; but if ever a night of terror come upon you,
then each of these will shine in its proper guilt, in the eye of conscience.
And then 4. The commonness of them adds to their sinfulness, though it take
from your sense thereof. If your neighbor for a time break over your hedge,
and tread your corn, the matter is soon put up, it is but a trespass by chance;
but if he daily use it, and make it his way, you think it is intolerable: So if
a wandering thought stole in once a week, it were a less offense; but if they
will transgress, and make a way over God's ground, spoil his Garden often in
every day, this makes the sin the greater, though the sense of it be the less
Tu qui dicis peccatum parvum, velim scire, quoties tale peccatum admittis, si
tot parvulas plagas in corpore aut maculas and soissuras in vestibus fieri
velis. August.
.

3. Something must be advised for cure. And that is, 1. A true knowledge, and
deep sense of the nature of sin, whereby you will see, that no sin can be
little; that there is more evil in the least sin, in a vain thought, than in
all the world besides. Hence, says God, Ier. 6.19. Behold I will bring evil
upon this people even the fruit of their thoughts. All the possible sorrows
that can tear the mind and soul; all the sickness and sores that can be
inflicted on every part of the body; all the mischiefs that can sink thy name
and estate, (put them all together) amount not to that real evil, that is in
the least sin The least infirmities do break the first covenant of works, and
hence you do not only deserve, but are under the sentence of death, and curse
of God, by the most involuntary, accidental infirmity, according to that, Gal.
3.10. Mr. Shepherd select cases.
. For it is an offense to God, displeasing him whom the Angels study to please,
and would not offend for ten thousand worlds. Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee
only have I sinned. The greatest evil in sin, is that it is against God; by it
you provoke the highest Majesty, displease the sweetest Nature, and offend your
chiefest Friend. And if I know a little thing will offend such a person, I am a
wretch, for a little thing to offend so great and good a friend. Might not Adam
have argued thus, it is but an Apple, there can be no great hurt in this; what is
this to breed a jarr between God and me? and yet we have found that little Figg
or Apple, a great sin. Here was all, God was disobeyed, his Will opposed, his
Sovereignty and Mercy trodden under foot; and this is the nature of sin:
whereof, if the soul have a deep sense, it will excuse no longer, but frighted
at the hideous look thereof, fly even into the fire to escape it, Psalm.
119.113. I hate vain thoughts: but thy Law do I love. I not only avoid them,
but I hate them; I see a sinning evil in them, I see a damning evil in them. I
hate vain thoughts; not only wicked, wanton, revengeful, proud, or blasphemous
thoughts, but vain thoughts; empty thoughts fill me with grief Though to live
in the greatest sin, may consist with the form of Godliness, yet to live in the
least, may not with the power thereof.
. Natural conscience may abhor the former, but a soft heart can only oppose the
latter. And there is the means he used; Thy Law do I love; he that loves a pure
Law, cannot but hate a vain thought.

2. You must apprehend the evils, yea, the great evils that are in this sin.
For though we grant, there is more of poison in some other crimson sins, and in
some distractions more than others, yet there is much evil in the least of
these; which, on purpose to whet and ripen your most serious resolutions
against them, (and see they attain that effect) I shall now in the seventh
place discover:

CHAP. VII. The Evil of Distractions. Cap. 7. The Evil of Distractions.

SECT. I.
THE Evil of Distractions,. 1.
is, 1. In their Nature. 2. In their Effects. Take the former in these
demonstrations.

1. These distractions in God's Worship, They are sins against the first Table.
are sins against the first Table. And these proportionably are ever greater
than those against the second. Though the offense of them be properly against
the second Commandment, yet they have a fling against every precept of the
first Table It would be an heinous offense among the incense offered to God to
have put brimstone. The prayers are thine ^incense, but thy distractions are
brimstone, that stink in his nostrils. Chrysostom. Hom. 73. in Matthew.
. For how does he acknowledge God, that in his very presence offends him? or
how do thou honor, love and delight in him, as the chiefest Good, when thou
startest aside from converse with him, to parley with the world and sin?
There Is the first Commandment broken. Do you worship him according to his will,
that thus worship him? If material Images be cast off, and spiritual
fornication committed, ye are still breakers of that Commandment. A graven
Image in the mind, a worldly or wicked fancy there, where Christ should be,
cannot but provoke him to be very angry. There Is the second Commandment broken.
And these manifestly break the third Commandment, being a palpable taking his
great Name in vain. To speak of God, and think of the world: to hold discourse
with him, and think of your lusts, is an high taking his Name in vain. As if
the wife should be speaking busily with her husband, and at the same time
looking at the picture of the Paramour, what rage would this beget in her
husband's heart? To make the Name of God a cloak for the things, the nothings
of the world, for the worst thing sin, is the saddest sacrilege; and for which
he will not hold you guiltless, if he find you griefless. And then the fourth
Commandment is broken by a plain rape, and theft committed of God's holy time;
that which you God forbids us to find our pleasure on his holy day, Isa. 58.13.
And do we not find our pleasure by our Thoughts? Mr. Angier, p. 125.
destinate, at your kneeling down to his service, is purloyned away by these
roving thoughts, especially when they invade the Sabbath. For when you seem to
give him much, in effect it comes to nothing; sift out the bran of your
wandering thoughts, and the flower of cordial service will be next to nothing.
And so your time is lost, your duty lost, and danger of your souls loss after
all. And thus you see the first Table broken at a blow: It is a sad blow that
breaks four Commands at once.

SECT. II.
THE second Evil in their Nature,. 2. Distractions are heart-sins.
is, Non est reu^, nisi men's sit rea. A principle in Law.
That they are heart-sins, Psalm. 5.9. There is no faithfulness in their mouths,
their inward part is very wickedness. As wounds in the inwards are most
dangerous, because hard to come at and cure. Hence it is far easier to cure a
swearer of swearing, than a roving heart of its distractions. And as these sins
are more dangerous, so are they very displeasing. The heart is God's-Acre, the
enclosure he keeps for his own walk and delight. He has said, Prove. 23.26. My
Son, give me thy heart. Now to injure him of his peculiar, to lay the filthy
excrements of our sinful distractions under his most blessed nostrils (to speak
with most deep reverence and grief) to thrust him out of his Mansion House on
Earth, the heart; this is no small injury, affront, and unkindness. And such a
backslider in heart, shall be filled with his own ways, if he fill not the
sacred bottles with his tears. And they are Outward sins are majoris infamiae:
Inward sins are majoris rea^us. As bleeding inward kills.
more heavy to the conscience, in that they meet with no shame or trouble
without, which is the ordinary lot of other sins, but are begun and perfected
in the heart within; and their guilt is more, because their shame is less. And
they do thereupon leave (as such other sins do) a deeper sting of remorse, and
horror of conscience, when the conscience is weak. There is much evil in
these, Ezekiel. 6.9. I am broken with their whorish HEART, which has departed
from me.

. 3. Distractions are sins in the special Presence of God.
SECT. III.
THE third Evil in the nature of them, is, That they are sins in the special
Presence of God. We read, Ezekiel. 8.16. of God, showing the Prophet with infinite
wrath, five and twenty men at the door of the Temple of the Lord, between the
Porch and the Altar, with their backs toward the Temple of the Lord, and their
faces toward the East, and they worshipped the Sun toward the East. This he
highly resented, that in his Temple they should have their faces toward the
Sun, and turn their backs on him. This is the manners of a roving heart. In
God's own presence he turns his back on God, and his face to the things under
the Sun, and those he worships. O infinite patience! that turns not such a soul
into a Pillar of Salt, yea, throws it not into a Pit of Brimstone! Ezekiel. 5.11.
Therefore as I live, says the Lord God, surely (see how he binds it with
double strength) because thou have defiled my Sanctuary with all thy detestable
things, and with all thy abominations, therefore I also will diminish thee -- A
third part shall die with the Pestilence. Which of all thy detestable sins, but
thou have had a fling at in the Sanctuary and Presence of God? now a proud, now
a wanton, then a worldly thought. Ah, says God, I cannot bear it. He that
provokes me to my face, shall feel it Oras, loqueris ad sponsam; legis, ille
tibi loquitur. Hieron. ad Eustoch. tom. 1. p. 142.
. Few think these sins have brought the Plague, no more than the Corinthians
did their unworthy partaking at the Lord's Table. In his special presence he
looks at thee, as I may say, with both eyes, Psalm. 90.8. He sets all our
iniquities before him, but he places these secret sins in the light of his
countenance. O this is an evil thing, and a bitter, that thou should provoke
the Lord to his face, and that his fear does not awe thee, Ier. 31.11. Yea, in
my house have I found their wickedness, says the Lord; this dies it with a
double dye. I am God Almighty, walk before me, and be thou perfect, Genesis 17.1
To believe you are sitting, standing, kneeling before God should make us
perfect Ihi pec^a ubi nescis esse Deum. Bern. de mod. been viv. Sermon. 19.
. How demurely does the Child stand before his Father, the Scholar before his
Master? and shall the Child of God only forget himself? the poorest Scholar,
before the best of Masters? Famous was that execution, Levit. 10.12. Two of
Aaron's Sons came with their Censers, and offered strange fire BEFORE the Lord,
which he commanded them not, and there went out fire from the Lord, and
devoured them, and they died BEFORE the Lord. Behold the dreadful hand of God!
before him was their sin, before him they were punished. Lord! how terrible art
thou in thy holy place! If no place will deter them from sin, no place shall be
a sanctuary to them from Judgment. What are distracted thoughts but strange
fire? and a A greater curse goes with an evil thought in God's service, than
if it were another time; times of blessing perverted, are times of greatest
curse. Mr. Angier. p. 123.
strange punishment may the workers of iniquity have, if timely Repentance
prevent not.

SECT. IV.
THE fourth Evil in their Nature,. 4. Distractions are sins about the most
serious business.
is, That they are sins about the most serious business Claudatur contra
adversarium pectus, and soli Deo pateat -- nec aliud habeamus in cord, and
aliud in voce, quasi sit aliud quod magis debeas, cogitare, quam quod cum Deo
loqueris. Cyprian. de Orat. Domin.
. The most grand affairs under the Sun, are transacted in an Ordinance. I have
read of a Noble Man of this Nation, that when his Cause of Life and Death was
trying, though he had a pardon in his pocket at the same time, he was
irrevocably sentenced, being that while asleep; he was sleeping, while the
Judge was sentencing, was not this a gross neglect, and did not he (trow ye)
bite his nails, and beat his head, that could not watch, when his head was in
question? Sinner, thy head, and life, and soul, and all are in question: thy
eternal happiness is handling, or thy dreadful sentence passing, and is this a
time to trifle and straggle away from God? If you should come to the elbow of a
Counselor pleading at the Bar, much more of one impeach't for Treason, and
tell them, such a companion has sent for them to the Tavern, or that such a
Cock is like to win the Game, the Cattle broken into such a field, such a game
at Chess likely to be lost; with what disdain and indignation would they turn
back such a message, and cry, Is this time to trouble me with these things?
when the very hearing of such an errand may lose my cause, or hazard my life
Consider what a prayer is worth; every thing is worth, according to what we can
have for it, why a man may have grace and glory for a ^ervent prayer. If you
should sell that for a trifle, when another had thousands for the same,
would thou not befool thy self? Mr. White of vain thoughts. p. 80.
. Are Cocks, or Corn, or Companions, parallel to immortal souls? what are these
to the things between God and me? If the dead must not be buried, when Christ
calls; nor a man stay to take leave of his friends, how greatly does he
trespass that runs riot after toys and sins, when the great God calls and calls
again? We have a clear instance, Luke 10.41, 42. the Preacher was at Martha's
house, and serious in his Sermon: Martha (good woman) was highly cumbred, and
distracted with much serving: Mary sat at her Savior's feet, and heard his
word. Says Martha, I think it much that my Sister must have all the Dainties,
and I all the Distractions: Master, rectify this inequality. Ah, says our
Lord, Martha, Martha, thou art cumbred (or as the word signifies distracted)
about many things. But one thing is needful. Mary is embarked in a most
necessary affair, and worldly cumber is improper for an heavenly business. She
that is working for her soul, has work enough at that time. Salvation, Eternal
salvation! Eternal salvation of soul and body; these are not things to dally
about.

SECT. V.
THE fifth Evil of these rovings of heart,. 5. Distractions are sins of
Hypocrisy.
is, That they are sins of Hypocrisy Nec cum Psalmum dico, attendo cujus
Psalmus est. Idcirco magnam injuriam. Deo facio, cum illum precor ut meam
precem exaudiat, quam ego qui fundo non audio; deprecor illum ut mihi intendat,
ego vero nec mihi nec illi intendo. Bern. Med. c. 8.
. And there can be no little evil in the sin of Hypocrisy. What is Hypocrisy?
Matthew. 15.7, 8. But the Honor of the lips, and the Distance of the heart, vox
and preterea nihil, as it is said of the Nightingale, a sound of words, and no
soundness in the heart, that is Hypocrisy; of all sins most odious unto God and
man. And though the purpose of the heart be wanting to make it formal, and full
Hypocrisy, yet a custom in these will beget that at length, and he that uses
to lie in jest, will come at length to lie in earnest, Hos. 11.12. Ephraim
compasses me about with lies. Oh how often may the Lord say over us, these
people compass me about with lies. What a Generation of Vipers are here! like
the Viper that is speckled without, and poisonous within! Moses took a vail,
when he spoke to Israel, and put it off, when he spoke to God. But the
Hypocrite does quite contrary, he shows his best to men, his worst to God, but
the Lord sees both the vail, and the face; and it is hard to say, whether he
hates more the vail of dissimulation, or their face of wickedness. This, it is a
disappointing of God, in a sense a deceiving of him, Mal. 1.4. Cursed be the
deceiver, that has in his flock a Male, and voweth and sacrifices to God a
corrupt thing. Yea, says God, you have in your flock a Male, you can be
serious when you will, but a corrupt thing (it seems) will serve my turn; you
disappoint me, you deceive me, you appoint a meeting between an heart and me,
and here I come, and the heart is gone; you knock at my door with great
earnestness, and when I come, the heart is gone: you are deceivers, and deserve
my curse. If this be not repented and reformed, such deceitful Hypocrites must
carry away no blessing of mine, but a curse.

A prayer, though but of forty words sincerely made and felt every syllable
shall prevail more with God, than a long Oration with half an heart: and the
meanest Sermon heard with a prepared, humble, and attentive heart, shall
receive a greater blessing, than a better sermon with a worser heart: for God
is a spirit, and shows do work nothing with him: he that seems to serve him,
and does not, exasperates him the more. An eye to Heaven, and an heart for
Hell, an humble knee, and a haughty spirit, a serious posture, and a frivolous
soul, are abominable to the Lord Thy wandering duties, Satan keeps as bills of
Indictment against the great day: what is good in them, he lays before thee
now, to quiet thy conscience; but miserable comforters are those which pacify
the conscience, but purify it not. Mr. White. p. 86.
.

SECT. VI.
. 6. Distractions alienate the heart from duties.
IN the next place, the Evil of Distractions is seen in the Effects, whereof
these are some.

First, They do alienate the heart from holy duties In this sense they are a
curse; for what is a curse but separation from God, think then, when wandering
thoughts come to us in holy duties, the curse comes, and when they stay with
us, the curse stays. Mr. Angier. p. 186.
. When we miss of God, we have small mind to his service again. It is the
comparison of a learned Divine, when there is no marow in the bone, we quickly
throw the bone away; even so when the sweet enjoyment of God is not found in an
Ordinance, which is lost by the roving heart, we shall ere long cast away that
Ordinance, except shame or custom restrain us. Now when the soul cares not for
prayer, or other Ordinances, it is a sad effect: the Lord may say to thee, with
more right and reason, than Dalilah did, Judge. 16.15. How can thou say, I
love thee, when thine heart is not with me? What love is that without an heart?
where the affection is, there the cogitation will be also. I may truly invert
this, and say, where the heart is not before, there love will not come after.
Let all the soul be seriously bestowed in any duty of prayer, singing, reading,
or hearing, and you will be loath to leave that duty, and long to be at it
again. O the sweetness therein, and love thereunto! Psalm. 119.93. I shall never
forget thy precepts, for with them thou have quickened me. Oh when shall I come
and appear before God! O that every day were a Sabbath, then should I be well,
as said that famous Mr. Bruen of Bruen-stapleford. Cestr.
Instance of Practical Piety. Hence, with a gracious heart, one duty prepares,
and gets a stomach for another. But you shall find, when the heart is out of
tune, and beating about the bush, and not half quarter of it with God; O then
it is the most wearisome employment in the world! A man had rather thresh than
pray, that has his heart in the Barn, when he is in prayer. And there is no
lively desires, or longings of soul to that business, wherein he felt so little
of God. Hence it is so hard to get a worldly family to get together to prayer;
Alas! the duty is a distraction to them; when they come, they still leave their
hearts behind them; you can make them no pennyworth of an Ordinance, whose
hearts do usually run out of an Ordinance.

SECT. VII.
. 7. Distractions affront the Majesty of God.
THE second Effect of Distractions, is, That they much affront the Majesty of
God Videtur enim deridere Deum, sicuti si alicui homini loqueretur, and non
attenderet ad ea quae ipse proserret. Aquin. 22 ae. q. 83. art. 13.
. It was an high affront to God, Act. 7.39. that his people, after they had had
experience of him, yet in their hearts turned back into Egypt. This is the
wisdom of a roving heart, they say. Come, we like not this blessed presence of,
nor work in our hearts: let us walk into the world again, Ezekiel. 11.21. But as
for them, whose heart walks after the heart of their detestable things, I
will recompense their way upon their own heads, says the Lord God. Here one
detestable thing offers it self, and there another: for every thing that draws
the heart from God, its chief good, is therein detestable: Now when the heart
walks after them, that is the right vein of distractions. Where the heart walks
after every trifle, that puts up finger, he shall have enough of his ways,
says the Lord. Must I stand for a sta^e, when he is aiming at other matters?
must the great God wait on a simple Worm, till he can be at leisure to speak
with him? shall the worst of evils be courted, while the chief of goods is
slighted, and yet even then pretend to service? As if some miserable Scullion
at the Court had made great means to possess the King with his low condition,
and when the King is come to speak with him, he lies sweeping the sink, or
scouring the spit, and there lets his Prince wait on him to no purpose; may not
he justly say, when I come next to meet you, you'st know the difference between
the Majesty of a King, and the sordidness of a Scullion Divinum auxilium est
implorandum non remiss, nec mente huc vel illuc evagante, eo quod tali^ non
solum non impetrabit quod petit, sed etiam magi^ Deum irritabit. Basil. Instir.
ad rit. perfect.
. Just so, poor soul, do thou and I, obtain leave to approach our heavenly Lord
and King, and when he expects the heart earnestly to solicit her great
affairs, she is roving away, and bestowed in the Kitchen, or worse, while the
great and holy God stands waiting to be gracious. What Father but would take it
for a great indignity, to see his Son stopping his ears, or whistling, or
playing with Flies, while he is reading his last Will and Testament to him, or
giving him order about his greatest affairs? And is not God greater than a
Father? and can he with his honor, abate such a child his punishment, if he do
not humbly cry him mercy, and study to offend no more? Though divine vengeance
be not always so visible, as a Parents Rod, yet it is as real and more heavy.
A poor man cannot escape, with his affronts of a great God.

SECT. VIII.
. 8. Distractions hinder the benefit of Ordinances.
THE third Effect of Distractions, is, That they hinder the benefits of an holy
duty. God seldom thinks of those prayers, that we think not of our selves, Isa.
64.7. And there is none that calls on thy Name, that stirs up himself to
take hold of thee: The Lord counts such prayers as none at all, when a man does
not stir up himself to his business, and non entis nulla est operatio What is
the reason that Christians are so much shadows rather than substance, when they
come to forgive injuries, depend on God, etc. but because their service of God
is more in show, than in substance, according to that threatening, Isa. 29.13,
14. Mr. Angier p. 188.
. That which in God's account has no being, can have no working. The benefits
of Ordinances are many and great: they are like the medium to sensation, as the
air to the eye, or ear; there is no seeing nor hearing without it: so are
Ordinances to the soul: they are the Conduits to convey God's grace to us, and
our desires to him: when a dirty distraction gets in, the Conduit is stopped, and
the soul starved. And in this sense God's Name (which should be most sacred and
dear to us) is most palpably taken in vain. When we use a great solemnity to no
effect, magno conatu nugas agimus. The wind and tide to serve, and yet the soul
to sleep; the Mariner to be at Dice or Cards, till the opportunity be lost,
what a great evil is this^ when our voyage is for life and death? If you could
by the expense of one serious hour gain a Lordship, would you not be intense
and earnest that hour? would you not fume at the company, that would divert
you, and disdain any ordinary business that would interrupt you? O stay, and
let me alone this hour, for I am busy. Now by the Hoc negotium plus gemitibus
quam sermonibus agitur plu^ fle^^ quam affatu. Bernard.
cordial management of one serious hour in prayer, reading, hearing, or
meditation; you may, yea shall infallibly gain at least one grain of grace,
which is worth more than a Kingdom, yea, than a whole World. And is not that an
evil thing, and bitter, that then interrupts you, and frustrates your gainful
employment, whereby it comes to pass that you get nothing? Pearls are dealing,
and you get nothing. Orient graces in the hand of God, ready to give, and you
none of them, who would entertain, that can be rid of such companions?

SECT. IX.
. 9. Distractions deprive the soul of its comfort.
THE fourth Effect of these Distractions, is, That they deprive the soul of its
purest comforts. The highest, truest, and purest joys and comforts, meet the
soul in the service of God, Cant. 2.3, 4. I sat under his shadow with great
delight. (There are then delights, and great ones too in the ways of God) And
his fruit was sweet to my taste. (If thou have any spiritual taste, his fruit
will be sweet to it.) He brought me to the banqueting house: God's house is
his banqueting house, and every Ordinance is a rare Feast to the soul, that
does spiritually manage it: Now these idle wanderings of the heart; first, by
their Disturbance, then by their Guile, do damp and deprive the soul of the
comforts thereof. Just as a black cloud does hide from you, the bright and
warming beams of the Sun. How often have you mist of those joys of the Holy
Ghost, sweeter than the music of the Spheres, by these vain thoughts? with
what sweet content do you look back on a Duty, where communion has been held
between God and you? and what a folly is it to lose an hour, and neither reap
pleasure not profit by it Thy prayers will tire thee out, for thou have only
the difficult part of duty; thou crackest the shell, but eatest not the kernel:
like one that wants an excellent Book, whose sense or language he understands
not, which is a great trouble, whereas he that understands both, is much
delighted. Mr. White of Thoughts.
?

There is fatness in God's house, and Rivers of pleasures with him, but he
shall have leanness in his soul, that gives way to these, and of all those
Rivers drinks not a drop, not one drop of true comfort and pleasure. O what an
Heaven do negligent sinners lose! how many gracious smiles, blessed tokens,
celestial raptures, the dainty Diet of Angels, and all through the idleness of
the soul! Psalm. 63.5. My soul is satisfied as with marrow and fatness, (I am
full, brim full of joy and comfort, my heart runs over, and) my mouth shall
praise thee with joyful lips. Now all these gleams of sweet comfort and
refreshing, are stolen away by these thievish Distractions. For an upright
heart, and an attentive, would seldom want the sweet comforts, that usually
accompany sincerity and seriousness. He that can keep his meditations fixed on
the right object, his meditation shall be sweet; and where should the Lord make
his Servants joyful, but in the house of prayer?

SECT. X.
. 10. Distractions grieve away the Holy Ghost.
THE fifth Effect of Distractions in the Worship of God, is, That they grieve
away the Holy Ghost. It is true what the blessed Apostle has said, Romans 8.26.
The Spirit helps our infirmities, and so helps against these, when they are
but infirmities, mourned for, and striven against, but when they are contracted
habits, then they grieve and quench the holy Spirit (...).
. The Greek word in that Scripture, signifies to take and heave up a thing over
against you, to heave with you. I but now, if our spirits instead of helping,
shrink away, and heave none, this promise will do us no good. If we leave the
business wholly to God's Spirit, without our diligent cooperation, he will
leave it to our spirits, without his divine cooperation. The Holy Ghost will
dwell only with an holy heart, and these Idols in the heart, do heartily
trouble that sweet Spirit, Ezekiel. 14.3. Son of man, these men have set up their
Idols in their heart, and put the stumbling block of their iniquity before
their face, should I be inquired of at all by them? Read on, and you will see what
consequence this is of. What are worldly and sinful distractions, but Idols in
the heart? what are abused objects of the eye, or ear, but the stumbling blocks
of iniquity before the face? and how can the holy Spirit dwell in such a soul,
or abide such doings? Luther somewhat says, that the Holy Ghost dwells not in
Babel, but is Salem; that is, delights not in the heart, where is nothing but
confusion, (that is the english of Babel) but in the heart where there is quiet,
peace, and freedom, (that is the meaning of Salem.) In Salem also is his
tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion, Psalm. 76.2. The unkindness offered
is very great: as if you should earnestly importune some noble friend, to
accompany and help you in some arduous affair, and he comes to go with you,
once and again; and still, when you should come along, and promote your own
business, you steal away about some trivial matters, and leave your noble
friend in the lurch: This is the very case, you humbly impor^une the holy
Spirit of God, to help you in the service of God; and he most graciously comes
to help you, but one distraction or other charms away your heart, and the Holy
Ghost is left alone. And thus the Holy Ghost is so often sinned against, till at
length he is sinned away. And thus you see the evil of Distractions, which is
the seventh Point to be handled.

CHAP. VIII. The Cure of Distractions. Cap. 8. The Cure of Distractions.

SECT. I.
. 1.
AND if there be such great evil in these Distractions, and evil effects of
them, what shall an upright heart do to be rid of them? I say, an upright
heart, that inquires for means to use them, and craves a plaster not to look
at, but to apply to his sore. And art thou thus resolved, that read these
lines? For us to spend our skill, and you your time, without full purpose to
practice, is labor in vain: Nay, it will harden your hearts here, and increase
your condemnation hereafter. You will deceive your selves, and disappoint us,
if you rest in hearing, without doing what you hear. Well then, are you
resolved unfeignedly to take the Lord's counsel, for the destruction of your
distractions? Stop a little and resolve -- And now let me put that question to
you, Ier. 30.21. Who is this that has engaged his heart, to approach unto me,
says the Lord? Who is this? who will do it? who is thus well advised? that
has engaged, not only made a proffer, but engaged, and that his heart, to
approach unto God, and where in this Congregation does that man sit, or stand,
that out of a deep sense of the hatefulness and hurtfulness of this sin, does
now engage his heart and soul to use all means against it, and that in the
uprightness of his heart? The Lord your God sees who yields and cries out,
through grace I am resolved. Well, on that condition I proceed to Direction.

I. Dispel the Causes forementioned, I. U^e the Remedies against the
forementioned Causes.
and use the Remedies prescribed against them; and here if you be in good
earnest, you will look back and review them, and the helps adjoined, and beg of
God, as you read them, In this Lord pardon and help thy Servant! A man of small
skill, may easily stop the symptoms of diseases, as the present pain in the
teeth, or the like; but he is an Artist, that removes the causes of them; and
it is more easy to turn off two or three of these vain thoughts, than to heal
the soul of the Thought-evil in the causes thereof. If these remain Atheism,
unpreparedness, lukewarmness, worldliness, and the like in the heart, all the
rules and receipts under Heaven, will never cure you of Distractions. For there
will still spring up continual supplies from these corrupt causes; as the
lopping of the boughs will still have new sprouts coming, until the ^oo^ be
stocked up; and therefore with faithfulness, and resolution, set upon all those
Remedies that have been prescribed. Beg of God to dry up the spring, else your
damming up the streams will do no good. When the causes are dispelled, the cure
is wrought.

And here is a plain discovery of an Hypocrite in heart; if some light easy
receipt will help him in any case, he may set to it; but if he must go about,
and take pains; if the way of cure be any whit intricate, or difficult, then he
throws it up, never will go to the bottom of his business: Whereas the upright
heart does but desire to know what to do, what is God's method and way, and
then long, or short, hard, or easy, he never disputes, he demurrs not, but
falls to work; he knows every inch he goes, he gets advantage, and IN keeping
of God's Commandments, there is great reward. The speediness of his cure he
desires, but the soundness of it he insists on, and counts no trouble in the
cure, like the evil of his sin. Are you resolved in this? else it is to no
purpose to proceed? To stumble at the threshold, presages. But if we be clear
thus far, I proceed.

SECT. II.
II. BEwail your former failings in this respect;. 2.
II. Bewail former failings herein.
this will diverse ways conduce to your amendment:

1. Morally, being an Argument that you really dislike the sin, and the
condition of God's pardon thereof. The ordinary Lord have mercy, does herein
fall short of pardon, because it is not spoke in tears; If God did but see a
man grieve for his sin No man was ever kept out of Heaven for his confessed
badness, but many have for their supposed goodness. Mr. Capell.
, a little ado, a few words should get forgiveness. The Publican had but a
short peccavi, nor David upon his dreadful fall; but they were words that were
felt, they were heart deep, they swum in tears, each word fetched a drop of
blood from the heart. And God was well pleased with them in Christ. When
Antipater had written a large Letter to Alexander, against his Mother Olympia,
his answer was, do thou not know, that one tear from my Mother's eye, can
wash away all her faults? so one penitential tear from a believers eye, can
persuade much with God in Christ for the pardon of his wanderings. But the most
imbroidered phrases, without this Christian grief, work not with God at all.
Lachrymarum lingua disertissime loquitur -- If Christ Jesus himself did sue for
pardon for an impenitent sinner, he would not be heard. But when your
conscience is touched, and the heart melts, and bleeds for your faults herein;
now, says God, I see yonder man cannot live with a wandering heart, and
therefore he shall live without it. I Will never see him drowned in his
distractions, that is thus drowned in tears about them; if he really dislike
them, I Will really dispel them.

And then again, till their guilt be pardoned, our tear are usually desperate;
like a wicked spend-thrift, while hopeless of a discharge from all, treasures
up sin unto sin, till that dreadful pay-day come, the day of Judgment.
Whereas, when sin, this sin is truly grieved for, the Holy Ghost does ever
bring a pardon in one hand, and a plaster in another; at the same time, to
clear the guilt, and cure the disease The curious Penman having ^rimm'd his
Page,
With the dead language of his dabbled Quill,
Lets fall an heedless drop, then in a rage
Cashieres the fruit of his unlucky skill:
Even so my pregnant soul in the infant bud
Of her best thoughts showers down a coal-black flood
Of unadvised Ills, and cancels all his good.
Mr. Quar^^s.
. O, says the soul, I am defiled, I am wounded in my flight to Heaven, I am
disappointed in my affairs, my God is angry. I have sinned just then, when I
should have scored out my sins. I have sinned against my remedy, and how shall
I be cured? O was there ever such a rotten backsliding heart! such a Cain-like
vagabond cursed frame? what place but Hell, is fit for that heart, that cannot
rest in Heaven? Ah Lord! I wonder that the end of my prayer, is not the
beginning of my punishment. Though these be but small like the Sand, yet being
many as the Sand, how can I stand under them? I am ashamed, yea even confounded
for these reproaches of my duties. Nay, then says God, that hearkens behind
the curtains all this while, Is Ephraim my dear Son? is not he a pleasant
child? I will remember him, I will have mercy upon him. When thou art ripe for
Hell in thy own eyes, then art thou ripe for grace and glory in the eyes of
God. No man shall ever be overborn with a sin he hates. Go my blessed Spirit,
that have melted him, and mend him; that have softened him, strengthen him: he
that laments his sin, shall never languish under it To weep for fear, is
childish, ^o weep for anger, is womanish; to weep for grief, is humane, to weep
for comession, is divine; but to weep for sin, is Christian. B. ^iall.
. The sacrifice of a broken heart does please him, though the sacrifice of a
broken Christ alone does satisfy him.

2. Dispositively, grief at heart does help forward the cure of distractions,
and that by softening the heart, and so fitting the same for the impressions of
God's will. When the Wax is melted, you may turn and mold it, which way you
will: So when the soul is melted by grief for these sins, God Almighty may
easily be heard, and his counsel will be taken. And also this godly sorrow (as
was before observed) does so afflict and make a man's heart to ache and smart,
that he will take some pains to prevent the like anguish again. When they knock
at door, you will say, O these are they, that cost me dear at such a time: non
emam tanti poeniteo. I feel yet the sad impressions of my late affliction for
them; I found a pardon no easy enterprise, nor Repentance so pleasing a potion
to brew for it again. I would not for all the world, (much less for one vain
thought or two) nor for a thousand worlds together, be under that anger of God,
nor feel one drop of his scalding indignation, which I have perceived for these
offenses. O Sirs, where godly sorrow is in the power of it, what carefulness
does it work? what zeal, what indignation, yea what revenge? It makes sin lie
like a Mountain upon the soul, musters up all the aggravations of sin, and sets
them home on the heart. O to sin in an Ordinance! against such a God! in the
midst of my greatest business! after such conviction! vows and promises of
exactness before him! To offend both Father, Son, and Holy Ghost at a clap!
heart of stone, do not melt? yea to offend the Angels of Heaven, which holy
spirits turn away their faces at our vanities in the Assemblies; yea and offend
the Angels upon Earth (God's Ministers) while that which cost them most serious
pains, is spoken to the air! to wound my own soul in the act of curing it, and
increase guilt, when I am getting it cleared! to play the Hypocrite before the
face of God, the Judge of Heaven and Earth! O wretched man that I am! O my sin
is exceeding sinful! lend a tear, O rend an heart! O thou most high! A broken
heart today, will be a good preservative against a wandering heart to morrow.

SECT. III.
. 3. III. Engage the assistance of the Holy Ghost.
III. ENgage the holy Spirit of God in thine assistance, Joh. 15.5. Without me
ye can do nothing. Supernatural work cannot be done, without supernatural help:
You may and ought to do what a man can do, that is, compose your selves, and
guard your senses, but you cannot do that which only a God can do, that is, fly
up, and fix your hearts in Heaven, Romans 8.26. We cannot pray for any thing [for
matter] as we ought, [for the manner] but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us. The Greek word signifies, the Spirit over and above steps
in and helps; or, as others, makes vehement intercession for us. We climb up
the Ladder as well as we can toward Heaven, but alas it wavers, no stability
till the Holy Ghost hold it at the top, and draw, and lift us up, and then we
get a sight of Heaven. And you have resolved, belike, and been secure of a good
frame, but Prove. 28.26. He that trusts to his own strength, is a fool; you
have found no fixedness or liveliness in your spirits without the assistance of
God: He that prays aright, must pray in the Holy Ghost, Jude v.20. This also
quickens and hears the soul, whereby there is no room, or leisure for
distracted thoughts.

Hereby the soul is carried straight up to God, and stays at nothing on this
side Heaven; yea, by the Spirit's blessed assistance, Every thought is brought
into captivity to the obedience of Christ. O blessed frame! when every thought
is captivated to obey Christ, there is none can deal with our spirits, but the
Spirit of God. When the Word comes in the hand of the Spirit, there is no
avoiding it. Then the reading one Chapter can convert, as that Ioh. 1. did the
learned Iunius: yea, of one verse, as that 1 Timothy 1.15. did Mr. Bilney; yea,
one sentence can comfort the heart, as that, Isa. 57.15. did the afflicted
conscience of one, that nothing else could satisfy; thereby the soul is
carried up, as Mr. Tilleman the Martyr was in his devotions, so that he saw or
heard no body, till after long search, and great noise, his persecutors took
him up from his knees. The heart is so carried upward to God, that all the
world looks as inconsiderable, as a mote or atome at that time, and not worth
the thinking on: And is entertained with that sweet content, that it cannot
wish to be any where else; and therefore a by-thought is as un^welcom, as base
company to him that is busy with Nobles.

Beg therefore of God, with earnest importunity, at the entrance of every
Ordinance, for his holy Spirit; and he has said, Luke 11.13. He will give his
Spirit to them that ask him. Say, Lord, if thy Spirit go not with me, let me go
no further. For as the Intercession of Christ is absolutely necessary for your
acceptance, so the Intercession of the Holy Ghost, is necessary for your
assistance. The Spirit it self also making intercession for us with sighs, that
cannot be uttered. Promise your heavenly Father, that you will never willingly
disoblige or grieve away his Spirit again. Art thou dead? cry, Quicken me, and
I will call upon thy Name. Is thy heart roving? cry, Unite my heart to fear thy
Name. Humbly plead his promise, that he will put his Spirit and fear into your
hearts, that you shall never (and if never, then not in his solemn Ordinance)
depart from him; and observe the gracious gales of the Spirit, and when they
clash not with the Rules of his holy Word, lay hold on them, and fall to duty.
It Is best rowing below, when the wind blows fair above. When thy heart is warm
and in ure, then do the business thoroughly. And beware of grieving him between
times; let there be a coherence between prayer and practice: let your whole
life be of a piece, lest he withdraw when you have most need of him. And
remember that to grief the Spirit often, is the way to quench the Spirit, and to
quench the Spirit often, is the way to do despite to the Spirit. That is a rare
expression, Gal. 5.25. If ye live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the
Spirit: how far is this phrase from vulgar apprehension or feeling! To live and
walk by the conduct and quickening of the Holy Ghost, this is the life of a
Saint. And then he that walks in the Spirit, prays also in the Spirit, and
watches thereunto, Ephesians. 6.18. Whereby those airy darts of the Devil, that
would conquer the strength of a man, are crushed and chased away by the
strength of a God.

SECT. IV.
. 4. IV. Believe the Presence of God.
IV. BElieve the Presence of God. The eye of the Master, makes the Scholar
busy. If his eye be off the Scholar, the Scholar's eye is off his book, Psalm.
16.8. I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand, I
shall not be moved: Else your hearts will be moved, and removed too upon every
motion. And therefore Faith, which does realize invisible things, and
presentiate an invisible God, is of great use in every holy duty, Heb. 11.6. He
that comes to God, must believe that God is. He must as fully believe that God
is present, as if he were visible Intend igitur illi, qui intendit tibi --
super singula^ verba divinae Scripturae diligenter intendas. Bern: Med. c. 6.
, that thou art encompassed and involved in the presence of God. If thou go
forward, he is there; if backward, thou may perceive him; on the left hand,
there he does work, though thou can not behold him; he hides himself on the
right hand, that thou can not see him: Yet he knows the way that thou
take, Job 23 9, 10. This his common presence: but then in an Ordinance, there
he is in the midst of his people; there he looks over Heaven and Earth as
nothing, and to this man looks he, that is poor, and contrite, and trembles at
his Word: and therefore, when you pray, you must not only speak, as speaking of
God, but to God. It Is sleighting a Prince, when we deliver a Petition, and look
another way; we bid our children look at us, when they speak to us, and so
should we at God, who is not far from every one of us in his Ordinances. There
he is with his Host about him; and though it is above us to Offerunt sancti
Angeli Dei (i. e. preces Sanctorum) non quasi nesciatis qui omnia novit,
antequam fiant, sed ut testes efficiantur Sanctitatis and pietatis justorum.
Origin. Solliciti discurrunt (viz. Angeli) medii inter nos and Deum and nostros
gem^tus fidelissime ad ^um portant. Bern. ibid.
determine whether his Angels are employed to conduct his Word to us, or our
Prayers to him; yet its certain, that they attend the great Jehovah, and never
more willing, than in an Ordinance; being transported with joy at a sinners
conversion, and most pleasantly feasting on our poenitential tears.

Remember, there is above thee an hearing ear, a seeing eye, and a
Register-book, wherein all thy thoughts, words, and actions, a^e written, and
thou shall not do amiss. A Rabbin to his Scholar.
It Is true, God is always, and every where with thee, with those more common
Attributes of Immensity, Power, and Providence; but in his Worship, there he is
also present by his grace, mercy, holiness, and efficacy. His common presence
may be compared to the Sun in a cloudy day; it is in the Sky, we have great
benefit by it, we should die without it: but his special Ordinance Presence, is
like the Sun breaking out of a cloud in a Summers morning, that discovers
atoms, warms our bodies, and refreshes our spirits. Even so the common
presence of God upholds the world, in him we live, move, and have our Being,
and the belief that God is every where, should persuade us to sin no where Sic
vive cum hominibus, quasi Deus videa^: sic loquere cum D^^, quasi ^omines
audiant. Seneca.
. But now the special presence of God in his Worship, that like the Sun
breaking out, inlightens the mind, warms the heart, and melts the most rocky
soul. Hereby God does, as it were, shine directly upon us; so that to trifle or
sin before him, is a crime intolerable. The name of every place, where God is
rightly worshipped, is, Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there. Thy closet, the
Lord is there between thy chair and thee, and can thou shift from him? thy
bedchamber, the Lord is there between thy bedside and thee, and can thou
turn from him? by the fireside with thy family, the name of that place is
Jehovah Shammah, and will thou sleep? In the Assembly, the Lord is there, and
what are all the Gallants there, in comparison of him? O therefore hear and
look at God, and pray and look at God, meditate and look at God, sing Psalms,
and still look at God. It was Hagar's saying. Genesis 16.13. Have I also here
looked after him, that sees me? And she called the Name of the Lord that spoke
to her Thou God see me. O call the Name of the Lord that speaks to thee, and
the Lord to whom thou speak, Thou God see me God looks not at the Oratory
of your prayers, how elegant they be, nor at the Geometry of your prayers, how
long they be, nor at the Arithmetic of your prayers, how many they be, nor at
the Logic of your prayers, how methodical they be, but the sincerity of them
he looks at. Mr. B^ooks.
. Keep thy eye upon him, as he keeps his eye upon thee; find a fairer object,
and gaze and spare not; but while there is none in Heaven or Earth desirable
like him, let nothing in Heaven or Earth distract thee from him. The lively
sense of this^ will charm the heart exceedingly, and we steal from duty,
because we see no One there. It Is said, Prove. 20.8. A King that sits in the
Throne of Judgment, scatters away all evil with his eyes; that is, his very
countenance should read such a Lecture of Justice, Temperance, Chastity, and
Piety, that every spectator should fear to do otherwise. O then how should the
presence of God so inchant the soul with that holiness, goodness, and sweetness
therein, that not one thought could be spared from so lovely an object!

The full and clear vision, and fruition of this presence of God, does so
eternally ravish and content the soul in Heaven, that they would not look off
the face of God for a thousand worlds; no, though all the Kings of the Earth in
their greatest triumph, should pass by Heaven gates, and the Earth's utmost
glory with them: A glorified soul is so full of the presence of God, that it
would not spare one minut's look to see it all. It is said of one Theodorus, a
Martyr, that in all his tortures he smiled, and being asked his reason,
answered, that he saw a glorious youth wiping the sweat off his face, whereby
he was infinitely refreshed. If thou could but see by the eye of Faith, the
blessed face of God smiling on thee, and with the handkerchief of his love
wiping thy sweat and tears away, thy heart would be glad, and thy glory
rejoice, and thou would say, Lord, it is good, yea, it is best for me to be
here. Go not willingly from him, without a sight of him: Moses had few
distractions when he saw God face to face. The actual faith of a Saint ingages
the actual presence of God. Drexelius tells us of a vision of an holy man, and
behold in the Temple, an Angel at every man's elbow, that was at prayer: He
that prayed with malice in his heart, his Angel wrote his petitions in Gall; he
that prayed coldly, his prayers were written in the water; he that prayed with
distractions, his suits were written in sand; and he that prayed in faith, his
Angel wrote his petitions in Letters of Gold (...), etc. Stant illic Angeli,
qui quae emittuntur verba excipiunt and perscribunt. Adest Dom^nus qui
^ntroeuntium speculatur affectus. Basil. conc. 9. de Oration.
. The moral whereof at least is good: If thou would believe that every word
spoken by thee, or to thee, is written, with what care and conscience would
thou pray and hear? And be sure, there is one among you, that takes notes of
all, who will give to every man according to his works, whom to see and feel in
an Ordinance, will quit you from Distractions.

SECT. V.
. 5. V. Lay a Law upon your senses.
V. LAY a Law upon your senses. Beg of God to sanctify them; as they are all
Pensioners to Satan by nature and complo^ment, so bring them all into Covenant
with God, that ye may be sanctified in soul, and body, and spirit. Give them to
him, use them for him. Is is said, Prove. 17.24. The fools eyes are in the ends
of the Earth. Any new face that comes in, any antic garb, any noise about,
every head that moves, every leaf that stirs, commands the eyes and heart of a
fool, but that while, Prove. 4.25. Let thy eyes look straight on, and let thine
eyelids look straight before thee. Compose thy eyes in that devout and
heavenly posture, that whatever falls out, thou may hoc agere, keep to thy
business without wavering. For the heart is used to walk after the eye, Job
31.7. To the undoing of the soul.

It is a precept among the Rabbis, that if a Jew be at prayer, though a
Serpent come and bite him, yet he must not stir, till he has done his duty.
Satan that old Serpent will be nibling at thy heel with one vain suggestion or
other, but go thou through with thy business, and let God alone with him.

In Prayer then, fix thy eyes Heavenward Illu^ aspicie^^es Christiani, manibus
expansis quia innocuis, capite nudo quia non erubescimus, denique sine monitore
quia de pectore. Tertul. Apolog. p. 30.
, and let nothing divert them, till the prayer be done. This will show that
thou would lift thy heart thither, if thou could, and will prevent many an
impertinent distraction, that comes in by the eye. If any deride thee for this,
doubt thou not of good company, Psalm. 123.1. Unto thee do I lift up my eyes, O
thou that dwell in the Heavens. Let your ears be as good as stopped, to every
thing, besides your work. And the lifting up your craving hands, will not be
unprofitable to this end; for you will find them to flagg, when the heart
knocks off from its business, whereby you may be advertised to come in again,
Lam. 3.41. Let us lift up our hearts WITH OUR HANDS unto God in the Heavens.
And let your prayers be vocal, if it may be, for the voice both helps to fix
the thoughts, and raise the affections, the want whereof we discern in
meditation.

In hearing of God's Word, let the eye be chained to the Preacher with the
greatest attention and reverence; as if you saw an Angel in the Pulpit, or
Christ himself. And beware, lest your needless complements to men, be
interpreted a neglect to God. It Is small manners to be complementing the Kings
Servants in his Presence chamber, till you have done your homage to the King.
Do your work with God, it is time enough to perform your civilities to men, when
that is done. Look then to God, from him is thy expectation, with him is thy
business, Luke 4.20. The eyes of all them that were in the Synagogue^ were
FASTENED on him. And therein also, let your ears be only open Heavenward.
Lord! to deal with thee I am come, and thou shall have all, my soul, and body,
and all.

And here I cannot but digress a little, but it is to cure a more criminal
digression, which is that frequent Abuse of Whispering and talking to one
another, in the service of God, which except it be upon such instant
indispensable business, as cannot be ordered before or after the Ordinance, is
a sin in an high degree, and that

1. Because it brings a guilt and distraction upon two at once. If a vain
thought there be so evil, as you have heard, how criminal then is this, that
involves you both, yea perhaps occasions a distraction to twenty more, that
observe you? And the guilt of all their vain thoughts on that occasion will be
charged on your account, according to the equity of that Law, Exodus 21.23.

2. Because this has more of Affront in it. Thy heart testifies to God's face,
that thou do despise his presence. Who but an impudent Renegade would, while
the King is laying down terms of mercy and honor to him, be talking and
laughing with his companions at some uncouth Courtier that comes in? and who
but an implicit Atheist shall be whispering with his neighbor about any thing,
while the King of Heaven and Earth is treating with him about Eternity? You
hold it no piece of good manners, while any man is speaking to you, especially
if he be your superior, to neglect him so far, as to turn from him to
discourse another; nay, if the most necessary business call you away, you
apologize for your diversion, and crave pardon: And shall you dare while your
Maker is in conference with you, to confront him with an open parle with
others? This is an high affront, if you consider it well.

3. This has more offense in it. An offense to the Preacher, that has taken
much pains to prepare that, which you will not take pains to hear, or else
imply, it is not worth the hearing. An offense to the Congregation that sees
it, who must needs, if they fear God^ be troubled at so public a fault. An
offense to the Angels, that, while they stoop down to look into the mysteries
opened in the Church, see you slight them so notoriously: An offense to your
own souls, that perhaps in that moment miss of what would most have done them
good. O therefore, Christian Reader! mourn for thy misbehaviour this way, and
amend it for time to come, lest God refuse to treat with thee, that triflest
thus in thy treating with him. Remember, it is work enough for a poor man, to
converse with a great God. He needs no other business, to fill his hands.

And then in Meditation you must also compose your senses. There shut your eye,
and ear, and sequester your self wholly to the contemplation of things
invisible. The least sight or sound will here distract: Any thing, yea nothing
will throw us off the hinges in this duty; indeed it is said of Isaac, Genesis
24.63. That he went forth in the field in the evening-^ide to meditate. And in
that kind of meditation, where the rise and subject matter is sensible, there
the senses must be active and busy; but I think, in other cases, the outward
senses may stand aside, and let the soul alone without them: we are never more
sensible, than when we use no outward sense at all.

And lastly, in communicating at the Lord's-table, there fix both your eyes on
the sacred elements, until the eye have affected the heart to feel what Christ
felt, to die in his death, and looking on him whom you have pierced, you mourn
for him with a superlative sorrow: And then look at those sacred signs with an
eye of Faith, till virtue come from that brazen Serpent, to cure your sin-stung
soul. Look yet again, till thy heart be inflamed with love to him, till he cry
in Heaven, Cant. 4.9. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Love, thou
have ravished my heart with one of thy eyes, with one chain about thy neck. He
that spends his eye there to observe his neighbors, to criticize upon their
gestures, has little to do, and less to get in that sacred Ordinance. And then
lay a Law upon thine ear, and taste, and touch, for most of the senses are
gratified and useful in this Ordinance; that nothing may interrupt thy
communion with Jesus Christ at that time. For there the utmost strength of body
and soul are scarce enough, to gain, and feel, and do, what is there to be
gained, and felt, and done.

And in general, be not treacherous to your selves. Satan without you can do no
great matters within you: your senses you can command, your hearts not so well.
Be faithful in what ye can, else if you could order your very hearts, you would
not. He that will not do what he can, would much less do, what he cannot.

SECT. VI.
. 6. VI. Reflection and Ej^culation.
VI. THE sixth Cure of these Distractions, is, a watchful reflection of the soul
upon its self, and ejaculation unto God, It is said, Eccles. 10.2. A wise man's
heart is at his right hand, but a fools heart is at his left. Is not this the
meaning of it? That a wise good man has his heart ready, can speedily serve
him, instantly recoil upon himself; but a wicked foolish man, his heart is
awkward and unskilful, a left-hand-heart, unweildy and unready for any good
work. O get then a dextrousness of heart to bolt in^ and break the sinful knot
of your vain imaginations Quacu^que hora mala cogitatio venerit, expelle ^am;
quam cito apparuerit scorpio, contere caput ejus, ibi emenda culpam, ubi
nascitur, viz. in cord. Bern. de modo been vivendi. Sermon. 29.
. That a distraction may not set so long on the heart, that it hatch, and breed
yet more of the kind, and so swallow you up in condemnation. It is said, Genesis
15.11. When the Fowls light, Abraham drove them away, not when they were
sitting or feeding upon the carcasses, but as soon as ever they lighted, we
must not give place to these for a moment. Mr. Dod advises us to ask our
selves often these two questions. 1. What I am? 2. What I am doing? We are
well, if we can well answer these two questions. If thou can answer, I am a
Child of God, and I am doing God's Will, it will stand thee in more stead than
if thou could answer all the questions in Aquinas. We read, Nehem. 4.17. That
in the building of God's house, every one, with one of his hands wrought in the
work, and with the other hand held a weapon: Work and watch, work and fight was
the guise of them. And he that will edify in God's house yet, must do the
same; hear and watch, and watch and pray, and fight, and struggle, and pray
still. This Hill we climb inch by inch: One may tumble into Hell, but the
strait gate must be striven at. Let conscience then perform it is part, and
speedily glance into the heart with all fidelity. Abraham's Fowls came without
sending for, and yet would not go away without driving. You cannot hinder a
Thief from coming by the house, but you may from quartering with you, at least
with any quiet and approbation.

And it is good to cast off these wandering thoughts with an Ejaculation to God
Ideo Sacerdos ante Orat^onem prefatione praemissa parat fratrum mentes dicendo,
sursum corda, and respondet Plebs, habemus ad Dominum, ad^oneatu^ nihil aliud
se quam Dominum cogitare debere. Cyprian. de Orat. Dom.
, else the destruction of one, will prove the generation of another. When Satan
casts in his injaculations, lift you up your ejaculations. This will engage
divine strength, and work God your friend. Do as they, Act. 19.34. When they
thought Alexander would speak evil of Diana, they cried, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians. So when these are injected then breath forth into some heavenly
ejaculations, so will you cross the tempter, and in stead of losing, gain Cry
unto God, Lord, will thou suffer thy slave to abuse thy child before thy face,
while he is on his knees for a blessing. Dr. Harrison.
. Send up thy prayer in a Parenthesis, like that, Psalm. 119.37. Turn away mine
eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken me in thy way -- Forsake me not, O God,
me strength -- And take not thy Holy Spirit from me -- Awake O North Wind, and
come thou South, blow upon my Garden. These darting desires sent up with faith,
will weaken the habits of corruption, and affright Satan from his suggestions.
This resisting the Devil will make him flee from you: As the golden spikes were
set on the Temple, to keep the Fowls from thence, so will these, being
conscionably used, keep off vain thoughts from lodging upon your sacrifices. Up
therefore and stir up thy self, by this means, to save thy sacrifice from being
devoured, and thy soul polluted. Alas, we are daily told, and we feel it, that
the heart is deceitful above all things; if a wary eye be not kept over it, you
will find it sometimes in the bed of lust, sometimes on the pinnacle of honor,
and often diging in the world, and yet salve up all with an I thank God, I am
not as other hearts are. If ever you be rid of less guests, you must do, as
good Barnabas advised them, with full purpose of heart to cleave unto the Lord,
Act. 11.23. There must be heart, purpose of heart, full purpose of heart, and
then you will cleave unto the Lord.

Obj. But I am suddenly slipped from God, before I am aware Neh. 4.11. And our
Adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, till we come in the midst
among them -- and cause the work to cease. Thus Satan --
, and when I see it, and resolve anew, yet ere five sentences be past, I am
gone again.

Answ. This shows the sad corruption of our nature, and should therefore humble
us: And this argues also the contracted ill disposition of the soul: when a
disease has such recidivations and returns, it speaks that it is too much
radicated, yet in this case you must not give out, nor throw down your watch;
you must not compound with sin, because it is hard to sue out an ejectione
firma, no peace must be made with Amalek for ever: If the Devil and your
unregenerate part be unwearied in their assault against you, you must be
unwearied in your resistance, and die se defendendo. And you will find, as use
and custom has strengthened these temptations, so an use of reflection and
strenuous opposition, will at length weaken, and at last extinguish them.

SECT. VII.
VII. THE last and great cure of distractions,. 7.
is, strength of grace. VII. Strength of grace.
As no props without will keep the ship steady, except there be store of
ballast within; so no extrinsick helps will stablish your hearts against these
wanderings without grace, yea strong grace within, Heb. 13.19. It is a good
thing that the heart be established with grace. For,

1. The more sanctifying grace you have, the more mortified will your heart be
unto the world, and the flesh, the great disturbers of divine service. The
fairest Landscape showed to a dead man, moves him not at all. A heart dead to
the world, is not removed from God with every trifle of the world, 2 Cor. 4.18.
While we look not at all things that are seen, but at things that are not seen.
Things visible are not worth looking at, especially when things invisible are
in place. What Is a temporal house, or land, or children to me, that see, and am
contracting for an eternal and glorious house and state? Alas! what taste it
there in these rotten things?

2. The more grace, the clearer will be your eye of faith, to behold the
Majesty of God Psalm. 48.9 We have thought of thy loving kindness, O God, in the
midst of thy temple. These are the thoughts of such as see by the eye of faith.
with whom you have to do, and the reality of the things about which you treat;
for faith is the evidence of things not seen, and makes the soul as real as the
body, and Heaven as real as the world, and the day of Judgment as real as the
present day: And how undistractedly would a man pray, that saw the world on a
flame, or himself dropping into another world?

3. The more grace, the tenderer will be your conscience; and so sooner smart,
and more oppose these enormities; the tender eye cannot bear, what the brawny
hand can. A distraction in a duty more troubles a tender conscience, than the
total omission of it does another. A little sin, is^ no little sin, where there
is a great deal of grace. O keep your conscience tender, with all the ca^e and
skill you can. A little wedge makes way for a greater, and a little thief can
let a greater in. Blessed is the man that fears always, and he that has a
soft heart, is always hard to sin.

4. The more grace, the more affections to things above, Col. 3.2. Set your
affections on things above, and where there is much affection, there is little
distraction. A heavenly mind is all in all, Isa. 26.8, 9. When the desire of
the soul is to the remembrance of God^ when with thy soul thou have desired him
in the night, then with thy spirit within thee, thou will seek him early If a
man have store of gold and silver in his po^ket, and but a few farthings, he
will bring out gold more readily than farthings; so when there is much grace,
much of Heaven in the soul, your thoughts will savor of that. Mr. Cobbet of
prayer^ p. 405.
. He that has his usual conversation in Heaven, will not easily have his heart
from thence in prayer. It Is a clear case, where the treasure is, there will the
heart be also. A mind above, will no so easily have thoughts below. Where is
that man that can say, Psalm. 119.20. My soul breaks for the longing it has
to thy Judgments at all times. He whose heart breaks for the presence of God,
will break his heart, when he slips from him: And he that cries, O when shall I
come and appear before God? will not privately wish, when shall I have done,
and take leave of him?

5. The more grace, the more disposed frame will the heart be in, for the
service of God: And it is indisposition to an Ordinance, that lets in
distractions there; as an instrument out of tune, has diverse jarring strings,
and still one or other slips, and spoils the melody: a distraction is a string
slipped, that spoils the music, a tuned and disposed heart would prevent it
much. The flock of sheep that is indisposed and unwilling to drive, start out of
the way into every Lanes end; one this way, and another that; and just so is it
with an unwilling heart, one thought starts this way, another that, and it is a
piece of skill to drive them through. O but a willing heart, an heart prepared
and ready to every good work, it flies up quite an end, and delights its self
in the Lord, The Law of God is in his heart, none of his steps then shall
slide, Psalm. 37.31.

6. The more grace, the more spiritual and invisible sins are observed and
resisted. Small grace discerns and mortifies the filthiness of the flesh; but
strong grace sees and hates the filthiness of the spirit, and so perfects
holiness in the fear of God. Gross sins are left at first, but more resined
sins, spiritual wickedness in heavenly employments, these are work for riper
graces afterward. Hence the strong Christian usually with ease, can avoid
oppression, cruelty, uncleanness, drunkenness, and the like; but the weak
Christian hardly conquers spiritual pride, passion, unbelief, distractions, and
such like; a little mote more troubles the eye, than much dirt molests the
hand; so an holy tender heart is more troubled with these undiscerned sins,
than another man with greater crimes.

7. The more grace, the stronger resolutions you will put on against them, and
resolution breaks the heart of them. The poor Countryman going to his Market;
at every door in town almost, there is a snare laid for him; here one calls him
in, and there another: but he resolved in the morning, not to spend a penny,
and thereby he breaks through and avoids them all: Alas! his who^e weeks
earning had gone at a clap, and he should have had nothing, but repentance to
feed on, the week following: Even so, when thou come into an holy Ordinance,
the souls Market, where the soul has much business; here one thought stands
and beckens, and there lies another, and at the door of every verse and
sentence, a suggestion stands; but if thou have firmly resolved at the
beginning of the duty, by God's grace, I Will not stir from my God, from my work
one jot, thou will not heed nor exchange a word with these vain follies: For
alas! if thou should, the whole gain of thy duty would be eaten up, and the
end of thy duty, would be the beginning of thy grief.

8. The more grace, the more, business ye will find you have to do with God in
his Ordinances; little grace has little to do, and much grace has much to do;
he has always business with God, special earnest business, Psalm. 27.4. One
thing have I desired of the Lord -- that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
-- and why? to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple. O I
have somewhat to inquire after, I am to do something by this duty, and
therefore cannot trifle. He that comes to visit his friend in a complement, he
talks, he walks, he trifles, and goes home again, but he that comes upon
business, he is full of it: He is like Abraham's honest and faithful Servant,
Genesis 24.33. And there was meat set before him to eat, but he said, I will not
eat, till I have told mine errand. I have great business with the Lord, about
the Church, and about my soul, and I will not eat, nor talk, nor think, nor
dally about any thing, till I have told mine errand, or heard my Maker's errand
unto me: And for this end, it is a rare thing to carry somewhat always on the
spirit to spread before God, an heart pregnant with some needful request, or
matter whereof to treat with God, Psalm. 45.1. My heart is inditing a good
matter, and then, my tongue shall be like the pen of a ready Writer; O then I
shall go merrily on in his service, when I have matter prepared in my heart.
And indeed, as the Mariner sees further new stars, the further he sails, he
loses the sight of the old ones, and discovers new; so the growing Christian,
the further he sails in Religion, he discovers new wants; new Scriptures affect
him, new trials afflict him, new business he finds with God, and forgetting
those things that are behind, he watches after those things that are before,
and so finds every day new business with the Lord his God: and he that is busi^
trifles not; the more business, the less distractions. And therefore be advised
all ye that intend for Heaven, to get more grace. It is as much as your duty to
get the second grace, as it was your duty to get the first grace; and as the
want of this would damn you, so a want in that will displease God, and that is
as bad.

Quest. But how should a poor weak Christian get strong grace, if I can get any
grace, it is well for me, a little grace is much for him, that had none at all.

Answ. Though thou are a poor weak Christian, yet that strong and blessed God,
whose thou art, gives power to the faint, - and to them that have no might, he
increases strength, Isa. 40.29. And though it is well for thee to have any
grace, yet it is better for thee to have more: few folks are contented with a
naked life, but they would live well and comfortably, they would be healthful
and plentiful, and will a little only of grace serve thy tur^? And though a
little grace be well for him that had none, yet it is not well for him that
has such means and motives for much grace, as thou have had. And therefore I
renew my counsel, if ever you would attend upon God, or enjoy him hereafter
without distraction, strive for stronger grace. And to obtain it,

1. You must be upright and humble: Upright, for Job 17.9. He that has clean
hands shall be stronger and stronger. The sound child grows, the child painted
on the wall thrives not: so the sincere Christian, he, though he feel it not,
comes on, and goes from strength to strength, but the hypocrite, he never grew,
for he never had a root. And humble you must be. The humble valleys grow: God
can never (he thinks) lay out too much upon an humble heart.

2. You must manage the means of growth with your whole strength. Attend upon
the most edifying Ministry, read the most profitable Books, consort with the
most lively growing Christians, and particularly be frequent in the trial of
the state of your soul. Each week, if possible, call your selves to some
account, and strive to discern a weekly growth; but if you cannot, desist not
from that work, but try again: Single out some special grace, or duty to thrive
in next week; as for example, the grace of Patience, saving Knowledge, the duty
of an Husband, Parent, or Child. And still be trying, you will find one time or
other, what will fully pay you for your labor: only observe, he that thrives
in the world takes pains and care; and so in grace, he that will grow, must
strive and sweat for it. A little grace is worth a great deal of pains.

And thus you have the eighth Point, to wit, the Cure of Distractions, if you
will apply it; but to what end are Rules, unless ye will be ruled by them?
These helps cannot help you, except you now faithfully put them in practice.
The plaster cures not in the box, but laid on the sore. And your charge be it,
if these do you no good. Review them then, and resolve by divine grace to
practice them every one, and the Lord of Heaven give his blessing.

CHAP. IX. Encouragements under the burden of Distractions. Cap. 9.
Encouragements under the burden of Distractions.

SECT. I.
. 1.
BUT, lest any honest Christian should by his frequent distractions, be
discouraged from his duties, or in his holy duties, I shall in the ninth place,
prevent such a temptation, by laying down some Encouragements for those that
groan under the burden of distractions. And here I assert two things: 1. That
these distractions should not drive you from your duties: You have been
thinking, perhaps, it were better my service were undone, than done so
confusedly; and our false hearts are secretly prone to accept any occasion to
lay down our work, but believe not the Devils rotten Divinity: he takes on him
to be tender, lest God's name be taken in vain, but this is to insinuate you
the more; but in this sense, obedience is better than sacrifice; thy obedience
to his command, is more pleasing to him, than thy torn sacrifice. And then it
is a known case, that the omission of a duty will never fit one for a duty
better. Luther's saying herein, was, the more I neglect, the more unfit I am.
Indeed, some ground will mend my lying still, but that is better ground, than is
in fallen man's heart. Ours is the ground that must be stirred, and manured, and
quickened, and then some fruit will come. As one sin fits the heart for another.
so one duty fits the soul for another. However, it is better to serve thy Master
with a trembling hand, than not at all, and the Father takes well a
well-intended work, though it be unwillingly marred in the making. 2. These
distractions should not wholly discourage you in the performance of your
duties. Despise you they must, discourage you they must not. Our good Master
would not have us draw heavily in his service. It Is prophesied, Psalm. 138.5.
They shall sing in the ways of the Lord. This is a sweet hearing. God's work
goes best on, when we sing at it. All the infirmities of a Christian laid
together, yet should not discourage him in his duty. Si dixeris, doleo,
sufficit. And for your support, I lay down these encouragements.


I. Encouragement. Distractions are consistent with grace.
I. Distractions are consistent with grace Et si latratum cani^ sustinet, morsum
non timet, latrat enim cum suggerit, tunc vero mordet cum ad consensum
pertrahit. Bern. lib. de consc.
. Grace may live with them, but not be lively long with them: They are like the
blew and yellow weeds, that grow with the best corn that is. Grace may live
with them, though it can never agree with them: and therefore conclude not
against thy self, O I have no grace, I am so pestred with these things: surely
no child of God has such an heart. For this is an epidemick distemper;
wherever the hand of God has sown good seed, the enemy has scattered these
his tares amongst it. Indeed there is no sin so crimson, that is absolutely
inconsistent with grace, abate but that transcendent one, the sin against the
Holy Ghost: Let no profane heart make use hereof to hearten them in their
sins: a profane heart, I say, for a gracious heart is of another temper. Alas!
the worst of sins do sometimes peep into the best men's hearts, yea may creep
into them, and lodge in them for a season. How much more may a sudden thought
break in, which, like lightning, springs into the heart without any warning? Do
not therefore cry out, when this or any other corruption steals into your
hearts, I am a lost man, this cannot consist with grace, but this should not
consist with grace. The former conclusion being made, dejects the spirits; but
the latter whe^s the spirit of amendment. It was foolishly done of Dinah, Genesis
34 1. To rove about to see the Daughters of the Land; it was not done like
Jacob's Daughter, but this was no argument for her to conclude, O I am not
Jacob's Daughter. So thou have an heart like Dinah, of a gaddy temper, that
runs abroad, and comes defiled home; this is not done like a sanctified heart,
but it were a simple conclusion to draw hence, certainly I am no child of God,
I have no true grace at all For alas, the sweetest Rose has its prickles, the
greatest wits have a spice of madness, and the sincerest heart has some vanity
in it Si vel hoc dolemus, quod non possumus orare, ^am oramus.
.

SECT. II.
. 2.
II. THE second Encouragement is, That your case is not singular. II.
Encouragement. Your case is not singular.
Though the commonness of a Plague make it not the better, or less mortal, yet
it shows that I am not alone miserable: So, although this consideration make
not the sin less heinous, yet it makes the affliction more tolerable. Poor
soul! thou art not alone in thy complaints. Go to all the Saints in an
Assembly, and they will all conclude, there is none has a more giddy heart
than they, and there is few at the end of an Ordinance would be pleased, that
the rest should know the particulars of their straggling. Though charity binds
us in particular to hope better of every one than of our selves, yet both God's
Word, and Interdum orantem, lup^ululans and vulpecula ganniens transilivit,
psallentique gladiatorum pugna spectaculum praebuit and unu^ quasi interfectus
and ante pedes eju^ corr^ens, sepulturam rogavit. Hieron, in vit. Hilarion. p.
242.
common experience tell us in general, that the imaginations of the thoughts of
men are evil continually. And there is none thinks themselves so bad, but there
are found others, that would be glad to change hearts with them: some indeed
are nearer the cure of this disease, and do watch more narrowly, and so have
obtained more freedom than others, but yet all are tainted with this infirmity;
and every man being convicted by his own conscience, will go out of the
Congregation one by one, and there will not be a sinless man to cast a stone at
thee Non ille qui coelum clausit, oratione, animam clausit a cogitatione.
.

SECT. III.
THE third Encouragement is,. 3.
That Christ's Intercession for thee is without distraction. III. Encouragement
from the uninterrupted Intercession of Christ.
There was fire always on the Altar, though the sacrifices were intermitted.
His intercession is continual, ours is interrupted. What unspeakable comfort
may a poor weak Christian take in this? that Christ Jesus is every moment, I
say, every moment presenting to the Father, the unanswerable argument of his
passion, for the impetrating and obtaining pardon, and grace, to help him in
time of need. See Heb. 6.20. Heb. 3.25. Poor sinner! thou art sometimes so
dead, that thou can not pray to purpose, so guilty thou do hardly pray, and
often so distracted, thou think thy prayers stand for nothing, yet be not
discouraged, thy Mediator is sick of none of these diseases. The holy Psalmist
was sometimes, as Psa. 77.4. so troubled, that he could not speak; yet then had
he one to speak for him. The sight of that precious glorified Son of of God,
does infinitely please and prevail with his Father for us, when we can hardly
speak good sense for our selves.

I, but how can I tell that he intercedes for me?

Answ. 1. Have thou a good word to speak for him to men? then has he a good
word to speak for thee to God.

And 2. Do thou sigh, and groan, and speak for thy self as well as thou
can, his intercession is to help our weakness, not to excuse our laziness. If
some ignorant poor man, that cannot say his errand, but is often out in his
business, have a cordial friend (that has the grace of speaking, and the
favor to be heard) undertake his business, he needs not be discouraged: so,
though you have much ado, and be often out in your best resolved duties, yet
you have a friend in Court, that has the Art of it, and the King's ear beside,
who ever lives to make intercession for you, and therefore do your best, and
never be discouraged.

SECT. IV.
THE fourth Encouragement is,. 4.
That distracted duties may keep you humble, IV. Encouragement from the
consequent.
when as your perfect performances might make you proud. It is written of
Master Knox, that on his deathbed, after he had received many blows from Satan
about his sins, he was at last assaulted by him with this temptation, viz. That
sure God owed him a kindness for his upright and industrious labors, until
that 1 Cor. 4.7. was strongly imprinted on him, What have thou which thou have
not received? Perhaps the Lord foresaw, that thy heart was ready to be fly
blown with pride, when thou do well, and therefore he suffers these
distractions, like Vultures to gnaw upon thy heart, to keep thee humble Si vero
debilitatus a peccato six nequis orare, quantumcunque potes teipsum cohibeas;
and Deus ignoscit, eo quod non ex negligentia, sed ex fragilitate non potes ut
oportet assistere coram eo. Basil. in Sermon. de Orando Deum.
. Far be it from you to draw from hence an occasion to rest more securely in
these sins. That Knight was surnamed Fortunate, because, being on a time in the
deck of a ship, a great wave came and took him off into the Sea, and another
wave took him and set him on the deck of another ship; yet no man (I trow)
would to obtain such a name, be content that a wave should so hazard him: Even
so, though God do sometimes make use of our infirmities to do us good, yet let
no man venture therefore to sin, that grace may abound, Because the Physician
can so temper poison, that it may do thee good, will thou therefore venture to
drink poison? It is miraculous wisdom in God to do thee good hereby, and it
were miraculous folly in thee therefore to venture upon evil. And with this
caution, I proceed and observe, that it is a very hard thing to hear, or pray
exactly without some tang of spiritual pride after it: And to prevent this, God
permits us to wander, and lose our selves, lest we should be lost; he sees that
it is easier for a man to fall into a lesser evil, when he can turn it to a
greater good, than to attain a lesser good, and hazard to fall into a greater
evil. O when a man sees so much dreggs in his very best duties, such constant
disapppointments, such foolish impertinencies in his heart, yea such wicked
contrivances in the very presence of God, O then what a wretched man am I!
surely I am more brutish than any man, I am not worthy to come to thee, nor
think I my self worthy that thou should come under my roof, no such sinner on
earth as I; my best is very bad, etc The worst prayers we make (to our sense)
speed ever best, and then we pray most happily, when we arise most humbled. Dr.
Harris.
. Thus the soul is thoroughly humbled, and brought to sit among the chief of
sinners, and spiritual pride rebuked.

SECT. V.
THE fifth Encouragement is,. 5. V. Encouragement from Gods gracious
acceptance.
That our God can gather some sense out of a distracted duty, and do us some
good by it Evagatio vero mentis quae sit praeter propositum, orationis fructum
non tollit. Aquin. 22 ae. q. 83. a. 13.
, Romans 8.27. He that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the
Spirit, it is true of our spirit as well as of God's. The great searcher of
hearts knows what you came pregnant with, what you meant, though you mist it in
the delivery. He can tell what was written in the Letter, though it did
miscarry, and will answer your godly meaning, and overlook your unwilling
failing, Psalm. 103.13. As a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord -- Why,
the child comes sometimes full of a suit to the Father, and he is quite out in
his tale, has forgotten what he would have; but the Father knows what he
wants, and what he would have said, and grants the whole. And so, provided thou
be a child, and art heartily sensible of thy wants, and come panting to the
Throne of Grace; thy heavenly Father will accept thy meaning, and grant thy
petition, though thy heart did unwillingly give thee the slip, while thou
mournest for it, and resolvest to mend it the next time A man that has the
Palsy, his hand shakes, but we cannot say, he shakes his hand: so we may say,
it is not they, but sin in them, as it is not he, but the Palsy distemper in
him that shakes his hand. Mr. White of vai^ Thoughts. p. 68.
. The industrious Scholar comes sometimes full and clear in his lesson, but
when he is delivering it, he is out: put him in his way; he is out again: Now,
if his Master know, he had it perfect ere he came, he pities and helps him, and
concludes, that fear or care made him miss it, and that his want is only in
utterance, strokes him on the head, and bids him labor to do better next time.
So the serious Christian, he is deeply sensible of his spiritual wants, and
knows and feels well what he must ask, and down he kneels, but yet when he
comes to open his case, alas! he is drawn away utterly against his mind, and his
heart runs at random Non imputantur cum violenter importantur. Gilb. in suppl.
Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 1.
. Why now your heavenly Master knows your preparation, your intention, your
endeavor, your grief, your resolution, he will not turn off such a Scholar. He
is a Father, and will make the best of his child's faults, especially seeing
him fallen out with himself for them.

SECT^ VI.
THE sixth Encouragement under the burden of distractions,. 6. VI.
Encouragement, from the sufficiency of grace in Christ to help against them.
is, That there is grace and strength in Jesus Christ to help you against these
your distractions. Without him we can do nothing to purpose; but that is a sweet
word, and a true, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me,
Phil. 4.13. There is a stock in Christ's hand for such needy souls as you
Potesta^ nostra ipse est: Itaque ora brevissime ac persectissime quant im
potes. Aug. Solil. loc. 2.
. You find your grace insufficient for you, but then his grace is sufficient.
Lay the mouth of faith then to the two breasts of his power and pity, and suck
thence divine power, to help your humane weakness. How can that little Cistern
be empty, that lies with a Conduit to the Ocean? How can that Wife be poor,
whose Husband is a Prince? How can that body languish, whose head has plenty
of spirits, and power to convey them? why, he was anointed with the Oil of
Grace above his fellows, but it was for his fellows. He was rich for the poors
sake; he was strong for the weaks sake. Be thou therefore strong in the grace
that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.1. Your wound is not incurable, at this door
others have sped, and so may you. Wrestle not therefore against these
temptations, only in your own strength. The Devil is too strong for you alone,
and the heart too deceitful. Not I, but the Grace of God with me, said Paul
himself. If habitual grace be too weak for them, auxiliary grace is too strong.
Money in my friends purse, especially in my Fathers is as good, as in my own,
especially when it is there for me. There never was seen a Lazarus lie dying at
this Rich man's door for want. If there be any thing in Heaven to pleasure you
that fear him, you shall not go without it.

SECT. VII.
THE seventh Encouragement is,. 7. VII. Encouragement; there will be no
distractions in Heaven.
That in Heaven you will be perfectly rid of your distractions. There his
servants serve him without wanderings Vita justorum in his terris non ^am in
justitia cernitur quam in justi^^catione, non in sancti^ate, sed in
sanctificationo, non in puritate, sed in purificatione, non in perfectione, sed
in profectu.

J. F^^ de ver. ^r. Justif. p. 162.


. Here you would serve him, there you shall se^ve him. Here we have the world
to cumber and draw us off, there will be no other world but Heaven. Here the
Devils stand at our right hand to resist us, there he shall never come, nor
once peep among the Saints above. Here our flesh is continually suggesting evil
motions, or crying, Master, spare thy self, but flesh and blood shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, nor trouble us there. Here the crowding of Gallants
distracts us in public, and the crying of children distracts us in private,
but supreme Holiness will be all the Gallantry in Heaven, and no cries were
ever heard above. Here one untuneable voice distracts us in the Psalm; but
there will be a perpetual Union, and the eternal Hallelujah shall be sung
nemine contrasonante. Here this or that business calls us away, invades us in
the middle, and curtails us at the end, but there is no other business to go
to, no company to fetch you out, nothing that can give you such content, no nor
any content, out of that blessed employment. All the outward senses, and all
the inward faculties will be so wholly taken up with the vision and fruition of
the Ever-blessed Trinity, that there will not be room for one by thought, or
glance from that fair object to all eternity. O run apace, and you will be
shortly there, dispatch your work with all the speed you can, fly with an holy
have through all worldly business, cast anchor at no worldly comfort, till you
discover Land, till your work be done, and your place in Heaven ready for you,
And in the Interim, be not discouraged at your rovings, for you are not yet in
Heaven In Grammar, the Present tense is accompanied with the Imperfect. But the
Future with the Plusquam Perfectum.
. Perfection is reward as well as duty, and so is our aim here, but our
attainment there: And let that happy state be a copy by which you write your
present duties. Think sometimes when you are dull and roving, you saw a
Casement open into Heaven, and there beheld those celestial sacrifices, and
their divine employment; and think withal, shortly shall I be among them, and
do I pray here, as I would sing yonder? does this impertinent frame sort with
yonder most blessed frame? why art thou cast down, O my soul! I shall yet
praise him, who is the help of my countenance, and my God. And this may be for
encouragement to poor souls, that are fainting under the burden of their
distractions.

And now at last we see the shore, and so shall only lay on some binding
sheaves, and drive away; and that will be by noting some Inferences from the
subject, which is the Truth, and last point to be handled.

Cap. 10. Inferences from this Doctrine.
CHAP. X. Inferences from this Doctrine.
SECT. I.
. 1.
THE first Inference from this Doctrine and Subject, I. We have cause to mourn
over our best duties.
is, That we have cause to mourn over our best duties, and when we have written
fairest, to throw dust thereon Miserere mei Deus, quoniam ibi plus pecco, ubi
peecata mea emendare debe^, or^^ quidem ore, sed mente foris vagante; orationis
^ructu privor, corpore sum interius, sed cord exterius, and ideo perdo quod
dico -- parum. enim prodest sola voce cantare sine cordis intention. Bern.
Med. c. 8.
. Alas! what swarms of Flies corrupt our pot of ointment, and what a savor do
these leave thereupon, in the nostrils of God? we can hardly ever be busy
within, but vain thoughts send for us without. As our Lord Jesus could not be
about his great work, but they came with this disturbance, Yonder stand thy
Mother and Brethren without, to speak with thee: So it is with us; the Devil
and our hearts together, give us no quiet, when never so busy, but will molest
and cry, yonder is such a business to speak with thee, this Iron burns, and
that work must be ordered. Alas! what broken and torn sacrifices do we bring to
our God? what a fair escape have we with our lives and senses out of the
presence of God? As that Emperor killed the Sentinel on the place, whom he
found asleep; saying, Dead I found thee, and dead I leave thee. So most justly
might the Lord answer our distracted duties, with distracting terrors, and
leave us under the judgment of distraction, for our sins in distractions. And
what a piece of ignorance and impudence is it, for any man to be proud of his
duties? Alas! the best duties are of diverse colors, like the Beggar's Coat,
and what Beggar will be proud of his patched Coat? If there were any flowers or
spices in thy duties, they were none of thine, from thee came all the stench,
from above came all the perfumes; and what poor reason then have thou to be
proud? It is sad, that when our sins make us humble, our duties should make us
proud, Isa. 64.6. We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses
are as filthy rags, for there is none that -- stirs up himself to take hold
of thee. With what shame and trouble would we go among folks, if we had no
better clothes than filthy rags? and yet how high we look, that have no better
clothes of our own, upon our souls? if you wear any better, they are borrowed
garments, and what silly wretch is proud of borrowed garments?

And this shows likewise, what need we have of the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, to make our prayers pass into the holy place. It was the smoke of the
Incense which came with the prayers of the Saints, and ascended up before God
out of the Angels hand, Rev. 8.4. The prayers of the Saints themselves, are
like smoke in God's eyes (to speak with reverence) but the smoke of the Incense
is a perfume in God's nostrils. Jesus Christ can be heard when we cannot. Our
quaintest Oratory is broken and ineffectual. His intercession is constant and
Imperatory. Go therefore to the Throne of Grace, leaning on your Beloved. Keep
an actual eye to Christ's mediation in your prayers, and though you bring in
his precious Name in the fagg end of your supplication, yet remember you have
need of him in every sentence; a broken prayer had need of an entire Mediator.

SECT. II.
II. IT follows hence,. 2.
That omissions of holy duties are extremely dangerous. II. Omission of duty
dangerous.
Into these our fall is most frequent, against these our watch is most
careless, after these our mourning is most easy: yet of these the number
great, and the nature heinous. If according to that, Ier. 48.10. He be cursed
that does the work of the Lord negligently, what is he that does not God's
work, one way, or other? If a distraction in prayer may damn^ O what may an
Omission of prayer do! If the Scholar be whipped that looks off his book, what
will become of him that played the truant! Do the consciences of God's children
smite them for vain thoughts in a duty, how should yours wound you, that you
have no thoughts of your duty! O you that omit secret prayer, reading the
Scripture, meditation, and such like, will your negligence pass with God? He
sees how seldom you sigh in secret; what strangers you are to prayers and
tears: should one in some cases, refuse marriage for fear of distractions in
God's service? and can you wholly omit his service without danger! Are
watchfulness and seriousness such dispensable things, that they are happy that
have them, but one may do well without them? I tell you, he that chastens his
careless children, will punish his graceless servants. He that makes them smart
for their distractions, will make you tremble for your omissions. Undone duty
will undo your souls. It Is not enough that you have left off the language of
swearing, unless you have learnt the language of praying. It Is not enough that
you have burnt your books of curious Arts, unless you love to read in the Book
of Books, the Scripture. To be mortified to contemplative wickedness is well,
but till you be vivified to contemplative holiness, it is not well enough. Do
you must, or die you shall. You may come to Hell as certainly by not climbing
up, as by running down; and lose Heaven by Naturality, as well as by Hostility.
When you have read the 25 th. chap. of Matthew, you shall tell me, whether
wanting Oil may not as truly ruin you, as drinking poison; whether an
unprofitable servant will not come to a sad reckoning, as well as a prodigal
Son. Though you take not another, yet you may be consumed for not giving your
own; and in fine, you will find, that sins of omission do deserve damnation.

O hearken to this, all ye that live quietly, in the omission of closer or
family prayer, of solemn fasting, or communion in the blessed Supper of the
Lord. Has God abated you of the price that others must give? has he granted a
new way to Heaven for you? must others make Religion their business, and you
baulk it where you please? what can your consciences answer to that, Iam. 2.10.
If a a man keep the whole Law (mark, the whole Law) and yet offend [ Gr.
stumble, stumble and stop] at one point, he is guilty of all: O beloved! there
is a concatenation of Truths and Duties in Religion, you may easier go away
with all your work than some; a negative holiness will but bring you to a
negative Heaven, and you know, behind Heaven-door, is Hell. O awaken therefore
your hearts, ye that stick at this point, that are far from debauchery, and
excess any way, but will not be gotten to positive duties. Will ye with one
dash expunge the one half of Scripture! Is not Good as amiable, as Evil is
hateful? what cause is there to fear, that your avoidance of evil is from no
good principle, but either fear, or shame, or interest, or at the best, a
better temper? For the love or fear of God would make you cleave to that which
is good, as well as abhor that which is evil, and to do God's will, as well as
deny your own.

SECT. III.
. 3.
III. SEE hence what grand necesit^y we have of Watchfulness; III. The great
need of watchfulness.
that most continual duty of a Christian; this is the garment we must put on
next us every day, especially in every duty. Between duties, that we may not
want praying hearts; in duties, that we miss not prayer-blessings. Some duties
bind always, but not to be always done, as prayer, hearing, meditation, but
you can be safe no where without your watch Nusquam securitas neque in coelo,
neque in paradiso, multo minus in mundo. In coelo cecidit Angelus sub
praesentia Divinitatis, Adam in Paradis^ de loco voluptatis, Iuda^ in mundo de
schola salvatoris. Bernard.
, at all times, in all places, with all companies, yea with no company, in all
callings; there is a snare for the heart every where. Wherefore says the
Prophet Hosea 12.6. Wait on thy God continually; and the wise man, Prove. 23,
17. Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long; especially, but not only
in your morning and evening sacrifices. It is a true and a sad observation,
that many praying people are most devout and serious in God's service morning
and evening; but trace them all day long, hardly one word of God, or Heaven in
their mouths, as if Religion were hemmed up in times of Worship; nay, they are
often most light and vain betwixt times: but be thou IN the fear of the Lord,
involved, surrounded and swallowed up in the sense and fear of God's glorious
presence, all the day long Philo describing the Therapeulae by some thought to
be Christians, says, They have God perpetually in their mind, insomuch that in
their dreams they see nothing but the beauty of the divine powers. Dr. Light^.
on Acts. p. 296.
. This will dispose you to duties of Worship. A watchful Christian has his
heart ready at a call: it is quickly in tune that was never out. Holy duties
are not heterogeneous to any holy heart, the same frame will serve. He that
walks with God, is never out of his way. A short, or rather no preface, will
serve to usher in conference, with whom you have been conversing all the day.
It is sometimes the whole work of a prayer to be acquainted with God. Away with
this strangeness; if you will be upright, walk before God, and watch unto
prayer. Methinks, sincerity and watchfulness are the Catholic Graces Sine hac
nec amanda est ipsa charitas, nec ipsi sidei fidendum, nec been sperandum de
ipsa spe. Dr. Arrowsmith.
. Sincerity makes every grace true, watchfulness makes every grace sure. Of all
graces, study these Catholic Graces. Here is the essence, here is the
quintessence of Religion. O therefore prize this Angelical, this Evangelical
Grace, pray for it, Psalm. 141.3. Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, keep the
door of my lips; for except the Lord do keep the City, the watchman waketh but
in vain. Thou art impotent, God is omnipotent. And then practice it, the use of
it will teach the Art of it; as children learn to go step by step, as they
learn to swim, by venturing. Adventure on this exercise, try one week, try one
day, try one hour, try the next duty. As you renew your falls, still renew your
vows; you can do all things through Christ that will strengthen you. I beseech
you in Christ's behalf, set on this duty in good earnest. You will pay me for
all my pains with one well-grounded resolution, to set up a constant watch.
What a sad close will that be unto your life, to say, Cant. 1.6. My Mothers's
children made me a keeper of the Vineyards, but MINE OWN VINEYARD have I not
kept? O therefore watch and pray, or else temptation will enter into you, and
you will fall into temptation.

And most especially in the service of God 1 Pet. 1.13. Gird up the loins of
your mind. As loose clothes hinder a journey, so loose hearts hinder a duty.
. Watch and pray Christ has joined together, and what Christ has joined
together, let no man, especially no good man put asunder. What is the first
step in an Ordinance? (as the Orator of old in another case) Watchfulness. What
is the second step in an Ordinance? Watchfulness. What is the third step in an
Ordinance? still Watchfulness. Particularly

First, In Prayer. Prayer is a pouring out the heart unto the Lord; by a
distraction you pour it by Psalm. 62.5. My soul, wait thou ONLY upon God, for my
expectation is from him. A distraction imposes two Masters on the soul to wait
on. Rovings in prayer make that which is our most reasonable service, the most
irrational thing in the world. No folly like speaking to one person, and
thinking of another Eternam vitam or a petimus, nec tamen cord desideramus,
clamantes tacemus; si vero desideramus ex cord, etiam cum ore conticescimus,
tacentes clamamus, Greg. lib. 22. in Job.
.

Secondly, In hearing God's Word. This is the audible conference of the
Almighty with thy soul. A distraction lets him talk unto the walls. When you
come to a Sermon, you stand on your watch, and set your self on the Tower, and
watch to see what God will say to you, Hab. 2.1. By a distraction you do
almost, as if a servant stopped his ears at the orders that his Master is giving.

Thirdly, In reading. Therein you Oration tua ^^cutio est ad Deum^ quando legis,
Deus tibi l^^uitur; quando oras, cum Deo loqueris. Aug. in Psalm. 85.
peruse God's heart in black and white, where you may believe every letter to
be written in blood, not like Draco's Laws, but in bleeding love. A distraction
neither understands, nor applies those sacred characters. Which of you would so
read your Father's last Will, especially in matters that concerned your selves?
One chapter, one leaf, one verse well read and applied, will do your heart more
good, than an hundred read with half an heart.

Fourthly, In singing Psalms, you had need to watch^ Thereby you pay unto God
the Rent of his mercies. A distraction clips the coin, and turns the heart to
do homage to the Devil. Well resolved therefore of David, Psalm. 103.1. Bless
the Lord, O my soul, and ALL THAT IS WITHIN ME praise his holy Name. Thy melody
is base, if the main strength of the soul be not in it. I am persuaded that God
has suffered this Ordinance in particular to be slurr'd once and again, to be
left off by some, and cast off by others, out of his just Judgment, there
being so general a neglect of the inward and feeling management thereof. For
where sits the man Cantant ut placeant populo magis quam ^eo. Habes in
potestate vocem tuam, habeto and mentem; frangis vocem, ^range and voluntatem.
Bern. de inter. Do. c. 51.
, that lets each word and line in the Psalms, run through his heart as he sings
them? Nay, if the truth were known, there is hardly one passage, that is felt
from the beginning to the end: for if it were, O the heavenly affections it
would raise, and the sweet frame it would leave on the soul! you would not part
with that Ordinance out of your Families, nor Congregations, for all the world.

Fifthly, In Meditation, great need of watchfulness, else when the soul is
soaring aloft, like the Eagle, these darts will, or ever you are aware, strike
down the heart again. O how hard is it to spend a quarter of an hour in
meditation without a distraction! If there be any thing in the fancy, if there
be any thing in the room, if there be any thing in the world, thou will have
it, to withdraw thy heart from God. And generally the more spiritual the duty,
the more distractions. And therefore I say unto you, watch.

SECT. IV.
. 4.
IV. SEE hence what cause you have to bless God for freedom from distractions,
IV. Reason to bless God for freedom from Distractions.
and be sure you do it. Those that have an habitual ability against these
snares, O bless the Lord for it! it is he that keeps the heart in tune, not you.
We like little children, can break the strings, and put our hearts out of tune,
but it is the Lord that sets and keeps us in order. You little know the anxiety,
and fear, and trouble, that these do cost many a poor Christian; they strive,
they mourn, they doubt, they are ready to throw up all: These Vultures do gnaw
upon their very hearts; no comfort, no joy of the Holy Ghost, no peace within,
and all through the continual assaults hereof. And by the only mercy of God
thou art well and free. Thou can continue instant in prayer, thou can come
to Heaven gates, and get thy errand heard, thy business dispatched, and little
distraction in it. O give the Lord praise, lest he leave thee to thy self, and
then thy case will be more miserable than theirs. Thankfulness keeps the mercy
which ingratitude forfeits. And we are Freeholders of these blessings, but
it is because we hold of his free grace and mercy.

Yea, those that are often pestered with them, and yet sometimes freed, bless the
Lord for that. It is as much your duty to praise God when you are freed, as to
bewail it when you have failed. It is the comparison of a good Divine; if a man
have planted many Trees in his Orchard, and the Caterpillars, or Cankers have
consumed them all, but one or two, how glad will he be of them that are left,
and make much of them? the rest are killed, and these only remain. Even so thy
duties of Religion, which thou have planted, and expectedst they should bring
thee some good fruit; but alas! these Caterpillars have consumed it, unless it
be here and there a prayer, here and there a Sermon, that have escaped; O bless
the Lord for these! you have often prayed for such a mercy, now you have it:
Let praises wear, what prayers have won. It is sad to consider, what a beggarly
spirit we are of: if we want any thing, Heaven and Earth shall ring of us; but
we are graves, wherein the gifts of God are buried without any resurrection.
Where is the heart that is pregnant with praises, that cries out to his friend,
O help me to praise the Lord! Divide our lives, and the one half of them is
mercies, and the other half is sins: and yet divide our prayers, and hardly the
tenth part is spent in praises. Alas! thanks is a tacit begging. Let God gain
the glory, and thou shall not lose the advantage. The God of Israel is he that
gives strength to his people, blessed be God, Psalm. 68.35. Conclude with the
Psalmist, Not unto me, O Lord, not unto me, but unto thy Name give glory. Think
not, when thou have attended on the Lord without distractions, I have quit my
self well, but mercy has quit its self well. He that justly pays his score
shall be trusted again.

SECT. V.
. 5.
V. YOU see here in the last place, That Religion is an inward, V. Religion is
an inward, difficult and serious business.
a difficult, and a serious business, Romans 2.28, 29. He is not a Jew that is
one outwardly -- But he is a Jew, that is one inwardly, and circumcision is
that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of
men, but of God. To be watchful and holy within, that is a Christian; to have
the vanities of the heart cut off, that is circumcision; to carry it so in an
Ordinance, that you may be praised of God, that is Religion: while others are
quarrelling about shadows in God's Ordinances, beware le^t you lose the
substance thereof.

There are written on the walls of the Jews Synagogues at this day, (...) i.e.
Prayer without the intention of the affection, is like a body without a soul.
There is in Religion a Body and a Soul. The Religion of the body, is but the
body of Religion, the Religion of the soul, is the soul of Religion. And as the
separation of the body and the soul, is the death of a man; so the divorcing
asunder the form and power of godliness, is the death of godliness. As it is
injury to macerate and destroy the body for to cure and save the soul; so it is
a crime to damn and lose the soul, to please and pamper the body. Even so it is
injurious to destroy the body and outside of Religion, to preserve and advance
the soul and inside of Religion; but it is heinous to lose and break the heart
of the inside and vitals of Religion, to pamper and adorn the exteriours
thereof. It is well, if while we quarrel about a bended knee, we do not lose a
broken heart. Is the folly of the Quakers criminal for killing Religion in her
body? how sinful then is Formality, that slayes Religion in her soul!

And then you see here also, that Quatuor difficillimi labores laborantis in
partu, docentis in schola, imperantis in bello. Precantis in Ecclesia. Drexel.
Religion is a difficult and serious business; men cannot swim to Heaven in a
stream of Rose water, nor row up this River while they are asleep: we cannot
wrestle with our God, with our hands in our pockets, nor get the blessing
without sweat and tears. To repeat so many Pater nosters, or Ave-maries, with
the heart on other things, and running sometimes from their knees to other
business, in the midst of their Devotion, as many do in the Church of Rome
Behold the Jesuits Divin^ty. It is enough to be bodily present at the Mass,
though absent as to the mind, provided he behave himself with a certain
external Reverence. Connick. q. 83. a. 6. n. 197.
; or, to say our prayers, and be slumbring, or dressing us the while, as in the
guise of many outside Christians, is far from our Religion. The manner of
duties is material to the acceptance of them. Ah stupid worldlings! how can ye
read those Scriptures, Mat. 7.14. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way,
that leads unto life, and few there be that find it, Mat. 11.12. The Kingdom
of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force, and such like,
and yet hope for salvation in that secure and formal course you hold. Do you
imagine, there are two ways to Heaven, one for the diligent mortified and
watchful Christian, and another for the idle sluggard, or carnal worldling!
Have the holiest Saints much ado to walk with God, and get to him, that make it
their business? they are saved, and that is all; and can you live and die well
enough, that are neither mortified, nor watchful, nor diligent, that have no
delight, but in your vanities? no skill, but in the world? no diligence, but
for your base ends? what back-way have you found to Heaven? what blind way have
you descried to happiness? Awake, awake! look at the Scripture, and then look
at your selves, and be convinced, that the only way to eternal happiness, is to
make Christ your choice, Religion your business, the Scriptures your Rule,
Heaven your design, the Saints your company, and the Ordinances your delight;
and in them, remember that you go to attend upon the Lord, and this must be
done without Distractions.

And now you know your duty and your danger. The end of speculation is
practice, and the end of our Preaching is not your approbation, but your
submission. The Christian Religion is not so much the form of spiritual
Notions, as the power of spiritual Motions. He that complements in God's
service, will complement his soul into Hell. The outside of Religion may bring
you to the the outside of Heaven, but inside-holiness will conduct you into the
inside of happiness. If these Directions I have given be but studied and
applied, as you would study and apply a medicine for the Gout, or Stone, or but
the Toothach, I verily trust they will prove the destruction of your
distractions: But if they be neglected, your distractions will prove your
destruction.

FINIS.

