Imprimatur,

Anto. Saunders Rmo in Christo Patri ac Dno, Dno Gilberto, Archi-Episc.
Cantuar. a sac. Dom.
September. 24. Ex Aed. Lambeth.
The Romish Horseleech:

OR, AN Impartial ACCOUNT OF THE Intolerable CHARGE OF POPERY TO THIS NATION,
In an Historical Remembrance of some of those Prodigious sums of money
heretofore extorted from all degrees during the exercise of the Papal power
here.

To which is Annexed an Essay of the Supremacy of the King of England.

Quantas divitias comparavit nobis haec fabula Christi!

Vere enim hortus deliciarum Papis fuit tum Anglia and puteus inexhaustus.

Innocent 4. Pap. London, Printed by R.W. for Ralph Smith, at the Sign of the
Bible in the Piazza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1674.

TO HIS Honored Friend A.B.
SIR,
WHen you, and my self, in an exercise of Friendship, and Conversation, (which
I always have esteemed no small felicity of my life,) have frequently, within a
few years last past, entertained our selves, in taking together some view of
our present Times; and sometimes again making a retrospect to the Times of our
Forefathers, in this Kingdom; not forgetting also, that sometimes, by way of
prospect, we have made no less than a kind of Prophets of our selves in
guessing at what might hereafter come to pass amongst us, for (...). Eurip.

Him the best Prophet we confess,
That well of future things can guess.


But for what is past, we have made some remarks upon those vicissitudes, and
changes, which we, and our Ancestors have seen in this Kingdom. And
particularly noting the different state, and posture of the same, we concluded
that the alteration, and change must needs have been very great, as to the most
important concerns of the Nation, since the Power, and Jurisdiction of the
Popes of Rome was here exauctorated. Upon which, as I remember, we wished some
particular account of the State, and habit of our Body Politic, when the
Influences from Rome were praedominant over it: and that, as well in reference
to our Head, the King's Majesty, as also to the Members, the People: wherein we
desired seriously to know, whether the Pope's Power was prejudicial to them, or
either of them.

In which matter, that I might give some satisfaction to you, and my self also,
I set my self to methodize such notes, and instances, as formerly had occurred
to me: First, Touching the Property of the People, and how that was invaded by
the Romish Practices: And then, touching the Supremacy of the Royal Majesty of
the King of England, and how that was Eclipsed by the interposition of the
Papal Power: And now I have put these Collections together, you see what they
amount unto.

I confess the Subjects are transcendant, and vast; and not to be measured with
my line. The trivial Controversies amongst Neighbors, about Meum, and Tuum,
frequently puzzle the gravest Judges, but for the Fundamental Arcana imperii,
he that shall endeavor to poise them, shall sooner discover the weakness of
his own Arm, than their weight: I have known the united strenghts of
Parliaments put to puffing, and blowing, when they have lifted at them. But, as
the Divines say of the Holy Scriptures, though they contain many Mysteries, and
things hard to be understood; yet there is plainly, and clearly delivered in
them so much as is sufficient to make men good Christians: So, in the Doctrine
of the King's Supremacy, though we cannot reach its utmost import, there is yet
so much of it clearly discoverable, as is sufficient to make all Englishmen
good Subjects: And as to that, I have entitled my Discourse an Essay only, not
pretending to say all that the subject affords; and have traveled no farther
therein, than our Laws, Statutes, Authorities, and Records have lead me: and I
hope that thereby I have produced Demonstration sufficient, that our Sovereign
is invested with a most just Authority over all his Subjects, and in all Causes
within his Dominions: and then seeing that Veritas est index sui, and obliqui,
it follows, by all the rules of consequence, that the Pope's Usurpations were
most unjust.

For that other concern relating to the People's Property, I took that task, at
first, to have been much the easier of the two; that is, that it would not have
been very hard, to have comprehended, and given some reasonable estimate of
those sums which heretofore went out of England to the Popes, and Court of
Rome. But after a little dealing therein, I strangely found the account to
swell beyond all bounds, and soon experienced the difficulty to lie as much in
the mutiplicity in this, as in the intireness in the other. This Grievance was,
and could be, adequately known only to our Ancestors who felt it, but the smart
is not as yet quite worn off of their Posterity; and therefore what is offered
in this affair, I have thought fit to style, a Remembrance, and indeed it ought
not to be forgotten.

But now, Sir, I may possibly deliver a sound Paradox; That though it is
conceived a very hard thing now to understand, as formerly it was to endure,
and once thought more hard to remedy, all the mischiefs which our Forefathers
suffered from the Papal Usurpation, and Tyranny; yet certainly the Cure was at
all times not so very difficult to have been effected: the Antidote was as near
as the Poison; and there never wanted a Panpharmacon, which, if duly applied,
would at any time have removed those malignant distempers that invaded the
Kingdom's constitution: And that was, in a word, the Execution of the good
Laws. It is the Honor, and Excellency of the Laws of England, that no man can
have a wrong, or damage, but the Law, if rightly managed, will do him right.
Did the Papal Power usurp, and incroach upon the King's Rights? the inherent
virtue of the Common Law declared all to be illegal, and void. Did the Romish
Practices weaken, and impoverish the People? the same Law at once arraigned,
and damned those Novelties, and grievances; and hence it was that all the
supervenient Statutes ran but as Declaratory of the old Law. Vid. Coke 5. R^p
Cawdrys Case.
The Law indeed may sometimes be laid asleep by connivance or mana^led by some
contrivance; but it is a true, and good Rule. Dormit aliquando jus, moritur
nunquam: and when the Law is awakened, and let loose, it soon discovers, and
breaks all offenses, and offenders.

The incomparable Spenser, in his Faery Queen, sets forth one Sir Arthegal, the
Patron of Justice, attended with Talus, his Iron man, the Executioner, whom
nothing could withstand: Pardon me if I give you his description of this
notable Officer. Our renowned Poet relating how the Divine Astraea, loathing to
sojourn longer amongst wicked men, retired to Heaven from whence at first she
came: But when she parted hence she left her Groom, Faery Queen. lib. 5. Canto.
1. Stanz. 12.

An iron man, which did on her attend,
Always to execute her steadfast doom,
And willed him with Arthegall to wend,
And do what ever thing he did intend.
His name was Talus, made of iron mould,
Immovable, resistless, without end;
Who in his hand, an iron flail did hold,
With which he thresh'd out falsehood, and did truth unfold.


This Iron man, when commanded, and set on, could rout seditious multitudes,
destroy tyrannick Giants, quell hideous Monsters, and knock down enchanted
Castles: Our Heroic Laws do no less, when by their commanded Officers, they
dissipate superstitious concourses, truss up the Gigantick Jesuit, drag out
the monstrous Plotters, and batter down that second Babel of Confusion which
the sons of the Earth would be rearing in our English plain.

What thoughts these Collections, and Observations will raise in you, or
others, I can but guess at: I am sure they have sufficiently discovered to me
the drift of the Papal Policy; That is, to establish, and uphold a Spiritual
Dominion in the World: to effect which, it was necessary the Consciences of men
should first be inslaved by superstition, and ignorance; and then, by the
Usurpation of Temporal Power, and the engrossing of Temporal Riches, the work
was done; and the Papal interest so carried all in the middle, and dark Times,
when Kings durst not exercise their just authority, nor the People call that
which they had their own: and in this despondency it was, that the Laws were
muffled up. But when, toward the latter Ages, the revolution came of Learning,
and Knowledge, with a reviviscence and improvement of all Arts, and Sciences,
and men became tired with groping so long in the dark, and those great Lights
began to dawn in the World, then both Kings, and People rouzed up themselves,
and their Spirits revived, the shades vanished, the Birds of darkness flew
away, and the Beasts of prey retired to their dens: Every man then, with
alacrity, addressed himself to his proper Office; Princes took their Scepters
in their hands, and swayed them again without control; the People applied
themselves all to their honest callings, and what they got by God's blessing,
and their own industry, they enjoyed whilst they lived, and when they dyed
left it to their posterity; which formerly used to be snatched away before
their faces by the Romish Harpyes.

The consideration of all which, as it clearly manifests the great abuses,
poverty, and slavery, which this Nation once, and for a long time suffered
under the Pope's yoke; so it cannot but make us reflect on that proportionable
mischief which still lies upon those that have not yet shak'd him off: with
this further observation, how an entire subjection unto Popery corrupts, and
debases the spirits of men; for nothing is more obvious, than that in Italy,
Spain, Flanders, and other Countries wholly the Popes, as to his spiritual
reign, the Inhabitants are either the most Atheistical, debauched, and
dissolute; or those, who with a blind zeal apply themselves to an observance of
the Rites of that confused, and absurd Religion, presently become fond, and
stupid, giving themselves up only to admire their Holy Father the Pope, their
Confessors, and Priests, fancying Rome to be the true model of the Heavenly
Jerusalem, and the Pope, and his Cardinals ruling therein like Christ, and his
Apostles; gazing upon the formality, and gaudiness of their Church, and
entangled with a multitude of ridiculous Ceremonies, and Observances: all which
tends to make them unactive, and unfit for all those generous, and ingenious
courses that bring Honor, and Riches to a People: When, on the contrary, the
Reformed part of the World, being manumitted from such slavery, and
encumbrances, beat out the Popish every where in Trading, and generally excel
them in all Arts, and Sciences. And this may be noted in our selves, when
presently after the Reformation, the English grew potent at Sea, sent forth
great Colonies and Plantations; maintained traffic, and commerce over the
World, and brought home Honor, Plenty, and Riches to the Nation. So the
Netherlanders, after they had freed themselves from the Romish briers,
presently got good fleeces on their backs, grew rich, and powerful, eclipsing
the glory of Venice, that once famous Republic, which has ever since been in
the wane: Amsterdam supplanted Antwerp: Flanders truckled under Holland: and
the Hanse Towns generally Protestant, outstrip'd all their Popish Neighbors in
wealth, and strength. Whilst the once great, and dreadful Monarchy of Spain is
fallen into a Consumption, supported only with a little Indian Gold, which they
steal home sometimes. The Austrian Eagle has molted his Feathers. Portugal
losing both in their Plantations abroad, and reputation at home. And in those
Countries where Protestants and Papists are mingled, as in F^ance, Germany,
Poland, etc. the Protestants generally are the Traders, and grow rich, as all
Travelers testify.

For, besides that an addicted zeal to the Romish Religion contracts, and
debaseth the spirits of men; their Guides endeavor also, by all possible
means, to contain them in a dull, ignorant and formal way; knowing Learning,
and knowledge to be their common Enemy, as at once discovering, and
overthrowing all the superstructures reared upon their sandy foundation. But
then, what Wealth, what Honor, and Riches do their Clergy, and Orders enjoy?
How glorious the Popes; How splendid the Cardinals; How abounding in Riches,
and Titles, all their Relations, Kindred, and Dependants? all sucked from the
People. Whilst to lull, and gratify the abused multitude, they have infinite
devices: they have perpetual provisions for the dull souls, in their Cells: the
austere may take their fill of Discipline, and rigor: the impure, and
voluptuous, have their conveniences at hand: the lawless, who find themselves
too strait laced, may be eased by Dispensations: the credulous shall never want
Miracles; the fantastical visions; nor the superstitious Ceremonies; with
infinite baubles more, to keep the uneasy Babes quiet.

Now when any person comes to claim, or exercise any extraordinary power, or
authority, in a place, or shall levy, and take up what moneys he please, he
must reasonably expect to have a Quo Warranto sued out against him, to which he
must plead his Title to his Privilege; and that, I must confess, has been
very fairly done by the Papal Attorneys in this cause, on the behalf of their
Holy Client; and they have drawn their Plea from the written Text of the Divine
Law, in this manner; God made two great Lights in the firmament; Genesis 1.16.
the greater Light to rule the day, and the lesser Light to rule the night:
from which they infer the infallible Dominion of the Church; for Pope Innocent
the Third wrote to the Emperor of Constantinople thus: Epist. ad Imp. Decret.
lib. 1. de major. and Obed. Tit. 33.
You ought to know (says he) that God made two great lights in the Firmament of
Heaven, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the
night; both great, but the one greater. To the Firmament of Heaven, that is,
the Catholic Church, God made two great Lights, that is, instituted two
Powers, the Papal Authority, and the Regal Dignity; but that which is to rule
by day, that is over spiritual things, is the greater; but that over carnal
things the less, that there may be known to be as much difference between
Popes, and Kings, as there is to be between the Sun, and Moon. And then comes
the Gloss upon the Canon Law, which says, Whilst the Earth is seven times
bigger than the Moon; and the Sun Eight times bigger than the Earth: the Papal
Power must consequently be fifty seven times bigger than the Regal Dignity.

Again, that great Hebrew Prophet sets forth a most exact Image of the Royal
Papacy, in Melchisedeck, Campanel. de Mon. Hisp. cap. 5.
who did prefigure, say they, the Majesty of St. Peter, and his Successors,
who had Melchisedeck for their Prototype: and therefore the Pope must needs be
invested with a Royal Priesthood, and armed as well with the Civil, as the
spiritual Sword; for if it were otherwise, Christ, and so his Vicegerent, would
be a diminutive Lawgiver, and not as Melchisedeck, who was at once both King,
and Priest.

Further, to fortify this Plea to a Royal Jurssdiction in the World, they
allege that Jacob, and Esau were perfect Types of the Catholics, and the
Heretics; signifying that the Catholics should abound in Power, and Riches;
but the Calvinists, and Lutherans should be low, and poor: expressed fully in
the Salutation of the Angel Gabriel to the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.33.
That our Lord the Pope was to rule over the House of Jacob for ever, and of
his Kingdom there shall be no end. That is, in a word, The Pope is to govern
the World.

Another Argument to prove this Plea is fetched out of the Eighth Psalm, Psalm.
8.5, 6.
viz. Thou have Crowned him with glory, and honor. Thou make him to have
Dominion over the works of thy hands: thou have put all things under his feet.
All Sheep, and Oxen, yea and the beasts of the field. The Fowl of the air,
Anton. Sum. Theol. p. 3. cap. 5.
and the Fish of the Sea, etc. By this, they say, is clearly meant St. Peter,
and the power given to him, and his Successors in the Sea of Rome; to whom God
has subjected the Sheep, that is, the Christians; the Oxen, that is, the Jews,
and Heretics; the Beasts of the Field, that is, the Pagans; the Fishes of the
Sea, that is, the Souls in Purgatory; and the Fowls of the Heaven, that is, the
blessed Spirits and Angels.

So much for Dominion, and Command; now for Wealth, and Riches; nothing is more
plain, say they, than the Holy Prophet Isaiah, speaking of the Roman Church,
The Gentiles shall come to thy light, Isa. 60.
and Kings to the brightness of thy rising: Then shall thou see and wonder, and
rejoice when the riches of the Sea, and all the substance of the Gentiles shall
come unto thee: they shall bring gold and incense. The sons of Strangers shall
build up thy Walls, and their Kings shall minister unto thee. Thy Gates shall
be open day and night, that they may bring unto thee the Riches of all Nations,
and their Kings shall be brought: For the Nation and Kingdom that will not
serve thee shall perish. The sons of them that afflicted thee shall come
bending unto thee, and all they that despised thee shall bow down at the soles
of thy feet. Thou shall suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the
breasts of Kings. For Brass I will bring Gold, and for Iron Silver, and for
Wood Brass, and for Stones Iron. A most plain description of the glory, and
splendour of the Roman Church: but the dull Heretics will not understand the
meaning: and St. John, they say, was surprised with a (...), when he describes
the Angel refusing the honor offered to him, but now dutifully paid to Christ's
Vicar.

Then, when Christ told St. Peter, that he would make him a Fisher of men,
though possibly the innocent, and meek Apostle, not fully apprehending the full
import of that right which thereby was conferred on him, applied himself to a
kind of spiritual Fishing, hunting after some mystical Fishes, to enclose them
in the net of some invisible Kingdom in the Heavens; and Cardinal Pool
interprets the donation thus, Regin. Pole in Ioc.
Thou and thy Successors shall have dominion over all men, ruling over Kings,
and commanding, regulating, and casting out Emperors: yet the good Apostle's
more illuminated successors, have now hit upon the true import, and meaning,
and conclude that Christ did not only give them a power to fish for men, but
for money also, and for that purpose conferred on them a Right to Fish in all
secular Ponds, and Rivers: For, The Kings of the Earth (says Christ to Peter)
from whom do they receive Tribute? not certainly from us, for we are free: But
go thou to the Sea, and cast forth a hook, and take up the first Fish that
comes up; that take, and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a
piece of money, that take. And by this a great fishing right was established in
him, and from him derived to his Successors, that is, to fish in all waters;
now by Waters the Holy Scriptures intend People, and Nations, and Tongues, and
Languages: And Christ commanded Peter to lanch out into the Deep, and then they
enclosed such a multitude of Fishes, that the net brake; and it was very well,
Sermon. 2. in Fest. Petri.
and pertinently observed by Pope Innocent 3. that the meaning of that advice,
or command, Lanch out into the deep, was this, Go up to Rome, which had a vast
dominion over all People, and from whence they might spread their Nets over all
the World, to catch all Nations. And so in pursuance of this Right, this
Fishing Trade for money has been driven with all possible art, and industry
all the World over, to the great profit of the Roman Merchants.

But in process of time so it fell out, that several Kings, and States, looking
upon these Romish Fishermen as Trespassers, and Intruders; after a due
examination, and consideration had of all the Pleas, and allegations in this
matter, and canvassing the Pope's Title to a free Piscary in all Waters, not
only upon this Globe, but in the Celestial, and Infernal Waters also; his
Title was adjudged, and declared to be of no force, or value, and thereupon he
was prohibited to fish any more in the British Ocean, the Baltic Sea, the
Lake Lemane, and in many Rivers of Germany; and he was in great danger of being
prohibited fishing also in the Neighboring Adriatic: so that what prizes he
gets now amongst us, it is by stealth, and now and then a few silly Fishes are
drawn, and enticed into his Nets.

But in many places still the Trace is freely driven, with great returns, and
profit; how formerly it was managed here, the ensuing Pages will make some
discovery; as also how it came to be stopped. But certainly vast Riches are
continually brought in by the Factors of Rome, and thereby the Popes, and
Cardinals have mightily enriched Sons, Nephews, Relations, and Kindred, and
oftentimes raised great Families, as those of Borgia, Aldobrandini, Sfondrati,
Caraffi, Peretti, and many more. Yet I have lately met with a notable
Observation of an intelligent Roman, Il Nipotismo di Roma. P. 2. lib. 3. fo.
163.
who with great reason, and experience informs, That seldom, or never any of
those Families prosper, but suddenly decay, and wither; And that if any one
please but to run over the actions of all the Popes, and the Histories of their
Families, he will find it an infallible truth, that they are all, either
extinct, or reduced unto a very mean inconsiderable condition; as if Heaven
would not endure the Patrimony of St. Peter should be made an universal scandal
to the World, and be an occasion of eternizing the memory of the Sacrilege
they have committed.

The Observator proceeding to give this further reason, Because, says he, it so
pleases God, not to suffer those who have raised themselves unto that greatness
out of the Bowels of those in Purgatory, to continue long without some signal
mark of his displeasure: Heaven is offended to see sacred things transformed
into profane: Alms into Theft: Churches into Palaces: Altars into Lordships:
Holy things into Comedy, and sport: Divine worship into Adoration of Riches, or
rather Adoration into Riches.

And as this was, and is one way still, of employing the Church's Treasure,
viz. to raise Families, and enrich Nephews, etc. So you see what it comes to at
last: And because the Popes are generally chosen old men, their Kindred, and
Nephews, as their discretion dictates, make the best use of their time, and
with all greeciness ingross all that they can, whilst the old Gentleman is
supported with Cordials: neither are they satisfied with what can be fingered
at present, but reversions, and remainders must be secured also; Nay, to above
five, or six of Pope Urban's little Cozens at one time there were Benefices,
and preferments given, while they were yet rocking in their cradles: And
sometimes Benefices have been disposed off to those that were not yet born, Id.
fo. 91.
for in the Articles of Marriage, not long since, of one of the Barberines,
with a Lady of the Family of Colonna, this was one, That a certain Abbey should
be given to the Firstborn Son.

But now, Sir, I cannot but tell you of a certain difficulty, which I have
often ruminated upon, being a great inconsistence, as I have conceived, in the
Roman Church: And that is, That this external Splendour, Glory, and Riches,
should by some be urged as an infallible mark of the True Church: To see the
Majesty of the Son of God set forth in the exaltation of the Pope his
Vicegerent, seated in a glorious Throne; adorned with a Triple Crown, and other
suitable habiliments; Emperors holding his stirrup, and laying their necks
before him to be trod upon; to see him served at the Table by Kings; and
offering his Toe to be kissed with great reverence, and devotion by persons of
the highest quality, to see him assisted by a conclave of glorious Cardinals,
and with them appearing like the Major, and Aldermen of this blessed
Corporation: All which, they fay, must needs be the Characteristical marks of
the true Vicar of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who, by his Royal
Charter, has invested his Substitute, and his Associates, with these Honors.
When again, by others in the same Church, and those of great repute amongst
them, the true marks, and signs of the Catholick-ship thereof are made to
confist in wilful Poverty, in going barefoot, and bare-leg'd, in watchings,
fasting, and penances, in going attired in Sackcloth, tattered and lowsey rags,
in showing sour, and mortified looks, and bloody backs; affirming, that for an
eminence in these severities, it was that the glorious St. Francis is now
advanced to the vacant Throne of Lucifer, the highest place in Heaven, because
he was the poorest wretch on Earth. I now say, to which of those so different
Characters, or marks, shall we apply our selves; and from whence, seeing they
are not yet agreed amongst themselves, shall we take our measures to pitch upon
the true Church? whether from Riches, or Poverty; from Honor, or Contempt;
from Rule, or Subjection; from a plump, or a macerated looks; from outward
gorgeousness, or poorness of spirit? I must confess my self at a stand and
shall take a little time to consider of it.

But I will detain you no longer with these speculations: and for these
subsequent remarks, which were conceived at your instance, I now put them into
your hands; but if you suffer them to fall under the Eyes of any such as shall
be startled, or offended at them, I know not how they will help themselves: It
is a hard matter to answer Demonstrations, and matters of fact, drawn from the
most authentic Registers, and Manifesto's of time, which has been my work
chiefly to exhibit. And if I should have proceeded to have set forth all that
train of vanities, and mischiefs which attend Popery, it would have been
infinite, and far exceeded my designed limits: besides, it would be no news to
you, who can far better decipher them than my self. But for this which is
already done, I give it wholly to your dispose, as also is

Your humble Servant, etc.

The Contents Of the First TREATISE.
Peter Pence. page 2 First Fruits, and Tenths. p. 10 Confirmation, and
Admission money. p. 19 Legatine Levies. p. 22 Kings John's Pension. p. 28
Appeals. p. 33 Dispensations. p. 37 Indulgences, Pardons. p. 46 Relics, Agnus
Dei's, Crosses, Pictures, etc. p. 70 Rood of Grace, Images, Miracles. p. 78
Jubilees, Pilgrimages. p. 85 Offerings, Gifts, Presents, etc. p. 97
Collections, Contributions. p. 102 Courts, Jurisdictions. p. 106 Contributions
for the Holy Land. p. 110 Croisado's. p. 114 Ambassadors, Agents. p. 116
Strangers Beneficed. p. 120 Priories-Alien. p. 124 Knights Templars, and
Hospitallers. p. 129 Elections of Popes, and Cardinals. p. 134 Siding in
Schisms. p. 138 English Popes, and Cardinals. p. 147 Canonizations. p. 156
Pope's Legates, Collectors, etc. p. 161 Caursins, Lombards. p. 168 Complaints of
the People. p. 170 Sums exhausted. p. 175 Matthew Paris Vindicated. p. 180
Abbys, Monasterys, etc. p. 186 Chanterys, Free Chapels, Colleges. p. 190
Shrines, Relics, etc. p. 194 Itinerary Priests, Consecrations, Visitors,
Courts, Confessions, etc. ibid. Purgatory, with its dependants. p. 197 Masses,
Anniversaries, Obits, Requiems, Dirge's, Placebo's, Trentals, Lamps, etc. p.
199 The Place, and Torments of Purgatory. p. 205 The Fryer's Case. p. 208
AN Historical Account, Or, a Remembrance of some of those sums of money
heretofore going out of England to the Papacy, and Court of Rome, when the Pope
exercised his Power here.
I Will not pretend to be as exact in the account, and computation, as the
Pope's Officers were in the Collections of those sums; Stat. 25 He^. 8. cap.
21.
when I find a Statute affirming the ways, means, and Instruments of drawing
the same to have been Infinite. I shall therefore only profess to give you a
Remembrance of some, for a taste of all the rest, Ex ungue Leonem, etc. And in
pursuance of our purpose, we will begin with the Peter Pence; which at first
though but a Donative, or Alms, as shall be presently showed, yet by the
inference of a Right from Prescription of Time, and the manner of exaction, at
last it became a burden, and an encumbrance to the whole Nation: and though
this was but small, in respect of other payments, yet time swelled them to a
vast account.

CHAP. I. Peter Pence.
Peter Pence, Cowell Interp. in verbo. Spelm. Gloss. Matt. Westminster. in An. 727.
Polychron. lib. 5. cap. 24. Antiquit. Bri^t. fo. 58. 69.
Denarii Sancti Petri, called in the Saxon Tongue, Romefeoh, the Fee of Rome:
and sometimes also Romescot, and Rome-peny, was, if we may so properly term it,
a Tribute of Alms, given by the ancient Saxon Kings to the Sea of Rome. Some
say that Ina, a King of the West Saxons, was the first Donor about the year
720. at such time as he was in Pilgrimage at Rome. Others say that Offa, a King
of the Mercians, first gave them, about the year 790. But probably the truth
may be, and Matt. Westminster. insinuates no less, that these being Kings of several
Kingdoms in the Saxon Heptarchy, each of them might be the first Donor within
their respective Dominions. The occasion upon which Offa gave the same, Spelm.
Council. Tom. 1. fo. 311. Acts and Mon. fol. 103.
is storied thus: Ethelbert King of the East Angles, a virtuous Prince, being
persuaded by his Council to marry, against his own inclination, went to Offa,
in design to obtain his Daughter Athilrid to Wife: but King Offa's wife being
averse to the match, in treacherous manner caused Ethelbert to be slain,
whereupon Offa, in some sort to expiate that horrid act, Chro. Jo. Brompt.
Coll. 776.
gave the Peter Pence to St. Peter's Church in Rome. But at last, by Adelwolph,
this tributary Alms was ratified, and given throughout the whole Kingdom.

The Charter whereby King Offa gave the Peter Pence remains still extant under
seal, 1. Instit. fo. 7. a. W. Dugdale Antiq. of Warw. 133. 673. Vid. Matt.
Paris in vita Rob rti Abb. S. Alb^ni. fo. 80.
as Sr. Edw. Coke affirms: which if true, it was not heeded by such as have
affirmed, that the first sealed Charter that we have in England, is that of
King Edward the Confessor, upon his founding of Westminster Abbey; and that in
imitation of the Normans, amongst whom he had been educated. But Sr. Edw. Coke
adds further, that the sealing of Charters, and Deeds is much more ancient than
some have imagined; and to that purpose, besides that sealed Charter of King
Offa, he makes instance in a Charter of King Edwin, Brother of King Edgar,
bearing date An. Dom. 956. under his own seal, with the seal also of the Bishop
of Winchester to it; and this long before the Normans entrance. But this by the
way only.

For the Peter Pence, Sim Dunelm. Coll. to. 150. ^tow Annal. fo. 26.
which in the Saxon Laws are often termed Regis Eleemosyna, it was a Penny for
every House in which was Twenty Pennyworth of any kind of goods, to be paid
yearly on Lammas day. Lambert fo. 78. J^rnall. Col. 871.
And in K. Edwards Laws there is a very strict constitution for the payment of
them: so that in time it was esteemed, consuetudo quasi Apostolica, as Matt.
Westminster. has it, a qua neque Rex, neque Archiepiscopus, Abbas, vel Prior, aut
aliquis in regno immunis erat Only I find that the Monastery of St. Camb.
Britt. fo. 410. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. fo. 311.
Alban's, in honor of that Proto-Martyr, to whose memory it was founded, was
alone quit, as to that charge; and that by the Indulgence of King Offa, as Mat.
Westminster. relates.

This payment, as before is said, at first, and for a long time, was termed and
esteemed, as indeed it was, a Tribute of Alms; being styled in the Laws of
Canutus, Leges Canut. in Jornal. 920.
Larga Regis benignitas; and in those of the Confessor, Regis Eleemosyna: and
so it was received also by the Court of Rome, Epist. Hen. 1. in Eadmer. fo. 113.
as Pope Paschalis the 2. to one of our Kings, Eleemosyna beati Petri, prout
audivimus, ita dolose collecta est, ut neque mediam ejus partem hactenus
Ecclesia Romana susceperit. Sim. Dunelm. Coll. fo. 150.
And Sim. Dunelmensis thus, Hoc anno E^helhelm comes Wilton. Eleemosynam Regis
Elfredi detulit Romam. And all this importing no more, but that Charity was the
first foundation of it; and the Pope to have been the King's Beads-man as it
were, and not the King the Popes Homager. Yet the continuance occasioned the
pretense of an absolute Tribute: Pol. Verg. lib. 4.
and Polydor Vergil the Historian, and sometimes the Pope's Collector of the
Peter Pence here, improperly terming it Vectigal, S. Cressy Church H st. li.
29. ca. 15.
S. Cressy is so ingenuous as to give him a reproof for so doing: yet in that
notion it was exacted a long time by the Pope's Officers: But yet upon some
distaste, some of our Kings would sometimes adventure to deny payment; as King
Edward the Third did once in his time: the reason whereof is storied to be
this, viz. Polychron. Stow. Mat. Westminster. etc.
when in his reign was the great contest between the two Kings, for the Crown
of France, and many of the Popes then residing at Avignion in the Territories
of France, being most of them Frenchmen, did too partially take part with the
French King: So that after the great and famous victory obtained by the Black
Prince, at the Battle of Poitiers, this was set up in Vienna, and several other
places, and after grew into a kind of Proverb, viz.

Ore est le Pape devenu Franceys, Hen. de Knighton Coll. fo. 2615.

Et Jhesu est devenu Angleys:
Ore serra veou que ferra plus,
Le Pape, ou Jhesus.
id est.
The Pope is now all Frenchify'd:
And Jesus on the English side:
And now you see which of these two,
The Pope, or Jesus, most can do.
And therefore, because the Popes took part with the French, our King Edw. 3.
commanded the Peter Pence should be no longer paid: which Prohibition all that
King's time continued; till the reign of his next Successor King Rich. 2. And
some offers being then made to gather them again, at a Parliament a Petition
was preferred, that it might be declared by Parliament, whether the charge
called Rome-penny, should be levied of the Commons, and paid to the Pope's
Collector, Rot. Parl. 1. R. 2 na. 84.
or no: and the Answer to it was, Soit fait come devant ad este use: and so
they were revived again by that weak King. But yet it was Resolved by the
Casuists of those times, of which John Wickliffe was one, and of great esteem,
and so represented to that King Rich. 2. That in case of necessity, such
payments as were but in nature of Alms, might lawfully be withholden, according
to that Rule of the Divines, Extra casus necessitatis, and superfluitatis,
Eleemosyna non est in praecepto. But the payment of them, de facto, being
indulged by that King, as is before said, I do not find but they so continued
till the reign of K. Hen. 8. in whose time the above named Pol. Pol. Vergil
H^st. fo. 90.
Vergil, an Italian, Archdeacon of Wells, was Collector of the Peter Pence in
England, as he, in his History testifies.

But one thing is to be noted, that though the payment of them continued so
long time, and the Popes had constantly their Collectors here: yet the Pope
could not alter the accustomed proportion, nor the manner of gathering of them:
for when, in the time of K. Acts and Mon. Ed. 2. f. 335.
Edw. 2. Rigandus, the Popes Officer went about to make some alteration in
that, he was severely prohibited by the King. And at last, Stat. 25 Hen. 8.
cap. 21. Sleid. com. lib. 9.
amongst other things, these Peter Pence were totally taken away by K. H^n. 8.
of which Sleiden takes special notice. Antiquit. Brit. fo. 302.
And although Queen Mary set her self to put all things in such plight, in
reference to the concerns of Rome, as they were in the beginning of her Fathers
time, yet the Peter Pence were never restored in all her reign: For Pope Paul
the 4. Hist. Council. ^rident. fo. 392.
receiving the English Ambassadors which came from Q. Mary, urged much to them
the duty, and necessity that lay upon the Queen to make restitution of all
Church Lands, Revenues, and Goods, that her Father K. H. 8. had taken away: and
in particular told them, That the Peter Pence ought to be paid; and that,
according to the ancient custom, he would send a Collector for that purpose:
He also told them, that he himself had performed that charge three years in
England, where he was much edified by seeing the forwardness of the People to
deposite, and especially those of the meaner sort: further pressing, that they
could not hope St. Peter would open the Gates of Heaven to them, so long as
they usurped his Goods on Earth. The relation of all this much quickened the
Queens zeal for restitution, but her short reign, and some other impediments
prevented her intentions: and so the Peter Pence vanished. Only whereas some
Monasteries anciently collected some proportions of them, and then answered so
much to the Pope's Collector, in continuance of time it became fixed as a Rent,
or duty to the said Monasteries, which afterward devolving to the Crown, and
from thence by sale, or grant to others, Sr. Rog. Twisden. Hist. vindication.
cap. 4.
with as ample profits, as the Religious Houses had enjoyed the same; it is
conceived that at this day they are in some places paid, as appendant to the
Manors which belonged to some such Houses, and in some places by the name of
Smoak-money. And further we may note, that these Peter Pence were sometimes
called Praestation money, collected by some Archdeacons, who handed the same,
sometimes to the Bishop of the Diocese, and sometimes immediately to the Pope's
Collector General; as appears by a certain Instrument discovered by that
excellent Antiquary Mr. Antiq. of Warw. fo. 126.
Dugdale, setting forth some part of the Office of an Archdeacon.

For the yearly value, or sum of these Peter Pence, what they did amount unto,
through the whole Kingdom, the very manner of the duty, and collection, speaks
them uncertain: yet it seems there was a rate set upon every Diocese, Spelm.
Council. Tom. 1. fo. 313. Sr. Rog. Twisden fo. 77. Seldom Analect. lib. 2. cap.
3. Acts and Mon. in Ed. 2.
as appears by one of the Pope's Bulls for that purpose, said to be Gregory 5.
the Bull it self is pointed to by Sr. Hen. Spelman; but the rates we have
specified by the other learned Knight from an old Manuscript belonging to the
Church of Chichester, as also by others.

Episc.
l. s. d. Cant. 07 18 00 London. 10 10 00 Roffens. 05 10 00 Norwic. 21 00 00
Eliens. 05 00 00 Lincoln. 42 00 00 Cicestr. 08 00 00 Hereford. 06 00 00 Sarum.
17 00 00 Winton. 17 06 08 Exon. 09 00 00 Wigor. 10 05 00 Bath. 12 00 00 Covent.
10 00 00 Eborac. 11 10 00

There it seems were the certain rates to be answered to the Pope's Exchequer;
the overplus to remain to the Collectors, or it may be Farmers, like those of
our Excise, or Hearth-mony, sic parvis componere, etc. Whilst the People were
racked to pay the utmost penny; for upon reasonable compute, the Peter Pence
could amount to no less than 7500 l. per annum.

Know we must also, An. Dom. 852. Will. Malm s^b. de gest. Reg. Angl. lib. 2.
cap. 2.
that King Athelwolph gave a yearly pension to Rome of 300 marks, thus to be
employed, To buy Candles for St. Peter 100 m. To buy Candles for St. Paul, 100
m. For a free gift to the Pope, 100. m. This by some Writers has been
confounded with the Peter Pence, Matthew. Westminster. in An. 855. Florent. Wigorn. in
An. 857.
agreeing so near with the rates above; but certainly they were several
charges: and this though small, yet being paid many years, the sum. total.
could not choose but be very great: and once John of Gaunt opposed the payment,
An. 46. Ed. 3.
being demanded by Pope Gregory the thirteenth.

CHAP. II. First Fruits, and Tenths.
FIrst Fruits, Primitiae, are the Profits of every Spiritual Living for one
year: and these anciently, and often were called Annates, because the rates of
First Fruits of Spiritual Livings is after one years profit of the same.

Tenths, Decimae, are the Tenth part of the First Fruits, or yearly value of
all Spiritual Livings: And these were anciently paid to the Popes, as in
England, so throughout all Western Christendom: For the Pope, as Pastor
Pastorum, claimed Decimas Decimarum.

Now though these were of a later date than the Peter Pence, yet by whom they
were first imposed, or in whose time first taken, De Schism. inter Urban. 6,
etc. lib. 2. cap. 9.
there is much difference amongst the Historians. Theod. a Niem. Secretary to
Pope Gregory the eleventh says that Boniface the ninth about the year 1399.
reserved first the First Fruits of vacant Churches, and Abbeys: with whom
agrees Platina, Platina in vita Bonifac. 9.
in the life of that Boniface, saying, Primus Annatarum imposuit usum; though
he confesses also, that some refer their Original unto Pope John the two and
twentieth, of which opinion is Polydor Vergil, Po^yd. Vergil. de Inv. n^. rerum
lib. 8. cap 2.
though he intimates also, as if some thought them of a higher time. But indeed
our own Contrymen assign their beginning here to that Pope John the two and
twentieth: An. D. 1316.
among whom Walsingham, speaking of that Pope, says thus, Tho Walsingh. in Ed
2. fo. 84.
Summus Pontifex reservavit Camerae fuae primos fructus beneficiorum omnium in
Anglia per triennium vacantium. And Ranulph. Cestrensis thus, Johannes 22. Lib.
7. cap. 42. in H. Knighton Coll. fo. 2534.
Beneficiorum per mortem, seu resignationem vacantium, sive per translationem,
primos fructus reservavit. But howsoever, or by whomsoever these became first
imposed, after the Popes had been absolutely, and thoroughly seized of them,
then they claimed them, Jure Divino, by example of the High Priest amongst the
Jews, Numb. 18.6.
who had Tenths from the Levites. But Pol. Vergil sings another note, in the
place above referred to, insinuating the maintenance of the Pope's grandeur to
be the first rise of them, and that this was one of the fairest flowers in the
Triple Crown: but when the payment of them had been continued some competent
time, it was politickly done, upon any questioning, to assign them a Divine
Original, which was sure to satisfy such as used to take the Pope's word for
far greater matters.

The payment of these, with other great sums (of which more anon) so strangely
impoverished the Kingdom; that notwithstanding that allegation, or pretense of
Divine Right, the Kings of England made no scruple sometimes to forbid the
payment of them; 2 Ed. 3. Claus. Rot. m. 4. 25 Ed. 3. 47 Ed. 3.
as K. Ed. 3. once discharged the Pope's Nuntio from collecting the First
Fruits, etc. and many Prohibitions were granted against the Popes Collectors,
on complaint made by the grieved Commons in Parliament, as appears by the
several Collections thereof made by the Lord Coke: Coke Jurisd. of Courts, cap.
14 Stat. 2 H. 4. cap. 1. 1 Ric. 2.
and in one Statute made to remedy that grievance, it was termed a Horrible
Mischief, and Damnable Custom: and at another Parliament it was called a Very
Novelty.

But herein did the policy of the Court of Rome notably appear, that sometimes,
when the Kingdom complained of its burdens, and the Kings in some exigency
calling for the Subjects Aids, and thereupon the Pope's revenue in danger of a
temporary, if not a total stop, the Popes would in such a juncture, and perhaps
in a frolic of bounty, concede or assign the First Fruits, etc. for some time
to the King, as for one year, or more, as the occasion seemed to require: and
in particular, Pol. Vergil. Hist. lib. 20. fo. 405.
Pope Urban gave them to King Richard the second to aid him against Charles the
French King. And this project served excellently well, both to habituate the
People to payment, and to win the Kings for their continuance, to whom they
might be thus useful in any case of extremity. But the policy of after
Parliaments went a reach beyond that of the Popes: for as a perpetual addition
to the revenues of the Crown, they were by a Statute in the time of King Henry
the eighth given to the King, his Heirs, Stat 26 Hen. 8. cap. 3.
and Successors for ever. And then for the ordering of these First Fruits, and
Tenths, there was a Court erected An. 32 Hen. 8. Stat. 32 Hen. 8. cap. 45.
but this Court was dissolved again An. 1 Mariae; but King Philip, and Queen
Mary gave them not again to the Pope, but by Authority of Parliament discharged
the Clergy thereof.

Afterward by a Statute, Stat. 1 El^z. 4.
in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, they were revived, and reduced again to
the Crown, yet was the Court never restored; but the First Fruits, and Tenths
were ordered to be within the Rule, Survey, and Government of the Court of
Exchequer, and a new Office, and Officer created, viz. a Remembrancer of the
First Fruits, and Tenths of the Clergy, who takes all compositions for them,
and makes out Process against such as pay not the same. And now they are to be
paid in such manner as is directed, and appointed in, and by the said Statutes
o^ 26 Hen. 8. and 1 Eliz. The Stat. 26 Hen. 8. appointing that every Spiritual
person shall pay, or secure by Bond, his First Fruits before his actual
possession of his Ben^fice: and that an Obligation for First Fruits shall be of
like force as a Statute Staple: and that no more shall be taken for such an
Obligation than eight pence, and for an Acquittance four pence: and if any
person shall be convict, by Presentment, Verdict, Confession, or Witness,
before the Lord Chancellor, or other Commissioners, to have entered upon any
Spiritual Living before composition, or payment, he shall forfeit the double
value of the First Fruits: Stat. 3 Ed. 6. cap. 20.
And if Tenths, being due, shall not be paid within forty days after demand
thereof made by the Bishop, or his Officers, and thereupon certificate made
under Seal of the Bishop, or Collector, the party making default shall be
deprived, ipso facto, of that one Dignity or Benefice. Besides, it is to be
remembered, St^t. 1 E^iz. 4.
that Vicarages not exceeding Ten Pounds per annum, and Parsonages not
exceeding Ten Marks per annum, shall not pay First Fruits, but all are to pay
Tenths.

Then, for the valuation of Ecclesiastical Livings, we are to know, that
anciently they were valued by a Taxation Book made An. 20 Ed. 1. Coke 4 Instir.
fo. 120.
which still remains in the Exchequer: But then another Book of Taxation was
made An. 26 Hen. 8. kept in that Court also; and according to this latter
Taxation are the values of Ecclesiastical Livings computed for the payment of
the First Fruits, and Tenths: And so much as every Living is there valued, so
much it is said to be in the Kings Books; and so much must be paid for First
Fruits. Yet every Spiritual person, at his Composition, and entering into
Specialties to pay the same, shall have deduction of the Tenth part thereof,
and that in respect of the Tenth, as shall be by him paid that year; for by the
Stat. 27 Hen. 8. Stat. 27 Hen. 8. cap. 8.
none shall pay Tenths the same year that they pay First Fruits, therefore they
are deducted, as aforesaid.

The way now of Composition for First Fruits, is for the Parson Presented,
Admitted, etc. with sufficient Sureties, to enter into Four Bonds, each
conditioned for the payment of the Fourth part of the First Fruits (deducting
the Tenth, as aforesaid,) the first Bond payable at half a years end: the
second Bond at a Twelve-moneths end: the third at a year and halfs end: and the
fourth at two years end: and so the party has two years time to pay the First
Fruits. And then by the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 4. it is appointed, That if an
Incumbent continue in his Benefice half a year after the last avoidance, and
then dye, or be legally outed, before the end of the year, then he, his
Executors, Administrators, or Sureties, shall pay only a Fourth part of the
First Fruits: If he live out the year, and dye, or be outed within six months
after the year, then only half the First Fruits shall be paid: If he live out
the year and half, and dye, or be outed within two years, then only three
quarters thereof shall be paid: But if he live out two whole years, then the
whole First Fruits are to be paid: these Bonds being of like force as a Statute
Staple. And thus the First Fruits, and Tenths stand at this day. Concerning
which it may be further noted, that the Bishop of Norwich anciently had,
Fitzherbert Tit. Jurisdiction 22. 19 Ed 3.
and enjoyed by Prescription the First Fruits within his Diocese of all
Churches after every avoidance: as also had the Archdeacon of Richmond, within
his Archdeaconry; but these also were given to the Crown, by the said Statute
of 26 Hen. 8. cap. 3.

What great sums were anciently paid to the Popes upon these accounts, by the
rule of proportion may be guessed at: but no other certainty known, but that
they were very great, as by the complaints about them, and the impoverishing of
the Realm by that means, of which you shall hear more, may be observed. And
what every Bishop paid to the Sea of Rome at his entrance, for First Fruits, I
find thus particularized, viz.

Canterbury is rated in the Kings Books at the sum of 2816 l. 17 s. 9 d. and
used to pay to the Pope, G^d w^ de Praes. Ang^. Note, that every Floren
contained 4 s. 6 d. of our money. D^^a. 8 s.
for First Fruits 10000 Florens, besides 5000. for his Pall.

London is valued at 1119 l. 8 s. 4 d. and used to pay to the Pope for First
Fruits 3000 Florens.

Winchester is valued at 2491 l. 9 s. 8 d. ob. and paid to the Pope for First
Fruits 12000 Ducats.

Ely is valued at 2134 l. 18 s. 5 d. ob. q. and paid to the Pope 7000 Ducats.

Lincoln is valued in the Kings Books 894 l. 18 s. 1 d. ob. and paid to the
Pope for First Fruits 5000 Ducats.

Coventry and Lichfield rated in the Exchequer at 559 l. 17 s. 7 d. ob. q. and
paid to the Pope, some say 1733 Ducats, others but 300.

Salisbury is valued at 1385 l. 5 s. ob. and paid to the Pope upon every
vacancy 4500 Ducats.

Bath and Wells is valued at 533 l. 15 d. and paid to the Pope at the ingress
of every new Bishop only 430 Florens. Quod miror, says Bishop Godwin, in
regard it was esteemed one of the richest Sees in England.

Exeter, by a late valuation set in the time of King Ed. 6. is valued at 500 l.
and yet paid heretofore to the Pope for First Fruits 6000 Ducats.

Norwich valued at 899 l. 8 s. 7 d. q. and used to pay to the Pope upon every
vacancy 5000 Ducats.

Worcester valued at 1049 l. 17 s. 3 d. ob. q. and paid to the Pope for First
Fruits 2000 Florens.

Hereford valued at 768 ^. 10 s. 10 d. ob. q. and paid to the Pope for First
Fruits 1800 Florens.

Chichester valued at 677 l. 15 d. and used to pay to the Pope 333 Ducats, as
an Income.

Rochester valued at 385 l. 3 s. 6 d. and paid to the Pope for First Fruits
1300 Florens.

St. David's valued in the Kings Books at 426 l. 22 d. ob. and paid to the Pope
1500 Florens.

Landaff valued at 154 l. 14 s. 1 d. and paid to the Pope for First Fruits 700
Florens.

Bangor valued in the Exchequer at 132 l. 16 s. 4 d. ob. and paid to the Pope
for First Fruits 126 Florens.

St. Asaph valued at 131 l. 16 s. 4. d. ob. and paid for First Fruits to the
Pope 126 Florens.

York Archbishopric pays to the King for First Fruits 1609 l. 19 s. 7 d. and
paid to the Pope 10000 Ducats, besides 5000 for the Pall.

Durham valued at 1821 l. 17 d. and used to pay to the Pope for First Fruits
9000 Florens.

Carlisle valued at 531 l. 4 s. 11 d. ob. and used to pay to the Pope on every
avoidance 1000 Florens.

What was paid to the Pope for Spiritual Livings, other than Bishoprics, we
must conclude it uncertain, though certainly very great; part whereof, as also
from the Bishoprics, was annual, and certain, as the Tenths; and part casual,
and uncertain, as the First Fruits, depending on the uncertain deaths of
Incumbents, and such as did succeed them.

But, besides these ordinary, and known rates, and sums, payable as Fines, or
Incomes, at first entrance; and the annual sums proportioned from them as
aforesaid; it commonly, and generally happened, that some other vast sums
extraordinary went to Rome, before any Bishop could be absolutely settled in his
See, and that upon Appeals, and several other accounts, of which we will here
give a few instances.

By the death of Geffrey Plantagenet the Archbishopric of York becoming void,
Godw. in vita Walteri Gray, Eborac.
Simon Langton, Brother of Stephen Langton, was chosen Archbishop by Capitular
Election: but because Stephen was fallen into the Pope's displeasure, and
suspended; the Pope refused to confirm Simon, and sent order they should choose
another: whereupon Walter Gray was pitched. upon, and recommended to the Pope's
approbation: with this commendation, that he had never known woman in all his
life: At which the Pope swore by St. Peter, Virginity was in those days a
great virtue, and he should be the man. But the private agreement was, that
Walter should give the Pope ten thousand pound Sterling: for payment whereof he
became bound in the Court of Rome: which cast him into such a debt, that he was
necessitated to be continually scraping, to discharge his bond: and for that
reason, as my Author says, the Bishop is by all Historians charactered to have
bin a most niggardly, and penurious man.

At another time, Matt. Paris in An 1243. H^n. 3.
the Bishopric of Winchester being void, the Monks made choice of one William
de Raley, alias Radley, but altogether against the mind of the King, who
intended another: and therefore the King sent his Messengers, Theobald a Monk
of Westminster, and Mr. Alexander a Lawyer, with a great sum of money to Rome,
to get the election vacated; and commanded the Magistrates to shut the Gates of
Winchester against him: whereby Raley finding himself repulsed, he curses, and
interdicts the whole City of Winchester, and posts away to Rome; where, in
despite of the King, he gets his election confirmed, upon the tender of eight
hundred marks, of which the Pope, as the Historian says, would not abate him
one penny: whereby he was constrained also to live a miser, and in debt, all
his days.

The Bishopric of Durham being once vacant, Acts and M^n. T^m. 1. fo. 259.
and several putting in for the place, King Henry the third, labored what he
could, that Mr. Lucas his Chaplain should be elected: but the Monks, slighting
the King, made choice of one William Scot: who runs presently to Rome, for
confirmation: and the King presently sends after him the Bishop of Lichfield,
and the Prior of Lanthony, to solicit against Scot: but after a long tugging,
and expense of all their money on both sides, it was determined that a third
man, viz. Richard Poor, should have the Bishopric.

After the death of Stephen Langton, Matt. Paris in An. 1228. fo. 350. 355.
An^quit. Brit. in viti Richard Man.
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Monks made choice of Walter de Hempsham to
succeed him: at which the King then being displeased, Walter hasts away to
Rome, as the use then was, for his confirmation: and the King presently sends
after him, as his Proctors, the Bishops of Coventry, and Rochester: who
appearing before the Pope, complained grievously of the misdemeanor of the
Monks, in making choice of that man, as being of no experience suitable to that
Dignity: but of mean learning: one of a debauched, and scandalous life, having
gotten several Bastards upon a Nun: and for his extraction, his Father had bin
condemned, and hanged for Theft; as himself had also deserved, having bin a
Ringleader amongst Rebels, and Traitors. But all this would not satisfy the
Pope, to set him aside, Polychron. 1.7. cap. 34.
until the King engaged the Pope should have a Disme, or the Tenth part of all
the moveable goods, both of Clergy, and Laity, throughout England, and Ireland:
which granted, the election of Walter Hempsham was declared null, and Richard
Wethershed promoted to the place.

The next Successor to Richard Wethershed was Edmund, between whom, Antic.
Brit. and Godw. in vita Edmundi.
and the Monks of Rochester, a great contest happened, about the election of
one Richard Wendover to be their Bishop: whereupon the Bishop goes to Rome, and
the Covent send their Proctors, and these carrying the most money got the
cause, and Edmund condemned by the Pope in 1000. Marks.

The Bishopric of Chichester being once void, Matt. Paris i^ Hen. 3.
the Canons there elected one Robert Passelew, to gratify the King, who had a
great kindness for the man: but others stemaching him, means was made at Rome
to have his election quashed; and one Richard de la Which to have the place: and
thereupon all parties run to Rome with money, Bribes, complaints, and
recriminations; all which being heard, and the money taken, the King's man was
fob'd off, and Which settled in the Sea. The story is at large in Matthew Paris;
and a multitude more of like nature might here be exhibited; but these shall
suffice, with this averrement, that seldom any election went so cleverly off,
but something extraordinary came to the Pope, besides what was certain by the
first Fruits. From which we proceed to payments of other natures.

CHAP. III. Legatine Levies.
THE Statute of 25 Henry 8. Stat. 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21.
Providing that no more sums of money shall be paid to the Bishop of Rome,
begins with recital, how the subjects of this realm had for many years been
greatly decayed, and impoverished by intolerable exactions of great sums of
money, taken and claimed by the Bishop of Rome, called the Pope, and the Sea of
Rome, as well in Pensions, Censes, Peter Pence, Procurations, Fruits, suits for
Provisions, and Expeditions of Bulls, for Archbishopricks, and Bishoprics, and
for Delegacies, and Rescripts in Causes of Contentions, and Appeals,
Jurisdictions Legantine, Dispensations, Licenses, Faculties, Grants,
Relaxations, Writs of perinde valere, Rehabilitations, Abolitions, and other
infinite sorts, etc. as the words of the Statute are: I cannot now pretend to
enumerate, or specify them all, when the Statute declares them to be infinite;
and therefore we shall content our selves to point but at some of them;
beginning with the

Legatine Levies, as I may call them: Vid. Matthew Westminster. Flor. Hist. in An.
1245, 1246. etc. Mart. Paris. Polychron. etc.
And these were sums of money exacted, and levied upon the King's Subjects
throughout the whole Kingdom, by Legates, and Officers for that purpose deputed
by the Pope. And these were called for, as often as the Popes pretended a need
of them; for the Court of Rome did inculcate, and would have the world to
believe, Matthew. Paris An. 1226. fo. 328.
That being a Mother, she ought to be relieved by her Children. Now the first
Extraordinary Contribution raised for the Pope in this Kingdom of this kind,
appears to have bin about the year 1183. when Pope Lucius the third having some
quarrel with the Citizens of Rome, Rog. Hovede^ P. Postenor, fo. 622.
sent to King Henry the second, postulans ab co, and a clericatu Angliae
auxilium, requiring Aid from him, and his Clergy: whereupon, Consuluit Rex
Episcopos suos, and Clerum Angliae de petitione Summi Pontificis. Cui Episcopi
and Cleri consuluerunt, ut ipse secundum voluntatem suam, and honorem, faceret
auxilium D. Papae, tam pro seipso, quam pro illis: quia tolerabilius esset, and
plus placeret eis, quod D. Rex, si vellet, accepisset ab eis auxilii
recompensationem, quam si permisisset Nuncios D. Papae in Angliam venire ad
capiendum de eis auxilium, quia si aliter fieret, posset verti in consuetudinem
ad regni sui detrimentum. Adquievit Rex consilio suorum, and fecit auxilium
magnum D. Papae in auro, and argento. The King consulted the Bishops, and
Clergy, about the Popes request; to whom the Bishops, and Clergy returned, That
the King might, if he so pleased, and for his honor, send aid to the Pope, as
well for himself, as for them: because it would be more tolerable, and more
acceptable to them, for his Majesty, if he pleased, to take a Compensation from
them for his Aid, than that he should permit the Pope's Officers to come into
England, to receive it of them, which might turn to a custom detrimental to the
Kingdom. To this counsel the King adhered, and sent a great Aid to the Pope in
Gold, and Silver; as Rog. Hoveden has at large related the Carriage of that
business: In which several passages are very remarkable; as, that the King did,
in matters that concerned the Pope, consult with the English Church, and
followed their advice: and then the care, and circumspection of the Clergy, to
avoid mischievous consequences for the future: and that not without very good
cause, for the Popes were so prone to be busy, and tampering in this matter of
money, that afterward in the time King Edward the first, Papa mi^it bullas
inhibitatorias, quod nulla persona Ecclesiastica daret seculari personae
contributionem ullam absque licentia specialita Romana curia concessa in hac
part. Henry de Knighton Coll. 2489.
he prohibited the Clergy from giving any thing to the King without his leave
first obtained, and that under pain of the great excommunication: a great
presumption this, but without any considerable effect to the purpose intended.

But notwithwanding the before mentioned caution, the Popes gained much upon
the Clergy, afterward, though the King and Temporal Lords oftentimes proved
sturdy: Matt. Paris fo. 361, 362.
For Pope Gregory the ninth, An. D. 1229. demanded a Tenth of the movables
both of the Lay, and of the Clergy; to which the Lords would not consent,
Nolentes Baronias vel Laicas possessiones Romans Ecclesiae obligare, but the
Clergy with some grumbling paid it. And eleven years after, he demanded a
fifth part of the goods of the Clergy; upon which great debate was taken, Matt.
Paris An. 1240. fo. 536.
the Clergy appealing to the King, that they held their Baronies of the King,
and could not charge them without his consent; that having before given a
Tenth, this again of a Fifth might create a custom; with diverse other weighty
reasons: But all would not do, for the King was not against it, and the
Archbishop, for his private ends, beginning to deposite, all were drawn in at
last to pay: which occasioned that complaint the year following, Id. fo. 549.
That there remained not so much treasure in the Kingdom, as had in three years
bin extorted from it, (the vessels, and ornaments of the Church excepted.)

But notwithstanding that reluctance, Matt. Paris, fo. 549. 666. 701.
notwithstanding that notable Remonstrance preferred in the Council of Lions
An. D. 1245. from the body of the Kingdom, of the heavy burdens the Nation lay
under by the exactions of Rome, and likewise to the Pope himself the year
following; Pope Innocent the fourth invented a new way, to charge every
Religious House to find a number of Soldiers yearly for his service, and to
fight for the Church militant: and about the same time attempted also, ut si
Clericus extunc decederet intestatus, ejusdem bonas in usus D. Papae
converterentur; that is, the Pope would make himself heir, or Executor, to
every Clark that should dye intestate: and not long after it was, that he
received from the Clergy eleven thousand Marks, as an addition to six thousand
he had received the year before. And then, and from that time, the Pope made no
spare to drain, and exhaust the English Clergy at his pleasure, to the shameful
scandal of the Holy See at that time, and to the notorious ignominy, poverty,
and contempt of this Church, and the Clergy thereof. Matt. Westminster. Flor. Hist.
in An. 1301.
And of these times it was that Matthew Westminster makes this complaint, Porro
illis diebus, sal terrae, and caput vulgi in magnum Hydropem ceciderunt: quanto
enim plus pecuniam (humorem) hauriebant, tanto amplius eam sitiebant. Sedit
ergo in tristitia fidelium Ecclesia, deducta per vocales tutores suos
miserabiliter sub tributo: In those days the Head of the people was fallen
into a dropsy, which the more money it sucked in, the more it thirsted after
more: therefore the Church of the faithful sat disconsolate, being by her
Governors brought under a most miserable tribute, and servitude. An. D. 1302.
Annal. of Ire^. in Camb. Brit. fo. 163.
At this time also it was that these grievous exactions reached into Ireland,
recorded in the Annals thereof, That the Tenths of all Ecclesiastical Benefices
in England, and Ireland were exacted by Pope Boniface the eight, for three
years, as a Subsidy to the Church of Rome, against the King of Arragon. Neither
did our Hyperborean neighbors escape Scot-free, in this deluge of exaction:
Tho. Walsing. Hist. fo. 48. Ypodig. Neust. fo. 89. Flor. Hist. in Ed. 1. fo.
417. H. Knighton Coll. etc. Pol. Vergil. Fabian. Speed, etc.
Nay no less there would satisfy the Pope, but the whole Kingdom; for it was
that Boniface the eight, that then claimed the whole Realm of Scotland, as part
of St. Peter's Patrimony, against our K. Edward the first, and sent his Bull of
demand to the King for that purpose: between whom there passed several Answers,
and Replies, in the point; and the conclusion was, That the incroaching Pope
was glad to sit down worsted in the cause; the transactions of all which stand
registered amongst the Tower Records, exemplified at large to posterity by
Walsingham, Matthew Westminster, Knighton, and more briefly by others. But all
this while the poor Clergy languished, being continually pill'd, poll'd, and
squeezed by the unlimited avarice of this Pope, and his successors, emptying
the Kingdom of its money, and filling it with complaints, the product of its
poverty.

CHAP. IV. King John 's Pension.
THe troublesome reign of our King John is sufficiently related by all our
Historians, in whose straits the Pope appeared sometimes for him, and sometimes
against him: but once taking him in a great exigence, Jo. Serres Hist. in Phil.
August. Matt. Paris in An 1213. fo. 236.
the King was wrought upon to surrender his Crown to Pandulfus, the Pope's
Legate, and substitute, laying the same, with his Scepter, Robe, Sword, and
Ring, the Royal Ensigns, at his feet; subscribing also, as is said, to a
Charter, whereby he surrendered his Kingdom to the Pope, and professing that
thence forward he would hold his Crown as a Feudatary to the Pope, and paying
an annual Pension, or Tribute of 1000 marks for both his Kingdoms of England,
and Ireland: the insolent behavior of the Legate at this, the Historians fully
describe, which I list not now to insist on, but cannot but remember, that
Matt. Paris says, that with this Charter, and 10000 l. sterling. in hand, Id. fo.
237.
Pandulfus goes triumphing away to Rome. But then, when, or how long after,
this yearly rent, or tribute of 1000 marks was paid, our Writers seem not to
agree; though all concur in the invalidity of the surrender: Vid. Speed Chron.
in vita Johan. Rot. Parl. An. 40 Ed. 3.
And at a Parliament held at Westminster. An. 40 Ed. 3. the Chancellor, then Bishop
of Ely, declared to the Lords, and Commons, How the King understood that the
Pope, for the Homage that K. John did to the Sea of Rome, for the Realms of
England, and Ireland, and for the Tribute by him granted, meant by Process to
cite the King to Rome, to Answer thereunto, wherein the King required their
advice: The Bishops for themselves desired respite of Answer till the next day,
as also did the Peers, and Commons; at which time the whole Estate came
together, and by common consent Enacted, and Declared, That forasmuch as
neither King John, nor any other King, could bring this Realm and Kingdom in
such thraldom, and subjection, but by common assent of Parliament; the which
was not done: And therefore that which he did was against his Oath at his
Coronation, besides many others causes. If therefore the Pope should attempt
any thing against the King by process, or other matters in deed, that the King
with all his Subjects should with all their force and power resist the same.
Then, for the Tribute or Pension of 1000 marks, it appears to have been
sometimes paid, with intermissions: for Pope Honorius, having gratified K. Hen.
3. by his menacing Bull to Geoffry de Lysimaco, earnestly demanded, by Otho his
Legate, all the arrears of the 1000 marks annual rent granted by his Father K.
John, due from the beginning of his Papacy, and the King's reign, who thereupon
paid all those arrears, amounting to 10000 marks, for which he desired the
Popes allowance, and acquittance by this Letter, Claus. 10 H. 3. m. 2^. do^so.
still kept upon the file. Dom. Papae salutem. Ad instantiam magistri O.
Subdiaconi and Capellani vestri, viri utique prudentis and merito
commendabilis, qui ad nos transmissus ex part vestra, requirebat a nobis
instanter ea quae restare a tempore Papatus Vestri credidit de annuo censu
nostro vobis debito: Paternitati vestrae praesentibus intimamus, quod
venerabili Patri P. Norwic. Episc. septem millia quadringentas and tresdecem
marcas and dimidium de praedicto censu solvimus, sicut m^minit ipse pariter and
confitetur: Et ad perficiendum octo millia marcarum, praedicto magistro Ottoni
solvi fecimus quingentas quater viginti and sex marcas and dimidium: Et
praeterea mill marcas tibi assignari fecimus. De mill vero marcis vobis
satisfecerint Magister Stephanus de Eketon, and Magister Stephanus de Ducy,
nuncii nostri, sicut nobis significastis: Et sic de toto tempore Papatus vestri
plenarie vobis est satisfactum. Supplicamus igitur sanctitati vestrae quatenus
nobis super hoc literas vestras patentes dignemini destinar^. Test meipso apud
Westmonast. 24. die Martii, Anno regni nostri Decimo. An even reckoning so far.
And then it appears, that in the 33 year of King Hen. 3. Pope Innocent the 4th,
in the sixth year of his Papacy sent to the King to demand this 1000 marks due
for that year, An. 33 H 3. in Turri Land.
by this Instrument, or Bull, Innocentius Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei,
charissimo in Christo filio Regi Anglorum illustri, salutem and Apostolicam
benedictionem. Excellentiam tuam affectione paterna rogamus, quatenus mill
marcas sterlingorum quas pro anno praesenti Ecclesiae Romanae nomine Census
debes, dilecto filio Thesaurario Domus militiae Templi London. solitae
devotionis affectu, nomine nostro facias assignari. Dat. Lugdun. 5 Kal.
Augusti, Pontificatus nostri sexto.

Dorso, De censu annuo Dom. Papae debito.

But whether any thing, or no, was paid upon this demand appears not: But by
the Liberate Rolls, it appears, 31 H. 3. m. 1.
that this rent due for the 31 year of K. H. 3. was then paid to the Treasurer
of the Temple.

In the year 1276. Pope John 21. sent such another Bull, or demand to K. Edw.
1. still preserved amongst the Tower Records, whereby he demanded the arrears
of this annual rent of 1000 marks, for seven years then last past, and also for
that year: but whether payment was made accordingly, there remains no evidence:
and when, or how much was afterward paid upon this account, is now uncertain.
But from these footsteps thereof, which we find amongst our Records, it may
well be collected, that the Popes being sensible of the defeasibleness of their
Title to this Rent, durst not always insist upon it, but sometimes when they
met with an easy King, or one whose affairs required the Pope's countenance,
or aid; then they would put on a demand of this rent, with the arrears of it,
and many times, without doubt, were gratified therein: but then with wise, and
resolute Kings, they had the discretion to let it alone; and so by continuance
of time, and non-claim, the rent came at last to be extinguished.

CHAP. V. Appeals.
APpeals to the Court of Rome was another way of drawing great sums of money
out of England continually thither. And these began most visibly in the time of
King Stephen, Gervas. Dorobern. coll. fo. 1667.
according to that of Gervasius Doroberniensis, Inusitatae enim erant in Anglia
Appellationes, usque quo Henricus extitit Wintoniensis Episcopus: remembered
also by Hen. Huntingdon, Hen. Huntingd. lib. 8.^0.395.
who tells us also the occasion; related at large by Bishop Godwin, in the life
of Theobald, Archbishop of Canterbury. And then when the Popes had tasted the
sweets of the gains accruing this way, all encouragement was given to
Appellants, so that afterward there scarcely happened any controversy of
value, but one party, or other would presently Appeal to the Pope, and Court of
Rome: for the management of which Appeals, it was necessary to retain Proctors,
Notaries, Advocates, Agents, Sollicitors, and many other Officers, who all
living by the employment, expected always to be well paid: And in the Court of
Rome were continually resident a multitude of Officers, Judges, Clarks,
Scribes, Advocates, Canonists, Civillians, Referendaries, who every one must
have a finger in every cause brought thither by Apppeal, and be all well paid,
and bribed, for Bulls, Breves, Citations, Commissions, Sentences, References,
Expeditions, with innumerable sorts of Processes, issuing during the depending
of causes; which were never speedily ended, but spun out to the utmost length,
with all encouragement of Appellant Suitors, bringing grist to the mill, and as
long as any money flowed to make the wheel go.

And as these Appeals were purchased in suits between party and party, most
commonly to the utter undoing of the Plaintiff, or Defendant, and many times of
them both, the Pope having the fineness, when he had cracked the Nut, to take
the kernel to himself, and to give one shell to one of them, and the other to
the other: so oftentimes they caused a far greater mischief, being made use of
by haughty, turbulent, and undutiful subjects, especially Churchmen, to cross,
and oppose their Sovereigns, upon every, or any pretense whatsoever: Witness
the Appeals of Anselme, Becket, the Monks of Canterbury, with multitudes more,
from the King, and his Laws, to the Pope, as in all our Histories most
frequently occurr: All which tended only to carry huge sums to Rome, and to
bring thence no less mischiefs to the King, and Kingdom. And besides this,
multitudes of Appeals were founded upon the Elections of Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Deans, etc. for it was very rare to have all parties acquiesce in an
Election, but Incapacity, Simony, Surprise, or some irregularity would be
pretended; and then presently an Appeal must be made to Rome, and there
generally the cause determined for that party which brought the most money.
Venalesque manus, ibi fas, ubi plurima merces. Acts and Mon. fo. 259.
As once John Hereford was elected Abbot of St. Alban's Monastery, but upon
some dis-satisfaction taken thereat, Reynold the Physician, and Nicholas a
Monk, were instantly posted away, with a huge bag of Money to Rome, whereby the
Election was confirmed upon these terms, That the new Abbot should swear, every
third year, by himself, or some other, to visit the Limina Apostolorum in Rome,
with a subintelligitur, that he should never come empty handed: and this was
very frequently injoined to others, in such, or the like cases. Now for the
particulars of these Appeals, I could produce a multitude of instances, and
Cases; but designing brevity, I had rather refer you to Mat. Paris, and others,
who are not sparing therein.

I shall only, upon this Head, further note, that not only many particular
persons were ruined, and undone, by reason of the great expenses they were put
unto, upon this account, at Rome: but also many religious Houses, and Covents,
became by that means so impoverished, that they would certainly have been
utterly broken, and dissolved, if some extraordinary courses had not been taken
for their support; as once the Abbot, Par. 3 Ed. 1. m. 13. Pre Abbate, and
Conventu, de Fev^^sham.
and Covent of Feversham, being greatly indebted to Merchants, Usurers, and
others, by reason of their vast ex ences at Rome, the King, by his Sovereign
Authority, to preserve them, and their House from ruin, took them, with all
their Possessions, Fulco Peyforer, and Hamon Doges.
Lands, Goods, and Chattles, into his special protection, and committed them to
the management of certain persons, for the discharge of their debts, and their
necessary support, as appears by the Patent for that purpose, yet to be seen,
but too large to be here inserted. Lambert Peromb. in Feversham.
Note, it was the Monks of this Abbey of Feversham that once contended in a
Controversy with King John, both by way of Appeal to Rome, and by force of
Arms against the Sheriff, and the Posse Comitatus, but had the ill fortune to
be worsted at every turn.

The like Protection, and Provision, in the same form, and for the same reason,
was granted, and made, by King Ed. 1. to the Abbots, and Covents of Bordesley,
and Bynedon. And also to the Prior, and Covent of Thornholm: but the custody of
them, their Lands, and Goods, were granted to other persons.

CHAP. VI. Dispensations.
DIspensations, Vid. Centum gravamina G^rm. An. D. 1521.
and Absolutions from cases reserved, and Faculties, were other great means of
drawing vast sums of money hence to Rome. And for the managing and dispencing
of these, the Popes had their Ministers, Officers, and Courts, ready to make
out, and grant these Dispensations to such as had occasion, or to whom it would
be a convenience to purchase them: and that in a multitude of cases: As to
Dispense with one man to hold two Bishoprics, or a Plurality of Benefices. To
make Infants capable of Benefices, and Offices. To Legitimate Bastards. To
qualify persons to marry within the degrees prohibited by the Canons, or by
God's Law. To lay aside Habits of Professions Regular, to revert to a secular
State. To give liberty to live without Rules, Order, and Discipline, which had
bin entered into. For liberty not to keep rash, or prejudicial Oaths. To eat
Flesh at times ordinarily forbidden. To wave the performance of Vows. To
rescind contracts, marriages, and covenants. And innumerable other the like
cases, in which exact care was taken, that the party purchaser should be served
to the height of his ability, and the benefit of the Dispensation.

King Henry the third, Matt. Paris in Hen. 3.
swore to maintain Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, with other liberties of
the People; and for that had a great Subsidy given him; but for money the Pope
Dispensed with his Oath, and then he would perform nothing.

Simon Montford, Id. An. 1238. fo. 471.
Earl of Leicester, married the Daughter of King John named Elianor, who was
professed in Religion: at which King Henry the third, and others being
offended, the Earl posts to Rome, and there effusa, and promissa infinita
pecunia, as the Historian has it, he obtained of the Pope, to give Order to
his Legate Otho, to give sentence for the marriage.

John of Gaunt, Tho. Walsing. in E. 3. An. 1359. Cambd. An. Eliz. fo. 2. Sr.
Fr. Bacon Hist. Hen. 7. fo. 199.
by a like Dispensation, married his Cousin Blanch.

King Hen. 8. Married his Brothers Widow by such a Dispensation; not cheaply
obtained; for a noble Author says, the Pope was very difficil in granting it;
not for want of power, I suppose, but to scrue the more money out of the Royal
Purchaser. It was Pope Julius the Second that gave this Dispensation. But
asterwards the validity of the Marriage, upon such a Dispensation, being
questioned, as being directly against the Scripture, Pope Clement 7. at the
instance of King Henry, Hist. Cont. Trid lib. 1. f^. 68. Camb. Speed, etc.
sent Cardinal Campeggio into England, framing a Bull, or Breve, to dissolve
the King's marriage with Queen Catharine, (to be published when some few proofs
were passed, which were made ready) and to give liberty to the King to marry
another: But afterward, the Pope conceiving it would disgust the Emperor, who
was Katharines near Kinsman, he sent another Nuntio to Campeggio, with order to
burn the Bull, and to proceed slowly in the cause: Resolving, like his
Predecessor, to make the best advantages he could of the plenitude of his
power. But the King, perceiving the juggling, went another way to work, and how
he procured his marriage to be vacated, our Histories and Records testify.

Also Charles the fifth Emperor, procured a marriage between Philip his Son,
and Mary Queen of England, by a Dispensation from Pope Julius the third,
because they were allied in the third degree, and that Charles himself had
contracted to marry her, when he was under age. Camb. Annal. Eliz.
And after her death King Philip, desirous to keep his interest in England,
treated seriously of a marriage with Queen Elizabeth, his late wives sister,
with promise to obtain a special Dispensation from the Pope, which the French
King labored secretly to hinder, but the Queen gave him a repulse.

By virtue of these Dispensations it is, Sr. Edw. S^nds Earop. Spec. (...).
that the House of Austria, for some reasons of State marry all amongst
themselves, so continuing all of the same family, or as limbs of the same body.
Whereby Philip the second of Spain might have called the Archduke Albert both
Brother, Cousin, Nephew, and Son; for he was so either by blood, or affinity;
being Uncle to himself, Cousin-german to his Father, Husband to his Sister, and
Father to his Wife. And it so happened, that by reason of the multitude of
Canons, as were put forth by diverse Popes, of restrictions, and limitations,
very few Princely Families in Europe could at any time intermarry without
Dispensations from such, or such a Canon, and then let the Pope alone for
setting his own rates and prices upon his own Instruments.

As great sums of money came thus to the Popes, upon their Dispensations in
point of marriage: So frequently they made their advantages by dispensing with
promises, Vows, and Oaths. How King Henry the third, obtained a Dispensation
about MagnaCharta, we have touched before; And that power claimed, and
exercised by the Popes, made them very necessary for all such Princes, as
either upon extremity were constrained to enter into hard conditions; or such
as had fair opportunities put into their hands of taking advantage against
their neighbors. And this was the case of Francis the First, the French King,
to whom Pope Clement the seventh, gave a Dispensation from performance of
Covenants made upon Oath with Charles the fifth, upon his release, after he had
bin taken Prisoner at the Battle of Pavia^ whereby, in gratitude, Joh. Serres
in vit. Franc. 1.
Francis was ever after a sure confident of the Pope's, testified to the world
by that famous entermarriage between the Son of the one, and the Kinswoman of
the other. The contemplation whereof, Sr. Edw. Sands ut Sup. fo. 43.
with other the like instances, and the observation of the short continuance of
diverse Sworn Leagues at this day, has made some, with reason enough, believe
that the unlimited fingers of the Popes have been, and are still secretly
stirring, in untying those knots of the bonds of Conscience, and more
frequently than the world is well aware of, and that some Popish Princes
themselves, in imitation thereof, have assumed the like faculty, of dispencing
with their own Oaths, when it seems advantageous for their Kingdoms interest,
as it did to the Popes for that of the Church. To justify which transcendant,
extravagant power of the Popes, they and their Creatures are not without some
comprehensive Principles, and Maxims, whether of Religion, or policy, I leave
it to others to judge; as, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics:
Mosconius de Majest. Eccl. vid. Revieu del Conc. de Tr^nt^vid. 100 gravam. c.
1. Fascicul. rerum expetend.
That the Pope can dispense with the Law, above the Law, and against the Law,
by the plenitude of his power: and that in every promissory Oath that a man
Swears, the Pope's power is tacitly before excepted. The notorious abuse, and
mischief in which matter, framed one of the principal Articles of Grievances,
presented to the Pope from the Germans, for a reformation, at an Imperial Diet
at Noremberg An. D. 1522. a little before the Council of Trent.

The Pope's practice in Dispencing with Oaths brings to mind this story,
Helmold. in Chron. Slavorum. cap. 29.
That when contest was between the Emperor Henry 4. and Pope Gregory the
seventh, the Pope Excommunicates the Emperor and puts on Rodolphus Duke of
Saxony to rebel against him, in order to his deposition, and absolves the Duke
of his Oath of Allegiance given to the Emperor: after which a Battle happening
between the Duke, and the Emperor; the Duke was mortally wounded in the right
hand; which made him cry out to his company, See you that this hand, with which
I first made, and then broke my Oath of Allegiance to my lawful Sovereign, is
thus struck by the Divine vengeance; the Spectacle whereof I pray God may work
repentance in the causers of my defection and perjury, as it has done in me.
Not long after which he expired miserably, and deplorably.

Once it was, Epist. ad Zach. Pap. 2. Tom. Conc.
that the import of one of these Dispensations mightily puzzled a certain
Archbishop of Germany, Legate there for the Sea of Rome: for he sent to Pope
Zachary, to know his opinion, or resolution about a Dispensation which a German
produced, and pleaded, as obtained from Pope Gregory his Predecessor; which
was, To marry a woman, that had first bin married to his Uncle, and afterward
to a Counsin of his, from whom she was divorced, and he yet alive; besides she
was his kinswoman in the Third degree, and had bin a Nun: but it is thought the
Pope was as much gravelled at it, as the Archbishop, for it does not appear
that he returned any answer.

Charles the Eight, the French King, Phil. de Com. lib. 7. cap. 3. Arnold.
Ferron de Reb. gest. Gall. in vita Car. 8.
made great use of this dispensing power of the Popes; For this Charles had
taken the Daughter of Maximilian, King of the Romans, for his wife: but
afterward, to obtain the Duchy of Britain, he Solicited to marry Anne the
heir thereof, though she was betrothed, nay already married to Maximilian, by
his Proctor, openly in the Church: a double injury to Maximilian, to have her
taken from him, whom he accounted his Wife; and to have his Daughter sent home
again, who had bin diverse years Queen of France; but 'this was an easy thing
for the Pope to do, as Phil. de Comines tells the story at large: adding, that
there was great disputes, and arguments, in those times, Pro, and Con, whether
those actions could agree with Laws of Holy Church, or not; and relating, that
the ussues of those Ladies became very unfortunate, and that many calamities
proceeded from those marriages: but the interests of the Pope, and the French,
being twisted in this affair, he spared not to cut asunder the sacred bonds of
marriage, which had been made so solemnly before.

By these practices the Popes acquired infinite advantage: for thereby they did
not only in hand get great sums, or some other valuable considerations; but
also obliged, and secured the favors of many, and of their posterities also,
whose estates, and legitimation depended altogether upon the validity of these
purchased Dispensations.

These Dispensations were experienced the more mischievous in this regard, that
whereas the Popes gulled the People of great sums of money other ways, by the
fineness of a pia fraus, where the common saying, volenti non fit injuria,
might take some place: but here the estates, and fortunes of persons, and
families frequently became rent, and torn, by the ruinous consequences of these
Dispensations: And hence all those grievous complaints that have been made
against them. Hist. Conc. Trid lib. 7. fo. 676. vid. Terr. Torti. fo. 51.
In the very Council of Trent, spoke stoutly, and freely against the abuses of
them, one Johannes Verdun; but it was not a time then to have his story heard,
so as to be regarded.

Dispensations are styled Legum Vulnera; and indeed when a Law is once, in the
least, wounded by a Dispensation, it proves such a stab, that there is but
little life left in it afterward. Christ came not to dissolve, but to fulfill
the Law: but the Popes have made it a practice to dissolve Laws, that they
might fill full their own Coffers.

Complaints against this grievance we find most frequently in our Parliamentary
Records, and Histories, Matt. Paris in Hen. 3 Anno D. 1246.
of which more hereafter: and at present we will only note that of Matthew
Paris; how the Estates of the Kingdom being once assembled, they made an
unanimous Remonstrance of the manifold grievances endured from the Pope, and
particularly of that which was wrought by that damnable clause of Non obstante,
contained in a multitude of his Bulls, Breves, and Instruments, which he sent
abroad to torment the People, and by which the Authority of Grants, Laws,
Statutes, and Privileges was vacated, and overthrown, and his own revenues
established upon the ruins of the Nation, Dispensing with any thing, nay every
thing, by which he might gain any thing, as may be read at large in that
notable Historian, to whom, for brevities sake, we referr those that would
receive further satisfaction therein, and pass on to the

CHAP. VII. Indulgences, Pardons.
INdulgences, and Pardons, shall in the next place be remembered, as most
powerful devices to draw money to Rome. And because the import of these,
generally, has not been so well apprehended, we will take liberty to make a
little enquiry into the nature, and virtue of them.

In the Primitive Times, when the Christians had committed any heinous offense,
as for example, either in denying their Faith, or sacrificing to Idols, for
fear of persecution: the parties offending were enjoined some severe, and long
Penance: and the rigor of this the Bishops, and Pastors had power (if they saw
cause) to mitigate, at their discretion: which mitigation, or relaxation of
Punishment, was called Indulgence, or Pardon. And this derived from St. Paul,
who released the incestuous Corinthian from the bond of Excommunication, upon
his humiliation, and serious repentance.

And this manner of Indulgence was ancient, and continued long in the Primitive
Church: But the Indulgence in the Roman Church is of another nature: for seeing
that Sin, as they say, deserves as well some Temporal punishment, as Eternal
Damnation, their Indulgence is a supposed Absolution from the guilt of Temporal
punishment, Vid. Pol. Vergil. de invent. rerum. lib. 8. cap. 1.
which punishment is inflicted, they say, in Purgatory; and all this, as they
further add, by the application of the merits of Jesus Christ, and his Saints,
by the medium, and method of the Church: and these merits are termed Thesaurus
Ecclesiae, The Treasure of the Church, and appliable to the souls of the dead
burning in Purgatory, to work out their Temporal punishment. And this is the
notion of Indulgence in the Roman Church, if I mistake not, for it is a
Doctrine as difficult to understand, as to maintain. But this is certain that
these modern, new coined Indulgences, differ infinitely from that of the
Primitive Times; for those which were first used for mitigation of Penance, or
Punishment, are now reduced to be in stead of real private satisfactions: and
that which was formerly left to the discretion of every Bishop in his own
Diocese, to dispense, in that manner, with summum jus, is now solely
transferred to the Power, and authority of the Pope: and that not only from
Penances, and Punishments in this life, but also from imprisonment, pains, and
tortures in Purgatory for many thousands of years: As, whosoever in the state
of Grace shall say seven prayers before the Crucifix, Horae bea^ae Mar. Virg.
secundum usum Sarum.
and seven Pater nosters, and seven Ave Marys, shall obtain Six and Fifty
Thousand years of pardon: fourteen thousand granted by St. Gregory: fourteen
thousand by Nicholas the First: and eight and twenty thousand by Sixtus the
4th. Bul^a Pli Quarti. Dat. Romans 1564.
And amongst the Articles framed at the Council of Trent, to be owned super
forma juramenti professionis fidei, this is one, That the power of Indulgences
was left by Christ in the Church, and that the use thereof is most wholesome for
Christ's people.

For the Antiquity, Authority, and validity of these Indulgences, as now
practiced, let those maintain, if they can, whom it most concerns, and who get
by them, for my business now is not to dispute; only I cannot forbear to tell
you what a learned Romanist says of them, Cunerus Declam.
Dolendum and mirandum, etc. It is to be lamented, and admired, how Catholics
write of Indulgences, so timorously, so coldly, so diversely, so doubtfully, as
if they were so far fetched, or so uncertainly framed, that they could hardly
be proved. We will therefore only take notice of their efficacy to draw money
out of the Peoples purses, our present purpose; and for their power of drawing
Souls out of Purgatory, we leave it to another opportunity.

For the purpose of drawing money from the people, there could not have been a
more neat contrivance, Rivet.
and therefore, by one, they have not improperly been called Emulgences;
Romarorum loculos impraegnare. Mat. Paris. Hen. 3.
and by the Romanists themselves, in their truest signification, The Treasury
of the Church. For seeing the Pope was become the sole dispencer, and disposer
of them, when he had occasion, or a mind to amass moneys, it was a ready, and
sure way upon pretense of Wars against the Turks, or of Wars against Heretics,
or Wars against the Emperor, or any neighbor Prince, or State, with whom the
Pope was at odds, to send out, and proclaim Marts, and Sales for these
Indulgences, upon terms that those who would disburse any sums of money, for
the purposes aforesaid, as the occasion was, they should have Pardons, and
Indulgences for numbers of years proportionable to the sums they could, or
would deposite; Hen. de Knighton Coll. 2671.
Nam aliter non absolvebantur nisi tribuerent secundum posse suum, and
facultatem suam, For people could not be absolved, except they did disburse as
much as their abilities would afford, as Hen. de Knighton deals plainly in the
case: And then for the poor, and indigent, truly they deserve our pity, when
the Taxa Camerae Apostolicae deals thus plainly with them, Taxa Came. Apost.
Impress. Paris.
Nota diligenter quod hujusmodi gratiae non conceduntur pauperibus; quia non
habent, ergo non possunt consolari, Note diligently, that such graces are not
granted to the poor; because they have not wherewithal, they cannot be
comforted. A very sad Case!

Now for those people that were conscious, and certain they were guilty of many
sins, and persuaded they should lie frying in Purgatory many thousands of
years, to purge themselves, and make them fit for Heaven; who would not
presently unstring, and give even almost all they were worth, for such
advantages, and to be freed from those bitterly represented pains, and torments?

Then to assure people they were not cheated in these penny-worths, and
bargains, the Mystery of the Pope's Triple Crown was sufficient: for
anciently, if not still, the word, Mysterium.
Mysterium, was engraven thereon, to denote, and signify the Rule, and
Authority, the Pope bears in Heaven, in Earth, and in Purgatory. And so these
Indulgences, and Pardons were trucked for, and bought up, at any rates: until
people began a little to consider, and look about them, and to observe upon
what terms, and for what purposes these Indulgences were sent abroad, wherein
no distinction of persons, or sins was made, which reasonably might have been
expected from Christ's Vicar; that whosoever performed some religious rites,
and paid certain sums of money, should have all their sins forgiven, whatever
they were: so that all men, who would come to the price, were not only promised
everlasting life, but made capable of delivering the souls of others out of
Purgatory: considering also, that in employing the money raised by these
Indulgences, there was no regard had to the end for which they were given, but
frequently, Centum gravam. Germar.
by way of anticipation, it was assigned to some other purpose, as to carry on
the Popes revenge, to pay his debts, to gratify a friend, to enrich a Nephew,
to marry a Niece, to wage a War, to subdue an Antipope, or the like: that all
immaginable shifts, sharking, Hen. de Knighton Coll. fo. 2671.
and tricks were used to make the most of them, in regard they were generally
farmed out to the most cunning snaps, and such as would give most for them. So
that in time people began to be a little wary in laying out their money that
way, and the Markets, and sales for Indulgences began to be very cold: but then
the Collectors, and Factors would sell the cheaper penny-worths, and play at
small games before they would give out; as once in Germany, An. Dom. 1520.
when these wares began to be a little out of credit, the Pope's Officers would
sell them for a very small price, Cuicciard. Hist. lib. 13. fo. 629.
or play at Tables for them in Taverns, and Gaming-Houses, wherein money was
staked against Pardons esteemed of such a value. Vid. Hist. Council. Trident.
And so from the discoveries of the cheats, and rapine hereby practiced, the
Indulgences were not only contemned, and exploded, but way made for Reformation
of other Corruptions in the Church.

Now, as well to show the liberality of the Popes, in granting these
Indulgences, as also somewhat further to explicate the nature of them; we will
here take a view of such Indulgences, and Pardons, as formerly have been
granted to some of the Churches in Rome, as they are specified in an old Book
called, The Customs of London, as follows.

The hoole Pardon of Rome granted by diverse Popes. Customs of London.

IN the City of Rome been four Chirches, Vid. Onuphr. de 7. sanctioribus urbis
Romans Ecclesiis.
in which is Mass daily don, but there been six of the same privileged, above
all the oder with great holiness, and pardon, as is hereaftir shewid.

The Furst is called St. Peter 's Chirch the Apostell, and is set upon the foot
of an Hill, and men go upward thereto a stair of xxix steppys high, and as
often as a man gooth up and down that steyer, he is relesid of the seventh part
of penance, enjoined and grauntyd by Pope Alysander.

Item, As ye com before the Chirch there the Well springs, so may ye see above
the door an Image of our Lord, and between his feet stondeth one of the pence
that God was sold for, and as often as ye look on that penny, ye have xiv hundred
yer is of pardon.

Item, In the same Chirch on the ryht side there is a pilour that was sometime of
Salamon 's Temple, at which pilour our Lord was wont to rest when he preched
to the peeple, at which pilour if there any be frantyk, or madd, or trobled
with spyrits, they be deliveryd, and made hool.

And in that Chirch be xi Aulters, and at every of the Altar is xlviij yeris
of pardone, and as many Lenters, or Karynes: and vii of thoe Aulters been
severally privelegyd with grace and pardone.

At the Furst Altar is the Vysage of our Lord, who looks on that has vij C
year of pardone.

Item, At the same Altar is the spear that Christ was pierced with, which was
brought fro Constantynopl, sent fro the great Turk to Pope Innocent the viij.

The Second Altar is of Seint Andrew, and their ye have vij C year of pardone.

The Fourth is of our Lady, there is vij C years pardone.

The v Altar is of St. Leo, there he recevyd the absolucyon in his mass fro
Hevyn, and there is pardon of vij C years.

The vj Altar of All Soles, and there is v C years of pardon: and every hyh
fest one Sole out of Purgatory.

The vij Altar is of Saint Simon, and Jude, and there is vj C yeris of pardone.

And before the Quyer door stond two yriven Crosses, and who so kysseth thoo
two Crosses, he has v C yer is of pardone.

Item, Upon our Lady day in Lent is hanged before the Qyer a cloth as our Lady
made her self, and it hangs till our Lady day Assumpcion, and as many times
as one beholdith it he has iv C year of pardon.

Allsoo, as many times as a man goothe thorogh the crowds at St. Peter's Chirch,
he has iv C year of pardon.

And as often as one followith the Host to the sick bodies he has xiv C years
of pardon.

Also, Pope Sylvester grauntid to all thoe as daily gothe to the Chirch of St.
Peter the iij part of all his sins relesid, and all advows and promise relesyd,
and all sins forgeten relesyd and forgeven, except. leying honds on Fader and
Mother vyolently, and above this is granted xxviij C year of pardon, and the
meritys of as many Lentes or Karyns. [The knowledge of a Karyn ye shall find in
the end of this book.]

And in the feste of Saint Peter a M year of pardon, and as many karyns, and
the Third part.
threddendell of penance enjoined relesyd.

And fro the Assencyon day of our Lord unto the Assumpcyon of our Lady ye have
xiv year of pardone, and as many karyns, and foryefenes of the iij part of all
sins.

And upon the one side of Saint Peter 's Chirch a Chirchyard lies, and that is
called Goddys field, and there be beryed pore pylgryms and none other, and it
is the land that was bought with xxx pens that our Lord was sold for, as often as
one goes upon that ground he has xv C year of pardon.

Item, In the Chirch of Saint Poule without the walls ye have xlvij M year of
pardon.

Item, In the day of his convercyon i C year of pardon.

Item, On Childermasse day iij M year of pardon.

Item, On the Eight day.
Vtas of Saint Martin when as the Chirch was hallowed xiv M years of pardon,
and as many karyns, and the iij part of all sins relesyd.

Also whoo that visit the Chirch of Saint Poule two Sondays does as much as
if he went to St. James of Compostella in Spain.
St. James and did come ageyn.

Item, In the Chirch of St. Laurence without the walls there lies the body of
St. Laurence, and of St. Stephen, and at the hyh altar ye have xciij M year of
pardon.

And who that visit the other aulters has at each altar vij M years of
pardon, and as many karyns.

Also, The Pope Pelagius grauntid there at the iv festys of the year at each
feste vij C year of pardon and as many karyns, and who that gothe thither every
Wednesday he deliverith a sole out of Purgatory, and himself quyt of all syns.

Item, In the Chirch of St. Crucis there is a chamber or a Chapel within, that
Pope Sylvester named Jherusalem, there is the bond that Christ was led with to
his crucifyeing, and there been ij Sausers, and the one is full of his blood,
and the other is full of our Ladys mylk, and the Sponge wherein there was mengyd
eyselly and galle.

And one of the Nayls that Jhesus was nailed with on the cross, and a part of
the block that St. John his head was smeten off upon, and two arms, the one of
St. Peter, the oder of St. Poule.

Item, There stondyth a cheir in which Pope Anicetus.
Accensius was mastered, and too all them as sit in that cheir is grauntyd an
C M year of pardon, and as many karyns, and every Sunday a sole out of
Purgatory, and the treddendell of all syns relesyd.

Item, In the same Chirch is a great part of one of the Crosses that one of the
thevis was put on that was Crucified with Christ.

Item, In the same Chirch is the tytell of Christ as was in Latin, Ebrew, and
Greek, which was found in the time of Pope Innocent, to the which the same Pope
has grantyd great pardon.

Item, In the Chirch of St. Mary Major there stondyth on the hyh altar the head
of Saint Jheronimus, and there ye have xiiij M year of pardon, and as many
karyns.

And on the oder altar on the ryte hand there is the Cradle that Jhesus lay
in, and of our Lady's milk, and a great part of the holy Cross, and of many
Seintis Bodies, and there ye have xix M year of pardon, and as many karyns.

And Pope Nicholas iv, and St. Gregory, each of them grauntyd thereto x M year
of pardon.

And fro assencyon to Crystmas ye have xiiij M year of pardon, and the thread
part of all synns relesyd.

Item, In the Chirch of Saint Sebastian without the Town, there in a place that
Pope Calixt named Tolund, as there the Aungel appeared and spack to Gregory the
Pope. In that place is foryefenes of all Sins, and all penance.

At the hyh altar is grauntid xxviij C yer is of pardone, and as many karyns:
and whosoever comes to the furst altar that stondith in the Chirch has xiiij C
year of pardone: and there is a Sellare or a vaute wherein lies beryed xlix
Popes that deyed all Martirs, who so comes furst into that place delyveryeh
viij Soles out of Purgatory of soche as he most desires, and as much pardon
thereto that all the world cannot nombre, ne reken, and every Sunday ye delyver
a Sole out of Purgatory. And in that Sellare stondyth a pytt, there Saint Peter,
and Saint Poule were hyd in ccl year, that no man wist where they were become, and
whoo that puttyth his head into that pytt and takyth it out agein is clean of
all sin.

Pope Gregory, and Sylvester, and Pope Nicholas, and Pope Pelagius, and Pope
Honorius, each of them grauntyd to the same place one M year of pardon, and as
many karyns. And there lies the bodies of diverse oder holy persons which were
too long to write of: and so the grace that is at St. Sebastians is groundyd
that it cannot be taken away.

Item, In the Chirch of Saint Mari Mayor before written, before the Quyer, is the
Image of our Lady which Saint Luke did peint; which Image St. Gregory did bear
fro Mari Mayor to Saint Peter's the Apostel, who also coming before the Castle
of St. Angel he see an Angel in the hyht of the Castle, having in his bond
a burning Sword, and with him a great multitude of Aungells, which song before
that Image Regina coeli laetare etc. Answering St. Gregory.

Ora pro nobis Alleluja. Item, In the Chirch of Seint John Latryneus the Pope
Sylvester yaf thereto as many years pardon as it reyned drops of water the day
thot hallowyd the Chirch; and that time it reyned so sore, that no man had seen
a greter reyn before that day.

And when he had grauntid this, he thought in himself whedyr he had so much
power or not.

Then there came a voice fro hevyn, and said, Sylvester thou have power enough
to yeve that pardon, and God grauntyd thus much thereto, that and a man had
made a vow to Jherusalem, and lacked good to do his Pilgramage, if he go fro
St. Peter's Chirch to St. John Latrynes, he shall be discharged and have
absolucyon of that promise.

And any time that a man comes to St. John Latrynes, he is quytt of all
Sins, and of all penance, with that, that he be penitent for his sins.

Blyssed is the mother that bears the child that hereth mass on Saterdays at
St. John Latrynes, for he deliveryth all them that he desires out of
Purgatory, too the nombre of lxxvij Soles.

Item, Upon the tour of the Chirch stondyth a double cross that was made of
the sword that St. John was beheded with, and at every time that a man
beholdith that cross he has xiiij M year of pardon, and as many karyns of all
penance.

And at the hyh altar ye have remishyon of all Sins, and of all penance,
and innumerable pardon more than he needs for himself.

There is the grave that Saint John laid himself in when he had said mass, and
then come a great light over the grave, and when that light was gone, then fund
they nootyng there but hevinly bred. In that grave comes every good Friday in
the night the holy cream and oil, and he that puts therein his head has CM
year of pardon, and as many karyns.

And behynd the hyh auter stondith a cheyr that God sat in, and whoo that
sits therein has the thread part of all his syns relesyd.

And who that visits all the oder aulters has at each altar xliiij C year
of pardon, and as many karynes: and on the one side of the Chirch there is a
Sacrifice that is at Saint John Baptist's altar, and there is the table that
our Lord ete at upon Maundy Thurresday. And also the Tables of stone with the
X Commandments that our Lord gafe to Moses on the mount of Sinai: And there is
a iiij Square of the v borly lofes, and of the two fyshes, and also there is
our Ladys keverchef.

Item, In the same Chirch on the hyh altar been the bodies of Seint Peter, and
Poule, and the head of Zachary the Prophet, Fader of Saint John the Baptist,
with dyvers oder reliqys.

Item, In the same Chirch-yard stondith a Chapel that is called Sanctum
Sanctorum, there is the face of our Lord, there ye have xiij M year of pardon.

When the Emperor Constantine was Crystened, he spoke thus to Pope Sylvester:
In that I have geven my house to the wurship of God, grant you mekely his grace
to all them that willingly come to this town: Then answered Pope Sylvester,
Our Lord Jhesu Christ, that by his great mercy has purged you of your great
lazary, he might purg all them that visit this Chirch of all hur syn, and all
oder penance.

He that wool not beleve this may go to Seint Latrynes before the quyer door,
and there he may see in Marbill all that is written here.

From Saint John 's day till Scrovetyde all this pardon is doubled, and fro
Scrovetyde to Ester the pardon is threfold double: Blessed is he that may
deserve to have this pardon. And in the same Chapel abovesaid may come noe
weemen.

Item, About that Chapel on the left side there are steppis which sometime ware
at Jherusalem, and who so gothe up tho steppis on his knees, he deliveryth one
sole out of Purgatory.

Item, In the Chirch of Saint Eustace ye may have relese and pardon of all
sin.

And he that is shreven and repentant of his syn he has a M year pardon, and
as many karyns.

Then follow the Indulgences granted unto other lower Churches in Rome, but by
these specified, you may judge of all the rest. And then the Relater, according
to his promise, proceeds to tell the Reader what a Karyne is.

A Karyne, (says he) is to go Wulward vij year: Item, Karyne.
To fasten bred and water the Friday vij year: Item, In vij year not to sleep
one night where he slepeth one oder. Item, in vij year not to com under one
covered place, but if it be to here mass in the Chirch door or porch: Item, In
vij year not to ete ne drynk out of no vessel, but in the same he made his
avow in. Item, Capiat qui Capere potest.
he that fullfills all these poyntis vij year during, does and wynneth a Karyne,
that is to say, a Lentdum.

And thus may a man have at Rome (as he concludes) great pardon, and soul
health: Blessed ben all thoose pepull, and in good time born, that resseveth all
these graces, and well kepyth them. Of the which pardone and grace, our Lord
Jhesu Chrest mote grant to all good Christen men. Amen.

And thus, with the proposal, and belief of these heavenly advantages, men,
women, and Children, of all qualities, were continually drawn, and enticed to
Rome, at their great charges, and expenses, to partake of these transcendant
graces. But to show the Popes charity, and liberality in these gracious
Indulgences, we must know that they were granted also to many Churches, and
Altars within this Kingdom, like cummin Seeds, most commonly depensil'd upon
the walls.

Against an Altar, thus:

Si quis Missam ad hoc Altar fieri curabit, Wever Fun. Mon. 121.
plenariam peccatorum remissionem consequetur. Si vero pro defuncti alicujus
anima ad idem Altar legatur Missa, statim in ipso actu and celebratione missae
anima defuncti ex Purgatorio in coelum ascendet, and servabitur. Nihil Certius.

But these home Indulgences were never esteemed so powerful, and effectual, as
those which were far fetched, and dear bought. And the profit accruing to the
Popes, and Court of Rome, by virtue of these, was excessive great, and always,
since their first contrivance, esteemed one of the Cardinal supports of the
revenues of that See. And for the improvement thereof, these Romish Indulgences
were sometimes made Itinerant, and sent abroad into other Countries, under the
managery of Commissioners, to be delivered out, and dispensed for money, to
such as could not travel to Rome for them: (of which more anon, when we come to
the Jubiles.)

Thus Pope Leo the Tenth, Hist. of Counc. of Tient lib. 1. sect. 13.
a man very liberal in rewarding his kindred, and Courtiers, when some other
fountains were dried up, whence riches used to be drawn out of other Nations to
the Court of Rome, thought fit to serve himself of that of Indulgences; and
sped so well in that project, that he gave to diverse persons the Revenues of
diverse Provinces, reserving something to his own Exchequer: and particularly he
gave the Indulgences of Saxony, Id. Sect. 16.
and of that arm of Germany which reaches from thence to the Sea side, to his
Sister Magdalen, the wife of Franceschetto Cibo, bastard Son of Pope Innocent
the eighth, in recompense of the charges which the family of Cibo were at, when
he retired himself to them at Genoa under Alexander the sixth.

And hence it was, Id. Sect. 27.
that Franciscus Soderinus, Cardinal of Praeneste, called Cardinal Volterra,
told Pope Adrian the sixth, That no Reformation could be made, that would not
notably diminish the Rents of the Church, which having four fountains, one
Temporal, viz. the Rents of the Ecclesiastical Estate: the other three
spiritual, viz. Indulgences, Dispensations, and Collations of Benefices; none
of them could be stopped, but that one quarter of the Revenues would be cut off.

The Exemplification of the Holy Pardons at Rome before, acquaints us how those
graces were, and are there delivered out by wholesale, and in gross sums: but
there were some men that thought it surer to purchase them, as it were, by
retail: and others again thought they were not sure enough without they had
them under hand, and seal, and the Pope's general warranty to them: thus,

Sir Gerard Braybroke Knight. and Elizabeth his Wife, about the year 1400, were
buried in St. W. Dugdale Hist. of S. Paul's Cathed. fc. 45.
Paul's Church in London: and in the year M DC VIII. the bones of Sir Gerard
lying in a Coffin of Lead, cased with wood, were dug up, at the East end of
the South Isle, siding the Quier, and with them an Indulgence from Pope
Boniface the 9. which being esteemed by the purchasers thereof, without doubt,
of great value, we will here exhibit a true transcript of the same.

Indulgentia Domino Gerardo Braybroke militi, and Dominae Elizabethae uxori
ejus, per Bonifacium Pontificem Romans ejus nomine nonum concessa.
BOnifacius Episcopus, Servus Servorum Dei, dilecto filio nobili viro Gerardo
Braybrok juniori Militi: and dilectae in Christo filiae, nobili mulieri
Elizabethae ejus uxori, Lincolniensis Dioeoesis, Salutem, and Apostolicam
benedictionem. Provenit ex vestrae devotionis affectu, quo nos and Romanam
Ecclesiam reveremini, ut petitiones vestras, illas praesertim quae animarum
vestrarum salutem recipient, ad exauditionis gratiam admittamus. Hinc est,
quod nos vestris supplicationibus inclinati, ut Confessor, quem quilibet
vestrum duxerit eligendum omnium peccatorum vestrorum, de quibus cord
contriti, and ore confessi fueritis, semel tantum in mortis articulo, plenam
remissionem vobis in sinceritate fidei Apostolicae S. Romans Ecclesiae, ac
obedientia, and devotione nostra, vel successorum nostrorum Romans Pontificum
canonice intrantium, persistentibus, authoritate Apostolica concedere valeat
devotioni vestrae, tenore praesentium, Indulgemus. Sic tamen, quod idem
Confessor, de hiis de quibus fuerit alteri satisfactio impendenda, eam vobis
per vos, si supervixeritis, vel per haeredes vestros, si tunc forte
transieritis, faciendum injungat: quam vos vel illi facere teneamini, ut
praeferatur. Et ne vos (quod absit) propter hujusmodi gratiam reddamini
procliviores ad illicita in posterum committenda, nolumus, quod si ex
confidentia remissionis hujusmodi forte aliqua commiseritis, quo-ad illa
praedicta remissio vobis nullatenus suffragetur. Nulli ergo omnino hominum
liceat hanc Paginam nostrae concessionis and voluntatis infringere, vel ei ausu
temerario contraire. Si quis autem hoc attentare praesumpserit, indignationem
omnipotentis Dei, and beatorum Petri and Pauli Apostolorum ejus, se noverit
incursurum. Dat. Romae, apud S. Petrum, Nonas Julii, Pontificatus nostri anno
secundo, and Anno Domini MCCCXC.

A little further to show the power, and virtue of these Indulgences, to draw
the Peoples money, and I think the best effect of these piae frauds, we may
note, how by means thereof many of our Churches, and religious houses, were,
from time to time, built, and repaired: As the Abbey, and Church of Crowland by
the relation of Petrus Blessensis, Camb. Brit. in Lincol^sh.
in the time of K. Hen. 2. by an Indulgence for the third part of Penance
injoined for sins committed, to all that helped forward the work. W. Dugdale
Hist. of St. Paul's Cath. fo. 11, 12.
And, to instance in no more but the Cathedral of St. Paul's in London, a
multitude of Letters are avowed by Mr. Dugdale to have been by him seen, and
read, by which Indulgences, extending to certain numbers of days, for penance
was granted to all such as, being contrite, and confessed, should afford their
help to so good a work: particularly,

Hugh Foliot, An. D. 1228.
Bishop of Hereford, granted an Indulgence for 20 days penance, to be in force
for seven years.

Richard Wethershed Archb. An. D. 1230.
for 40 days penance.

Henry Archb. An. D. 1235.
of Colen in Germany, granted for the same purpose relaxation of 50 days
penance.

Afterward, in the reign of K. Hen. 3. these several Indulgences were granted,
viz.

Edmund Archb. of Cant. for 20 days penance.

Walter Archb. of York for 40. Joscelin Bishop of Bath. 38. Walter Bishop of
Carl. for 40. Rich. Bishop of Rochester. 40. Hugh Bishop of Cov. and Lichf. 30.
William Bishop of Norwich. 20.
Cum multis aliis, etc.

Afterward, An. D. 1244.
in the year 1244 comes an Indulgence from Walter Bish. of Norwich, extending
to those which should either, for devotions sake visit the Tomb of Roger Niger,
or give assistance unto the work. As also some time after, An. D. 1252.
another for the like purpose, from Richard Bishop of Exeter.

In the same year, Pope Innocent the 3. sent out a Pardon for 40 days penance,
to all such as should assist to carry on the work.

But, in the year following, Laurence Bish. of Rochester, in his Indulgence,
adds the visiting of the said Tomb of Roger Niger.

To these succeed the Indulgences of Boniface Archbishop of Cant. for 40 days.
John Bishop of Landaff for 20 days. William Bishop of Sarum for 20 days.


Afterward, the fruits of these being found, a multitude of Letters hortatory
were issued out by several Bishops, with Indulgences, as aforesaid, for the
same purpose, viz by Fouk Basset Bishop of Land. Richard Bishop of Lincoln.
Giles Bishop of Salisbury. John Bishop of Winchester. Walter Bishop of
Salisbury. Robert Bishop of Durham. Godfry Bishop of Worcester. Thomas Bishop
of Hereford.


And after all this, An. D. 1281.
within a few years, another Letter hortatory issued out by John Archb. of
Cant. affording the same number of days, for Indulgence, as the other Bishops
had done. The like from William Bishop of Norwich. And some time after that the
like from John Bishop of Norwich, An. D. 1283.
and Roger Bish. of Salisbury.

After which, one Simon, a Cardinal of Rome gave one hundred days release to
all such as should give to the repair of the whole fabric.

With these came also contributions from Ireland, which began An. D. 1237. and
continued several years, granted by Christian Bishop of Emely, for 20 days.
William Bishop of Leghlin, for 30 days. Gilbert Bishop of Imely, for 21 days.
Isaac Bishop of Killalow, for 8 days. William Bishop of Conor, for 40 days.
Thomas Bishop of Elfin, for 40 days. David Bishop of Cashall, for 40 days.
Thomas Bishop of Down, for 40 days.


And, to shut up the bead-roll, there came only one from Scotland, viz. from
Albinus Bishop of Brechin, whose Indulgence reached but ten days: but then of
such extent, that it included all persons, who for devotion sake, should visit
the Altars of St. Edmund, Archbishop of Cant. and St. Edward the King, situate
in that Cathedral, and there either pray for the soul of the Lady Isabel de
Daughter to william King of Scotland, and wise to Rob (...) Brus of Amandal^.
Brus, or give something to the Fabric.

Thus you see how that in several times, and ages, several Bishops practiced
this power of granting of Indulgences; but that practice being experimented
derogatory, and prejudicial to the Supremacy of Rome, an Act of resumption
passed in that Court, and the power of granting Indulgences reduced, and fixed
where they took their first rise.

Now, to what sum, or sums, the moneys raised by Indulgences, and
appropriated to Rome, amounted to, we may well conceive them to exceed all
account; when as once in the Switzer's Country, Hist of Counc^ of Trent. lib. 1
sect. 27.
a scanty and barren place to England, there was at one time raked up, by these
Indulgences, managed by one Friar Samson of Milan, no less than One hundred and
twenty thousand Crowns. And the Contemplation of their efficacy for that
purpose, made one once say, That the Pope could never want money, so long as he
could hold a pen in his hand; and one of the Popes themselves thus profanely
to boast, Quantas nobis divitias comparavit haec fabula Christi! but no more of
that.

Lastly, for the Authority, and validity of these Indulgences, I gave you
before the Opinion of a Romanist, I will now conclude with this of a
Protestant, viz. That these Indulgences have no foundation, either in
Antiquity, in Reason, or in Scripture: Not in Antiquity, in regard they began
but about 400 years ago: Not in Reason, Vid. Chemnit. Examen de Indulg. ap. 4.
for how can one mere man satisfy for another, dispense with another, to
another, and by another? Not in Scripture, which says expressly, The blood of
Christ which purges us from all sin; and, When we have done all we can, we are
unprofitable servants.

CHAP. VIII. Relics, etc.
Relics, Agnus Dei's, Crosses, Pictures, Beads, Swords, Bracelets, Feathers,
Roses, Shoos, Boots, Parings of Nails, Drops of Milk, drops of blood, Hair,
Medals, Ashes, Dust, Rags, Chips, Consecrated Wax, and innumerable other
hallowed knacks, come next in play: And by these the People were constantly
gulled out of their money: For these were daily brought over from Rome, and
bartered for Gold, and Silver: a cheat practiced, to my knowledge, upon many
Devoto's at this day.

Amongst these commodities, having named the Beads, those precious helps of
Romish devotion, and the Virgin Mary being sometimes observed painted with
Beads in her hand, some have therefore conceived them to have been of Divine,
or Apostolical Institution: Polyd. Verg. de In^^^^. rerum. l b. 5. cap. 9.
But Polydore Vergil informs me, that Peter the Hermit, about the year 1090.
was the first Inventor of them, to be as trammels to hold their Offices, and
Devotion, to a right pace: At first (says he) they were made of wood; but,
Hodie (says he again) tantus honor calculis accessit, ut non modo ex ligno,
succino, and corallio, sed ex auro, argentoque fiant, sintque mulieribus instar
ornamenti, and hypocritis praecipui fucosae bonitatis instrumenti; that is, At
this day Beads are in such esteem, that they are not only made of Wood, Amber,
and Coral, but also of Gold, and Silver, used by Women as Ornaments; and by
Hypocrites as instruments of fained devotion.

Then, for these, and all the other precious things before mentioned, such
virtue was imputed to them, that scarce any that had money, would stick to give
the rates set upon them: especially when it was given out, and believed, they
had power, and virtue, to fortify against Temptations: infuse, and strengthen
grace: fright, and drive away the Devil, and all evil spirits: allay winds, and
tempests: purify the air: secure from thunder, and lightning: stop all raging
infections, and contagions; and be as panpharmacons against all diseases: with
a multitude more benefits, and advantages which they brought to the possessors
of them: All which, I say, being considered, who would be without such precious
things, when they might be had for money? Besides, it always was (as was but
reasonable) in the Pope's power, to set his own price upon his own commodities,
as best knowing the virtue, and value of them. And then such hallowed things,
the dearer they were, the better, and more virtual they were esteemed; like
Tobacco, and such other fantastical commodities, that take their estimation
amongst the fond, ignorant, and undiscerning, far more from their high price,
than their intrinsic worth, and value. And, as one specimen of the respect
which these Relics, and trifles once had, as also how their esteem fell; Lo.
Herb. Hist. Hen. 8. fo. 377.
there is a pretty story, That upon the dissolution of Monasteries, and Abbeys
here, in the time of King H. 8. care was taken, that upon the surrender of any
foundation, the debts of the House should be paid. Now so it was, that there
had belonged to one of the Monasteries, as part of their treasure, a piece of
St. Anthony's finger, covered only with an ounce of Silver; which Relic the
House had pawned to one for Forty pounds, who repairing to the Commissioners
for his money, and offering to deliver the pledge, they refused to redeem it,
as not taking it to be of so much value, and so left the cheated Broker to make
the best he could of the forfeiture.

And besides the price of these Relics, and Wares, at the first hand, many of
the more famous sort of them were made daily pick-pockets to multitudes who
brought their devotion, and offerings in vows, and pilgrimages to them, when
they were kept, and exposed at some famous place. For,

As these Relics, many of them, were bought up, and ingrost by private
persons, so multitudes of them were treasured up, and preserved in Cathedrals,
Abbys, and Religious Houses: And that we may make some estimate of the number,
and quality of them, we are here again beholden to Mr. Dagdale, for exhibiting
an Inventory of such as were once kept in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul's in
London.

Hae sunt Reliquiae quas Radulfus d'Diceto Decanus Lundoniae contulit S. Paulo.
W. Dugd. Hist. of S. Paul's. fo. 234.


De Cultello Domini. De Capillis S. Mariae Magdalenae. De S. Stephano Papa and
Martyr. De Osse beati Laurentii Martyris. De Pallio aliisque reliquiis S.
Martini Turonens. Episcopi. De S. Marco, and Marcellina Martyr. De S. Victore
Martyr. De Testa S. Ypoliti Martyris. De Baculo S. Martini Turon. Episcopi. De
S. Oswaldo Rege and Martyr. De Stola and pallio S. Maximini. De Baculo S.
Maximini Treverens. Episcopi. De Capite S. Eugenii Martyris. Os cujusdam
Martyris de sociis S. Mauritii. De Sandaliis and Sudario and Casula S.
Remaclii. De Osse and vestimento S. Walburgae Virginis, and de margaritis
armillae ipsius. De Osse Alexandri Papae and Martyris. De Pulvere reliquiarum.
Other Relics in the same Church.

A Vessel of Crystal, with two ribs of St. Laurence in it.

A Crystal Vessel containing some Relics of St. Swithin, Cosmus, and
Damianus, The sepulcher of our Lord, St. Mary, Mount Calvary, and other
Relics.

A Crystal Cup containing the Hairs of the blesled Virgin, and the hand of St.
John the Evangelist.

A Vessel of Crystal holding some of St. Paul's blood.

A Crystal Vessel containing two pieces of the Head of St. Thomas the Martyr,
some of his Hair, and Garment.

A Crystalline Vessel containing some of the Garments, Milk, and Hair of the
blessed Virgin.

A Vessel of Silver gilt, made like a Cup, containing Relics of SS. Oswald,
Alban, and Dunstan.

A precious Image of St. Paul.

The Head of St. Athelbert King, and Martyr, in a Silver and gilt Box.

The cheek of St. Ethelbert Confessor, and Founder of the Church, with four
Teeth only remaining in it, in a Silver and gilt Vessel enriched with precious
stones.

A Rib of St. Richard in a Silver Vessel: and another of his Ribs in a Crystal
Vessel.

A Vessel of Jasper, lined with plates of Silver and gilt, containing Relics
of SS. Andrew, and Philip Apostles: of Dionys, and Blase, Martyrs: and some of
the wood of St. Andrews Cross.

A great black Chest of Gilbert Bishop, containing a multitude of Saints
Relics.

Another Chest covered with red Silk, full of Relics of diverse Saints.

A little chest of Copper, full of Saint's Relics.

A Box of Ivory, with Relics of St. Austin, and others.

A little Ivory Box, with Relics of St. Agnes, and others.

A Silver gilt Box, with a multitude of Relics in it.

A Coffer colored blew, with many Relics in it.

A certain Lapis de Israel, expressing the Majesty of God, enriched with Silver
and many precious stones.

A curious consecrated Image of the Blessed Virgin, with her Son, holding a
Pearl in her right hand, richly adorned.

The great Arm of St. Melitus, curiously adorned.

The little Arm of St. Melitus, in a border of Gold.

The Arm of St. Osith, holding her Head in her hand, adorned very richly.

The Head of St. Gamaliel.

Another Arm, with some bones of the 11000 Virgins.

A Crystallin vessel, containing many Relics of St. Thomas the Martyr.

Three holy Crosses, with the Images of the Crucifix, St. Mary, and St. John,
of Silver gilt.

A Silver gilt Cross, with the Crucifix, St. Mary, and St. John, having on the
top some part of the wood of the Holy Cross.

Many other curious Crosses, and Crucifixes.

Many other Coffers, Chests, Boxes, and Vessels, all stuffed with precious
Relics, Agnus Dei's, Beads, etc.

The Rochet of St. Edmund Archbishop of Cant.

The Relics of St. Apollonia, and a multitude more.

On the top of the spire was a great Cross, Contin. Matt. Westminster. in An. 1314.
wherein were many Relics of diverse Saints, put there by Gilbert de Segrave
Bishop of London, to the intent, that by the glorious merits of those Saints,
the Steeple might be preserved from Tempests.

King Canutus, Speed Chron. in Canut.
as our Historians generally say, in his return from Rome, bought at Pavia the
Arm of St. Augustine, the great Doctor of the Church, and gave it unto
Coventre, for which he paid one hundred Talents of Silver, and one of Gold:
though others say it was Egelnotus, Hen d'Knighton cod fo. 2318. Godwin in vita
Egelnoti.
Archbishop of Canterbury, that bought it, and as a (...) of his respect to
Earl Leofric, gave it to his City of Coventre. But were it the one, or the
other, I find not any abatement in the price; which being so large, it gave it
the greater reputation, to draw multitudes, with great expenses, to visit it.

But the bounty of this K. Canutus appeared most excessive to the Abbey of Hide
near Winchester, to which he gave a Cross, Cambd. Britt. in Hanshire, fo. 266.
Speed in vita Canuti.
so costly for the materials, and curious for the making, that he bestowed as
much thereon, as his own years revenue of all England amounted to: But the fate
of this Costly Cross, was, that about the reign of K. Henry the sixth, it was
burned, with the whole Monastery, by the malice, and practice of Honry de Blois
Bishop of Winchester.

To all these Relics, and hallowed wares, and infinite more ejusdem farinae,
wherewith our Abbeys, monasteries, and Cathedrals were furnished, according to
the blind, and extravagant devotion of those times, a strange veneration, and
esteem was had by the People, until the Reformation made many notable
discoveries of the cheats, and delusions wrought in, and by them; as

Our Lady's Girdle, showed in eleven several places, and her milk in eight. Lo.
Herb. Hist. Hen. 8. fo. 431.


The Bell of St. Guthlac, and the Felt of St. Thomas of Lancaster, both
remedies for the Headache.

The Penknife, and Boots of St. Thomas of Canterbury, and a piece of his shirt,
much reverenced, and confided in by great-bellyed women.

The Coals that roasted St. Laurence.

Two, or Three Heads of St. Vrsula.

Malchus his Ear. And the parings of St. Edmund's nails.

The Image of an Angel with one wing, which brought hither the spears head that
pierced Christ's side.

An Image of our Lady, with a Taper in her hand, as burned nine years without
wasting, till one forswearing himself thereon, it went out, and was then found
to be but a piece of wood.

Our Lady of Worcester, from which certain veils, and dressings being taken
away, there appeared the Statue of a Bishop, ten foot high.

Our Lady of Walsingham, Cambd. Brit. in Norfolk. Stow in An. 1538.
the termina of many a costly, but fruitless Pilgrimage.

The Rood of Grace, at Boxley in Kent, made with diverse vices, and wiers, to
turn the eyes, and move the lips, was showed publicly at Paul's Cross, by John
Bishop of Rochester, and there broken, and pulled in pieces, the people
laughing at that, which they adored but an hour before. And here it will not be
amiss a little further to give you the Legend of this famous H. Rood: which I
find this: Lambert Peramb. of Kent, in Boxley.
An English Artist being taken Prisoner, in the wars between us and France,
and wanting money for his ransom, set his wits on work, to make some famous
piece, and having got some materials, he made a curious Rood, the like had
never bin seen, The Rood of Grace at Boxly.
for it is gestures, and moving all it is Joints, as bowing the head, lifting up
it is self, rolling the eyes, shaking the hands, knitting the brows, etc. which
being finished, he got leave, upon his parol, to bring it into England, to
sell, and make money of it for a ransom, and laid it on the back of a Jade,
which he drove before him: coming to Rochester, and staying there, to drink,
the Jade went forwrds, a way not intended by the Master, and stayed not till he
came to Boxly, and running to the Abbey Church door, he made such a knocking,
and bouncing against the door with his heels, that at the noise the Abbot, and
Monks came, and opened the door, which no sooner done, but the beast rushed in,
and ran to a certain pillar, and there stood: whilst the monks were busy in
taking off the load, in comes the owner puffing, and sweating, and satisfying
them that the Jade, with his load, was his property, endeavors to lead him out
of the Church, but notwithstanding all his beating, and pulling, the resty
beast would not stir one inch from the pillar; then he takes off the Image,
thinking to carry it away himself, but that would not stir neither, and
therefore after much heaving, and lifting to no purpose, they all thought that
God had sent, and destined it to that House, like another Palladium, and so the
Abbot, and Monks giving the Master his price for it, they set it up just at
that pillar, where it stood for many years, doing rare feats, to the enriching
of the House, till it was easily removed to Paul's Cross, and there uncased, as
you have heard before.

In the same Church there was also the Image of St. S. Rumwald.
Rumwald, which was a very small one, the representation of a Boy-Saint: and
the use of this Image was this; If you were minded to have any Benefit by the
Rood of Grace, you must be shriven by one of the Monks first, and then by
lifting at this St. Rumwald, proof was made whether you were in clean life, as
they said, or no; and if you proved to be clean, then was your way made for
your offering to be accepted before the holy Rood: If you were not clean, which
was known by your not being able to lift that little Image, then you must be
confessed again, on presumption you had concealed some foul sins. But then here
was the trick on it, the Image being small, hollow, and light, that a Child of
seven years old might easily lift it, there was a divice to fasten it to a post
with a pin of wood, which a Knave standing behind could put in, and out as he
list, which pin being put in, the strongest man could not stir it: and then
when any person offered bountifully, the pin was pulled out, that he might
easily lift it; but to one that proved stingy, the Image would not stir at all:
and so, in stead of devotion, this frequently proved great pastime, to see a
great lubberly fellow tugge, and lift in vain, at that which a Boy, or Girl,
had easily took up before him. The Blood of Christ at Hales in Glocester-shi.


Another the like imposture was practiced at Hales in Gloucester-shire, where
the Blood of Jesus Christ brought from Jerusalem, being kept, as was affirmed,
for many ages, had drawn many great offerings to it from remote places: And it
was given out, and believed, to have this property; That if a man was in mortal
sin, and not absolved, he could not see it; otherwise he might see it very
well: Therefore every man that came to see this Miracle, this most precious
Blood, confessed himself first to one of the Priests there, and then offering
something at the Altar, was directed to a Chapel, where the Miracle was
showed; the Priest who confessed him, in the mean time, retiring to the back
part of the said Chapel, and putting forth a little Cabinet, or Vessel of
Crystal, which being thick on the one side, that nothing could be seen through
it, but on the other side thin, and transparent, they used diversely: For if a
rich, and devout man entered, they would show him the thick side, till he had
paid for as many Masses, and given as large Alms, as they thought fit: After
which, to his great consolation, and the assurance of his not being in mortal
sin, they turned to him the thin side, where he might see the Blood: And all
this at last was discovered to be the Blood of a Duck, every week renewed by
the Priests, who to their great gain, kept the secret a long time amongst
themselves.

The curiosity of some possibly may here expect to be gratified, in some
memoirs of the once famous Lady of Walsingham; and the notorious Sainted
Becket, of the riches of his shrine, the confluence at his Jubilee, with the
reverence to his Relics, and memory: But, in pursuance of my design of
brevity, I shall referr them to the learned Mr. Cambden, Cambd. Brit. in
Morfolk. Will. Summer Antiq Cant. fo. 247. etc. Vid. Erasm. Coll. Pereg. Re^.
ergo Anatomy of the Nuns at Lisbon. De Schism. lib. 1. fo. 171.
for the first: and the industrious Canterburian Antiquary, for the other; with
the assurance they will not fail of satisfaction on the matter: And, for what
concerns Becket, I shall only add this, That the English Nuns at Lisbon, in
Portugal, do pretend, that they have both the Arms of Thomas Becket; and yet
Pope Paul the third in a Bull exemplified by Sanders, pitifully complains of
the cruelty of K. Hen. 8. for causing all the bones of Becket to be burnt, and
the Ashes scattered in the winds; the solemnity thereof recorded in all our
Chronicles: and then how his Arms should escape that bone-fire, is very strange.

We will pack, and shut up this show of Relics with this one more memorable:
In the reign of K. Edw. 6. the Teeth of St. Apollonia were in great esteem, as
conceived effectual to cure the Toothache, and for that purpose were bought by
many ignorant people, and carried about with them: this being notified to the
King, order was given, that all her Teeth should be brought in to a public
officer appointed to receive them, which being done, they filled a Tun
therewith: and so the cheat was discovered.

The consideration of the nature, and use of these Relics, together with the
Saints to whom they were affirmed to have belonged, the Miracles, and cures
said to be wrought by them; and also the Indulgences, the subject of the last
Chapter before; unriddles to me a certain difficulty, which has puzzled diverse
to give a satisfactory reason for: And that is, why the livings in London were
anciently esteemed of so great value and so highly rated in the Kings Books,
for first Fruits, and Tenths, when it is well known the Tiths, and Church dues
there, are very small, and inconsiderable, compared to the Country Livings,
whose certain profits, by reason of the predial Tiths, far outstrip those of
London. And certainly this was the reason, because every Church in London was
furnished either with some famous Saint, some precious Relic, some gracious
Indulgences, some wonderful Miracle, or some other pia fraus, whereby, and
whereunto, people were continually enticed to be suppliants and visitors, with
their vows, and offerings: as at one Church was a Saint celebrated for giving
easy travel to big-bellyed women: Another gave safety to Merchants, and
Mariners, in their Sea voyages: here was cure for such a disease; and there
for another: so that at every Church there was something virtual, and peculiar,
to draw customers, and profit to the Priests. And then London being the
Metropolis of the Kingdom, unto which people flocked from all quarters, both
natives, and strangers, and none but had their Special, and proper designs,
griefs, and difficulties, or at least curiosities, for which, if they wanted
ease or satisfaction, there, as they were told, they might be sure at one
place, or other, to find it. And so the Priests never wanted vent, or customers
for their wares; as Mountebanks, Juglers, Punchinello's, and such like, with
good success, choose to open, and show at Fairs, and at times, and places of
the greatest resort, and concourse of people. But then at the Reformation, when
all these cheats were detected, and exploded, and the Churches cleared of them,
and the Priests reduced unto their standing legal revenues of Tiths, and Church
dues: Stat. 37 Hen. 8. cap. 12.
then all those City livings fell so low, that the Parish dues respectively
proved too small to maintain one Priest: And thereupon the King, and State
thought good, to make provision by a Decree, confirmed by Act of Parliament,
that the Parsons, and Ministers in London-should have a maintenance by the
payment of the sum of two shillings and nine pence out of every Twenty
shillings Per annum rent of Houses, shops, etc. without which they could not
have subsisted. And more lately, Stat. 22 and 23 Car. 2.
for the better settlement of the maintenance of the Parsons, Vicars, and
Curates in London, an Act of Parliament has passed since the late dreadful
fire, to ascertain the annual revenue, and sums to be raised by every Parish
for the maintenance of the Ministers, and how the same is to be assessed, and
paid: for which those that are further concerned may consult the Act; whilst
we prepare our selves to go on to the Jubile's, and Pilgrimages, which now call
us away.

CHAP. IX. Jubile's, Pilgrimages.
JUbile's Pilgrimages, Vows, etc. and confluences to Rome, both at stated, and
arbitrary times, upon those accounts, were means to carry vast sums thither
out of the Kingdom: the devout Travelers always when they came home, (though
many of them happened to drop short) saying as Naomi, after her peregrination, We
went out full, but return empty. Whilst others who stayed at home, fearful, or
unable to take such long, and perilous journeys, would not be behind in their
liberal Donations, Bequests, and Presents; especially when they were persuaded,
it was for their soul's health, and to which full hands would contribute as
much, as bare feet: For, A Papa undique nunciatum est, Antiq. Bri fo. 302.
si Romam Jubilatum veniant, accepturos singulos peccatorum veniam: at his qui
aut valetudine, aut negotiis impediti ire non poterant, fecit potestatem vota
pecuni^ redimendi; as the provision was in that case.

Here I conceive it will not be impertinent to make a little inquiry into the
Original, Use, and Ends of these Jubile's: And for that we must know, Platina
in vita Bonifac. 8. Polydor. Vergil. de Invent. ^er. lib. 8. cap. 1. Lassels
voyage of Italy. part. 2. fo. 38.
that Pope Boniface the Eight, (in some imitation of the Jewish Jubilee) in the
year 1300. instituted the first Jubilee, promising remission of all their sins,
to all such as should, at Jubilee time, visit the Limina Apostolonum at Rome:
Lassels, a modern Traveller, in his voyage of Italy, affirms these Limina
Apostolorum to be some steps about the High Altar in St. Peter's Church at
Rome. And this Pope Boniface ordained should be observed every hundred year: at
which solemnity there was such a confluence of people, that they scarcely could
all crowd into the City. After that Clement the Sixth appointed the Jubilee to
be celebrated every Fiftieth year, An. D. 1350. Platin. in vita ejus. Vid.
Chron. Will. Thorn. fo. 2195. Tho. Walfingh. in Ed. 3. fo. 160.
that all men might be in compass to receive the benefit of it; the hundred
year Jubilee, like the Ludi Seculares in old Rome, being thought too much out of
distance for many that might thirst for the comforts of a Jubilee. But then Pope
Sixtus the 4. out of compassion to all those longing souls, appointed the
Jubilee to be kept every Five and Twentieth year, An. D. 1475.
and began it in the year 1475. But lastly, Pope Alexander the 6. in a strain
of Charity beyond all the rest, and to accommodate all that should desire the
benefits of a Jubilee, Polyd. Vergil. u^supra.
to save the charges, and hazard of journeying to Rome, as also to improve the
profit, thought good to make over those graces, by way of exchange, to such as
would pay a competent rate, seeing many could not, or would not come so far to
fetch them: And in his time the Jubilee falling in the year 1500, being the
16th. year of our King H. 7. he sent one Jasper Pons, Lo. Bacon H^st. Hen. 7.
fo. 199.
a Spaniard, his Commissioner, over into England: One represented to have been
better chosen, than such as went into Germany, on that account, who carried the
business with some prudence, and semblance of holiness: insomuch as he levied
great sums of money to the Pope's use, and with little scandal at that time:
with whom, it was thouht then, the King shared the moneys, although some
argument was made to the contrary afterward, by a Letter which Cardinal
Adrian, the King's Pensioner wrote to the King from Rome some years after: for
this Cardinal being to persuade the Pope, on the King's behalf, to expedite the
Bull of Dispensation for the Marriage between Pr. Henry, and the Lady
Katharine, to which the Pope seemed somewhat difficil, he used it as an
argument of the King's merit to that See, that he had touched none of those
Deniers that Pons had levied in England.

And now because the proceeding, and managery of this noted Jubilee, as to the
rates, and sums, that were paid upon the distribution of the Heavenly Grace
(as they called it) in that manner, may give a little light to what was done
elsewhere in like case; we will here exemplify the rates thereof, as they were
Copyed out of an old Roll heretofore in the custody of the late learned Sr.
Wever Fun. Mon. fo. 165.
Simonds d' Ewes. The Roll contains the Articles of the Bull of the holy Jubilee
of full remissyon and great joy granted to the Relme of England, Wales,
Irelond, and Garnsey, according to the true meaning of our holy Fader: wherein
was declared, That the King, with all his progeny, all Archebuschopps,
Buschopps, Abbots, Duks, Earls, Barons, Knygtes, Sqyres, Gentilmen, Yeomen,
Cetezins, and all oder Christen people, which truly confessyd, and contryte,
should vysit soche Chorches as should be assigned by Gaspar Pons, the Holy
Fader's Imbassator, and there put into the Cheste soch sum of money as is here
following taxed, shall have the same Indulgence, Pardon, and Grace, with
remissyon of all syn, as if they had gone personally to Rome in the year of
Grace, etc. And then, after some preliminary Articles, about ordering of the
business, comes this,

The tax that every man shall put into the Cheste that woll receyve the great
grace of Jubeley.
FVrst, every man, and woman, what degree, or condition, or state soere they
be, If he be Archebuschop, Duk, or oder dignite sprituall, or Temporal, havyng
londs to the yearly valor of M M. l. or above, if they will receyve this great
Indulgens and Grace of this Jubiley, for themselfs, and there wyfes, and
children not married, shall without disseyt put into the cheste ordained for
that intent of true and lawful moni, iij l. vij s. viij d.

Also every man and woman that has londs and rents to the yerly value of M l.
must pay for themselfs, and wyfs xl s.

Item, all those that has londs, etc. to the yerly valor of CCCC l. must pay
xxvj s. viij d.

Item, All those that has londs, etc. to the yearly valor of CC l. must pay
xiij s. iv d.

Item, All those that has londs, etc. to the yearly valor of C l. must pay vi
s. viij d.

Item, All those that has londs, etc. to the yearly valor of XL l. must pay ij
s. vi d.

Item, All those that has londs, etc. to the yearly valor of XX l. must pay
xvi d.

Item, All men of Religion havyng londs, etc. to the yearly valor of MM l.
must pay for themselfs, and their Covent x l.

Item, Those that has londs, etc. to the yearly valor of M l. must pay for
them and their Covent v l. iv s.

Item, Those that has londs, etc. to the yearly valor of CCCCC l. must pay for
them and their Covent iij l. vi s. viij d.

Item, All those that has londs, etc. to the yearly valor of CC l. must pay
for them and their Covent xx s.

Item, Those that has londs, etc. to the yearly valor of XL l. must pay for
them and their Covent x s.

Item, Secular men and women that has londs, etc. to the yearly valor of XL
l. whose movable goods extendyth to M l. must pay for themselfs and their wyfs
xl s.

Item, Those whose goods movable extendyth to CCCC l. must pay for themselfs and
wyfs vi s. viij d.

Item, Those whose goods movable extendyth to CC l. must pay for themselfs and
wyfs, iij s. iv d.

Item, Those whose goods movable be within CC l. and not undre XX l. must pay xij
d.

Item, Those whose goods movable extendyth not to XX l. shall pay for themselfs
their wyfs and children as it shall please them of their devotion.

After all this come certain Articles of the Bull of Dispensation with Simony,
Usury, and of goods as be wrongfully keped, reserved to the Comissary only.
Always provided, that the said persons make a composycyon hereof with the said
Comissary, and soche moni as they compound for, effectually to pay to the said
Comissary.

It was the Pope's Charity also to impart these Graces, and the benefits of a
Jubilee, to all Countries under his Spiritual Jurisdiction, upon such, and the
like terms, and conditions; whereby Grace, and Heaven were bought, and sold, as
firm as any goods in a Market overt.

By virtue of all these provisions you see how easy it was at last for all
sorts of persons to attain the benefits, and happiness of a Jubilee; where
Pardons, and Indulgences might be had as cheap as heart could wish. Nay, who
would not scrape, and run, and give all he was worth, at such an opportunity,
for so mighty an advantage, as the pardon of all his sins? A far more blessed
time this, than that of the Hebrew Jubilee, when only the Bondmen of their own
Country were made free, and possessions returned again to their first owners:
But here was to be obtained freedom from the bondage of sin, and the Devil; and
Livery, and Seisin of an eternal Inheritance in the Heavens. In a belief
whereof, there were seen persons of all sorts, sexes, and ages, flocking and
crowding to participate of this Holy, and Heavenly Treasure: Old men rejoicing
they had lived to see so happy a day; and young men catching at the
opportunity, lest they should not live the revolution of another Jubilee: And
those that could not go themselves, if they sent but money enough, all was well
enough.

Then, as these Jubile's were celebrated at some stated times; the Pilgrimages
were undertaken, and performed daily, and by multitudes, and that upon several
accounts: for,

Pilgrimages were, Pilgrimages. Peregrinatio Rel^gionis ergo.
when any person, (either out of Devotion: or by way of Penance: or in
performance of some vow, after recovery from some desperate sickness, or some
great danger escaped: or to obtain the favor, merits, or intercession of some
Saint: or in adoration of some famed Image, or precious Relic: or to
super-errogate; to the charitable augmentation of the Churches Treasury: or
other like cause:) undertook, and performed a Journey to some Holy place, as to
the Holy Land, the Lady of Loretto, St. James of Compostella, but generally,
and especially to Rome the Holy; and from thence these Pilgrimages were
anciently, Romeria. Romipeta.
and often called Romeria, and Pilgrims Romipetae. And when the Pilgrim arrives
there, presently he addresses himself to visit the Martyr's Sepulchers: the
stately Churches, and Altars: the holy Shrines, and Relics there showed: the
most famous mirecles there said to be wrought: and, if possible, to kiss the
Pope's Toe; however, to put his head under the foot of the Image of St. I^dels
Voyage of Italy part 2. fo. 41.
Peter standing in St. Peter's Church there, in token of subjection to his
Successor, All which, and much more, being performed, with fitting devotion,
and offerings, the poor Pilgrim thinks himself very happy, and his pains, and
money well bestowed: whilst the loose Italians scoff at the foolish
Tramontano's, as they call them, for making such idle, fruitless, and
chargeable expeditions. But when our Pilgrim returns home, he appears, Erasm.
Coll.
Obsitus conehis imbricatis, stanneis imaginibus oppletus, undique culmeis
ornatus torquibus, brachium habet ova serpentum, etc. as Erasmus describes him.
But not with one penny of money in his pocket: though seldom, or never without
a meager Fanatic looks, a thredbare Coat, some scores to pay, and generally a
disease into the bargain: it being a common Proverb at Rome, Tritum Romae
Adagium, e curia tria report^r^: malam consc eni^m, stomachum languidum. and
marsupium inane. Masson. Palmers.
That men ordinarily carry away thence, An ill Conscience, a bad Stomach, and
an empty Purse. And which is said to have caused Ven. Bid to make a voluntary
mis-interpretation of those well known Letters, S. P. Q. R. to import this,
Stultus Populus Quaerit Romam.

Another sort there also was of religious Peregrinators, that traveled the
world called Palmers: Vid les Antiquit. d^^ Ville d^ Paris. Per Clau^ mali^gr^.
fo. 2^^.
and the difference between a Pilgrim, and Palmer was thus; The Pilgrim had
some home, or dwelling place, but the Palmer had none. The Pilgrim traveled to
some certain designed place, or places, but the Palmer to all. The Pilgrim went
at his own charges, but the Palmer prosest wilful poverty, and went upon Alms.
The Pilgrim might give over his Profession, and return home, but the Palmer
must be constant, till he had obtained the Palm, that is, Victory over all his
spiritual Enemies, and Life, by Death; and thence his name Palmer; or else from
a staff, or boughs of Palm, which always he carried along with him. Not
forgetting his scrip, wherein to put the Alms, and Charities of people.

The Jubile's being celebrated at Rome, and the Pilgrimages generally made
thither, as to the place of the greatest esteemed sanctity, as we have noted
before, and as Ven. Beda anciently observed upon this occasion, Romam adire
magnae Virtutis aestimabatur; Beda Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 23.
there was at all times observed a greater proportion of English to flock
thither upon those accounts, than of any other Nation; distance always
increasing such kind of devotion: And this has made me sometimes reflect upon
an usual Observation of our Travelers, who describing the Genius, Manners,
Customs, and behaviors of the Italians, represent them as mostly symbolizing
with the English, and far more corresponding than the French, Spaniard, or any
other Nation not so distant from us: And therefore I have been apt to think
this agreement, or likeness might be wrought, in some measure at least, by that
great, and long intercourse, and communication as formerly was used between the
Italians, and the English, multitudes of them coming over hither for
preferment, and upon several other accounts, as may be collected from diverse
instances in these Collections; but far greater numbers of ours running thither
upon infinite occasions, part whereof we have already touched, and shall note
some others in the subsequent periods of our discourses: And the Observation of
a late Traveller favors this apprehension very much, who speaking of Rome,
Travels of Jo. Ray. fo. 368.
The present Romans (says he) seemed to me, in their houses and furniture,
particularly in their Beds and Lodging, in their diet, and in their manners and
customs, and in their very pronunciation (so liquid, plain, and distinct) more
to symbolize, and agree with us English, than any other people of Italy, which
so is, either because we learned of them, or they of us, or both mutually of
each other, when there was that great commerce, and intercourse between us and
that City for so many years together: But for so much of all this as concerns
the interchange of manners, and customs, I leave it to the consideration, and
observance of such as have to deal with them; whilst nothing is more certain
than that by that communication, and commerce that happened between us, the
Italians engrossed most of our wealth, and riches, which is sufficient for the
purpose of our present design. And indeed, as the occasions of running, and
flocking to Rome were infinite, so many that went thither, never came back
again, resolving to lay their bones in that holy ground; and many others
overgrown with a longing zeal, would purposely transplant themselves thither,
as to the fountain of grace, and then their revenues, and estates must of
course be transmitted after them, and spent there.

Now to show, that the women would not be left at home in these zealous
excursions, and to what purpose many of them went, I will be so bold as to give
you one Paragraph out of a famous Epistle of advice from Boniface, Archbishop
of Mentz, to Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterb. Epist. Borifac. A^^h ^^gun^. ad
C^^hb. Arch. C^nt. in S. Hen. Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. fo. 241.
which is this, -- si prohiberet Synodus and Principes vestri mulieribus and
velatis foeminis illud iter and frequentiam quam ad Romanam civitatem veniendo
and redeundo faciunt, quia magna ex part pereunt, paucis remanentibus
integris: Perpaucae enim sunt civitates in Longobardia, vel in Francia, aut in
Gallia, in quibus non sit adultera vel meretrix generis Anglorum, quod
scandalum est, and turpitudo totius Ecclesiae vestrae. I was sorry, I confess,
to find this blot upon the reputation of our Country-women on record in such
manner; but that downright Boniface did not use to spare the faults of any that
came in his way; if not the miscarriages of Princes, Vid. Epist. ad Ethelbald.
in W. Malmsb. and Spelm, Sup. fo. 136.
and Priests, much less could the notorious misdemeanors of the women miss him,
from whom, it seems, many of the Italians may derive their pedigrees; and to
that probably, in some measure may be assigned that agreement, and likeness
which our Travelers observe between them, and the English, at this day, the
communicated tincture being not yet worn out in so many descents.

CHAP. X. Offerings, Gifts, and Presents.
OFferings, Gifts, Presents, Bequests, and Legacies, to Saints, their Altars,
Shrines, and at Holy Places, amounted to a very great value. We have mentioned
before, and shall have occasion to mention more of those many occasions, which
many had, or made unto themselves, of running to Rome, upon Appeals, or as
Ambassadors, Agents, or otherwise. And few would hope their journeys to prove
successful, if they did not visit such famed Holy Places, with suitable Gifts,
and offerings: whilst many that stayed at home, would take the opportunity, to
send by the hands of others, what they had vowed, or designed for that purpose.

The proximity, Major e Longinquo reverentia.
and commonness of a thing takes off much from the esteem conceived by
hearsay, or first sight: Many famous Saints, and Shrines, we had here in
England, and they were zealously adored, and presented from Forrainers; whilst
the devotion of the English was not satisfied with our home objects; but he was
the happy man, that could bestow something at Rome the Holy. And the Italians
would laugh at the English, for their bigottry, as they called it, in
traveling so far, with such ardent zeal, and liberality, to so little purpose,
as they thought; in regard those objects, by reason of their vicinity to them,
and experienced inefficacy, were by them contemned: whilst on the contrary,
they themselves, in a like strain of Fanatic zeal, or devotion, would run to
St. James of Compostella, in Spain; or to our St. Thomas of Canterbury, or
further, to show they could be as fond, and liberal in our quarters, as we had
been in theirs.

And hence it was that the Shrines, and Altars, of many Saints became so
excessive rich. What vast treasure, in Jewels, Gold, and Silver, Stows Anna's
in Hen. 8. W. Somner Antiquit. of Cant. Erasm. Pereg. Relig. Ergo. Antiq. of
Darham. Camb. Britt.
was conferred on our St. Thomas of Canterbury; Cuthbert of Durham; Lady of
Walsingham, and multitude more, in our own Country, both by natives, and
strangers, our Historians, and others, with admiration testify. So, for the
reasons aforesaid, great quantities of our English Gold, Silver, Jewels, etc.
were swallowed up in the Treasuries of Saints beyond the Seas, especially in
Italy, and at Rome.

The greatest Treasure, of that nature, thought to be in the world at this day,
is at the Lady of Loretto, in Italy, esteemed sufficient, if so employed, to
maintain a War against the Turks many years: the same being daily increased by
Gifts, and offerings from those who have an esteem to the pretended Sanctity of
the place. This Treasury being showed to Strangers, and Travelers, with
admiration they behold, the most costly vestments, the hugest, and massiest
Plate, the most precious Jewels, with the choicest rarities of Art, the world
affords; and for Silver, the plenty of it there makes it of as little esteem,
as in the days of Solomon: and all this, for the most part, the Oblations,
Gifts, and Presents, of Kings, Princes, Queens, and Nobles of the Romish
Religion, of other Countries.

Now, to show that all the Gifts, Presents, and Bounty did not always run to
Rome, and Italy, but that sometimes there were Vestigia pauca retrorsum, we
find that sometimes, and on some occasions, the Pope would send, as tokens of
his grace, and benediction, some presents hither again, of which we will
produce a few instances.

Pope Alexander the second, Speed in vit. Harald.
sent to William the Conqueror (besides a consecrated banner, and an Agnus Dei)
one of the hairs of St. Peter.

King Henry the second, Rog. H^veden in Hen. 2. S^eed Chron. Hen. 2.
obtained of Pope Urban the third, that he might make one Son of his Lord of
Ireland, and particularly his Son John: to whom the Pope sent, as a special
mark of grace, a Coroner made of Peacocks feathers, woven with gold.

Pope Julius the second sent to K. Hen. 8. a precious consecrated perfumed Rose
of Gold, and constituted W. Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, his Deputy to
present it, with fitting ceremonies, as appears by his Letter, or Instrument,
for that purpose, preserved amongst our Metropolitical Archives, in these
words: Cod. Ms. in Regist. principali Archb. Cant. (nuncupato Warham) fo. 26.
Venerabili Fratri Guilielmo Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, Julius Papa Secundus,
Salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem. Charissimum in Christo filium nostrum
Henricum Angliae Regem illustrem, quem peculiari caritate complectimur, aliquo
insigni Apostolico munere in hoc regni sui primordio decorandum putantes,
mittimus nunc ad eum Rosam auream Sancto crismate delibutam, and odorifico
musco aspersam, nostrisque manibus de more Romans Pontificum benedictam, quam ei
e tua fraternitate inter missarum Solemnia per te celebranda, cum ceremoniis in
notula alligata contentis, dari volumus cum nostra and Apostolica benedictione.
Datum Romae apud Sanctum Petrum sub annulo Piscatoris, Die quinto Aprilis, Anno
Millesimo quingentesimo decimo, Pontificatus nostri Septimo.

In the Irish rebellion, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, Cam^. E^^zab.
the Pope, as a token of favor, sent to Desmond, a principal Leader amongst
the Rebels, a gracious Agnus Dei, and a hallowed Ring from his own finger,
which Desmond wore about his neck, as a charm, or preservative against all
dangers: But his traitorous Consederates being beaten, and dispersed, this
pitiful deluded favorite wandered a long time in the woods, and bogs, till at
last, almost starved, he was found in a poor Cattage, and notwithstanding his
Defensative, had his head cut off by a common Soldier.

Afterward, Speed Chron^ in Eliz^b.
in another rebellion in Ireland, the Pope sent to Tir-Oen, the grand
Ringleader, for his encouragement, certain Indulgences, and a precious Plume of
Phoenix feathers, for a Trophey of his victories: but they proved but Icarus
wings, whereby he soared the higher, to get the more miserable fall.

Sometimes again, the Pope, Bishop Carlton's Remem. cap. 4. fo. 39. Greg. 13.
out of good Husbandry, rewards, or incourageth his Creatures with Titles of
Honor; as Thomas Stukeley, an Arch Traitor to Queen Elizabeth, was by the Pope
Created Marquess of Lagen, Earl of Wexford and Caterloghe, Vicount of Morough,
and Baron of Rosse, all famous places in Ireland. And it was the Pope's design,
if Stukeley's Rebellion had succeeded, Boon Companion.
to have made his Son James Boncompagno King of Ireland.

CHAP. XI. Collections.
COllections, and Contributions, set on foot, and vigorously promoted for
diverse purposes, was another means of draining great sums frequently out of
the Kingdom. And amongst these, Contributions for relief of the Holy Land, as
well for the quantity of the sums, as for the misimployment, were very
considerable: but of that, we will note more anon, in a Chapter apart for that
purpose. And here we will take notice of some other occasions, for which such
Collections were made.

King John, to gratify the Pope, granted license, and safe Conduct, to the
Friars of the Hospital of St. Mary's, in Rome, to Preach, and make Collections
throughout England, for the maintenance of their House, built by the Pope, as
appears by his Letters Patents: Pat. 15 Johan. m. 7. nu. 20.
Rex omnibus suis fidelibus tam Clericis, quam Laicis, etc. Salutem. Sciatis
quod concessimus fratribus Hospitalis S. Mariae in Saxia apud Romam licentiam
praedicandi in regno nostro Angliae; and fideli^m eleemosynas caritative
petendi and accipiendi ad sustentationem pauperum praedicti Hospitalis,
secundum formam privilegii Apostolici quod inde habent. etc. Test moipso apud
Rading 10. Die Decembris Anregni nostri 15.

In the seventh year of King Edward the first, some counterfeit Friars, Bre.
Reg. 7 Edw. 1. in Turri Land. Pro fratribu^ S. Antonii.
of the Order of St. Anthony of Vienna, wandering abroad, and Collecting Alms
throughout England, the King, upon Complaint thereof, issued out his writ for
their apprehension.

The Abbots of the Cistercian, and Praemonstratensian Orders beyond the Seas,
Bundel. Inq. An. 26 Ed. 1.
imposing subsidies, Aides, and Contributions, on the Monasteries of their
Orders in England then under them, whereby much money, wools, and other
Commodities were transported out of England, to the great grievance, and
mischief of the Kingdom; King Edward the first, issued out writs to all the
Sheriffs of England, to inquire of those abuses, and to stop the current of
them: As by the said writs still preserved upon Record it does appear. And
afterward to stop the like exportation of moneys, and Goods, (for they would
not be brought totally to give over) the same King, Pat. 27 Ed. 1. Pro Abbate
de Gerendon.
by his special writ, prohibited all of the Cistercian Order, except one, viz.
the Abbot of Gerendon Com. Leic. who was of that Order, to presume to go beyond
the Seas on that account.

So the Abbot of Cluny sending his Proctors into England, to demand and Collect
great sums of money from the Monasteries, and Priories of their Order here,
and on all Ecclesiastical persons on whom they had conferred Benefices, without
the King's license: the King sent out his Writs, as well to the said Proctors,
to inhibite their proceedings; as also to the Warden of the Cinque Ports, not
to permit any Monk of that Order, or any other Servant, or Messenger to pass
the Seas, or carry over any moneys, without his special license; the writ to
the Warden of the 5. Ports was thus: Rex dilecto and fideli suo Roberto de
Burghersh Custodi Quinque Portuum suorum, Claus. 28 Ed. 1. m. 14.
Salutem. Datum est nobis intelligi quod Abbas Cluniacensis quosdam ex suis
Monachis in Angliam specialiter destinavit, ad petendum and levandum, etc.
(reciting the occasion at large) Ideo vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod
nullum Monachum Ordinis praedicti, vailettum seu alium nuncium quemcunque
pecuniam deferentem ad parts transmarinas transire permittatis, sine nostra
licentia speciali. Test Rege apud Blidam, etc.

The like mandate went out afterward to the Constable of Dover, Claus. 29 Ed.
1. m. 8. dorso.
and Warden of the Cinque Ports, not to permit any Canon, Valet, or other
Messenger of the Order of the Praemonstratenses, to carry any moneys, or to
pass out of England, without the King's special license, as was done before for
Cluny.

But yet so prevalent were these begging Friars, by their importunities, and
favorers; that the Monastery of Cluny having sustained great losses, and being
deeply in debt, as was suggested, the King, notwithstanding his former
Prohibitions, was persuaded to grant to the Abbot thereof, and his Agents, to
come and collect an Aid, and relief from all the Cells, and Monasteries here
subject to that Order, and from all their Tenants within his Dominions, with
full protection, and encouragement so to do; Cl. 34 Ed. 1. Pro Abbate
Cluniacensi.
as by his Patent for that purpose, remaining upon Record, and too long to be
here inserted, it does appear.

And upon such, and the like occasions, it was that sometimes privately, and at
other times openly, and with the King's license, Collections, and Contributions
were fet on foot, and carried on throughout the whole Kingdom, wherein all art,
and Rhetoric imaginable was used, by suing, Preaching, and begging, to draw
people to unstring, and deposite according to their respective abilities, and
inclinations: by which means, the Nation was always kept bare, and poor, whilst
the wealth thereof was carried away into foreign parts, and mostly unto the
Kings Enemies, as appears by many complaints thereof, for that purpose made.
Particularly, Rot. Parl. An. 8 Ed. 3.
in a Parliament held An. 8 Ed. 3. a special Petition, and complaint was made
by the Commons in that behalf. And afterward, in several King's raigns, a
multitude more to the like effect; as by our Parliamentary Records it does
appear, which for brevities sake we here omit to specify, referring such as
would receive further satisfaction therein, to that excellent Abridgement of
the Tower Records, collected by the learned Sir Robert Cotton, and lately
printed.

Cardinal Woolsey at one time had raked up Twelve Barrels full of Gold, Speed
in H. 8. nu. 77.
and Silver, to serve the Pope in his wars, etc.

CHAP. XII. Courts.
COurts, and Jurisdictions of the Pope, both at Rome, and within the Kingdom,
drew constantly out of the People's purses incredible Masses of money. For, to
these Courts belonged Judges, Officials, Delegates, Referendaries,
Commissaries, Dataries, Scribes, Notaries, Proctors, Registers, Summoners,
Apparitors, Clarks, Sollicitors, and a multitude of other Officers, who all by
their places, and practice, grew rich, sent great sums to their chief, the
Pope, and helped to beggar the people. In these Courts all causes of
Contentions, and Instance, between party and party, as also ex officio, were
entertained, and cherished: And the charge, and expense going this way, was so
much the worse, in regard of the danger, turmoil, and vexation continually
attending those that had to do in these Courts: For by some other ways men
were wheadled, and gulled out of their money, to their no small content; but
here they were squeezed, racked, and tortured, as long as their purses, or
themselves could breath.

These Courts, at first were pretended to be instituted for Ecclesiastical
Persons, and causes only; But then, at the instance of Ecclesiastical persons,
many of the Laics were cited to Rome, to make Answer concerning businesses not
at all belonging to the Cognizance of that Court, as matters of Inheritances,
Gages, Pawns, Contracts, etc. And Laics also, upon Oath, or Allegation, that
they could not have Justice before their proper Judges, were admitted, and
encouraged to bring their Causes to Rome, or out of the King's, into the Pope's
Court. And thereupon the Pope's Judges, and Officers spared not to disturb all
other places of Judicature, in derogation of the King's authority,
excommunicating all that would not obey them.

And these Courts, as they were managed, became an accumulative charge, and
burden to the people: For the right of Patronage belonging to diverse Lay, and
Ecclesiastical persons, was (under Color of Prevention, or Provision) by the
power and authority of these Courts, usurped by the Pope, his Legates, and
Officers, when Benefices were vacant; and then the same usually conferred on
Courtiers, Favorites, Italians, and Strangers: And these men dying, either at
Rome, or in their way thither, or thence, their Benefices were conferred again,
by these Courts, upon others, to the great wrong of the right Patrons. And then
great Benefices would not he conferred on worthy persons, or on any other,
unless temporary gratuities, and continuing Pensions were first given, and
secured out of them to the Courtiers, Dependants, and Officers of the Pope. And
in granting these Benefices, many Arts were used to get money under the names
of Reservations, Permutations, Surrogations, etc.

In these Courts also Excommunications were often denounced for trifles, but
not taken off without great charge.

Confirmations of Foundations Ecclesiastical, Religious, and charitable, were
here purchased with great sums of money.

When the Pope had any Aid, or exhibition from the Ecclesiastics, here were
contrivances that they should be sure to be repaired again by the People.

All trifling frivolous causes drawn to these Courts, but no dismission without
good payment.

No Public Penance here awarded, without some private sums to be paid.

Licenses for money to keep a feme putein. Money exacted of Monks, and Friars
for concubinage, on presumption they had or might have quam pro quo. Farming
out Livings, and Benefices to poor Vicars, at such high rates, as they were
forced to get their money again of the People by Confessions, Anniversaries,
Obits, etc. Burial denied to all that died suddenly, or by chance, on
presumption they dyed in mortal sin, until here some good sum was paid. With
infinite other tricks, and devices, to draw money from the people, practiced by
these Courts, and their Officers, tedious to enumerate, but more intolerable to
be born; as may in some measure appear by the Stat. of Praemunire, and
Provisors, Vid. Coke Pl^cit. Coren. cap. 53. W. Prin Record of King John H. 3
Ed. 1.
pointed at in the former discourse; with the Suits, Attachments, and
Prohibitions, for suing for Lay Fees in these Courts, in derogation of the
Crown, and impoverishing of the People, exemplified by Mr. Prinne out of the
Tower Records.

To these Courts also the Popes sometimes would be so audacious as to cite even
Kings themselves, as claiming Jurisdiction over them. Thus Pope Boniface the
eighth, Matt. Wes^m. in An. 1301.10.435.
having a Controversy with our King Edw. 1. touching the Realm of Scotland,
which the Pope affirmed belonged to the Church of Rome, wrote to the King, That
if he pretended any Title to the Realm of Scotland, he should send his Proctors
to the Court of Rome, with all his evidences, proofs, and Instruments touching
the same, there to have and receive Justice in the premises.

At another time Pope Innocent the fourth summoned King Henry the third, Westminster.
M^tt. An. 1246. fo. 3^7.
to appear to Answer to one of his Vassals, David by name, and to give him
satisfaction, for some wrongs, as he said, he had done him. But, in the first
case, the King, by advice of his Lords, and Barons, slighted the citation: and
to the other nothing was returned but scoffs, and derision.

CHAP. XIII. Contributions for the Holy Land.
COntributions for relief of the poor distressed Christians in the Holy Land,
and to carry on the War against the common Enemy of Christendom, were
frequently set on foot: Sim. Dunel^^. Hist. fo. 249.
And by that means great sums were as often drained out of the Kingdom: but
then a small, or no part thereof employed for those purposes. Chron. W. Thorn.
Coll. 1926. Gervi^s. Dorobern. 1522.
For to this end the Popes often prevailed with Princes to impose on their
subjects, and made them the Instruments, on this pretense, to hook money out of
their pockets.

Johannes Ferentinus was sent hither from the Pope about that matter An. D.
1206. and sped so well in his negotiation, and carried such a great quantity of
money away with him, that King John wrote to the Pope the next year, Matr.
Paris in An. 1206. fo. 214.
Quod uberiores sibi fructus proveniant de regno Angliae, quam de omnibus
regionibus citra Alps, etc. That the Pope had greater profits out of England,
than all other Countries on this side the Alps, etc. Nay and these Levys were
continued sometimes for six years together, as Thorn notes: Thorn ut supr.
wherein the Kings themselves were wont to promote the business, by being
indulged by the Popes to go snips in the gains.

After the death of Pope Clement the 4th. the Sea of Rome continued void two
years, and ten months, Matt. Westminster. fo. 352. Contin. Matt. Paris. fo. 976. Tho.
Walsingh.
by reason of the great discord, and potent factions amongst the Cardinals: And
at last Theobald, the Archdeacon of Liege, who had been comrade, and
fellow-souldier with our King Edw. 1. in the Holy Land, was elected, and took
the name of Gregory the 10th. whereupon was made these verses, Papatum munus
tenet Archidiaconus unus, An. D. 1272.

Quem Patrem Patrum fecit discordia fratrum.
The Papal Office one Archdeacon takes,
Whom Father of Fathers Brethren's discord makes.


King Edward the First coming out of the H. Land into England, after the death
of his Father King Henry the Third, touched at Rome, where he was nobly
entertained, and caressed by his old friend this then Pope Gregory the 10th.
and between them it was contrived to raise some great sums in England, under
pretense of aid, and succor for the Holy Land: and in pursuance thereof a
special Nuntio was sent from the Pope, Reimundus.
to compel all Ecclesiastical persons to pay Two years Dismes: but so it
happened, that as the moneys came in, the King, and the Pope's Collectors
scrambled for it, but the Pope, as was believed, got the greatest share; and
the King wanting for his occasions of state, was forced to borrow several sums
of the Collectors, on sufficient security given for repayment, Pat. 20 Ed. 1.
m. 10.
as by the Bonds, Securities, Counter-bonds, and Acquittances, upon that
occasion, still extant amongst the Tower Records, may be seen; and by this
token, that at one time the King received of the Pope's Collectors 100000
marks, but not one penny, as I can learn, employed for the use pretended.

And from this practice of the King, and Popesgoing sharers in these, and other
sums, gotten from the People, when discovered, grew that infamous Proverb,
Matt. Paris in An. 1255. fo. 917.
That the King, and the Pope were the Lion and the Wolf: as, on the like
distasted occasion, these Satirical Rhimes had also been made, Ecclesiae navis
titubat, regni quia clavis
Errat: Flor. Hist. An. 1306.
Rex, Papa, facti sunt unica capa:
Hoc faciunt, Do, Des, Pilatus hic, alter Herodes.
The Church's ship in safety cannot home pass,
When the chief Pilot once mistakes his Compass:
When King, and Pope are given both to plundring,
One Pilate proves, the other Herod thundering.


Which trick, of sharing with the Popes, Arnold. Ferron. de reb. Gall.
was learned by the French Kings, of ours: but some of them grew so cunning at
last, as to put all that was raised that way into their own Pockets, and so
out-shot the Pope in his own Bow.

CHAP. XIV. Croisado's.
CRoisado's, and vowed expeditions to the Holy Land, and against Turks, and
Infidels, dispensed withal, or commuted, was another trick of the like nature,
and oftentimes brought great sums into the Pope's Exchequer.

For it being observed that the Turks ever warred against the Christians with
great alacrity, S. Hen. Blunts voyage into the Levan^.
upon a belief, that if they were killed, ipso facto, they went into Mahomet's
Paradise: The Pope, to beat the Turk at his own Weapon, would oftentimes
publish a Croisado, that is, invite persons to undertake expeditions against
the Infidels, upon promise of pardon of all their sins; Gapitula apud
Gaitintun. Chron Gervas. fo 1522. Temp. Hen. 2. Speln. Council. Tom. 2. fo. 117.
Rad. de Diceto Coll. 707.
Quicunque Clericus, vel Laicus, crucem acceperit, ab omnibus peccatis suis,
auctoritate Dei, and beatorum Apost. Petri and Pauli, and summi Pontificis,
liberatus est, and absolutus, as was declared in one of our Councils. Upon
which multitudes of all sorts, as Kings, Nobles, and Common people, according
to the zeal, and persuasion of those times, would vow to go, and list
themselves for the Holy War, and in token thereof continually afterward wore
upon their Backs, Crouchbacks.
the sign or badge of a Red Cross, as being to fight against the enemies of
Christ's Cross.

Now the Pope being God's Lieutenant over these Troops, for money would absolve
these of their vows, or such of them, as upon second thoughts, desired to stay
at home. Will. Malm^^. lib. 4. cap. 2.
Frequently would he also divert, and turn their Arms to other uses, as to
subdue the Albigenses, Waldenses, and many others of the Popes private enemies.
Matt. Paris in An. 1250. fo. 803.
And Matt. Paris tells a story, how once the Pope sold these crossed Pilgrims
to others, even for ready money, as the Jews did their Sheep, and their Doves
in the Temple. Besides, when some great expedition was in hand, and great
contributions made to carry on the War, the Pope must be made the Treasurer;
but never gave any account of his disbursements, keeping, or converting all, or
most of the money to his own use. Also in absence of Princes upon those
expeditions, the Popes, and their Officers, took their full swings, to the
enriching themselves, besides many other considerable advantages, and acquists,
as by the Histories, and Complaints of Christendom, in that matter, most fully,
and at large it does appear.

CHAP. XV. Ambassadors, Agents.
AMbassadors Leiger, and Extraordinary, Proctors, and Agents, constantly
residing at Rome, with their retinues, and servants, maintained there by our
Kings, drew as constantly great sums of money out of the Kingdom. For Rome
being the seat of Policy, and the Popes making themselves concerned, and busy
in the affairs of all Princes, these took it, as it was indeed, their interest,
to have continually their respective Agents, and Ambassadors there, to
solicit for their Master's interest, to oppose contrary Factions, and to gain
intelligences.

And for these, and the like purposes, our Kings always had two, three, or more
at a time there: from, and to whom, multitudes of Internuntio's, Carryers, and
Messengers, were continually posting, and running, with Letters, Instructions,
and Dispatches; all occasioning a vast expense. And by these it was, ^
Ninotismo d^ Roma.
that the Popes were courted, and caressed; their Nephews, Cardinal Patrons,
and Favorites bribed, and presented: For the Popes are never without their
Creatures, and Privado's, a Caesar Borgia, a Donna Olympia, or some such like,
who must be effectually dealt withal, and by them way made to the Pope's ear,
and savor; besides Pensions, and Gratuities to servants, and Officers, through
whose hands business ran, for expedition, Intelligence, etc.

One memorable Record testifying all this, with the King's care to transmit
moneys to his Ambassadors, for the purposes aforesaid, it will not be amiss
here to exhibit, Pa^. 8 and 9 Joh. Reg. ^.5. m. 3.
Rex omnibus Mercatoribus ad quos, etc. Sciatis quod quicunque mutuo tradiderit
Hen. Abbati Belli loci, and Thomae de Ardinton, and Amfredo de Dene, nunciis
nostris, quos misimus ad curiam Romanam pro negotiis nostris, quingentas
marcas: nos ei vel nuncio suo has literas nostras referenti una cum literis
praedictorum nunciorum summam illius mutui, eas plene persolvemus: Et ad hoc
nos obligamus per nostras has literas patentes. Test Dom. P. Winton. Episcopo
apud Rokingham 20 die Febr. anno regni nostri 8. Et injunctum est Thomae de
Ardinton, and Amfredo de Dene, qui habent in hac forma quatuor paria chartarum,
singulas de D. Marcis, ita quod per totum sunt M M marc. quod nihil inde
expendant sicut diligant corpora sua, ante consummationem negocii pro quo
remittuntur ad Curiam: Et debent reddere Justic. cartam de M marcis de priore
itinere suo, in quo tulerunt chartas de MMM marcis, and non expenderunt per
totum nisi M M marcas, vacatis inde 30 Marc. de uno anno de foedo P. fill. Ric.
fratri Dom. Papae: and O. Hanibal 60 Marc. and ad dict. termin. cassand. de 50
Marc. Et nepoti Dom. Port. 20 Marc. Et Praeceptum est Justic^ quod cartam illam
afferat Regi. Et praeceptum est Thomae de Ardinton quod cartam nepotis Dom.
Port, quae liberetur antequam nomen inserebatur, afferat, quoniam nomen
nesciebatur cum carta scripta fuit. A notable Record this, implying the King's
care, and caution in that affair.

So King Edward the First, sending Franciscus Accursius, and other Messengers
to Rome about his Affairs there, issued several Instruments for furnishing them
with money; and payment of the annual Pension to his Advocate in Rome; and to a
Cardinal at Rome, granted to them, till they could be preferred by him to
Benefices, or Offices, of greater value; all preserved to this day, too long to
be here transcribed, Pat. 6. Ed. 1. m. 6. De D^^^iis Fran. Accursio, and fociis
nunciis Regis ad cur. Roma^am.
and of which let this one satisfy, as a specimen of the rest, Rex Orlandino
de Podio, and sociis suis mercatoribus de Luk salutem. Mandamus vobis, quod de
denariis nostris vel vestris is custodia vestra existentibus habere faciatis
dilecto Cierico nostro Domino Francisco Accursio, and sociis suis nunciis
nostris ad curiam Romanam proficiscentibus, rationabiles expensas suas quibus
indigent in cundo, ibidem morando, and redeundo, ad expeditionem negotiorum
praedictorum. Et cum sciverime^ quantum eis liberaveritis, nos debitam
allocationem seu quietanciam vobis inde habere faciemus. Test Rege apud
Shetwik xvij. die Sept.

Many other transcripts, Chart. 1 John nu. 12. Claus. 10 Hen. 3. m. 1. dors.
Pat. 52 Hen. 3. nu. 15. Pro R.S. Angeli Diacon. Cardinal. Claus. 9 Ed. 1.
and Instruments of like nature might here be produced, as likewise promises,
and assurances of gratuities, and annual pensions to Cardinals, and others, to
engage them to promote the King's businesses in the Court of Rome. And in one
year only King Edw. 1. sent Letters, and Addresses, with competent sums, and
arrears of Pensions to no fewer than seventeen Cardinals, and Officers in the
Court of Rome, to engage them to attend, and promote his affairs there.

By these Ambassadors, and Agents the Kings gratuities, and bounty, was handed
to the Popes, upon several occasions: Lo. Herb. Hist. fo. 211.
as King Henry the Eighth, in the year 1526. sent to Pope Clement the seventh
being in some distress, Holinshead in H^n. 8.
Thirty Thousand Ducats for a Present. At another time, in the same King's
reign, the Pope being under restraint, and want, by the Emperors means, the
Cardinal of York carried at one time out of the Kingdom 240000 l. of the King's
Treasure, Speed in H. 8.
to work his delivery.

The last public Ambassador sent hence, and residing at Rome, was Sir Edward
Carne, Doctor of the Civil Law, Knighted by the Emp. Charles the Fifth: who lay
Leiger there several years, and there dyed about the beginning of the reign of
Queen Elizabeth; and ever since that way of negotiation, and expense, to the
great ease of the Exchequer, has ceased.

CHAP. XVI. Strangers Beneficed.
ANother way of draining infinite sums out of this Kingdom, to Rome, and
Italy, was the conferring of Bishoprics, and all sorts of Ecclesiastical
Benefices, Offices, and Promotions, upon Strangers, and chiefly Italians.

These constantly residing at Rome, and in Italy, had their Farmers, Factors,
and Agents here, to Collect their Rents, and Revenues, and transmit the same to
Rome, to be received, and spent there.

In the year 1253. Matt. Paris in An. 1253.
an Inquisition was taken of this, whereby it appeared, that the Ecclesiastical
Revenues in England, of the Italians (whereof many were Boys, more Dunces, but
all Aliens) did amount to no less than Threescore and ten thousand Marks per
annum: esteemed a greater revenue, at that time, than that of the King: which
occasioned the sharp Letter of Rob. Grosthead to the Pope, about that
grievance, with the Pope's disdainful reception of the same, at large related
by Mat. Paris, and of which more hereafter.

At a Parliament held An. 1379. Rot. Parl. An. 3 Ric. 2.
a great complaint was made of forrainers holding Ecclesiastical Benefices:
many Cardinals at Rome having the best Promotions, and Livings conferred on
them, or granted to hold in Commendam, Acts and Mon. Tom. 1. f. 389.
of which there are Catalogues yet extant. And of this many mischiefs did
ensue; As little or no Divine Service, or Instruction of the People: No
Hospitality kept, for relief of the Poor: Decay of Houses, and increase of
Barbarism; so that between the Italian Hospitality, which none could ever see,
and a little Latin Service, which few, or none could understand; the poor
English were ill fed, but worse taught: And lastly the exhausting the wealth of
the land, to the impoverishing of the People, and weakening of the King, and
Kingdom, in case of invasion, or any attempts against them. But how all this
was then resented, you shall hear more anon.

Memorable is it, that in the raigns of King Hen. 7. and King Hen. 8. the
Bishopric of Worcester had four Italians successively, of which none ever
lived there.

Johannes Gigles, or de Liliis, Go^w. de P^aeful. Angl. in W^g^^n.
born at Luca.

Sylvester Gigles, his Nephew, succeeded.

Julius Medices, a Cardinal of Rome, Nephew to Pope Leo the tenth, and
afterward Pope himself by the name of Clement the seventh.

Hieronymus de Nugutiis, upon the resignation of Jul. Medices, enjoyed it many
years.

And such prevalence had the Popes, and Cardinals in this matter, that once
King Edw. 1. having promised the Cardinal-Bishop of Sabine, at his instance, to
present one Nivianus, an Italian, his Chamberlain, to a Benefice in
Licolnshire, then in his gift by the death of another Italian the Popes
Chaplain, and forgetting his promise, presented his own Clark thereunto; but
being reminded thereof, to make good his promse, P^t. 5 E. 1. m. 16. De
praesemation: pro M Aptonio de Niviano
he revoked his first Presentation, and Presented Nivianus to it, as appears by
his Patent for that purpose, still preserved amongst our Records.

At such time as Rubeus, Mar. Paris in An. 1240. fo. 540
and Ruffinus, two of the Pope's Factors, were very busy here in England in
Collecting money for the Pope, one Mumelinus comes from Rome, with Four and
twenty Italians, with orders that they should be admitted to so many of the
best Benefices that should next fall void. M^^t. P^j^^ codem anno.
And in the same year it was, that the Pope made agreement with the People of
Rome, that if they would effectually aid him against Frederick the Emperor,
their Children should be put into all the vacant Benefices in England: And
thereupon order was sent to Edmund Archbishop of Cant. the Bishops of Lincoln,
and Salisbury, that Provision should be made for Three hundred Romans Children,
to be served of the next Benefices that should fall; unde stupor magnus corda
haec audientium occupavit; timebaturque quod in abyssum desperationis, talia
audiens mergeretur, as the Historian has it: But this made such an impression
upon the Archbishop, being a tender man, to see the Church in that manner
wounded, and so much evil in his days, that he disposed of his affairs, and
retired into France, where for a little while he lived, Godw. in vita ejus.
bewailing the deplorable state of his Country, and of grief dyed at Pontiniac.

CHAP. XVII. Priories-Alien.
PRiories-Alien were another cause, or means of carrying great sums, for a
long time, out of the Kingdom. And these were of this Original, viz. according
to the devotion of the times, many foreign Monasteries and Religious Houses
were endowed with possessions here in England: and then the Monks beyond Sea,
partly to propagate more of their own Rule, and Order, and partly to place
Stewards, as it were, to transmit a good proportion of the Rents, and profits
of these their new acquired possessions, at so great a distance, would either
by themselves, or the assistance of others, build a Cell, or competent and
convenient reception, for some small Covent, to which they sent over, from time
to time, such numbers as they thought fit, and constituted Priors over them
successively, as occasion required: and thereupon they were called
Priories-Aliens, because they were Cells to some Monasteries beyond the Seas.
And these Foundations became frequent after the Conquest; So as in the reign of
King Edward the third, they were increased to the number of one hundred and ten
in England.

With some proportion, or allowance out of the revenues of these, the Prior and
Monks sent over were maintained, and the residue transmitted to the Houses to
which they were allied: to the great damage of the Kingdom, and enriching of
strangers.

In time, the Foundations of these Priories-Alien became very numerous, being
spread all over the Kingdom. Lamb. Peram. of Kent. Weav. Fun. Mon.
One John Norbury erected two, the one at Greenwich, the other at Lewsham in
Kent; both belonging to the Abbey of Gaunt in Flanders.

At Wolston, in Warwickshire, a Cell, W. Dugd. Warw. in Wolston.
or Religious House, was founded, subordinate to the Abbey of St. Peter Super
Dinam in France. Another at Monks-Kirby, in the same County, Id. fo. 50.
founded by Geffry Wirce of Little Britain in France, appropriated to the
Monastery of Angiers the principal City of Anjou. And another at Wotton Wawen,
in the same County, Id. fo. 604.
a Cell of Benedictin Monks, belonging to Conchis in Normandy: of all which Mr.
Dugdale has several remarks of Antiquity.

At Hinckley, in Leichestershire, Burton Descrip. of Leic. fo. 134.
a Priory of Canons Aliens was founded by Robert Blanchmains Earl of Leicester,
or as some say by Hugh Grandmeisnell Baron of Hinckley, belonging to the Abbey
of Lira in Normandy: and this of a very good value.

Roger de Poictiers founded a cell for Monks-Aliens at Lancaster. Cambd. Brit.
in Lancast.


Edward the Confessor, Id. in Glocest. fo. 362.
by his Testament assigned the religious place at Deochirst in the County of
Gloucester, and the Government thereof, to the Monastery of St. Denis near
Paris in France: in this remarkable, that it will be hard to given another
instance of such an assignation before the Norman Conquest.

King Henry the third once gave license to the Jews, Stow Survey in Broadst.
Ward. Lindwood Constit. lib. 3. Tit. 20.
at their great charge, to build a Synagogue in London; which when they had
finished, he ordered should be dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and then made it a
Cell to St. Anthony's in Vienna.

And near unto Charing Cross there was another, Stow Survey in Westminster. fo. 495.
annexed to the Lady of Runciavall in Navarre, in the Diocese of Pampelone,
founded in the fifteenth year of King Edward 4.

At Sion, Cambd. in Midd. fo. 420.
in Middlesex, there was anciently a Monastery for Monks-Aliens: Mr. Cambden
tells us when they were expuls'd, and how it was converted into a Nunnery for
Virgins, to the honor of our Savior, the Virgin Mary, and St. Briget of Syon.

But Lindwood tells us, Lindwoed l. 3. Tit. 20.
that the Superior House, to which at first it belonged, not mentioned by Mr.
Cambden, was at Wastena, in the Kingdom of Sweden, of the Rule of St. Austin.

But the richest of all for annual revenue, Harpsfield Catalog. Ae l. Rel. fo.
762.
was that which Yvo Talbois built at Spalding in Lincolnshire, giving it to
the Monks of Angiers in France: the yearly revenue whereof was valued at 878 l.
18 s. 3 d. per annum.

Instances might be made of a multitude more of the like Foundations, all
tending to carry money out of the Kingdom, and most commonly to the King's
Enemies beyond the Seas. Which mischief being apprehended, Rot. Parl. 50 E 3.
nu. 128.
and great complaints thereof frequently made in Parliament, these
Priories-Alien became oftentimes seized into the King's hands, and the revenues
thereof sequestered to the King's use: and then restitutions made, and seisures
again, as occasion required; until the fourth year of King Henry the fourth,
Claus. 4 H^n. 4. nu. 30.
when a new consideration was had in Parliament about these Priories-Alien, and
resolved that all should again be seized into the King's hands, excepting those
that were Conventual: and thereupon Summons was given to all the said Priors to
appear on the Octaves of St. Hillary at Westminster, and to bring with them all
their Charters and Evidences, whereby the King and his Council might be
satisfied, whether they had been Priories Conventual time out of mind, or not.
But notwithstanding this Act, and that the former seisures had been made upon
this ground, that by transportation of the revenues belonging to these English
Cells, to those Houses in France, whereunto many of them belonged, and were
subordinate, the King's Enemies, at such times as he had wars with the French,
were assisted: in the Parl. held at Leic. An. 2 Henry the fifth, it being
considered, that though a final peace might afterward be made between England
and France, yet the carrying over such great sums of money yearly to those
foreign Monasteries, would be much prejudicial to this Kingdom, and the People
thereof: there was an Act then made, that all the possessions in England,
belonging to the said Priories-Alien, should thenceforth remain to the King,
his Heirs, and Successors for ever, excepting such whereof special declaration
was then made to the Contrary, Rot. Parl. 2 Hen. 5. nu. 9.
Al intent (says the Act) que divine Services en les lieux avantdictz purront
pluis duement estre fait per genti Anglois en temps avenir, que n'ount este
fait devant cest heurs en icelles per gents Francois, etc. intimating the
mis-imployment of the same. And so from thenceforth our Kings disposed of these
Priories-Alien, and all their revenues arising hence, in such manner as they
thought most conducible to the good, and ease of themselves, and the People:
Which Act of State proved a Praeludium to the dissolution which befell the
entire English Monasteries, in the reign of King Henry the eighth.

CHAP. XVIII. Knights Templars, and Hospitallers.
THE Orders of the Knights Templars, and Hospitallers were also possessed of
large revenues, and lands here: a great part of the profits whereof was
transported away, and spent out of the Kingdom.

For the Original, Rule, and nature of these Orders, several have collected,
and exhibited them, particularly Mr. Dugdale, W. D^gd. Hist. of Warw. fo. 704
An. 1 Ed. 2.
to whom those that would be satisfied therein are referred. For our purpose,
let it be sufficient to note, That in the year 1307. by the King's special
command, Hen. d'Knighton coll. 2531
and a Bull from the Pope, the Templars were generally throughout the Kingdom
laid hold on, and cast into prison, and all their possessions seized into the
King's hands. Th. Walsingh. Hist. fo. 73. An. D. 1311.
The crimes objected against them were very heinous, contained in diverse
Articles, but whether true, or false we will not now examine. And it was not
long after that the whole Order was condemned, and suppressed in a General
Council at Vienna, under Pope Clement the fifth, and their possessions given to
the Knights Hospitallers: who enjoyed the same here till the 32. year of King
Hen. Stat. 32 H. 8^ cap. 24.
8. when an Act of Parliament was made, reciting, That diverse of the King's
subjects called Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, abiding beyond the Sea,
receiving yearly out of this Realm great sums of money, have unnaturally, and
contrary to the duty of their allegiances, substained and maintained the
usurped power, and authority of the Bishop of Rome, lately used, and practiced
within this Realm, he the said Bishop being common Enemy to the King our
Sovereign Lord, and this his Realm: and considering, that it were better that
the possessions in this Realm belonging to such as adhered to the Bishop of
Rome, should be employed, and spent within this Realm, for the defense of the
same, than converted to and amongst such unnatural subjects, etc. It was
enacted, That the said Corporation of Knights Hospitallers, within his
Majesty's Dominions, should be utterly dissolved; and that the King, his Heirs,
etc. should have all their Manors, Lands, etc. And so the Kingdom was freed of
that mischief, which their transporting so much money yearly out of it had
occasioned.

Queen Mary (a Princess more zealous, than wise, or politic) made some attempt
to restore the Convents dissolved by her Father, Sand. de Schism. lib. 2. fo.
30^.
and Brother: particularly re-instating the Benedictines at Westminster: The
Carthusians at Shone: The Brigetteans at Sion: The Dominicans at Smithfield in
London: A sort of Franciscans, heretofore zealous for the legality of her
Mother's marriage, at Greenwich: And the Hospitallers of St. John's of
Jerusalem in Clarkenwell: But her example was not followed by any of the
Nobility, or others, who had incorporated any of the Abbey Lands into their
estates; but the Queen restored only what remained in the Crown un-aliened from
the same: But yet such a beginning of hers gave a shrewd alarm to all the
rest, that they should be attaqued, in convenient time, with some Acts of
resumption, which would compel them to refund; and that the rather, because
Cardinal Pool, in that Act in this Queen's reign, to secure the Abbey Lands to
the then Owners (without a formal passing whereof to quiet at present so many
persons concerned, Popery would not so easily have bin restored at that time)
would not absolve their consciences from restitution; but only made, as it
were, a temporary palliate cure, the Church of Rome but suspending that power,
which in due time was to be put in execution. But, for our Hospitallers, as I
said before, they were, with some others, restored, and placed in their
shattered mansion in Clarkenwell, Stow. Survey fo. 483.
Sir Thomas Tresham being made the Prior of the Order. But the short reign of
that Queen prevented further restitutions: And Queen Elizabeth coming to the
Crown, permitted all things to remain for some time, as she found them; so that
at her first Parliament she sent writs to the Lo. Prior Tresham, and Abbot
Fecknam, to appear as Barons therein; but they were scarce warm in their Seats,
but they, with all the rest of the late restored Orders, were once again
dissolved; and the Kingdom's fears of refunding, and resumption, for that time
cured, with addition of hope never to be so frighted again.

As Allies, and Successors to these Knights Templars, and Hospitallers, it will
not be amiss something to note of the Knights of Malta. How they were first
expulsed out of the Holy Land, and then out of Rhodes, by the Turks; how
afterward they seated at Nice, and Syracuse successively, and at last settled
in the Island Malta, where now they are, we referr those that would be
satisfied therein to the Historians, and Travelers that have taken notice of
them. Gro. Sandies Trav. lib. 4. fo. 229. Travels of Jo. Ray. fo. 303.
But we are informed by our late Travelers, That now in the City of Valetta,
in Malta, they have Alberges, Halls, or Seminaries of the eight several Nations
of the Order, which are the French, Italians, German, English, Provencal,
Auvergnois, Castilian, and Arragonian: These Albergs are buildings like
Colleges; and the Seignior of each Nation is Superior of the Alberg, Grand
Prior of his Nation, of the Gran Croce, as they call it, and of the Privy
Council of the Great Master. Amongst these there is an Alberg, or an apartment
for the English Nation, or rather a piece of ground enclosed, with the
foundation of an Alberg, the Walls being not quite reared up. This standing now
void, for want of English to stock it, some of the Citizens would have bought
the ground, to have built upon: but the Grand Master and Council would not sell
it, expecting that one day the English Nation would be reduced again to the
Obedience of the Roman Church, and then it would be finished, and replenished
with such for whom it was first designed. In the time of Mr. Sand's being
there, an Irishman, living in Naples, and receiving a large Pension from the
King of Spain, bore the Title of Grand Prior for the English; but who has
since succeeded in that Office, I have not thought it very necessary to
inquire. And in like manner, as we are informed, the other dissolved Orders,
especially those as were of greatest note, and most richly endowed, still keep
up, and continue their Successions, as well as they can, with Rentals, and
Particulars of the possessions of their respective Houses, in hopes they will
revert once again to their former use.

CHAP. XIX. Elections of Popes, and Cardinals.
THE Election, and making of Popes, and Cardinals was another way of carrying
great sums frequently out of England to Rome: And that upon this account.

The Pope being both a spiritual Monarch, and a Temporal Prince, it could not
otherwise be, but by that sway which he bore in the Consciences of such as
owned his authority, he came to have a great influence over all the State
affairs of Christendom, besides his challenging a power to depose Kings,
absolve Subjects of their Oaths of Allegiance, dispense with Vows, and Oaths,
and dispose of Kingdoms, and States as he pleased: and then the Kings, and
States of Europe acting according to their respective rules of State, and
Policy, there continually happened a reciprocation, and recurrence of Treaties,
Leagues, Alliances, Quarrels, and Wars amongst them: And the Popedom being
Elective, all those Princes, and States (amongst whom our Kings had their
proper concerns) made it their interest, and utmost endeavor, in a vacancy, to
procure the promotion of such a one to that See, as might be favorable, or at
least not noxious, to their interests, and designs. And hence all the subtle
contrivances, the secret Cabals, sometimes the twisting, and at other times the
unravelling of interests, and factions, the canvassing of parties, the buying
of votes, the purchasing of intelligence, the bribing of Officers, and any
thing, or every thing that money would do, must be set on foot, and carried on
with utmost vigor, cost, and pains. At such a time, and occasion Rome becomes
thronged with Ambassadors, and Agents, with their Guards, and Retinue, from all
quarters, and all at a vast expense, watching, laboring, and sweating, every
one for his Master's business: whilst the roads are pestered with Messengers,
Curriers, and Posts, carrying, and re-carrying of News, intelligence, and
instructions.

Then, by reason of all this packing, and canvassing, it often happens that the
Conclave cannot agree in many months, though generally those Princes who had
bin most liberal, have had their turns served; and many times again, by reason
of the fierce opposition, and difficulties, the Cardinals, not to disgust the
contending factions, are fain to pitch upon some heavy, old, overgrown man, who
is likely to do neither hurt, nor good, or at least not long, and sometimes
again the Conclave becomes so divided, and rent, that one part of them chooses
a Pope, and another part an Antipope, and when these (with their partisans)
have for some time scuffl'd, tug'd, and fought for it, in comes a third dog, and
catches the hare from them both: and sometimes three Popes have been up, and in
play at one time. In this hurly-burly St. Peter's chair is overturned, and
broke in pieces; one Pope snatches up part of it, and runs into Germany;
another scrambles for another part, and runs with it into France; whilst
another pieces up the remaining shivers, and seats himself at Rome. Presently
the world is filled with complaints, Remonstrances, and Manifesto's: The
Emperor storms, and says his man had foul play, and that his Imperial Eagle
shall fly his utmost pitch to do him right: The surly Spaniard grumbles, and
protests he will hazard all his Indies, before his Creature shall be so
baffled: And the French King swears that all his Flowers de Lis shall wither,
before his Confident shall be rooted out: neither are our Kings of England only
lookers on whilst this game is in playing, but either their Arms, or their
money, must be laid to stake on one side.

In this Battle-Royal, after many incounters, and ran-counters, the weakest,
though not always the worst, most commonly goes to the Walls: one of them
perhaps sent out of the world with a Fig, or a Potion: another entrapp'd, and
thrown into a Dungeon: whilst the third, for a few months, or it may be years,
struts up and down, claps his wings, and crows as victor; and then goes himself
to the Pot, and leaves the Pit for other Combatants, and the spectators to
their expectation of more sport.

Of this sort Bellarmine reckons up six and twenty schisms in the Roman Church,
but Onuphrius, a more exact accountant, Onuphr in vita Clem. 7.
reckons up thirty; whereof some lasted ten, some twenty, and one fifty years.
The Contemplation whereof has caused some to make a very shrewd objection,
against the perfect unity, complete succession, and Divine Infallibility, so
much boasted of in that Church.

I might, and could easily here make particular instance of all these famous
bickerings, scuffles, and counter-scuffles: but the same being obvious to all
that converse with books, Dr. Stilling-fleet of the divisions of the Romans
Church.
and something having bin lately worthily done to that purpose, and it being a
Parergon to the drift of these papers, we will no further engage in these
quarrels, than to note, that they were cause, for the reasons aforesaid, of
great expense to our English Kings, when they thought it their interest to have
a friend seated in the Pontifical chair: and the reason of that Policy now
ceasing, we being altogether unconcerned in that affair, the money that used to
leak that way, is kept within the Kingdom, to the great ease, quiet, and
benefit both of King, and People.

I will only here take liberty to mention one famous schism, the procedure,
and conclusion thereof justifying all that we have before pointed at in this
matter. About the year 1404. Platina in vitis Innoc. 7 Greg. 12. Alex. 5. Jo 24
Innocent the seventh being Pope; by the prevalence of a Faction, one Petrus de
Luna was set up at Avignion, as Antipope against him: between these was great
struggling, and holding, till the death of Innocent; but the Faction dyed not
with him, Pet^r Moon.
for the Cardinals chose Gregory the twelfth, between whom, and Peter de Luna,
who called himself Benedict the thirteenth, the schism continued with great
sury, whereby such mischief, and disturbance grew in the world, that to appease
the matter there was no other remedy, but to depose them both; which was done
in a Council at Pisa; and a third man, Alexander the fifth, chosen in their
rooms; the two disbanded, Popes sneaking away to their Friends: But this
Alexander soon dying, as not enjoying his dignity above eight months, A
Neapolitan.
Balthazar Cossa was chosen in his stead, who took the name of John the
twenty-fourth, and then the two discarded Popes peep out, and begin to stir
again, with many abetters on all sides. To compose all which, (there being now
three Popes on foot, at once:) a Council was called at Constance, where all
these three were deposed: in which transaction the King of England had a great
stroke, as Platina expressly says: but long it was, In vita Johan. 24.
and with much ado, before all would submit to Martin the fifth, who was then
chosen; Gregory the twelfth dyed soon of grief upon it: Peter de Luna betakes
himself to a strong Castle, and stands upon his guard, and justification,
having many friends, and particularly the Scots, as is specially remembered; but
all would not do, his party was run down, and he from that time vanished: The
third, that is John 24. took his heels, and ran for it, in a disguise, but being
discovered, and apprehended by the Count Palatin, he was kept several years a
Prisoner, Platina says in the Castle of Heidelberg, Camerar. Hist. meditat. l.
4. cap 7.
but Camerarius has it in the Castle of Mansheim, where, says he, they use to
show the Chamber, in which he was imprisoned, and where, at his Exit, he left
these verses, of his own making, bewailing the lubricity of fortune, the vanity
of the world, and his own Captivity.

Qui modo summus eram, gaudens and nomine, Praesul,
Tristis and abjectus nunc mea fata gemo.
Excelsus Solio nuper versabar in alto,
Cunctaque gens pedibus oscula prona dabat.
Nunc ego poenarum fundo devolvor in imo;
Vultum deformem quemque videre piget.
Omnibus e terris aurum mihi sponte ferebant,
Sed nec gaza juvat; nec quis amicus adest.
Sic varians fortuna vices, adversa secundis
Subdit, and ambiguo nomine ludit atrox.
Papa fecit.
I, who of late enjoyed the highest place,
Now, all forlorn, bewail my wretched case.
I lately wore the glorious Triple Crown,
All kissed my feet with humbly-falling down:
But now I Am thrown into a pit of woe,
And my abhorred face dare hardly show.
From all parts treasure flowed in to me,
But now, or Gold, or Friend I cannot see.
Thus Fortune's rolling wheel pursues its scope,
Sometimes she smiles, and then deludes our hope.
By the Pope.
But up his exauctoration, or reducement, one made this Distich,
Balthazar imprimis vovitabar, and inde Johannes,
Depositus, rursus Balthazar ipse vocor.
First Balthazar, and then Pope John I was,
But now deposed, for Balthazar must pass.
Neither was all this laboring, tugging, and canvassing, for that supreme
dignity of the Popedom only, but proportionably as great endeavors, and
expenses were had for the obtaining of the intermediate promotions of Priorys,
Abbacys, Bishoprics, and Cardinalships, all being as mediate steps, whereby to
mount at last the Pontifical Throne. And this matter of promotion, and
preferment, continually carried great sums to Rome, from private and
particular persons, who aimed to climb as high as money would carry them; and
without that, the greatest merit, or endeavors were but to little purpose.
Ambition is rooted in the nature of all men, and scarce ever any took Orders,
but he designed to arrive at the highest dignity his Order was capable off:
hence all that holding, thrusting, and striving, for all those improveable, and
growing preferments here, from the Priest, to the Bishop: and all that
appealing, and running to Rome, for Confirmation: and after that, all the
solicitations, bribing, and driving of interests for a Cardinalship: and never
any rest, till they arrive at St. Peter's Chair, or the Grave.

In the reign of King Henry the Fifth, Sp^ed Chron. in Hen. 5.
what a vast sum of money was amassed by H. Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester, of
which at one time he lent the King 20000 l. and took his Crown to pawn for it;
with part of this he obtained a Cardinalship, but lived not to finish, with the
rest, his designed purchase of the Papacy.

In the reign of King Henry the Eight, Lo. Herb. Hist. Hen. 8.
the great, and rich Woolsey was never quiet, but always caressing, and
presenting with great sums, sometimes the Emperor, sometimes the K. of
France, and at all times some leading Cardinals, for their interest, and favor
for his Election to the Popedom; and thereupon, after the death of Pope Leo the
tenth, he renews his solicitations to the Emperor, and French King, and sends
Doctor Pace, his Agent, with good sums to the Cardinals at Rome: but Adrian
the sixth was chosen before the heavy solicitor came to the end of his
journey. But then again, after the death of this Adrian, Woolsey puts hard for
it again, with all that wooing, entreaty, and money could do; but such an ill
Planer reigned over his projects, that he was gulled of his money, and baffled
once again, Julio de Medici, by the name of Clement the seventh, carrying it
clear from him: but, a little to comfort our repulsed Cardinal, upon his
earnest request, this Pope Clement condescended that the Legantine power, which
Adrian before had granted only for five years, and so from five years, to five
years, should now be conferred ^on Woolsey for term of life; whereby he might
enjoy a kind of Papal authority in England, which he missed at Rome: but this
Cordial proved too strong for him to digest, and utterly ruined his
constitution, as by the series of his story does appear.

And now these mighty endeavors, and expenses for those promotions in the
Court, and Church of Rome, to Cardinalships, and the Papacy, makes me conceive
it not altogether impertinent here, to make a little enquiry, what Countrymen
of ours attained those dignities, and whether the pains and cost expended was
answered by the preferment.

I confess not many of our Countrymen have reached those high dignities of
Pope, and Cardinal; though always some or other of them, have been gaping, and
aspiring that way; the Pontifical Chair, and the steps to it, having been
mostly possessed by Italians, intimated by that noted Observation in Italy it
self, That of the Romans, Sr. Edw. Sands E^rop. specal. 10.91.
the Priests are the most wicked: And of the Priests, the lewdest are made
Cardinals: and of the Cardinals, the worst are chosen Popes: But the most
famous that sprung up there of the English growth, of both sorts, take as
follows.

Pope Joan shall lead the dance, Pope Joan. Pla^ina in vita J. han. 8. Jo. Bale
in vita ejus, Et Godw. Alex. Cook of Pope Jour.
of whom much might be said; but let it suffice here to be known: That all
writers agree her to be English by Parentage, though some say she was born at
Mentz in Germany, others that she was born in England. When she came to ripe
age, she ran away, in man's apparel with a Monk of Fulda, and studied in many
famous Academies, both of the Greeks, and Latins, especially Athens, where her
Paramour dyed, and then she came to Rome, where in Disputations, and
Scholastic exercises, An. Dom. 855.
she got such a fame, that after the death of Leo the fourth she was elected
Pope: which office she exercised two years, Contulit sacros ordines, promovit
Episcopos, ministravit sacramenta, caeteraque Romans Pont. exercuit munera. Cor.
Agrip. de Van. scient. cap. 62. de fact. monast. O Lucina fer opem
five months, and three days, celebrating Mass, giving Orders, and acting, in
all things, her part, as a complete Pope, only wanting the Masculine Gender.
But so it proved, that in the time of her Papacy she was gotten with Child, and
going to the Lateran, between Colosses, and St. Clements, she fell in ^^bour,
but wanting a Midwife, and other accommodations requisite in that case, she
there dyed: and for the scandal thereof, her successors, in all their
Processional pomps, have ever since avoided that way: and to prevent the like
to come, the Porphyry Chair was devised, Sabellic. lib. 1. Aenead. 9.
thus described by Sabellicus, Spectatur adhuc in Pontificia domo, marmorea
sella, circa medium inanis, qua novus Pontifex residat, ut sedentis genitalia
ab ultimo Diacono attrectentur, A marble Chair, with a hole in the seat,
wherein the new Pope fitting, the junior Deacon may handle his Genitals. This
story of Pope Joan the modern Pontificians do not like, though related by all
these Writers, and who were all Romanists.

Marianus Scotus.
Sigebertus Gemblacencis.
Martinus Polonus.
Sabellicus Mantuanus.
Johan. Parisiensis.
Antoninus Nauclerus.
Fascic. Temp. Author.
Fulgosus.
Theodoric. a Nyem.
Ravisius Textor.
Laonicas Chalcondylas.
Fran. Petrarcha.
Johannes Boccacius.
Ranulph. Cestrensis.
Johan. Lunidus.
Alph. de Cartagena.
Jo. Tritemius. Palmerius.
Valatteranus.
Canstantin. Phrygio.
Christ. Masseus.
Anselm. Rid.
Supplem. Chron. Author.
Chronic. Chronicorum.
Gotefridus Viterbiensis.
And for them all Platina, the famous writer of the Pope^s lives, who tells all
the story at large, concluding thus, Platina in vita Johan. 8.
Quae ideo ponere breviter and nude institui, ne obstinate nimium and
pertinaciter videar omisisse, quod fere omnes affirmant; that is, He would not
omit the relation, because almost all men then believed it to be true.

Nicholas Breakspear, Adrian. 4. An. D. 1154.
born at Langley near to St. Alban's, in the County of Hartford, acquired the
Popedom, by the name of Adrian the fourth. This man suffered Frederick the
Emperor to hold his stirrup as he alighted from his Horse, and then checked him
for not showing himself an expert Groom: and after excommunicates him, for
standing upon his right, and writing his name before the Popes: but not
therewithal sufficiently revenged, and with his Cardinals conspiring to ruin
the Emperor, sending a Counterfeit to stab him, and an Arabian to poison him,
he was choked with a Fly that got into his Throat; verifying what he used
often to say, That none can be more unfortunate than to be made Pope.

William Grisant, Urban 5. An. D. 1362. Tho. Walsingh. Hist. fo. 172.
an Englishman, obtained the Papacy, by the name of Urban the fifth. Of this
man Thomas Walsingham tells this story, That he waiting long in the Court of
Rome for preferment, and none coming, he complained to his friend, that he
verily thought in his heart, if all the Churches in the world should fall, yet
none would fall upon his head: but when he was Crowned Pope, his friend
remembered him of what he had said, and told him he had now gotten on his Head
all the Churches in the world. But the virtue of them all could not preserve
him from poison, Balaeus in vita ejus.
of which he dyed at Marseils, in his return (as is said) into Italy.

Geffry of Monmouth, Geffry of Monmouth. Pontic. Virun. Ciacon. Magdeburgens.
the famous Historian, is affirmed by some to have been a Cardinal: But the
very learned Bishop Godwin, in the Lives of the Bishops of St. Asaph, of which
this Geffry was one, much doubts it. I think it not worth the while now to
examine the business, or seasonable to animadvert upon the fabulosity of his
History: only there comes to mind a story that Roger Hoveden tells of him, Rog.
Hoved^n pars posterior Hen. 2. fo. 544.
how once he was slurr'd both of his Bishopric of St. Asaph, and the Abbacy of
Abingdon, when he cunningly designed to have held both. The story is thus; In a
Council then held, the Clergy of St. Asaph beseeched the Archbishop of
Canterbury, that out of the plenitude of his power, he would command Geffry
their Bishop to return to his Cure, and charge, or send them another in his
stead, for that he had withdrawn himself from them; and being come into
England, King Henry had given him the Abbacy of Abingdon, then void^^ whereupon
the Archb. convented Geffry before the Council, and injoined him, either
presently to return to his charge, or to resign it, and stand to favor: in
hope whereof, he resigns into the hands of the Archbishop, by delivering up his
Ring, and Pastoral staff. But the consequence was, that thereby he became
stripped of both; for the King presently gave the Bishopric to one Adam a
Welchman, and the Abbacy to a certain Monk.

Boso, Boso. An. D. 1155. Balaeus.
an Englishman, was made a Cardinal, of whom nothing is left memorable, but
that by his vehement stickling, he proved mainly instrumental in the Election
of Alexander the third to the Popedom, against the strong factions of Victor,
Innocentius Paschalis, and Calixtus, who all stood for the place; and thereupon
came to participate of the alternate fortunes of his Master, in his bickerings
with the Emperor at that time.

Stephen Langton was created Cardinal of St. Steph. Largton An. D. 1206. Matr.
Paris. Antiquit Britt. in Steph. Langt. Godw. in vita.
Chrysogon, and the Archbishopric of Canterbury falling void, by the death of
Hubert, the Monks chose Reginald the Sub-Prior, with great secrecy, and
injoined him silence, till he could get his confirmation at Rome. But he being
big of his Honor, could not forbear tattling, insomuch as King John then
reigning, dealt with the Monks to elect John Gray, Bishop of Norwich: upon
which, the two Elects appeal to Rome: but the Pope, to end the strife, put
Stephen Langton, his Cardinal, and Creature into the place: whose insolence
promoted, if not occasioned, all the mischiefs that happened in that King's
time, too large to be here specified, but fully related by all Writers of that
time.

Roger Curson, Roger Curson. An. D. 1211. Mart. Paris. Matt. Westminster Balaeus.
Onuphrius.
about the year 1211. was created Cardinal. Of him I find little amiss,
spending the most of his time in the Holy War, until at his return, he came
the Pope's Legate into England, as an instrument to promote the intolerable
exactions which the Kingdom suffered in the time of King Hen. 3. but he
presently vanished, the time, place, or manner of his death, being not now to
be retrived.

Robert Somercot, Rob. Somercot. An. D. 1231. Ciaconius. Onuphr. M. Paris.
created Cardinal under Pope Gregory the ninth, is charactered to have been a
person of very great merit: and after the death of that Pope, stood fairest for
the Election: but the Italian Cardinals resolving to have none but one of their
own Country, our Somercot was poisoned in the very Conclave.

Robert Kilwardby sat six years Archbishop of Cant. R. Kilwardby. A. D. 1278.
Godwin in vita ejus.
and then for a Cardinalship relinquished his See; and going into Italy to take
possession of his new dignity, within a few months he dyed, of poison, at
Viterbium there. Of this man there is a memorable story, implying the practice
of the Popes in making the English money their property, and disposing the same
at their pleasure; as also his ingenuity once in shifting himself neatly out of
such an encumbrance: Antiquit. Brit. in vita Kilw. fo. 189.
William Chillenden the Prior of Canterbury had spent 1300 marks about his
Election, but the Pope setting him aside, a little to stop his grumbling, and
make him some recompense, promised him that the next Archbishop should pay him
1300 marks, which sum when Chillenden came to demand of Kilwardby being the
next comer in, the Archbishop dealt seriously, and plainly with him, and told
him, that if he persisted to have the money, he knew privately so much of his
irregularity, that he could, and would out him of his Priory: at which
Chillenden was so frighted, that he durst make no further demand, and so the
Archbishop saved his money.

Hugo de Evesham, Hugo d'Evesh. An. D. 1287.
a famous Physician was dignified with a Cardinalship by Pope Martin the
fourth; after whose death, he for his worth, Bal. de Script. Brit.
and learning being just at point of being chosen Pope, was poisoned, as
Somercot had bin before him: to color which, Ciacon.
Ciaconius says he dyed of the Plague.

William Macklesfield, W. Macklesfield. An. D. 1303.
was made Cardinal by Pope Benedict the eleventh, but he dyed four months
before his Cap came; and therefore when it was brought, it was with great
solemnity set upon his Tomb.

Walter Winterborn, W. Winterb. An. D. 1305.
created Cardinal, to succeed Macklesfield, but enjoyed his honor a very few
months.

Thomas Joyce presently succeeds Winterborn: Thom. Joyce. Fratres Praedicatores.
these three last were all of the same Order: In the year 1311. this Cardinal
returning from his negotiation with the Emperor, Godw. in vita Tho. Joyce.
in Sabaudia lethali morbo correptus, vitam terminavit, as our Author has it.

Sertor of Wales, Sertor Wallens. An. D. 1361.
dyed in Italy, the fates denying him the honor, in the juncture of time, ante
susceptum pileism, as Macklesfield did before.

Grimoaldus de Grisant, Gri. d'Grisant An. D. 1366.
Kinsman of Pope Urban the fifth and by him created Cardinal, dyed at Avignion,
but how not known.

Simon Langham, first Bishop of Ely, Sim. Iangham An. D. 1376. Antiq. Britt.
and Godw. in vita.
and thence translated to Canterbury, and at last created a Cardinal: on which
account he went to Avignion, and there, as he sat at dinner, was suddenly
snatched away by a Paralysis.

Adam Easton, Cardinal, Adam. Easton. An. D. 1385.
siding with some other Cardinals in a great faction between two Anti-Popes:
seven of his Comrades were sewed up in bags, and thrown into the Sea; whilst
this Adam, degraded and tortured, was thrown into a most loathsome dungeon,
where he lay starving for five years together: but upon the turn of times was
afterward drawn out, and lived a few years.

Phillip Repingdon, Canon, Phil. Reping. An. D. 1408.
and Abbot of Leic. Chancellor of Oxford, Bishop of Lincoln, and at last
created Cardinal of St. Nereus, by Pope Gregory the twelfth, Acts and Mon. fo.
409.
became upon his promotions so intolerably terrible, and cruel, that he dyed
most hateful, and hated, being toward his latter end generally called Philip
Rampington.

Henry Beaufort, the rich Cardinal, H. Beaufort. An. D. 1426.
of whom something before: Notwithstanding all his wealth, dyed frustrate of
the Papacy, and despairing of better enjoyments in another world.

Christopher Bambridge, Chr. Bamb. Godw. in vita P. Jovius.
Archbishop of York, and then Cardinal, Sojourning, and intent on his office,
at Rome, was there poisoned by Rivaldus de Modena, a Priest, and one of his
domestics.

Thomas Woolsey, Tho. Wolsey. An. D. 1520
a Butcher's son of Ipswich, Archbishop of York, Chancellor of England, Lo.
Herb. Hist. Hen 8.
Cardinal, and Legate a Latere; whose high spirit not content with all the
preferrement the world could afford, except the very highest, put him upon
wooing, laboring, and bribing, at a vast expense, to obtain the Papacy; in
which attempt he received two notable repulses, a Brewers Son, by name of
Adrian the sixth being preferred before him. Thereupon he applies himself to
Pope it so in England by virtue of his Legatin power, that he ran himself
into a Praemunire, and the displeasure of a terrible, and resolute King; Cook 4
Instit. fo. 89.
and many Articles were framed against him, of which this was one, That he was
so audacious, as to rown the King in his Ear, and blow upon him, at such time
as he had the foul, and contagious disease of the great Pox broken out in
several places of his body: but as he was going toward London, under guard, to
make Answer to his crimes, in sad apprehension thereof he dyed heart-broken
with grief, or poison, Guicciard. Hist. of Italy. fo. 910.
at the Abbey of Leicester. Gui^ciardin has this note of him, An example in our
days worthy of memory, touching the power which Fortune, and envy have in the
Courts of Princes. And it was his insolence that made Charles Brandon, the Noble
Duke of Suffolk once say, It was never merry in England since we had Cardinals
amongst us.

John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, John Fisher. An. D. 1535. Speed Chron. in
Hen. 8. Herb. etc.
having made himself obnoxious to the King's Laws, and displeasure, by opposing
his Supremacy: the Pope, to secure his life, as conceiving the King would not
touch one of such a Character, made him a Cardinal, but the policy failed, and
it rather hastened his death, for by that time his Hat was come to Callis, his
Head was struck off at Tower Hill.

Reginald Pool, Regin. Pool. An. D. 1536. Sleidan. C^m. Charles 5.
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Cardinal, being beyond the Seas about the
beginning of the Reformation, wrote a Book for the Pope's Supremacy, against
the King, and therein incited the Emperor preparing against the Turk, to bend
his forces against his natural Sovereign, and native Countrymen, as being worse
than Turks: This Book writ by a natural born subject of the King of England,
was then adjudged a sufficient overt act, within the Stat. 25. Edward the
third, De proditionibus, and therefore High Treason, Cook. Pl. Coron. fo 14.
Brook Treason Tit. 24. Antiq. Brit. in vita Poli.
and Pool attainted thereupon. But he keeping out of the reach of Justice,
after the death of P. Paul the third, was just upon point of being elected
Pope, but his own stupidity, Act. and Mon. fo. 1774.
with the imputation of incontinency, slurr'd him of the dignity. In the reign
of Queen Mary over he comes, and what he did, both to the Living, and Dead, our
Historians abundantly testify; and that the next day after the Queen, dyed
Cardinal Pool. Et sic exit Papismus in Anglia.

Peter Petow, Peter Petow. Cambd. Britt. in Warw.
made Cardinal, and Lega^ a Latere, by P. Paul the third, in time of Queen
Mary, was coming over in pursuance of his Legatine power: But the wary Queen
suspecting he might act something derogatory to her regality, forbad his
entrance; which the Cardinal took so to heart, that he dyed presently after.

Allen, Will. Allen.
the last Cardinal Englishman, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth appears a Herald
before the Spanish Armado in 88. and by a Book dispersed over England, stirs up
the Nobles, Sp. fo. 1177. B. Carlton Remembr. 141.
and People to join with the Spaniard in execution of the Pope's sentence of
deposition of the Queen: But all coming to nothing our Cardinal dyed an exile
at Rome. An. D. 1594. Godw. in vita.
Bishop Godwin takes farewell of him with this character, He was last of our
England Cardinals in time, and worst in wickedness, deserving not to be
reckoned amongst Englishmen, as like another Herostratus, to get himself a
name, endeavoring to fire the English Church (without envy be it spoke) the
noblest in the world; so that his memory deserves oblivion. Et sic exit
Cardinalismus.

Several others are reckoned in the Cataeogues of England Cardinals: but
because it is doubtful, whether some of them were English, and others whether
ever Cardinals, and little memorable left of most of them; these already
mentioned shall suffice to testify, that the Italian promotions were generally
more fatal, than fortunate to our Countrymen, and that the pains, and cost was
not recompensed by the acquist. And so we pass from these highest dignities on
Earth, to such celestial Honor as was, and is to be purchased in the Church
of Rome.

CHAP. XX. Canonizations, etc.
CAnonization, and Sainting of Men, Women, and Boys, was another way whereby
great sums were often brought unto the Popes. And that was, when any person
lived more austerely, or devoutly than ordinary, or being famed for any
miracles pretended to have been done by him, in his life time, or by his
Relics, or at his Tomb, after his death: or that he dyed for, or in defense
of the truth, or the Church's cause: Then if his Surviving friends, or
relations made application to the Pope, upon payment of good sums, according
to the abilities, and qualities of the persons soliciting, for sentences,
fees, Orders, references, and others things requisite in such case, the party,
by a kind of Apotheosis, was made a Saint, and a place assigned him in the
Calender. Of this extraction were the famous St. Cuthbert, St. Guthlac, St.
Dunstan, St. William, St. Swithun, St. Tibba, St. Thomas of Canterbury, St.
Thomas of Lancaster, St. Winisni^d, St. Hugh, and infinite more; who for money
had their names put into the rolls of Glory, and their fames, and merit
celebrated, and supplicated here on Earth.

I find that great endeavors were used to have Robert Grosthead, the renowned
Bishop of Lincoln sainted; and particularly King Edward the first, labored it
by an express unto the Pope for that purpose: Rot. Romans An. 34 Ed. 1.
but nothing could prevail, in regard he had so signalized himself against the
corruptions of the Church, and times then; when as Becket, Anselme, Hugh of
Lincoln, and multitudes more, were Canonized for money, or something they had
done signally, and meritorious for the Papacy.

But this King had better success in his solicitation to the Pope for the
Cononization of Thomas de Cantelupe Bishop of Hereford then deceased, famed for
a multitude of miracles, as was suggested. Tho. Walsing, in Ed. 1. fo. 11.
Thomas Walsingham abounds in the celebration of him, and his miracles: Mart.
Westminster. in Ed. 1.
but more modestly than the Monk of Westminster, who ascribes to him no less
then 163 miracles: and others many more, too many in all conscience to be
believed, or here remembered in particular. But of such esteem it seems he was,
Godw. in vita ejus.
that this King Edward the first, to obtain the benefit of his Prayers, and
intercession in Heaven, for himself, and his Realm, according to the persuasion
prevailing in those ignorant times, sent his Letter of request to Pope John 22.
to have him a Canonized Saint, to which the Pope, after some dealing withal for
that purpose, was at last wrought: But for the King's Letter, being still
preserved amongst our Records, and which we conceive may be acceptable to some
to peruse, we will take the liberty to transcribe.

Sanctissimo in Christo Patri Domino Divina Providentia Sacrosanctae Romanae ac
universalis Eccles^ae Summo Pontifici; Claus. 33 Ed. 1. m. 3. dorso. De
translatione S. Thomae de Hereford.
Edwardus eadem gratia Rex Angliae, etc. devota pedum oscula beatorum. Pium and
justum esse censetur, ut sicut gloriosus Deus in Sanctis suis and in Majestate
mirabilis, Ministros fideles suos magnificat, altis decorat honoribus, and
coelestis efficit beatitudinis possessores in coelis: Sic and Sacrosancta
Romana Ecelesia vestigia ipsius prosequens, eos ad quorum memorias ipse Deus
suae virtutis potentiam manifestat, signa ac prodigia faciens pro eisdem, digno
venerationis offlcio laudari, glorificari, and studiis sollicitis honorari
efficiat in terris, ut per hot fides catholica roboretur, and idem altissimus
qui laudabilis est in saecula, glorificetu^ amplius and laudetur, ac ex hoc
salutis nostre causam miserecordius and miseribilius operari dignetur. Cum
itaque Thomas dictus de Cantilupo Ecclesiae Herefordensis Antistes, qui nobili
exortus prosapia, dum carnis clausus carcere tenebatur, pauper spiritu, mente
mitis, justitiam sitiens, misericordiae deditus, mundus cord, vere pacificus
prout firmiter recolimus nos expertos, utpote cujus apud nos diu, and
laudabilis conversatio and gloriosae vitae insignia, ex mul^a familiaritate
quam nobiscum habuit eadem fuerunt evidentius nobis nota, quod Sanctitatem and
ipsius conversationem laudabilem cernebamas, quemadmodum degens in seculo
magnis pollebat meritis; nunc veniens in coelo, magnis corruscare miraculis
dignoscatur, in tantum, quod ipsius meritis and intercessionibus gloriosis,
lumen caecis, surdis auditus, verba mutis, and gressus claudis, and alia
pleraque beneficia ipsius patrocinium implorantibus coelesti dextera
conferuntur: de quorum miraculorum corruscatione multiplici nonnullis de regno
nostro certitudinaliter innotescit. Nos attendentes per Dei gratiam fideles in
Christo, nosque praecipue, and populum regni nostri ejus posse suffragiis
adjuvari, ut quem familiarem habuimus in terris mereamur habere Patronum in
coelis: Sanctitati vestrae devotissime supplicamus, quatenus tantam lucernam
absconsam sub modio remanere diutius non sinentes, set eam mandantes super
Candelabrum collocari, hiis qui sunt in domo Domini solatium praebituram,
dignemini ipsum ascribere Sanctorum Cathologo venerando, ut ejus precibus
Dominus exoratus gratiam in praesenti, and gloriam nobis praebeat ia futuro.
Conservet vos Altissimus ad regimen Ecclesiae suae per tempora foeliciter
longiora. Dat. apud Westminster. Secundo die November. Anno regni nostri 33. And upon
this, as I said before, he was Canonized for a Saint. The Letter it self I have
the rather exemplified at large, that you may see upon what ground the Popish
Confidence is founded, and what by-ways have been beaten, in quest of Heaven.

King Henry the seventh had a desire to have had King Henry the sixth, Lo.
Bacon Hist. Hen. 7. fo. 227.
his Predecessor Canonized for a Saint, thereby to acquire some celestial
Honor to his own House, and Line of Lancaster: and for that purpose he dealt
with Pope Julius; who knowing that he had an able Chapman in hand, made his
demands accordingly. Some indeed say, that that Pope (who was a little more
than ordinary jealous of the dignity of the Sea of Rome, and of the Acts
thereof) knowing that King Henry the sixth, was reputed in the world but for a
simple man, was afraid it would diminish the estimation of that kind of Honor,
if there were not a distance kept between Innocents, Lo. Bacon supr. Speed
Chron. in Ed. 4. fo. 885.
and Saints. But the general opinion was that Pope Julius was too dear, which
the wary King perceiving, having somewhat tasted of the charge, in expenses
upon witnesses, References, Commissions, and Reports for the verification of
his Holy Acts, and Miracles, (a thing usual in the Court of Rome, when a good
Client comes:) thought good to reserve his money for some better bargain, and
withdrew his suit betimes, Et sic nihil inde venit.

The manner of Canonizations, with the Ordinary charges, Sir H. Spelm. Conc.
Tom^. fol. 717, 718.
too long to be here inserted, but most worthy to be noted, you may find
exhibited by Sir H. Spelman, in the second Tome of his excellent collection of
the English Councils.

CHAP. XXI. Pope's Legates, Collectors.
IN the foregoing Chapters particular instances have been made of some of those
many, and great sums of money heretofore going out of England to the Pope, and
Court of Rome; with some of the ways, and means of drawing the same thither:
wherein we had occasion of mentioning the Pope's Legates, Agents, Collectors,
and Officers, employed about the gathering, and transmitting those sums: of
some of whom, it will not, I conceive, be impertinent to revive some memorials,
as tending something to the amplification of the particulars before specified.

Pandulfus of these shall be the Antesignanus, though not first in time,
Pandulsus. Matt. Paris. John Serres Hist. in Phil. August. Speed Chron.
yet as most notorious: To him, as the Pope's substitute, it was, that King
John was enforced to surrender his Crown, laying the same, his Scepter, Robe,
Sword, and Ring, the Royal Ensigns, at his feet; subscribing to a Charter,
whereby he surrendered his Kingdom to the Pope, and paying an Annual Pension of
1000 marks for both the Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, and professing that
thenceforward he would hold Crown, and Kingdoms, as a Feudetary to the Pope.
But of this Legate, and this action, enough before, in King John's Pension; from
whom we pass to.

Nicolas Thusculanus, Nicolas Thusculanus.
who was the next Legate, and came to get the former Grant of King John renewed:
This man sped so well in his Negotiation, as he returned to his Master with
great sums of money: besides having disposed of a multitude of the spiritual
Dignities, and Benefices, to the Pope's Kinsmen, to Italians, and Strangers,
all absent, unknown, and insufficient, yea, and to some unborn.

John Derlington was several years Collector of Peter Pence, Jo. Derlingt.
Disms, and other sums accruing hence, to Pope John, Nicolas the third, and
Martin the third, of whom Leland says thus, Jo. Leland. Coll.
Nullo enim tempore defuerunt suae arts Romany corrodendi pecunias, relicto
religioso Apostoli Petri, Derlingtonus iniqui proditoris Judae permansit in
Officio: to reward which service of Derlington, the Pope, by Provision, made
him Archbishop of Dublin; In an. 7 Ed. 1. Bal. de Script. Britt. Cent. 4. c. 56.
wherein, as John Bale says, he carried himself, ut mercenarius, and non
Pastor, non ut pascat, sed ut mulgeat vel tondeat.

Otho comes next, Otho Matt. Paris. fo. 446. Acts and Mon. Tom. 140.260. H.
d'Knight. coll. fo. 2440.
who, how received, and presented, how he abused the King, pilled the Clergy,
and in intolerable manner damnified the whole Kingdom, is at large related by
Matthew Paris, and others: one, viz. Henry de Knighton, gives him this exit,
Hic cum esset onustus pecunia, and quaedam Statuta edidisset, reversus est ad
locum unde exierat. Of him we meet with this passage; Once making an essay to
enter Scotland, to see what he could get there; the Scots King advised him to
beware, for his Subjects were rough fellows, and certainly would do him a
mischief, when they understood his errand. Besides, it being a bare Country, he
might well be slighted, as once an honest poor man did the Thieves, which he
was told were broken into his house, Let them alone, said he, for they will
have much ado to find something in the dark, when I my self can find nothing in
the light. But notwithstanding all this discouragement, on he went as far as he
durst, that is, to the Borders, where some of the Bishops of Scotland meeting
him, partly with good words; and partly with meances, something he got out of
them, as I remember about 3000 l. of which no doubt but he gave a good account.
At another time, this Otho came to Oxford, where he was entertained with good
respect: Ypod. Neustr. fo. 59 Knighton Coll. 2432: Polychron. l. 7. c. 35.
and the Scholars, after dinner, coming to give him a visit, the rude Porter
at the Gate gave them an uncivil repulse; which, with throwing scalding water
in one of their faces, and in revenge thereof the death of the Master Cook,
such a hubbub was raised, that the Legate was glad, for safety, to get into the
Steeple, where sculking, he might hear the rabble, ranging about, searching for
him, and crying out, where is that Usurer, that Simoniack, that pillar, and
poller, and filcher of our money, who perverting the King, and subverting the
Kingdom, inricheth strangers with our spoils. But in the dead of the night, out
he creeps, and with some difficulty got over the River, running to the King not
far off, to whom he tells a pitiful story, with his hazards, beseeching his
protection for those of his Company, in great danger, left behind. Whereupon
the King presently sends a Company of armed men, who apprehended thirty
Scholars engaged in the Riot, which they carried in Carts to Wallingford
Castle, and thence to London, who being brought barefoot to the Legate's door,
upon great entreaty of the Bishops, and their penitent submission, all were
pardoned, and the University released of Interdiction.

Petrus Rubeus comes next in play: Pet. Rubeus
for the understanding of whose Negotiation, and Artifices, I will give you
only one Paragraph of Matthew Paris, Matt. Paris in An. 1240. fo. 533. Flor.
Hist. An. 1240.
viz. Per eosdem dies, venit in Angliam nova quaedam pecuniae exactio, omnibus
saeculis inaudita and execrabilis. Misit enim Papa, pater noster Sanctus,
quendam exactorem in Angliam, Petrum Rubeum; qui excogitata muscipulatione,
infinitam pecuniam a miseris Anglicis edoctus erat emungere. Intravit enim
Religiosorum Capitula,, cogens and seducens eos ad persolvendum, exemplo
aliorum Praelatorum, quos mentitus asserebat gratanter persolvisse: Dixit enim,
ille Episcopus, and ille: ille Abbas, and ille jam libens satisfecit: quidnam
vos ignavi tam moramini, ut grates cum muneribus amittatis? Fecit enim
praedictus Impostor jurare, ut hoc genus pecuniam extorquendi nulli hominum
infra dimidium anni facerent manifestum; quasi eliciens hoc ex singulorum
primitiva professione, cum tantum de honestis sit Consilium Papale celandum.
Hoc faciendo more praedonum domesticorum, qui fidem ab expoliatis extorquent;
ut nulli pandant nomina spoliantium. Sed etiam si homines silerent, lapides
Ecclesiarum contra grassatores clamorem levarent. Nec potuit hoc maleficium
latere sub tenebris: quomodo enim possent Praelati a suis and sibi subjectis
pecuniam exigere, nisi causa exactionis exprimeretur? To all which, being so
plain, and notorious, although there needs neither Translation, nor Comment:
yet the English Reader may please to know the import of it to be this; An D.
1240.
That about that time came into England an abominable way of exacting money,
never heard of before: For our Holy Father the Pope sent a notable fellow,
Peter Rubeus, by name, who with a cunning mouse-trap trick, wiped the poor
English of infinite sums of money. For he would come amongst the
Ecclesiastics, when they were met together in their Chapters, and persuade,
and compel them to promise, and pay certain sums, telling them lies that many
others had given freely, That this Bishop, and that; this Abbot, and that, had
given such and such sums; and upbraiding them for their slackness. Then the
Impostor would make them swear that they would not discover to any one within
half a year what they had given; telling them that was the ancient way of
keeping the Popes secrets according to their Oath or promise at their first
profession: Therein doing like Thieves that extort Oaths from them they rob,
not to discover their names. But here, if men should hold their peace, the very
stones of the Churches would cry out against these robbers, etc.

Contemporary with Rubeus, Ruffious. Mumelinus.
were Ruffinus, and Mumelinus, who acted their parts also in this Tragedy; and
of whom something before.

Stephanus, Stephanus. An. D. 1249.
another of the Pope's Legates took his turn also, to the great profit of his
Master, and the universal damage of the Kingdom. For the Pope being at
difference with the Emperor Frederick, this Stephanus was sent to demand, and
collect the Tenths of all movables of all the Clergy, and Laity, both in
England, Ireland and Wales: on which occasion the Argument was applied, That
Rome being the Mother of all Churches, ought to be relieved by her Children;
which was done very dutifully at that time.

Walo, another Legate, Walo.
must not be forgotten, and his Province was to gather Procurations throughout
all England, of all Cathedrals, Churches, and Religious Houses, which he
managed strenuously.

William de Testa was another of the Pope's Legates, and Collectors; W. de
Testa. Flor. Hist. An. 1307. Tho. Walsin. fo. 64. Ypod. Neust. 97, 98.
Matthew Westminster, and Thomas Walsingham, end the reign of King Edward the
first, with the general Complaints of the Nobles, Commons, and Clergy of
England, against the grievances, and exactions of this William de Testa, and
one Peter Hispan, the Pope's Legate a Latere, in the Parliament held at Carlisle.
The Petitions, and address to the King, Ryley Placit. Parliamentaria, fo. 376,
377. Albertus, etc.
for remedy of those grievances, are very remarkable, still preserved amongst
our Records, and lately exhibited to public view.

Albertus, Alexander, Johannes Anglicus, Johannes de Diva, Ferentinus,
Martinus, Rustandus, Petrus Enguelbanck, Gasper Pons, Pol. Vergil, and a
multitude more, might here be remembered, but our Histories being generally
fraught with their Acts, and devices, the curious are referred thither for more
satisfaction, if they please.

Besides these Legates, Collectors, Caursins. Lombards.
and Factors, there was another sort of men came over into England much
instrumental in improving, An. D. 1235.
and transmitting the Pope's moneys: And these were called Caursins, and
Lombards: Mart. Paris in Hen. 3. fo. 417.
Italians by Country, and terming themselves the Pope's Merchants: these drove
the trade of letting out of money, of which they had great Banks, and were
esteemed far more severe and merciless than the Jews. Matthew Paris gives this
Etymology of the name Caursini, quasi Capientes, and ursini, because they
worryed men like Bears.

Now, because the Pope's Legates, and Collectors, were all for ready money,
when any sum by Levy, First Fruits, Tenths, Dispensations, etc. became due,
and payable to the Pope, by any Prelate, Covent, Priest, or Lay person, these
Caursins would furnish them with present Cash, upon their entering into some
solemn Bond, or Obligation, as security for so much money lent: The form of
which Bond, or Obligation, in English, was as follows; To all that shall see
this present writing, Thomas the Prior, and the Convent of Barnwell greeting,
etc. Know ye that we have borrowed and received at London, for our selves, and
profitably to be expended for the affairs of us and our House, from Francisco,
and Gregorio, for them and their partners, Citizens and Merchants of Millain,
one hundred and four marks, 13 s. 4 d. of lawful money Sterling being counted
to every mark. Which said one hundred and 4 marks we promise to re-pay at the
Feast of St. Peter ad Vincula at the new Temple in London, An. D. 1235. And if
the said money be not fully paid at the said time and place, we bind our selves
to pay to the said Merchants, or to any one of them, or their certain Attorney,
for every Ten marks forborne two months, one mark for damages by reason of
non-payment, with the expenses of one Merchant with his horse and man, till the
money be all paid. And for payment of Principal, Interest, damages, and
expenses, we oblige our selves, our Church, and successors, and all our goods,
and the goods of our Church moveable, and immovable, Ecclesiastical, or
Temporal, which we have, or shall have, wheresoever they shall be found, to the
said Merchants and their heirs. And do recognize and acknowledge, that we
possess and hold the said goods from the said Merchants by way of courtesy
only until the said money be fully paid. And we renounce for our selves and
successors, all aid of Canon and Civil Law, all Privileges, and Clerkship, the
Epistle of St. Adrian, all Customs, Statutes, Letters, Indulgences, Privileges
obtained for the King of England from the Sea Apostolic: as also we renounce
the benefit of all Appeals, or Injunctions, with all other exceptions real or
personal which may be excepted against the validity of this Instrument. All
which we promise faithfully to observe. In witness whereof we have hereunto set
the seal of our Covent. Dated at London, Die quinto Elphegi, Fest. S. Elph.
April 19.
in the year of Grace, 1235.

You see by this how sure, and firm they made their security: and then the
severity of these Caursins oftentimes constrained their Debtors to sell even
their Chalices, and Church Plate, to discharge these Obligations, and secure
the rest of their goods: for which they became so hated, and obnoxious, that
Roger, Bishop of London, once excommunicated them for their wicked oppressions;
but then they appealing to their good friend the Pope, Stow Survey of London.
fo. 217.
he interposed, and caused the Bishop to desist. A street in London, from their
meeting, and residing there, then acquired, and to this day retains the name of
Lombard Street, quasi Banker-street. On sall of the Pope's revenues here, these
Caursins packed up, and transplanted themselves into other Countries.

CHAP. XXII. Complaints of the People.
WHat sense the People had of all these grievances, burdens, and extorsions,
and what complaints they made upon the same, if I should go about to
exemplify, out of our Records, and the Historians who have delivered them
amply, and at large, it would be infinite, and far exceed our designed limits.
Nay, many learned Romanists themselves, as Cl. Espencaeus, Marsilius of Padua,
Nic. Clemanges, Theodoric de Nyem, Aeneas Sylvius, Mantuan, and a multitude
more, have with open mouths, cried out against the avarice, and exactions of
the Popes, and Court of Rome: one of them saying, That Rome being at first
founded by Robbers, does yet retain her first Original: and that it is called
Roma, quasi rodens manus, and this Rhyme thereupon made, Roma manus rodit, quos
rodere non valet, Johan. Andreas.
odit. and this, Dantes custodit, non dantes spernit, and odit.

And Germanus, Matt. Paris in Hen. 3.
Archbishop of Constantinople, once signified to the Cardinals at Rome, That
the Grecians were much scandalized, and stumbled at this, That the Cardinals
desired to be accounted his Disciples who said, Silver and Gold have I none,
when they were altogether intent upon gathering of Silver and Gold.

Petrarch, in an Epistle of his, says, That the grim Porter is appeased with
Gold, That Heaven is opened with Gold, and Christ himself sold for money.
Impres. Paris. An. D. 1520.
And for the prices, and rates, there is a notorious Book, styled Taxa Camerae
Apostolicae, specifying what may be had at Rome for money, and for how much.

For our selves, what a multitude of complaints do we meet withal, made in,
and by Parliaments, in the raigns of King Hen. 3. Ed. 1. Ed. 3. and of other
Kings of all these grievances, An. 21 Ed. 3. An. 40 Ed. 3. Rot. Par.
and mischiess, all preserved upon the Rolls, as so many scarrs of the wounds,
which that way our Ancestors received from Rome. And what advices the
Parliaments gave to our Kings in that case, our Records abundantly testify.

Anno 18 Ed. Rot. Parl. 18 Ed. 3.
3. The Commons find great fault with Provisions coming from Rome, whereby
strangers enjoyed the best Dignities, and Benefices, causing decay of
Hospitality, transporting the Treasure of the Land to the Kings Enemies, the
discovering the secrets of the Realm, with many other mischiefs, and
inconveniences; humbly beseeching the King, and Nobles, to find some remedy:
whereupon, by common consent, the Act of Provision was made, to remedy those
mischiefs, as by the Act at large it does appear.

The transactions in Parliament held at Carlisle are very memorable to this
purpose, Ryley Placit. Parliament. fo. 376, etc.
consisting of Petitions to the King for some relief in these grievances, which
produced a Letter, or Remonstrance of all the Papal oppressions, and exactions,
drawn up in the name of the King, Nobles, and Commons of England, and sent to
Pope Clement by special messengers, all still preserved amongst our Tower
Records, and lately published to the World.

A multitude more of Petitions, Remonstrances, Orders, Ordinances, and
Statutes, to the same purpose might here be amassed, against the Pope, and the
intolerable exactions, and extorsions of his Legates, Nuncio's, and Collectors:
but, to avoid tediousness, I referr the Reader to that excellent Abridgement of
the Tower Records from K. Edw. 2. Sr. Rob. Cotton's Records. Impres. An. 1657.
vid. ib. 50 Ed. 3. fo. 128.
to K. Ric. 2. by Sir Robert Cotton, lately Printed, where most plentiful
satisfaction may be had.

Hitherto of public complaints, now for those of particular persons, I cannot
omit that of Robert Grosthead, the devout, and famous Bishop of Lincoln: who
observing the miserable burdens endured by his Country from these Romish
exactions, took the boldness to write a Letter thereof to Pope Innocent the
fourth exemplified at large by Mat. Matt. Paris in Hen. 3. An. 1253. fo. 870.
Paris, expostulating with him to this purpose: That by his exactions, and
Instruments with non obstante, he brought on this Nation a Noah's flood of
Mischiefs, whereby the purity of the Church was desiled, and the Commonwealth
perturbed. That by his Reservations, Commenda's and Provisions of Benefices for
such persons as sought to fleece, and not to feed the flock of God, he
committed a sin, than which none was at any time more hateful to God, or
destructive unto man, except that of Lucifer, nor ever will be, but the sin of
Antichrist. He signified further, that no man could, with a good Conscience,
obey the mandates he had sent, though they came from the highest order of
Angels; for they tended not to the edification, but the utter ruin of the
Church. With much more to the like purpose. At all which the Pope was so
galled, that he exclaimed against him thus, What means this old dotard, this
surd absurd man, thus to arraign our actions; By Peter and Paul, I could find
in my heart to make him a dreadful example to all the World: Is not the King of
England our Vassal, and both he, and his, at our pleasure? But some of the more
temperate Cardinals endeavored to allay the Pope's heat, telling him the
Bishop had said nothing, Ut enim vera fateamur, vera sunt quae dicit. Mat.
Parisupr.
but what they all knew to be true, and that it would not be discretion to
meddle with a person of his piety, worth, and fame; whereupon all was
smothered, and no more words made on it. But for that notable Epistle it self, I
have been credibly told, that it is enrolled, in perpetuam rei memoriam, in the
Red Book, in the King's Exchequer at Westminster, with this Marginal Note, Papa
Antichristus. And there is a very memorable Epistle of Petrus Cassiodorus, a
noble Italian Knight, Jo. Bal. de Romans Pont. Act. lib. 6. Acts and Mon. vol. 1.
fo. 46^.
written to the English Church about the twenty ninth year of K. Edw. 1.
exhorting them to cast off the Romish yoke of Tyranny, oppression, and
exaction, formerly preserved in Manuscript in St. Albans Monastery, but since
made public; too large to be here inserted, but most worthy to be perused.

The Poets also, according to the scantling of the wit of those times, spared
not to satyrize upon these intolerable exactions of the Popes, one whereof made
this Distich, Roma capit marcas, bursas exhaurit, Antiquit. Britt. An. 1337.
and arcas:
Vt tibi tu parcas, fuge Papas, and Patriarchas.
Rome drains all Bags, all Chests, and Burses,
Of all their Pounds, and Marks:
If therefore you would save your Purses, Fly Popes, and Patriarchs.


Observable also is it, upon these encroachments, and extorsions, how sometimes
our Kings would despond, and tamely suffer the Popes, and their Legates to grow
upon them: and at other times rouse up themselves, and give some check to their
insolences: As K. Hen. 3. though a facile man, yet was once so enraged against
Rubeus, that he bad him be gone out of his Kingdom in the Devil's name. And as
these exactions were at the height in that King's time, yet his Successors did
not always suffer them so to continue, being forced to set some bounds to those
avaricious torrents, Pol. Vergil. Hist. in Ric 2. lib. 20.
by the Statutes of Provisors, and Praemunire: and oftentimes to give stout
denials, to unreasonable demands; as the English Clergy themselves, at last,
Lo. Herb. Hen. 8. fo. 57, 59.
adventured to do, in the years 1515. and 1518.

And observable also is it, that Q. Mary, though most zealous for the Doctrines
of the Church of Rome, yet in restoring the Pope's Supremacy, she and the State
were very cautious, like those whom others harms had made to beware; and some
prudent provisions were made in that behalf: Stat. 1 and 2 Phil. and mar. cap.
8. Coke 3. Instit. cap. 4. fo. 127.
neither were the Statutes of Praemunire repealed in all her reign; but the
Pope's Supremacy was restored, not simpliciter, but secundum quid, as bounded
within some legal limitations. But her reign was short, and not pleasant, and
the Pope wanted time to work her for his purpose, for having got his head in,
he did not doubt but by degrees to thrust in his whole body: for it is ever
observable, that in the Papal concerns there is no moderation, for they must
have all, or nothing, let their pretenses, and promises, at first admission, be
what ever they will. And whatever Prince, or State shall once admit of any
Papal authority within their Dominions, their destiny may easily be read, that
they, and their people, must for ever after be slaves, or if they once begin to
boggle, or kick, the Casuists have legitimated many ways to rid them out of the
World, for the advancement of the Catholic cause, and the propagation of the
Roman Faith.

Now, after this imperfect Account given of the Rents, and Revenues of the
Popes, heretofore issuing out of this Kingdom, if any one shall desire to have
some estimate made of the sums, I must profess it beyond the reach of my
Arithmetic, and when I see any Accountant do it, Erit mihi magnus Apollo. Yet
this is certain, that they were very vast: Otherwise there was no ground for
that Complaint, which was made by the Kingdom's Representative in the reign of
K. Edw. 3. Rot. Parl. 50 Ed. 3. nu. 105. Mat. Paris. 224.
That the Pope's Collector held a receipt, or audit, equal to a Prince. Or for
that which King John wrote to the Pope in his time, That this Kingdom yielded
him more profits, than all the other Countries on this side the Alps. Id. 224.
Or for that boast of the Pope, Vere, inquit Papa, hortus noster deliciarum est
Anglia, vere puteus est inexhaustus: Et ubi multa abundant, de multis multa
sumere licet. Antiq Britt. fo. 178.
Or for the computation made in the time of King Hen. 3. Repertus est annuus
redditus Papae talis, quem ne regius quidem attigit, That the Pope's rents
exceeded the Crown revenues. Or the Remonstrance to the same purpose from the
whole Kingdom to Pope Innocent the fourth in the year 1245. Matt. Paris. fo.
666. 698. Act. and Mon. Tom. 1.
exhibited by Mat. Paris, Fox, and others, too long to be here inferred, but
most worthy to be read, and the import thereof thoroughly understood. Nay we may
well judge the Pope's incomes to exceed all account, when it appears, that
notwithstanding some notable provisions of State to the contrary, the Pope's
intrado should yet carry so huge a proportion, That in the Parliament held in
the twenty third year of King Hen. Io. Herb. Hist. Hen. 8. fo. 330.
8. it was computed, that the Papacy had received out of England, for the
Investitures of Bishops only, since the second year of King Hen. 7. not much
above 40 years, 160000 l. sterling; an incredible sum, considering the
scarcity, and value of silver at that time, and the laws against such
exportations. And the sums going to Rome must needs be infinite, Stat. 25 H. 8.
cap. 21.
when a Statute prohibiting the payment of any impositions to the Bishop of
Rome, and enumerating some of the ways, whereby the same were exacted, and
raised, concludes those ways, and means to have been infinite.

But it is not more difficult to give a perfect account of all the sums, than
it is easy to apprehend and understand the malevolent influence that all this
had upon the Kingdom: when it is most evident, that our Kings were thereby
continually affronted, vexed, and debased: The Rights of all persons
injuriously invaded, and usurped upon: The Coin, and Treasure of the Nation
continually drained out: The secrets of the Kingdom discovered: All Arts,
Learning, and Trading discouraged: The whole Nation weakened, and reduced to a
state of poverty, and slavery to Strangers, and laid open, and naked to the
invasion of all enemies. All which we have transmitted to us by unquestionable
Authorities, the Rolls and Records of Parliaments, Statutes, and the Historians
of those times, generally Romanists, not sparing to speak out, though so much
reflecting upon their Holy Father the Pope, choosing rather to discover the
Truth, than conceal their Fathers shame.

CHAP. XXIII. Matthew Paris Vindicated.
OF the Historians which we have made use of in these discoveries, and
Collections, you see we have been much beholden to Matt. Paris, who seldom
spares to cry out, with great resolution, upon the corruptions of the Church in
his time, and particularly upon the cruel exactions, and extorsions of the
Popes, and their Creatures; who biting so hard upon this sore, I find the
Cardinals Bellarmine, and Baronius, endeavoring to loosen his teeth. Bellarmin
speaks of him thus, Bell. de Script. Eccl. in M. Paris. fo. 248.
Haec Historia multa habet scitu digna, praesertim de rebus Ecclesiasticis, de
concilio Lugdunensi, de dissidio inter Ecclesiam and Imperium. Sed quoniam
editaest ab haereticis Tigurinis, caute legenda est: non pauca enim leguntur
tum in ipso libro, tum in notis marginalibus, quae videntur addita ab
haereticis, ad invidiam conflandam Romans Ecclesiae, i. e. This History has many
things worthy to be known, chiefly touching Ecclesiastical affairs, the Council
of Lions, and the difference between the Church, and the Empire: But inasmuch
as it is now published by the Tigurin Heretics, it is to be warily read; for
there are not a few things, as well in the Book it self, as in the Marginal
Notes, which seem to have have been added by Heretics, to throw envy on the
Roman Church. And then Baronius, thus, Baron. Annal. An. Chapter 996.
Matt. Paris Hist. Ang. a quo si quis demat calumnias, invectivas, dicacitates,
and blasphemias in Sedem Apostolicam, ejusque Pontifices (nisi probra illa
fuerint additamenta potius ejus qui primus edidit, haeretici hominis; cum
peculiare sit illis, libros, quos potuerint, depravare) aureum sane dixerit
comentarium, i. e. Matt. Paris, the English Historian, whose calumnies,
invectives, twatling malapertness, and blasphemies, against the Sea Apostolic,
and the Popes, if any one lay aside (unless those reproaches were rather the
additions of some Heretic that first published him, as it is peculiar to such
to deprave all the Books they can) he might esteem it a golden Comentary. Which
aspersions upon the credit of our Historian, induces me to make a little
enquiry into his quality, and reputation: and that the rather, in regard I find
two of our own Countrymen endeavoring also to throw some blots upon his
credit, viz. John Pitz, a Collector of our English Writers, insinuating his
discoveries of the corruptions of the Church in his time, non ab ipso sic
scripta, Jo. Pitz. de Script. Angl. Aet. 13.367. Brian Twine de Antiq. Oxon.
li. 3. fo. 283.
sed ab aliis illi falso ascripta fuisse. And Brian Twine the Oxford Advocate,
suspecting the fidelity of Archbishop Parker, in his Edition of Matt. Paris.

For what the Romanists say against our Historian, it imports no more than a
light suspicion only, that something was added by the first Editor, and nothing
affirmed directly; or if it were, it would soon vanish, upon this
consideration, that what Matt. Paris writes, stands justified, not only by all
the authentic, Eadmerus lib. 2. Malmsb. lib. 2. fo, 136. Nubrigens. lib. 1.
cap. 10.
and uncontrollable Records, but also by the concurrence of all the Historians
of that Age, (besides what we shall presently hear in vindication of our
Editions more directly:) And first, premising that Matthew was a Benedictine
Monk of St. Alban's, a Servant, and Favorite of King Hen. 3. in whose time he
lived, and at whose instance he compiled his History; employed by Pope Innocent
the fourth, not only to visit the Monks in the Diocese of Norwich, but also
sent to reform a Convent in Norway much corrupted: Let Us then see what
testimonies are given of him.

Leland thus, Jo. Leland. Tom. 4.10. 207.
Domum reversus assidue, quemadmodum and ante fecit, studiis vacabat, ac doctos
viros, quotquot tunc temporis in Britannia claruerunt, impensissime coluit,
unde variam sibi multarum rerum cognitionem pariebat. Quid dixi, sibi pariebat?
immo patriae potius, and posteritati.

Jo. Bale, Jo. Balaeus de Script. Brit. cent. 4. n. 26.
to the same purpose, and further, giving an account of his Histories, In
quibus, says he, quorundam Romans Pontificum avaritias, frauds, mendacia, dolos,
pompas, impudentias, tyrannides, and arts pessimas ita depinxit, ut nunquam
ullus Apelles melius.

The Centuriators of Magdeburg give him this Character, Cent. Aet. 13. cap. 10.
Vir imprimis eruditus fuit, qui and singulari fide and dexteritate Historiam
Anglorum conscripsit; proceeding in the words of Bale before.

Flaccius Illyricus, Catalog. Test. lib. 16.
speaking of his History, says thus. In eo opere valde multa narrat de
gravissima Papae tyrannide, qui miris artibus omnia Eccles. jura ad se
rapuerit, imo and quam multiplicibus artibus Angliam penitus sit depraedatus,
expilaverit, and exsuxerit.

The learned Isaac Casaubon, Is. Casaub^n. Epist. ad Carier. Ep. 1.
without question, for good reason breaks out thus, Quis nescit sanctissimam
Paparum authoritatem dudum versam esse in horribilem tyrannidem? Jam elapsa
sunt multa secula cum omnes boni hoc vident, and gemunt. Vnus Matthaeus Paris
probationi ejus rei satis superque fuerit. And, Epist. 99.
in another Epistle of his, he defends Matt. Paris against the false
accusations of Coifetellus drawn from that of Bellarmin, and Baronius before:
adding, Proleg. ad Ex. Baronian.
that his own Eyes, comparing the Prints, with the extant Manuscripts,
sufficiently confuted their slanders, as vain, ridiculous, and false; in regard
he found no variance at all between them, especially in that which concerns the
Pope's rapines; and thereupon he concludes thus, Quare falsissima est Baronii,
and Bellarmini confectura.

The modest, and learned Ger. Jo. Vossius, Ger. Voss. de Hist. Latinis lib. 2.
cap. 58.
on whose credit much may be taken up, of our Historian says thus, Historia
Matt. Paris Cantabrigiae adservatur in Collegio S. Benedicti: Vti and in
Bibliotheca Baronis de Lumleio: ac primum Londini, post Tiguri, typis divulgata
fuit: atque id fide bona, ut Manuscripti quos dixi, codices culvis fidem
fecerint: and then he takes notice of that invidious aspersion of Twine; who
being an Oxford man, it seems he was never so happy as to see that incomparable
treasure of Antiquities in Benet College Library in Cambridge, congested by
that most worthy Prelate; where his own Eyes might have confuted the slander of
his pen.

Degoreus Whear, Degrees. Whear de M^h^d. legend. Hist. sect. 29.
in his excellent Methodus, etc. ranks our Historian amongst the rest thus, His
etiam adnectat veram illam and fidelem Matthaei Parisiensis Historiam.

Lastly, An. D. 1640. Londini.
Dr. W. Watts, a very good Antiquary, and Historian, puts forth Mat. Paris
again, in an excellent Equipage, and with all attendants befitting his merit;
having first compared the former London Edition of Archb. Parker, with all the
Manuscripts extant, and then Printing this Verbatim with the former, as not
finding that differing at all from the Manuscripts. One whereof, remaining in
the King's Library at St. James's, Proleg. ut supr.
and which Is. Casaubon examined, and had some time in his keeping, is taken to
be the very authentic (...) of the Author, written with his own hand, and
heretofore kept in the Monastery Library of St. Alban's.

Then, for the aspersion of Twine, it is, without all doubt, as false, and
frivolous, as it is unworthy; proceeding chiefly from his inveterateness
against the most eminent University of Cambridge, which it seems he could not
vent, without endeavoring to blast the memory of a most reverend, learned, and
faithful Prelate, whose great integrity, and fame, will ever stand impenetrable
to the teeth of this angry nibler.

Thus, having set our honest Author rectus in Curia, upon the testimonies of so
many creditable Witnesses, we may well conclude, That the Times, the Popes, and
the Court of Rome were corrupted, and not the Historian: and that what we have
of Matt. Paris is but the Echo of the People's complaints, and groans, in
those times, which sounding so harsh in the Romanists ears, it is no wonder
they are so displeased to hear it.

CHAP. XXIV. Abbeys, Monasteries, etc.
HItherto our Collections have reached only to mention, or point at such sums
of money as heretofore went out of England to the Popes, and Court of Rome,
whilst they excercifed any power here. Now, if I should proceed to specify the
other vast sums of money, as yearly, nay daily issued out of the King's
public Exchequer, and the People's private purses, upon the score of Popery,
and as appurtenant thereunto, spent and expended within the Kingdom, to vain,
insignificant, and superstitious purposes; I should tire my Reader with
multitudes of particulars, and yet shame my self, in falling so infinitely
short of such an Account as Truth would make: And therefore I shall only hint
briefly at some heads, or generals of the same.

In the first place then, V^d. Speed's Catal^g^e.
the founding, and endowing of a multitude of Abbeys, Monasteries, Nunneries,
Chanteries, Free-Chappels, and Colleges, within the Realm; and those generally
with the best lands, and revenues, exhausted and swallowed up many fair
estates, diverting them from the right heirs, to the ruin, or decay of many
noble Houses, and Families.

Then the Votaries that entered into these Abbeys, Monasteries, and Nunneries,
always carried their portions, and estates along with them: and by themselves,
or their friends, gave either Lands, Goods, Plate, Jewels, Copes, Vestments, or
some other Ornament, at their first admittance into one of the Convents: as
many English do at this day, upon their entrance into religious houses, and
Orders, beyond the Seas.

These Houses were also wonderfully enriched by the burials of great Persons in
them: Weaver Pun. Mon. fo. 158.
For in this matter of Sepulture, Monasteries, and Abbeys were always
preferred greatly, before all other Churches, upon the estimation of the
Sanctity of those places, and a presumption that their Souls in Purgatory
should have some benefit by the Prayers of the professed there: with this
further confidence, that such as were buried in Friars habits, should have
wonderful advantages thereby: For which purpose, St. Ri^. Baker in K. John.
Dugdal. Ant. Warw. fo 115.
it is said that King John was buried at Worcester in a Monks Cowl. And Mr.
Dugdale makes mention of some of the Honorable family of the Hastings, that
lie buried in the Gray Friars, at Coventre, in the very habits of Friars
Minors: Proceeding, that this Orders of Friars was so much reverenced by the
generality of people, that by the Bequests, and Testaments of most men, and
women, of abilities, it appears that formerly they seldom neglected to give
more, or less to one, or other religious House of this Rule: and if they were
Persons of quality, they commonly made choice of their Sepulture in one of
them. Neither was it the least policy of these Friars to obtain from great
persons such a disposal of their bodies, considering how they were generally
employed, and trusted in making their Wills, and Testaments: for where ever
they sped in that kind, they were sure to have a good Legacy from the Testator,
and not without hope, by so fair an Example, to obtain no less advantage by his
posterity.

Thomas Walsingham, Tho Walsing. in Ed. 1 fo. 20.
speaking of the burial of Queen Elianor's heart in the Church of the Friars
Minors in London, did not without cause complain thus of them, Qui (meaning the
said Friars) sicuti and cuncti fratres reliquorum ordinum, aliquid de
corporibus quorumcunque potentium morientium sibimet vendicabant, more canum
cadaveribus assistentium, ubi quisque suam particulam avide consumendam
expectat, i. e. These, as all the Friars of the like Orders, challenged
something as their due from the bodies of great men dying, like a company of
dogs snatching every one at a piece of a dead Carcass: Thus Walsingham, being a
Monk, out of envy, spared not to snarle at the nimble Friars; who, no doubt but
some time or other would be even with him, and those of his Order.

Then these Professed Monks, and Friars, upon their visiting, and confessing of
the sick, always used the most persuasive arguments they could, for the sick
person to bestow something toward maintenance of their Fraternities, or
repairing of their Covents: and that he would bequeath his Body to be buried in
the Church of their Covent, promising they would daily say Prayers, and Masses,
for his soul's ease in, and release out of Purgatory. And by confessing such as
were in health, they frequently injoined such penances, as made to the
prejudice of the sinners purse, but their own profit.

Of the Exorbitances of these cloistered Monks, and Friars, many examples might
be produced, as of their Ribauldry, Lechery, Quarelling, Fighting, Idleness,
Cheating, Thieving, Debauchery, Gluttony, etc. all maintained by the People's
money: but we will here content our selves with one instance only. Cook 4
Insti. c. 11. fo. 112.
King Edward the first, about the latter end of his reign having collected a
vast sum of money, to carry on his war against the Scots, and laid it up in
his Treasury at Westminster, his Treasury was broken up in the night, and one
hundred thousand pounds in money, besides Plate, and Jewels, stolen out of it,
by the Abbot, and Monks of Westminster, and their confederates, whereof eight
and forty Monks, with the Abbot, were apprehended, and sent Prisoners to the
Tower; and by Inquisition, and examination of witnesses, it appeared that
diverse of the Monks, and other persons in the night time were seen often
passing to and fro the Kings treasury, Pat. 31 Ed. 1. m. 23. dors. De
inquirend. de thesaurar. Regis fracto.
and the Abbey, carrying bundles in their arms, and laps, and that they conveyed
away by water great hampers that were very heavy; and some part of the King's
Plate, and Jewels, were found, and seized in London, and other places: upon
which the Monks, were long detained in prison, till afterward released by the
King's special command, when he repaired to Westminster to give thanks to God,
for his Victories over the Scots.

Matthew Westminster, Matt. Westminster. An. 1303.
a Monk of that Abbey, minceth this story of the Robbery of the Kings Treasury,
in favor of the Monks, and says that only Ten of them were imprisoned; when
it appears by the Record, that 48 of them, Cook ut Supra.
with the Abbot, were imprisoned, and Indicted for it. And upon this occasion it
was, that the Court of Exchequer, sometimes called the Novel Exchequer, was new
built.

Chanterys, Free-Chappels, and Colleges, as they were instituted, and
employed, spent and exhausted huge sums of money, and revenues, the purposes
of which expense will appear in the brief description of the nature of those
Foundations.

A Chantery (so called a Cantando) was a Chapel (commonly annexed to some
Parochial, Chantery.
Collegiate, or Chathedral Church) endowed with Lands, or some other yearly
revenues, for the maintenance of one, or more Priests, daily to sing Mass,
Vid. Stat. 37 H. 8. ca. 4. and 1 Ed. 6. ca. 14.
for the souls of the Donors, or Founders, and such others as they did appoint.
Now the exact number of all these in England cannot be known, for they were
very numerous: but if at Mathematician measured Hercules by his foot, a
probable conjecture may be made of them from those which were founded in the
Chathedral of St. Paul in London; for in the second year of King Ed. the sixth,
a certificate was returned by the Dean and Chapter of St. Paul's, to the King's
Commissioners, affirming, that they had seven and forty Chanterys in that
Church: according to which proportion there was certainly a vast revenue
swallowed up by them throughout the whole Kingdom: For there was not a
Cathedral, or Collegiate Church in England, but some number of Chanterys were
founded in them, and in many Parochial Churches also: And if the model of the
Country Churches be observed, very often some additional building, or
excrescence appears, differing from the old, or first. Fabric, erected and
used for these Chanterys. And that the nature, and use of these may be the
better apprehended, we will here specify the Foundation, and Ordination of one
of them, viz.

Thomas de Pakinton, in the year 1348. W. Duadale Amiq. Warw. in Chelmscote.
An. 22. Edward the third, founded a Chantery at Chelmescote in Warwickshire,
and settled Lands, and Tenements, of a good value to maintain four Priests, to
sing Mass for his Lord the Earl of Warwick, his Countess, Children, and
Ancestors; as also for himself, his Parents, Kinsfolks, and their posterity,
and for the Souls of all faithful people deceased, in manner following, viz.
Two of them, which were to inhabit near the Chapel at Chelmscote, every day
to sing the Mattens of the day, and of the blessed Lady, with all Canonical
hours distinctly, and openly: and to sing Mass daily; viz. one of them every
Sunday, and on the great Festivals; and on Monday the Mass of the holy Trinity;
Tuesday of St. Thomas the Martyr; on Wednesday of St. Katherine, and St.
Margaret; Thursday of Corpus Christi; Friday of the holy Cross; and Saturday of
the Annunciation of our Lady, The other Priest to celebrate every day the Mass
of Requiem for the Souls of all faithful departed this life; and in every Mass
to say 7 Collects, one of the celebration of the Mass; the second for him the
said Thomas de Pukinton, viz. Deus qui Caritatis, etc. the third also for him
after his death, Deus cujus misericordiae, etc. the fourth of St. Thomas the
Martyr: the fifth of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin: the sixth for the
Souls of the deceased, beginning with Inclina: the seventh the general Collect,
which begins Sanctissima Dei genetrix Maria, especially naming therein the
said Earl, his Countess, and Children, and him the said Thomas de Pakinton, and
all his kindred: and upon all Holy days to say a Placebo, and Dirige; with
special commendation of the Souls of the Persons before spoken of, and the
souls of all the faithful deceased, Likewise he ordained that the other two
Priests should live together near the Church, and be daily present therein at
Mattens, and all other Canonical hours, to join with the other Priests, except
just cause and hinderance happened; and daily sing Mass at the Altar near his
Fathers grave. And that all these Priests, before their admission to these
Chanterys, should take their corporal Oaths to observe all the Orders to their
utmost power. And this Ordination, containing several other particulars, was
confirmed by the Canons of Kenilworth, Rectors of the Church; by John de
Chelmescote Vicar; the Earl of Warwick; and Bishop of Worcester.

Free-Chappels, were such as were founded, Free-Chappels.
and endowed, and had no relation unto, or dependence on a Mother Church;
(saving only the right of Sepulture:) and these were greater than Chanterys,
having greater Revenues, and more room for Priests, and more Priests for that
room, to fing Mass, and pray for the souls of the Founders, and others,
according to the institution.

Colleges were Foundations of like nature, Colleges.
and though fewer in number, yet were richer than both the former: amongst
which the College of Fotheringhay, Speed Catal. in Northampt.
in Northamptonshire, was yearly valued at four hundred nineteen pounds, eleven
shillings, ten pence, halfpenny. For the Offices, and employments of the
Priests in these, and the Free-Chappels maintained, they were much of the
nature of Chanterys, of which enough before.

Now, the yearly value of all those Lands, Tenements, Rents, and Revenues,
which were settled upon these Abbys, Monasterys, Nunnerys, Chanterys, Colleges,
and Free-Chappels, without doubt was as vast, as to us now unknown; the Pope
being better able to give an account of them, at this day, than we our selves:
for they say that Rentals, and Particulars of all those Lands, and revenues,
are still kept upon the file, in the Pope's study, that great Landlord of the
world, in expectation, and hope, they will once revert to their former use, and
behoof: but the generous English will not easily be gulled, and they will not
be wheadled, by Romish Arguments, out of their Estates.

In the next place, Shrines, Images, Relics, etc.
Shrines, Images, Relics, Indulgences, etc. in a multitude of places within
the Kingdom, daily drew great sums out of the People's purses, both in the
procuring, and purchasing, and donation of such precious Commodities, and in
daily resorting to them afterward with Vows, and Offerings. But these being of
the same nature, and ejusdem farinae, with those at Rome, and elsewhere, of
which enough before, we will trouble you no more with them here.

So the Commanding, Dispensations.
and forbidding many things, wherein Dispensations might be had from Courts,
and Officers here; as certain obstacles of marriage; the use, and difference of
meats; vows, etc. and all to be redeemed for money.

Many wandering Mountebank Priests went up and down the Country, Mountebank
Priests.
preaching the lives of some holy men, and Saints; and promising the simple
people, that if they vowed themselves to those Saints, and paid something in
hand, and such a yearly tribute, they should be freed from such diseases as
they desired.

The Bishops had diverse ways, Bishops, and Priests.
and Artifices, to scrue money out of the Priests under them; and then those
Priests, to heal themselves, were forced to cheat, and wring money out of the
people.

Great, Consecrations.
and frequent expenses were had in Consecrating, and hallowing of Churches,
Churchyards, etc. Baptizing of Bells; making, repairing, apparelling, and
adorning of Images; and such like matters: for upon pretense that these, or any
of these, were profaned, by several and trifling ways; then all must be
consecrated anew, and the Parish, and the People Assessed, and constrained to
pay deeply for it. And of this kind of grievances, great complaints were often
made.

Many Courts were also in England, Courts.
to which citations, and summons were made; and therein People continually
vexed, tormented, and excommunicated; and thence dismissed never, till
excessive sums were extorted, and paid: the aggrieved partys not daring to
appeal to Rome, for fear of more excessive charges. Nay the corruptions in, and
the grievances growing by these Courts, as they were innumerable, so no other
way tolerable, but that all was to be redeemed for money. And one pretty trick
the Ecclesiastical Judges had in these Courts; that when the business of
matrimony had proceeded so far, that one of the partys had pretended a
Contract, which the other denied, and that some gifts, as earnests of love, or
marriage, had passed between them, the Ecclesiastical Judges, separating the
partys, would keep the gifts for themselves, as forfeited, or escheated.

Visitors, Visitors etc.
and Synodal Judges, traveling about the Country, with a numerous retinue of
Advocates, Proctors, Notaries, Registers, Summoners, Servants, Apparitors, and
Officers, under Color of visiting of Churches, Chapels, and Parishes, were a
very great burden, and charge to the People where ever they came, scruing money
upon every pretense out of their pockets, as they pleased, besides annual sums
claimed as due; making themselves stalking-horses, whereby any man might
satisfy his revenge, or malice upon his Neighbor, upon Complaint, Suggestion,
or information, of wrongs done, or Canons broke; whereupon sentences, censures,
Condemnations, and Excommunications, with all rigor, followed, to the utter
undoing of many men, the enriching the Judges, and Officers, but never turning
to any avail, or satisfaction of the Complainant. These Itinerants also
extorted great sums, as they pleased, weekly, monthly, or yearly, from
Usurers, Brokers, Scriveners, Bakers, Butchers, Victuallers, Physicians,
Surgeons, Midvives, Schoolmasters, etc.

Private Confessions, Confessions.
as they were managed, were the more frequently, and excessively abused, for
the drawing moneys out of men; in regard the cheat was closely handled, whilst
the Sinner's conscience was quieted, and the world served with a public
penance, or some visible addresses to these Confessors.

The new Doctrine, Purgatory.
and invention of Purgatory, bred by Superstition, and nursed by Covetousness,
as it was managed, became a most forceable engine, continually to drain the
People's money. For when men were made to believe, that after death their Souls
should enter into a region of Fire, there to suffer long, and bitter torments,
to be purged, and fitted for the region of bliss: but yet to be eased there,
and the sooner released, according to the measure, and number of the Masses,
Offices, and Prayers, which should be made on their behalf here, whilst they
lay broiling in that fearful State: People were put upon it, to make the best
provision they could in their lifetime, or at least at their deaths, that such
helps, and means should be used, on their behalf, as they might reasonably
reckon upon a short, and tolerable continuance there.

To this purpose the Founding, and Endowing of Monasteries, Abbys, Nunnerys, by
the best, and richer sort, and the Colleges, Free-Chappels, and Chanterys, by
the middle sort of people, according to their respective abilitys, and the
apprehensions they had of this future State, all pointed at the good of the
Founder's soul after death, and the souls of such others as he appointed; of
which we have had something before.

But then, alas, for those poor Creatures, whose small estates, and narrowness
of fortunes, would not reach to such provisions, what would become of them?
These then were put to it, to make the best shift they could for themselves; by
endeavoring in their lifetime, to get an interest in the favor, and merit of
some Saint, and by purchasing, and getting all the Indulgences they could: for
it was a very sad thing to leave all to chance, or to trust to the voluntary
intercession of others; this would leave them at a great uncertainty, and, in
articulo mortis, make the poor Soul shift its mansion in a most fearful
apprehension, and horror. Indeed Sir Thomas Moore was so Charitable a
Solicitor for these poor Souls, Sr. Thomas More's Supp^ication of souls. In
imitation of Gerson's quer^^a defunctorum in igne Purgatrorio ad Supersites
amico^. Pars 4 oper. Coll. 959.
that he drew up a most Pathetical Supplication for them, and presented it in
their names thus, To all good Christen people, in most piteous wise continually
calls, and cries upon your devout Charity, and tender pity, for help,
comfort, and relief, your late acquaintance, kindred, Companions, Spouses,
Playfellows, and friends, and now your humble, and unacquainted, and half
forgotten Suppliants, poor Prisoners of God, the silly Souls in Purgatory, here
abiding, and enduring the grievous pains, and hot clensing fire, etc.

But yet, not trusting to the uncertain Charity of others, most persons
strained to the utmost, and many most excessively, their fortunes considered,
to leave some provision behind them, for that purpose: and most commonly by
their last Wills, and Testaments, which were accounted sacred, and carrying an
Obligation more than ordinary, for all persons concerned to see them performed:
and thereby, or by Acts executed in their lifetime, it was not rare, for many
men, though they had many Children to provide for, or many debts to pay, to
post-pone all relations, and considerations to this concern of the Soul, and to
appoint, and take Order for Masses Satisfactory, Anniversaries, Obits,
Requiems, Dirges, Placebo's, Trentalls, Lamps, Lights, and other offices, to be
performed daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly, as far as the sums destined
would afford, for the ease, and help of the Testator's Soul.

Masses satisfactory, Masses.
were the Romish service appointed to be said, or sung, at a certain time, or
times, and at an appointed place, at such an Altar, or in such a Chapel, with
special reference to, or remembrance of such a Soul, or Souls, tormented in
Purgatory.

An Anniversary, Anniversa^y.
was the appointment, and performance of Prayers, at such, or such a time, once
a year, for the souls of deceased persons: Commonly upon the day of the death
of the party who appointed it: and this in imitation of the old Anniversary
days, whereon the Martyrdom, or deaths of Saints were celebrated.

An Obit, Obit.
was a funeral Office, performed for the dead, and for his Soul's health, at
certain times, and place appointed.

A Requiem, Requiem.
was on Office, or Mass, commonly sung for the dead, so called from those words
in it, Requiem aeternam dona eis, Domine.

A Dirge, Dirge.
quasi dirige, was an office of the same nature, for Souls in Purgatory, so
called from the first word of the first Antiphone in the Office, Dirige, etc.

A Placebo, Placebo.
was another such like Office, or Service, performed for the health, and good
Estate of some Soul, or Souls, so called from the word Placebo, being the first
word of the Office.

A Trental, from the French Trente, Trental.
was a service of thirty Masses, said or sung for the dead, or a service
performed thirty days after their death.

Lamps, and Lights, Lamps, Lights.
were by many ordered to be continually burning before some certain Altan,
Image, or place, or over some Sepulcher, so hallowed, as conceived to afford
some ease, or benefit to Souls in Purgatory.

The revenues that were given, and settled, for the maintenance of these, and
such like devices, which were very considerable throughout the Kingdom, were by
the Stat. 1 Edward the sixth, Cap. 14. Stat. 1 Ed. 6. Cap. 14.
given to the King; and they, as vain, and Superstitious inventions, quite
nulled.

What an esteem was formerly had of the virtue, and efficacy of these Masses,
etc. may partly appear by a memorable Record still extant, viz. Alianor Consort
of King Edward the first, dying, Pat. 19 E. 1. m. 11. Litera supplicatoria de
orando pro regina defuncta.
the King sent out a writ to all the religious Houses, and Monks of Cluny in
England, to sing Masses, and make Prayers for her Soul, and to c^rtifie him the
number of the Masses they should perform on that behalf, that proportionably he
might show his gratitude to them.

So, in the year 1290. Chron. W. Thorn. Coll. 1958.
Dominus Thomas (Prior of Christ's Church in Canterbury) concessit Domino Regi
in festa translationis beati Edvar^i Quinquaginta Psalteria, Duo Millia CCCL
Missas, pro animabus Progenitorum suorum and Reginarum Angliae, as an
Extraordinary liberality, and spiritual Alms. As is related by W. Thorn.

And about the same time also it was, Bundel. Brev An. 19 Ed. 1. in Turt. Land.
that Arnald Otho, Abbot of Condam, sent a certificate to the King, to inform
him what Prayers, Masses, and Anniversarys, he and his Monastery had ordered
for the speedy translation of his deceased Queen to the heavenly joys.

From all this now may easily be apprehended the force of vitiated, and
depraved Imaginations; when men's Intellectua's are first blinded with
ignorance, and then led by Superstition; being affrighted with uncouth
relations of Apparitions, Miracles, and the horrors of an imaginary Purgatory:
what will they not do, or undertake, to alleviate, and mitigate, in tanto, if
not in toto, those approaching torments? and for that purpose, suffer
themselves to be haled, and pulled, sometimes one way by guides, as blind as
themselves; and sometimes another, by treacherous, and dangerous designers. Yet
in the darkest of these times, there wanted not some, that could discern that
all was not right, and that they were gotten into a very uncertain, and
dangerous road; and in as much danger from their guides, as the enemy which
they would avoid. Some of these, in a more serious way, protesting, and
advising both against the Error, and the danger of it, had their mouths soon
stopped; when others more jocular, between jest, and earnest, as it were, made
bold with the corruptions, and abuses of the times, witness the wits, and
Satyrists of their respective times Rob. of Gloucester, John Harding, Jeffrey
Chancer, John Gower, Rob. Longland, alias Piers Plowman, Lydgate, and many
more, whose dull rimes carried a cutting sense with them. Indeed though the
Lashes of a Satyrist seldom or never produce amendment of Epidemical vices, and
Errors; yet in this they have their fruit, that thereby posterity is oftentimes
more truly informed of the manners, and genius of times, than by the professed
Historian, who rarely touches that string: And by these, the abuses, and cheats
of Priests, Monks, and Friars, in their Masses, Confessions, Shrifts, Penances,
Pardons, Indulgences, Miracles, Relics, etc. all serving to fill the people's
brains with vain, and terrible apprehensions, and to empty their purses, were,
according to the wit of their respective Ages, to the warning of this, notably,
and smartly detected, arraigned, and condemned.

A multitude more of instances might be given, of the Chargeableness, and
expensiveness of Popery, whereby the People were daily abused, and
improverished, to the enriching of others with their spoils, whose natural
office, and duty was, to feed, and not to fleece the flock. Hence has bin
noted the ready tendency of degenerate Religion, when it throws off its
spiritual temper, at the same time to grasp at Temporal Power, and Temporal
Riches. How that Power was usurped, we have in part seen in the first Tract:
and how the Riches were engrossed, we have endeavored to make some discovery
in this; and amongst all the Arts used for that purpose, none proved more
effectual, than this device of Purgatory: this was the fire that always kept
the Pope's Kitchen warm, and gave life to Indulgences, Pardons, Dispensations,
Jubiles, Regular Foundations, Shrines, Masses, Confessions, etc.

I must confess I have sometimes endeavored to understand the nature, and
import of this Popish Purgatory; but could never yet meet with any satisfaction
therein: And to say truth, the differences amongst the Papists are so many, and
irreconcilable, in all the points, and circumstances which concern this
Doctrine; that they serve sufficiently, in stead of all other reasons, and
arguments, to confute it. E^kius in Enchei^id.
First, for the place, Eckius will have it to be in the bottom of the Sea: Some
will have it in mount Aetna, Vesuvius, Hecla, Ande, or some such other
ignivomous Montgibels; and Bernard de Bustis in an Hill of Ireland. In Rosa^.
part 3. Ca. 2.
Next, for the torments, Sir Thomas More will have them to be only by fire; but
Fisher his fellow-sufferer by fire, and by water: Lorichius neither by fire,
Lorich. Instit. Cathol.
nor water, but by the violent convulsions of Hope, and Fear. Then, Vid. B.
Jewels Defense part 2. cap. 16.
for the Executioners, or Tormentors, these differ no less again; for Bishop
Fisher will have them to be the Holy Angels, but Sir Thomas More to be the very
Devils. Then, for the sins to be there expiated, some will have them to be the
Venial only, and others say the Mortal too. And for the time of Souls
continuance in that State, Dionys. Carthus. de 4. Noviss.
Dennis the Carthusian extends it to the end of the world; when Dominicus a
Soto limits it to ten years; and others make it depend on the number of the
Masses, and Offices, that shall be done on their behalf, or if the Pope do but
speak the word. Lastly, for the extremity of the pains, Aquinas makes them as
violent as those of Hell: But the Rhemists say, Rhem. Annot. in Apoc. 14.13.
Durand. de Offic. mortuor. cap. 7. Beda Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap. 13.
that the Souls there are in a very fine condition: And Durandus, between these
extremes, gives them some intermission from those terrible pains, upon
Sundays, and Holidays. Beda tells a long story of a Northumberland man, that
after he dyed returned to life again, and gave a relation of the condition of
those piteous Souls, viz. that he passed through the middle of a long, and
large valley, that had two lakes in it, on either side one all along, both
top-ful of Souls, constantly leaping out of one, into the other; in the one of
these lakes the Souls were tormented with Fire, and in the other with freezing
cold, and when a Soul had bin so long in the hot lake, that it could endure no
longer, it would skip out into the cold lake; and when it had layn so long
there, as that became intolerable, it would leap back again into the fiery
apartment: and so they continued continually tormented with that alternation of
heat, and cold. But by all this uncertainty, or contrariety rather of opinions,
it may clearly be seen, upon what weak foundations they have raised this
building; which certainly would have fallen to the ground long ago, if it had
not bin for the profit which the Popes, Priests, and Friars have raised by the
fiction.

And upon this one point of Popish Doctrine, viz. Purgatory, as I noted before,
their Masses, Requiems, Dirges, Trentals, Prayers for the dead, the Doctrine of
merits, works of Supererogation, Indulgences, Pardons, Jubiles, etc. do depend;
all tending to bring into the heavenly Exchequer at Rome, where, by inversion
of the Holy Scripture, Gain is great Godliness: and though St. Peter said,
Silver, and Gold have I none, yet those which pretend to be his Successors,
ingross to themselves the Treasures of the world: for to the support of that
usurped Hierarchy, all Kings, with the People, were by these Arts forced to
contribute, and to make surrendry of their Temporal Power, and Temporal Riches:
And though the Pope, as the Head thereof, glutted himself with the cream of the
Kingdom's wealth; yet all the other members, down to the very petty-toes, of
that Romish Body, would be continually raking, and scraping for themselves;
being as spunges to suck from the People: that they might afford sometimes to
be squeezed by the Pope.

CHAP. XXV. The Frier's Case.
ONe way, specified before, of carrying great sums out of the Kingdom to Rome,
was Appeals, and drawing a multitude of Causes to be heard, and determined in
the Court of Rome: and though those were not always the most weighty, or
difficult; yet, whatever the suggestion was, if introduced with money, the
cause was received, and treated accordingly. And now, for a Conclusion, and
that my Reader may as well be a little recreated, as informed what kind of
causes were brought sometimes before his Holiness, and his Courts: I will give
him a Report, or Relation of a certain case, transmitted thither, as it
received a hearing, rehearing, and re-re-hearing, before it had its final
Resolution in the Court of Rome; as depending there near upon Fifty years,
before it was dismissed.

St. Francis, Anti-mach. fo. 86, etc.
the Founder of the Order of Franciscan Friars, about the year 1198. amongst
other Articles of his Rule, Ordained thus, That all that were of his Order, for
Apparel, should cloth themselves with the basest, vilest, and of the lowest
price that could be: That they should only have one Coat, with a Hood, and
another without a Hood: That they should wear no shoos, nor ride on Horseback.
Now amongst the Friars of this Order, there grew great differences, and
disputations, about the Interpretation of this one Article. To compose which, a
General Chapter, or Convention was held, that the true meaning of the Article
might be understood, and declared, and that all might sort themselves to one
Habit, for some wore habits of one color, and some of another: and some wore
short, and others long; insomuch as they seemed not to be all of the same Rule,
and Order.

In this Chapter, or Convention, there were notable disputes, and arguments,
upon all the points, or branches of this Article. But about the two last points
they came to agreement without much difficulty: for seeing they were forbidden
to ride on Horseback, they resolved to ride but on Asses, and Mules, or to go
on foot, as now commonly they do; wherein they considered also the convenience
of Asses, in regard they could keep them in their Covents at an easier charge
than Horses, for they would live very well without Provender. And for Shoos,
they resolved, that they would take away the uper leather, leaving a sole only
with a thong, to go over the foot, to make the sole fast to the foot, and so
they should not be Shoos, but Soles. But the great difficulty was about the
Coat, and Hood: And there were some cunning Friars, good at division, who
divided the first branch of the Article into three principal Points or
Questions: The First, about the Color; The Second, about the Quantity; And the
Third, about the form, or fashion of the Coat, and Hood.

To the First, First great Point.
about the Color, there were diverse Opinions, and no accord could be amongst
them. For the glorious St. Francis had spoken nothing of the Color in his
Rule; but only ordained, that they of his Order should wear Habits of a low
price: and thereupon fell out a great Question, viz. what Color was of least
price, and would seem to be most vile.



But then there were others of a Third Opinion, who thought themselves more
certainly in the right, than either of the other Two; and these said that no
color was more easy to be had, viler, or more suitable to their Order, than
that which came pure from the Beast's back, and that was Black, or White: And
that it would correspond with St. Francis his mind, and design, that they
should wear the Color of the Beast, in token of Humility, and Patience: and
further adding, that all other Colors cost something, if it were but labor,
but the Color of the Beast would cost nothing at all.

But to all this, they that were for Green, or Smokey Colors, replied; That
they who disputed for the Color of the Beast showed they had too much of the
Beast in them; because their Conclusion was alternative, and indeterminative;
for they concluded upon White, and Black, without resolving either upon the
one, or the other; and that such a Conclusion employed a contradiction; for,
said they, nothing is more contrary, than Black, and White. Besides, if they
weared the Color of the Sheep, it might give occasion unto men, to censure
them for being Wolves, in Sheep's clothing. They urged also, that already
other Mendicants had taken up those two Colors, for the Jacobins wore White
under, and Black above: and the Carmelites contrary, Black under, and White
above: and that generally all other sorts of Monks, which held the Rules of St.
Augustine, St. Bernard, St. Benet, and others, were either Black, or White; and
it might be esteemed, either presumption, incroachment, or usurpation, to
assume the Habits, or Colors of others; and therefore that would not be the
way to draw unto them the Devotion of the World: And then these concluded, That
if they should take the Color of Black, there were some Countries where were
no Black Sheep, as in Berry, Limoges, and Languedoc; in which Countries they
must be forced to dye their Wool, and that would make it dear, and, by
consequence, directly against the Rule of the blessed St. Francis; and how
should they pay for dying, when they are expressly forbidden to handle any
Silver? And then, if the Order should choose the White Color, there are other
Countries, where there are no White Sheep, or but few, as in Tuscany, and other
places; so that there the Friars must have their Clothes out of far Countries,
which would be to their greater cost, and directly also against their Rule, and
Liberties: And therefore these concluded, no Colors so fit, as the Green, or
Smoaky.

But then, Rejoined.
those that were for the Color of the Beast, rejoined, and said, That that
Opinion for Green, and that other for Smoaky Colors, were the most Savage, and
Sordid opinions in the World, answerable to the Reason of those as maintained
it: for, said they, Green is a Color most fit for Fools, and Jackanapes's that
are ordinarily seen in that Color. And then, in Countries, where they say there
is none but Black Wool, how can they dye that into Green, or Smoaky? But, by
this time the Contest grew very hot, which a shrewd old Friar observing, and
suspecting that this wrangling about Habits, would bring them to a habit of
wrangling, and make a rent in the Order, stood up, and after silence commanded,
he commended all those that had so thoroughly, and learnedly debated the matter
on both sides: but seeing, said he, the case is very weighty, and difficult, it
seems to me to merit the Resolution of our Holy Father the Pope, and that it
ought to be referred to his determination: to which motion, for that time, they
all assented.

After this, Second great Point.
the Seniors of the Fraternity caused the second Question of the three to be
proposed, touching the quantity of their Habits, whether they should be long,
or short; wide, or strait. And to this, a number stood up, declaring their
Opinion to be, That the Garments of their Order ought to be short, and strait,
and that for many reasons, as they alleged: Francis, our Founder, ordained we
should wear Habits vile, and of little price, we cannot better observe that
Holy Rule, (wherein consists the estate of perfection) than in making our
Habits as short, and strait as is possible. Besides, said they, our blessed
Founder has made us all Mendicants, to live on the Charities of good people,
to gather which, we must be always traveling, and running about the Country;
and therefore we cannot possibly be so nimble, in a long, and wide, as in a
short, and strait garment.

But then presently another company steps up, Francis, in this, may somewhat be
understood, because in this Article he uses the word Tunic, which seems to
signify a long Robe, or Garment. Moreover, long habits are more seemly for
religious men, and short Habits for Laymen. Further they said that all other
sorts of Monks wore long, and wide Habits, and it would be a great blemish, as
well as a Novelty, if the Order of the most glorious St. Francis should take a
short Habit. And then, said they, when we go into the Pulpit to Preach, or when
we go to say Mass, will it not be a rare sight for us to go like Skipjacks, and
Millers? Therefore these concluded, that their Habit should be long, and large.

Notwithstanding all this, Francis had taught them the way of Humility, and
therefore they should not wear long Garments, like Pharisees, to be reverenced
in the World; for that tasted of Pride, and not of his Humility; and they which
are despised of the world, are esteemed of God, and so contrary. Then for the
Notation of the word Tunic, they said, that in the Rule of S. Benet, it
signified not a long Robe, but a little Coat, or Cassock, and so it is found in
Ambrose Calepin's Dictionary (who was of our Order, said they,) not a long
Robe, but Toga, and that therefore the Letter of the Article made for them in
that point. And as for what had been said, that other Monks wear long, and
wide; these said it would be so much the better, that there might be a
distinction between them, and others; and that they might not look like Laymen
in short Habits, the Hood would make a difference sufficient for that purpose:
and length of Garments alone would not distinguish them from the Laypeople, for
many of them also wore long Robes, as Advocates, Counselors, Proctors,
Physicians, and Merchants, and diverse others: And though we may confess, said
they, that at the beginning, it possibly may seem a novelty, to wear short, and
strait Garments, with a Hood; but time, and custom will take away the
strangeness of it, for to all things there is a beginning. But, by this time
the disputes upon these points began to be very warm also: so that some of the
old subtle Friars commanded silence again; and having given due commendations
to the ingenuity, and nimbleness of the Disputers on both sides, they Resolved
to remit the resolution of these high matters also to the great Oracle of the
World, their H. Father at Rome.

Then the Third Question was started, Third great (...),
touching the form, and fashion of these Habits: and upon that it was put to
the Cuestion, Whether their Habits should be single, or double: If they might
be any whit fine, or not: If they should have Collers, or none: If they should
use Points, or Buttons: If they should have skirts, or none: Or sleeves, or no
sleeves: Or, if sleeves, whether the hanging sleeves, contrary to their Rule:
Francis had commanded them to beg, and live upon Alms, and also had forbidden
them to carry pouch, bag, or scrip, and it was necessary they should have
something wherein to put their Alms. To Answer which, the others said there
might be another help, viz. to take a Man, or a Boy with them, (whom they might
call a Judas) to carry a bag, or scrip, for that purpose, who also might take
money, if any gave it. But this project did not, in all respects, please the
others; though as to the taking of money, they liked that well enough, but such
Boys, and Men would be Judas's indeed, and steal, and purloin what was given;
however if they should be honest, they must be maintained, which would strike a
great stroke, and make a hole in their gains, and so the bread would be eaten
out of the poor Fryer's mouths by these hang-by's.

Then they came to debate the fashion of their Hoods: And as to that, diverse
other the like points, which blew the Company into a great Combustion: which
some of the more discreet amongst them perceiving, and considering what bad
success they had in the disputes upon the former Points, and that in these
there was like to be no better harmony: they moved that the differences in
these great Points also might be referred to the infallible Judgment of the
Pope, holding it as expedient to send for a resolution of three Questions, as
of two; for said they, when a fire is made, it is as cheap roasting Three
Chickens, as Two. And to this they all consented.

Not long after, certain Delegates of the Order took their Journey to Rome, to
Pope Nicholas the Third, about the year 1280. who convened all his Cardinals,
that with them he might understand, and determine all these high, and subtle
Points. And after long debate, and mature deliberation taken, upon all things
alleged, and insisted on, in these matters; at length, with the advice of his
Cardinals, the Pope made this Resolution, viz. He ordained, and commanded, that
in all those Questions, that only should be observed, which should be concluded
and determined in a Chapter General, or else in Provincial Chapiters, or
Conventions, which for that purpose should be Congregated: Provided, that there
might always shine in the Friars an holy Poverty, according to their holy
Rule. Upon this, and for this purpose, many Chapiters were afterward
assembled: but all to no purpose at all, for therein they fell out, in as great
heats, and differences, about all these difficult points, as ever they were
before.

Then, about thirty years after, the Fraternity, by reason of the great
dissentions amongst them, touching these matters, sent Delegates to Rome again,
to Pope Clement the fifth, who then held a Council at Vienna, An. D. 1311.
giving the Pope to understand, How, according to the Ordinance of Pope
Nicholas, the Chapters had done all they possibly could, to overcome the said
difficulties, but could not bring them to any tolerable conclusion; but that
contrarily, the more the matters were debated, the more doubts, and
difficulties always did arise: therefore, as to the very Oracle of Truth, they
wholly submitted to him all their differences in the premises. Upon this the
Pope, after hearing all that they alleged, and offered, touching the points in
difference, with advice of the Prelates, Cardinals, Doctors, and others
assembled in that Council, puts forth a true Oracle indeed, that is, nothing of
certainty to the Questions proposed to him: For his Resolution was, That the
Guardians, and the other chief Ministers of the Order, should judge of the
vility, color, length, wideness, and fashion of their Habits: Commanding all
the Friars punctually to observe, and obey the Orders, and resolutions of their
Guardians, and Chiefs, without framing, or proposing any more doubts,
subtilties, or scruples. With all this, contained in a very fair Bull, the
Delegates, and Agents returned home: And the Guardians, and Chiefs of the
Order, in pursuance thereof, applied themselves to order, and settle these
matters: But then, besides the differences that arose amongst themselves, when
ever they agreed on any thing, those Friars, against whose Opinion it was
carried, would quarrel insolently at it, and would be so far from yielding
conformity, that they did not spare to revile their Superiors, calling them
Fools, and Dunces, for no better understanding the Text of St. Francis his
Rule: And in this disorder they continued a long time; until

In the year 1323. in the time of Pope John the 22. who resided at Avignion,
the Guardians, and superiors of the Order went to complain once more to his
Holiness, that the Friars would not obey the Orders they had agreed upon by
virtue of the Bull of Pope Clement; and humbly prayed his Holiness further
directions, and aid therein. Whereupon the Pope sent Summons to all those
Friars who refused to obey their Superior's Decrees in all those controverted
points, that they should either personally, or by writing certify the Reasons
of their obstinacy: and when these were come in, the Pope assembled all his
Cardinals in Conclave, where the Allegations for, and against the Fryer's
disobedience, were all canvassed, and debated at large, and many offers, and
proposals made for a final conclusion of all: but nothing of that nature was
accepted, and no agreement there was like to be except, the Pope would
juridically, and openly, and plainly give his Sentence in the case. And
thereupon the Pope gave Order for his definitive Bull to be drawn up: wherein,
in the first place, he highly extolled the Bulls of his Predecessors, the Popes
Nicholas, and Clement, wondering why men should decline the import, and ^enor of
them: and then for himself, he ordained, and declared, That the vilitie of
Habits should be measured by the custom of every Country: and after gave power,
and Commission to the Guardians, and Superiors of the Order (as did Pope
Clement) to make a Rule for the longitude, latitude, color, thickness,
fashion, substance, and vility, as well of the Tunics, as the Hood; and upon
all other circumstances, accidents, and dependances upon the same: commanding
all the Friars to obey the Rules that should be made, without any more
Objections, Arguments, or Contradictions. But neither would this Third Bull do
the business; for men esteemed it, in effect, no more than what had bin ordered
before, without any fruit. And so the heats, and disputes continued amongst the
Friars, as high as ever: Nay some spared not to reflect on the Pope himself,
saying, that he did not rightly understand the points in controversy: Others,
that he used too many Counselors, and that one honest Tailor, if the Pope
could have found him, would better have informed how to stitch up these rents,
than the whole Conclave: and the greatest Scandal was, that if the Pope, the
Vice-deus, the Oracle of Truth, the unerring Head, the infallible Guide, could
not settle, and put an end to differences of such inferior nature; how could
he (did many say) infallibly judge, and determine in matters of Faith, and the
more sublime points of Religion, about which there were such differences in the
world?

But at last these heats amongst the Friars were somewhat allayed, and cooled
with time: and the generality of the Order betook thmeselves to the White, and
Black Colors, as they come purely from the Beast, and thence the denomination
to the white, and black Friars: and some of them intermingled the two Colors,
and made a third, and from them came the Gray Friars. And for the Garments, and
Hoods, they came to wear them long, and large: only the difference about the
Sleeves was never yet accorded, for some wear strait, and little Sleeves; and
others wear large, and wide, for some conveniences, and of this sort was that
Friar, who when he was Preaching against stealing, had all the time a Goose in
his Sleeve. And thus, though their Infallible Judge could not, or would not,
put an end to these differences amongst his own Creatures, with all his
Decretals, and Extravagants, as those Bulls were called; yet at this time we
shall here to them all put a

FINIS.
An Essay of the Supremacy of the King of England, within his Majesty's Realms,
and Dominions.
IN our view of the resplendent Majesty of our Sovereign Lord, the King of
England, it must needs fare with us, as with a curious eye, that looks on the
Sun in its full luster; thereby discovering its own weakness, sooner than the
nature of that Glorious Body: being dazell'd, if it gaze too long; and
scorched, Excellens objectum destruit sensum.
if it approach too near such a refulgent, and disproportioned Object. And
therefore, that I may proceed with Truth, and safety, in this affair, I must
make use of the Instruments of Law, and the skreen of Authorities, to direct,
and defend me, in my intended progress therein.

In the first place therefore, we are to know, That the King of England has
two capacities in him: viz. One as a natural Body, being descended of the Blood
Royal of this Realm: and this Body is of the same nature with his Subjects,
Plowd. Comment. seig. Barkly's Case. fo. 234. Id. Case de Duchy. fo. 213.
and subject to Infirmity, Death, and the like. The other as a Politic Body,
or Capacity; so called, because it is framed by the Policy of man: and in this
Capacity the King is esteemed to be Immortal, not subject to Infirmity, Death,
Nonage, etc. And therefore, when a King of England dies, the Lawyers have a
peculiar way of expressing the same, not saying the Death of the King, but the
King's demise. Demise le Roy.
And therefore, in respect of this Politic Capacity, it is often said, That
the King of England never dies: and by the Law of England there can be no
Interregnum; for upon the King's Demise, his lawful Successor is, ipso facto,
King, without any essential Ceremony, or Act, ex post facto, to be done: For
the coronation is but a Royal ornament, Calvin's Case. fo. 10, 11.
and solemnization of the Royal Descent, but no part of the Title. And all this
may be collected from the Resolutions of all the Judges, in the case of Watson,
and Clark, Seminary Priests, who, with others, Hill. An. 1 Jac. Cok. Pl. Coron.
7.
entered into Treason against King James, before his coronation. So King Henry
the sixth, was not crowned until the eighth year of his Reign, and yet several
men, before his Coronation, were Attaint of Treason, and Felony, as by the
Records thereof it does appear.

The Reasons, and causes, wherefore, by the Policy of the Law, the King of
England is thus a Body Politic, are three. viz.

First, Causa Masestatis, The King cannot give, or take, Calvin's Case. fo. 12.
but by matter of Record: and that in regard of the Dignity of his Person.

Secondly, Causa Necessitatis; as in case to avoid the Attainder of him that
has Right to the Crown: As if the right Heir to the Crown be Attaint of High
Treason, yet shall the Crown descend to him, and, eo instanti, when it happens,
without any other reversal, the Attainder is purged; as it fell out in the Case
of King Henry 7. lest, in the interim, 1 Hen. 7. fo. 4. b.
there should be an Interregnum, which the Law of England will not suffer, any
more than nature does a Vacuum. As also by virtue of this Politic Capacity,
though the King be within Age, yet he may make Leases, and Grants; and the same
shall be valid: for otherwise his revenue would decay; and the King would not
be able to reward service, etc.

Thirdly, Causa Vtilitatis; As when Lands, and Tenements, or Possessions
descend from his collateral Ancestors, being Subjects, as suppose from the Earl
of March, etc. to the King; the King is seized, or possessed of them, jure
Coronae, in his Politic Capacity, and they shall go with the Crown. And in
this Capacity it was, that Queen Elizabeth had, and enjoyed all that belonged
to Queen Mary, though they were but Sisters of the half Blood, which no others
could do. And as the Crown of England is Descendible to the Heirs males, yet
when a King dies, and leaves no Son, but Daughters only, the Crown, and Dignity
Royal, descends to the Kings eldest Daughter alone, and to her Posterity: and
so it has bin declared by a Parliament: for Regnum non est divisibile. Stat.
25 Hen. 8. cap. 22.
And there shall be no Possessio fratris of the Lands of the Crown: for the
quality of the Person does in these, and many other likes cases, alter the
descent. So as all the Lands, and Possessions, whereof the King is seized, or
possessed, jure coronae, shall attend upon and follow the Crown, unto
whomsoever it shall Descend: for the Crown, and the Possessions of the same,
are concomitantia.

The natural Body of the King being thus invested with his Politic, and Royal
Capacity, we behold him as the Representative, and Lieutenant of God Almighty,
who is King of Kings. All Power is from God; and Imperium non nisi Divino fato
datur: And therefore Plato did say, That God did not appoint, and establish
men, that is, men of a common sort, and sufficiency, and purely Humane, to rule
and govern others, (cautiously to be understood) but such as by some Divine
touch, singular virtue, and gift of Heaven, do excel others: and therefore they
are called Heroes, and stand in Comparison with others, as we may conceive of
the Air, which if we do compare with the Heavens, it is a kind of Earth: but if
we compare it with the Earth, it is then a kind of Heaven. So of King's, if we
compare them with God Almighty, they are but a kind of men; but if we compare
them with other men, they are a kind of gods: both intimated in that of the
Psalmist, I have said ye are gods, but ye shall dye like men.

This Royal majesty of the King of England is replenished with plenary, and
undoubted Right, and Authority to rule, and govern all his Subjects; and that
in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical, as Temporal. For this Kingdom of England
is a Sovereign Empire or Monarchy consisting of one Head; the Sovereign, or
King; and of a Body Politic, the People: and this Body is distinguished into
the Clergy, and the Laity: all of them entirely Subject to their Royal Head,
the King: who, as before is said, is furnished, and instituted with an entire
Authority over every Subject, of what degree, or quality soever: and that in
all causes Ecclesiastical, and Temporal: For otherwise the King would be
imperfect in his Authority, contrary to the true notion of Sovereignty; and
thereby disabled to deliver Justice in all causes, to all his Subjects, or to
punish all crimes, and offenses within his Dominions: a consideration of high
import, for the necessary security both of Prince, and People.

But notwithstanding the full, and Sovereign Right of the King, to rule and
govern all his Subjects, and that in all causes: and consequently the just, and
necessary duty of all his Subjects to yield a full, and entire Obedience to all
the Kings good Laws: (for it is the Law that measures out, and spiriteth the
King's Authority; as it directs, and enforces the Subject's Obedience) yet so
it has bin, and so it is, in our Antinomian times, partly by the obstinacy,
and devotedness of some; the weakness, and ignorance of others; and the
peevishness, and perverseness of many; that there is a multitude of natural born
Subjects in this Kingdom, who, in defiance of the Laws, both in their Opinions,
and Practices, deny, or oppose our Sovereigns Supremacy.

On the one hand, there are the Sectaries; who, notwithstanding the Law is the
Standard of true Allegiance, make the ground, the rule, and measures of their
Allegiance, to be their own private fancies: And though the Law is the bright
Sun, shining in the Horizon of this Kingdom, by the Light whereof every one
ought to guide his actions; yet these men out-stare this Sun, and giddily run,
some of them after the Ignis fatuus of a pretended Light within them: some
after the false fires of a misguided zeal: too many after the Boutfeaus or
malcontent Incendiaries: and some after the very fumes of Hypochondriacal
fits, mistaken for visions, and Revelations.

On the other hand, there are the Devoto's of Rome; who in contempt of the
King's Laws, and Authority, make the rules, and measures of their Allegiance to
be the will, and pleasure of a Forrainer. As the Sectaries set up a Pope in
every man's Conscience, (whilst they invest it with a power to control the
Decrees of Princes) and new Lights for themselves to live, and walk by; these,
contrarily, put out their own Eyes, and give themselves up to be led by an
infallible Head, as they think; to whom whilst they yield a blind Obedience,
they cannot see to be good Subjects. These men, of both sorts, strike at our
Supremacy, the very foundation, and heart-string of Government; and by whom the
very Sinews of Sovereignty are cut asunder; when either upon the suggestions of
fanatical delusions, or the imperious awes of an extraneous Power, the King's
natural Subjects shall audaciously lift up their Hands, and Heels against him.

My Province, at this time, to wave all disputes, shall only be to make some
discovery of those Foundations of Law, Right, and Authority, whereon our King's
Supremacy is built, by the Legal, and unquestionable Historical Evidences, and
Manifesto's of the same: and whilst I keep close there, I shall be sure to be
on a safe bottom. I shall not pretend to wade into the vast Ocean of the King's
Prerogative, in all its extensions, but shall confine my self to the affair of
the King's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters; without professing yet a
stature to reach the top of this sublime, or the bottom of this profound
concern.

In the first place then, we are to know, that the King's just, and lawful
Authority in Ecclesiastical matters, is in part declared by a statute made in
the first year of Queen Elizabeth: Stat. 1 Eliz. Ca. 1. Non novam introduxit,
sed antiquam declaravit. Coke 5. Rep. Cawdrys Case. fo. 8.
And it was one of the Resolutions of the Judges, in Cawdry's Case, That the
said Act of the First year of the Queen, concerning Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, was not a Statute introductory of a new Law, but Declaratory of
the Old. But for our purpose, it will be sufficient to transcribe the Preamble
of the Act; which runs thus: Most humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty,
your faithful and obedient Subjects, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and the
Commons in this your present Parliament assembled, that where in time of the
reign of your most dear Father of worthy memory King Henry 8. diverse good Laws,
and Statutes were made, as well for the better extinguishment and putting away
of all usurped and foreign powers, and authorities out of this your Realm, and
other your Highness Dominions and Countries, as also for the Nota.
restoring and uniting to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, the ancient
Jurisdictions, authorities, Superiorities, and preheminences to the same of
right belonging; by reason whereof, we your most humble and obedient Subjects,
from the 25. year of the reign of your said dear Father, were continually kept
in good order, and were disburdened of diverse great, and intolerable charges,
before that time unlawfully taken and exacted by such foreign power and
authority as before that was usurped, until such time as all the said good
laws, and Statutes by one Act of Parliament made in the first and second years
of the raigns of the late King Philip, and Queen Mary your Highness Sister,
Entitled, An Act repealing all Statutes, Articles, and Provisions made against
the Sea Apostolic of Rome, since the 20th. year of King Henry 8. and also for
the establishment of all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical possessions and
hereditaments conveyed to the Laity, were all clearly repealed and made void:
as by the same Act of repeal more at large appears. By reason of which Act of
repeal, your said humble Subjects were est-soons brought again under an usurped
foreign power and authority, and yet do remain in that bondage, to the
intolerable charges of your loving Subjects, if some redress (by the Authority
of this your High Court of Parliament with the assent of your Highness) be not
had and provided. May it therefore please your Highness, for the repressing of
the said usurped foreign power, and the restoring of the Rights, Jurisdictions,
and preheminences appertaining to the Imperial Crown of this your Realm, that
it may be Enacted by the Authority of this present Parliament, etc. And then it
proceeds to Repeal the said Act of Philip, and Mary; and revives the former
Statutes of King Hen. 8. and King Edw. 6. abolisheth all usurped foreign
powers, and authorities; and restores and uniteth all Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Superiorites, and Preheminences Spiritual, and Ecclesiastical to
the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

This Statute doing Right to the Queen, and her Successors; ever since, as in
Temporal Causes, the Kings of England, by the mouths of their Judges, in the
Courts of Justice, have judged, and determined the same, by the Temporal Laws
of England: So in all Ecclesiastical, and spiritual Causes, (as Blasphemy,
Ecclesiastical Causes Stat. de circumsuecte agatis. 13 Edw. 1. Articuli Cleri.
9 Edw. 2. Fitzh. Not. Bre. 41, 42, 43, etc.
Apostasy from Christianity, Heresy, Schism, Ordering Admissions, and
Institution of Clarks, Celebration of Divine service, Rites of Matrimony,
Divorces, Bastardy, Substraction and Right of Tiths, Oblations, Obventions,
Dilapidations, Reparation of Churches, Probate of Wills and Testaments,
Administrations, and Accounts upon the same, Simony, Fornication, Incest,
Adulteries, Solicitation of Chastity, Appeals in Ecclesiastical causes,
Commutation of Penance, Pensions, Procurations, etc.) the Conusans of all which
belongs not to the Common Law; but the determination, and decision of the same,
has been by Ecclesiastical Judges, according to the King's Ecclesiastical Laws
of this his Realm.

And although the said Stat. 1 Eliz. declares how, and by whom, the King may
appoint the same to be done; yet (as is intimated before) the King by Law may
do the same, although that Statute had not bin made: And hence it was, that
Stephen Gardener, the noted Bishop of Winchester, Significantiori vocabulo
competentem Principi jure Divino po^est^tem expr^mi clarius volu^runt.
in his Oration De vera Obedientia, once said, That by the Parliaments stiling
of King Hen. 8. Head of the Church, it was no new invented matter wrought; only
their mind was to have the power pertaining to a Prince by God's law to be more
clearly expressed by this Emphatical compellation. And certainly this was the
ground of that answer, which King James gave to the Nonconforming Divines, at
the conference at Hampton Court, upon the seven and thirtieth Article of the
Church of England; the said Divines urging, that these words in the Article,
viz. Confer. at Hamp. Court fo. 37.
The Bishop of Rome has no Authority in this land, were not sufficient, unless
it was added, nor ought to have: To which the King, being somewhat moved,
roundly replied, What speak you of the Pope's authority here? Habemus jure quod
habemus, and therefore, in as much as it is said, He has not, it is plain and
certain enough that he ought not to have.

Nor is this Authority united to the Crown of England only, but of right also
to all other Christian Crowns; and accordingly avowed by all other Christian
Princes. And to this purpose I could multiply the Suffrages of many ancient
Fathers, and Doctors of the Church, but my aim being rather at matter of fact,
I will forbear the particularizing the explicit Judgments, and Declarations
of those Devout, and just men, who were as careful, in its degree, and
proportion to give unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, as to God, the
things that are God's. But for the matter of practice; And in the first place
here I cannot but take notice, That in the first Ages of Christianity, Religion
did not only subsist, but spread by immediate influence from Heaven only; but
when by virtue of the same influence it had once prevailed, and triumphed over
all oppositions of Pagan superstition, and persecution, and subdued the
Emperors themselves, and became the Imperial Religion; then Ecclesiastical
Authority assumed, and fixed it self in its natural and proper place; and the
exercise of its Jurisdiction (and what that was I shall show also) was
restored to the Imperial Diadem: and Constantine was no sooner settled in his
Imperial Throne, but he took the settlement of all Ecclesiastical matters into
his care and cognisans: He called Synods, and Councils, and ratified their
Canons into Laws: He routed the Conventicles of the Donatists: made Edicts
concerning Festivals, the Rites of Sepulture, the immunities of Churches, the
Authority of Bishops, the Privileges of the Clergy, with diverse other things
relating to the outward Polity of the Church: In which affair he was carefully
followed by his Successors, as evidently may appear to all conversant in the
Civil Law. And the aforesaid Stephen Gardener, in that his notable Oration of
true Obedience, makes instance in the Roman Emperor Justinian, who, with the
approbation of all the world, at that time, set forth those Laws of the most
Blessed Trinity, the Catholic Faith, Justiniani factum, qui leges edidit de
Trinitate, de fide Catholica etc. Steph. Wint. Orat. fo. 19.
of Bishops, and Clergymen, and the like. The like also appears by the most
famous Partidas, set forth by Ferdinando the Saint, and his Son Alphonso, for
the ancient Kingdoms of Castile, Toledo, Leon, and others of Spain, celebrated
in the Spanish Histories. Correspondent to which also has bin the practice of
the Kingdom of France, Lew. Turquet Hist. of Spain.
whose Kings have ever been esteemed, in some sense, the Heads of their Church:
and this is the reason, that the opening their most ancient Councils, under the
first, and second (the Merovingian, and Caroline) line, was ever by the power,
and authority, and sometimes the presidency of their Kings, and Princes: It
being a noted saying in one of their Councils, C^ncil. Parisien^. 6. lib. 2.
cap. 2.
Cognoscant Principes Seculi se Deo debere rationem propter Ecclesiam quam a
Deo tuendam accipiunt. And according to this Doctrine, C d. L^g. Antiq. Gall.
f^. 827. L^ndenbrog.
for matters of Church, or State, of Charles the Great, Ludovicus Pius, Lewis le
Gros, Pepin, and others, collected by the French Antiquaries. And at this day
generally, amongst the Lawyers, and most learned of the French Nation, it is
held, and declared, Vid. le Re^^w de le Council de Trent. Bore^. lib. 4. de
Decret. Eccl. Gall.
That the Bishop of Rome was anciently the First, and chiefest Bishop,
according to the dignity of of Precedence, and order: not by any Divine
institution, but because Rome was the chief City of the Empire. That he
obtained this Primacy over the Western Church by the grace, and gift of Pepin,
Charles the Great, and other Kings of France: And that he has no power to
dispose of temporal things. That it belongs to Christian Kings, and Princes to
call Ecclesiastical Synods; to establish their Decrees; to make wholesome Laws,
for the government of the Church; and to punish and reform abuses therein. That
the Laws whereby their Church is to be governed, are only the Canons of the
more ancient Councils, and their own National Constitutions, and not the
Extravagants, and Decretals of the Bishop, or Court of Rome. That the Council
of Constance, assembled by Sigismund the Emperor, with a concurrent consent of
other Christian Princes, Decreeing a General Synod, or Council, to be Superior
to the Pope, and correcting many abuses in the Roman Church, which yet remain
in practice, was a true Ecumenical Council; as also was the Council of Basil.
That the Assembly of Trent was no lawful Council, and the Canons thereof rather
to be esteemed the Decrees of the Popes, who called, and continued it, than the
Decrees of the Council it self; and that in regard the number of Bishops there
met was but small, bearing no proportion to the import of a General Council; as
also the greatest part of those present were Italian, and Vassals to the Pope;
and nothing there resolved on, but what was before determined at Rome; which
then occasioned this infamous byword, That the Holy Ghost was carried in
Cloak-bags, every Post, from Rome to Trent. That the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper ought to be administered under both kinds: and that, at the least, a
great part of Divine Service ought to be performed in the vulgar Tongue. Thus
far the French, and

Many the like instances might here be added to the same purpose: but yet,
under favor, all Crowns Imperial must give place, in regard of this one
Flower, or Jewel of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, to the Crown of England: For
as the first Christian King, that ever the world saw, is recorded to have been
of this Island, the renowned Lucius; so is he intimated to be the first that
ever exercised Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, being directed thereunto by Pope
Eleutherius, V^d. Eleuth. Epist.
to fetch his Laws, by the advice of his Council, out of the Old, and New
Testament, and by the same to Govern his Kingdom, wherein he was God's Vicar.
According to which advice, the British, Saxon, Danish, and first Kings of the
Normans, have governed their Churches, and Churchmen, as may appear by the
Laws by them for that purpose made, Archaionem. Analect. Angl. Brit. li. 1, 2.
Hist. Cambr. fo. 59. Jo. Brompton. etc.
and lately exhibited to the public by Mr. Lambard, Mr. Seldom, Dr. Powell,
and others. Neither can any Ecclesiastical Canons, for Government of the
English Church be produced, till long after the conquest, which were not either
originally promulged, or afterward allowed, either by the Monarch, or some
King of the Heptarchy, sitting, or directing in the National, or Provincial
Synod. Nay, in the after usurping times, there is to be seen the Transcript of
a Record An. Manus. Chronic. Abb. de Bello. Vide the like Charter of exemption
to the Abbot of Abbindon, by K^nulphus, in Stanf. pl. Cor. l. 2. fo. 111. b. 1
Hen. 7. fo. 23, 25.
3 Hen. 2. wherein when the Bishop of Chichester opposed some Canons against
the Kings exemption of the Abbey of Battle from Episcopal Jurisdiction; the King
in anger replied, Tu pro Papae authoritate ab hominibus concessa, contra
dignitatum Regalium authoritates mihi a Deo concessas, calliditate arguta niti
praecogitas? Do thou go about, by subtilty of Wit, to oppose the Pope's
authority, granted by the connivence of men, against the authority of my Regal
Dignity, given by God himself? And thereupon requires reason, and justice
against the Bishop for his insolence. And thus it is most easily demonstrable,
that the Kings of England have had these Flowers of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
planted in the Imperial Crown of this Realm, even from the very beginning of
the Christian Monarchy in this Island; where we hope they have now taken such
root, that neither any Fanatic whispers at home, nor the roaring of any Romish
Bulls from abroad, will ever be able to shake, or blast the same. And from
hence was the Resolution of our Judges (mentioned before) in the Case of
Cawary, Cook 5. Rep. De Jure Reg. Eccl.
that the said Statute made in the first year of the Queen, concerning
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, was not introductory of a new Law, but Declaratory
of the old; which appears as well by the Title of the said Act, as by the Body
of it, An Act restoring to the Crown the ancient jurisdiction over the state
Ecclesiastical and spiritual. 1 Eliz. 1.
in diverse places: for that Stat. does not annex any Jurisdiction to the Crown,
but that which in truth was, or of right ought to be, by the ancient Laws of
this Realm, parcel of the Kings Jurisdiction.

Now it is not unknown how from the root, as it were, of this inherent
Authority grow the several Branches of the same; (...).
As that he has the supreme Right of Patronage over all England, and all
Ecclesiastical Benefices within the same: so that if the immediate Patron
present not a Clark in due time, nor the Ordinary, nor Metropolitan, the Right
of Presentation devolves on the King, and there rests. Nullum tempus occurrit
Regi.
He only has the Patronage of all Bishoprics, and none can be chosen but by
his Conge d' Eslier, and whom he nominates: none can be consecrated Bishop, or
take possession of the Revenues of the Bishopric, without a special Writ, or
Assent from the King. The King only calls National, or Provincial Synods; and
by his Commissioners, or Metropolitans, gives life to Canons, Orders,
Ordinances, and Constitutions, relating to the Government, and Ceremonies of
the Church; for reformation, and correction of Heresies, Schisms, Contempts,
etc. Halls Case. Coke 5 Rep.
The King has Power to pardon the violation of Ecclesiastical Laws, to
dispense with the rigor of them; and to regulate all Ecclesiastical Persons,
as that a Bastard may be made a Priest; 11 Hen. 7.12. a.
That a Priest may hold more Benefices than one; That he may succeed his
Father; That he may be non-Resident, etc. And for his Superintendency over the
whole Church, the King has the First Fruits, and Tenths of all Ecclesiastical
Benefices. And from him lies no Appeal to any foreign Jurisdiction whatsoever.

Neither is it unknown what strange encroachments, and usurpations have been
made upon the fundamental Right of our Kings, by the Popes, and Court of Rome;
and again how strenuously, in all times, it has been asserted, and vindicated,
by the Kings, and People of England: the Papal Dominion rising, and falling
here, according to the quality of the Times, and the measures of resistance
which it met withal. And evident is it also, by what means this foreign
Dominion came to be owned here: for in the Empire the Bishops of Rome usurped
one half of the Imperial Power, and annexed the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
and Supremacy to their own See: for taking advantage of the public
distractions occasioned partly by the incursions of the Barbarians on the
North, and East parts; and chiefly by the divisions of the Empire it self, and
by some opportunities of serving some weak, and vicious Emperors in their
unworthy purposes, they gained at last, by force, or fraud, the whole Dominion
of Religion to themselves: and by pretending to the Spirit of Infallibility,
they usurped an absolute Empire over the Faiths, and Consciences of men: which
yet they could not maintain without the continual disdained affronts to the
Princes of Christendom; the last whereof reduced under this yoke were the Kings
of this Island; and for which there were not Arts enough wanting: As by making
a bad use of innocent, and good meanings, and improving the humility of others
for an advantageous step whereon to mount it self: For when Religion came to a
consistency here, the Bishop of Rome was greatly reverenced by the Christians
of this Island, as one that was the Primate of one of the then most glorious
Churches in the World, Patriarch of the West, and residing in a City famous for
Arts, and Learning, and the seat of the Empire: And then the fame of this
eminent Bishop ( crescens eundo, Tacit. Hist. lib. 2.
and majora credi de absentibus, as Tacitus speaks) acquired a mighty reverence
for him in these remoter parts: though the devout Britains, who received more
probably their first conversion from Asia, applied themselves chiefly to
Judaea, as a place of the greatest sanctity; yet amongst the Saxons, for the
reasons aforesaid, Beda Hist li. 4. cap. 23.
Romam adire magnae virtutis aestimabatur, as Ven. Beda has it: But as this
was of their part, no other than as to a great Doctor, or Prelate, from whose
countenance, and assistance they hoped for great advantages; so those
Instructions they received from Rome, were not as coming from one that had
Dominion over their Faith; the one side not at all giving, nor the other
assuming more respect, than what was decent, and fit, out of Charity,
Reverence, and Christian affection, each unto the other. And therefore
observable is it, in that famous transaction of the Kingdom of France, Platina
in vita Zach 1. Spondan. in eod.
about the deposing of Childerick, and setting up Pepin in his room; which some
have contended to have been done by the Pope's Authority; The Truth is, Mente
stupidus, and vita ignavus. Paul. Aemil.
Childerick was set aside by the Peers of France, for a Fool, or Frantic; and
Pepin stepping up, applied himself to the then Pope Zachary, to confirm, not to
confer his new obtained Kingdom: for in those days they gave no such power,
neither did Pope Zachary claim it. Only that such an extraordinary action might
carry the better face in the world, it was thought requisite to have the
suffrage of so grave an Oracle: and therefore Baronius confesses, and that you
will will say is much, Baron. Annal.
Francos non Zachariae paruisse decreto, sed acquievisse consilio: and there is
great difference between an Authoritative Injunction, and a Prudential Advice,
which is only an Answer out of discretion, and left to discretion, and so can
imply no obligation at all. And Sabellicus relates it thus, That the Peers of
France deposed Childerick, Sabell. Enn^ad. 8 lib. 8.
and set up Pepin in his stead, Romano Pontifice consulto; whence this Gloss
upon one of their Laws, Papa deposuit, id est, deponentibus consensit. But
enough of this.

But certain it is, that by one way or other, the Papal Dominion arrived to a
great height in the World, and particularly in this Island, in after times; and
then the former addresses of the Christians of this Island to the Bishop of
Rome were made use of, as notes, and evidences of subjection: and what had
passed by the Popes advice, and Counsel only, was afterward said to have been
done by his Authority: And so the ordering, and determining of Ecclesiastical
affairs was endeavored to be drawn to a foreign Judicature, to the apparent
prejudice, and diminution, as well of the Rights of the Crown, as of this
Church. And therefore in this case it fared with our Ancestors, as with her in
the Tragedy, Quisquis in primo obstitit
Repulitque amorem, tutus ac victor fuit. S^nec Trag. Hippolyt.

Qui blandiendo dulce nutrivit malum,
Sero recusat far, quod subiit, jugum.


But notwithstanding the infinite subtle arts, and mighty efforts for that
purpose, the Papacy found it, at any time, a most difficult thing, to carry any
thing here by a high hand, and to bring the Ecclesiastical State of this Nation
to depend on Rome. For our Princes never did doubt, but they had the same
Authority within their own Dominions, as Constantine had in the Empire; and our
Bishops the same as St. Peter's Successors in the Church: Ego Constantini,
Ailred. Rival. Coll. 361.16.
Vos Petri gladium habetis in manibus, said King Edgar, in an eminent Speech
unto his Clergy. And what Power in the Church our Kings took themselves
anciently to have, appears by their Laws, and Edicts, published by themselves,
Leg. Edv. confess cap. 17. fo. 142. Leg. Canut. and Inae, apud. Jornal. Mart.
Paris. w. 2.
and acknowledged by their subjects: All speaking thus; That the ordering, and
disposition of all Ecclesiastical Affairs, within their own Dominions, was
their sole, and undoubted Right, the Foundation thereof being that Power which
the Divine wisdom has invested the Secular Magistrate withal, for the defense,
and preservation of his Church, and People, against all attempts whatsoever.
And all our Laws, and Lawyers concurring in this, Rex sub nullo nisi tantum sub
Deo. Bracton. Leg. Sanct. Edw. cap. 19.17.
That the King of England is subject to no Power on Earth, but to God only: and
in King Edwards Laws he is called Vicarius summi Regis; as also in Bracton;
that being the Cognomen, as it were, given by Pope Eleutherius, long ago to
King Lucius here; as not being under the power of any other. And this in effect
acknowledged by the whole Body of the English Clergy, Reg. Hoveden in Hen. 2.
pa. post. fo. 510.
in a Letter of the Bishops of the Province of Canterbury, to Tho. Becket, An.
D. 1167. as it stands recorded at large by Roger Hoveden.

To this it will be but seasonable, and pertinent, to add the Historical
Instances, and evidences, some of them, as occurr, demonstrating, as the
continual claim, and when they could, the exercise of this Right, by the Kings
of this Island; so the worthy resistances as, from time to time, have been made
against all foreign usurpations, and encroachments upon the same: sufficient
to show, that our Princes did not command the Ecclesiastics here, who made up
so great a part of their subjects, according to the will, and pleasure of any
foreign Potentate; nor that they were only lookers on, whilst others governed
the English Church. Therefore we may observe,

All Councils, and Convocations, Eadmer. fo. 25.5.11. Florent. Wigorn. An.
1070. fo. 434. Stat. 25 H. 8.19.
assembled at the King's appointment, and by the King's Writ, Jubente, and
praesente Rege, as one says: and that upon the same Authority, as the Emperor
Constantine had long before assembled the Council of Nice.

Some appointed by the King to sit in those Councils, and supervise their
actions, Matt. Paris ad An. 1237. fo. 447.
ne ibi contra regiam coronam, and dignitatem aliquid statuere attentarent. And
Mat. Paris gives us the names of the Commissioners, for that purpose, in one of
the Councils held in the time of King Hen. 3. And when any did otherwise, he
was forced to retract such Constitutions, as did Peckham: or they were but, in
paucis servatae, Ly^dw de soro competent. cap. 1.
as were those of Boniface, as Lyndwood ingenuously does acknowledge.

No Synodical Decree suffered to be of force, but by the King's allowance,
Eadmer. fo. 6.29.
and confirmation. In hoc concilio, ad emendationem Ecclesiae Anglicanae,
assensu Domini Regis, Gervas. Dorobern. An. 1175. fo. 1429. Mat. Paris. Hen.
Huntingd. Eadm. passim. Pat. 8 and 9 Johan. R. m. 5.8.
and primorum omnium regni, haec subscripta promulgata sunt capitula, as
Gervasius Dorobern. informs us.

No Legate suffered to enter into England, but by the King's leave; and
swearing to do nothing prejudicial to the King, and his Crown.

All matters of Episcopacy determined by the King himself, Eadmer. 115.23.
inconsulto Romano Pontifice.

No Appeals to Rome permitted.

None to receive Letters from the Pope, Thorn. Coll. 2152. Coke 3. Instit. cap.
54.10.127. Hoveden. Hen. 2. fo. 496.
without showing them to the King, who caused all words prejudicial to him, or
his Crown, to be renounced, and dis-avowed by the bringers, or receivers of
such Letters.

Permitted no Bishops to Excommunicate, Eadmer. fo. 6.31.
or inflict any Ecclesiastical censure on any Peer, nisi ejus praecepto.

Caused the Bishops to appear in their Courts, Addit. Mat. Paris. fo. 200
to give account why they excommunicated a subject.

Bestowed Bishoprics on such as they approved, Forent. Wigorn. An. 1070. fo
536.
and translated Bishops from one See to another.

Erected new Bishoprics: Godwin de Praef. Angl.
So did King Hen. 1. An. 1109. Ely, taking it out of Lincoln: Carlisle 1133. out
of York, or rather Durham.

Commanded by Writ, Coke 2. Instit. 625. Addit. Mat. Paris. fo. 200. nu. 6.
the Bishops to Residency.

Placed, by a Lay hand, Clerks in Prebendary, or Parochial Churches, Ordinariis
penitus irrequisitis; as it is phrased in Matt. Paris.

By these, and many other instances of the like nature, exercised by our Kings,
it appears that the English ever took the outward Policy of this Church, or
Government of it, in foro exteriori, to depend on the King. And therefore the
writs of Summoning all Parliaments express the calling of them to be, Pro
quibusdam arduis, urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum, and defensionem Regni
nostri Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, etc.

In the Reign of King Edward the first, Bro^k. Tit. Praemunire. pl. 10.
A subject brought in a Bull of Excommunication against another subject of this
Realm, and published it to the Lord Treasurer of England: and this was, by the
ancient Common Law of England, adjudged Treason against the King, his Crown,
and Dignity; for which the Offender should have bin drawn, and hanged; but at
the great instance of the Chancellor, and Treasurer, he only abjured the Realm.

King Edw. Trin. 19 Ed. 3. Fitzh. Quare non admisit. pl. 7.
presented his Clark to a Benefice, within the Province of York, who was
refused by the Archbishop, for that the Pope, by way of Provision, had
conferred it on another. The King thereupon brought a Quare non admisit: the
Archbishop to it Pleaded, that the Bishop of Rome had long time before Provided
to the said Church, as one having Supreme Authority in that case; and that he
durst not, nor had power to put him out, who was possessed by the Pope's Bull.
But for this high contempt, against the King, his Crown, and Dignity, in
refusing to execute his Sovereign's commands, against the Pope's Provision, by
Judgment of the Common Law, the Lands of his whole Bishopric were seized into
the King's hands, and lost during his life. And this Judgment was before any
Act of Parliament made in that case. Nota.
And there it is said, That for the like offense, the Archbishop of Canterbury
had bin in worse case, by the Judgment of the Sages in the Law, if the King
had not extended favor to him.

Although by the Ordinance of Circumspecte agatis, Coke 5 Rep. Case de jure R.
Eccl.
made in the thirteenth year of King Edward the first, and by a general
allowance, and usage, the Ecclesiastical Court held Plea of Tithes, Oblations,
Obventions, Mortuaries, Redemption of Penance, Laying of violent hands on a
Clark, Defamations, etc. yet did not the Clergy think themselves assured, nor
quiet from Prohibitions purchased by subjects, till King Edward the second, by
his Letters Patents under the Great Seal, Sta^ 9 Edw. 2. Artic. cler. ca. 16.
in and by consent of Parliament, upon Petition of the Clergy, had granted them
Jurisdiction in those cases.

An Excommunication by the Archbishop, Finzh. Excom. 4.16 Ed. 3. Bro^k Excom.
pl. 5.14 H. 4.
although it be dis-annulled by the Pope, or Legate, is to be allowed. Neither
may the Judges give any allowance of any such sentence of the Pope or his
Legate. And it has often bin adjudg'd, 30 Ed 3 Lib. Assiz. pl. 19.12 Ed. 4.16.
and declared, That the Pope's Excommunication is of no force in England.

It is often Resolved in our Books, that all the Bishoprics in England were
founded by the King's Progenitors, and the Advowsons vowsons of them all belong
to the King; and at first they were Per traditionem annuli, and pastorasis
baculi.
Donative. And that if an Incumbent of any Church with cure dies, if the Patron
Present not within six months, the Bishop of that Diocese ought to collate,
that the cure be supplied: if he neglect by the space of six months, the
Metropolitan of that Diocese shall confer one unto that Church: and if he also
neglect six months, then the Law gives to the King, as Supreme, within his
own Kingdom, and not to the Pope, power to provide a Pastor.

The King may not only exempt any Ecclesiastical Person from the Jurisdiction
of the Ordinary, but may grant unto him Episcopal Jurisdiction: as it appears
the King had done of ancient time to the Archdeacon of Richmond. 17 Ed 3.13. 20
Ed. 3.
And the Abbot of Bury was exempted from Episcopal Jurisdiction by the King's
Charter.

The King Presented to a Benefice, 21 Ed. 3.40.
and his Presentee was disturbed by one that had obtained Bulls from Rome; for
which offense he was condemned to perpetual imprisonment.

If Excommunication be the final end of any suit in the Court of Rome, as
indeed it is, and be not allowed, Fitzh. Not. Br. fo. 64. f.
or allowable in England, as it has often bin Declared; It then follows, that
by the Ancient Common Law of England, no suit for any cause, though it be
spiritual, arising within this Realm, may or can be determined in the Court of
Rome; Quia frustra expectatur eventus, cujus effectus nullus sequitur.

At a Parliament held An. Stat. 25 Ed. 3. de Provisorib.
25 Edward the third, It was Enacted, That as well they that obtained
Provisions from Rome, as they that put them in execution, should be out of the
King's Protection: and that they should be dealt withal, as the King's Enemies,
and no man so dealing with them should be impeached for the same.

At a Parliament held An. Stat. 16 Ric. 2. cap. 5.
16 Ric. 2. It is declared, That the Crown of England has bin so free at all
times, that it has bin in subjection to none, but immediately subject to God,
and none other, and that the same ought not in any thing, touching the Regality
of the said Crown, to be submitted to the Bishop of Rome: nor the Laws, and
Statutes of this Realm by him frustrated, or defeated at his Will. And the
Commons in that Parliament affirmed, that the things attempted by the Bishop of
Rome, be clearly against the King's Crown and his Regality, used and approved
in time of all his Progenitors, in which points the said Commons professed to
live, and dye: and to all which the Lords assented also, as being thereto bound
by their Allegiances.

It is resolved that the Pope's Collector, 2 Hen. 4 fo. 9.
though he have the Pope's Bull for that purpose, has no Authority within this
Realm. And there it is said, That the Archbishops, and Bishops of this Realm
are the King's spiritual Judges. And in another place it is said, Papa non
potest mutare Leges Angliae: 11 Hen. 4. fo. 37.
Per Curiam.

In the reign of King Henry the sixth, 1 Hen. 7. fo. 10.
the Pope wrote Letters in derogation of the King, and his Regality; and the
Churchmen durst not speak any thing against them: But Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester, for their safe keeping, put them into the fire.

In the reign of King Edward the fourth, 1 Hen. 7. fo. 20.
the Pope granted to the Prior of St. John's, to have Sanctuary in his Priory:
and this was pleaded, and claimed by the Prior: but resolved by the Judges,
Keilway Reports. 8 H. 8. fo. 191. b.
That the Pope had no power to grant any Sanctuary within this Realm: and
therefore the same was disallowed by Judgment of Law.

In Brook Tit. Presentation al Esglise, Bro. Present. al Esglise. p. 12.
It is affirmed, That the Pope was permitted to do certain things within this
Realm by usurpation, and not of right, until the Reign of King Kenry the
eighth, quod nota, says the Book. Stat. 24 Hen. 8. ca. 12.25 H. 8.21.
And in what esteem the Pope's Authority here was in that King's time, may
sufficiently be collected from the Tenor, and Purview of the Statutes, about
that affair, in his reign made.

In the reign of King Kenry the sixth, Henry Beaufort Uncle to the King, being
Bishop of Winchester, was made Cardinal, and thereupon purchased from the Pope
a Bull Declaratory, that he might still hold his Bishopric: yet it was held,
and adjudged, that the Sea of Winchester was become void, by the assumption of
the Cardinalship; and therefore the Cardinal fallen into a Praemunire, 4 Hen.
6. in Arch. Turr. Land.
for which he was glad to purchase his pardon, as by the Records of all this it
does appear.

It was Adjudged in the Court of Common Pleas, Dier 12 Eliz.
by Sir James Dyer, Weston, and the whole Court, That a Dean, or any other
Ecclesiastical Person, may resign, as diverse did to King Edward the sixth, Vid.
Grend ca. in Plowd. Com.
for that he had the Authority of the Supreme Ordinary.

With all this may be noted also, the several Statutes heretofore made against
the usurpations of the Bishops of Rome in this Kingdom, the principal whereof
these, viz. Stat. 25 Ed. 3. de Provisorib. Stat. 27 and 28 Ed. 3. Cap. 1, 2.
Stat. 38 Ed. 3. Cap. 3. Stat. Statutes of P^ov^sors, and Preminire.
16 Ric. 2. Cap. 5. Stat. 2 Hen. 4. Cap. 3. Stat. 6 Hen. 4. Cap. 1. Stat. 7
Hen. 7. Cap. 6. Stat. 3 Hen. 5. Cap. 4. Stat. 1 Hen. 7. Cap. 4. Stat. 24 Hen.
8. Cap. 12. Stat. 25 Hen. 8. Cap. 21. Stat. 1 Eliz. Cap. 1. etc. By all which,
with the foregoing Resolutions, and Presidents, to which a multitude more, to
the same purpose, might be added, it does appear clearly, that long before the
time of King Hen. 8. diverse Statutes, and Laws were made, and declared against
foreign encroachments upon the Rights of the Crown in this matter; and those as
sharp, and severe, as any Statutes, for that purpose, have been made in later
times, though then both King, Lords, and Commons, that made those Laws, and the
Judges that did interpret them, did for the most part follow the same Opinions
in Religion, which were held, and taught in the Church of Rome. And therefore
those that will lay upon this Nation the imputation of Schism, for denying the
Pope's Supremacy here, Vid. Case de Praemunire: in St. John Davys Rep.
must charge it many Ages before the time of King Henry the eighth, For the
Kings, Lords, and Commons of this Realm, have ever been most eminent for
asserting their just Rights, and Liberties; disdaining to become a Tributary
Province, as it were, to the Sea of Rome; or part of St. Peter's earthly
Patrimony in Demesne. And the Faith, and Loyalty of the English race has bin
generally such, (though true it is, that every Age has brought forth some
singular monsters of disloyalty) as no pretense of zeal, or Religion could ever
draw the greater part of the Subjects for to submit themselves to a foreign
Yoke; no not when Popery was in greatest height, and exaltation; of all which
the aforesaid Statutes are manifest Evidences, being generally made at the
Prayer of the Commons, as by their Preambles may appear, most worthy to be
read: Particularly, in the Preamble to the Statute of 16 Ric. 2. They complain,
Sta. 16 Ric. 2. cap. 5.
That by Bulls, and Processes from Rome, the King is deprived of that
Jurisdiction which belongs of right to his Imperial Crown: That the King does
lose the service, and Counsel of his Prelates, and learned men by translations
made by the Bishop of Rome: That the King's Laws are defeated at his will, the
Treasure of the Realm is exhausted, and exported to enrich his Court: And that
by those means the Crown of England, which has ever bin free, and subject unto
none, but immediately unto God, should be submitted unto the Bishop of Rome, to
the utter destruction of the King; and the whole Realm, which God defend, say
they: and thereupon out of their zeal, and loyalty, they offer to live, and dye
with the King, in defense of the liberties of the Crown: And then they pray the
King to examine all the Lords in Parliament, what they thought of these wrongs,
and usurpations, and whether they would stand with the King in defense of his
Royal liberties; which being done, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, did all
answer that these usurpations of the Bishop of Rome were against the liberties
of the Crown, and that they were all bound by their Allegiance to stand with
the King, and to maintain his Honor, and Prerogative.

Upon producing, and averrement of all this, it is requisite some satisfaction
be given about the conclusion, that happened so different to these premises. For,
if the Kings, and People of England have in all times been so sensible of, and
zealous for their just Rights, how could the Roman Power, in derogation of
those Rights, arrive to such a consistence, and height, as here it was for many
years? To this, as to the means, and manner of that acquist, to keep within our
Historical compass; First let it be premised, as undoubtedly true, That before
the time of the Norman Conquest, the Bishops of Rome had very little, or
nothing to do here, as well in matter of Fact, as of Right: For before that
time the Pope's Writ did not run in England: His Bulls of Excommunication, and
Provision came not hither: no Citations, or Appeals were made from hence to the
Court of Rome: Our Archbishops did not purchase their Palls there: Neither had
the Pope the Investiture of any of our Bishoprics: And Ingulphus, who lived in
the Conquerours time, a Favorite, and one preferred by him, thus informs,
Ingulph. Hist. fo. 901.
A multis namque annis retroactis nulla Electio Praelatorum erat libera mere
and Canonica, sed omnes dignitates tam Episcoporum quam Abbatum per annulum and
baculum regis curia pro sua Complacentia conferebat. For as it is observable,
that under the Temporal Empire of Rome, Britain was one of the last Provinces
that was won, and one of the first that was lost again: So under the Spiritual
Empire of the Pope, England was one of the last Countries of Christendom, that
received the Yoke, and one of the first that cast it off. But for our purpose,
that the Bishops of Rome had any Jurisdiction, or Hierarchical Authority in the
times of the Britains, Saxons, or Danes, there is an altum silentium in all
our Histories, and Records: For the times of the Britains, Eleuth. Epist.
Eleutherius Pope, about 180 years after Christ, writes to Lucius the British
King, and styles him God's Vicar within his own Kingdom; and sure he would not
have given that Title to the King, if himself, under pretense of being God's
Vicar General on Earth, had claimed Jurisdiction over all Christian Kingdoms.

After that, Beda Eccl. Hist. Matt. Westminster. Polychron. Fab. Huntingd. etc.
about the year 600. Austin the Monk was sent by Pope Gregory into England, to
convert the Saxons to the Christian Faith: But the British Bishops, then
residing in Wales, gave no regard either to his Commission, or his Doctrines,
as not owing any duty to, or dependence upon Rome; but still retained their
Ceremonies, and Traditions which they received from the East Church, upon the
first plantation of Christianity, being both diverse, and contrary to those of
the Church of Rome, which Austin did endeavor to impose upon them. Usser. de
Prim. Eccl. Brit.
Then about the year 660 there is a famous disputation celebrated between one
Colman, and one Wilfrid, touching the Observation of Easter, wherein the
Britains differed from the practice of the Roman Church; from which is plainly
inferrable, that the Authority of the Bishop of Rome was, at that time, of no
estimation in this Island: And that the Primitive Churches of Britain were
instituted according to the form of the East, and not of the West Church. Nay
upon the first coming of Austin, and his retinue into Britain, there was such
a strangness, and averseness to him, that one Daganus, a British, Beda Eccl.
Hist. lib. 2. cap. 4 Spelm. Council. Tom. 1. fo. 129.
or Scottish Bishop, happening into their Company, he would neither eat with
them, nor under the same roof where they were; as Mellitus, Laurentius, and
Justus complained in an Epistle of theirs to the Scots Bishops.

For the Saxons, though King Ina, Larga Reg is Benignitas.
or some other, gave the Peter Pence, partly as Alms, and partly in recompense
of a house erected in Rome for entertainment of English Pilgrims: Yet it is
certain that Alfred, Athelstan, Edgar, Edmund, Canutus, Edward the Confessor so
called, and diverse other Kings of the Saxon race, gave all the Bishoprics of
England, per annulum, and baculum, without any other Ceremony, or any
application to Rome; as was usual by the Emperor, the French King, and other
Christian Princes so to do: as also in all their Laws for the Government of the
Church here, they consulted only with their own Clergy, without any regard to
the Authority of Rome. But under the Norman Conquest the Papal usurpation
marched in: for as the Conqueror came in with the Pope's Banner; So either by
the way of complemental gratitude, or surprise, the Pope presently laid hold
upon part of the purchase, as boasting all was gained by his aid, and blessing.
And thereupon he sent two Legates into England, favorably received by the
Norman; by whom a Synod of the Clergy was convened, Will. Malm. de gest.
Pon^if. Angl. lib. 1. fo. 204. Rog. Hoveden pa. prior. fo. 453.
and old Stigand, Archbishop of Canterbury deposed, because he had not
purchased his Pall in the Court of Rome: and many other Bishops, and Abbots
displaced, on supposal, for the like reasons, of the invalidity of their
Titles, but speciously to place the Normans in their rooms, or rather
ultimately to introduce the Papal authority in cases of the Church. Amongst
these is to be noted, that the King having earnestly moved the old Bishop of
Worcester, Matt. Paris Hist. in Will. 2. fo. 20.
Wulstan, to give up his Staff; his answer was, that he would only give it up
to him of whom he first received the same; and so the old man went to St.
Edwards Tomb, and there offered up his Staff, and Ring, with these words, Of
thee, O holy Edward, I received my Staff, and Ring, and to thee I now Surrender
the same again; not acknowledging any authority in the Pope, or in any other on
his behalf, to receive, or dispose them, as Matthew Paris relates the story at
large. And though the Conqueror did thus Complement the Pope, in the admission
of his Legates, and some other small matters, yet how far he really submitted
himself appears by an Epistle to Gregory the seventh, by him wrote, thus,
Excellentissimo S. Eccl. Pastori Gregorio, Gratia Dei Anglorum Rex, and Dux
Normannorum Willielmus, Salutem cum amicitia: Hubertus tuus Legatus ad me
veniens, ex tua part me admonuit, ut tibi and successoribus tuis fidelitatem
facerem, and de pecunia quam antecessores mei ad Romanam Ecclesiam mittere
solebant, melius cogitarem, unum admisi, alterum non admisi, fidelitatem facere
nolui, nec volo, quia nec ego promisi, nec antessores mees antecessoribus tuis
id fecisse comperio. Pecunia tribus fere annis, in Gallia me agente,
negligenter collecta est, nunc vero divina misericordia me in regnum meum
reverso, quod collectum est per praefatum Legatum mittetur, and quod reliquum
est per Legatos Lanfranci Archiep. fidelis nostri, cum opportunum fuerit,
transmittetur, etc.

But in the time of his next successor K. Will. Rufus, a further attempt was
made, that is, to draw Appeals to the Court of Rome: and that appears in the
noted transactions with Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury, at large reported in
our stories. And afterward, in the time of King Henry the first, another step
was made, viz. to gain to the Pope the Patronage, and Donations of Bishoprics,
and other Benefices Ecclesiastical: at which the King taking courage, writes
roundly to the Pope, thus, Notum habeat Sanctitas vestra, Hist. Jorvall. Coll.
quod me vivente (Deo auxiliante) dignitates and usus regni nostri non
minuentur, and si ego (quod absit) in tanta me directione ponerem, magnates
mei, imo totius Angliae populus id nullo modo pateretur. Notwithstanding which,
upon the regress, or restoring of Anselme, and some difficulties that pressed
the King, in reference to his elder Brother Robert, Matt. Paris in Hen. 1. fo.
63.
in a Synod held by Anselme at London, in the year 1107. a Decree passed, Cui
annuit Rex Henricus, and statuit, as Matthew Paris says, ut ab eo tempore in
reliquum nunquam per donationem baculi pastoralis, vel annuli quisquam de
Episcopatu vel Abbatiaper Regem vel quamlibet laicam manum investiretur in
Anglia. But yet with this clause of salvo, Sr. H. Spel^. Council. Tom. 2. fo. 28.
Suis tantum juribus regalibus sepositis and exceptis, as appears in the
Exemplification of the Acts of that Synod, by the learned Collector of our
English Councils. In recompense whereof the Pope, that there might be quid pro
quo, yielded to the King, that thenceforth no Legate should be sent into
England, without the King's leave; and that the Archbishop of Canterbury, for
the time being, should be, for ever, Legatus natus; and for the honor of the Sea, it was obtained, that the Archbishop of Canterbury should in all General
Councils sit at the Pope's foot, tanquam alterius orbis Papa. But this
agreement was soon broken, on both sides, the Pope sending his Legates, and the
King resuming the Investiture of Bishops, Matr. Paris. fo. 65.
as the same Historian relates, in diverse instances.

In the next troublesome reign of King Stephen, it was won clearly, that
Appeals should be made to the Court of Rome; established in a Synod at London,
Speim. Council. Tom. 2. fo 44.
held by Henry Bishop of Winchester, the Pope's Legate; for before that time, In
Anglia namque Appellationes in usu non erant (as un unquestionable Historian
has it) donec eas Henricus Wintoniensis, dum Legatus esset, Hen Huntingdon.
lib. 8. fo 395.
malo suo crudeliter intrusit: in eodem namque Concilio ad Romani Pontificis
audientiam ter appellatus est.

And in the reign of King Henry the second, began the claim, and usage of
exempting Clarks from the secular Power, whatever their crimes were. And from
this root sprang the famous contention between this King, and his Archbishop
Thomas Becket; together with the Constitutions of Clarendon, for the rectifying
that abuse; at large to be read, and observed in the Historians of those times.

To all this it will be but pertinent to subjoine some brief disquisition
touching the Canon Law, how, and by whom compiled, and when introduced into
this Island; under which, where admitted, no small part of the Papal authority
was neatly, and artificially drawn in. For which purpose we must know, that
after the Power of the Bishops of Rome came to some consistency in the world,
and the Pope began to look upon himself as a spiritual Prince, or Monarch, he
presently began to attempt to give Laws to Nations, and People, as a badge of
his Sovereignty: but then well knowing, That ubi non est condendi authoritas,
ibi non est parendi necessitas, he would not impose those Laws, at first,
peremptorily upon all People, but offered them timide, and precario, and in
such places where he presumed they would find the freest reception: and in
order to this, at first, he caused certain Rules to be collected for the Order,
and Government of the Clergy only, which he called Decreta, and not Laws, or
Statuta: and these Decrees, as they were called, were first published in the
year 1150 in the reign of our King Stephen: and whereas Sr. Edward Coke, Sr Ed.
Coke Pref. a^ 8. Relat.
in the Preface to the eighth Report, says that Roger Bacon, the learned
Friar, says in his Book de impedimentis Sapientiae, That King Stephen forbad
by public edict, that no man should retain the Laws of Italy, then brought
into England: we may, with some assurance, intend it of these Decrees, about
that time compiled, and published. And these were received, Keilways Rep. 7
Hen. 8. fo. 184.
and observed by the Clergy of the Western Churches only, for those of the
Eastern Churches would never admit these Rules, or Canons.

Afterward the Bishops of Rome attempted to bring the Laity also under the
obedience of these Canons; and for that purpose, they first began with Rules,
or Canons about abstinence, and days of Fasting, to be observed by the Laity,
Ma^sil. Pat. lib. Defens. Pac. pa. 2. c. 23 Durard. Rat. Di. l. 4. c. 6, 7.
as well as Clergy, which at the first institution, were termed by that mild
word Rogationes; and thence the week of Fasting before the Feast of Pentecost,
came to be called Rogation week, in regard this time of Abstinence was at first
appointed by an Ordinance called Rogatio, and not Praeceptum, or Statutum.

When the Laity had swallowed this Ordinance of Fasting, then, De una
praesumptione ad aliam transivit Romanus Pontifex, as Marsil. Pata. has it;
that is, the Bishop of Rome proceeded to make, and publish several other
orders, by the name of Decretals, and these were published about the year 1230.
An. 14 Hen 3. Mat. Paris in Hen. 3. fo. 417.
and made, or proposed to bind all the Laity, as well Princes, as their
Subjects, in several matters relating to their Civil, and Temporal concerns;
As, That no Layman should have the Donation of Ecclesiastical Benefices: That
no Lay man should marry within certain degrees, out of the degrees limited by
the Levitical Law: That all Infants born before Espousals, should after
Espousals be adjudged Legitimate, and capable to inherit: That all Clarks
should be exempt from the Secular Power; and diverse more such like.

But then we must know, that these Decretals, so made, were not entirely, and
absolutely received in all parts of Christendom, but only, at first, in the
Temporal Territory of the Pope, which, on that account, is called by the
Canonists, Patria Obedientiae, but wholly rejected in England, France, and
other Christian Countries, which thence are sometimes called Patriae
consuetudinariae, as resolving to adhere to their old Laws, and Customs: As the
Canon that prohibits Donation of Benefices per Laicam manum, was always
disobeyed in England, France, the Realm of Naples, and diverse other Countries.
The Canon to legitimate Infants born before marriage, was specially rejected in
England, when in the Parliament held at Merton, Stat. de Merton. An. 20 Hen. 3.
Omnes Comites and Barons una voce responderunt, Keilway 7 H. 8. fo. 181. b.
Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari, quae hucusq, usitatae sunt, etc. The Canon that
exempted Clerks from the Secular Power was never observed fully in any part of
Christendom: Infallible arguments, that these Canons received not the force of
Laws from the Court of Rome, as if that had power to give Laws to all Nations
without their respective consents; but the approbation, and usage of the People
received them as they pleased, partially, and specially, as to Places, Times,
and parts of those Canons; and for the same reason that some rejected one,
others did more, and some all of them; as Bodin says, Bodin. de Repub lib. 1.
cap. 8.
That the Kings of France, upon erecting of their Universities there, declare
in their Charters, that the Profession of the Civil, and Canon Laws, may there
be received and used according to discretion, but not to bind as Laws.

Now when the Bishop of Rome perceived that many of his Canons were embraced in
several Countries; under color thereof he claimed Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
within those Realms, with power to interpret, and dispense with his own Canons;
and for that purpose sent his Legates about, with Commissions to hear and
determine causes according to those Laws; which, upon their first exhibition,
Marsil. Pat. ut supr. pa. 2. c. 23.
as is before noted, he durst not call Laws, or Statuta, ne committeret crimen
laesae Majestatis in Principes, as Marsil. Patav. observes; who further says,
that these Canons, inasmuch as they were made by the Pope, neque sunt humanae
leges, neque divinae, sed documenta quaedam, and narrationes. But, as is said,
when he perceived they were allowed, and used, in part, or in whole, in diverse
Countries, they were revised, digested, and compiled into Volumes, and called
Jus Canonicum; and being appointed to be read, and expounded in public
Schools, and Universities, they were commanded to be obeyed by all under pain
of Excommunication, with declaration of the Pope's power to interpret,
abrogate, or dispense with them at his pleasure; and thereupon the Canonists
say, Lib. 6. de Constable. cap. Licet.
Papa in omnibus pure positivis, and in quibusdam ad jus Divinum pertinentibus
dispensare potest, quia dicitur omnia jura habere in scrinio pectoris sui,
quantum ad interpretationem, and dispensationem.

In the 25th year of King Ed. 1. An Dom. 1297 Tho. Walsing. and Stow, in hoc
anno.
one Simon, a Monk of Walden began first to read the Canon Law in the
University of Cambridge: and the year after it began to be read also in the
University of Oxford, in the Church of the Friars Praedicants; and from that
time got ground in England, being sometimes admitted, and sometimes rejected,
according to the Ebb, or Flow, of the Papal interest here: but how really this
Canon Law was an innovation, and usurpation here, it is sufficient but to
peruse the Preamble to the Statute of Faculties, Stat. 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21.
and Dispensations, made in the reign of King Hen. 8. to which the Reader is
referred.

As another Branch of the Pope's power, in the matters aforesaid, we may
observe that this clause, or words (non obstante) was first invented, and used
in the Court of Rome; whereupon Marsil. Petav. pronounces a dreadful Vae
against that Court, for introducing this clause of (non obstante) as being a
bad president, and mischievous to all the People of Christendom: for when the
Temporal Princes perceived the Pope to dispense with his own Canons, they made
no scruple to imitate him, and dispense with their Penal Laws and Statutes:
Vid. le Case de Penal. stat. in Coke 7. Rep.
and hereupon one Canonist said thus, Dispensatio est vulnus, quod vulnerat jus
commune: and another thus, That all abuses would be reformed, if these two
words, viz. non obstante, did not hinder. And Matt. Paris, reciting several
Decrees made in the Council of Lions; beneficial to the Church, Mat. Paris in
An. 1245.
says thus, Sed omnia haec, and alia per hoc repagulum, non obstante,
infirmantur. But now to return.

We have seen how by several steps, and gradations it was, after the Norman
Conquest, that the Court of Rome usurped upon the Crown of England, in four
main points of Jurisdiction, under four of our Kings, (not immediately
succeeding, for of King Will. Rufus the Pope could gain nothing:) viz. 1. Upon
the Conqueror, by sending Legates, or Commissioners, to hear, and determine
Ecclesiastical causes, and other purposes. 2. Upon King Hen. 1. the Donation,
and Investiture of Bishoprics, and other Benefices. 3. Upon King Stephen, in
drawing of Appeals to the Court of Rome. 4. Upon King Hen. 2. in the exemption
of Clerks from the secular Power: all rivetted, and clinch'd by the new
Decrees, and Canons, which were continually multiplied, and obtruded here; and
all this, notwithstanding the generous resistances, which, at several times,
were made to all.

Neither would all this satisfy, till an entire surrender of the Crown it self
was obtained from King John, re-granted him again, to hold in Fee-Farm and
Vassallage of the Court of Rome: For it was both before, in, and after this
King's time, that by the boldness, and activity of strangers, and treachery, or
pusillanimity of subjects, cooperating with the weaknesses, and necessities of
Princes, the Papacy arrived to that height, as to domineer in a most
intolerable way, both over the Purse, the Conscience, the Regality, and all the
most weighty concernments of the Nation.

Now, to redress all this, some unequal resistances were at diverse times made:
Vid. Mat. Paris in H. 3. in toto.
King Hen. 3. was totally born down, and his Kingdom, and subjects reduced to
utter poverty, and slavery by this usurpation.

After him comes the noble King Edw. 1. who truly may be styled Vindex
Libertatis Anglicanae: at his Father's death he was abroad in the Holy Land;
but no sooner returned, and Crowned, and finding his Kingdom in such a bad
plight, his first work was to put some stop to the career of Papal
encroachments: For the Pope having then summoned a General Council, he would
not suffer his Bishops to repair to it, till he took a solemn Oath of them for
their Loyalty, and good abearing: Then the Pope forbidding the King to War
against Scotland, he slights his prohibition, and proceeds: The Pope demands
the First Fruits of Ecclesiastical Livings, but the King forbids the payment
thereof to him: The Pope sends forth a general Bull, prohibiting the Clergy to
pay Subsidies to Temporal Princes, whereupon, a Tenth being granted to the King
in Parliament, the Clergy refused to pay it; but the King seiseth their
Temporalties for the Contempt, and obtained payment, notwithstanding the Pope's
Bu^: After this he made the Statute of Mort^^ain, that the Church might not
grow monstrous in temporal possessions: In his time, one of his subjects
brougth in a Bull of Excommunication against another, and the King Commanded he
should be executed as a Traitor, according to the ancient law; but the
Chancellor, and Treasurer, on their knees begged that he should be only
banished: He caused Laws to be made against bringing in of Bulls of Provision,
and Breves of Citation, and made the first Statute against Provisors.

His Successor King Edw. 2. being but a weak Prince, suffered the Pope to grow
upon him, but then the Peers, and People withstood him all they could, and when
that unhappy King was to be deposed, amongst the Articles framed against him,
one of the most heinous was, That he had given allowance to the Pope's Bulls.

After him King Ed. 3. a magnanimous Prince, courageously resisted the Pope's
encroachments, and caused the Statutes against Provisors to be severely put in
execution, and the Bishops of Winchester, and Ely, and Abbot of Waltham
convicted, and punished for their high contempts. Yet during the nonage of King
Rich. 2. the Pope's Bulls, Stat. 16 R. 2. ca. 5.
Breves, and Legates became very busy, and daring again, whereof the People
became so sensible, and impatient, that upon their special prayer the Stat. 16.
R. 2. of Praemunire was enacted, more severe, and penal than all the former
Statutes against Provisors: and yet against this King, as against King Ed. 2.
it was objected, at the time of his depose, that he had allowed the Pope's
Bulls, to the enthralling of the Crown.

After this comes a weak King, Hen. 6. and then another attempt was made, if
possible, to revive the usurped Jurisdiction; for the commons denying the King
money, when he was in great wants, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest
of the Bishops, offered the King a large supply, if that he would consent, that
all the Laws against Provisors, and especially that of 16 Ric. 2. might be
repealed; but the Duke of Gloucester, who before had burnt the Pope's Letters,
caused this motion to be rejected; so that all those Laws, by especial
providence, have stood in force until this day. All which, with the
Resolutions, and Judicial Judgments before specified, founded upon the
ancient, and good Laws of the Land, have enabled our Kings, at all times since,
to vindicate the just Rights of their Crown. But King Hen. 8. designing a
further Reformation, which could not be effected, whilst the Pope's authority
had any life in England, took this course; First he writes to the Universities,
the Great Monasteries, and Churches in his Kingdom, and in particular May 18.
1534. to the University of Oxford, requiring them, as men of virtue, In
Archivis Oxon. ad An. 1534. Antiq. Eccl. Brit. fo. 384. 37.
Integrity, and profound Learning, diligently to examine, discuss, and resolve
a certain Question of no small import, viz. An Romanus Episcopus habeat majorem
aliquam jurisdictionem sibi collatam in Sacra Scriptura in hoc regno Angliae,
quam alius quivis externus Episcopus? and to return their Opinion in Writing,
under their common seal, according to the mere, and sincere truth thereof. To
which after mature deliberation, and examination, not only of the places of the
Holy Scriptures, but of the best Interpreters of the same, for many days, they
returned Answer, Jun. 27. 1534. Romanum Episcopum majorem aliquam
Jurisdictionem non habere sibi a Deo collatam in Sacra Scriptura in hoc regno
Angliae, quam alium quemvis Externum Episcopum. Conformable to which was also
the Resolution of all the English Clergy. Upon which, and presently after, King
Hen. 8. was by Parliament agnized Supreme Head of the Church, in these his
Dominions; Stat 26 Hen. 8 cap. 1.
whereby it was also Enacted, and Declared, That the King, his Heirs, and
Successors Kings of England, should have and enjoy united, and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this his Realm, as well the Title, and Style thereof, as all
Honors, Dignities, Jurisdictions, etc. to the said Dignity of Supreme Head of
the Church of England belonging, or appertaining: with full power, and
authority to visit, redress, reform, order, correct, restrain, and amend all
errors, heresies, abuses, etc. which Act, Io. H^rb. Hist. of Hen. 8 fo. 380.
though much to the support of the Regal Authority, seemed not suddenly to be
approved by the King, nor before he had consulted with his Council, (who showed
him many precedents of Kings of England, that had used this power) and with his
Bishops, who having fully discussed the point in their Convocations, Declared,
That the Pope had no Jurisdiction in this Kingdom warranted by Gods word;
suitable to what was Declared by the Universities, Colleges, and Religious
Houses, with learned men of all sorts, maintaining it necessary that such a
power should be extant in the Realm, for the Peace, good Order, and Government
of the same; the Reasons, and Arguments of all which, were couched in a Book of
the King's, about that time published, De vera differentiae Regiae, and
Ecclesiasticae potestatis: whence also the Learned Bishop Andrews, in his
Tortura Torti, seems to have drawn diver assertions of the Regal Authority, to
which the Reader is referred.

A practice this, I mean of consulting the Clergy, and the Learned, in a case
of so great an import, agreeable to former Presidents, Tho. Walsing in An 1408.
fo. 420.
as I find in Tho. Walsingham, In concilio cleri celebrato Londoniis,
assistentibus Doctoribus Vniversitatum Cantabrigiae, and Oxoniae, tractatum est
de censu and obedientia Papae subtrahendis, vel non subtrahendis. And as King
Hen. 2. Rog. Hoveden in Hen. 2. pa. prior.
professed he would proceed, in the great cause depending between him, and his
Archbishop Becket.

Now when King Hen. 8. was by Parliament agnized Supreme Head of the Church,
within his own Dominions, and by him, for the reasons aforesaid, owned and
accepted: what they meant by this, may well enough be collected from the
premises, and from that notable Oration of Stephen Gardener, of True Obedience,
before mentioned: which Title, he neither took, nor the Parliament gave, in
other sense, than the French have always attributed it to their Princes; and
what the Royal Ancestors of King Hen. 8. Spelm. Conc. 437. Seld. ad Eadm. 1^5.
^^g. Edvard. etc.
himself assumed, under the Homonymous names of, Tutors, Protectors,
Governors, Domini, Christi Vicarii, Agricolae, etc. and the like.

And this is the Supremacy which the Kings of England have always claimed, and
exercised within their own Dominions, with the temporary obstructions above
mentioned: that is, in Sovereign way, to Rule and Govern all their Subjects, of
what degree, and quality soever: to call their own Clergy, and Churchmen
together, and with their advice to see the Church reformed: and by Act of
Parliament to have all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction restored and united to the
Crown; as in the First year of Q. Eliz. was done, enlarged on before.

And here it will not be unnecessary to observe, and know, how that Restitution
was resented by the Queen's Subjects at that time: And for that, observe (and
observable it was) the general compliance, and complacence of the People in it:
as also, that from the First, until the Eleventh year of that Queen's reign,
Cok^ 5 Rep. de ure Reg. E^c^esiastico. fo. 35.
no person of what persuasion of Christian Religion soever, at any time refused
to come to the Public Divine Service, celebrated in the Church of England, and
established by public Authority within this Realm: until the Bull of Pope Pius
Quintus, in the Eleventh year of her Majesty's Reign, came out against her;
whereby he deprived her of all her Right, Authority, Dignity, and Privilege,
in or unto these her Realms, and Dominions, and absolved all her Subjects of
their Allegiance. After this Bull it was, that those who regarded the Pope's
power, or threats, more than their Prince's just Authority, or their own
Allegiance, refused to come to Church; and from that occasion first acquired
the style of Recusants. Vid. Camb. Annal.
This gave rise also to a multitude of treasonable practices, and conspiracies
against the Queens life: taken up also against King James: Vid. Arth. Crohagans
case in Crook. 1. Rep.
continued against our late Sovereign, King Charles the First: and still
fermenting, to break forth upon all opportunities to promote the Catholic
cause: and all abetted by the traitorous Doctrine of King-killing, justified,
and proclaimed to the World by Bellarmin, Co licenz^, and con privi^egio.
Baronius, Mariana, Emanuel Sa, Allen, Creswell, and others both Natives, and
Strangers: the consequence whereof was this, That though Treason was always in
the intention, yet (God be praised) nothing has yet been brought to Execution,
but the Traitors

In this affair, St. Jo. Davys D sc. of Ireland. fo. 242.
I find a memorable Observation, of a grave Statesman, That in the Indentures
of submission of the Irish to King Hen. 8. all the Irish Lords did acknowledge
him to be their Sovereign Lord, and King; and owned his Supremacy in all
causes, utterly renouncing the Pope's Jurisdiction; most worthy of note (says
he) in that when the Irish had once resolved to obey the King, they made no
scruple to renounce the Pope.

Besides these which have been experienced in our own Country, infinite have
been the mischiefs, occasioned in the World, upon this score of Supremacy, and
Dominion: and that by the mighty struggling, and bickerings that have been
maintained between the Papacy, and the Princes of the Earth, about the gaining,
and keeping this Power. Besides the general Observations, that a great means of
the growth of the Turkish Empire, to its now formidable stature, has been the
Wars, and disturbances, wrought upon this ground, amongst the Christians
themselves. Also the decay, and corruption of sincere piety, and devotion, by
the turning the current of Religion, out of its pure primitive channel, into
the sink of disputes, and controversies, about the Rights, and Bounds of
Dominion; when Christ himself has told us, That his Kingdom is not of this
world. This caused Divine Religion to degenerate into Humane Policy: and upon
this it was, that Machiavel, too truly, observed, Match. Disc. on Tit. Live. lib.
1. cap. 12.
That there was now here less Piety, and Religion, than in those that dwelt
nearest to Rome; the main point of Religion there practiced being how to draw
this Prince, or that State, or Territory, under the Spiritual Dominion of the
Pope, P^atin in vits G^^g. 7.
there esteemed the very Atlas of the World, with power to depose, dispose, and
impose in all Kingdoms as he please. But for true Christianity, Hos^ in de
Or^g. Monac. li. 6. ca. 66.
Hospinian affirms, that the name of Christian, in the Italian tongue, was used
to note a Block-head, and a Fool. Add to this, the many Treasons, Rebellions,
Perjuries, Wars, and Commotions raised in Christendom about this very quarrel.

And for this main drift of the Papacy for Dominion in all places, but now
mentioned; it is visible, that the Pope's Supremacy is the foundation that
supports the whole building of that Hierarchy; and therefore it has been
thought necessary by them always to lay that stone in the first place: As about
the year 1594. the Bishops of South Russia, being under the King of Poland, but
of the Greek Church, submi^ted themselves to the Bishop of Rome, (in the point
of Jurisdiction) yet not without special reservation of the Greek Religion,
Brierw. Inquir. cap. 18. fo. 138.
and Rites, before they would acknowledge their subjection; as appears by the
Articles of conditions extant. Whereby it is manifest, that the Pope aimed not
so much to reduce those Churches to the Truth, as to his own Obedience. As the
Emperors, and our Kings; John, and King Hen. 8. thundered against, only for
impugning the Pope Supremacy, though they held all other points of Romish
Religion.

And, as the Papacy gained in this matter, in some places, and in some measure;
so it lost much more in others, by straining, and aspiring to an unlimitted
authority, suis and ipsa Roma viribis ruit^ For when the Pope, and his Clergy
endeavored the advancement of their S^veraignty over the World; upon this
occasion any Countries fell away, not only from (...) Dominion, but also from
many other corrupt D^ctrines of the Church of Rome. For when they perceived
that the chief struggle, and design was for Temporal Greatness; that many
conclusions tending to that end, were obtruded as Articles of Faith, so
manifestly contrary to the Dictates of Christianity, and prejudicial to the
Rights of others: Then both Princes, and People, began to look into their
Title, and examine their Evidences, and finding them all defective, and
defeasible, thought there was no other remedy, but quite to cut off that Power,
that would not be confined: whereby this Image of Papal Supremacy became
broken, and thrown down in many Countries, and is but in a tottering condition
in several others at this day: The Kings, and Princes of the Earth maintaining
the just Rights of their Crowns, and Kingdoms against this Usurpation, on
these, and the like grounds, and reasons, viz. That the Title, and Power of
Kings is far more ancient than this pretended Spiritual Dominion, and Quod
prius est tempore, potius est jure: and that in this sense Grace destroys not
nature; and Kings must not lose by becoming Christians. That Dominion is
expressly given in Scripture unto Kings, and is as expressly denied in Scripture
unto the Clergy. That as the Pope claims, at best, to be but the Vicar of
Christ, and that not as he was God; it is most certain that Christ never
impeached, impaired, or imposed upon the Temporal Right of any man; the same
Authority that Princes had, either by the Law of Nature, or of Nations, before
his coming, the same he left untouched at his departure; neither did any of the
Apostles, or Disciples, after his recess, ever innovate in the same. That the
Church in this world is not at home, but in a state of perigrinancy, and
militancy; and it is neither Reason, nor Justice, that strangers should either
expel, or domineer over the ancient Inhabitants, and Melior est conditio
possidentis, as the Lawyers speak. That the proper Rights, (...) Sacra Regni,
Sacra sublim^^.
and Qualities of Majesty, and Sovereignty, are to be both perpetual, and
absolute, as not depending upon any other, nor subject to any exception, or
restraint: That these Rights consist in managing affairs of the highest nature,
which cannot be separated from the Sovereign Power, for upon the guiding of
them, all the fortunes of a State depend: That nothing is of so high a nature,
in a State, as Religion; for inasmuch as Religion commands the Conscience,
Religio, a Religando.
and holds the soul in subjection, if supremacy therein be acknowledged in
any forrainer, the very sinews (as I may say) of Sovereignty are cut asunder:
And it is the most destructive Error in Policy, and Government, to allow to any
other, a power of disposing, or declaring, in matters of Religion, either
besides, above, or against the Prince himself: by which means any King, or
Prince would soon be despoiled of his Authori^y, and his Subjects drawn from
their due Allegiance, upon pretenses of Conscience, and Religion.

But now, for a Conclusion of this Discourse, touching the Kings Supremacy, it
will be but pertinent, and reasonably expected, to clear one thing. viz.
whereas upon restitution of that Right to the Crown, by the Statute made in the
First year of Queen Elizabeth, some were induced to conceive, by the generality
of the words, that affirm her Majesty to be Supreme Governor, as well in all
Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical causes, as Temporal, etc. as if it had bin an
usurping upon the Sacred function of the Church, properly belonging to them in
Sacred Orders. To give satisfaction in this, we may, in the first place,
observe, in what Spears, and in what distances, all the Divines agree that
Ecclesiastical Authority does move; and for our purpose at this time,
Bellarmine shall suffice for all; Bellarm. de Romans Pont. li. 4. c. 22. s. 1.
who divides Spiritual Power, into that of Ordinis, and that of Jurisdictionis:
For that of Ordinis, it appears chiefly in the Administration of the
Sacraments: That of Jurisdiction is held to be double; First, Internal, where
the Divine, or Holy man, by Demonstrations, Persuasions, Instructions, Heavenly
Counsel, and the like, so convinces the inward Conscience of a man, as it
presently resigns, and yields obedience to that which is proposed; as did those
Three Thousand Souls, Acts 2.37, 41.
which were converted at the Preaching of St. Peter. Secondly, External, when
Christians, in foro exteriori, are compelled to their duty, and Obedience.

Now, for that first power of Order, and for that power of Jurisdiction
Internal; our Kings never claimed, or pretended to claim, or exercise them,
or either of them: The example of Vzza sufficiently lessoning all persons to
keep within their due, and proper distances, and Offices, in God's service; 2 Samuel 6.7.
this bold person being immediately stricken by the Divine Hand, for his error,
and for his acting an irregular part in the holy Procession of the Ark. And
that of Vzziah, a King indeed, proclaming aloud both the sin, and danger, in
trespassing beyond the stated and just bounds, and limits in Religious Offices,
whilst under his usurped Pontifical Robes, 2 Chronicles. 26.21.
he wore a loa^hsome leprosy to his dying day, as a most signal mark of the
Divine vengeance, for Exchanging his Scepter for a Censer, to offer up
unwarranted, and noisome Incense. But (God be thanked) neither of these is the
case of our Kings, who otherwise have taken f r their patterns diverse other
Noble, H^zekiah, J^siah, etc.
virtuous, and Religious Princes, to whose Honor it is recorded, how, though
they neither offered Sacrifice, nor Incense; yet that they cleansed the
polluted Temple, reformed the corrupted Religion, and manners of their times,
and caused Judah, and Jerusalem to serve the Lord. So ours never assumed to
themselves a Power, or Authority of Preaching, Teaching, binding, or loosing in
foro animae, Administering the Holy Sacraments, conferring Orders, or any thing
in particu ar properly annexed to those Orders: But only in matters External,
that is, of Jurisdiction external (the last Branch of Eccl^siastical Authority)
and what belongs to the outward Polity of the Church, they look upon it as
their duty, and honor, to become Nursing Fathers: to see that the true God be
publicly worshipped: to see that Atheists, Poly^heists, and all such as break
the Moral, and eternal Law be Corrected, chastised, and restrained; upon which
acconut it is often said, that Rex est Custos utriusque Tabulae: To see that
good and wholesome Laws be made, and established for the good government of the
Church: That both the Church, and Churchmen be regulated, and defended in
their respective Rights, Possessions, Interests, and concerns; and that such as
do transgress the lawful constitutions of the Church be duly punished: and to
this purpose the Regal Office is thus described in King Edward's Law, Rex, Leg.
Edv. Confess. cap. 17. fo. 142.
quia vicarius Summi Regis est, ad hoc est constitutus, ut regnum terrenum, and
populum Domini, and, super omnia, Sanctam veneretur Ecclesiam ejus, and regat,
and ab injuriosis defendat. Jo. Brompt. Coll. 761 923. etc.
And much to the same purpose in those of Ina, Canutus, and others. And hence
it also is that in those Laws we often find the Prince extending his Commands
unto the same things the Priest did his Exhortations.

And thus, the premises considered, it plainly may be collected wherein the
formalis ratio of our King's Supremacy, and Ecclesiastical Authority does
consist; which, being inherent in their Crowns, they do, and may at all times
put in practice, sine ulla labe Christianitatis, and without praying the Aid of
any foreign Power, or Potentate whatsoever.

And further, to anticipate all prejudice, and Scandal in this matter, Queen
Elizabeth, in the same year of the Restitution of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
to her Crown, did declare, she did not challenge any other authority,
Admoni^ions annex^d unto the Inj^^ctions. 1 El.
then was challenged, and lately used by King Henry the eighth, and King Edward
the sixth, which is, and was of ancient time due to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm: that is, under God, to have the Sovereignty, and rule over all manner of
persons within her Realms, and Dominions, etc. And for the Oath of Supremacy
appointed by the said Stat. 1 Eliz. whereby her Highnesse's Supremacy was
Declared in the style aforesaid; It was D^clared in a Statute made the next
Parliament, St^t. 5 El. Ca. 1.
That the said Oath shall be taken, and expounded in such form as is set forth,
in an Admonition annexed to the Q. Majesty's Injunction, etc. At which time
also a Synod being held, for avoiding of diversity of Opinions, and
establishing of consent touching true Religion, etc. It did expressly declare,
Artic. 37.
That they did not give to our Princes the ministering of God's word, or the
Sacraments: But only that Prerogative as is given in the Holy Scriptures by God
himself, viz. That they should rule all Estates, and degrees committed to their
charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Temporal, and restrain with
the Civil sword the stubborn, and evil doers, etc. Stat. 13 Eliz. cap. 12.
And the Articles of this Synod were likewise confirmed by Parliament. So that
now no man need doubt, but that all this was but acknowledgement, that what our
Kings, and Princes had done in former Ages, might lawfully be continued by
their Royal Successors: and that therein they did not usurp upon the Rights,
and Offices of others, but only maintained their own: and that all these
Declaratory, Supervening Statures, passed and Enacted upon the most weighty
Reasons of State, were not Introductory of any new Law, but only Assertory of
the just Rights, and Prerogative of the Kings, and Crown of England. Like as a
Reformation once made in the ancient Roman Empire, Jul. Capitolin. vit. Ant.
(...)
by the Emperor Antoninus Philosophus, is thus celebrated by Julius
Capitolinus in his life, Jus autem magis vetus restituit, quam novum fecit.
Applicable, as well to all the other points, and branches of the Reformation
here, as to that of the King's Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. But the clearing
that I leave to the Divines.

And thus have taken a brief view only (for much more might have bin added out
of our authentic Records, and Histories) as of the ancient Rights of Kings,
and Princes in general, so particularly of our own in matters Ecclesiastical:
How the same have, for some time, been suppressed, and usurped upon by the
Papal Faction, but happily Vindicated, and restored in these latter Ages: In
which affair no Country has proceeded more regularly, laudably, or legally,
than this our Kingdom of England; the Princes of the same, as Supreme within
their own Dominions, calling together their own Clergy, and with their
assistance, and advice reforming the Church. And what remains now, but my
submission, and pardon, for the presumption of this attempt upon my Sovereign's
Supremacy: seeing that Prince may be said, in a manner to be deposed, that is
made the Subject of an usurping Pen.

FINIS.

