THE STATE OF THE WHOLE KINGDOM: CONCERNING His MAJESTY and the PARLIAMENT,
Between, LONDON, YORK, and HULL.

In a Compendious Demonstration of All Interceding Messages, Intentions, or
Resolutions, either of the King or Parliament, with the Respective Answers of
either.

Also, Certain Weighty and Remarkable Admonitions sent from the Commissions
in Scotland, both to the King and Parliament, to Compose the difference between
them.

London, Printed for T.W. 1642.

The State of the whole Kingdom, concerning his Majesty, and the Parliament,
between London, York, and Hull.
THe King and the Parliament mutually fomenting fears and jealousies between
each other, have caused this Kingdom to be involved in such a stupendous
Laborynch of distraction, that the estate of the whole Kingdom is shaken
thereby. Messages, and Remonstrances, Declarations and Replies have been often
reflected on each other; and while the Kings indignation is exasperated, the
Parliaments suspicion is not wanting. London is replenished with grief for his
Majesty's absence; and his Majesty is also himself perplexed at the exclusion
given him at Hull, That a Subject should deny him the enjoyment of his own
possessions. In respect therefore that so many troubles and distempers do
infect and contaminate this Realm, with the contagious diffusion of fears,
and approaching miseries; and that the State of this Kingdom is at this
present reduced to the very brinke of calamity: it will not be impertinent
seriously to consider by what means it has been brought into them, and by
what means probably it may be emergent and brought out of them. Diverse causes
have produced these effects; but the principal cause is to be concluded from
the variance and disunion between the King and his Parliament. But it will not
be unnecessary to search scrutably into the first, and prime cause, that begot
this variance and disunion, and then nourished and continued the same. It was
(as it is by astipulation of all Men generally affirmed) the tumultuous uprores
of some factious Spirits, that did not only scare, but affright His Majesty
from his great Council: running Catervatim, by Troops down to White Hall, and
then disturbing his Majesty with obstreporous clamours. Which caused His
Majesty thereupon to constitute, and appoint a daily Court of Guard; but
perceiving, notwithstanding, their protervity so egregiously obstinate, he left
his Parliament. And ever since, this disagreement have continued between them
to the unexpressible grief of the Subjects. The Authors then hereof are
apparently demonstrated, not to be any foreign, but domesticke foe: for our
Enemies are only of our House and Family, such as under pretense of Peace,
hatch civil Wars, and such as our own discentions, jealousies and distractions
have begotten and raised up. And certainly, where such are found (especially
between a King and his People) they will prove a sufficient destruction to that
Kingdom, and no other cause of the unhappiness, and misery of a State need to
be sought after: for civil discord is a plentiful Sourse, from whence all
miseries and crowding mischiefs flow greedily into a Kingdom.

The Scripture tells us, Of the Great strength of a Little City United, and
of the Little stability of a Great Kingdom divided within it self. So that
upon a prudent inquiry, we may assign our own jealousies and discords, for the
chieft cause of our past, and present troubles, and of our future fears.

The King for his part offers to concur with the Parliament, in the settling
all their liberties and immunities, either for the propriety of their goods, or
liberty of their Persons, which they have successively received from their
Ancestor, or which himself has granted unto them. And (as appears by His
several Messages, and Answers to both Houses of Parliament) what shall yet
remain for the good and comfort of His Subjects, He is willing to hearken, to
all their just and reasonable Propositions? And for the ratification and
establishment of the Protestant Religion, he woes them to it: The rule of His
Government, He professes, shall be no other, then the Laws of the Kingdom.
What can be more pretended, or expected from a King?

The Parliament on the other side make profession, that they intend to make His
Majesty a glorious King, to endeavor to support his Dignity, and to pay unto
him, that duty and obedience, which by their Allegiance, several Oaths, and
late Protestation, they owe unto him: and to maintain all His just Regalities,
and Prerogatives.

So that this Kingdom (the Parliament and King having thus reciprocally agreed
of that, which would in the the general make at once both the King, and his
People happy) will be most unhappy and unfortunate, if they do not bring both
inclinations and endeavors so to propound and settle particulars, as both King
and People may know, what will give them mutual satisfaction, which certainly
must be the first step to the settling of a right understanding between them.
But when that confidence and belief, which should be betwixt a King and his
Subject are once lost and dissolved, there can be no greater difficulty, then
to conjoyne them. For it is much easier to compose differences arising from
reason, yea, from wrongs, then it is to satisfy jealousies, which arising out
of the diffidence, and distrust between the King and People, grow, and are
varied upon every occasion. The Parliament have ordered the disposal of the
Militia of the Kingdom without the Kings consent, warranted by the Authority
of the fundamental Laws of the Land.

The King Answers to the contrary, and desire to know what those fundamental
Laws of the Land are, and where to be found, or by what Ordinance since the
first beginning of Parliaments to this present has it been ever mentioned,
that any thing has been endeavored to impose any thing on the Subject without
the Kings consent?

The Parliament affirm by many Statutes the unlimited power, and Authority of
a Parliament.

The King acknowledges the same also, but withal he understands, that in
the Word Parliament, the King as a part thereof is chiefly comprehended.

The King (being denied him to enter into Hull) proclaimed Sir John Hotham
Traitor, being an unparalleled, high, and unheard of affront offered to his
Majesty.

The Parliament maintain that Act of his to be no Treason, and proclaim him
contrarily a faithful servant of the Parliaments, and that they are confident
his Act will appear to all the World so far from being an affront to the
King, that it will be found rather an Act of great loyalty to His Majesty, and
to the general good of the Kingdom especially. The King affirms, that He
has the same Title to His Town of Hull, which any of His Subjects have to
their Houses or Lands, and the same to his Magazine and Munition there, that
any Man has to his Money, Plate or Jewels; and therefore that they ought not to
have been disposed of, without, or against His consent, no more then the House,
Lands, Money, Plate or Jewels of any Subject ought to be without, or against his
will. The Parliaments Answer, That His Majesty's Towns are no more his own,
then the Kingdom is his own; and his Kingdom are no more his own, then his
People are his own; and if the King had a propriety in all his Towns, what
would become of the Subjects propriety in their Houses therein, and if he had a
propriety in his Kingdom, what would become of the Subjects propriety in their
Lands throughout the Kingdom, or of their Liberties: if His Majesty had the
same right in their persons, that every Subject has in their Lands, or Goods,
and what should become of the Subjects interests in the Towns and Forts of the
Kingdom, and in the Kingdom it self, if His Majesty might sell, or give them
away, or dispose of them at his pleasure, as a particular Man may do with his
Goods. Thus in every particular there is a moore Antipathy and Opposition on
both sides, several fears and jealousies being nourished, between both the
King and his Parliament; which if there be no endeavors to Allay, mitigate or
remove, they will every day increase, grow stronger, and stronger, and gather
strength variously: Nay, they are already grown to that height, and the mutual
replies to those direct terms of opposition in contrary Answers, that if
there be no present stop made, it is to be feared, it will speedily pass
farther then verbal contestations. Yorkshire is in preparation of Arms to
assist His Majesty, and the Horse-riding of that Country has been performed
according to His Majesty's command, and if by provocation of Words a Civil War
should arise, it would presently bring the whole Kingdom to a destructive and
ruinate demolution. So that we are upon the very brinke of our miseries: but it
is better keeping out of them, then getting out of them: and in an Estate, the
Wiseof prevention, is infinitely beyond the Wisdom of Remedies. If for the
sins of this Nation these mis-understandings should produce the least Act of
Hostility, it is not almost to be believed, how impossible it were to put a
stay to our miseries. For if it should so happen (which God of his Goodness
avert) that mutually Forces and Armies should be raised, jealousies and fears
would be much increased thereby, and in the very charge of maintaining them,
the wealth of the Kingdom would be consumed. Of this we had lately a costly
example in the Wars of Scotland, and after pacification was concluded, it cost
this Kingdom not much less then a Million of pounds. And if two Armies be
once on Foot here in England, either a sudden encounter must destroy one of
them, or the keeping them both will destroy the Kingdom. I hope the Parliament
will endeavor by moderation, and calmness, to put a stay to our appraching
miseries, and hearken to the wise advice of our Brethren of Scotland, in their
Message to the King and Parliament, wherein they earnestly entreat them, That
all possible means may be forborne which may make the breach wider, and the
wound deeper: and that no place be given to the evil spirit of division, which
at such time work uncessantly, and rests not; But that the fairest, the most
Christian and peaceable way of reunion may be taken by so wise a King, and
Parliament, as may (against malice and opposition) make his Majesty more
glorious, and His Kingdom more happy then ever.

Which Pious, Prudent admonitions of Scotland (I hope) will be respectively
embraced, to the reconciliation of the King and Parliament, and consequently
the security of the Kingdom.

FINIS.

