THE Trades-man's CALLING.

BEING A DISCOURSE concerning the Nature, Necessity, Choice, etc. of a Calling
in General: AND Directions for the right Managing of the Tradesman's Calling in
Particular.

1 Cor. 7. 24. Brethren, let every Man wherein he is called, therein abide with
God. By Richard Steel, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Samuel Sprint at the Bell in Little Britain,
MDCLXXXIV.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
FOR as much as the Pains and Trouble of writing Books is (unto some Tempers I
am sure) very great, unless animated thereunto by some Opposition, Gain,
Vainglory, or such like Motives; and the Age we live in so curious, if not
censorious; it is meet that I give some account of this present Endeavor,
which plainly is, only to guide the honest-minded Tradesman in the right way to
Heaven. It is evident, that there are vast numbers of People, that are employed
in some Trade or other; and I reckoned their some Directions and Cautions about
their Carriage therein, would not be an unuseful undertaking. Surely an Affair
that takes up six parts of seven of their Time, does require more Rules, and
admits more Cases of Conscience, than are digested into any one Treatise yet
extant.

Whilst others therefore are canvassing more doubtful Points in Doctrine or
Worship, my present Province shall be to direct the Mind and Practice of the
conscientious Christian in his daily Employment, where certainly he has most
Temptations, and without God's Grace falls into most Sins, and where he has
need of all the Assistance that God or Man shall impart, unto him. For it is
not sufficient to be devout in Prayer in the Morning, and at Night, and leave
Conscience asleep all the Day; no, those Religious Duties are only the Means
whereby to procure that Wisdom, Faith, Patience, Self denial and Integrity of
which he will have use all the day long.

And the Tradesman has more Exercises for these Graces, than most other Men:
he has the same Corruption of Nature to bias him, and the same Devil to tempt
him, with others; but then he has more variety of Trials from the World, than
the studious Scholar, or the plain Husbandman: And infinite are the Cases of
Conscience, that come in a Tradesman's way; all which, tho this small Tract
cannot reach, yet I hope hereby to instruct and resolve him in the most
material of them, or at least to establish such Principles and Rules, as, being
faithfully applied to particular Cases, will tend much to his Direction.

When therefore I have discoursed of the Nature and Kinds, the Necessity, the
Choice, and the right Entrance into a Calling in general, I shall lay down
those Directions that are necessary for the Christian Tradesman in his
particular Calling, and point at the Temptations to which he is liable; and add
something concerning the leaving or finishing his Calling; and so commit all to
the Blessing of the Almighty, which only can make this Endeavor useful to the
Souls of Men, which is the unfeigned desire of,

May 12. 1684. The unworthy Instrument Richard Steel.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Nature and Kinds of Callings. What is a Calling. Page 1 What
is our General or Spiritual Calling. 2 What a Particular or Temporal Calling
is. ibid. Here 1. Its Author, 3 2. Its Essence, 4 3. Its Ends. ib.
The several Kinds of Callings. 5 Inference, 1. Folly of Men, 6 1. That mind
neither Calling. ib. 2. That neglect either of them. 8 3. That respect not the
Author. 9 4. That mistake the Ends. 10
2. The Wisdom of God, 1. In the variety of Callings. 11 2. In qualifying and
inclining Persons to them. 12



CHAP. II. OF the Necessity of a Temporal or Particular Calling. 1. Proved, 1.
From the Light of Nature. Page 13 2. From the Light of Scripture. 1. God's
Institution. 14 2. His Command. 15 3. The Example of Christ. 16
3. From the Light of Reason: 1. In point of Justice and Equity. 1. To a Man's
Self, 17 2. To a Man's Family, ib. 3. To the Poor, ib. 4. To the Public. 18
2. In point of Safety, 1. From Sin, 19 2. From Danger. ib.

Object. 1. I have no Need. Answ. 20 2. I have no Ability. Answ. 21

2. Applied, 1. In Reproof, 1. Of begging Friars. ^^ 2. Of Idle Beggars. 22 3.
Of Lazy Christians. 23
2. In Exhortation, 1. To Parents, 24 2. To Children and Youths. 25


CHAP. III. OF the Choice of a Calling. 1. It must be Lawful. How this knows*
26 What Callings are Unlawful. 27
2. It must be fit; for the Persons, 1. Education 29 2. Abilities. 1. Of Mind,
30 2. Of Body. 31
3. Inclinations. ib. What to do in case these concur not. 32
3. It should be Attainable, Safe, and Useful. 33 Inference. The Necessity of
good Deliberation. 35

CHAP. IV. OF Right Entrance into a Calling. Four things needful. 37 1. Right
Ends. ib. Viz. 1. God's Glory. 38 2. Common Good. ib. 3. Own Good. 39
2. Due Qualifications. 1. Knowledge, 1. To read and write. 40 2. In the
Principles of Religion. 41 3. A Capacity for it. 42
2. Grace. Particularly, 1. Humility, 43 2. Fidelity. 44

3. Firm Resolutions against. 1. The Difficulties. 45 2. The Temptations. 46
4. Earnest Prayer. 47 Use 1. Reflection. 49 Use 2. Instruction. ib.


CHAP. V. OF the due Managing of a Trade or Calling. Six Requisites thereunto.
Page 51 Sect. 1. The First Requisite in a Trade is Prudence or Discretion.
Where, 1. The Description of it. 52 2. The Excellency and Necessity of it. 53
3. The Employment of it, which is, 1. In getting a full Insight into it. 55 2.
In fixing the Circumstances of it, as Time, Place, Persons. 56 3. Due
Deliberation in particular Cases. 58 4. Proportioning the Affairs of your Trade
to the Ability of your Mind, Body, Estate. 59 5. Ordering your Expenses suitable
to it. 60 6. Frequent Inspection into the state of your Affairs. 62 7.
Governing the Passions of Anger, Fear, Hope, etc. 63 8. Considering the
Contingencies of it. 66 9. Avoiding ruinous Courses; as, 1. Bad Company. 67 2.
Suretiship. 68 3. Gaming. 70 4. Pragmaticalness. 71
10. Disposing your outward Calling in Subordination to your Christian Calling.
72 Use 1. Repr. 1. Indiscretion of the Godly. 73 2. Carnal Policy of the
Ungodly. 74
2. Exhort. Labor for Wisdom. 1. Beg it of God. 2. Consult wise Men. 75 3.
Study for it in the use of Means. 76



Sect. 2. The second Requisite in a Trade is Diligence. Page 76 Here, 1. The
Nature of it. 2. The Extent of it. Consists in, 1. Employing all the Faculties
of the Mind. 78 2. All the Strength of the Body. ib. 3. The Substance of your
Time. 79 4. Laying hold of Opportunities. 81 5. Taking care of (seemingly)
lesser matters. 82 6. Rejecting Avocations; as Absence from 83 Shops, Taverns,
useless Visits, 84 Recreations, undue Devotion. 85 What time may be spent in
Exercises of Devotion. 86

3. Inducements to Diligence. 1. It Is matter of Duty. 87 2. Of Safety. ib. 3.
Of Benefit. 88 4. Of Comfort. 89
4 Use, 1. Repr. Of Idleness. 90 2. Exhort. 1. To this Diligence in your 91
Particular Callings. Cautions herein, 92
2. Much more in your Heavenly. 93


Sect. 3. The Third Requisite in a Trade is Justice. 1. The Nature of it. 96 2.
The Necessity of it. 1. It is your Duty, 1. By the Law of Nature. 97 2. By the
express Law of God. ib. 3. By the Law of Christ. 98
2. It is your Interest. ib.
3. The Extent of it. 1. Performing lawful Promises. 99 Of paying your
Work-Folks. 101
2. Paying due Debts. 102 Of breaking upon design. 103
3. Using exact Weights, Measures, and Lights. 104 4. Right working of
Manufactures. 105 5. Making Conscionable Bargains. 106 viz. 1. Content with
reasonable Gain. 107 What is the best measure of a Tradesman's Gain. ib.
2. No Advantage of another Necessity. 109 3. Nor of their Unskilfulness. 110
4. Deal not for stolen Goods. 111 5. Use an honest Plainness. 112
6. Defraying lawful Impositions. ib. Against stealing of Custom, 113 and
starving of Ministers. 114
7. Paying due Respects to the Orders of your Society. 115 8. Having an
equitable Regard to Fellow-Traders. 116 Particularly to Partners. Against
Engrossing. 117
9. Having a paternal Care about Apprentices. Warning against too much, 118 1.
Rigor, 119 2. Indulgence. 120
10. Making due Provision for Wife and Children. 122 11. Showing Mercy to the
Poor. 123 Objects of Charity specified. 124

4. Use. 1. Of Reflection. 125 2. Of Comfort. 126 3. Of Conviction. 127 4. Of
Exhortation. 1. To proceed by this Rule, 2. To Restitution. 129 This your. 1.
Duty. 2. Interest. 130
Object. 1. Of Inability. Answ. 131 2. Fear of Shame. Answ. 133 3. Absence or
Death of Parties. Answ. 134

3. Take the safer Path in doubtful Cases. 135 4. Prevent others from doing
Wrong. 136


Sect. 4. The Fourth Requisite in a Trade is Truth, or Veracity. Where, 137 1.
Its Nature is described. ib. 2. Your Obligations to it demonstrated, 1. From
the Light of Nature. 138 2. From the Light of Scripture. 139 3. From the Light
of sound Reason. ib. There Is 1. Equity in it. 141 There Is 2. Commodity in it.
142 There Is 3. Ingenuity in it. 142 There Is 4. Policy in it. ibid
Object. 1. From Examples of the contrary. Answ. 143 2. From the smallness of
the Sin of Lying. Ans. 144 3. From the pretended Necessity of it. Answ. 145
3. Instances wherein it is to be exercised. 1. Not concealing what you should
discover. 146 2. Shunning all unjust Commendations of Commodities. 147 3.
Avoiding all unjust Disparagements thereof. 148 4. Abhorring any Untruths in or
about your Bargains. 149 5. Forbearing all Equivocations. 150 6. Restraining
multiplicity of Words. 151
4. Use, 1. Of Reflection. 153 2. Of Reproof. 154 3. Of Exhortation to
Veracity. 155 Means. 1. True Faith and Fear of God. 156 2. A truly tender
Conscience. 156 3. A real Love of your Neighbor. 157


Sect. 5. The Fifth Requisite in a Trade is Contentedness. 158 Where, 1. The
Description of it. 2. Reasons for it. 159 1. In respect of God, 1. His Command.
161 2. His Providence. 162 3. His Glory. ibid
2. In respect of our Selves. 1. Our Deserts. 163 2. Our Mortality. 164 3. Our
Comfort. ibid

3. The Practice of it. 1. In cheerful undergoing the Inconveniences of it. 165
A list of some Inconveniences in a Trade. 166
2. In a thankful acknowledgment of the Excellencies of it. 169 A Discourse of
the Excellencies of a Trade. 170
3. In a patient bearing the Losses, etc. in it. 172 4. In watching against the
contrary Temptations. As 1. Ambition, 175 As 2. Envy, ibid As 3. Covetousness,
177 As 4. Despondency, 179 As 5. Invading other Callings. 180 In what case one
Man may have several Callings. ibid
5. In a steady Continuance in it, 181
4. The Use. 1. Of Repr. The Evil of Discontent. 2. Of Exhort. to
Contentedness. 183 Means. 1. Faith. 184 2. Humility. 3. Prayer. 185

Sect. 6. The Sixth Requisite in a Trade is Religiousness. Where, 1. The Nature
of it. 186 2. Inducements to it. 1. Nature teaches it. 187 2. Scripture
teaches it. 188 3. Reason teaches it. It being, 1. The truest Wisdom, 189 2.
The highest Equity, 190 3. The soundest Comfort, ibid 4. The greatest
Necessity. 191 Object. 1. From the Difficulty. Answered. 192 Object. 2. From
the Prejudicialness. Answ. 193 Object. 3. From the Singularity. Answ. 194
Object. 4. From the Danger. Answ. 195 Object. 5. From the Needlesness. Answ. 196


3. The Exercise of it. 1. In maintaining a religious frame of Heart. 197 2. In
the due Exercise of Faith. 199 3. In the right performance of Religious
Worship. 200 4. In observing a right Rule and End. 203 Whether a Man may aim at
Riches in his Calling? 204
5. In spiritualizing your Calling. ibid A Catalogue of all the Trades
mentioned in Scripture. 205
6. In the holy Observation of the Sabbath. 206 7. In the Practice of
Watchfulness. 209 8. In the use of holy Ejaculations. 211 9. In the exercise of
all Grace. 213 10. In promoting Goodness and discourag. Sin. 215 Some
Directions for the. 1. Choosing some good Books. 217 2. Using them. 220


4. Use. 1. Of Lamentation and Reproof, 221 Particularly the Omission 1. Of
Family Worship, 223 Particularly the Omission 2. Of the Lord's Supper, 225
2. Of Exhortation. 226



CHAP. VI. OF the Finishing of a Calling, 229 Conclus. A Man cannot lawfully
leave his Calling till God does discharge him. 230 He does this, 1.
Immediately. ibid 2. Mediately. 1. By the Hand of Man. 231 2. By his own
special Providence, 1. Disabling the Mind. 232 2. Disabling the Body. 233
Whether a Man may withdraw from his Calling and live upon his Estate? 234
3. Disabling a Man in his Estate. 235 4. Summoning him by Death. 236


Here Advice to Tradesmen, 1. To set their Souls in Order. 237 2. To set their
House in order. 238


ERRATA.
SOme literal Mistakes have past the Press. For others that are more material,
read as follows. Page 91. line 1. for I was. read I went. P. 93. l. 15. f.
then, r. thee. P. 119. l. 31. f. own, r. owe. P. 120. l. 28. f. incurred, r.
inured. P. 128. l. 8. f. Wrath, r. Wealth* P. 207. l. 25. f. all night r. as
night.

THE Tradesman's Calling.
CHAP. I. Of the Nature and Kinds of Callings.
A Calling is some kind of Life to which we are called of God: Now all
Christians are called of God to know and believe in him, to love and serve him,
and at length, fully to enjoy him. And besides this Calling, and subordinate to
it, God does call every Man and Woman, as if he called them by Name, to serve
him in some peculiar Employment in this World, both for their own and the
Common-Good. And hence arises* that Distinction of a General, and of a
Particular or Personal Calling; they might with more clearness be styled, our
Spiritual, and our Temporal Callings, but only* that some, even Particular
Callings (as that of Ministers) are conversant about Spiritual Matters, tho
they are distinct enough from our Christian Calling.

Our General or Spiritual Calling then, is whereby a Person is called of God to
believe and obey the Gospel; which, being revealed under the Notion of a
Covenant of Grace, is named Vocatio ad Foedus. And this, when the Word is
accompanied with the Spirit, is Effectual Calling, and leads to Salvation;
according to that, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy
Calling. But here I shall discourse no more of this, save only to note,
wherefore it is termed our General Calling; namely, because this is common to
All Christians, requires of All the same Duties, assures to All the same
Promises, and obliges All to the same Conditions: So that, as no Man may
undertake any Particular Calling that is inconsistent with his General; so in
case of Competition in any Instance of present Duty, that must humbly give
place to this; for every Man ought to manage his Temporal Calling in
Subordination to his Spiritual, and must remember, that, in the throng of all
his Business, he is a Christian.

A Particular, or Temporal Calling is a settled Employment in some special
Business of God's Appointment, for our own and others good: And this is termed,
Vocatio ad Vitae institutum, vel ad munus: The former and this latter are both
elegantly mentioned in one Verse, 1 Cor. 7. 20. Let every Man abide in the same
[earthly] Calling, wherein he was called [by his heavenly Calling.] No Man
should think, that God likes him either the better or the worse, merely for his
outward Calling; and therefore let every Man contentedly abide in the same
Earthly Calling, provided it be a lawful one, wherein his Heavenly Calling
found him.

In the abovesaid Description, consider, 1. The Author of a Particular Calling,
which is God. So the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7. 17. But as God has distributed to
every Man; as the Lord has called every one, so let him walk. Hence certainly
these Employments are named Callings, because every Man must be called of God
unto them: He directs Men to them, he inclines them, he enables them for them.
Now God calls unto them, 1. Immediately by himself: so he called Adam to be an
Husbandman, Genesis 2. 15. Amos to be a Prophet, Amos 7. 15. Paul to be an
Apostle, Acts 9. But this Method he rarely uses in these latter days. They
that will pretend to an immediate Calling, must produce extraordinary Gifts and
Qualifications, else it is but Conceit and Delusion. 2. God calls Men mediately
by Instruments, such as Parents, Guardians, and in some cases Magistrates. By
those that have a Right, either by the Law of Nature or Municipal Laws, to
dispose of others, God does as really call to this or that Employment, as if he
did it immediat^ly. For tho the Lord God, who has sole Right and Authority
over all his Creatures, does never demise his Property to any other, yet he
does delegate Parents, and such Superiors, to act under him, and to dispose
those that are under their Care, according to his Will; and he ratifies all
that they regularly perform in that behalf. There is besides, also an inward
Call of God, which consists in Abilities of Body, and Mind, and Inclinations:
of which more hereafter.

2. The second thing in the Description of a Particular Calling, is the Essence
of it, which is a settled Employment in some special Business. For it is not
enough to be doing something sometimes; no Man is so idle, but that he is
sometimes doing: but a Calling is some constant Business, which fills a Man's
time; and it is requisite, that it be a Man's own, his proper Business; for we
read of those that did not work at all, yet are called Busybodies, 2 Thessalonians. 3.
11. whom the Apostle notes for disorderly Livers; that is, they were busy
Intermedlers in others Affairs, but did not employ themselves in any constant
Business of their own. And, 1 Thessalonians: 4. 11. he exhorts them to study to be
quiet, and to do their own Business. For the great Governor of the World has
appointed to every Man his proper Post and Province* and let him be never so
active out of his Sphere, he will be at a great loss, if he do not keep his own
Vineyard, mind his own Business.

3. The third thing is the End of a Particular Calling; the next End is, a
Man's own Good: That with quietness they work, and eat their own Bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. A Man's own Bread tastes pleasantly to an ingenious Man, tho never
so course. Yea, a Person may design to gain such an Estate by his Calling, that
he may live comfortably, that he may have whereon to live, and wherewith to
give -- Let him labor, working with his Hands the thing which is good, that he
may have to give to him that needs; Ephesians. 4. 28. Another End is the Common
Good: For we are in this World, as the Members are in the Body, where each must
be useful for the whole, and where each preserves its self, (it is true) but
it is with regard to the whole. And therefore it is a brutish Selfishness to
design no bodies Good but our own; and that Proverbial Speech is very
unchristian, if it be understood exclusively, viz. Every one for himself: No,
as the Community has need of thee, so thou have need of the Community. And the
Eye cannot say unto the Hand, I have no need of thee; nor again, the noble Head
to the poor Feet, I have no need of you; 1 Cor. 12. 21. But the highest End of
all, being understood* tho not expressed in the Description, is the Glory of God.
For, as of him, and through him are all things; so to him must the Glory of all
things be intended and ascribed, Romans 11. 36. If the honest Tradesman desire a
competent Estate, it is that he may live, not to himself, but to the Glory of
God; if he get any thing more, his aim is therewith to educate his Children so
as they may honor God. In short, as the most religious Actions of an
Hypocrite, being traced to the utmost, do end in self; so the meanest Labors
of a true Christian resolve themselves into the Glory of God. And so much for
the Description of a Particular Calling.

The Kinds of Callings are diversified by the different Objects, about which
they are conversant. For, 1. Some are employed chiefly about the Soul; as
Schoolmasters, Tutors in Arts and Sciences, and particularly Divines, which,
tho they be often poor Trades, yet are always rich Callings. 2. Some are
employed only about the Body; as Physicians, Chirurgions, Apothecaries, and all
that depend on them; tho these oftentimes have fair Opportunities, if withal
they have but Hearts to suggest saving Counsel to their Patients Souls. 3. Some
Callings are for Man's Subsistence; such is the Husbandman, and the Tradesman:
The Husbandman's Calling indeed concerns the Being, and the Tradesman's the
Wellbeing of Man's Life. The Substance and first Principles of our Food and
Raiment are conveyed to us by the Care and Labor of the Husbandman; the
Tradesman moulds and fits them for our immediate Use and Service. 4. Some again
are employed for Man's Delight and Convenience, as Music, and diverse other
Arts, wherein also several Trades have some Concern. 5. Some Callings there are
again, which are conversant about the Defense of Men's Bodies and Estates; such
as Soldiers, and all those Employments that relate to Military Affairs. And
lastly, some are employed for the Public Peace and Safety of Mankind, as
Princes and Magistrates of all kinds and degrees; whose Calling also is of God;
for there is no Power but of God, the Powers that be are ordained of God; Romans
13. 1.

And here let us make a stand, and behold,

1. The Folly of Man in reference to what has been said: 1. Of those that mind
neither their Spiritual nor Temporal Callings. As for their general Christian
Calling, they were born and bred in it, it is true, and so do profess it; and
if they had received their Birth and Education under Paganism or Mahumetanism,
they had yielded up themselves to those Religions: For, as they have never
searched into the Foundations and Reasons of Christianity, so they never study
nor set themselves to the Practice of the great Duties of it; but their whole
business is to please their Appetite, and to promote their Interest in this
World, and do wholly neglect the World to come: A lively Faith, sound
Repentance, constant Holiness, Self-denial, and undissembled Love to God and
Man, they are Strangers unto; and some of them for Temperance, Justice,
Patience, Friendship might go to School to Heathens; and have only to support
them a Form of Godliness, but in the mean while they deny the Power thereof.
And the same Persons are equally mindful of any Temporal Calling; that is, they
no way promote the Good of Mankind; they have Parts, but improve no Science
with them; have Strength and Health, but use no Art or Faculty; Talents, but
hide them in a Napkin. O how will these give account to the Judge of Quick and
Dead? Do ye think that he will never reckon with you, because he delays his
coming? Or, that he will be put off with the Story of your Extraction or
Education? You have Abilities to ridicule Religion, and to do Mischief; you
have Strength enough to drink, to hunt, to whore; ye are only wise to do Evil,
but to do Good ye have no Knowledge. Woe to you, if ye reform not; ye have a long
Arrear, and he that is gracious, and merciful, and slow to Anger, yet by no
means will clear the Guilty: And therefore bethink your selves, grant your
selves but Leisure to consider what ye have done for God, what for Mankind, and
what for your own Souls; and upon a serious Reflection you will find, that ye
have been all this while asleep, in a pleasant foolish Dream, and that it is
high time to awake to Action and Employment; who knows but that you may receive
your Penny, tho you come into the Vineyard at the eleventh Hour?

2. Their Folly is here taxed, that neglect either of their Callings. Perhaps
they are very diligent in Reading and Hearing, in Prayer and Fasting, and do
run from one Sermon to another all the Week long; but do nothing in any
Particular Calling; they serve God, but serve not their Generation by the Will
of God, as David did, Acts 13. 36. and as they ought to do: But these People
live, as if they were all Soul, and no Body; or as if they were born only for
themselves, and for no body else. And if some of their Ancestors had taken no
more care of them, than they do for Posterity, they must have fasted out of
necessity, instead of fasting out of choice. Against such as these, holy
Augustine wrote a whole Book of old; who are but a sort of Secular Monks and
Nuns, that forget the old Canon, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. That if any (let them be who,
or what they will) will not work, (being capable of it) they should not eat. On
the other hand, there are a far greater number, that are very diligent in their
worldly Employments, that rise early, sit up late, and eat the Bread of Care,
Labor, and Sorrow, but apparently neglect the Welfare of their Souls, and the
Care of the World to come. No laboring to get Knowledge, Faith, or Holiness; no
reading or hearing of God's Word, or Prayer, but only such as is merely
superficial and customary; busy at the Exchange at Noon, but sleepy in their
Prayers at Night; exhausting all their Strength and Spirits in their Shops, and
quite heartless in their Closets and Families; that live as if they were all
Body, and no Soul; or, as if after this short Life, there were not a far longer
to come: yea, the very Sabbath, that Sacred Day of Rest, which should be a
Delight, is a Grief to them; and in their Hearts they cry, When will it be
over, that we may to our worldly Business again? yea, in that very Day, tho the
Law does bind their Hands from Labor, yet their Souls are filled with Cares
and Contrivances about temporal things. But why do ye separate those Callings,
which God has joined? what Blessing can you expect upon an Estate that is
gained without Godliness? or, What will it profit you to gain the whole World,
and lose your own Souls? You might work hard, and pray hard also: you may gain
enough of both Worlds, if you would mind each in its place: whereas if you
neglect the main, God may justly, as he has frequently, rent away the Earthly,
and locked up the Heavenly Riches, from those who value not a grain of Grace
above a world of Gold. Trust him therefore who never deceived you, saying, Seek
first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all other things shall be
added to you. Mat. 6. 31.

3. Their Folly is manifest, who respect not the Author of their Callings, to
wit, Almighty God; That seek not his Advice, that mind not his Blessing. It is
most certain, that all Persons and Things are governed by the Providence of
God; that there is nothing so great, nor any thing so small, which is not
directed thereby. Now if this be really believed, surely it concerns all Men in
their weighty Affairs to have recourse to Him, to consult his Will, and to
crave his Blessing; else we neglect him, we make nothing of him; and he may
very justly neglect us, and be unconcerned about our Welfare. Learn of
Abraham's Servant, Genesis 24. when he went about his Master's Son's Affair; how
earnestly he craves the Direction of God in that matter, and how well he sped
thereafter. Learn of Jacob, Genesis 28. when he set forth into the World, how he
prays and vows, and how the Lord blessed him exceedingly. And that Apostle who
forbids distracting Care in any matter, commands, that in every thing, by
Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, we make our Requests known unto
God. Phil. 4. 6. How dare any then choose their Calling without God's good
liking, or rush into it without earnest Prayer? On the other side, With what
boldness and cheerfulness may one proceed in his Employment, when he can aver
that he was called to it by God himself, who will therefore stand by him, and
carry him through it? Prove. 3. 6. In all thy Ways acknowledge him, and he shall
direct thy Steps.

4. Their Sin and Folly is no less, that mistake the Ends of their Calling:
Aiming therein only at their Wealth, Ease, and Honor; and not at the Glory of
God and the Public Good, as well as their own Subsistence. The End is that
which enobles or imbases any Action. A right Principle, Rule and End sanctifies
every Step and Passage of a Man's Life; but if any of these be wanting, the
thing is spoiled. Grant the Calling to be never so lawful, yet if ye imbark in
it with an eye only to Self, ye may get Wealth and Honor, but therein you have
your Reward. You proceed herein but like prudent Pagans, who may be as
Industrious, as Rich, as Just as You; but ye do no way show forth the Praises
of him that has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous Light. The
Motto of Christians is, Romans 14. 7, 8. None of us lives to himself, and no Man
dies to himself; but whether we live, we live unto the Lord, etc. He that
lives only to himself, lives like a Beast; he that lives to the Public, lives
like a Man; but he that lives also to the Lord, lives like a Christian; and
that Man shall die to the Fruition of that Lord, to whom, and for whom he has
lived.

2. Behold the Wisdom of God: And that,

1. In the Variety and Kinds of Callings, suited to the various Necessities of
our Human Life. Has Man a Soul? there is a Calling provided and sanctified for
the Instruction and Salvation thereof. Has he a Body? there is a Calling fitted
for the preserving and restoring the Health of that. And then, his Body must
have Food and Raiment; how many Callings are ready to prepare these? Some for
the Head, some for the Hands, some for the Feet; every Member almost has a
Calling to attend it; some for Necessity, some for Delight, all for the Comfort
and Welfare of Mankind.

And, 2. The like Wisdom in qualifying and inclining some to one Employment,
and some to another. One Man shall have a Fancy to travel, to fetch in
Materials from abroad; another shall delight in working them up at home; this
Man shall have a subtle Head, that a curious Hand, the other a brawny Arm;
Skill in one, Strength in another, Prudence and Care in a third, and all for
the good of the whole. Just as it is in the Natural Body; the wise God has
placed every Part and Organ in its proper Situation, and disposed them for
their several Functions, and each is at Ease and Content in its place; even so
in the Body Politic, the infinite Wisdom and Goodness of God shines forth, in
distributing to every Man his Function; and in qualifying and inclining some to
one Office, and some to another, for the general good of all. And his
Providence is signal, in making Men generally pleased with their several
Employments; as it is in Habitations, he that lives in the Champian, wonders
how the Inhabitant of the barren Mountains can endure it; and he that inhabits
a sweet Air, admires how any can live comfortably among the Fens; and yet so it
is, each Man is inamoured of the place of his own Birth and Breeding, and sits
and sings under his own Roof. And as the most ignoble Parts of Man's Body, do
quietly and readily perform their Offices without Discontent or Envy at the
rest; so the Divine Providence has most sweetly tempered the various Minds of
Men, to choose and use, in this variety of Callings, what is most acceptable to
themselves, and useful to the whole. And as any anomalous and useless Part of
the Body, would be ashamed (were it capable of Shame) to adhere to the Body to
no end or purpose; so should that Man or Woman be out of Countenance, that is
not in some Calling useful to their Generation: Which leads us to the second
Head of Discourse upon this Subject, which is of the Necessity of a Calling.

CHAP. II. Of the Necessity of a Particular Calling.
I Proceed then, in the second place, to show, That every Man and Woman, that
is capable thereof, should have, besides their General and Spiritual, a
Particular and Temporal Calling.

This I prove, 1. From the Light of Nature; this teaches us, That every Man
must endeavor to live; that Sustenance drops not immediately out of the
Clouds; that it is unreasonable to live upon others; that Motion is natural to
Mankind, so that if Idleness were enacted by Authority, it is thought very many
would pay their Mulct that they might work; that Man is not only an active
Creature, but he has Brains and Strength, which were given to no Man to be
useless; and the very Pagans will addict themselves to some Employment or
other, for their own and others good. Hence Pharaoh's first Question to
Joseph's Brethren was, What is your Occupation? Genesis 47. 3. This instructed
Jubal to teach Music, and Tubal-Cain to be an Artificer in Brass and Iron,
Genesis 4. 21. In a word, God's giving Men Hands as well as Mouths, tells us, that
they who eat, should also work. And the Inclination and Aptitude to this or
that Employment, which the God of Nature has put into Men's Minds, if they
would observe and excite the same, is a plain Indication and Proof, that every
Man should settle himself to be some way useful in the World.

2. From the Light of Scripture. And here we have,

(1.) The Ordinance and Institution of God to Adam, both before and after the
Fall. Before the Fall, when Adam was in the State of Innocence, yet the Wisdom
of God chose a Calling for him; Genesis 2. 15. And the Lord God took the Man, and
put him into the Garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it. He was God's high
Steward over all the Earth, and might, if any Man, have lived at Ease, yet was
obliged to an Employment. He that was greater, and wiser, and holier than any
of his Offspring, the second Adam excepted, must have a Calling. Let no Man
therefore plead his Birth, Estate, his Parts or Graces, to justify an idle
Life. After the Fall; Genesis 3. 19. In the Sweat of thy Face shall thou eat thy
Bread, till thou return unto the Ground. He must into the same Calling again,
tho he found more Difficulty in it than he had before; as a broken Tradesman,
that sets up again with a less Stock, in worser Times. And having two Sons,
they were each of them fixed in a Calling; Genesis 4. 2. Abel was a Keeper of
Sheep, and Cain was a Tiller of the Ground. Tho they had the whole World before
them, yet they had no Writ of Ease from a settled Employment.

(2.) We have God's express Command; 1. In the fourth Commandment, Six days
shall thou labor, and do all thy Work; Exodus 20. 9. This [ Thy Work] plainly
implies, that every Man (for every Commandment is given to every Man) should
have his proper Work or Business, which should ordinarily take up his time from
Sabbath to Sabbath; which is further pressed upon all Mankind, from God's own
Example, verse. 11. For in six Days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, which he
could have done in six Minutes, but chose to fill every Day with Work, probably
for our Instruction and Encouragement to the like Diligence. And, 2. We find
Commands to the same purpose in the New Testament, Ephesians. 4. 28. -- Rather let
him labor, working with his Hands the thing that is good: that is, following
some honest Calling. Yea, the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. does command and exhort
by our Lord Jesus Christ, that Men should with Quietness (that is, without
disputing or grudging) work, and eat their own Bread. Let all idle and useless
Persons consider, how they will answer these plain Injunctions at their Peril.
Add to this the sharp Reproofs we find in Scripture upon the Neglecters hereof.
When Hagar, Genesis 16. 8. had quit her Employment, the Angel meets her with,
Hagar, Sarah' s Maid, whence come thou? and whither will thou go? And in the
next Verse, sends her home to her uncomfortable Calling again. And the Apostle
2 Thessalonians. 3. 11. calls such as work not at all, disorderly People, and such as
ought to be sharply admonished; yea, Verse 6. commands them in the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, to withdraw from every such disorderly Person: So that it is
no trivial Fault in a Man or Woman to live without a Calling.

(3.) We have in Scripture the Example of our Savior himself. When Almighty
God has but one Son in the World, he bestowed him in a Calling, he made him a
Preacher. And before his entrance upon his Ministerial Employment, it is highly
probable, that he labored with his supposed Father Joseph, in the Carpenters
Trade: For tho in Mat. 13. 55. the People styled him the Carpenter's Son, yet
in Mark 6. 3. they plainly asked, Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary?
etc. And if our Savior Christ, in whom the Fullness of the Godhead dwelt*
bodily, stooped to an ordinary Calling, that he might fulfill all Righteousness;
how dare any that are called by his Name, disdain or refuse some settled
Employment? And we sind the Apostles themselves, not only* chosen to that
glorious Office out of their respective Callings, but even after the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, they diligently returned to the same, until they had
their Commission given them to preach the Gospel; as is evident, John 21. 2, 3,
etc. Yea, the Apostle Paul, upon occasion, even after his entrance into his
Sacred Function, abode and wrought with Aquila and Priscilla at their Craft,
for they were Tentmakers; Acts 18. 3.

3. We have the Light of Reason to strengthen. this Point, viz. That every
Person that is capable, ought to have, besides their Christian, some Particular
Temporal Calling. And that,

1. In point of Justice and Equity. Justice (1) to a Man's Self; he that is
useless in the World, steals from himself; and hereupon this Duty falls under
the Eighth Commandment, which says, Thou shall not steal. Which condemns all
such Omissions, as turn to the prejudice of ones self in his outward Estate;
and certainly an honest Diligence in any lawful Calling, with the Blessing of
God, would greatly increase a small Estate, and enable a Man to live more
comfortably himself, and more usefully to others.

(2.) Justice to a Man's Family requires it: For, If any provide not for his
own, and especially for those of his own House, he has denied the Faith, and
is worse than an Infidel. 1 Timothy 5. 8. So that a Person without a Calling, so
far robs his own Family; for by his Care and Pains they might live more
comfortably, and be disposed more happily. And the idle Parent is also a ready
Copy for the idle Child to write after; till at length, By much Slothfulness
the Building decays, and through Idleness of the Hands the House droppeth
through; Eccles. 10. 18. And at last, Drousiness covers them all with Rags;
Prove. 23. 21. Whereas the Industrious Spinster is not afraid of the Snow for
her Household; for all her Household are clothed with Scarlet. She makes her
self Coverings of Tapistry, her Clothing is Silk and Purple; Prove. 31. 21.

(3.) There is a Justice to the Poor. And neglect of a Calling disableth from
that. Hence, Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him labor -- that he may have to give to him
that needs. God who has given to you Eyes, and Hands, and Health, and Stock,
intends and appoints you to be helpful to those that have no Eyes, no
Strength, no Health, or Ability to work at all. And no Man should murmur at
this; seeing it was one of our Savior's Proverbs, recorded, Act. 20. 35. It is
a more blessed thing to give, than to receive.

(4.) There is Justice and Equity in it in respect of the Public; it is good
for the Commonwealth. And as every Member of the Body is useful to the whole;
so should every Person, who is (as before) a Member of the Body Politic, be
serviceable to the common Good. No man should stand like a Cipher in his
Generation; but should so employ himself, that there may be a want of him in
the World. How many Trades have been at work to furnish thee out in Meat,
Drink, and Clothes every day? and how unreasonable is it, that thou should
make no Returns to them again? That many Rivers should daily empty themselves
upon you, and that you should be like a dead Sea without any vent or use to
them again? Hence the Apostle gives this Order: Tit. 3. 14. And let ours also
learn to maintain good Works [or, as the Margin, profess honest Trades] for
necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful. The very Bees will drive out the
Drones from their little Commonwealth. Indeed he deserves not the Protection,
that adds not to the Welfare of the Public.

2. The other Reason for every ones engagement in a Calling is in respect of
Safety, and that,

(1.) From Sin. For he that is fully employed, has not that leisure to sin
that others have. Non vacat, hinders more than non licet. I have no leisure,
restrains more than I have no leave. Satan with his Temptations has a fair
Mark at a Man that is unimployed; as a Fowler has at the Fowl that is sitting
still: whereas the busy Man, as the Fowl upon the Wing, escapes many a Snare. 1 Timothy 5. 13. And not only idle, but Tatlers also, and Busybodies. It Is a rare
thing to be merely idle and no worse: an idle Head has usually a busy Tongue;
and he that does not what he ought, will commonly be speaking what he ought
not. Hence S. Augustin's Wish upon those words in Timothy, Would to God, that
they who hold still their Hands, would hold their Tongues also! And spends a
whole Book to show the Sin and Mischief of an Idle Life.

(2.) There is Safety from Danger: For as he that is without a Calling, is
liable to Satan's Temptation, so also is he from under God's Protection. His
Angels have a Charge to keep us, but it is only in those ways which the Lord
appoints to us. Psalm. 91. 11. Every thing is safest in its place. If a Cross do
befall a Man in his Place and Calling, he has* Comfort in it; whereas those
Disasters which meet with a Person that is not employed, or ill employed, have
a double weight. Famous is that Instance of Jonah; he had a noble Calling
tendered him, but he had no Mind on it, and away he flees: but a dreadful Tempest
meets him, the Ship could not bear such a sinful Weight, and you know that
never Man had such a fair escape as he had. Whereas Elijah and other Prophets
were wonderfully saved from Dangers in their Calling, but no body is safe out
of theirs. If Satan find a Man on his Ground, without God's great Mercy, he
will do him a Mischief. And this you see is evident from the Light of Nature,
of Scripture, and of Reason, that every Man should employ himself in a Calling.

I can imagine but Two Objections against this Assertion. The first is, I have
no need of a Calling, I can live without it.

Answ. 1. Tho you have no Outward Necessity to enforce you to take up a
Calling, yet it may be necessary for you, in respect of your Soul, to prevent
the Corruptions that are apt to breed there. The standing Pool is prone to
Putrefaction; and it were better to beat down the Body, and to keep it in
subjection by a laborious Calling, than through Luxury to become a Castaway.

2. Tho you have no need of a Calling in respect of your selves, yet it may be
useful to others. If you have no Kindred that need your help, yet the Poor you
have always with you: and you heard even now the Apostle appointing Men to
work, that they might have to supply those that need.

3. Tho you have no need of a Calling, yet there is a necessity upon you by
reason of God's Command before mentioned, that God who best knows what is fit
and needful for all his Creatures. The Apostle Paul had no need to preach, in
point of Livelihood; yet upon this very account he says, A Necessity is laid
upon me, yea, woe unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. So, tho you have no need
of the World, yet the World has need of you; and therefore, why stand ye all
the day idle? go ye also into the Vineyard.

The other Objection is, I have no Ability, or Capacity for a Calling. One is
sickly, another lame, another old, another blind, and what can such as these do
with a Calling?

Answ. 1. If by any of these Infirmities, you are wholly disabled, then God
himself releases you; and you have time to bewail your Neglects and Loss of
Opportunities heretofore; and a fit occasion to exercise both your Trust in the
Providence of God, and your Patience under his heavy Hand. Time was, you could
have done something if you would, and now you would be doing if you could.

2. You should bewail your present Unusefulness as a sore Affliction, and also
the Sins that have brought it upon you; and endeavor to employ your selves
some way, as far as possibly you can. None, except such as are under acute
Sickness or Pain, but might be doing something for their own or others Good:
and a willing Mind would break through small, yea, great Difficulties, rather
than sit and signify nothing in the World. And so much for the Proof of this
Proposition about the Necessity of a Calling, which may be improved,

1. By way of Conviction and Reproof of three sorts of guilty Persons:

(1.) Of the Begging Friars, and such Monks as live only to themselves, and to
their formal Devotion; but do employ themselves in no one thing to further
theirown Subsistence, or the Good of Mankind. Some such sprang up of old, who
used to plead the Sixth of Matthew against all wordly Care and Labor; and who
interpreted that of the Apostle, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. If any Man will not work,
neither let him eat, of spiritual Work and Labor: Which the Learned Augustine
largely confutes by the Context. But what would he have said, if he had lived
to see such swarms of Drones, dividing their time between a dull Chapel and a
warm Refectory, covering a Life of Sense with a Vizor of Religion? At the
first, these People both prayed hard, and labored hard, and not only
maintained themselves, but helped the Poor; but they are since degenerated into
a public Grievance. And yet they have the Confidence to boast of this their
Course as a State of Perfection, which in very deed, as to the Worthiness of
it, falls short of the poorest Cobbler, for his is a Calling of God, and their's
is none.

(2.) This meets with Idle Beggars: A sort of People that live without Law, and
without Gospel; that are neither useful to the Public Good, nor careful of
their own; but be like Wens upon the Body Politic, and Sinks of all
Uncleanness. Happy for them, if fewer People spent their foolish Pity upon
their Bodies, and if more showed some wise Compassion upon their Souls. If they
be any ways able, doubtless they should be employed; if they be altogether
impotent, certainly they should be pitied and maintained: but in the mean time
they are wholly neglected by the Church, and the excellent Laws in force for
their reclaiming, are generally disused by the Commonwealth.

(3.) This reaches all lazy Christians, of what Rank and Quality soever: That
live like the Leviathan in the Sea, as if made only to play therein: what
Account can you give at Night to your own Consciences? What Account can you
give at last unto the great God? He that has lent you Talents, has also said,
Occupy till I come; Luke 19. 13. Your Strength is a Talent, your Parts are
Talents, and so is your Time: How is it that ye stand all the day idle? Why do
you like those vain Athenians, who spent their time in nothing else, but either
to tell or hear some new thing? Acts 17. 21. What is Mankind the better for
you? What Gap do you stop? Or, what miss will there be of you from off the
Earth? You are like Ministers sine Titulo, like wandering Stars that move in no
proper Orb, to whom is reserved (if ye reform not) the Blackness of Darkness
for ever. Object. Yea, but we do some good, this way and that. Answ. Ay, but
are you in a Calling? has God called you to this lazy Life that you live?
Nothing will pass in any Man's Accounts, except it be done in the way of his
Calling. Object. The truth is, I cannot work, as that sorry Steward said, Luke
16. 3. I cannot dig, to beg I am ashamed. Answ. I take not upon me to be Judge
of Men's Capacities or Abilities; but are you fit for nothing? have ye neither
Nerves nor Brains? God is too wise and good to make any Man wholly
unprofitable. Do not you render your selves useless, lest ye be dealt with like
unsavory Salt, which being good for nothing, is cast out and trodden under
Foot of Men. Object. I cannot attain any Calling, I would be in an Employment,
but cannot meet with any. Answ. 1. See that this Disappointment be not a just
Judgment of God upon you for your Negligence heretofore. Perhaps you have been
unfaithful, or unthankful in your former Station; and therefore God now justly
keeps you out of his Service, and you are to be readmitted only upon your sound
Repentance. 2. See that Pride or Sloth be not now the true Hinderance: Your
Purse is too low for an high Employment, and your Spirit too high for a low
one. Or, it may be, you would have a Livelihood without any Labor; you would
enjoy Plenty, but would take no Pains: whereas you should resign your selves to
God's Disposal, and be contented to be an Hand, yea, a Finger, yea, a Toe in
the Body, rather than to be an Excrescence and no useful Part of it. If they
who make these Excuses, did want Bread, and Friends to supply them, they would
soon throw away these Crutches, these lame Excuses, and fall to work.

2. By way of Counsel and Exhortation:

(1.) To Parents. Educate your Children for Callings, dispose them into some
honest Calling. Isaac was a great Man, yet he disposed his Sons, Jacob and
Esau, into several Callings. Our Kings themselves disdain not to be listed in
some of the Trading Companies of the Great City. So was King James of the
Cloth-workers, King Charles I. of the Merchant-Taylors, and King Charles II. of
the Grocer's Company. The Turkish Emperor has ever some manual Occupation,
wherein he imploys himself. Why then should any of you neglect, or scorn to
settle your Children in some fixed Employment? Otherwise the Estates you leave
them, will prove Fuel only that will feed their Lust, and at last consume
them. And you of the poorer sort, who plead your Poverty in bar to this
Command, do your Children an irreparable Injury, you betray your Trust, and
implicitly direct them the way to the Gallows; whereas by placing them in some
honest Calling, they might come, as many have done, to be excellent Instruments
in the Church or State, and great Comforts to all their Friends.

(2.) To Children and Youths. Get into Callings, as you tender your own
Happiness here and hereafter. Rouse up vour slothful Spirits; imagine not that
such noble Souls were given you for such worthless Lives; mind your Books, and
then you will be fit for something. Importune your Parents to put you into a
Way; consume not your greener Years in Sports and Trifles. Idleness is sweet,
but the Bread of Idleness has no Taste: Your Time wastes, and Opportuities are
losing all this while. Others will step before you into those Professions which
would enrich and adorn you. In your Races, he that stays a little behind, will
hardly recover his lost Ground: Every thing is restless till it be in its
place. He that is out of a Calling, is out of place. Therefore up and be doing,
and the Lord be with you: Yet make not more haste than good speed; for tho you
should be resolute to have a Calling, yet you should take good Advice about the
Choice of your Calling, which leads into the third thing to be handled, which
is about the Choice of a Calling.

CHAP. III. Of the Choice of a Calling.
THE third thing then to be handled, is about the Choice of a Calling; which
commonly belongs to Parents or Guardians, not excluding the Inclination of the
Party to be disposed, who must spend his Life in it.

And here both must agree to choose;

First; A Calling that is lawful: For God calls us to no other, neither can we
expect his Blessing in any other: Nay, every Minute we spend in any other, we
offend and provoke God; and whatever Riches or Honor we purchase therein,
comes with his Anger and Curse; which very often cleaves to Posterity that do
inherit them. How then may we know a lawful Calling?

A lawful Calling is that which some way tends to the Glory of God, and
consequently does some way further the true Happiness of Mankind, either
Temporal, Spiritual, or Eternal. If the Calling do thus tend to the good of
Mankind, it undoubtedly pleases and glorifieth God: Demonstrate therefore the
latter, and then you conclude the former. For our infinitely good God has
instituted no Calling, but what is for his Creatures good. From the Chief Good
nothing but Good can come. Far sooner may the Sun dart down Clouds and
Darkness, than the Holy God appoint, or call any Man to a mischievous
Employment. Not that every Calling promotes the Happiness of every Individual;
but it must be either for the particular or general Good. And so the very
public Executioner, that takes away Men's Lives, yet is a Calling for the
Publick-Good. Yea, it must tend to the real Happiness of Mankind; and this
respects both Soul and Body, and comprehends both the Life that now is, and
that which is to come. So that any Calling that does really minister to the
Health of the Body, to Man's comfortable Subsistence, to his lawful Pleasure
and Delight, to his Honor and Reputation, to his Defense and Safety, is a
lawful Calling. Again, any Calling that serves for the inlightning of Man's
Mind, for the refreshing of his Spirits, for the restoring the Decays of his
Faculties, for the increase of Knowledge in the Word or Works of God, is a
lawful Calling. And then, doubtless, that Calling which directly tends to
reconcile Man to God, to restore the Image of God in him, to direct a Man how
to conquer his Lusts and Passions, to guide his Life in true Piety and Virtue;
and lastly, how to attain eternal Felicity, is a lawful and noble Calling. All
and every of these Callings are justified by that of the Apostle, Tit. 3. 14.
And let ours also learn to maintain good Works for necessary uses, that they
may not be unfruitful.

And on the other side, we may hereby discern which are unlawful Callings.

Namely, 1. Such as directly tend to God's Dishonor; as the Craft of
Demetrius, that consisted in making Silver Shrines for an Idol, Acts 19. 24.
And those curious or magical Arts mentioned Verse. 19. of that Chapter. I say,
which have this explicit and plain Tendency; for otherwise a Man may be
innocently employed in those things, which others may wickedly abuse; as may be
instanced in most Callings in the World.

So, 2. Such Callings as directly tend to the hurt of Man, either in Body,
Soul, Estate, or any way else; these are unlawful Callings, and were never
appointed by God, who is Holiness and Goodness it self. Such are all Knights of
the Post* Bawds, Cheats, Ballad-makers, mere Gamesters, and in the Judgment of
the Ancient Church, Stageplayers. These, and such like, are not lawful for a
Christian, who has renounced the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and is
devoted to the Service of an holy God. And they that are fondest of them, and
gain most by them, will reap no Fruit in the Issue from them, but Shame, if
they repent; and Death, if they do not.

Let every one therefore consider well, Is this Calling which I am choosing
lawful in it self? Is the Employment such as to be made a Calling of? will it
bring Glory to God? will it not only be beneficial to my self, but useful to
the Commonwealth? Will it consist with the Welfare of my Soul? with the
indispensable Service, which I owe to my Maker? Will it necessitate me to omit
the Worship of God, and to live as if all days were alike? Nay, if it may not
some way promote the Glory of God, and others Good as well as my own, it is not
a lawful Calling.

Secondly; You are to choose a Calling that is Fit: As the Apostle in another
case concludes, All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient:
So here, every lawful Calling is not fit for every Man. And it is evident, that
Rashness and neglect of due Care in this matter, proves the Ruin of many a
tender Plant, and also a public Mischief. For hence it comes to pass, that
some Youths have Capacities above their mean Callings, and so are not content
in them, are ready to scorn them, and invade others that are above them. And
others have Callings above their Capacities, wherein they do but bungle for a
time, and then are discouraged; and if they obtain any Office in Church or
State, prove Burdens and Mischiefs to the Public. The Countryman might learn
this in his own Farm: every Ground will not bear every Grain, and therefore he
does wisely dispose of each Grain sutably to his Ground, lest he reap nothing
but Sorrow for his Harvest. And should not Parents take more care of their dear
Children, who are not committed to a Calling for a Year, but for term of Life?
To find out a fit Calling then, you must consult;

1. A Person's Education. A genteel or liberal Education directs to such a kind
of Calling, if other Requisites do concur: and a plain rustic Employment may
well fit such an Education. It is manifest, how difficultly a Person that has
been brought up in Learning and other Accomplishments, can stoop to servile and
low Employments: a great deal of Wisdom and Humility will be spent to make that
Man easy in his Calling. That of the Apostle is a Mystery, Let the Rich rejoice
that he is made low; Jam. 1. 10. Tho it be easier to descend than to ascend in
local Motion; yet on the contrary, it is an harder Lesson to descend lower,
than to get up higher in Worldly Estimation or Employment. And then, he that
has been tenderly educated, should not be settled under too much Severity;
lest such new Wine being put into old Bottles, both be spilt and lost. But you
should choose such a Calling as will bear some Proportion and Sutableness to
your Education.

2. You must consider their Abilities; and that both of Mind and Body.

(1.) For the Mind. Never thrust one of a dull Capacity, brittle Memory,
shallow Judgment, or ungovernable Passions into an ingenious, especially into a
religious Profession; for as such will disgrace the Employment, so they will
disgrace and expose themselves. They will be but like the Ass in the Fable, the
more derided for her costly Trappings. You may object, that some of mean
Abilities have proved very useful in Church and State. But as that seldom falls
out, so the Wisdom and Goodness of God will not justify Men's Folly in such
preposterous Disposals. For God may do what he will, but we must do what we
ought; and that is, to fit the Means to the End, and for an ingenious Calling,
choose out an ingenious Person. And so on the other side, it is great Pity to
cramp one of great Parts into a sordid Employment: it is like thrusting one to
the Oars, that might serve at the Helm. God by giving to some pregnant and
excellent Parts, does tacitly appoint them to Professions suitable thereunto;
his way of calling Men ( now) is not by audible Words, but by bestowing real
Gifts.

(2.) For the Body: A robust and healthy Constitution, where Gifts of the Mind
are more sparing, is fittest for a laborious Calling; as a heavy Burden sits
best on Strong Shoulders: whereas those of weaker Complexions, must be fitted
with more easy Employments. As we see the wise God does usually call forth his
strongest and hardiest Servants to the most difficult Services and Sufferings;
and on the other side, he gently leads those that are with young. And his
Providence has so ordered it, that there is as great a Variety of Callings, as
there are of Dispositions, that every one might have an Employment proper and
suitable for him. Parents therefore and Schoolmasters should consult together,
who jointly may fully discover the Abilities of such as are to be disposed,
that they may not be engaged in Matters either too high or too low for them.

3. You must consult their Inclinations; which if they be vehement, and
especially well-grounded, are a great Indication, (if other Requisites do
concur) to the Disposers of Youth, of their fitness for an Employment. For
sometimes the Constitution does strongly biass Persons to this or that sort of
Business, and accordingly does greatly dispose them thereunto. So that one that
is unwillingly fixed in a Calling, seldom thrives well in it; whether it be
from that natural Abhorrence of any Force offered to the Will; or that the
Inclination does also facilitate and greatly assist in any matter. And
therefore it concerns Parents to taste the Option of their Children; and if
they find it is not rational or fit, then to use all due means to conduct and
regulate their Desires to that which is expedient. For as in the case of
Marriage, tho no discreet Parent will impose a Yoke Fellow upon their Child;
yet they may muster up all the fit Arguments they can, to induce them to a good
Choice: So here is room for the Parent's Reasons, as well as for the Child's
Inclination; and every dutiful Child will give a great Deference to the
Judgment of a wise and loving Parent.

But now if these three Ingredients of Fitness do not concur, or if they clash
one with another, how shall a right Choice be made? For Example, if a Person
has had an Education for a nobler Calling, but neither his Abilities nor
Inclination are agreeable thereto; Or, if his Inclination to a Calling be
strong, and his Abilities weak: Or, if his Parts be sufficient, and yet he has
no Disposition to it. In all these Cases, every Man should study to find out
God's Will, where his Call lies; and he ought to conform himself thereunto
without any hesitation or disputing. Now Abilities are the most signal
Testimony of God's Will in this Case. A Man may have been unhappy in his
Education, a Man may be humoursom in his Inclinations; but a Man's present
Parts or Gifts do most unquestionably determine what he is fit for: But here,
All Persons, especially Young Persons, are not competent Judges of their own
Abilities; and therefore it is their Wisdom and their Duty to be concluded by
the Advice of their Faithful Friends and Relations, who most commonly are the
fittest Judges, in what Cases Education, Abilities, and Inclinations shall,
when they concur not, give place to one another. And let these ever consult
with the Wisest of the Calling which they are about, who can best acquaint them
with the Fitness of it: And above all Address must be made unto God by earnest
Prayer, to direct and incline to what is best. For if God should choose our
Inheritance for us, Psalm. 47. 4. Then surely it is best that he choose our
Calling for us; and doubtless the great matter to be inquired into and regarded
in this Affair, is, to know in what Employment God would have us to be; for
there we shall be sure to have his Blessing which is all in all.

Finally, it were also advisable, that you choose a Calling, that is safe,
useful, and attainable by ordinary means: Safe, that is chiefly in respect of
the Soul; for some Callings there be, that are sufficiently gainful, and
perhaps in themselves simply lawful (such as the Retailers of Wine and Ale,
etc.) which yet are attended with such Temptations as are not easily avoided.
His Grace must be strong that lives innocently in them. What wise Parent will
place his Child in the brink of a Precipice?

And then useful: For every one should desire to be as useful to the World as
he can: Now some Callings there be, wherein a Man may get Riches abundantly for
himself; but, in the way of his Calling at least, he does little good to Men's
Souls or Bodies. It is very desirable to a good Man to do as much Good as he
can; and a kind of Penance, to spend the Substance of his Life in an Employment
about Trifles; but this, if the Heart and Ends be holy, may be lawful enough,
tho not so expedient, or not so comfortable. Unsafe Callings may be needful,
and some less useful Professions may be lawful, and therefore (herein) I would
not impose upon the Conscience, but only direct to the best.

And then, lastly, attainable, that is, by just and honest means. For if it be
never so lawful and fit in it self, yet if it be out of your reach, or if it be
in others Disposal, it were Folly in you to choose it. For Example, it were a
ridiculous thing for a poor Country-Lad to choose the Calling of a
Turkie-Merchant, which is out of his reach, or of a Judge, which is in the
King's Disposal. But whosoever is about to choose a Calling, let him sit down first,
and count the Cost, let him consider, whether he have Means proportionable to
the End; whether with God's ordinary Blessing, he be able to deal with it;
whether his Head be strong enough to overcome the things to be learned, and his
Heart strong enough to undergo the things to be born, for the attaining of it;
lest happily after he has laid the Foundation, and is not able to finish it, all
that behold it, begin to mock him, saying, This Man began to build, and was not
able to finish. Notwithstanding, if a Person be capable of sundry Callings of a
different Excellency, it is his Wisdom and Duty to choose the best, wherein he
may most eminently serve God, and his Generation.

And from this Head about the Choice of a Calling, I infer the necessity of
Deliberation, in order to such Election. God has given to Man Reason for this
use; that he should first consider, then choose, then put in Execution; and it
is a preposterous and brutish thing to fix, or fall upon any weighty Business,
such as a Calling or Condition of Life, without a careful pondering it in the
Balance of sound Reason. It is enough for a Bowl to go according to its Biass,
or for a Beast to follow its Fancy and Appetite; and yet many choose no better a
Guide to themselves in this matter. They fancy such a Course of Life, but can
give no solid Reason why or wherefore, and it thrives accordingly with them.
They promise themselves Ease and Honor by the Ministry, and meeting with
neither, are sick of it. They fancy wonderful Gain, or Delight in other
Callings, and being disappointed, are weary of them; and this befalls them for
want of Deliberation.

You should therefore consult (as is said) grave and wise Men, Men of
Experience and Fidelity, and steer your Course by their Advice; let Judgment
and not Fancy determine your Resolutions. So you will bid fairest for good
Success therein; or, if the Event answer not your Expectations, you will have
this solid Comfort, that you were not ruined by your own Rashness. Consider
therefore, Is it lawful to follow such a Calling? am I qualified for it? have I
Wit, Strength, Patience; yea, and Stock to manage it? For, as good Dr. Harris
wisely told his Children, A rich Cobbler is better than a poor Merchant. Herein
let your Parents, Guardians, and Teachers assist you with their Judgments; for
every purpose is established by Counsel, and in the multitude of Counselors is
Wisdom; Prove. 20. 18. It Is better to lose two or three Months of your Time in
considering, than two or three Years afterward in repenting when it is too
late. Your Friends that were alive to advise you before, may be dead when they
should assist you after you have miscarried; and those that would pity a Man of
Conduct in his Distress, will neglect a Man of Humor.

But generally this Care lies on Parents, who are solicitous enough in this
Affair; unless they be surpised and deceived by the Flatteries or Folly of
some unfaithful Friends, that abuse their Ignorance and Credulity, and so will
rather serve the Necessity of a Correspondent or Customer, than study the
Welfare of the Person to be disposed. In all such Cases, it is better to have
no Friend than a false Friend. And therefore above all, and before all, and
after all, crave the Direction of the only wise God, who has promised to be
found of them that sincerely seek him; and who will by one means or other,
sometimes by Persons and Means unknown to you and unthought of, guide you into
the Way which he shall choose; and then hoist up your Sails and lanch forth into
your Business cheerfully. And this may suffice concerning the Choice of a
Calling, which is the third thing to be handled in this Subject.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the right Entrance into a Calling.
I Come now, in the fourth place, to speak of the right Entrance into a
Calling, when you have made a discreet Choice. For in all matters, a right
beginning is half the Business done; and he that misses his way at setting out,
strays still further to the end of his Journey. We may justly impute the
Miscarriage of thousands to their rash Atheistical Entrance into their
Callings. How many go to the Universities, and to Trades without any Sense of
Religion, of their Duty, of their Dangers, and the Temptations that are before
them? And being thus unarmed, are soon surpised with Temptations, and blown up
to the Grief of their Friends, and their own Ruin. It Is true, the most hopeful
beginning may end sadly, but what End then may we expect from a careless
Entrance?

Let all Persons then at their first starting out, be careful,

First; To have right Ends: for the End (as I said before) either enobles or
debases the Action. Tho a good End will not justify a bad Action, yet it will
sanctify a good one: And on the contrary, a base, a wordly, a wicked End will
vilify the holiest Action in the World. Now the Ends you should aim at in every
Particular Calling are, as you heard in the Description, these three.

First, and chiefly, the Glory of God. Reckon upon this, that you were made,
redeemed, called, and kept merely to the end, that you might glorify your
Maker. Now as every Pin and Nail in the Building, how obscure soever, concurs
to the Beauty and Strength of the Work, and consequently to the Credit of the
Workman; even so every Calling, how mean soever it is, contributes to the
Honor of the great Householder, the Maker of Heaven and Earth. Keep therefore
the Honor of God in your Eye; and then, tho you may be disappointed in your
inferior Ends, as Riches and Splendour, yet you will attain your great and
noble End, which is best of all. That is an undoubted comprehensive Rule, 1
Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the Glory
of God. Conclude thus with thy self, that since the Lord made all things for
himself, I will make it make it my Design, and count it my Honor, to glorify
this good God in that course of Life I am entering upon. And assure your selves,
that the more sincerely solicitous you are for his Glory, the more careful and
provident he will be for your Welfare and Happiness; for it is a tried Truth,
Those that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be lightly
esteemed; 1 Samuel 2. 30.

A second thing ye should aim at, is the Common Good. This thing is generally
far enough from young Peoples Thoughts; their narrow Spirits mind it not. Their
Eye is fixed upon a Livelihood for themselves, let the Public sink or swim. But
this Temper results from the Depravation of our Nature, and the very Heathens
have determined that the Common should always be preferred to ones Private Good.
And we see in the Body Natural, which is a lively Resemblance of the Body
Politic, the Hand, in case of any attempt upon the Head, or Heart, or Life
will venture it self; and will choose to be wounded, and, in case of Gangrens,
to be cut off, to preserve the whole. Conclude then thus with thy self, I am a
poor inconsiderable Creature, and tho I am obliged to endeavor to maintain my
Life for the Service of my Maker; yet my Business and Ambition shall be, rather
to be an useful Member to the Country that nourishes me, to promote the Good
of Mankind, than only or chiefly to build my Nest on high, and load my self
with thick Clay. And you may be sure, that if you contrive and consult the
Public Good, the Public will be interessed in your Welfare; and he that
waters, shall be watered himself.

And then, thirdly; You may and ought in the Entrance into your Calling, to aim
at your own Good; Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal. You may desire the
obtaining of a Competence in this World; this is justified by the Light of
Nature, and commanded in the Eight Commandment; yea (as has been said) you may
aim at a comfortable and plentiful Provision, (if it please God) not thereby
the more to satisfy your Appetite, nor to gratify an ambitious Humor; but that
you may do the more Good, not only to your Friends; but to God's Friends, the
Poor. But you should have a more special Eye at your Spiritual and Eternal
Good. For as there is a Natural, so there is a Spiritual Life, and you should
choose to be placed where this noble inward Life may be nourished, where the
true God is truly worshipped, where his Day is strictly kept, where you may be
under a wholesome Restraint; and in short, where you may learn the Trade of
true Godliness, and both how to live in this World, and in the World to come.

Secondly; For the happy Entrance into a Calling, you must be sped with due
Qualifications for it. And they are especially Knowledge in the Head, and Grace
in the Heart.

1. Knowledge. And for the meanest Trade;

(1.) You should know how to read and write. Reading is both necessary for your
Spiritual and Temporal Calling: Thereby you are enabled to read God's Word and
other good Books, which should be to you both Food and Recreation. Thereby you
may get Knowledge by the Fire side, and receive that sacred Warmth into your
Heart, which will be helpful to you for every good Word and Work. Particularly,
thereby you will enjoy sweet Company on the Lord's Day, when you must not work,
and should not play. Both these are also very necessary in your Temporal
Affairs; in so much that he who is unaccomplished with them, is scarce to be
reckoned among rational Creatures, is unable to convey his Mind with any
certainty to his distant Friends, to understand their Minds or Desires, but by
Assistance from others. He is unable to take or keep any just Account of his
own Affairs, of the Increase or Decay of his Estate; much less can he be useful
to others, which is always a comfortable thing, and sometimes beneficial. And
the Book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray
thee: And he says, I am not learned. Isa. 29. 12. A sad Answer. But if you are
designed for higher Callings, a suitable measure of Learning is requisite,
according to the Quality of the Employment you choose: rather always storing
your self with some Grains too much, than too little for any of them: For in
most Callings, your Learning will suffer Loss, either through want of List, or
want of Leisure.

(2.) You should be well versed in the Principles of Religion. These are the
Ballast which must keep you steady in the various Assaults your Faith may meet
with, in your Christian Course. An uncatechiz'd Head, and an unsanctified Heart
are liable to all manner of Temptations. Think it no Burden therefore to learn
your Catechism, and carry it not only in your Trunk, but inyour Head, into your
Calling, and look it often over alone, if so be it your Superiors do neglect
to examine you therein. That Neglect in Public and Private is such, as sadly
threatens the Vitals of our Religion. The Jesuits confess, that by catechizing
we did spread and fix the Reformation; we had need be careful lest we drop it
by the Neglect thereof; and therefore though you may, by good Advice, carry
other good Books with you, and sometimes read them; yet the way to be a settled
and conscionable Christian, is to converse much with the Principles of
Religion; which well digested, breed the purest Blood in the Heart, and produce
the most savoury Fruit in the Life and Conversation.

(3.) You must carry with you a Capacity for the Calling you undertake. Then
you will go on smoothly with it, and what ever Difficulty is therein, will be
compensated with the Delight that will attend it. He that attempts a Calling
without a Capacity for it, loses his Time, frets his Instructors, and blunts
those Spirits which might be sufficient for another Employment. Tutors and
Mast^^s therefore should very carefully observe the Capacities of Candidates
during their time of Probation, and faithfully represent them to those who have
entrusted them; otherwise they will injure both the Parents, the Children, and
themselves.

2. The other necessary Qualification for a good Entrance into a Calling, is
Grace in the Heart. When the Heart is sanctified, and sincerely devoted unto
God, then he will preserve you, teach you, and bless you; he will interess
himself in all your Concerns, supply the Absence of Parents, support you under
any Difficulties, or Severities you may meet with, and crown your Endeavors
with a prosperous Success, so far as it is good for you. O Sirs, it is as much
a Man's Interest, as his Duty, to be holy; yea, and to begin betimes; otherwise
you may fall into such Snares and Temptations in your Youth, of which you may
never be cured while you live. And indeed it is scarce possible for a young Man
or Woman, in this wicked World, and in that slippery Age, to escape the
Contagion of evil Company, without a Principle of saving Grace.

More particularly, I commend to you these two:

1. Humility. When you are going into a Calling, the best and fittest Garment
you can go in, is to be clothed with Humility. An humble Heart within,
accounting others better than your self, not reckoning your self too great, or
too good for any honest Employment; and showing its self in a modest and
respectful Carriage and Behavior, will make God and Man to be in love with
you: A meek and quiet Spirit is in the sight of the Lord of great Price. This
will make you content in your Condition. This Work and this Fare, tho it may be
hard, yet, says the humble Soul, it is rather too good for me: The Neglects,
yea the Contempts cast upon me, alas they are nothing to what I deserve. What
care I for fine Cloths, or any great Respect, that am conscious of my own
Unworthiness? This Grace will make you ready to be commanded, easy to be
pleased, hard to be provoked, and generally to be beloved. Yea every one will
heap Respect on him that flees it, and will honor those that are mortified to
Honor. Whereas, carry what Parts, Education, or Accomplishments you will into
your new Calling, yet if you carry a proud Heart with you, you will neither be
acceptable to others, nor easy to your selves. You Will be disputing when you
should obey, you will be fretting when you should submit, envying whom you should
respect, disdaining whom you should cherish, and justling with those Equals
whom you should embrace. Every Task will be too hard, every Reproof too
galling, every Hour a Year till ye be at liberty; and then you will carry your
Chain with you: for he can never be at liberty, that is a Slave to his Pride
and Passions.

2. Fidelity. 1. In Word. Be sure that you hate a Lie, or any thing like it.
Well may a Liar be ranked among Idolaters, Whoremongers, and abominable
Persons, Rev. 21. 8, 27. For as there is unspeakable Malignity, Atheism and
Debauchedness of Conscience in it, so it prepares and disposes a Man to all
Wickedness. It ruins all Human Conversation, by taking away that Confidence to
Men's Words, which is necessary to it. And therefore fix this Resolution, to
speak Truth what ever it cost you.

Dare to be true, nothing can need a Lie:
A Fault that needs it most, grows two thereby.
Mr. Herbert. Rather hazard the Anger of Man than the Wrath of God. Veracity
and Truth may mitigate the Rage you fear, but a lying Tongue will be but for a
Moment; and here remember that Saying of Eli to his Sons, If a Man sin against
another, the Judge shall judge him; but if a Man sin against the Lord, who shall
entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2. 25. 2. Show the same good Fidelity in Deed. Resolve
to be just and faithful to those that entrust you. In their Affairs, in their
Secrets, in whatsoever belongs to them, show all good Fidelity, Tit. 2. 10.
Then, tho your Skill and Parts prove short of Expectation, your Faithfulness
will procure for you both Love and Esteem. A true Heart will make amends for a
weak Head, or a slow Hand. Natural Weakness all will pity and pardon, but Moral
Obliquities, being Faults of the Will, are ill resented by God and Man. And
therefore whatever Necessities you may be under, whatever Conveniences, nay,
whatever Temptations you may have, be exactly punctual and honest; for the true
God hates the Man that is false, whether it be in Word or in Deed.

Thirdly; For the happy Entrance into a Calling, you must take with you firm
and good Resolutions. For you must exspect both Temptations and Difficulties in
every Place and Calling, which you have not met with before. These will be like
to stagger you, if you go not forth with a steady Resolution. If your Calling
depend most on the Head and Brain; you must not be discouraged with the
Crabbedness of your Studies; but seeing God has endued you with Capacity and
Parts (as is before supposed) it is possible, and a resolute Industry will make
it facil to overcome all. If your Calling depend on the Labor of the Hand,
still resolve to buckle with it; every day it will be easier than other, and
that which now you tremble at, shortly you will play with. You must also expect to
meet with some Severities, harsh Looks, harsh Words, harsh Usage, but let none
of these things terrify you: All this shall turn to your good. It is the wise
Providence of God to permit all these things, for the taming and subduing that
Wantonness and Pride in young People, which is for the most part inseparable
from that Age. Settle your Resolutions therefore at your Entrance, to suffer
what is sufferable in your Calling, still hoping that a dark Morning will have
a Sunshine Evening; and in the mean time that the Sunshine of God's Favor
will guild every drop of the Storm that falls upon you, and sweeten it unto you.

But your greatest Danger is from the Temptations that will meet you in your
Employment, which you must carefully discover, and then resolutely avoid. For
our Adversary the Devil has Baits in all Places, and in all Callings; and we
see how many swallow them to their Perdition: but if you can but see the Hook
as well as the Bait, and contemplate the Baseness, the Odiousness, the Danger,
as soon as you see the Profit or Pleasure that hides it, by the Grace of God
you will escape. And of all Temptations, resolve to shun ill Company. Such
there are in every place, who, like the fallen Angels, having made Shipwreck of
a good Conscience themselves, endeavor to draw others into the same
Condemnation. Such there are in both Sexs, who may soon betray an unwary Youth
into all Ungodliness. Begin therefore no Acquaintance with any, till you have
received concerning them from some judicious Hand, a sober Character. He might
be very innocent at the School, whom you may find very criminal in the
University or in the City. But especially if you hear or see any, that are
Idle, Voluptuous, Swearers, Drunkards, Wanton, Sabbath Breakers, bless you from
them; and if your Vicinity or Relation to them should necessitate you to be
sometimes with them, let it be always with a wary Reservedness, let them see
that you are sailing another way. And herein you must be resolute: Two or three
Denials and Frowns will rid you of them, whereas your Easiness will strengthen
their Importunity; and when you are once gotten into the Snare, it will not be
an easy matter to get out again. Enquire therefore after the Diligent, the
Modest, the Religious of your Age, and converse with them; for there is most
certainly a secret Charm in Society, and in a short time, he that frequents and
delights in any Company, whether good or bad, will be like them.

Fourthly; For a right Entrance into any Calling, earnest Prayer is necessary.
For if every Creature be sanctified unto us by the Word, (approving the use of
it) and Prayer (procuring the Blessing of it) we may justly conclude that
Calling unfanctified, that is not blessed with Prayer. It is not the best Trade
or Calling, it is not the best Tutor or Master, tho as much Care ought to be
taken (mark it well) in the choice of a Master, as of a Trade; but it is the
Blessing of God, earnestly sought by Prayer, which makes the Man. If People
would abate of their anxious Care about these things, and add more of their
fervent Prayers, they would have more Comfort. For so the Apostle directs,
Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing; but in every thing by Prayer and
Supplication, with Thanksgiving, let your Requests be made known unto God. The
utmost Care and Providence of the wisest Parent, comes far short of the
constant and powerful Providence of God, which is procured by Prayer.

And let the young Person concerned, earnestly seek the Favor and Blessing of
God withal, and heartily bewail the Sins of his Childhood, his Disobedience,
Slothfulness, Lying, Sabbathbreaking, and all such like, that he may not carry
the heavy Load of Guilt out of one Place and Condition of Life into another;
which as it will provoke God to Anger, so it will expose him to new Sins, when
he has never bewailed the old. How many have we known and seen hopeful every
way, good Education, good Parts, good Callings, good Tutors or Masters, and yet
have miscarried and come to nothing? This shows that GOD stands for something;
that all other Requifites are but Ciphers without the Blessing of Heaven, which
must be sought by Prayer, and earnest Prayer. And this not only at his
Entrance, but he must continue this sweet and needful Duty, at least each
Morning and Evening, if possible, during his whole time; for it is the Key to
open to him the Mercies of the Day, and to shut out the Dangers of the Night.
Young People would be glad to have twice a day Opportunity to send to their
Earthly Parents, how much greater a Privilege is it to have free Liberty to
send to your Father which is in Heaven, who has more Will and Power to do you
good, than all the Creatures in the World?

And now having discoursed of the right Entrance into a Calling, let each of us
make a double Use of it.

1. By way of Reflection on time past. Did all of you that are in Callings,
thus enter upon them? Were your Ends right? Were you duly qualified? Were your
Resolutions firm? and your Prayers earnest? Let your Consciences return a true
Verdict, a just Answer. If they acquit you; what Peace, what Joy, what
Satisfaction may you have, whether you have succeeded in outward things or not?
You have done your Duty, to which a Blessing always belongs. But if upon a
serious Inquiry, Conscience accuse you; what cause have you to be humbled, to
bewail your Neglects, and cry for Mercy and Forgiveness, and this,
notwithstanding all the good Success you have had in them? For God does
sometimes give to Children outward Blessings, with respect to the Parents, or
other Ancestors Integrity; which is a Seal to the Uprightness of the Parent,
but not to the Goodness of the Child; Or, he may give you a great Estate and
Honor in Wrath, or to pay you off for some good thing, and yet short of Grace,
which may be found in you. For your own Parts, you had need to judge and condemn
your selves with broken and contrite Hearts, if perhaps your Sin may be
forgiven you. For, as an Oppressor, yea, a Thief may get Possession of a
well-stor'd House, and be jovial in it, till the Judge inquire how he entered it;
so may a Man obtain in his Profession a vast Estate, but at last God will
examine how he entered upon it, and whether by an orderly way he took Possession
of it?

2. By way of Instruction for the future. Let all those who expect the Favor
and Blessing of Almighty God, see that they follow this course. These are Rules
of Practice, and therefore are not answered either by your Approbation or
Contempt, but do carry their Authority with them, and call for Obedience to
them. When you are entering into any Calling, take care to propound for your
Ends, the Glory of your Maker, the Good of Mankind, as well as your own
Comfort. See that you be qualified with Knowledge in the Mind, and saving Grace
in the Heart. Let your Resolutions be good and strong, to break through all the
Difficulties and Temptations, which are in your way: And set forth with Prayer.
If you believe that there is a God, you cannot deny that all these are
necessary for you. If you would prosper in vour Affairs, this is the ready road
to Success. If you live to accomplish your Designs, these things will further
you; if you die before you attain them, these will bring you to be Freemen of
that City which cannot be moved. Be but true to your selves, the Holy God will
not be false to you; for as a Man sows, so shall he reap. He that aims at the
World, often misses it; but he that truly aims at Heaven, is sure to carry it.

And thus, when a Person has chosen a lawful Calling, has fixed his Ends
aright, is sufficiently qualified, firmly resolved, and has sought the
Direction and Blessing of God by Prayer, he may safely enter upon it. Which is
the Fourth Point to be handled in this Subject.

CHAP. V. Of the due managing of a Trade or Calling.
THE Fifth Thing to be considered, is the right Behavior of a Christian in his
Calling, or the due managing thereof. What I have said hitherto, is in order to
this: And tho we have thus far discoursed of Callings in general; yet supposing
our Youth has chosen some Trade or other, into that we will follow him. Now
these are of two sorts; the one are managed principally by the Tongue, yet so
as they are directed by the Brain; such are all sorts of Merchants, and they
who drive Trades only with buying and selling: The other are managed by the
Hand, yet so as they are also assisted with the Brain; such are all sorts of
Mechanic Trades, or Handicrafts, which are employed in working all kinds of
Manufactures. Now tho each of these have some distinct Virtues, and
Temptations, Conveniences and Inconveniences more proper to them; yet the
following Requisites will reach them both, and with the Blessing of God make
the Practiser of them an excellent Tradesman.

SECT. 1. Of Prudence in a Trade.
ANd the first of them is Prudence, or Discretion. It is said, Psalm. 112. 5. A
good Man shows Favor, and lends; he will guide his Affairs with
Discretion, (or Judgment). Now this Prudence is an Habit of the Mind, inabling
a good Man to dispose of his outward Affairs, in the most commodious manner. It
is not that carnal Subtilty, which teaches a Man to get an Estate by hook or
crook; but that godly Wisdom, which is consistent with a good Conscience. When
the Apostle, James 3. 17. mentions the Wisdom which is from above; he plainly
implies that there is a Wisdom which is from below. And as the former is the
Gift of God, who gives it liberally to those that ask it, as Solomon did; so
the latter is earthly, sensual, and devilish. Subtilty is nothing else but
Wisdom degenerate; and Prudence is only Subtilty strained and purged from all
Injustice.

Now true Prudence and Piety were always very good Friends. He, that was
Innocence it self, commended a Serpent's Eye in a Dove's Head: Mat. 10. 16. Be
ye therefore wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves. Doves, not to hurt or
wrong others; Serpents, not to be hurt or wronged by others. For this end was
that excellent Collection of Proverbs written, Prove. 1. 4. To give Subtilty to
the Simple; to the young Man Knowledge and Discretion. A Book to be therefore
often read by our Tradesman. Of this Prudence as Almighty God is the Author, so
he is the great Exemplar, whose Wisdom shines forth in so governing all Persons
and Things, that they all center in that great End, for which the World was
made and stands, his Glory. And what Ataxy and Confusion would suddenly follow
the want of it! And therefore let every Man in his place study to be like God,
in Wisdom as well as Holiness.

For this is suitable to Man's Nature, God has given him a considering Mind, a
Sagacity and Foresight of the End he aims at, and Judgment to choose out the
best means to attain it, which he has denied to other Creatures: Psalm. 32. 9.
Be ye not as the Horse, or as the Mule, which have no Understanding. He that
acts foolishly, acts like a Brute, and degrades himself so far of Reason, his
greatest Glory.

This is also very creditable to Religion: What an Honor were Joseph and
Daniel to their Profession? to have the mighty Pharaoh say to Joseph, Genesis 41.
39. There is none so discreet and wise as thou art: and to have Daniel for his
Wisdom, preferred to Offices of greatest Trust and Honor. When a Godly Man
has all the Accomplishments that any unsanctified Person has, and the
Addition of Grace withal, it is a manifest Ornament and Advantage. And since
wicked Men in Scripture are so commonly called Fools, it should make all good
Men study Wisdom and Prudence.

Besides; this Discretion in the Affairs of your Trade, will greatly contribute
to the Quiet and Comfort of your own Minds. For when you have taken the wisest
Course in any Affair; if so be that the Event answer your Desires, you have
Comfort both from your good Success, and also from your discreet Endeavors;
and if it do not succeed, yet the Comfort of your godly Wisdom may well
balance the Loss, or Disappointment that you have met with: whereas there is
nothing does more imbitter our Losses and Troubles, than our own Folly that
has brought them upon us.

And lastly; this Prudence greatly conduces to our Well-being in this World.
As in that Psalm forecited, it is said of the good Man, that he shows Favor,
and lends; and certainly his Discretion inableth him so to do. And Prove. 24.
3, 4. Through Wisdom is a House builded; and by Understanding it is
established. And by Knowledge shall the Chambers be filled with all precious and
pleasant Riches; built, established, and furnished hereby. And on the other
hand, as many sink by their other Vices, so too many are ruined by their own
Indiscretion; no visible Leak, by which their Estates have run out, only they
have been rash, wilful, and weak in their Negotiations. God does seldom bring
Men low only for the trial of their Faith or Patience; but usually they
contribute to their own Misery, and will be proved Felones de se at the day of
Judgment. Certain it is, if godly Wisdom will not enrich a Man, Riches are not
good for that Man.

Now this Prudence is to be exercised by a Tradesman, in the following
Particulars.

1. In Getting a full Insight into his Calling; so as to know all the Parts,
and lawful Arts and Methods thereof. For as there is a false Slight, so is
there a true Mystery in every Calling; tho more in some than others; and
Ignorance herein undermines the Foundation of a Tradesman's Success; Prove. 14.
8. The Wisdom of the Prudent, is to understand HIS Way. Not to be curiously
prying into other Folks Ways, but fully to understand your own. Some there are
that please and pride themselves much in their Skill in Callings that are
above, or besides their own; and in the mean time search not into the Concerns
of their own Employments: but the Wisdom of the Prudent is to be understand his
proper way, and to be skilful at home: Prove. 8. 12. I Wisdom dwell with
Prudence, and find out Knowledge of witty Inventions. What vast Progress might
be made in the Improvement of most Trades, if Men did employ their Brains
within the Sphere of their proper Callings? as is evident in the curious Indian
Wares, and in some Callings at home of latter Years. Study therefore all the
Parts of your Calling, and be not like some raw Travelers, that are ambitious
to know other Countries, while they know least of their own. Your Trade is your
proper Province. Neither God nor Man will condemn you for your Inexperience,
properly it is not Ignorance in other matters; but your own Vineyard you should
keep.

And to this end be careful to improve the time of your Apprenticeship, and
Learning, well: and woe to those Masters that do not faithfully teach,
especially that studiously hide the Mysteries of their Trades from their
Apprentices, contrary to their Obligations in that behalf; for that is the
proper time of learning, and of storing up such Rules and Observations, as you
will have use for afterward; Prove. 24. 27. Prepare thy Work without, and make
it fit for thy self, and afterward build thine House. It Is then that you must
prepare your Materials, and afterward erect your Building. And never be ashamed
to be still learning of any honest Skill: For let your Stock or Diligence be
never so great; yet if you be defective in Knowledge, you will prove like a rich
Ship with a weak Pilot, which will come to wrack.

2. This Prudence and Discretion must be used, in a wise Fixing the
Circumstances of your Trade.

(1.) For Time; for to every thing there is a Season, and a Time to every
Purpose under the Heaven; Eccles. 3. 1. There is a time to buy, and a time to
sell; that is, a fit time, which a wise Man nicks. It Is true, God has in his
great Wisdom hid future things from us, but yet he has given to Man Prudence
instead of Prophecy. And it is said, Prove. 22. 3. A prudent Man foreseeth the
Evil, and hides himself: And as he hides, so he armeth, he furnishes himself
in the due Season; and musters up all the Wisdom he has, in hitting the right
Seasons of buying and selling for his just Advantage, without the public
Prejudice.

(2.) For Place. It is said of the virtuous Woman, Prove. 31. 16. She
considers a Field, and buyeth it. So the Tradesman must consider, what Place
is most fit and proper for his Calling, and fix there, and he must suffer the
Conveniences of his Family, to give place to the Conveniences of his Trade, and
permit his Fancy to be directed by his Judgment therein.

(3.) For Persons. You had need of Prudence to discern, 1. Whom to deal with,
to wit, Men of Conscience, or at least of moral Honesty; and common Fame will
usually acquaint you where and who they be. For such you may rely upon with
more Security, than upon others; and it is more creditable to have
Correspondence with honest Men, than with Knaves. 2. Whom to trust: Here you
have need of all the godly Wisdom that you can get; for Man is a deceitful
Creature, and the Metal that glisters most, is not always the richest. It is
with many Men, as it is with many Fowls, that look fair and large, but stripped
of their Feathers, their Substanc is little. As that Faith is often soundest,
that is accompanied with doubting, at least with inquiring and questioning; So
it is better for you to be at the Cost and Pains of a diligent Inquiry, than at
the Grief and Pain of a sad Experience. It is most certain, that as it may be
Prudence to trust some Persons, and Charity to trust others; so there are many,
whom it is neither Wisdom nor Charity to trust at all. 3. Whom to be familiar
with. Herein you have need of your discreet Prudence: For tho you must be
friendly to all, yet you must be familiar but with few; and they must be those
that may some way do good and not hurt to you, or such as you may do some good
unto. And even of these, you must not choose too many, for your Employments will
not allow you time to perform those Offices to many, which are necessary in the
case of Friendship. Let your Choice therefore be among those, that are of a
grave and even Temper, and of greater Wisdom and Grace than your selves. For,
Prove. 13. 20. He that walks with wise Men, shall be wise; but a Companion of
Fools shall be destroyed.

3. This Prudence must be showed, in due Deliberation about the Affairs of your
Trade. For it is certain, that many Men, otherwise very ingenious, are ruined
by their Rashness, not duly considering with themselves, nor consulting others
in their Negotiations: And some also lose their Opportunity by too much
lingering and suspending their Determinations; and therefore I propound only due
Deliberation, that you be neither too swift nor too slow therein, but
proportionable to the weight of the Affair, to its Difficulty, and the Limits
the Business will allow. And herein, since Deliberation is only of the fittest
means to attain your Profit or Content in such or such a case, I earnestly
exhort you to refuse whatever your Fancy proposes, that is not honest, just,
and fair. For nothing is truly profitable, that is not honest. In these cases,
consult right Reason, consult the Scripture, consult that Golden Rule, Do as ye
would be done by, and then you cannot resolve amiss. But if the case will admit
it, take a Night's time to deliberate; for that which is weighed over Night,
and reviewed in the Morning, will be in some measure, ripe for a judicious
Resolution. I speak all this while concerning matters of some moment: as for
lesser matters; we take it for granted, that our Tradesman is furnished with
those Parts which are sufficient for the speedy dispatch thereof. However, in
all your Words and Actions, I advise a circumspect Slowness, rather than too
quick a Speed; which is usually followed with Repentance. Let every Man be
swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to Wrath; James 1. 19.

4. This Prudence stands in Proportioning the Affairs of your Trade unto your
Abilities:

(1.) Of Mind: So as not to over-charge either your Understandings, Memories,
nor Hearts with your Business; lest they, like a Bow overbent, be broke in
pieces. Some have stronger and larger Capacities than others, but no Man's
Faculties are infinite. A Ship that is well built, rigged and balanced, will
carry a great Burden; but it may be over-laden, and then it sinks: and so is it
with the Mind of Man; when your Business distracts you, that you cannot eat, or
sleep, or be cheerful, or pray, it is time to abate and draw in your Sails.

(2.) Of Body: That is, to undertake no more Work, than you are able to
perform. This commonly proceeds from Covetousness, whereby a Man would grasp at
more than his share; and thereby becomes a Slave to his Calling; and must of
necessity either injure his Correspendent by disappointing him; or else
himself, by over-toiling himself. You should therefore consider, that God
requires no more from any Man than what is possible, and consistent with those
Duties he owes to his Maker, and to himself. And that the holy God will never
allow, that that Body which is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, should be a Drudg
and Slave to the World.

3. Of Estate: That is, to lanch forth no further, than you can feel firm
Ground under you. For tho in some cases, as when the Gain is certain, or
extremely probable, it may be lawful and prudent enough to enlarge a Man's
Trade beyond his own Stock; yet a religious and wise Tradesman must be very
cautious in this matter; partly, that his Motives be right, that Ambition and
Covetousness do not engage him in it; and partly, that he venture not more than
his own Estate, in any such hazard, as may undo others without their own
Consent. But Discretion will teach the Tradesman to keep himself ordinarily
within his own Bounds; for as that Water which will merrily turn one Mill, when
parted into two, will make them go but heavily about: So that Stock, with which
a Man may cheerfully drive an ordinary Trade, will fill the Mind with anxious
Cares, when it must carry on a far greater; when with the same Straw, you must
make a double Tale of Brick, and when the same Stream must carry a Vessel of a
double Burden: And oftentimes the Story ends sadly; and he that was not content
with his own Stock, must be glad to live upon others Charity.

5. This Discretion is shown, in Ordering a man's Expenses suitable to his
Calling. That as he should not live sordidly much below his Estate, nor be
defective in his Allowance either to God, to the Poor, or to himself; so he may
not, either in his Provision, in his Furniture, in his Apparel, or in his
By-expences and Entertainments, exceed that Proportion which his Trade will
maintain. And therefore every prudent Man does calculate as near as he can,
what his ordinary Income is, and thereby adjusts his Expenses. The Indiscretion
or plain Folly of many is evident-herein; so that, without the Spirit of
Prophecy, one may easily foretell their Ruin. Some such Slaves to their
Appetites, that the Belly does immediately devour what their Head or Hands do
get, never providing for a time of Sickness or other extraordinary Casualty.
Other furnishing their Houses above the Standard of their Quality, while their
Shops or Purses want Furniture, and it may be some of their Creditors, or
Workmen their just Dues. Others, if not in their own Persons, yet in their
Wives and Children, proclaiming their Pride and Folly, in being apparelled
above their Condition or Ability, which is an undeniable Token of Pride lodging
within: For tho Pride is a Sin of the Heart, yet it shows it self in the Looks,
Words, Apparel, and Behavior of vain People; who by these exterior Additions
without, do tacitly acknowledge there are some great defects within: whereas
the worthy Man or Woman, so that their Garb be not ridiculous, but seemly, are
no way concerned about the richness or fashionableness of their Garments. And
others run out exceedingly in their By-Expences and Entertainments; not
considering, that they are only Stewards unto the great God, of whatsoever
Talents are in their hands; and also Trustees for their Wives and Children, and
for the Poor, and that no mortal Man has any thing of his own. Now herein
Godly Wisdom comes in and puts due bounds to all these Expenses, and teaches
the Tradesman to live rather somewhat below, than at all above his Income;
because he considers, that it is easy to augment ones port and manner of
living, but very hard to sink or abate in it; and he that begins his manner of
living as his Master ended, is like to end as his Master begun.

6. This Prudence is to be used, In a frequent Inspection into the state of
your Affairs; that you may know whether, and how much you thrive or languish in
your Estates. This is chiefly to be done about the State of your Souls; and the
neglect of it, renders a Man either very uncomfortable, or a very Bankrupt in
Religion. It is also greatly requisite in your outward Affairs, to take a Survey
either monthly, quarterly, or at least yearly, of your Condition: Prove. 27. 33.
Be thou diligent to know the State of thy Flocks, and look well to thy Herds;
and so in other Callings: and for that end, to observe an exact Method in
keeping your Books of Account, that you may readily and certainly take a view
of the Posture of your Affairs. If you improve in your Way; this will fill your
Heart with Comfort, and your Mouth with Thanksgiving unto God, and you will be
encouraged to drive the Nail that is going. If you find Things at a stay; this
will quicken you to more Industry and Frugality, before it be too late. If you
find that you run backward; this will oblige you to search by what Leak your
Estate wastes; what Excess or Improvidence you, or any that belong to you, are
guilty of; wherein you have not lived so soberly, righteously, and godly as you
ought to have done, for which God may justly blast you; you will discern what
Sin does waste you: for as the Thief in the Candle wastes it more, than the
proper Week does; so it will cost more to maintain one Lust, than many
Children. And by this means you may see a flat necessity of stopping and
altring your Course, and thereby save your Estate and your Soul also. As that
Man that is not welcome into his own Conscience, can be truly merry nowhere in
the World; so that Tradesman that dare not look into, and cast up his own
Books, can look into no other Book with comfort. As we say to careless People
concerning their Souls, they must give an Account, and therefore it is needful
that they take an Account of themselves: he that judges not himself, will be
judged of the Lord: So it will be far more safe and comfortable, that you
survey your Shops and Books, than that Commissioners should do it for you,
which is the common Issue of such Carelessness.

7. This Prudence is to be exercised, In Governing those Passions to which you
are most liable in your Calling. Philosophers place much of the business of
Prudence herein. Passions are natural to us, and inseparable from us; the
Government of them is the Work of Prudence, the mortifying of their
Extravagancies is the Work of saving Grace. To be a Slave to them, is a Misery
below a Gally-Slave. It was said by Abimelech, Whether is better for you, that
threescore and ten Persons reign over you, or that one reign over you? Judge. 9.
2. Surely it is far better, sweeter, easier to be under the Sovereignty of one
good God, than under the Dominion of numberless and tyrannical Passions. The
Tradesman is in danger of this Bondage, but Christian Discretion will curb
them. He is tempted to Discontent with the Providence of God; the Wind does not
favor his Merchandise; the Weather hinders his Manufacture. He is in danger of
Envy at the thriving of others, when he sees that they have more Custom or
Credit than himself. He is apt to be tossed with the Passions of Hope and Fear:
And your Prudence will preserve your minds steady above all groundless Fears and
Hopes. For when a Man has with his utmost Skill proceeded so and so in his
lawful Calling, he should never torment himself with unnecessary and
unprofitable Fears of the Event, either of that Affair in particular, or of his
Welfare in general: No, you are in your Way, you have the Providence and
Promise of a wise and good God engaged with you: Your Fears will not prevent
your Disasters, but rather provoke God to inflict them: And the Passion of Fear
was seated in Man's Heart only to prevent Evils, not to increase them: and
therefore, as it is a very great Folly to entertain or cherish them about
Contingencies, when we have done our best; so it is the Triumph of Wisdom to
check and extinguish them. The like also of groundless Hopes: For many a
Tradesman is ruined by his vain Hopes. He has some great Hit in prospect, some
rich Uncle whose Estate he expects. Some remote and unaccountable Wind-fall or
other, and in Contemplation hereof, neglects his proper Affairs, lives above
his present Estate; and tho he feel his Decay and Wasting, yet buoys up his
Spirits with these vain Hopes till he fall irrecoverably. Just like a formal
Hypocrite, whose Hope shall be cut off, and whose Trust shall be a Spider's
Web; he shall lean upon his House, but it shall not stand; he shall hold it
fast, but it shall not endure. Job 8. 14, 15. Now a grain of Christian
Discretion will free a Man from these Follies, and ground his Fears and Hopes
upon a solid Bottom; and so moderate them, that they shall neither prejudice
the quiet of his Mind, nor disorder him in the management of his Calling. But
his most common Palsion is Rash Anger; sometimes at his nearest Relations, but
especially at his Servants, and others that he deals with. Now the more
Prudence a Man has, the less Anger. For Anger rests in the bosom of Fools;
therefore be not hasty in thy Spirit to be angry. Eccles. 7. 9. A Wiseman ere
he give way to Anger will consider; whether the Matter be a Fault, and then of
what sort it is, involuntary, or wilful; of what degree it is; and will also
put himself into the Delinquents place, and will consider, that a Youth, a
Child, a Woman cannot have the same Judgment, Capacity, or Consideration that
himself has. And that his Passion, which doubtless is a Fault it self, can
never be a likely Cure for another Error; for one Sin never cures another: The
Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God; and by these Confiderations
he mitigates his Anger, and becomes slow to speak, slow to Wrath: He at least
defers the Expressions of his Anger, till the Storms and Clouds being over and
cleared, he may with a calm Mind animadvert on their Errors both with Justice
and Mercy, that he may be angry and yet not sin.

8. This Discretion is showed in a prudent Consideration of the Contingencies
belonging to your Calling. These are of great variety, and the Particulars fall
under the Observation of every Tradesman in his way. Now a prudent Man in all
those Cases, considers what may fall out in this or that Country, this and the
other Commodity, upon the return of such and such Ships, and what degrees of
Probability there be of its coming to pass; and accordingly, disposes his
Affairs to the best honest Advantage he can. In this sense also that is true
Prove. 14. 15. The Simple believes every Word, but the Prudent Man looks well
to his going. As a Mariner, the greater guess he has of the turning or rising
of the Winds, or of the approach of a Storm, the wiser he is, and he puts forth
a greater or lesser Sail accordingly; so the discreet Tradesman, by the right
use of his Reason, and of his Experience, and Observation, should carefully
consider what Events may fall out, and what Effects they may produce, and
thereupon either spread or draw in his Sails in his Trade and Calling. If there
were in every Trade, a certain and constant Method and Consequence of Events, a
small degree of Sagacity would serve the turn; but with many Callings it is
otherwise; and there is requisite some depth of Judgment and Experience,
whereby to make the best Conclusions in point of Practice. And tho he know not
what God will do, yet he studies to know what he ought to do; and reckons it
better for him to know his present Duty, than all the future Events in the
World: The Issue of things belongs to God, and what is not within our Power,
should be out of our Care. If the way he took, prove the worst, instead of
fretting at his Disappointment, he adores and submits to the Providence of God;
and concludes there were some secret Reasons in the Divine Wisdom to blast his
Expectations for his spiritual Good; he grows not sullen upon it, but buckles to
his Business again; and resolves, that God may still do what he will, and I
will still do what I ought.

9. This Prudence of the Tradesman stands, in Avoiding those Courses that have
ruined others. Cast your Eyes abroad, and you may easily discern the Rocks that
others have dashed upon, the Quicksands wherein others have been swallowed, and
true Wisdom will teach you to shun them with your utmost Care. I will instance
in some few.

(1*) Bad Company. I mean such as are infected in their Morals, that are
accustomed to Swearing, Lying, Sabbath-breaking, Quarrelling, Uncleanness,
Knavery, or such like Vices. From such, Prove. 2. 11. Discretion shall preserve
thee, Understanding shall keep thee: To deliver thee from the way of the evil
Man, etc. Such there are in all Towns and Cities, that drive a Trade of
Destroying themselves, and as many others as they can. Now if there were no
such thing as Religion, yet common Prudence should teach you to avoid these, as
you would Persons with the Plague; yea, tho you should be linked to some of
them by the Tie of Trading, Kindred, Cohabitation, Country, or former Custom:
for as none of these can justify your consorting with them; so none of these
Considerations can balance the Ruin and Misery which such Company will bring
upon you. It is almost impossible to converse with them, without becoming like
them. What Credit, what Profit, what Comfort can you get by such Society?
Wherein does their Company make you wiser, or better? Why, but it pleases us
Does it indeed please you? That shows your Nature is corrupt, your Palate is
viciated: But were it not better not to itch at all, than to be pleased with
scratching? What Scripture do you profess and live by? God's People of old,
their delight was in the Saints on the Earth; they were Companions of those
that feared God; and if ever you expect to live with them, you must live like
them. But what speak I of living in Heaven? Such Companions will make you unfit
and unable to live in the World. Destruction and Misery are in their ways. They
are not only the Shame of Christianity, but the Reproach of Mankind; they are
Brutes in human Shape; and will none serve you for Companions but these? Are
you fond of a Prison or an Hospital, or of the Plantations, or of Tyburn? for
to some of these, such Company send their Comrades. And therefore for God's
sake, yea, for your own sake, cast in no Let among them, let your early
Prudence prevent your late Repentance.

(2.) Another ruinous Mischief from which Discretion will guard you, is
Suretyship. I will not affirm that this is utterly unlawful, but I conclude
that as few Men do use the Care and Caution necessary in this Affair, so no Man
should engage therein, unless, first, he be able to pay the Obligation without
injuring himself or Family; and, secondly, be contented to do it without
perturbation of mind, and with the same freedom, wherewith he pays his other
Debts: For without doubt, the Surety does take upon himself the whole Debt,
both in Law and Conscience, in case the Principal prove either unable or
dishonest. And which of you are able and willing to run this Risque? If you
object, that without doing and receiving this act of Friendship for one
another, Trade cannot be upheld. I answer, Tho without it, a Man cannot trade
so high, which perhaps may be his Sin, and prove his Ruin; yet he may trade
still in a meaner degree, which may be more safe, and prove as comfortable. And
he that will lanch out further, if the Creditor knows him to be a Man of good
Discretion and Integrity, he may securely rely upon his single Bond, without
intangling another with him. If you reply, that he has formerly obliged you
some other way, or that he will take it unkindly to be denied: I answer, that
you must study to oblige him some other way, and labor to convince him, that
it is not want of Love, but the force of a Preingagement (which I would advise
every prudent Tradesman to make) to some near Relation, without whose Consent
you cannot, without Injustice, bind your self. For alas! this Person that now
solicits you, may be more indebted than you know of; he may prove less careful
and honest than you imagine; he may be bound for others in more than he is
worth; at least he is mortal, and may leave his Estate and you entangled at his
Death, to your great Molestation, if not utter Ruin. And these are not
unlikely Suppositions, but whereof sad Instances are visible every day.
Therefore before ye enter into any such Engagements, read that Counsel of a
wise Man, yea of a wise God, Prove. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. My Son, if thou be surety
for thy Friend -- thou art snared with the Words of thy Mouth -- deliver thy
self -- give not Sleep to thine Eyes -- deliver thy self as a Bird from the
hand of a Fowler: And, he that hates Suretiship, is sure, Prove. 11. 15. See
also Prove. 22. 26.

(3.) A third ruinous Course, whence this Prudence will preserve you, is
Gaming, I mean all such Games as make an in-road upon your Time, when they
devour that time which should be employed either in your religious or secular
Affairs, or such as hazard any thing considerable of your Estate. For it is
certain, that Gaming was never ordained to be a Trade, whereon to live, but for
a Diversion, a refreshment of the Spirits, whereby Men may be more fitted for
their general and particular Callings. And therefore such Recreations only are
to be used, as do most contribute to the health of the Body, and refreshment of
the Mind; and they are to be followed moderately, seasonably, and religiously,
so as you may comfortably beg the Blessing of God upon them, and bless his Name
after them. Fix your unalterable Resolutions therefore against all vain,
prodigal, and hazardous Games whatsoever. For though Drunkenness, Whoredom,
Idleness, Injustice will certainly do it, yet these two Follies of Suretiship
and Gaming may suddenly destroy those that use them: A Man may by these in a
few hours undo himself and Family to all intents. Play for no more in any
Recreation than you may lawfully expend upon your Delight, and can be content
to lose without impairing your Estate, or the Tranquillity of your Mind; and
never reckon the Estate you have your own, until ye have made Restitution of
what ye have dishonestly gained thereby.

(4.) A Fourth dangerous Evil from which this Prudence will secure you, is
Pragmaticalness or Curiosity, which is a busy meddling with matters which
belong not unto you. You have business enough of your own to employ all your
wit, time and strength; either in the works of Piety and Devotion; or charity
to the Souls and Bodies of others; of civility to your Friends and Relations;
and of Industry in your own Callings. And there is no Wisdom in intermedling in
others Affairs without a just cause, and a clear call: and God never calls you
thereunto, when it interferes with the necessary Duties abovesaid. But
especially beware of the Athenian Disease, who spend their time in nothing
else, but either to tell or hear some new thing: Acts 17. 21. I know the Nature
of Man is bent upon News; and Religion not only permits, but approves of our
being concerned for the prosperity of God's Church. But it is a natural itch,
and not any pure devotion, which inclines most Men to inquire after such
things; and much time is lost, much hazard is run, and little good is gained by
this idle course.

Above all, be conscionably careful of tampering with State Affairs. You ought
to make good the place wherein God has set you, and by all prudent and honest
means in your Station, promote the Publick-Good; but let no pretense how pious
soever, let no pressure how heavy soever, let no prospect how specious soever,
prevail with you to dishonor your Political Parents, to disturb the Public
Peace, or to imbark your self in any design foreign to your own Calling, or
unjustifiable by the Laws ye live under. Let Almighty God alone to rule the
World, let the lawful Magistrate alone to rule his Subjects, and let it be your
business, cheerfully to obey, or quietly to suffer. 1 Pet. 4. 14, 15. If ye be
reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye: But let none of you suffer as
an evil doer, or as a busy-body in other Men's matters.

10. This Godly Wisdom will help you, To dispose your Outward in subordination
to you Spirituel Calling. That is, so to order the particular duties which
belong to each of them, that in the instances of practice, they may not clash
or justle with one another; but sweetly agree and be furtherances each to
other. I know that some Callings are of that nature, and some Tradesmen again
so necessitous, that it is difficult to find Conveniences for the Worship of
God and good of the Soul. But Wisdom here is profitable to direct; hereby the
pious Tradesman after a due consideration of all Circumstances, and of his
necessary business within doors and without, fixes a time for prayer, for
reading, and hearing, as well as for working and bargaining; and tho he cannot
assign so much as others can, yet he does it with a right good will; and he
takes care, that neither of these Affairs do entrench upon the other, nor
prejudice the other. His Devotion disposes him for his business, and his
Diligence in his business renders his acts of Devotion welcome. And it is
imprudence as well as want of zeal, which occasions the confusion in Families
in these matters. The uncertainty of Time, or undue fixing of other
Circumstances, does commonly thrust out those Exercises of Religion, which if
prudently and sincerely performed, would bring a blessing with them both on
Soul and Body. But of these hereafter in a more proper place.

Let us now apply what has been said on this Head.

First; By way of Reproof.

1. Of the great Indiscretion of many even Godly and well-meaning Tradesmen,
that do greatly Err in some or other of the foresaid Cases. It Is true, this
fault is not so criminal as many others; for you will say, no Man can have more
Wit or Prudence than God has given him; every Man is not born a Philosopher.
But I say, many Men might have more Wisdom, than they had at first; they might
have improved their single Talent, and made it double: For as there is Wisdom
infused, so there is Wisdom acquired by means which God has appointed; and for
the want hereof, he may justly punish you in this World, however ye may escape
in the next. Hence proceed the ruins of so many Families; the Man, his Wife
and Children brought to beggary. Here lies one in Jail for Suretiship, another
for haunting ill Company, yonder is one sent to Jamaica by living above his
Ability, another for want of keeping and casting up his Books, some for
trusting, others for trading too high. All which might have been prevented, if
Men would either get more Prudence of their own, or consult and be ruled by
their wiser Friends. O that the Shipwreck of others might be as marks to the
rest! That these Pillars of Salt might season all other Tradesmen to the End of
the World!

2. But all this gives no countenance, but rather reproves the Carnal Policy of
Ungodly Tradesmen, who, resolving to be rich, will compass their Ends, tho it
be by the undoing others, and of their own Souls. That have the subtilty of the
Serpent without the innocence of the Dove; who have learned all the cunning
tricks Satan or his instruments can inspire them withal, and so are able to
turn and wind their easy and well-meaning Neighbor. This is Wisdom from
beneath; and however you may thrive with it for a moment, yet ye fight against
God, whose Justice will find you out; oftentimes in this World, Prove. 20. 21.
An Inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning: but the end thereof
shall not be blessed. But to besure, without Repentance, in the never-ending
World. And what will it profit a Man to gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul?

Secondly; By way of Exhortation. Then labor (all Tradesmen) for this Godly
Wisdom. It may stand you in more stead than all your Stock and all your
Friends. A Man's Wisdom makes his face to shine: It makes him amiable, it
makes him useful. But how shall we obtain it?

Answ. 1. Beg it of God. James 1. 5. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask it
of God, that gives to all Men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be
given him. Say not, I am a weak Man, a sinful Man; he gives to all Men: Say
not, I am extremely foolish, and I need more than I have hopes to get; for he
gives liberally: Say not again, I have received abundance of Mercy already,
and have not improved the Parts he gave me; well, ask still, for he upbraideth
not, and it shall be given you. This course Solomon took, 1 Kings 3. 5. when he
was entering upon his Calling; and the Lord readily gave it him, and threw him
in Riches and Honor besides.

2. Consult wise Men. For the Lord gives Wisdom it is true, but not by
inspiration, but in the use of means: The long Observations of others may be
made yours in a few days, if you would be willing to learn. Do not think that
you can grasp all the ways and rules of Prudence by your own Skill: Prove. 12.
15. The way of a Fool is right in his own Eyes: but he that hearkeneth unto
Counsel, is wise: not only he that gives Counsel is wise, but he that
hearkeneth to it. And therefore be sure that ye consort with such; rather choose
to be learning among the wise, than vaunting your selves among the foolish. He
that walks with wise Men, shall be wise, as ye heard before; but a Companion
of Fools shall be destroyed.

3. Study for it in the use of proper means. Read God's Word, wherein are the
mines of all true Wisdom, and particularly the Book of Proverbs, which is a
Collection of such wise Observations as may be applied to all particular cases.
Read also such other good Books, whereof there is store, to make you wise. But
add withal serious consideration of men and things, whereby you will vastly
improve in godly Wisdom; for every thriving and decaying Tradesman will be a
Book, to teach you something: Prove. 24. 32. Then I saw and considered it well,
[that is, the Vineyard of the slothful] I looked upon it, and received
Instruction. Which brings me to the second Requisite, conducing to the right
managing of a Trade or Calling.

SECT. 2. Of Diligence in a Trade.
AND the second Requisite in a Trade is Diligence. About which, 1. I shall
describe the Nature; 2. The Object of it: 3. Some Inducements to it. 4. Make
some Application.

First; For the Nature of it. It is a Christian Virtue, disposing a Man to use
his greatest Skill, Care, and Strength in his Calling. It differs not in
substance from the same moral Virtue among the Heathen; but that, in a
Christian there is a better Root whence it grows, and that is a sanctified
Heart, a Conscience that stands in awe of God, and so causes the Man to stand
in awe of it. And also he has a higher End in his Diligence, and that is the
Glory of God and the good of others, and not merely for his own credit or
advantage. Whereas the industrious Pagan, as he knows not God, so he cares not
for him: but self is at the beginning, self is at the middle, and self is at
the end of all his Care and Pains; and the unsanctified Christian is little
better, but rather worse, because he has greater light, and yet lives not up
to it. That which distinguishes it from other Virtues is, that it consists in
employing all a Man's Skill, Time, Care, and Strength in a sober and moderate
measure in his Calling; and so the extreme on the one hand is Idleness and
Carelessness, together with a busying ones self with other Men's matters; and on
the other hand, immoderate carking, and slavish drudging. Diligence walks
between these extremes. Next to the saving his Soul, his care and business is
to serve God in his Calling, and to drive it as far as it will go: for he knows
that his strength and time are lent him for that purpose; and that whatsoever
are employed otherwise, run waste. In short, the Diligent Man makes all the
convenient haste he can, to dispatch his work upon Earth, that he may the
sooner be in Heaven.

Secondly; This Diligence, as to the Extent of it, stands in these following
Particulars.

1. In the serious Employing all the Faculties of your Mind about your Trade
and Calling. Your Fancies, your Understandings, your Memories, and all the
acquired Improvements of them, are all to be laid out therein. In that, Prove.
27. 2^. where the Holy Ghost commands that Men be diligent, he adds in the
Hebr. Set thy Heart to thy Herds. So that whatsoever sagacity of Mind, depth of
Judgment, quickness of Invention, soundness of Consideration you are masters
of, should be here employed. And tho in some Trades there be less need and use
of these than in others; yet there is no Calling, but employment may be had for
every one of them. And it is a great commendation to any Man, that having a
rich Fancy, a clear Understanding, a strong Memory, instead of abusingt hem to
Sin, or misimploying them in matters foreign to his business, he improves them
to the utmost in his Calling, how mean soever. And that this is your Duty is
manifest from that, Eclces. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it
with thy might; for there is no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in
the Grave whither thou go*

2. This Diligence requires the Employing all your Strength of Body in the
business of your Trades. Have you a firm Constitution, a vigorous Nerve, an
able Arm, a strenuous Back? all these must serve God in your Callings, for he
has entrusted you with this Strength for this end. And this is especially
requisite in the time of youth and health: God having ordained those honest
Labors, both to provide for a livelihood for the Body, and to prevent the
distempers of the Soul: for the more laborious, the less lascivious; that
honest industry spending those exuberant Spirits, which are otherwise apt to
break forth in unlawful flames. Besides, Sickness and old Age will come, when
the strong men will bow themselves, and the grinders cease; and those that look
out at the windows will be darkened. It Is true, God does not require or approve,
that Men should so exhaust their strength in the labors of their Calling, that
they are left spiritless in his immediate service, when their work is done; but
observing that moderation which is in every thing requilit, they should not be
shy to lay out their strength in the affairs of their Calling; knowing that God
accepts their Labor, and will by Food and Rest recruit them again. Man goes
forth to his work, and to his labor until the evening. Psalm. 104. 23.

3. This Diligence requires the Employing the substance of your Time in the
affairs of your Trades. As the Servant's Time is his Master's, so the Master's
Time is God's, and not his own; and accordingly to be justly bestowed betwixt
his Temporal and Spiritual Calling, Hours having wings, and every moment flies
up to the Author of Time, and carries news of our usage of it. And here you
have that commendable instance of Jacob, Genesis 31. 40. Thus I was, in the day
the drought consumed me, and the frost by night, and my sleep departed from
mine eyes. And it is recorded to the praise of Ru^h, chap. 2. 17. She gleaned
in the Field until Even and of the virtuous Woman, Prove. 31. 15, 18. She rises
also while it is yet night, -- and perceiving that her Merchandise is good; her
Candle goes not out by Night. By all which Instances it is evident, that the
conscientious Tradesman is bound (if health permits him) to be stirring early
about his lawful occasions, and continue therein with a cheerful diligence all
the day long, except such time as his Soul or Body must be refreshed. For the
necessary Duties of Religion, as they take up but a little time, so they lose
none; and moderate refreshment must be allowed. But as Prayer and Provender
hinder no Journey, so Meal and Mattens gain time, and waste it not. The
Diligent Tradesman has always something to do, either to lay in or to lay out,
either to be learning or teaching; his Shop or his Books are always calling
him. He is as wary in his expense of Time as of Money, knowing that his Time is
but short; short for the work he has to do for his Soul, for his Livelihood,
for his Family, for his Friends, and for the Public: And that it is also
uncertain. For Man also knows not his time, as the Fishes that are taken in
an evil Net; Eccles. 9. 12. That, death is lurking in some part or other of his
Body, and it will be cold comfort, if it seize him out of his Calling: But,
Blessed is the Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing:
Mat. 24. 46. He considers also that Time when spent is irrecoverable, no
Prayers, nor Tears, nor Money can fetch it back again; and many times, that
which might have been dispatched yesterday, cannot be done to day. As the
Hebrew Phrase is, the work of a day is best in its day. And therefore let the
diligent Tradesman be careful to fill his Time with useful employment, and get
the substance of his work done, before his Time and Strength be done; lest he
be undone himself both here and hereafter.

4. The Tradesman's Diligence consists, in Laying hold of Opportunities. For if
a Man be never so industrious and painful, yet unless he be watchful to observe
his Opportunity, and then swift to lay hold thereon, he is wanting in the
diligence requisite for him. For oft-times great matters may be done in a small
juncture of time. Hence some Translations render that, Prove. 22. 29. See thou
a Man diligent in his business; ready and swift. As there are sometimes shreds
of time, that may be improved to great advantage; so especially Opportunities,
which if caught by the forelock, will pay for all the care and watching for
them; and if slipped, may never present themselves again. The foolish Virgins had
a proper season to have stored themselves sufficiently with Oil, but then
trifling and sleeping, they could afterward get none for love nor money.
Opportunity is Wind and Tide; an Affair transacted in a due season, is
dispatched with ease. The diligent Tradesman observes these, and so sails with
Wind and Tide. To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose
under the Heaven. And therefore is care requisite in a diligent man, as well as
labor; and many thoughts more useful, than many words. Thus the Kingdom of
Heaven is compared, Matthew. 13. 45. to a Merchant-man seeking goodly Pearls; who
when he had found One Pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had,
and bought that Pearl. He spied his Opportunity, and struck in with it to his
great Advantage: and so must the diligent Tradesman do, in what ever capacity
he be, always provided that he build not his Gain on others Ruins, nor purchase
his private Advantage with prejudice to the Public.

5. This Diligence is shown, In Taking a due care in those that seem lesser
matters. Many small matters amount to what is considerable at length. A mean
Customer attended, and pleased, shows the way to a greater. The disdaining to
get, or save, or mind things of small value, is often punished of God, by
bringing such proud and careless ones to a morsel of Bread. When the Creature
groans under one Man's vanity or abuse, the Lord hears it, and usually
transfers it to another, who will use it better. Plain and notable is that
passage of our blessed Savior, Joh. 6. 12. when there were only some fragments
left of five Loves and two Fishes, which had fed five thousand People; and
thereby one would think had done their part; yet he appoints his own Disciples,
to gather up the Fragments that remain, that nothing be lost. Now it is one
thing to be thus wary, out of a penurious gripple humor, and another when it
is out of a conscientious respect to all God's Creatures, and a diligent care
to put every thing to its best use; as it is very likely that Christ caused
these Fragments to be reserved for those that needed them. And a constant and
careful respect to such small matters, will render a man able to do much more
good, than a heedless person shall do, tho he be of a larger estate. God has
promised, that to him that has, shall be given; namely, to him that has but
two Talents, and improves them, they shall increase to four. I mean not by this
particular to encourage any Sordidness, or unseemly Parsimony; but a due regard
to those smaller matters, on which greater do depend, or which by some few
repetitions amount to great. By a due care hereof, many Persons have attained
to a great Estate, and have done a great deal of good with it.

6. This Diligent Care consists, In Rejecting those Avocations which would
divert you from your Affairs. In general, you should endeavor to be as much in
your Shops, Warehouses, or places where your most constant business is, as
possibly you can: yea, ye ought to delight to be there, as every thing does to
be in its place, and to be restless when you are necessitated thence, until
your return thereunto. For there is your place, where you may most confidently
expect the Presence and Blessing of God. Where did Peter and Andrew and James
and John meet with Christ, but in their Ships, fishing or mending their Nets?
As therefore it must be a weighty Cause, that will excuse the Clergyman in his
Non-residence, if ever his Conscience do consider that repeated charge to
Peter, Feed my Sheep: Joh. 21. 17. So must it be a considerable matter that
will justify a Tradesman's pleasing and reposing himself at his Countryhouse,
while his Affairs and Family at home are left at sixes and sevens. How many
hopeful Youths have been undone hereby, being left by their Masters to their
own wills, and so in that unhappy opportunity trapan'd either by bad Men or
Women unto all kind of Sins? Has the Minister the charge of Souls in his
Place, which being a personal Trust, cannot be devolved upon another; and so
have you in your Family; your Apprentices Parents confiding in your personal
worth and care, have entrusted their Children with you; and woe to you, if by
your Non-residence they miscarry. If you be grown too high for your Trades, or
that they be grown too hard for you, it is better to resign them unto more
diligent hands, than to neglect them to the offense of God, and hurt of others.

This Diligence will also guard you against frequent, and needless frequenting
of Taverns, Alehouses, and Coffee-Houses, where a great deal of Money is
wasted, a great deal of Sobriety is lost, and a great deal of Time is squandred
away, which should be employed in your Callings. It is hard to determine how
far such Converse may be permitted; but it is not hard to perceive, that many
Tradesmen exceed those Bounds, which, I do not say Religion, but a reasonable
Diligence does allow. And how many, which should be found in their Shops, must
be sought in the Tavern; and others when they should be worshipping God in due
season in their Families, are loitering away their time in Coffee-houses;
wherein, tho there be no Law to restrain, they have no Superior to call them to
account; yet there is an holy God who will enter into Judgment with them, if
they do not repent, that is, amend.

The same Diligence restrains you also from needless and fruitless Visits. A
due performance of these, is not only necessary in order to business, but also
to the preserving and cultivating of Friendship and Alliance; but then Religion
teaches Men to improve those civil Offices, to our own and others greatest
good; either by giving or receiving some good Counsel or needful Comfort; but
it is the idle and useless Visits, which the diligent Man avoids; the Visits
which are spent in ransacking all the affairs and faults of their Neighbors or
Acquaintance, in correcting the Miscarriage of Church and State, in judging and
condemning Persons that are absent, and so cannot make their own defense: Such
as these, 1 Timothy 5. 13. Wandering about from *house to house; not only idle, but
Tatlers also and Busi-bodies, speaking things which they ought not. The
Diligent Man gives his Visits, but commonly they are short, serious and
cheerful, whereby he may both leave a savor of Goodness behind him, and a
desire in his Friends to enjoy him again.

This Diligence also excludes all bewitching Pleasures and Recreations, which
would distract you from your business. Such as are lawful, necessary, and
seasonable you may admit; but if they ensnare your Heart, or incroach upon your
business, you must reject and answer them, as Nehemiah did, Neh. 6. 3. I am
doing my work, so that I cannot come down: why should the Work cease, whilst I
leave it and come down to you? Pleasures have their charms, but he that fears
God, shall escape them all. The diligent Man uses them, as Sauce to restore
his Stomach, palled with poring on his business; and therefore a touch of them
serves his turn. He tastes them as the Dogs of Egypt do the Water of Nilus,
with great caution, lest the Crocodiles devour them. But I have spoken somewhat
about these before.

Lastly, This Diligence will restrain all unseasonable Devotion. Far be it from
me to discourage the Exercises of Piety: This Climate is grown cold enough in
them. But there is a preposterous Zeal in some Tradesmen, and Women especially,
which draws them to neglect one Calling to further another. But the diligent
Man considers, that God in his great Wisdom appointed the six days for Work,
and a seventh for Rest. And tho upon extraordinary occasions we may and ought
to devote some of this time to sacred purposes, as in case of Solemn Fasts and
Feasts; and tho an industrious Tradesman may redeem by his Diligence some other
hours, as for the Refreshment of his Body, so for the enriching his Soul, by
reading, hearing, and prayer; yet it is no way justifiable, to neglect a Man's
necessary Affairs, upon pretense of religious Worship; to let necessary Work be
undone at home, just Debts unpaid abroad, the Family languish for want of
Providence, the Shop languish for want of his Presence; while he runs from one
opportunity to another, till hi^ Estate be weakened, and his Credit s^nk.
Doubtless there is a measure to be observed in those things, and usually a Man
is bound to pray and hear no more than will consist, 1. With his Ability of
Body; for if the Bucket be once broken, it will carry no Water. 2. With hi^
lawful Calling; for therein God is trul^ served. 3. With time to meditate on
what he hears; for one Duty must never exclude another, he that does nothing
but hear, will grow deaf with hearing; and those holy Exercises are but means,
the end is still nobler, which is to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present World. And so much for the Particulars, wherein this Diligence is
exemplified.

Thirdly; The Inducements which are proper to dispose the Tradesman to this
Diligence are these.

1. It is matter of Duty. Those places mentioned in Prove. 27. 23. and Eccles.
9. 10. put it out of doubt. Yea the Holy Ghost does link it together with the
holiest Actions: Not slothful in Business, fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord;
Romans 12. 11. Ye are as truly bound to be diligent in your Business, as to be
servent in Prayer; and it is intimated there, that you serve the Lord in both,
and consequently it is a real Sin, both to be bewailed and amended, to be
negligent in your Callings, as to be lukewarm in your Prayers. And in the
Fourth Commandment God does as well command Diligence in your Work on the six
days, as Seriousness on the Sabbath, and propounds his own Example to the same
purpose; For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth. And tho he ceased
creating, yet he is working still: Joh. 5. 17. My Father works hitherto, and
I work. His Eyes are continually running to and fro thorowout the whole Earth,
to show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose Heart is perfect toward
him: 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. So that here is the Command and Example of God himself for
Diligence.

2. It is matter of Safety. An honest Industry is an excellent Preservative
both from Sin and Danger. Most Men's Temptations overtake them, when they be
out of their Employment, or negligent in it. When good David had been sleeping
in the afternoon, and walking too idly afterward, 2 Samuel* 11. 2. then did he
fall into that Temptation, that cost him so dear. You know the standing Pool
corrupts, the un-employed Harness rusts; but he that is in the way of his
Vocation, is most out of the way of Temptation. So it is also in case of
Danger; if any Mischief hover over a Man, it is likeliest to seize upon him,
while he is negligent in his Vocation. When Ishbasheth was lying on his Bed at
noon, Baanah and Rechab smote him under the fifth Rib, 2 Samuel 4. 5. In all
likelihood, it had fared better with these two Princes, if they had been
studying and doing the Duty of Magistrates, instead of reposing themselves upon
their Beds. Let the Tradesman learn from others harms to prevent his own, up
and be doing, and the Lord is engaged to be with you.

3. In respect of Benefit. God does usually bless the diligent Man with Plenty.
The Hand of the diligent makes rich, Prove. 10. 4. For the thoughts of the
diligent tend only to Plenteousness; Prove. 21. 5. Now a plentiful Estate is
desirable, provided it be for right ends. If Riches and Honor be good for you,
Diligence is the means to compass them: Prove. 22. 29. See thou a Man diligent
in his Business: he shall stand before Kings, he shall not stand before mean
Men: That is, he is sit for the highest Offices; he may aim at them, he is
likeliest to obtain them. We see Princes choose out industrious Men for their
Service; 1 Kings 11. 28. And Solomon seeing the young Man (viz. Jeroboam) that
he was industrious (or as the Margin from the Hebr. that he did work, or take
pains) he made him Ruler over all the Charge of the House of Joseph; and you
know how great he grew. If Princes see Men to be only wise, they suspect they
will be too conceited; if high-spirited, too turbulent; if honest and
conscientious, too difficult; if popular, dangerous; but if diligent, they are
fit to be employed. Now tho the ordinary Tradesman never expects any great
Office or Preferment; yet certainly his Industry puts him into the road of all
the Preferment whereof he is capable; Isa. 23. 8. Whose Merchants are Princes,
whose Traffiquers are the Honorable of the Earth.

4. In respect of Comfort. There is a certain secret satisfaction of Mind, that
always attends an honest Diligence. The Sleep of a laboring Man is sweet,
whether he eat little or much: Eccles. 5. 12. He has been doing the duty of
his Calling, and that comforts him. I appeal to your own Consciences, and to
every Man's Experience, whether you find not more inward Peace and Comfort at
night after you have been diligently employed in your Calling, than when you
have trifled therein. And any cross which befalls you is better born, when it
finds you in your Employment, than when out of it. And if by the wise
Providence of God you do not by your Industry obtain abundance; yet you have
this comfort, of having done your Duty, which is the chiefest ground of all
just Satisfaction.

Fourthly; The fourth thing then upon this Head is to make some useful
Improvement hereof, which is,

By Reproof, By Counsel.
1. This detects and reproves the baseness and sinfulness of Idleness and
Sloth, whether it be in point of Care, or of Labor. The holy Ghost by the hand
of the Wiseman does frequently lash this sort of Men. Prove. 26. 13, 14, 15,
16. The slothful man says, There is a Lion in the way, a Lion in the streets:
he fancies danger and difficulties where there are none. Then, As the Door
turns upon his Hinges, so does the Slothful upon his Bed: The Slothful hides
his Hand in his Bosom, it grieveth him to bring it again to his Mouth. And yet
after all this, The Sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, than seven Men that
can render a Reason. And herein he did not beat the Air: For there were then,
and are now, numbers of idle Companions, idle Tradesmen, like those Cretians,
Tit. 1. 12. that were evil Beasts, slow Bellies, therefore evil because idle.
Come to their Shops in the day, they are abroad; the Prentice saw not his
Master since eleven of Clock; knock at their Doors at eleven at night, they are
at the Coffee-house; come in the Morning, they are in bed. Is this to be
diligent in vour business? Is this doing what your hand finds to do, with all
your might? How will you account for your Time, and Strength, and Parts? Why
stand ye thus idle in the Marketplace? Where are the old Roman Censores morum,
Officers who were to examine and punish those that spent much, and labored
little? It is said of the Manna, that if it were not gathered early, it melted:
They that loved their Beds, starved their Bellies. This course will load you
with Guilt, and ease you of your Estate; no Calling so high, but Sloth will
impoverish; none so mean, but Diligence will enrich. I was by the Field of the
Slothful, and by the Vineyard of the Man void of Understanding: You see the
idle Man and the Fool are wrapped in the same Cloak. And lo, it was all grown
over with Thorns, and Nettles had covered the face thereof, and the Stone-wall
thereof was broken down. Then I saw, and considered it well, I looked upon it
and received Instruction. Yet a little Sleep, a little Slumber -- So shall thy
Poverty come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed Man: Prove. 24.
20, etc. O learn by others Ruin to prevent your own. Conclude that Sweat is
better than Tears, Weariness better than Hunger, and aching Bones than a galled
Conscience. It was holy Mr. Carter's farewell charge to a Scholar, Cave fastum,
ignaviam, Antichristum. And one of the three things that wise Cato was said to
repent of, was, that ever he had spent an idle day.

2. Be persuaded then,

(1.) To be diligent in your Callings: You have excellent Patterns set before
you, the great God at work every day every where. Jesus Christ went about doing
good: Slipped his Breakfast to be at his Work; Mat. 21. 18, 23. waved his Dinner
to dispatch it, Joh. 4. 6, 34. Behold the Sun always in motion, and rejoices
in it, as astrong Man to run a race; Psalm. 10. 5. The Moon and Stars, the Sea,
the Rivers, all Creatures busy: Yea, go to the Ant, thou Sluggard, consider her
ways and be wise. You have excellent Promises for your Encouragement, and
severe Threatenings to awake you; you have undeniable Instances of such as have
been raised by their Industry, and of such as have been ruined by Idleness: you
have all Requisites to enable you: you have Brains, and Arms, and Health,
there is nothing wanting but an Heart. Shake off then the Lethargy that has
benumbed you, mind your Business, revive your Love to your lawful Calling;
reckon your selves to be most easy and happy in your Shops and Business, and
drive the Nail while it is going. But direct all to a right end, the Honor of
God, the Public Good as well as your Private Commodity, and then every step
and stroke in your Trade is sanctified. You are working for God, who will be
sure to reward you to your Hearts content.

Withal, you must beware, lest this Diligence degnerate either into sinful
carking, or into immoderate pains, whereby either the Soul or Body should be
oppressed; for whatsoever is gained thereby, contracts a Curse which comes along
with it, and without Repentance and Amendment, none of it shall ever do you,
nor your Posterity any good. Behold is it not of the Lord of Hosts, (that is,
by way of just Judgment) that the People shall labor in the very Fire, and
weary themselves for very Vanity? Labor in the Fire, and yet for very Vanity!
Hab. 2. 13.

And one other Caution yet, Let not your Diligence in your earthly Callings,
thrust out the Service of God. For this, was Martha reproved, Luke 10. 41.
Martha, Martha, thou art careful, and troubled about many things; but one thing
is needful. You have a Soul as well as a Body; and both must live, and
consequently must be fed: and the Blessing of God must be daily sought, without
which all your Diligence will be ineffectual; ye cannot be rich whether God
will or not. Observe that, Prove. 10. 4, 22. In the 4th Verse, The hand of the
Diligent makes rich; but in the 22d Verse, The Blessing of the Lord it makes
rich, and he adds no Sorrow with it. Now God's Blessing and Man's Diligence
are not opposed one to another, but subordinate to one another; that as the
principal cause, this as the ordinary means; as the Physicians Skill and the
Patients Care. It is only the Blessing of God, that supplies you with natural
Abilities, both inward and outward. It is he that gives thee power to get
Wealth; Deuteronomy. 8. 18. He governs and directs the Hearts of others; he speaks a
good word for them to the Conscience of thy Neighbor: He prospers thy
Endeavors; for all Second Causes depend upon the First both in their being and
in their working: He rules all those Circumstances that must concur to thy
Success; and he preserves and multiplies what thou have. Have thou not made an
Hedge about him, and about his House, and about all that he has on every side?
thou have blessed the work of his Hands, etc. Job 1. 10. And without this
Blessing, It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, or to eat the
Bread of Sorrow: Psalm. 127. 2. And therefore allow convenient room for Prayer
every day; and reckon to go round about by Heaven, is the next way to Success,
in all thy Undertakings; this is the way to thrive on Earth, and to be blessed
from Heaven. And this leads me to the last use of this Point.

(2.) If such Diligence be needful about your Earthly Callings; How much more
diligent ought you to be about your Heavenly? If you should rise betimes to
work, how much more to pray? If we should sweat to gain the World, what Agonies
should we have to obtain Heaven? There giving all Diligence, add to your Faith,
Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge: Again, Give Diligence to make your Calling and
Election sure; 2 Pet. 1. 5, 10. If Riches do not, how should Heaven drop into
your Mouth, while you are sleeping? What race is gotten without running? What
Crown is obtained without fighting? I therefore so run, not as uncertainly; so
fight I, not as one that beats the Air: 1 Cor. 9. 26. As Sloth is the evident
cause of Men's Poverty here, so it has the most general and certain Influence
into Men's Misery hereafter: Few Men being willing to be at the pains to be
saved; tho all the labor in Religion be accompanied with real Sweetness, and
be like a Scholars Studies, tho they make his Brain and Back to ache, yet
refresh his Mind, and he had rather study than be idle. What is it that hinders
Men from reading, whereby to get Knowledge? Sloth. What from Prayer? from
afflicting their Souls? from examing their Hearts and Ways! Yea, from
Consideration; or any thing that is difficult to Flesh and Blood? But Sloth.
Shake off this base Distemper, learn of them that will be rich, what pains they
take; they rise, they run, they sweat, they are unwearied for false Riches; and
shall we sleep and freeze in the pursuit of the true Riches? In the Name of God
stir up thy self, strive to enter in at the strait Gate, and work while it is
Day, wheu Night comes no Man can work. Let spiritual Diligence accompany your
temporal and outstrip it. For that is the brave Christian, (in holy Mr. Dod's
Judgment) that can work hard, and pray hard also. And so much for this second
Requisite to a good Tradesman, to wit Diligence.

SECT. 3. Of Justice in a Trade.
THE next Requisite in a Trade is Justice; we discourse not here, either of
Universal Justice, which the Moral Philosopher reckons to include all Virtues
in their Use or Exercise; nor of Distributive Justice, which consists in a due
Distribution of Rewards and Punishments, which belongs not to the Tradesman as
such. But of that which is called Commutative, which is exercised in Dealings
between Man and Man; and of this also not only as it is directed by the Law of
Nature, but also as it is adopted among the Christian Graces, where we shall
consider,

I. The Nature of it. II. The Necessity of it. III. The Extent of it. IV. Make
some Use of it.
I. For the Nature of it. It is a gracious Habit, inclining one constantly to
render to every one their Right. Where you see,

1. Its general Nature: It is a gracious Habit. An Habit, and so rooted and
fixed in the Soul, and will exert it self when no body is present to applaud or
to disgrace: an Habit, and so readily inclining a Man to Actions suitable to it
self. For neither is the Habit within sufficient, nor the Acts without, they
must go both together: And then a gracious Habit: For tho Morality may restrain
unjust Actions, and smooth the outward Conversation; yet it cannot breed in the
Heart a love of Justice, as it is pleasing to God; especially when the Practice
of it crosses a beloved Interest: No, that the Spirit of God must work. For the
Fruit of the Spirit, is in all Goodness, and Righteousness, and Truth: Ephesians.
5. 9. And then,

2. The particular difference of this from other gracious Habits is, that this
inclines us constantly to render to every one their Right. It supposes that
there is a Property which every Man has in these outward things, and that the
World lies not in common. And that an intercourse is necessary among Men for
their mutual well-being; that no Man can so subsist of himself, but that he
has use or need of others. Then steps in Justice to regulate all such
Negotiations, and teaches, and disposes the honest Tradesman to render to every
one what of right belongs to him. To Superiors, Inferious, Equals,
Relations, and generally to every one, that he may be able to say with holy
Paul, I have lived in all good Conscience before God, until this day; Acts 23.
1.

II. For the Necessity hereof.

1. It is every Man's Duty. For,

(1.) It is commanded by the Law of Nature. Those strictures of Man's primitive
Righteousness which are left in him, do teach him this. It was an Heathen
Emperor that made choice of this Motto; Quid tibi non vis fieri, alteri ne
feceris. What you would not have done to you, do not to another. Which being
rightly understood, is both the Foundation and the Rule of Justice. Every Man
would desire to be justly dealt with; and is it not equal and reasonable, to
render to every man, that which we expect from every man? It is scarce possible
to obliterate this Principle out of natural Conscience: and they that act
otherwise, do overthrow the common Principles of Nature and right Reason.

(2.) It is commanded by the written Law of God. This is the tenor of all the
second Table of the Moral Law, and is particularly intended in the eighth
Commandment, which says, Thou shall not steal. Which is nothing else but the
reviving of the Law of Nature, or a new Edition thereof. Other Scriptures are
frequent, and express to this purpose. Deuteronomy. 16. 20. That which is altogether
just (or, as the Hebrew emphatically, Justice, Justicer) shall thou follow.
Which Law is strengthened with the threatenings of Punishment in case of
disobedience frequently in the Scripture, and clear Instances of the
Performance thereof accordingly. In short, the Righteous God whom we worship,
is a Spotless Mirror and Pattern hereof in himself; He is Righteous in all his
Ways, Psalm. 145. 17. And he tells us, 1 John 3. 7. Let no man deceive you, he
that does Righteousness is righteous, even as he is Righteous. And the
Righteous Lord loves Righteousness, his Countenance does behold the Upright.
Psalm. 11. 7.

(3.) It is commanded by the Law of Christ. Our heavenly Savior that died for
us, has owned and urged this Justice. For, he came not to destroy the Law, but
to press it; and so has enfranchized this Adage. Mat. 7. 12. Therefore all
things whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even so unto
them: for this is the Law and the Prophets. And when the Apostle describes the
great Design of the Gospel, Tit. 2. 12. He tells, that the Grace of God which
brings Salvation, has appeared to all men; teaching us, that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, [towards our selves]
righteously [towards others] and godly [towards God] in this present world.
Wherein is contained the Sum of all practical Religion. So that the unrighteous
do blot out a third part of the Gospel, and so are unworthy of the Christian
Name.

2. This Justice is every Man's Interest. It is the sound and safe way to
Prosperity: In that Deuteronomy. 16. 20. That which is altogether just thou shall
follow, that thou may live, and inherit the Land which the Lord thy God
gives thee. Other ways possibly may be speedier to Riches, but this is the
safe way. Psalm. 5. 12. For the Lord will bless the Righteous, with Favor will thou compass him as with a Shield. Tho it please God to suffer some right
honest Men to be poor and distressed in this Life, to evince that there is a
Judgment to come; yet he does manifestly favor others with temporal Blessings,
to show that there is a Providence at the present. And on the contrary, the
most certain way to Crosses, Poverty, Misery, and Hell after all, is Injustice.
Endless Instances hereof are in every place: Every Assizes bears witness
hereunto. And if there were a Collection of all the Injuries, and the shameful
Issue of them, adjudged in these Judicatories year by year, you would see a
famous Commentary upon the just Threatenings of God against Sins of this kind.
Besides, those secret Executions done by divine Vengeance, sometimes on the
Persons themselves, and on their Estates; sometimes on their Posterity, in
theirs; which secretly moulder away, none imagining the cause, but only God. A
Fire not blown shall consume him, it shall go ill with him that is left in his
Tabernacles: Job 20. 26. Upon all which accounts, it is highly necessary, that
the Tradesman be exact and just in all his ways.

III. I come in the Third place, to show the Extent of this Justice, as it is
to be exercised by the Tradesman.

1. It consists in performing all your lawful Promises. You should be careful
before you promise any thing, you should be cautious in them; that what you
promise be lawful and possible, or else you sin in the very making such
Promises. Moreover you should consider the Equity and Convenience thereof
beforehand; but when your word is past, tho it be difficult to fulfill it, tho
it be prejudicial; you are snared by the words of your Mouth, and ought, yea
tho there be no witness in the case, to make it good. And a Promise or Contract
made by your Servant, whom you have used to entrust, binds you equally to
Performance, as if made by your self: For he whose Contract you would adhere
unto, if it should turn to your Advantage; you ought not to recede from, when
it turns to your Prejudice. It it given as a mark of one, that shall dwell in
the holy Hill of God. Psalm. 15. 4. He is one that swears to his own hurt, and
changes not. And a Promise binds an honest Man, as truly as his Oath. These
are the Bonds of human Society, which being dissolved, no Man can trust, nor
rely, nor trade with another. No Man can firmly proceed in his own Affairs,
when they do depend in any wise upon such unfaithful Men, who make no
Conscience of performing what they have promised. It is true, if a Man have
been cozened, and so engaged by a fraudulent Bargain into a Promise: if the
Fraud be in the substance of the thing bargained for, as Copper Lace for Gold,
or the like, the Contract is void ipso facto: for there was no consent which is
necessary in a Bargain, the one sold one thing, and the other bought another:
But if the Fraud was only in some undiscerned Circumstances, or faulty
qualities, tho the Seller ought to compensate the Injury, yet in case he
release you not, you are obliged; unless the Defects be so considerable, as do
render the Commodity useless; in which case you may seek your remedy, and
caveat emptor the next time.

This reaches such Handicraftsmen who promise to do such a piece of Work; but
never heed what they promise, and never heed how they perform it. This is
Injustice.

If you answer, That your Purpose went along with your Promise, but that
unexpected Accidents prevented your Performance; other Work of more haste or
profit came in; you had unforeseen Diversions, etc. I reply; Your Promises then
ought to be conditional, and such as he who imployeth you will admit of, or
else you wrong him to advantage your self, or to gratify another. And if
unavoidable necessity compel you to fail in any Promise, apply your self to the
Party injured, endeavor someway to satisfy him, and rescue your Reputation:
For in all these breaches of Promises, besides the Sin, this Mischief naturally
results from them, that no body at length will trust you, which is next to
being buried alive.

And other Tradesmen, that agree for a Commodity, but the Market falling, or
some other Contingence happening, never come for it. This is Injustice. Others
solemnly promise to pay such a Sum of Money at such a Day; The Day comes, but
no Money, nor perhaps any Message to crave further time. This is Injustice.
Justice requires a punctual exactness; else all Humane Society is broken,
Conscience is debauched; and he that commonly breaks his Promises to Men, will
easily break his Covenants with God.

And particularly, this Justice obliges you to pay your Work-folks their
Wages, and that at their Day, or usual time for the receipt thereof. No Command
of God can be more strict and plain than that, Deuteronomy. 24. 15. At his day (not
when you please, or are in the humor, but at his day) thou shall give his
Hire, neither shall the Sun go down upon it: for he is poor and sets his
Heart upon it; lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be Sin unto thee.
His Belly or Back may want it, or his Family may want it, or his Trade may want
it; or if none of these, yet it is his, not yours, but his when it is earned,
and becomes due; and if it be not unjust to detain from another against his
will what is his due, there is no such thing as Unrighteousness in the World.
See also Levit. 19. 13. Thou shall not defraud thy Neighbor, nor rob him: the
Wages of him that is hired shall not abide with thee all night, until the
morning.

2. This Justice is shown in paying your due Debts. The prudent Tradesman is
wary how he contracts a Debt, and considers whether God do call him to enter
such Obligations; but when they become due, then it is plain Justice to
discharge them, and to do it as cheerfully as you did contract them; otherwise,
tho you keep the Possession, yet another has the Right; and in detaining it
against his Will, you are unjust. The Scripture is clear, Romans 13. 8. Owe no
Man any thing, but to love one another. The business is not whether your
Creditor be rich or poor, (tho it be a heavy Aggravation, when the Widow or
Fatherless be defrauded of their due; their Tears will cry in the Ears of the
Lord of Hosts) but Justice stands in rendering to every one his due, and all the
while it is withheld, you live in Sin against God. For every Man is Steward of
his Estate unto God, and he that wrongs a Steward in what his Lord has
entrusted him, wrongs the Lord himself. If you plead Inability, this will be so
far from justifying your Wrong, that it does not so much as excuse you, unless
the Hand of God has disabled you: And then also, you ought to use all possible
and lawful Endeavors to make them due Satisfaction. But take heed of charging
that upon God's Providence, which has been the effect of your own
Improvidence; therein you charge God foolishly.

But there remains one other Offense against Justice, which is most
inexcusable, which is, Breaking upon Design. And that is, when a Tradesman
conceals an Estate, and counterfeits a Failure, compounds with his Creditors,
induces them to accept a part of their due Debt for the whole, and inriches
himself with their Spoils; How false and base a course is this? How many
damning Sins do thou wilfully commit, for the compassing a little momentary
Gain? Here Is Lying, here is Stealing, here is notorious Hypocrisy and
Dissembling, Distrust in God, and Injury to Man. How can thou hope to escape
the Curse of God upon thy Soul? Nay, upon this thy fraudulent Estate? is not
this the defrauding thy Brother? and is not the Lord the Avenger of all such? 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. These Men can have no Refuge, but direct Atheism; or else that
Conscience must be in a deep Lethargy, that is not affrighted with such
Threatenings of the Almighty. But let all such Men know, that their Iniquity
will find them out, sooner or latter. The Prisons they take, cannot keep out
either Sickness, Terrors, or Death. And that is a poor Relief, that only reaches
the Body, and that also but for a few moments.

3. This Justice consists in using exact Weights and Measures. And that not out
of fear of the Officers, but out of love to Justice. For without these, your
Commerce is a perfect Cheat; the Buyer goes away satisfied, that he has so
much as he bargained for, for his Money, when indeed he has not. See how
punctual the Law of God is in this matter, Deuteronomy. 15. 13, 14, 15, 16. Thou shall
not have in thy Bags diverse Weights, a great (to buy with) and a small (to sell
with.) Thou shall not have in thy House diverse Measures, a great and a small.
But thou shall have a perfect and just Weight, a perfect and just Measure shall
thou have: that thy days may be lengthened in the Land which the Lord thy God
gives thee. For all that do such things, and all that do unrighteously, are an
Abomination unto the Lord. Here Is the Law, and the Sanction: The Law shines
with its own Evidence; so just and honest, and yet to strengthen it, the
greatest Encouragement is given to the Obedience of it, and the greatest Check
to the contrary. The Lord is a God of Justice, and there is no Unrighteousness
in him. He hates all such Workers of Iniquity.

And as the Seller should use no other but exact Weights and Measures; so the
Buyer should be contented with them, and not desire or endeavor to have more
than he buys; for thereby he strives to his Ability to make them greater, as
the Seller would make them less, than the Law requires, which is equally
abominable unto God. For the same Law of Justice and Equity should govern both
of them; and what Arts or Tricks soever are used by either of them for their
own Advantage, to the Prejudice of the other, are criminal before the Lord.
Hearken what he says, Ezeck. 28. 16. Thou have defiled thy Sanctuaries by the
multitude of thine Iniquities, by the Iniquity of thy Traffic: therefore will
I bring forth a Fire to devour thee, etc.

And among other Frauds False Lights are justly reckoned; when Men do so
contrive the Lights in their Shops, as to represent their Commodities to be
better than they are; when the honest Chapman comes home, they are quite
another thing. What can be more fraudulent? It is no other than picking thy
Neighbor's Purse of so much as is extorted hereby from him, above the real
worth of that Commodity. How can you rejoice or sleep with such dishonest Gain?
Is not the Lord the Avenger of all such? Be not deceived, God is not mocked,
tho thy harmless Neighbor be trapan'd. If thy timely Repentance and
Restitution prevent it not, he will take thee from thy false Lights, and thrust
thee without Bail or Main-prize into true and endless Darkness.

4. This Justice does oblige a Tradesman to the right working of all
Manufactures. The Municipal Laws indeed, do generally make excellent Provision
for this; but unless Men be under the awe of God and their own Consciences,
they may easily find Evasions, and trample the Laws under their Feet. And the
Law reaches not to innumerable Cases of this nature. Tho it bind him that makes
the Cloth, yet it reaches not him who makes up the Apparel; tho it obliges him
that tans the Leather, yet it reaches not him that makes up the Shoe; and so in
many other Instances; now here Justice comes in, and teaches the Tradesman to
do all such Work for others, as he would choose to have them done for himself.
It Is true, it may not be necessary to bestow equal care and labor upon each
piece of Work; the Stuff, the Price, the design of it may not require it; but
Equity requires you to give to every Manufacture the Perfection requisite to
its kind; and not through Sloth, or multiplicity of Business, or any other
selfish respect, render things useless, or unserviceable.

Much less may you deceitfully thrust in a baser Stuff or Metal instead of a
better; hereby cheating you Customer in the Price, tho he should never come to
know it, yea, tho it should do him equal Service: for this is to impose upon
his Ignorance, and to extort from him a Price above the true value of the
Commodity. Say not, that the common Price will not allow, that you should
bestow any more Care or Pains about your Work: For it is the Slightness of the
Work which in many cases has abated the Price; which if you would generally
reform, you might and would in a short time raise up the Price to the just
value of your Work; and this Tract is designed to rectify not only one or two
Tradesmen, but the Generality; and particularly all such as desire to walk
honestly, and to procure the Blessing of God.

5. This Justice consists in making conscionable Bargains. And herein lies all
the Employment of diverse Tradesmen, to wit, in Buying and Selling. Now Justice
does incline a Man neither to buy too cheap, nor to sell too dear: but to deal
with others, as he would desire to be dealt with. So that here;

(1.) It requires only a reasonable Proportion of Gain, from what you buy or
sell. It is not easy to determine, by any particular standing Rule, the measure
of that Gain which a Tradesman may receive. For it cannot always be measured,
by what the Commodity Cost him, which he is about to sell; since he might by
surprise or otherwise buy it too dear, and why should another pay for his
Folly? Or he might by some special Providence obtain at an under-value; and,
why should he causelessly make another partaker of his Advantage? For without
doubt a Man may take greater Gain at one time than at another, and may take the
Advantage the Providence of God puts into his hands, so be it he use it
moderately. The Rates at which some Others sell, cannot always be a measure of
a Tradesman's Gain; for many of them may be necessitated to sell at an
under-rate; and why should other Men's Indigence prejudice him? Or some of them
may under-sell others, to gain a Customer, and so may take too little for one
Commodity, that they may have too much for another; and why should any such
indirect Designs regulate him that is above them? What a man has Formerly sold
for, can be no Rule; for every one knows, that Commodities ebb and flow, and
that which was worth a Shilling the last Month, may not be worth Sixpence
this. Again, so much Profit as may comfortably Maintain the Tradesman and his
Family, cannot always be a right measure of his Gain; because Twelve-pence in
the Pound may sufficiently maintain him that is in Health, or has a small
Family; whereas twice as much will not answer the necessary Expenses of
another, that is sickly, or has a numerous Family to provide for. Again, the
Utmost of what he can get for his Commodity cannot always be a sure Rule
whereby to measure his Gain; for it is possible for him to obtain of an unwary
Customer, double the true worth of his Commodity; which yet in Justice he ought
not to do. Nor lastly, can the Intrinsic worth of a thing be a sufficient
Rule, whereby to measure his Gain; since that in diverse Commodities cannot be
determined; and in many others, the Buyer's Fancy only makes them valuable.

All therefore that can be said by way of Direction herein, must be drawn from
that Golden Rule aforesaid, Whatsoever you would that Men should do to you, do
ye likewise to them. From whence it follows, That what I may reasonably desire
to gain by another, when I am to sell, that Proportion I should willingly allow
him when I buy to gain by me. And on the other side, That which I allow
reasonable to another to gain by me, when I am to buy, that only should I
desire to gain, when I am to sell to another. And in general, that Gain is
reasonable, where due Consideration is allowed to a Man for his Time, Pains,
and Hazard, which is best to be known in individual cases by the concurrent
Opinion or common Use of prudent and conscientious Persons. The Market-Price is
generally the surest Rule, for that is presumed to be more indifferent than the
Appetites of particular Men. Howbeit, in case the Seller allow any considerable
time to the Buyer for the payment of the agreed Price, it is lawful enough to
advance the rate accordingly; not only because he is thereby deprived of the
improvement of his Money in other Traffic, but also runs some hazard of the
losing of it: But here, as in many other cases, an upright Conscience must be
the Clerk of the Market, and the Rule it must steer by, is that good old one,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

(2.) In your Bargains, Justice forbids your taking advantage of another
Necessity. A Man's Necessity may be twofold, Respective or Conditional: as
when, for instance, your Fellow-Tradesman needs some Commodity of yours to
serve his Customer withal; in such cases you must do to others as you would be
done unto. But there is also an Absolute or Extreme Necessity. A poor Workman
or Work-woman must needs sell now to buy their Family Bread. A poor Man must
needs buy such a Commodity needful for Back or Belly; now to beat down the
Price with the former of these, or to screw up the latter, one jot beyond that
which you could and would afford it to them, in case you knew of no such
Necessity, is manifest Injustice; and Oppression is added to it. And I restrain
it not to these cases alone, but exhort you in no case to lie on the catch, to
make your Markets of others Straits; for no Man would willingly be so dealt
with; and Estates so gotten will be like Gravel between your Teeth. Nay, your
Compassion should incline you rather to deal better with those, whose wants
bring them to you, than you would with those that stand in no need of your
Consideration, and the righteous God will recompense you.

(3.) Make not your Advantage in your Bargains of others Unskillfulness. Every
Man has not the like Sagacity, and the weak may easily forget, mistake, and
overshoot themselves: Now God has not given to you greater Parts for the hurt,
but for the help of your Neighbor; and for you to employ them to his Detriment
is quite to pervert the use them. The Buyer perhaps knows not the true worth of
what he is about; as for Example, the best Edition of the Book he would buy.
The Seller sometimes knows not the true value of what you are buying of him.
Now may you make a prize of his oversight? No, here comes in that Royal Law,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. No Man would overreach or defraud
himself, and why will you deal so with your Brother? Say not, Let every Man
understand his own Business, and our Wit and Parts are Talents given us to
improve to our own advantage, as well as our Estates. For tho every one should
endeavor to be skilled in their own Affairs, yet certainly God has not
bestowed upon all the same natural Abilities or Opportunity, no more than the
like portion of outward Estates; and whosoever has a greater measure either of
inward Qualifications, or outward Estate, has an Obligation upon him with
them, to relieve, and not to ruin those that are defective, according to that
Rule in another case, Romans 15. 1. We then that are strong, ought to bear the
Infirmities of the weak, and not to please (or seek) our selves.

(4.) Make no Bargains with such as have no just Propriety in that which you
are contracting about. Some Care is due in this case, in those that sell; that
they encourage not Children, or other weak People, who cannot rationally be
thought to be trusted with Money, to barter with them. But especially this
concerns those, that are frequently tempted to buy such Goods as they know, or
have vehement suspicion to be stolen from the right Owner. It Is true, your
Gain by such Bargains may be great, but the Sin of it is manifest; you
encourage them in an evil way, you assist them in a wicked course, and so
become Partakers with them; Psalm. 50. 18. When thou saw a Thief, then thou
consentedst with him. Why should your Gain blind your Eyes? He that knowingly
connives, assists, and any way furthers an ill Action, shares in the Guilt of
it. And as the Sin, so the Danger; you are in danger of the Law of Man, and of
the Wrath of God; if the one miss you, the other will reach you, either here or
hereafter. Say not, that your Shops are your Markets; for what honest Man will
buy a stolen Horse in the Market, if he know, yea or suspect it? Say not, If you
buy them not, another will: for the Folly or Wickedness of another will never
justify, nor excuse yours. What Man in his Wits will say, If I go not to Hell,
another will, and therefore I Will step before him. Perhaps you will plead Ignorance,
at least Uncertainty in the matter. Indeed, if there be no rational cause to
doubt, you are not culpable; but tho you be not certain, yet if there be reason
to suspect it, you should not meddle with them, unless it be to retain them for
the Owner, and to bring the Thief unto deserved Punishment: For who will buy a
Suit of Clothes, if he have but any ground to think the Plague in them? Away
therefore with all such dishonest Gain, lest it bring a Curse upon all the
rest; and rather resolve to be poor with Integrity, than rich by
Unrighteousness.

(5.) Accustom your selves to an honest Plainness in your Bargains. A necessary
Prudence we have before recommended. Ordinary and discernable Faults every
Buyer is supposed to take notice of; but if your Commodity has any such
private Defects or Faults, as, being known to your Customer, would induce him
to relinquish his purpose, or at least to sink his Price, you do not justly to
obtrude the same upon him: for you would not, you ought not to be so dealt by.
If the Buyer be culpable that cries, It is naught, it is naught, but when he is
gone his way, boasts, Prove. 20. 14. then the Seller is no better, that cries,
O it is faultless! it is excellent good! when it is neither so nor so. It is
not your Formal Cant, nor smoothest Harangues, that will make good a bad
Commodity. And tho these Methods may serve you for a while, yet, according to
the old Proverb; Frost and Fraud will end in Foul. But of this more hereafter.

6. This Justice in a Tradesman is showed, in defraying all lawful Impositions.
For it is supposed, that every Tradesman lives under some Government; that in
every Government, the Prince, or Magistrate, must be supported in the Execution
of his Office, and enabled to protect his Subjects; that for this end, such and
such Tributes and Customs are allowed him by common Consent; that a great part
of such Impositions do issue from the Tradesman, especially from those that do
export our own, or import foreign Commodities. Now Justice expressly requires
that, Romans 13. 7. You render to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due,
Custom to whom Custom; so that you must either punctually discharge them, or
else plainly deny that they are due. And how can you question this, when they
are settled by Law, and this Law past with your own (in your Trustees) Consent,
and that in a mere secular matter, wherein the Magistrates* Jurisdiction is
unquestionable; and grounded upon the plainest Reasons, the Welfare, Safety,
and Commodity of the Subject, and of the Tradesman in a special manner? And
therefore you cannot in Justice deny them, or endeavor to defraud the
Magistrate of any part of them. Say not, that their Property is altered, they
are transferred by the Prince into other hands; so that he is not wronged, but
his Farmers or Officers, who, notwithstanding your Defalcation, gain
abundantly. For These are invested with an undoubted Right from the Proprietor,
and so cannot lawfully be defrauded, no more than a Tenant of what he takes in
Lease from his Landlord.

Neither plead, that the end wherefore such Taxations were granted, is not
attained; the Seas are not guarded, nor Traffic secured. For it is hard to
prove the matter of Fact; the Prince's Care herein ought not to be called into
question, without clear and uncontrollable Evidence; every neglect of
subordinate Officers must not involve the Supreme Magistate, unless it be
frequent, notorious, and considerable, and after due Information. And when all
is done, in all Ages there ever were, and still will be some Over-sights, some
unworthy Persons employed, who will seek their own, and not the Public Good;
whose Faults must be corrected by their Superiors, and not pleaded in bar of
Duty by every private Person. Neither is it enongh to reply, That if you do
adventure to withold Custom or the like, then you are ready, if detected, to
stand to the Penalty; and reckon, that thereby you are discharged from any
Guilt. For granting that it is due by Law, which certainly settles every Man's
Right in his Estate, it is flat Unrighteousness to rent away any ones Right
without their Consent; and the Penalty is chiefly intended to affright ill Men
from doing Injury, whom Conscience of God will not restrain. And therefore in
the Judicial Law, which was founded upon the highest Reason, there was a
Trepass Offering to be offered to God to atone for the Guilt, besides the full
Restitution to the Party wronged; Levit. 6. 5. and Numb. 5. 6. There is no
common Thief or Pick-pocket but might make this Plea, if there were any
Strength in it: That he ventures the Penalty, and so is blameless. And the
Greatness or the Poverty of the Party wronged, is so far from extenuating the
Crime, that it aggravates it.

And as you should render to Caesar the things that be Caesar's, so ought you
to render unto God the things that be God's. If ever ye expect the Blessing of
God, withold not from his Messengers, whatsoever is by Law or Equity due unto
them. The Labourer, in any Calling, is worthy of his Hire; their's is a
laborious Calling: The Sweat of the Brain consumes more than the Sweat of the
Brows. Never deprive, nor defraud, nor defer God's Ministers their Maintenance.
Dent. 12. 19. Take heed to thy self, that thou forsake not the Levite, as long
as thou live upon the Earth. And 1 Cor. 9. 14. The Lord has ordained, that
they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. Alas! they cannot
trade as you can; they have relinquished those gainful Emploiments, and are
devoted to the Service of God, and the good of Souls. And yet some diligent
Cobbler may live as plentifully as some of them. They must not only have Bread,
but Books and Physic; and should be so supplied, that they might make
competent Provision for their Families, and also be Examples as well as
Promoters of Charity to them that want; 1 Timothy 5. 17. The Elders that rule
well, are worthy of double Honor, especially they who labor in the Word and
Doctrine. And this is not only a Point of Religion and Charity, but of Justice
and Equity.

7. The Tradesman's Justice must be showed in paying due Respects to the Laws
and Orders of his Society. This Particular has place only in those Places
where such Societies are erected, and Bylaws and Orders made among themselves;
to the observation whereof the Members of the same are usually obliged by a
solemn Oath. Now supposing these said Laws to be consonant to God's Word, and
to Right Reason, you are in Justice and Conscience bound to give your Obedience
to them; yea, tho it sometimes interfere with your particular Advantage. When
thereby you are called to any Office of Charge or Trouble, you ought readily to
discharge it; so that it be consistent with the Employments of your Calling, or
other necessary Concernments: or else submit cheerfully to such Fines as are
duly imposed.

Again; Tho you might (for instance) import or export some Commodity to your
great profit; yet if the same be prohibited by the Laws of your Society, you
ought in Justice to forbear so doing. If there be Laws and Orders to which you
are sworn, engaging you to employ no Foreigner in your Trade, lest those who
served an Apprentiship be discouraged, and left without Employment; you are
bound in Justice to refuse all such Assistance, especially where in so doing
you do really cross the End of those Constitutions. In a word, you ought in all
things to consult the good of the Society as well as your own; yea, the future
welfare thereof as well as the present, if you will be jast unto your
Obligations.

8. This Justice will instruct you, to have An equitable Regard to your fellow
Tradesmen. Though every Man is bound to use all honest endeavors to get and
increase his Custom, yet as it is pity to be an hindrance to one that is poorer
than your self, so there is a Decorum to be observed in winning over to you,
your Neighbors Chapmen or Customers; namely you must abhor all unjust
Reflections upon your fellow- Tradesman, or on his Commodity, for that is
directly against the Ninth Commandment; and any other cunning or unhandsom
Tricks to attain your Ends; you must beware of a Covetous Principle, of all
Injustice and Uncharitableness, of any thing that is unseemly or scandalous.
And though Masters should be content, that their Apprentices having served
their Time with them, should carry away at their setting up some part of their
Custom and Customers; yet no ingenuous Apprentice will use any indirect means,
either before the Expiration of his Time, or after, to feather his own Nest by
leaving his Master naked, or to endeavor any thing herein, but what is
commonly and approvedly done in that case: For himself will not, when the case
comes to be his own, be content to be so used. Neither is it agreeable to
Justice or Equity, that the rich Tradesman, whose Estate perhaps will bear it
out, should under-sell his meaner Neighbors; or the rich Artificer so fall in
the Prices of his Manufactures, that his poorer fellow-Tradesman, wanting his
Stock and Credit, cannot subsist upon it; especially if such sinking the Price
of your Commodity spring from a design of weakening or impoverishing the other.

The like sinful Injustice there is, in such an engrossing of Commodities, as
does manifestly tend to the undoing of many, for the enriching of a few,
whether this be done by single Persons or Societies; if the Prejudice redound
to many, and the Profit to a few, it is a common Injury, it is a making haste
to be rich by Oppression, which tho your present Gain blind you from seeing;
yet the righteous God, who is the common Father to all, will one time or other
be sure to reckon about it. Surely none of you would be content, or had reason
to be content to be so used.

Above all, that Injustice is intolerable which is offered to your Partners
that repose the same Confidence in you, as they do in themselves; and where you
are bound by the strictest Ties of Law, and Conscience, and mutual Confidence
to be exactly just. So that to undermine one another, or to purloin from one
another is a Crime that deserves the severest Censure; and of which none will
be guilty, that have not dismissed all Love of Virtue, or Fear of Shame.

9. This Justice will oblige the Tradesman to a Paternal Care about his
Apprentices. It behooves you in Prudence, to be cautious whom ye take in that
Relation; to consider what their Birth, what their Education has been, what
their Disposition and Aptitude is; and do not for the supply of any present
pinch of Business, or for the lucre of a little Money, thrust a Thorn into your
Foot, which may pain you for seven long Years together: but choose such as are
of honest Parentage, sober Education, tolerable Temper, and capable of your
Business. And when you have bound them and inoculated them into your Family,
then Justice obliges you to use them just as you would have your own Children
used, when they come into that Condition. Beware of undue Severity or Rigor on
the one hand; and of foolish Indulgence, or careless Neglect on the other. For
as the wise Horseman when he would break a young Horse, will neither check nor
rein him too hard; lest he spoil his Mettle, and force him to the Curvet to the
danger of the Rider; nor yet does he throw the Reins on his Neck, and suffer
him to go where and how he pleases, lest he destroy himself and his Rider also:
So should the wise Master have a special Care to shun that Austerity, which
discourages his Apprentice's Endeovours, and also that Softness, which
incourages his Vices.

As to the former, it is unquestionably a Sin against God. Tho you had nothing
with them, yea tho you had bought them of their Parents for seven Years; yet
God, who is your Master, has charged you, Levit. 25. 43. Thou shall not rule
over him with Rigor; but shall fear thy God; which he repeats again, Verse. 46.
But over your Brethren the Children of Israel, ye shall not rule over one
another with Rigor. And as the Sin is great, so the Danger is evident, for such
usage has driven hundreds of Youths to desperate Resolutions; wherein, tho
they cannot be justified, yet for giving them such occasion, you shall be
condemned. Forbear then all imperious Carriage toward then; I would have you
to maintain your Authority; but that is sufficiently preserved by a grave and
religious course of Life, which will beget a Veneration in your Inferiors;
whereas any discerned Sin in you degrades you, and breeds an inward Contempt of
you in them that see it. Fix in your Hearts an unfeigned love to them, and that
will both guide you in all your Behavior toward them, and dispose you to bear
with their Frailties and Imperfections: and certainly if we own this debt of
Love to every Man, we ought to pay a greater measure of it to those that are so
near us. Be sure, that they have Food, and Raiment, and Rest convenient for
them. For Quality, let them have that which is suitable to their Condition: For
Quantity, let them have what is sufficient for their necessity. For Time and
Season, let them have it in such due season, as may be for their Health and
Comfort. You should scorn to squeeze an Estate out of your Apprentices Bellies,
or rent it from off their Backs. And then impose not too heavy Tasks upon them;
make not their Lives grievou, lest they cry unto the Lord, and he be wrath with
you, and blast all your Affairs. Charge them not with Faults without cause,
neither refuse to hear their just Apologies: read and think of that Scripture,
Job 31. 13, 14, 15. If I did despise the cause of my Manservant, or of my
Maidservant, when they contended with me, what then shall I do when God rises
up? and when he visits, what shall I answer him? Did not he that made me in
the Womb, make him? and did not one fashion us in the Womb? And in case of
Correction, let it be the last Expedient; and then by no means, brutish or
cruel, but such as a wise Father should give his own Child, that they may
discern your Love through your Anger; and be sure that you be as ready to
encourage them by word and deed, when they deserve it, as to rate and chide
them when they do amiss: for the one is as due as the other; and he that is
incurred to be ever finding fault, disheartens the Servant, and weakens the
Authority of the Master.

You must also be equally watchful against the other extreme, which is a weak
Softness, or dangerous Indulgence. The Authority wherewith you are invested, is
God's, and therefore you have no right to lose or part with it, but ought to
preserve and improve it both for the good of your Apprentices, and your own
Comfort. God is a God of order, and therefore you should let them understand,
that you are placed in a Sphere above them, and that they must observe a due
respect toward you, both in their Words and other Behavior. Indulge them in no
known Evil, especially not in lying or scoffing at Religion. Teach them none of
the wicked Crafts in your Calling, but still recommend to them Equity and
Honesty. Above all, do your utmost to keep them out of bad Company; and to that
end, take an exact account of their time, when they are out of your sight; for
it is then that they contract their mischievous Acquaintance; and particularly
on the Lord's Day, a day appointed of God for the good of the Soul, but abused
very often by poor Apprentices both to the ruin of their Souls and Bodies.
Keep them that day under your Eye; and the same Authority that ye assume over
them on the weekday, exercise the same to keep them from evil, and in good
Duties on the Sabbathday; or else God may justly reproach you for your
Selfishness and Hypocrisy. Some Relaxation ye ought to allow them, but let it
be at such Times and Places, and with such Company, that may be safe for them;
that they may be refreshed, but not infected. And tho they grudg at this
restraint, for the present; yet the time will come, that if they through their
Obstinacy come not to curse themselves for their own Folly, they will bless
you, and bless God for your Care about them. And one other Caution here is
needful, which is to beware how you send them into Foreign Parts without some
competent furniture both of Wisdom, Counsel and good Books; whereby they may be
there secured from the Temptations, which raw and unprincipled Youth do often
fall into: For what will it profit them or you to gain the whole World, and
lose the precious Soul?

10. The Tradesman should be just in making due Provision for his Wife and
Children, if he have those Blessings, for there is Justice herein. The Wife
has brought a considerable Portion, in prospect of a comfortable Provision; or
else has been helpful to get or keep your Estates, and govern your
Houshold-Affairs, or however is Bone of your Bone, and Flesh of your Flesh. She
has forsaken her Parents, and all her Friends, and cast her self upon the Love
and Care of her Husband; Is it not just therefore that she be provided for?
Your Children are pieces of your selves; in whom, as far as can be, you are
perpetuated; and by whom your Name, and God's Name, which is more, must be
upheld. These you have brought into the World in a helpless Condition: And is
it just in you so to leave them? And yet such is the Idleness and Negligence of
some Tradesmen, such the palate-pleasing in others, and in others such foolish
Bargains, and improvident Courses, that they leave little to their Families,
but Misery and Tears. The Goods are prized, but they are old and useless: the
Books are searched, and they speak no Comfort. The poor Wife runs and shifts one
way, the Children they flee another. Nothing for the Creditor, nothing for the
Wife, nothing for the Children. O wretched Injustice! the Name of such Men must
rot: Their Posterity cannot rise up, and call them Blessed. Will it excuse such
Men, that they have been just to all Men, when they have been unjust to their
own Flesh? Not at all. Limit your selves therefore in your Expenses; abate of
your daily Superfluities in Clothes, Diet, and Furniture, that you may leave
your Wives better than you found them; that you may leave your Children above
the Charity of their Friends; that you may not die like the Brutes, who have no
care of those they leave behind them. Prove. 13. 22. A good Man leaves an
Inheritance to his Childrens Children. Psalm. 112. 3. Wealth and Riches shall be
in his House, and his Righteousness endures for ever.

11. This Justice in the Tradesman obliges him, to show Mercy to the Poor. For
it is evident from the Scripture, that Righteousness contains Charity: Psalm.
112. 9. He has dispersed, he has given to the Poor, his Righteousness
endures for ever: which the Apostle also, 2 Cor. 9. 9. applies hereunto. And
with good reason; for the Poor have a right to what we can spare for them.
Hence, Prove. 3. 27. Withold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is
in the power of thine hand to do it. It is the Duty then of every Tradesman, as
it is of every other Man, to labor and work with his Hands the thing that is
good, that he may have (not only to feast himself and Friends, or to hoard up
for his Posterity, but) to give to him that needs. And he should so order his
own Expenses, and improve his Skill and Care, that he may, if it be possible,
be helpful unto others. It is therefore an unrighteous and unmerciful course in
such Brokers who require and retain for Pledges even the necessary Apparel,
Tools, etc. of poor People, whom they ought rather to relieve in their wants,
than ruin by their Oppression. In such Professions, if they mix not Charity
with Justice, they build their Houses with the Tears and Blood of the Poor. The
Christian Tradesman will rather study how he may employ or relieve many, than
impoverish any. He remembers how poor he was at his beiginning, and concludes,
that he must give some real Testimony of his Gratitude to God for his Bounty to
him.

And here is a large Field before you, wherein to sow your Seed. Either you
have some poor Kindred in City or in the Country; or God has some poor
Children of his, whose necessities cry for relief; or some poor Ministers of
Christ, that instead of living to study and preach, must study to live and get
Bread; or some poor ingenious Scholars, that if they were supported a while,
would become excellent Instruments of Good; or some towardly Youths, whose
Parents cannot put them to Trades; and others that have Skill and Parts, but
have no Stock to set up with; or some poor Tradesmen and Housekeepers that
often want Work, and so want Bread, or are overstock'd with Children, and yet
are loath to complain, and ashamed to beg, and so languish and waste away: or
some honest Maids, whom a little Money would settle either in Employments or
Marriage; who, being indigent and neglected, become liable to great
Temptations. Besides in the Country, there are Schools and Hospitals to erect
and endow; Tithes to redeem from the Impropriators: Workhouses to make for the
Poor: Lectures to set up in the dark Corners of the Land; room and imploiment
enough for your Charity. And to speak the Truth, the Tradesmen of England, and
especially of London, have outstript all other Subjects in such Acts of Charity
as these: No Sort of Men being more ready on all Occasions to realize their
Charity, or that have scattered up and down the Nation such visible Instances
thereof. For they are taught, that they are only Stewards of God's Stock, which
is in their Hands; that well-ordered Charity is the most certain way of
thriving; that what is employed this way is not lost, but lent on the best
Security, and for the greatest Interest; that it concerns them to lay up a
Treasure in Heaven, because they must not abide always upon the Earth; and that
the best Trading is for Invisibles.

IV. And here let us stay a while, and make some Application of all this, which
is the fourth Thing to be handled upon this Head.

1. By way of Reflection. Have you been exactly just in all the abovesaid
Instances? Examine your own Consciences. Perhaps no Man can charge you with any
Injustice; but what says Conscience? bring it to that Rule, Whatsoever ye would
that Men should do to you, do ye likewise to them: If Conscience be not blind,
it will see something amiss; if it be not seared, it will speak, and make you
hear it; and the softest Pillow will not give you sleep till you have made your
peace both with God and Man. And withal take notice, that it is not sufficient
to entitle you to the Favor of God, that you have done as you would be done
by; unless your Principle be right, that the Fear of God and the Authority of a
sanctified Conscience incline you to it. Can you say as Neh. 5. 15. other
Governors before did so and so; but so did not I, because of the Fear of God?
I was careful of my Credit, I was fearful of Disgrace; but the chief Bridle
that kept me from doing any Wrong, was the Fear of God. And though others made
no scruple to use such Tricks, nothing has been more common than such and such
Methods, yet so did not I do, nor ever will, because of the Fear of God. And if
this has been your Course, then

2. Here is Comfort for you. If you can truly say, I have nothing that of right
belongs to others; I can truly assure you, that many Blessings do of right
belong to you. Whether you have much or little, a Blessing is in it. Better is
a little with Righteousness, than great Revenues without Right, Prove. 16. 8.
Perhaps your Estate is but little, little to what it might have been, if you
had taken the indirect Courses, which some of your Neighbors have done: But
your little is better than their Revenues, yea than the Riches of many Wicked,
Psalm. 37. 16. You adorn the Gospel, and the Gospel will crown you: Your
Posterity shall, if it be good for them, flourish; when theirs shall be brought
to a Morsel of Bread: For the righteous God loves Righteousness, and does
usually in this Life reward the Upright. However he that walks righteously,
and speaks uprightly, he that despises the Gain of Oppressions, -- he shall
dwell on High. -- Thine Eyes shall see the King in his Beauty, they shall
behold the Land that is very far off, Isa. 33. 15. etc.

3. But if God or Man, or your own Consciences can prove you unrighteous and
unconscionable in your Dealings, that care not how you get Wealth, so that you
have it; nor whom you wrong, so that you can do it cleverly; let these Lines
help to convict you, let these Words sink into your Hearts. Happy ye would be,
but this is not the way to it: this only is the way to accursed Riches; you
build your House upon a Quick-sand; Jerem. 17. 11. As the Partridg sits on
Eggs, and hatcheth them not: So he that gets Riches, and not by right, shall
leave them in the midst of his Days, and at his End shall be a Fool. He was a
Fool all along, but he shall find at last that he is a Fool. And though the
Sword of Justice never reach you, nor any Man's Eye find you out; yet that
Scripture will follow and overtake you, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. Let no Man go beyond and
defraud his Brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the Avenger of all
such, as we also have forwarned you, and testified. You wrong your Neighbor
much, but you wrong your selves more. You dishonor and defy a righteous God,
who has said, Job 20. 15, etc. He has swallowed down Riches, and he shall
vomit them up again: God shall cast them out of his Belly, -- surely he shall
not feel Quietness in his Belly, -- In the Fullness of his Sufficiency he shall
be in straits, etc. Will ye not believe this, until ye feel it? Do not his Eyes
behold, and his Eyelids try the Children of Men? Has he left off to be just?
No, no; your Sin is crying for Vengeance all this while. O let the
Long-suffering of God be Salvation to you! Let our Counsel be acceptable to
you! which is to break off your Sins by Righteousness, and your Iniquities by
showing Mercy to the Poor, if it may be a lengthning of your Tranquillity, Dan.
4. 27. Your Riches are corrupted, your Gold and Silver is cankered, your
Subtilty is Folly, ye are in the wrong way to Greatness; durable Riches and
Righteousness go together; Wrath gotten by Vanity shall be diminished, but he
that gathers by Labor, shall increase, Prove. 13. 11.

4. Let all this strengthen my Exhortation to all you Tradesmen unto these four
Things.

1. That you govern your selves and all your Actions by this golden Rule of
Justice and Equity. Put your selves into the Place of those you deal with, and
carry it to them, as you would be used by them. Remember, that as you are
selling to others to day, so you may be buying of others to morrow. Reckon not
that all is gained, which is gotten from your Brother, but only that which is
honestly gained; that it is a light Gain that makes a heavy Purse, and that a
good Conscience is the best Estate; and generally in all the abovenamed
Instances exercise your selves to have a Conscience void of Offense, both
toward God and Men. Believe God, so shall ye prosper. Often think of that
Saying, What shall it profit a Man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose
his own Soul?

And 2. If you have wronged any Man, and dealt unjustly with him, make speedy
Restitution: For you cannot be said truly to repent of your Sin, unless you
have at least a real Purpose to restore, whatsoever you have unjustly gotten.
This is both your Duty and your Interest.

1. It is your Duty; commanded by God and commended by him: Commanded, Numb. 5.
6, 7. When a Man or Woman shall commit any Sin that Men commit, to do a
Trespass against the Lord, [mark, though your Neighbor be the immediate
Object, yet it redounds to the Lord] and that Person be guilty: then they shall
confess their Sin which they have done, and he shall recompense his Trespass
with the Principal thereof [that is, the just Value of the Thing wherein he
has wronged his Brother] and add unto it the fifth Part thereof [both as a
Penalty for the Wrong, and also to make the Satisfaction full] and give it unto
him against whom he has trespassed. Now the Moral Equity which is contained in
any of these judicial Laws, binds every Man to the End of the World. See also
Levit. 6. 5. Hereupon Samuel says, 1 Samuel 12. 3. Whom have I defrauded? whom
have I oppressed? and I will restore it you. This Nehemiah called for, Nehem.
5. 11, 12. and the People presently yielded to him. And this is Commended in
Zacheus, Luke 19. 8. Lord, if I have taken any thing, [mark, any thing of what
kind soever, of what quantity soever] of any Man [good or bad, rich or poor,
King or Subject] by false Accusation, I restore him [not I Will do it at my
leisure, when I have a greater Estate to do it with, but upon the nail I
restore him] fourfold: I Will be the Loser, he shall have fourfold. And if ever
Salvation come to your House, and the Dominion of Grace into your Heart, you
will go and do likewise.

2. It is your Interest to make Restitution. For what you have got by Wrong,
will never do you good. The Gain of Deceit lasts but a while; or if it do, it
stays with you in Wrath. If it abide with you till you die, yet the Curse of God
stays with it; and lies, if not visibly upon your Estate, Body, or Children,
yet really on your poor Souls, which is worst of all. It adheres to all you
have, as the Plague to a rich Suit of Clothes; they are gay and rich, but Death
is in them: and who, that is wise, would wear the richest Suit with the Plague
in it? course Sackcloth were much better. So it were better for you a thousand
times to live poor and just, and die blessed, than to live and die with a Curse.
Now is it not Wisdom to part with that which will do you no good but harm?
What, run a hazard of losing all your honest Gain, by keeping some little which
is dishonest? What, and venture Hellfire, rather than part with some of your
Estate; when as (if God say the Word tonight) you must part with it all before
Morning? Is it not better to bring it back and be saved, than to have it
fetched, and you be lost? I tell you, if ever your Eyes be savingly opened, you
will make as much haste to restore what you have wrongfully gotten, as ever you
did to get it; and shake it out of your Skirt, as you would brush a Spark of
Fire off your Clothes. Think not hereby to lay up Estates for your Children,
alas! this is not the way; for if you could rise out of your Graves but one
fifty Years after your Death, you would see that the Canker of your Deceits and
Injuries had consumed it all; and that those Riches which ruined your poor
Souls in the getting of them, had ruined the Souls of your Posterity in the
consuming of them. The Father damned by injurious Getting an Estate, and the
Son, or Grandchild at furthest, damned by the ungodly Wasting of it. How many
Houses have you seen ruined, where an Oppressor, where a Knave has dwelt? in a
few Generations their Names are blotted out; and they who preferred Earth to
Heaven, have neither Earth nor Heaven at last: and can you go by their Houses,
and not receive Instruction? will you see and know this, and yet follow them?
Resolve then from this Day to restore what you cannot honestly or safely keep.
Make your selves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness. Take thy ill-gotten
Goods in thy Hand (as that Philosopher did his Estate, when he threw it into
the Sea) and resolve, it is better that these Things be lost for me, than with
me: What shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul?

Perhaps you will plead your Inability: that if every Bird had its own
Feathers, you should be left absolutely naked; and in short, that your whole
Estate would not recompense those whom you have wronged.

Answ. Total Inability excuses Restitution in the Kind, but yet there must be
Restitution in the Mind. The Will you must have at present, and the Deed
(except remitted) if ever you be able. In the mean time you ought to mourn,
that you have wronged your Neighbor in Actions, and can only right him in your
Wishes. And sure there is some just Hand of God in it, that your Estate (though
increased by your wronging of others) should be brought to such an Ebb, that
you are now unable to make just Restitution. Surely God has blown upon it with
his Curse already; and you may find by this, that no Industry or Cunning can
assure ill-gotten Goods. And as sure as this Curse follows you externally; so
surely (without Repentance and Restitution) will it follow you eternally. And
therefore you are quite out in your Arguing, you cannot restore, because it
will make you poor; for if you do not restore, you will be poorer still: And
then it is better to be poor with God's Blessing, than poor with his Curse. And
grant it do bring you low, to restore every Man his own; alas! it does only
deliver you from that Estate, which would do you hurt, and strip you of some
Garments, that would keep you too hot. However the Event, Duty must be done,
whether we grow rich or poor by it. Poverty and Piety are better company than
Riches and Sin. And if you can trust God (and otherwise you cannot be saved) he
can and will, if it be for your good, make you amends for your Self-denial, and
give you Goods and a good Conscience also: 2 Chronicles 25. 9. The Lord is able to
give thee much more than this. Howbeit, if the present Restitution should be to
your utter undoing, which may be avoided by some reasonable Delay; acquaint the
Party injured with your purpose, who will in Charity allow you some space of
Compensation, and praise your Integrity.

Obj. It may be you will say, I shall be shamed, my Name will be posted up for
Dishonesty, and my Credit (which is a Tradesman's Demesne) will be blasted.

Answ. Sin is worse than Shame. A Man may stand under Shame, but you cannot
stand under the guilt of Sin. A wounded Conscience who can bear? Holy Augustine
has determined long ago, that Sin is not remitted, till the Thing be restored,
wherein you sinned. If your Conscience were tender, or your Eyes truly open,
you would more tremble for Guilt than Shame. It was never better with Ephraim,
than when he was ashamed, yea even confounded (the highest degree of Shame) for
the Sins of his Youth, Jer. 31. 19. and never worse with Ephraim, than when he
was given up to Sin, Hos. 4. 17. How long do you think it will be, ere you must
be charged before God, Angels, and all your Neighbors with your unworthy
Dealings? and then what unspeakable Shame will cover your Face, when it will be
found, that after all these Warnings, you lived and died in those Sins? Alas!
it will be but a while, and all your Hearts and Actions shall be laid out to
the view of all; and were it not better that you prevented this your self? But,
I pray, what Shame is it to do that which is good, and to undo that which is
evil? It is a Shame indeed to sin, but that is past; but now you are about a
Work of Righteousness, Equity and Honesty, there is no Shame in this; nay all
Men, at least all wise Men, will think better of you, than ever before: They
will now conclude certainly, yonder is a singular good Man, that of his own
accord will part with his Estate, and venture his Credit, rather than burden
his Conscience, or remain under the guilt of Sin. All Men will commend this,
and much Praise will redound to God. Pray what Disgrace is it to Zacheus, that
he was willing to restore which he had gotten by wrong? God and Man record it
to his Honor.

But for this you may so order your Restitution, that (if Occasion require it)
you never need to be known. Consider whom you have injured, and how much; and
then choose your discreet Minister, or some other faithful Friend, who may
dispose the Thing restored, or the Value of it, to the right Owner, and your
Name never needs be known. But rather exceed than fall short of the full Value,
in your Restitution. I will restore him, says Zacheus, fourfold. And you know
the Constitution which God made in this behalf, Numb. 5. 7. And add to the
Principal the fifth Part thereof, and give it to him. This is equitable for
him, who happily has been prejudiced by your Injury, more than the naked Value,
especially if much Time be past: and it is profitable for you, when your Sin
costs you so dear, it is likely you will not easily trespass so again.

If after all, you plead that the Party you have wronged is dead, and perhaps
there is none left, to whom Restitution may be made; or the Persons are now at
such a distance, that it is impossible to make them personal Amends.

I answer; Restitution must be made in the proper place, if it be possible; or
if the Party be dead, to their Heirs or Executors, and pains must be taken to
find them out. But if no Person can be found, in whom the Right of receiving
does remain; then hear what God says, Numb. 5. 8. But if the Man have no
Kinsman (or Person having Right) to recompense the Trespass unto, let the
Trespass be recompensed unto the Lord, even to the Priest. Almighty God is
Heir-General in such Cases, in whose name and stead his Priests and Poor are
authorized to give you an Acquittance; and your Sin, being bewailed, shall
through the Ram of Atonement, mentioned in the same Verse, be forgiven. But
till this be done or fully purposed, your Guilt remains, you are yet in your
Sin.

3. Hence be exhorted, in all your Trading to take always the safer Path in
doubtful Cases; for it is impossible to specify the Cases, which occur to you
in the Course of your Negotiations, wherein you will be in doubt whether this
and that may be done or no. In such Cases choose to do that which seems the most
innocent, the most just and the most charitable of the two. Run not always to
the utmost of Things that may be lawful; he that goes upon the Brink of a
River, you know is in Danger to fall into it. In matters of Duty, it is
generally best to do the most, but in matters of Privilege or Advantage (where
there is doubt) choose to take the least; for we have naturally Dispositions,
that will bias us toward our selves. And in point of Gain, always use Favor
to the Poor, Ingenuity to the Unskilful, and Moderation toward all. You will
find this to be the best way to a quiet Conscience, and to a firm Estate. And
in cases of weight and difficulty, resort to some more experienced and
conscientious Tradesman for Advice; yea, resort to God's Ministers, and stating
the Case aright, crave their Counsel. For the Priests Lip should keep Knowledge,
and the People should seek the Law at his Mouth; for he is the Messenger of the
Lord of Host, Malach. 2. 7.

4. Lastly, prevent others (as far as you can) from doing wrong. Recommend and
propagate Justice to your Children; charge your Servants, that they offer not
the least wrong. Be, and profess your selves to be, irreconcilable Enemies to
all injurious and deceitful Dealing. If Knaves and Cheats can encourage one
another in their Vilanies; how much more should upright and honest Men promote
Righteousness and Honesty? Stand not patiently by, while another Man offers to
do Injury; at least be not Partakers with them. He that hinders not an Injury
when he might, makes it his own. Improve the Interest or Sway you have in your
several Societies, to reform what is amiss there in this respect; and do your
best to settle whatsoever belongs to your several Trades in such a manner, as
is most agreeable to Equity and Honesty. And for all these Ends, labor to have
your Hearts renewed: the Tree must be good, before the Fruit can be so. The
Name of a Christian will not save him, that lives a Pagan Life. Imputed
Rightcousness will not profit an unrighteous Dealer. Think often, I must leave
this Shop and all these Riches when I die; and I know not how soon that may be:
and what makes me fear Death, but Sin? What comfort can I have in all my
Riches, if my Conscience be unsound? and resolve therefore, though I be a poor
Man, yet I Will be an honest Man; though I may not be very great, yet I will
always be very just; that so you may when you die, take a good Conscience with
you, and leave a good Name and a Blessing behind you. And so much for the
Tradesman's Justice.

SECT. 4. Of Truth or Veracity in a Trade.
THE fourth Requisite for the right managing of a Trade, is Truth or Veracity.
Where I shall,

I. Describe the Nature thereof. II. Demonstrate your Obligation to it. III.
Declare the Instances wherein it is to be exercised in the Tradesman's Calling.
IV. Make some Application of it.
I. Concerning the Nature of Truth; I willingly let pass many Notions and
Distinctions of the Schoolmen: And shall only take notice:

1. That there is a Truth of Things, whereby they are agreeable to that Idea,
according to which they were framed.

2. A Truth of Apprechensions, whereby we think, know, or believe of things
according to their true Nature.

3. A Truth of Expressions, whereby we speak of things according to what we
think, know, or believe. Now when our Apprehensions of things are not right,
that is Error or Mistake; which is a Fault and Sin in us, if it be about things
which we ought to know, or pretend to know. As for Example, when you conceive
that such a Commodity (which by your Calling you should have Knowledge in) is
good, when indeed it is not. But then, when our Expressions agree not with our
Apprehensions, That Is a Lie, and is a far greater fault, because it is
voluntary: So that every Mistake is not a Lie, every concealing the Truth is
not a Lie; every doubtful Speech is not a Lie; every Parable or Fable, such as
That Judge. 9. is not a Lie; every rehearsing of a Lie is not a Lie; though a
Man may so rehearse it, as to make it his own. But, a Lie is the voluntary
falsifying of the Truth; and it is aggravated when it is joined with an intent
to deceive. Truth is like the Sun, a Lie is the eclipse of it, it puts out the
Eye of Truth. But of this afterward. At the present this is sufficient, That
every Man in his Calling should judge of things as they are, and should (when
he is called to it) speak of them according to such his Judgment: and this is
called Veracity, whereby a Man speaks the Truth in his Heart, as it is Psalm.
15. 2. neither adds nor diminishes; neither depreciates a Commodity, or puts
Colors upon it, will neither affirm a thing or deny it, when he knows the
contrary; and this he does out of Conscience to God, and out of Love to Truth.
And this is sufficient for the Description of it,

II. Every Man's Obligations to this, result.

1. From the Light of Nature; by which it is evident, that the Tongue and
Faculty of Speech is given to Man, whereby to express and signify his Mind to
others; so that he that is dumb in Speech, is better than he that deceives with
it. As the design of a Clock or Watch is to be a true measure of Time, and to
keep its just pace with the Sun; but being false in this, were better to be
laid aside, that to deceive you; better to lie in your Desk, than tell you a
Lie in your Pocket. The design and honor of the Tongue is to speak truly; so
that it is reported of the very Indians, that in case they be convinced of a
Lie, they will in revenge draw Blood of their own Tongues. Hence it is, that
even natural Conscience does so strongly support a Man, when he speaks Truth;
no Frowns can daunt him: and on the contrary, he that falsifies the Truth (if
Conscience be not utterly seared) is pinched within, even natural Conscience
stings him, tho no body can accuse him; and then if he be detected, intolerable
is that Shame that covers him.

2. By the Light of Scripture. Which does constantly command Sincerity and
Truth, and forbid the contrary, Zech. 8. 16. These are the things that ye shall
do, Speak ye every Man Truth to his Neighbor. It describes a good Man by his
Veracity: Prove. 13. 5. A righteous Man hates Lying: Urges it with most
pregnant Reasons, Ephesians. 4. 25. Wherefore putting away lying, speak every Man
(no Man, no not the Tradesman excepted) Truth with his Neighbor: for we are
Members one of another: Where the Apostle ushers in his Exhortation with one
strong Reason, couched in the Illative [Wherefore] which shows that this is an
Inference from the foregoing Verses. q. d. You have put off the old Man with
his Deeds: All of you professedly, all true Christians really. It is ridiculous
and shameful for him that is invested with new Robes to retain any one foul Rag
upon him: And ye have put on the new Man after the Image of Christ, who is
Truth, and so it is fit that all his Members be in the same Livery. And then,
he backs his Exhortation with another Reason; We are Members one of another.
Now every Man will be true to himself, will never go about willingly to deceive
himself: It were a monstrous thing for one Member of the Body to go about to
impose upon another. Now we are all of us Members of one another.

(1.) As Men. Adam was the Root, we all are the Branches.

(2.) As Christians; and so we are all one in Christ Jesus; our Religion does
knit us closer together than all other Ligaments in the World. 1 Cor. 12. 25,
27. The Members should have the same care one for another. Now ye are the Body
of Christ and Members in particular: So that in deceiving any of the Members,
you affront the Head. In short, unless ye be true Men, ye can be no true
Christians; a salse Man, and a true Saint, is a Contradiction. Thus you see,
that the Scripture is direct for speaking Truth; it does indeed relate diverse
Untruths spoken by others, both good men and bad, but it never justifies them.
The Narration of such Faults of pious Men is a strong Argument of the Sincerity
of the Scripture; and, that it no way excuses them, of its Sanctity. In which
case Augustine charitably concludes, that God accepted in Rahab and the
Midwives, etc. Fidem mentis, and pardoned to them fallaciam mentientis. In a
word, we own and worship a true God, we profess a true Religion, we pursue a
true Happiness; by all which we are obliged to all manner of Truth, in Heart,
in Lip, in Life.

3. This Veracity is demonstrable by the Light of sound Reason; that even those
that care not for the Scripture, may be convinced of the necessity of it;
unles* they will not only renounce Divinity, but Humanity also. For,

(1.) There is Equity in it. Every Man would be truly dealt with: No Man would
be content that his Wife, Children, or Servants should deny the Truth, or feed
him with Lies. Which of you chooses to have any thing to do with those whom you
cannot believe? Now is it not very equal, that you should always speak the
Truth, that do desire always to hear others speak it? Is it reasonable that
other Folks should live by one Rule, and you by another? That Truth should be
eligible by all others, and not by you? This Veracity and Justice are so
conjunct, that he cannot be just in his Dealings, that is false in his Words:
For the same Law that commands us to do by others, as we would be done unto,
equally obliges us to speak in our Commerce to them, as we would be spoken to.

(2.) There is Commodity in it. This Veracity is so commodious, yea so
necessary among Men; that all Civil Society is dissolved without it. For all
Transactions and Commerce between Man and Man, do lean upon this Fundamental
Point; That one Man may believe another; now if Men do not constantly speak the
Truth, how can they be believed? thus all human Conversation is shaken. Now
Reason it self must needs enter an Action against any Course that overthrows
the good of Mankind: and it were endless to transcribe the pithy Expressions of
diverse of the Heathens, in the praise of Truth and Veracity, and in defiance of
the contrary.

(3.) There in Ingenuity in it. There is a certain bravery of Spirit and true
Courage in speaking the Truth, and a real cowardice in blanching and denying
it. It is only some worldly Hopes, or sordid Fear that does biass the Tongue
from its true Office; which is to be an Interpreter of the Mind. Let no Man
that trades in Lies, pretend to Generosity. Hence all noble Spirits are so
sensible of the Imputation, that they will presently answer the Lie given them
with their Sword: which tho neither true Fortitude nor Piety can ever justify;
yet such their Sensibleness proves, how ingenuous a thing it is to speak the
Truth, and how base a thing to pervert it.

(4.) There is Policy in speaking the Truth, honost Policy; for every Man
should by all good means, maintain and promote his Credit. This is the only way
to make a Man credible: Who will believe one, who he knows is accustomed to
derogate from the Truth? Such a Person shall not be believed, when he speaks
never so truly. He that is punctual in his Words, shall bebelieved in doubtful
things, when the other will be suspected in certain things. Among the very
Turks, the word of a Mohammedan, spoken on the Faith of a Mussulman, weighs
against all Contradiction. And therefore, setting aside the Scripture, there is
great reason for this Veracity, unless ye are content to be esteemed profligate
Wretches, who neither value the esteem of God or Man. Such Persons will find in
the issue, when they have affrighted all that know them from dealing with them,
that Honesty is the best Policy, and that the Reputation of fair dealing
within, is better than the fairest Sign they can hang out.

Three Objections are usually made against all this:

Object. That the Examples of others does encourage us sometimes to spare the
Truth. We read of many in the Scripture, that have trip'd in this kind: Abraham
himself, and Isaac, Rahab, David, and such like. And we daily see it done by
thousands; and surely then we may venture upon it as well as they.

Answ. That some holy Persons have been guilty this way, cannot be denied: but
it is observable, that it was generally for Fear, never for Gain: So Abraham,
David, Rahab, etc. Again; It is God's Word, and not good Men's Examples, which
we are to be guided and judged by: You can produce the instances of their Sins,
but you know not the bitterness of their Repentance. Again; when you are
mustering up Scripture-Examples, omit not that Lie of Ananias and Saphira, Acts
5. 8. which cost them both their Lives. Tell me, says Peter, whether ye sold
the Land for so much? and she said, Yea, for so much; and never spoke another
word. And then for the commonness of this Sin by others, it is an Objection to
be answered with Tears; it is too frequent, which is an Aggravation of the
Fault, and so far enough from excusing it. We are taught other Doctrine out of
the Scripture of Truth, Exodus 23. 2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do
evil. But if you will needs do as the most do, you must resolve to go where
most do go, and where all Liars are tormented for ever.

Object. 2. The smallness of the Sin excuses us. Lying is not Swearing, nor
Killing or Stealing; there can be no great hurt in it, for we do no great hurt
by it.

Answ. 1. Let the Sin be never so little, the Image and Superscription of the
Devil is upon it. For he is a Liar, and the Father of it, Joh. 8. 44.

2. If it were so small a Sin as you pretend; pray how many little Rents can
you be content to be made in your Garments? how many little Motes will any of
you rest with in your Eye? how many little Wounds will you brook in your Flesh?
and should we be more tender of every thing than of the precious Soul? Besides,
let me tell you,

3. That a little Sin allowed, justified and pleaded for: is more intolerable
than a greater Sin that is disallowed and disowned.

But lastly, this Sin is not so small as you make it; For as it renders a Man
most unlike to God, whose grand Attribute is Truth; So it is ranked among those
Sins which he is said particularly to hate, Prove. 6. 16. A proud Look, alying
Tongue; and there is so much Atheisin and Hypocrisy included in a Lie, that all
Liars are ranked with Murderers, Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and lodged with them
in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone for ever: Rev. 21. 8.

Object. 3. Necessity compells us to it: We can neither buy nor sell without
somewhat of it; neither will People believe us when we speak never so truly,
and so we are forced to lie; there is no trading, or at least no gaining a
sufficient Livelihood without it.

Answ. 1. There is no lawful Calling but may be followed with Truth and with a
good Conscience: they that plead the contrary, do tacitly make the holy God to
be the Author of Sin; an Inference to be abhorred as much as he abhors the thing
it self. Nothing can make Sin needful. Peter's Lie to save his Life did not
justify it, he wept bitterly for it. And if it were a Crime to lie to save his
Life, can the pretense of a Livelihood excuse you in it? Cursed is that Trade
that cannot be followed without Sin. But your case is otherwise. How many
conscientious Persons are there in your very Trades, that had rather die than
lie? If People will not believe you when you tell the Truth, much less will
they, when you tell Lies. Besure, whatsoever is gotten by your lying, is cursed
Gain; Prove. 21. 6. The getting of Treasures by a lying Tongue is a Vanity
tossed to and fro of them that seek Death. They that seek Death and
Destruction, in this course are sure to find it.

III. I come now in the Third Place, to declare how this Veracity should be
exercised by the Tradesman. And that we may not strain this Duty too far; you
may know that he is not obliged hereby imprudently to declare always all the
Truth he knows; and consequently to discover either the just Price that his
Commodity cost him, nor any other Circumstance, which would make to his
Disadvantage: For though you are bound never to speak a Falsehood, yet you are
not bound always to blurt out all the Truth, except when you are by the
Magistrate lawfully called thereunto. No Man is obliged to reveal the Mysteries
of his Calling; nor to tell where or how he is furnished with such a Commodity;
nor where his Customer may be sped at a cheap rate: Yet herein you must be
governed by that Royal Law, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: and you
are to answer others in all such cases, as you should desire to be answered
your self. And prefer a greater and common Good before a lesser private
Advantage; as the Law of Nature taught that Heathen to judge that the Mariner,
who having got the start of other Ships, which were carrying Corn to a
distressed Island, should scorn to make Advantage of the poor Peoples Ignorance
and Indigence, but plainly tell them of the Supplies that were coming toward
them. In other Cases, tho a Tradesman may not lie upon the Catch to defraud his
Brother, yet he may stand upon his Guard, and not betray or prejudice himself.

1. The Tradesman's Veracity then consists, In not concealing from your
Customer that Truth which by the Law of Equity or Charity you ought to tell
him. If you know any secret considerable Fault in your Commodity, it is not
sufficient that you make what Abatement you think fit for it, but you ought to
discover it to him: for he may, and perhaps upon good Reasons, set a greater
value upon that defect than you do, and be far more prejudiced by it, than your
Abatement comes to: Or if you know any other cause, whereby you may be
reasonably assured that the Bargain will turn considerably to his Prejudice,
and the forbearing of it will not be an equal Prejudice to you; the Law of
Justice and Charity obliges you to give him warning of it. By the same Rule you
ought not to pay to any Man that Coin which is not current, especially to him
that confides in your Sincerity; but fairly tell him your Suspicion of it, for
otherwise you do not indeed pay him the Sum for which you did agree. In all
such cases you would take it well and reckon it for great Integrity, to be
advertised your selves, and then it must needs be highly commendable in you, to
advertise your Neighbor. Say not, that you only do herein as you were done by,
you were deceived in the Coin or Commodity by others, and therefore may now do
the like: For you must not deal with others as you are, but as ye would be
dealt with; and you will find it an unsound Conclusion at last, to deceive an
honest Man, because you have been deceived by a Knave.

2. This Truth and Veracity is showed in shunning all unjust Commendations of
your Commodities. If you do this ignorantly, thinking them to equalize your
Praises, when indeed they do not, you offend in a culpable Mistake, because you
ought to know the real Goodness of your own Commodity; or to hesitate about it,
if it be dubious to you. But if you extol that which you know is not
praiseworthy, or above that which you know it deserves, it is then a notorious
Offense against Justice, Charity and Truth. Thus, to affirm that a Commodity is
new, or of the newest Fashion, when it is old; that it is the best in Town,
when you know there is better. To cry up this Book, merely because you printed
it, or this Edition, because you would gladly sell it, when you know the
intrinsic Goodness of the thing does not answer it, are all Trespasses against
that Veracity and Truth, which should be current between Man and Man.

3. This Veracity will teach the Tradesman, To avoid all unjust Disparagements
of a Commodity* Thus we read, Prove. 20. 14. The Buyer says, it is naught, it
is naught, but whon he goes away he boasts. But the Gain you reap by such
Artifices, will not balance the Guilt you contract by such double dealing.
Forge not therefore any causless Exceptions; for your own Conscience must needs
(if you have any left) give the Lie to your Tongue. Things which are manifestly
good, allow them their due Commendations, otherwise you will more disparage
your own Judgment, or your Sincerity, than the things themselves: Things that
are evidently faulty you may plainly, but withal modestly mention their
Defects. But be not too confident of wha^ is doubtful, but make use of due
Caution in respect of your selves, and the like due Charity i^ respect of your
Neighbor. Ruin not his Credit, because he has sometimes a Commodity* which
will not pass the muster: nor aggravate a Defect above Demerit of it, for that
savours of Spite and Uncharitableness. You may think that your Tongues are your
own, and being voluble, by them you can enhanse or depress what you please; but
all this is but a sort of Cheating, which the less it falls under the
Cognizance of Man's Law, the more it is obnoxious to the Justice of God.

4. This Veracity of the Tradasman consists, In abhorring to affirm or say what
is Untruth, either about the Kind, or Price of his Commodity. This is so plain
a case, that one would think none so base and wicked, as to offend herein. But
daily Experience proves, that this is too usual. To pretend a Commodity is of
one Kind or Country, and it is of another; that it is faultless, when you
strive only to cover them; to affirm that the Beast is sound, when he is lame;
that the Manufacture is of such an excellent Artist's Work, when it is not;
that is cost you two Shillings, when it never did; that you cannot afford it
under such a Price, when your own Conscience does or may tell you, that you
can; that you have refused so much for it, when it was never offered you; that
you never sold it at such a low rate, when you know that you have. These and
all such like Affirmations, are directly against Truth and Veracity; and you
have strongly stupefied and imposed upon your own Conscience, that dare trade
with these Falsities. Does not the God of Truth stand by you and hear every
Word? and may not he justly, how soon you know not, cram these Lies down your
Throats and choke you with them? Well, his Forbearance is no Acquittance. If,
for every Lie, your Tongue were boar'd through with an hot Iron, would you be
so brisk with them? Alas, without a sound Repentance, a far greater Torment is
prepared for you. Resolve therefore, if Truth will not maintain you, Falsehood
never shall. An Estate gotten by Deceit, will deceive him that gets it. And the
Wise Man has determined, That a poor Man is better than a Liar: Prove. 19. 22.

5. This Veracity is to be showed by the Tradesman, In forbearing all
Equivocations and disguises in his Transactions. For, as you have heard, the
end of Speech is to notify your Minds to others; when therefore it is clouded
with Ambiguities, purposely to deceive another, the end is frustrate, and your
Neighbor unjustly imposed upon. It Is true, a Man, as above, is not bound
always to impart all he knows; Prove. 29. 11. A Fool utters all his Mind: but
a wise Man keeps it in till afterward: But he is never permitted to deal in
mental Reservations and Equivocations, whereby to deceive his Neighbor, which
are nothing else but painted Lies. Your ambiguous Words are in one Sense true,
it may be, but in another, false; and you present them to him in one Sense, and
keep them to your selves in other; or perhaps you will speak out so much as may
deceive another, and reserve so much in you own Mind, as, were it added to the
rest, would contradict what you have said. Now these, as they are equally
injurious with downright Lies to them with whom you deal; so they are equally
abhorred and avoided by the upright Tradesman. For as a Thief disguised, is
fully as dangerous as barefaced; so all such sophistical trafficking is as
destructive to Justice and Honesty, as plainer Falsehoods. The upright
Tradesman, tho he should be a wise Man, yet he is a plain Man; he will speak as
he thinks, and do as he speaks. It savours strong of Knavery, when a Man's
Speech is like Apollo's Oracles, which may be understood either in a fair, or
in a fatal Sense. Would any of you be so trapan'd? or be pleased with such
double-dealings? why then renounce such dealing your selves: Be Israelites
indeed, in whom there is no gule.

6. The Veracity in the Tradesman extends to the Restraining the multiplicity
of Words. The Scripture does every where condemn a multitude of Words, and
says, Prove. 10. 19. In the multitude of Words there wants not Sin: but he
that refraineth his Lips, is wise. And Eccles. 5. 3. That a Fools Voice is
known by multitude of Words: Yea, Prove. 29. 20. See thou a Man that is hasty
in his Words? there is more hope of a Fool, than of him. And on the contrary,
Prove. 17. 27. He that is wise, spares his Words. And yet what a flood of Words
are commonly poured out about the smallest Traffic? Amongst which, there must
needs be many vain and unprofitable. The Seller commonly asking unreasonably
high, while the Buyer does as commonly bid unreasonably low; and a long ado ere
they can come near one another. Yea oftentimes he that sells, shall
peremptorily affirm, he will take no less than he has spoken; and he that is
buying as possitively concluding, that he will give no more than he has
offered; and yet both of them shall recede from their Words, ere they have
done. Now tho I cannot say that every altering of a Man's Price, either in the
Seller or the Buyer, is a Lie; for you have heard that a Lie is a falsifying
the Truth with an Intention to deceive, whereas this when it is justifiable is
only to ask too much, that the Chapman may give just enough, or only to bid too
little, that the Tradesman may not have too much; iniquum petere, ut aequum
ferat: Yet great Caution must herein be used, lest you take an unjust Price as
well as ask it, or at least occasion others to think you do so: but as our
Savior says in a like case, Mat. 5. 37. Let your Communication be yea, yea;
nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil: So certainly these
Methods proceed from that Injustice, which Men either have in themselves, or
suspect to be in others; or else why might not any such Traffic be dispatched
in two Words, as well as in two hundreds? And this shows how far we are
degenerated from the Primitive Simplicity; for there in one Verse, Genesis 23. 15.
Ephron says, The Land is worth four hundred Shekels of Silver: and in the next
Verse Abraham weighed to Ephron the Silver without more ado. The like in the
case of Boaz, of David and Araunah, of Jeremiah and Hanameel. And you will find
that frequent recedings from your Word, will endanger to forfeit your
Credibility, and it were much better and easier for Men to be at a word in
their Bargains; unless upon a stricter Observation of the Commodity, there is
visible cause to alter it. Say not, there is no trading without this Custom;
for we see, that de facto considerable trading is dispatched by diverse Persons,
without either many Prices, or many Words, which shows that the thing is
possible, and surely should be endeavored by all discreet and conscientious
Persons.

IV. And here let us make Application of this Point.

1. Let all Tradesmen reflect upon and take due Cognizance of their own
Behavior in this matter. Have you in the foresaid Particulars lived in all
good Conscience to this day? Have you always spoken the Truth in your Hearts?
Have you been cunning Hunters, as Esau, or plain Men as Jacob? have you set a
watch before the Door of your Lips, and kept your Mouth with a Bridle? have you
never made Lies your Refuge? nor affirmed any thing, which your Consciences
have contradicted? O judge your selves, that ye may not be judged of the Lord!
Erect a just Tribunal in your own Breasts, and call over your Behavior in your
several Callings; let matters have a fair Trial, and pronounce righteous
Judgment. And if you find your selves faulty, make your Atonement with God; and
make what possible Amends you can, to those that have been deceived by you.
Make true Confessions of your false Equivocations, and rest not, till you have
obtained Pardon through the Blood of Jesus Christ.

2. I am authorized from this Point to speak Reproof and Terror to all those
Tradesmen that do love or make a Lie. There are too many that care not what
they say, so that they may gain by it; affirm any thing, deny any thing, cloud,
color, equivocate, deny their own Words, contradict themselves, and their
Consciences, prostitute their Credits, cheat and injure their Brethren; and all
this to get that Wealth, from which they may be rent, or it rent from them in a
moment. Is this Wisdom? Is this Religion? Is it Morality? No, none of them.
This is to burn your Fingers, to save yours Snuffers; to suffer your Heads to
be broken, to spare your Helmet: It is to overreach your selves. They that
observe lying Vanities, for sake their own Mercy. It Is ten to one, that this
course will disappoint you in this World: You will at length be detected and
shunned of all Men: Prove. 12. 19. The Lip of Truth shall be estabishled for
ever: but a lying Tongue is but for a moment. God may justly pronounce your
Fate like Moabs, Jer. 48. 30. His Lies shall not so effect it. But if he
please, in Judgment, to prosper a lying Tongue, and that you grow rich thereby,
yet a heavy Curse is entailed upon your Estates. They will be means to feed
your, or your Posterities Sins in this World, and to sink your Souls into
endless Misery in another. Behold Gehazi, 2 Kings 5. His Heart was set upon
Money, no matter how he got it; he makes one Lie to Naaman, and another, to
Elisha, and got the Prize; but he got the Curse of Leprosy with it: let him be
a Pillar of Salt to you. If you value your External Credit, if you value your
Internal Comfort, if you value your Eternal Happiness, buy the Truth and sell
it not, and banish away those lying Lips. You dare not swear; you think, and
that truly, that swearing is an heinous Sin; but lying it is a Peccadillo, a
venial matter: but deceive not your selves; For, Rev. 22. 15. without are Dogs,
and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever
loves and makes a Lie: Behold the Company that Liars are found in, and the
Place whither they are cast. And tho among Sins there is no best, yet there is
a bad, and a worse, and Lying is justly reckoned among the very worst of Sins;
he must have a great measure of Atheism, and very little Life in his
Conscience, that can indulge himself in this Trade; yea, it is worse than
Swearing in some respects: Therein you offend God and hurt your selves; but
herein you offend God, hurt your own Souls, and injure your Neighbor also. If
all this cannot stop your lying Tongues, behold shortly, that shall come to
pass which is written, Psalm. 63. 11. The Mouth of them that speak Lies, shall
be stopped.

3. I exhort you in God's Name and Behalf, to speak Truth every Man with his
Neighbor, seeing you are Members one of another. Let your Words be a true Copy
of your Meaning: Do not row one way and look another, speak one thing and think
another. The People whom God will save, are Children that will not lie; Isa.
63. 8. What Man is he that desires Life, -- keep thy Tongue from evil, and thy
Lips from speaking Guile; Psalm. 34. 12, 13. Study and practice it your selves,
recommend it to your Children, charge it upon your Apprencices. If you permit
them to lie to your Advantage, they will not scruple to lie to your Prejudice.
No, let Justice and Truth have both of them a place, behind your Counters; let
them rule in the Shop, let them accompany you to the Exchange; so shall you
find Favor and good Understanding in the sight of God and Man. When Agur had
but two things to ask of God, this was one of them, Prove. 30. 7, 8. Remove far
from me Vanity and Lies; and then, will God give you the other thing which he
requested, that is, he will find you with Food convenient for you.

To this end, 1. Labor for the true Faith and Fear of God. So you will set the
Lord always before you: and then, sure you dare not utter an Untruth. This will
make you say with holy Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 31. The God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knows that I lie not. Few that
will dare to speak an Untruth, if they know that a stander-by is able to
disprove them. If you had but one dram of Faith or Fear, actually stirring in
your Hearts, you durst not, you could not speak a false thing. He always sees,
tho he be often unseen: He is not far from every one of us. How can you lift up
your Faces to him in Prayer at Night, when you have so affronted his Truth and
Omniscience in the Day? Assure your selves, that the God of Truth will never
bless either a Lie, or a Liar. Learn that Lesson, Prove. 23. 17. Let not thy
Heart envy (or imitate, so it may be rendered) Sinners; they will go their own way:
but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. Place thy self always
before him, and believe every place to be filled with God.

2. Get and keep a truly tender Conscience. This is God's Substitute, and being
in our Bosoms, is at hand to smite when the Tongue trips: even natural
Conscience would go far in this matter. The wise God has placed Conscience and
Shame in us for the bridling of Sin, and of this Sin in particular. Conscience
that stands in awe of God, and Shame that stands in fear of Man; and when these
Bridles are broken by the strength and custom of Sin, Man grows the most
profligate and abominable Creature in the World. But unsanctified Consciences
are very often, either void of Sense, or full of Rage; they are either
slumbring with Security, or roaring with Horror. A renewed Conscience is the
great Preservative, which having smarted for Sin, is tender at the approach of
it again; and so dare not come nigh any of the Avenues of Sin. In the Body, the
Hand can endure a Blow, the Eye cannot endure a Mote; the tenderness of the
part cannot bear it. Conscience is the Eye of the Soul, it is Index, Judex,
Vindex. And therefore beware of baffling, or of bribing your own Consciences.
If they may not speak, they will write; and write bitter things. And some Care
must be used tothis end, you must with that holy Apostle, Act. 24. 16. Exercise
your selves herein, to have always a Conscience void of Offense toward God and
toward Men.

3. And lastly; You must Love your Neighbor as your selves. Delicatares est
amor; we are impatient of any Injury done to those whom we love. It is base
Self-love, that begins and ends at home. No, he that rightly loves himself,
truly loves his Neighbor: And every Man is our Neighbor. O the Excellency of
our Religion! It teaches us to be sober, righteous, and godly here, as well as
how to be happy hereafter. It teaches us to be wise, and yet upright. Nature
teaches us to love our selves, but Grace teaches us to love our Neighbor as
our selves; and what Man ever told a known Falsehood to himself? But whither is
this lovely Grace fled and gone? Of old the Christians, Occultis se notis
norunt and amant mutuo pene antequam noverint; as Min. Faelix observes, but now
it is not so. Let every Man revive this noble Grace in his own Heart. Let all
Tradesmen walk according to this Rule; you are supported by others, be willing
that others be supported by you; you that expect plain dealing, use it. And if
you have any true Love to God, or to your Neighbor, or to your own Souls,
putting away Lying, speak every Man Truth with his Neighbor: for we are
Members one of another:

SECT. 5. Of Contentedness in a Trade.
A Fifth Requisite to the right managing of your Trades, is Contentedness. This
the Apostle aims at in that Exhortation, 1 Cor. 7. 20. Let every Man abide in
the same Calling, wherein he was called. For it seems that some raw Christians
had a conceit, that the Christian Religion dissolved all precedent Obligations,
that the believing Wife was ipso facto released from her Infidel Husband; that
it was unlawful and unreasonable for a Christian Servant, to continue in his
outward Servitude. And the Servants by the Jewish and Roman Laws were in such
Slavery, that Flesh and Blood was glad of such an occasion for Liberty. Now to
rectify this Mistake, says the Apostle, Let every Man (of what Birth, or Parts,
or Grace soever he be, let him) abide in the same (outward) Calling, wherein he
was (inwardly) called: Tho it be mean, let him stoop to it; tho it be
laborious, let him buckle to it; yea tho he be a Bond-Slave, yet let him be
quiet, till God that called him into it, call him out of it. Like the famous
Epictetus, of whom it was said, that he was Servus and mutilus and pauper, sed
Diis Charus. And here, I shall,

I. Give a Description of this Requisite. II. Give some Reasons for it. III.
Show you wherein the Practice of it is expressed, in a Man's Trade and Calling.
IV. Make some Use of the whole.
1. For the Description of it, as it relates to this Subject; It is a cheerful
Satisfaction in the Place and Calling, wherein God has set us. There is a
natural Stupidity in some Persons, and a moral Obstinacy in others; and there
is a merely Rational Contentment in others; but this which I am speaking of, is
a work of God's Spirit; a Mystery which is learned only in the School of true
Religion, whereby the Soul, the whole Soul is inwardly satisfied with God's
wise and holy Will, whereby he has chosen a Man's Profession for him; his
Satisfaction does not so much proceed from the Excellency of his Calling, as
from the declared Will of his heavenly Father, who has placed him therein. He
is at rest in his Mind, as far as it fit to be at rest, in this sinful and
miserable World. This is that hard Lesson which the Apostle Paul had learned,
Phil. 4. 11. For I have learned in whatsoever State I am, therewith to be
content: And an hard Lesson it is to Flesh and Blood, and rarely learned. Ever
since our Father Adam was unsatisfied with all the Delicacies of Paradise, none
of his Posterity could be well content with their Condition; unless God by his
Grace renew their Nature, and limit their Desires. Men may think, and many have
imagined, that if they were in another Estate, in another Condition, they
should be well, and never desire more: but they have found, that the Heart of
Man is herein, like a Bladder, which the more it is filled, the more it
stretches. And you will scarce find an individual Person, unless truly
mortified, that is at full ease in his present State; but hankering after some
absent Enjoyments. The Child in love with the Liberty of the Parent, weary of
his Restraint; the Parent's weary of his Cares and Labors; the Unmarried not
content with their Condition, and the Married less with theirs; the Poor envies
the Plenty of the Rich, and the Rich admire the Ease and Quiet of the Poor; and
so it is among all other sorts, and amongst the rest, our Tradesman is not
free. He is prone to prefer not only the Gown or the Sword before the Apron;
but this and that Trade before his own. So that it is evident, that
Contentedness is an hard Lesson, and not to be learned but from the holy Spirit
of God; and that there is some need to assist the Tradesman in this difficult
Point: We shall therefore demonstrate the great Reasonableness and Necessity of
it.

II. The Reasons to enforce this Requisite are either, 1. In respect of God:
Or, 2. In respect of our selves. There are many other Topics, whereby to urge
it, but I shall content my self with these.

1. In respect of God.

(1.) His plain Command of this frame in general; Heb. 13. 5. Let your
Conversation be without Covetousness; and be content with such things as ye
have: For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. No Command
can be more plain; nor any Reason to a Christian more strong, than God's
Command. Be content with such things as Ye have; not such things as Others
have, others have this and that, such a Trade, such a House, such a Table, such
Clothes; but be ye content with such things as ye have. Again, think not what
things ye have had; you have lived so and so, have fared better, and lived
every way higher, before your Marriage, before the Fire, in your younger days;
but be content with such things as ye now have. Again, he says not, be content
with such things as ye would have; say not, If I had but a better House, a
better Trade, greater Custom, lesser Hazard, more Acquaintance, I should do
well, I should be content, but be ye content with such things as ye have, and
adds a most satisfactory Reason: For I have said, I will never leave thee, nor
for sake thee. I am enough, he that cannot be content with Me, my Favor and
Grace, is hard, yea impossible to be pleased.

(2.) His wise Providence, which has placed you in this your Calling in
particular. Your Parents or Friends, who disposed you therein, were directed or
permitted by the all-wise God; who knew what Calling was best and fittest for
you. None of these things are brought about without God, and if you belong to
him, your Condition is good for you; and if you do not, it is but too good for
you. All things (and then all Callings) work together for good, unto them that
love God. Besides, he has Sovereign Dominion over you, and all his Creatures;
and accordingly where he places them, there they must cheerfully abide. As the
Soldier must stand in the rank or post, where his Captain places him, how
difficult or dangerous soever; much more must you be satisfied with the
standing your heavenly Lord and Master allots you: you know not what Service
God has for you to do in that Capacity, or what Blessings you are there to
receive; Psalm. 47. 4. He shall choose our Inheritance for us: And when he has
chosen it, shall we enter our Dissent, question his Goodness, or correct his
Wisdom?

(3.) The Glory of God is another Reason. You should be contented in your
Calling, because you may glorify God in it. There is no lawful Calling, but God
is honored and served in it. Your Wisdom, your Patience, your Diligence, your
Uprightness do glorify God exceedingly; for all men must know, that every good
thing, every virtuous Disposition, every good and perfect Gift (if you trace
them up to their proper Spring, they) come from the Father of Lights; and
consequently they infallibly prove him to be holy and wise, and good; and so
they glorify him. Hence even Servants are said, Tit. 2. 10. by their showing
all good Fidelity, to adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior. The meanest Trade
may as truly contribute to the Honor of God, as the least Finger or Toe does
to the Beauty and Welfare of the Body. It is not only the Beams and Pillars,
but the very Pins that are serviceable in the Building. And therefore while you
may bring Glory to God in your Calling, you should be very well content in it.
For that is the highest End and Honor we can reach unto in this World, to set
forth the Praises of him, who has called us: 1 Pet. 2. 9.

2. Other Reasons for this Contentedness in your Trade, are in respect of your
selves.

(1.) Your own Deserts. Do but consider what poor Creatures you are, what
unprofitable Servants you have been to God, what great Sinners against him; and
you will see reason enough for you to be content in your place, tho it were ten
times worse than it is. If good Jacob, when he had occasion for the best
Arguments he had, was forced to say, I am not worthy of the least of all the
Mercy thou have showed me: Genesis 32. 10. What pretense can you have to expect
every thing to your Mind, when you are not worthy of the common Air, the
hardest Crust, or the meanest Rags? It Is rank Pride that feeds out
Discontentedness. The humble Man concludes, here is even a poor Trade, a sorry
House and mean Fare, but it is good enough for me. I wonder I am not begging,
or starving, or roaring for Pain and Misery. Some others speed better, but I
verily think they deserve better: However, I am sure I deserve nothing; and
therefore having something, I am well content. Having Food and Raiment, let us
be therewith content: 1 Timothy 6. 8.

(2.) Your own Mortality: A great Argument to Contentedness. Whatever
Exceptions you have unto, or Disasters in your Callings, yet this may quiet
you, that your time in this World is but short, in comparison of Eternity. This
makes the Apprentice content with all his Hardship, that after his seven Years,
he hopes to live happily. You know not whether your Straits, and Troubles, or
Life shall last so long; and then afterward you have the prospect of a far
longer Felicity. If you fear God, there is but one Life between you and a Crown
of Glory, and that Life is wearing away apace. When a few Years are come, then
(says Job) I shall go to the place, where the wicked cease from troubling, and
where the weary be at rest: Job 3. 17.

(3.) Your own Comfort. For Contentedness produces that inward Comfort and
Tranquillity of Heart, which is not to be found in the great Houses, Shops, and
Wealth of those that are above you. It is the poor Tradesman's Riches; It fills
his Table, warms his Bed, trims his Apparel, gives him Music, it is his
Country House, makes his Shop a Palace, his Work pleasant, and his Sleep sweet:
When he can get no Money, no Trade, no Trust, yet this Grace supports him, and
gives him Songs in the Night. In short, there is no outward Comfort which you
want, but Contentment supplies it: Whereas on the contrary, if this be wanting;
the best Trade, House, or Estate will not make a Man happy. You see the
Merchants fine Clothes, but you see not the Disquiet of his Mind; your
Neighbor has a great House, a fuller Table, a softer Bed; but if he have not
this Furniture, this Dish, this Pillow, his Life is but a burden to him. This
always makes the best of a bad matter, believes God's Promises, hopes for the
performance, considers his own Unworthiness, sees the Emptiness of all outward
things; looks not at those that are above him, but at those below him, and
studiously keeps a Calm within, whatever Troubles he meets with abroad. It is
so needful to a Christian, that the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6. 6. ranks it with
Godliness; Godliness with Contentment is great Gain; as if, even Godliness it
self, were not sufficient without Contentment. Many other Arguments to press
this matter might be used, but they are fully insisted on by Others, that I
need to enlarge no further hereupon.

III. I proceed, in the third place, to show to the Tradesman, wherein this
Contentedness is to be practiced by him.

And that, 1. In a cheerful undergoing the Inconveniences, and Difficulties in
his Trade. There are some Inconveniences in a trading Life in general, compared
with some other Callings; what Condition in this World is wholly free from
them? One Inconvenience is, that your Business lies among all sorts of Men,
where you meet with much Falseness and Wickedness, Deceit and Disappointments.
This meeting with a discontented Spirit, makes it outwardly to flame, or
inwardly to smother. And the Man cries, Who would lead such a Life? never was
Man thus vexed perpetually; this Misery is never to be endured, etc. But now
Contentment prevents, or pacifies this Disquiet; and concludes, what cannot be
cured must be endured: If I cannot make others better, yet they must not make
we worse; I will mourn for that which I cannot mend; tho I am sorry that the
World is so bad, yet I congratulate my Hopes of a better, and I know that this
Life is my State of Exercise, and not of Rest, and so will be content.

Another Inconvenience which the Tradesman often meets with, is, bad Servants:
They are idle, careless, unfaithful, vicious. No sooner is his Back turned, but
his Business is neglected, his Goods imbezelled, and he loses more at home,
than he, with all his Care, can get abroad. Now a discontented Man upon this is
all on a flame, throws the House out at the Windows; seeing he cannot reform
them, torments himself, and cries out upon the Miseries of a Trade, and can
take no rest. But now Contentment will (after you have used all fit means to
reduce these ungracious Creatures, or, that being ineffectual, to discharge
them: When there is no remedy this will) make Peace within, and teach you to
possess your Soul in Patience; you must even renew your Endeavors to convince
and cure them: you must diligently both watch and pray for them, you must
mingle sweet Advice with bitter Reproaches: you must manifest, that you do
truly love them, and not your self only; and in case the Success answer not
your Expectation, you must conclude with the Prophet, Jer. 10. 19. Woe is me,
for my hurt, my Wound is grievous; but I said, Truly this is a Grief, and I
must bear it.

Another Inconvenience incident to a Trade is, that you must have a Dependence
upon many. If it be an Handicraft, you depend upon many Masters; if a selling
Trade, on many Work-folks, and many Customers; and these are some of them
fantastical, some penurious, some troublesome, some imperious, some inconstant,
some idle, and many very humorous. Now if a discontented Mind lodge within, this
is Fuel for it. No Man would be a Slave to such People. I must please every
one, no body cares to please me: I believe every body, no body will believe me.
I am weary of my Life, 'twere better to drive the Plough, or row at the Oars,
than drive a Trade. But Contentedness stills the Tempest with these
Considerations; God has set me in this Employment, these are things that are
incident to others in my Vocation, and ever have been. I know where my own Shoe
pinches me, but I know not the Troubles of others. These are not my Sins, and
any thing is better to be born than Sin: What have I Wisdom, Patience, and
Humility for, but to be exercised on such occasions? why should I expect Men to
be without human Infirmities? I that have Frailties of my own, surely may
endure them in others: Since the holy God bears long with the Follies of Men,
why should not I, that am obnoxious to his Justice as well as they? And
therefore I Will take up my own Burden, and Contentment will help me to carry it
easily.

These are some of the Inconveniences that are common to most Trades: But
besides these, particular Trades have their proper Inconveniences; and every
Tradesman is apt to enlarge and pore upon his own, because he feels them, and
smarts under them; not considering that there may be far greater Troubles,
which belong to others, and that every Man has his Load. And tho these are the
Fruits of Sin, yet the infinite Goodness of God permits and ordains these to be
occasions for the Exercise of Grace, and Means to wean us from this World, and
to prepare us for a better.

The like is to be said of the Difficulties which the Tradesman meets with.
Some Trades require hard Labor, others continual Care; sometimes he has too
much Work, and sometimes too little. One day a Bill is brought him, and he
wants Money; next day, he goes to dun his Debtors, and can get nothing. Now
there is no Relief in these cases, but Christian Patience and Contentedness.
You must go out of this World, if you would be free from Difficulties: For Man
is born unto Trouble, as the Sparks fly upward; Job 5. 7. Shall the Earth be
forsaken for thee? and shall the Rock be removed out of his place? Job 18. 4.
Must a new kind of World be created to give give you Satisfaction? No, no, your
business is to employ your Wit, your Time, and your Strength in that Condition
wherein you are placed, and humbly to submit to the Providence of God; and to
assure your selves, that God will either lighten your Burden, or strengthen
your shoulder; that no Evil shall befall you, out of which he will not bring
some good to you; and in short, that innocent Troubles are better than sinful
Triumphs.

2. This Contentedness of the Tradesman is showed, In a thankful Acknowledgment
of the Excellencies and Advantages of his Calling. For herein God has in great
Wisdom set the one over against the other (Conveniences to balance
Inconveniences) to the end, that Man should find nothing after him; Eccles. 7.
14. no just cause to complain of his Proceedings. And tho the Tradesman must be
content to give place to some other Callings, that move in a Sphere above him;
the Stars do not envy the Sun and Moon; yet he has many Advantages, let him
not grow proud by them, above others that are below him. And these you ought to
take thankful notice of, since it is both a sign and means of your
Contentedness.

And, first in general, The Calling of a Tradesman is more comfortable for the
Body, than diverse other Callings: unless it be some of the more servile Trades,
for the most part, you meet with less Toil than the poor Husbandman, and less
Danger than the Soldier. There are few of you that are kept from sleep by the
Aches of your Bones in daily Labor, or that will be content with the Fare or
Apparel of the Countryman; you know best how it is within, but one may easily
see by your outside, that you have the advantage of him every way; and
therefore you may be well content.

Again; Your Calling is more friendly to the Mind; you have generally a more
ingenious Education, than labouring-Persons; and when Apprentices, you are
fixed in Families, and among Persons where you have opportunity to cultivate
your Parts. In many Trades, you have much spare time, wherein by reading and
converse you may accomplish your selves above the ordinary sort of Men; not
that I would encourage any of you to extravagate, or wander out of your proper
place; but therein you have room enough for the exercising of your Invention,
Judgment, and other Faculties, and thereby to advance your Trades to greater
Perfection, and your own Credit and Profit therewithal.

Again; You have in your way, more opportunity to get good, than the poor
Husbandman. For spiritual Good, which is the main, you are usually feated in
such Places, Cities, or Towns, where God's Word is most constantly and
seriously preached; whereas many poor Husbandmen can seldom reach an edifying
Sermon; you converse among good Books, which carefully read, do convey Light
and Heat into your Souls, when many poor Countrymen are happy, if they can
procure a Bible, and a Practice of Piety, and that is all. And then you are
commonly seated among many sober and godly Neighbors, by whose sweet Company
and Converse, you have much Comfort and Benefit, and so beguile the Tediousness
of your Pilgrimage; whereas the poor Rustic has very few near him, that can
be helpful to him. And then for outward good things, you have a great
advantage. For if God add his Blessing to your Prudence and Diligence, you may
arrive at a greater Estate, and make better Provision for your Posterity, then
the Countryman is ever like to do. If he can but get plain Food and Raiment,
pay his Rent, and bring up his Children to read and write, and then advance
them to some Trade among you, it is the highest of his Ambition; but you many
times obtain a plentiful Estate, and prove a Credit and Succor to all your
Relations.

And then, lastly; You Tradesmen have a great Opportunity to do good; which
next the beatifical Vision is Man's greatest Honor and Happiness: You have
opportunity to educate and instruct diverse young ones that are committed to
you, and to direct them by your Counsel and Example into the way of Piety and
Virtue; whereby they may, when they swarm out of your Hive, carry those Habits
with them, which will enable them to do worthily in Ephrata, and be famous in
Bethlehem. And if the Lord do bless you in your Employments, you are enabled to
do much good both for the Church and Commonwealth. It was once the Character
of a Bishop, that he could not preach, but he could make Preachers by his
liberal Maintenance and Education of Persons for that Calling: So though the
Tradesman cannot preach, yet he can support and encourage Preachers; he can
settle a Maintenance on the poor Vicarage or Chapel where he was born; or
erect a School, and endow it, for the Instruction of poor Men's Children in
reading and writing at least; or an Hospital for the decrepit poor in the place
of his Nativity; or at least, he can bestow a quantity of Bibles, and other
good Books, upon those that would read them, if they had them. He can educate
and prefer some or other of his poor Kindred, and perhaps make his old Parents
bless God for their Relief and Assistance by him. And thanks be to God, there
be many Instances of such Feats, which the Tradesman has done in every
Country. And these are the Advantages of a Tradesman's Calling in general,
which they should thankfully acknowledge, and which should render them very well
content with their Condition.

Besides, every Tradesman should study and collect the particular Advantages of
his own Calling. If it be laborious, then it is usually more free from Cares,
and less subject to Losses; if you spend your time in buying and selling only,
then you have commonly more Time, and less Toil. In some Trades you are brought
into great Acquaintance, with the Mysteries of Nature; in others, with the
Curiosities of Art; in some, you learn to know Men, in others, Things. Now the
Tradesman should muster up and survey all these Excellencies and Advantages of
his Calling, both to demonstrate and to further his Contentment therein, and so
should conclude, I am well if I can see it, my Calling is but too good for me.

3. This Contentedness is to be shown, in a patient bearing of the Losses and
Disappointments that befall him in his Trade. And here our Tradesman has
occasion for all Grace he has: For sometimes he meets with great losses in his
Goods themselves; perishing either by their own Corruptibility, or by the
Carelessness of his Servants; sometimes he has great Losses by the Breaking of
his Chapmen or Correspondents; and sometimes merely by the Providence of God,
permitting either dreadful Storms at Sea, or wicked Pirates to swallow them up.
Now if God's Grace do not support his Spirits under these Losses; he frets
himself in pieces with impotent Vexation: he falls out with his Trade, with
Men, yea with God himself, and injoys nothing of what he has left, because he
is deprived of what he has lost. He inlarges upon the Folly of Trading, he
condemns all Mankind, because he finds some of them dishonest; he extols every
Man's Calling but his own; he frets at the Providence of God; nay, almost
questions whether there be any Providence, because it frowns upon him; quarrels
with his Meat, his Drink, his Servants, his Wife, yea with himself; because
(forsooth) he could not prophesy; he could not foresee and foretell how the
Seas or Men would prove: whereas by virtue of Christian Contentment, the
Tradesman, tho he be not insensible of his Losses, yet he labors to digest
them; and things looking ill, he will not make them worse by his own Folly.

He considers the Uncertainty of all worldly Employments, and of all human
Affairs, and that there is no sure trading, but to Heaven; he concludes that
tho he will not do it, yet God has set Bounds to his Estate, how much will do
him good, and that he takes, nor suffers others to take any way, but what he
knows would do him hurt. He knows that when he bears a Loss with Cheerfulness,
God will the sooner make it up, than when he murmurs: He remembers that he
undertook this his Calling with a supposition of such Events as these. Tho he
smart and have loss by the failing of his Neighbor, yet he thanks God that he
is not the Bankrupt himself, and accordingly if he find him not dishonest,
extends Compassion toward him. He knows that Endeavors belong to him, but
Events belong to God, who he is sure is more careful of his good, than he is
himself.

And therefore, when he has examined his own Heart and Ways, and mourned for
the Sins which have deserved and procured the Affliction, he satisfies himself
in the Will of God, refers the matter wholly to him, and rests contented, eats
and drinks, and sleeps as cheerfully as before. Thinks he, if my Happiness did
lie in these things, I might repine at my Losses; or, if Man's Life did consist
in the abundance of what he possesses, I were in a forlorn Condition: but my
Happiness is in God, he is the Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever:
Or if my own Vices had brought me low, my Idleness or Debauchery, my Pride or
Lusts, there were cause enough of Dolor and Discontent. But the Faults of
others shall never make me fall out with my self. And therefore whatever Losses
or Disappointment I meet with, I Will be content.

4. This Contentedness is to be exercised, in watching against the contrary
Temptations. Those Vices which do oppose and thwart this excellent Temper. And
they are,

(1.) Ambition, whereby you will be tempted to reach at things too high for
you: When a Man's Heart is too big and too high for his Calling, he is never at
ease. The Shoe is uneasy, but it is because the Foot is swelled. This ruined
our first Parents, and this ruins many of their Posterity. It is true, a
Tradesman may modestly aim at a convenient Pitch, yea, so that he do it soberly
and honestly, let him hopefully endeavor to attain the highest degree of
Greatness attainable in his own Calling; but this Endeavor so qualified, will
not make him restless and uneasy in his present Condition. He is very well, but
yet hopes for better; that he may be in a better Capacity to do good, and
rectify what he sees amiss in the Employment. He does not, he ought not to aim
only at himself herein. His greatest Ambition is to do good in the World, and
to get well to Heaven.

(2.) The Tradesman ought to watch against Envy; whereby a Man has an evil Eye
at those that seem to be in a better Condition than himself. There Is one in
more Credit than I; another gets far more Money than I; such and such live
without Care and Pains; Riches flow in upon them; they have what Heart can
wish. Sure the World is unequally divided; we are as skilful and diligent, as
honest as they, but they go away with all the Wealth, and we sit down with all
the Labor. See what a House, and what rich Furniture yonder is, how they can
lay up and how they can spend, how they --. And what is all this to thee? Is
thine Eye evil because God's is good? A little Modesty would teach thee that he
has Wisdom to know where to bestow his Gifts. Alas he sees, that thy
Neighbor's high Estate, and thy high Spirit would undo thee: he knows what is
fit for him, and he knows what is fit for thee: he knows that a Competence, and
Heaven at the end of it, is enough for thee, if thou be his Child, and it is
too much, if thou be his Enemy: While you have more than you deserve, you need
not care what God bestows upon others.

And then for those you envy, you know not the Burdens they lie under; you see
their seeming Happiness, but you see not their real Miseries: You envy their
brave Houses, but you see not the Cares, the Fears, and Discontents that
commonly lodge within them; you are vexed at the bravery of their Apparel, but
you would pity them, if you knew the Diseases that are under it. Their Cares
and Troubles are proportionable to their Estates, and so are their Temptations.
A wise Man would not have their Estates a Year, for the Temptations they have
in an Hour; Temptations to Pride, to Flesh-pleasing, to Covetousness, to
Atheism: What Fuel do their Estates lay up for these Sins? And then the
greatness of their Account, and the imminent danger they are in of missing
Heaven at last, makes their Condition to require your Compassion, rather than
your Emulation. Therefore, Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the
Glory of his House is increased: For when he dies, he shall carry nothing
away, his Glory shall not descend after him: Psalm. 49. 16. He that rejoices in
another Prosperity, makes it his own; he that envies at it, robs himself of
what he has to no purpose.

(3.) The Tradesman ought to watch against Covetousness, as a Sin most
repugnant to Contentedness, as is plain in the Scripture before mentioned, Heb.
13. 5. By Covetousness I mean here, An unsatiable desire of Riches; when a Man
will be rich, or else thinks he cannot be happy. And this restless Desire when
it is kindled in the Tradesman's Heart, perpetually torments him; and he has
no content in what he has, for the longing he has for more. This makes him
grudg himself Conveniences, scant his Family of Necessaries, forget the Poor,
and neglect his precious Soul to get Money: grasps after the Shadow, and loses
the Substance. Now what a madness is this? Do Riches make a Man more wise, more
holy, more cheerful, more happy any way? but only that, when they are rightly
got, they more enable a Man to do good. And do you in very deed desire them for
this end? why do you not then, do some good with those you have? I take God to
witness to my Conscience, (said good Mr. Tindal in the Book of Martyrs) I
desire of God to my self no more in this World, than That without which I
cannot keep his Laws. I know you aim at Satisfaction; Every Man's mind would
have Satisfaction, but that will never be got by increasing your Estate, but
only by abating your desires. You may as well content your selves with a
moderate, as with a vast Estate. As Cyneas told Pyrrhus, when he was boasting
how he would conquer Rome, and then Italy, and then Sicily, and then Carthage;
to whom Cyneas, And what will ye do then? O then, says he, we will feast and be
merry: Why so, says he, you may do now every whit as well, without all this
Pain and Danger.

So, that Comfort and Satisfaction, which you promise to your selves after all
your desired abundance, you may every whit as well receive at present. And why
then should you pinch your Bodies, neglect your Souls, trouble your own House,
and only inherit the Wind? For what has Man of all his Labor, and of the
Vexation of his Heart, wherein he has labored under the Sun? For all his Days
are Sorrows, and his Travel Grief; yea, his Heart takes not rest in the Night.
This is also Vanity: Eccles. 2. 22, 23. Wisdom has said, He that loves
Silver, shall not be satisfied with Silver; nor he that loves abundance, with
Increase. And that, when Goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and
what good is there to the Owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with
their Eyes? Eccles. 5. 10, 11. Watch therefore carefully against this
Temptation; if Riches decrease, break not thy Heart for them; if Riches
increase, set not thy Heart upon them. Cheerfully make use of what you enjoy;
bridle your Desires after the World; detest the motion of getting any thing
indirectly; trust in God to supply you, who gives us all things liberally to
enjoy; and still remember, that sincere Charity is the best method to obtain,
and intail an Estate upon you and yours.

(4.) Another opposite to the Tradesman's Contentedness, and which he must
watch against, is, Despondency and Dejection of Mind. And this commonly seizes
upon him, when Trading is dead. He has Goods in his Shop, but no Customers;
waits diligently, and watches for some Employment, but no Money comes: Another
has been at some Cost, and much Pains in his Handicraft, to prepare his Wares;
but knows not how, or when to vend them; and Provision must be had, Rents must
be paid; and the Pond that is always running out, and has no Spring within,
will at length be dry. And hereupon the Tradesman's Heart sinks: he sees, that
neither his Care nor Industry avail him, things grow worse and worse, and he is
not so concerned for present Affairs, as he is sollicitous for the future, what
will become of him and of his Family.

Against this Temptation you must vigorously arm your selves, by acting Faith
upon the Promises of God; who has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee, Heb. 13. 5. That tho the Lions do lack, and suffer hunger; yet they that
seek; the Lord, shall not want any good thing; Psalm. 34. 10. So that if an
affluence of outward things be good for you, ye shall not want it. You are to
know that God has all Men and Things in his Hands, and orders them with
perfect Wisdom and Goodness: That he sometimes permits his dearest Children to
come to Straits, to try their Faith, Hope, and Patience, and their Dependence
on him; whereof the Grasshopper is an Emblem, who is represented sucking Dew and
singing; I content me with this, and hope for better. You must know your
Happiness consists in the Favor and Grace of God: So that, although the
Figtree shall not blossom, neither shall Fruit be in the Vine, yet you may and
ought to rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of your Salvation. Withal you
should consider, That this Dejection is the ready way to let in Mclancholy, and
also Despair, which are miserable Companions; and which will make you a burden
to your selves, and to all your Friends. Rouse up therefore your fainting
Spirits. Attend still upon your Calling, make your Complaint to God, spread all
your Case before him. If you knew what God can do, you would bear up. They that
know his Name, will put their trust in him, for he has never for saken them
that seek him: Psalm. 9. 10. Therefore wait on the Lord, be of good Courage, and
he shall strengthen they Heart; wait, I say, on the Lord.

(5.) Another Temptation that is opposite to this Contentedness, you must
avoid, and that is, Invading other Callings. Contentment may well consist with
your utmost Diligence in your own Calling; but for a Man either to gripe (if
possible) at all the Custom in his own Calling, or to accumulate two or three
Callings, merely to increase his Riches, argues that Man to be far from true
Sobriety and Contentedness with his own.

In some cases, indeed it may be lawful for one Person to follow two or three
Trades. But then, 1. A just necessity must compel you to it; not a greediness
of the World, but a just desire to have a Livelihood, which the one in some
Cases and Places will not afford. And, 2. They must not be inconsistent; if the
one do hinder the other, or both together distract and hinder you from other
indispensable Duties, they are to be esteemed Snares, and to be cashiered
accordingly. The Apostles would not serve Tables, that is, take care about the
Poor, when it hindered them in the Ministry of the Word and Prayer: Acts 6. 4.
Yea, 3. You may not follow them, to the prejudice of the common Good; for you
must not love your selves so, as thereby to exclude your Love to your
Neighbor. Many a poor Family perhaps is sustained by the Trade, which you can
live well enough without. Unless therefore you proceed with these Cautions, you
discover a covetous Discontent in your Calling; and the wise and just God, who
has more Children besides you to provide for, will not hold you guiltless. In
like manner, you must beware of Invading any thing else, that is proper to your
Neighbor: If his House, or Shop be never so convenient and desirable for your
purpose, you must neither desire nor endeavor to procure it, to his Prejudice
and your Advantage: you must not only avoid any unjust, but any scandalous
course to settle your self in it. The wise God has placed him there, and woe to
him that supplants him against God's revealed Will, that is, against Justice,
Equity and Charity.

5. Lastly; The Tradesman's Contentedness in his Calling is showed, in his
steady Continuance in it: whereby, notwithstanding the Trouble, Pains,
Disappointments, Losses, and Crosses he meets with, he constantly abides by it;
and does not without sufficient cause desert it. And this was the case in the
Primitive Times, which the Apostle plainly resolves in that, 1 Cor. 7. 20. Let
every Man abide in the same Calling, wherein he was called. For Ignatius says,
That in his time, many Christian Servants were importunate with the Church,
that at her cost they might, by all means, be made free: They were sick of
their present Callings. Thus many now, when they grow slothful, or meet with
some Check in their Trades, are all on the spur to leave their own Callings,
and betake themselves to some other, or perhaps to none at all.

But he that knows himself to be at God's disposal, and not at his own, will
quiet his Mind in his present Condition, and will not budg, till God that
called him to it, do call him out of it. For as he that goes to Sea, has
resolved beforehand that he must have Storms and Enemies to meet him in that
Seafaring Life; so the Tradesman must reckon upon Discouragements and
Difficulties, (such there is also in all other Callings) and must not be
affrighted by them. How often have I in traveling along one side of a dirty
Lane, verily thought that the other side, if I could cross over to it, was fair
and even? but when with much difficulty I have crossed over the Road unto it,
have found it equally deep and dirty, as that I left. And even so you imagine
that some other Employment would be far more convenient for you, and it looks
so at a distance; but you will find, it may be by too late Experience, that
every Calling has its Troubles and Inconveniences; and if you cannot live upon
that wherein you have been educated, and the Mysteries whereof you know, it is
very unlikely you should make better shift in a way wherein you have far less,
and perhaps no Experience at all. And therefore Divines do conclude that it is
unsafe for any Man to change his Calling, unless it be occasioned by his
Private Necessity, or for the Public Good, wherein also he will never do
wisely or piously, unless he proceed by the Advice of judicious and upright
persons.

IV. And now this Section does require some Application of it.

1. Here then we must implead and reprove the Discontented Tradesman: That is
always either openly murmuring, or inwardly fretting at his Calling. It Is a
great Sin.

(1.) It displeases God. When the Israelites of old were sick of this Disease,
observe how angry God is with them: Exodus 16. 7, 8, 9. five times he repeats
their Murmurings in three Verses, as we commonly repeat a thing that vexes us.
It reflects upon his Wisdom and Goodness. If your Apprentice should be
frequently murmuring, and show Discontent in his place, would you like it well?
does it not reflect upon you? So, and much more does yours, displease your
Master in Heaven.

(2.) It diseases and disquiets your selves; good it does you none, but hurt
every way. The Bullock that is uncustomed to the Yoke, plucks his Neck this and
that way, and frets himself; but this only makes his Shoulders sorer, and
unable to bear it: So Discontent only makes your Burden heavier. And why should
you disquiet your selves in vain? Why should you overlook so many Mercies which
you have, or have had, and pore only upon some few Inconveniences?

(3.) It gratifies the Devil. It incourages that Tempter to tempt you: That
wicked and discontented Spirit watches these Opportunities to tempt you, either
to take some indirect Courses for your Redress, or to ferment you with an
Hatred to God, and possibly to drill you on to Self-Destruction: for he is a
Murderer from the beginning. It must therefore be an odious Sin, that so highly
offends God, that so gratifies the Devil, and that does so much mischief to
your own selves.

2. Be exhorted then to rest content in your Calling. Three things will further
you herein.

(1.) Faith, whereby to believe God's Word, which has said, All things work
together for good, to them that love God: Romans 8. 28. To believe his
Providence, so that all Events in the World are wisely governed; and that, All
the Paths of the Lord are Mercy and Truth (mark it, Mercy and Truth) to them
that keep his Covenant: Psalm. 25. 10. So that as he can do a Sinner no wrong,
so he cannot do his Child any harm. Faith, I say, to appropriate God, and then
you have all things, when you have Him that has all things. They that have not
God, patch a sort of Content out of the Creature; one Creature contributes one
thing toward it, and another Creature contributes another; now if any one part
be away, any one String out of Tune, the Music is spoiled; all the rest cannot
fill up that Defect, and therefore it is a vain attempt to seek Satisfaction in
them: But as Jacob said to Esau, I have all; and having God, so he had. And
then Faith, whereby to believe Eternity, that there is another endless World,
where there will be no Defect, no Grievance, no Cares nor Fears for ever.

(2.) Humility will greatly further you herein. For Discontent is usually a
brat of Pride: Ezekiel. 28. 5. By thy great Wisdom, and by thy Traffic have thou
increased thy Riches, and thine Heart is lifted up because of thy Riches: But
the humble Man concludes, I am nothing, I deserve nothing, I am worse than
nothing; if I can live, that have forfeited my Life, it is very fair. They that
have most, do but live, they have but Food and Raiment, and so have I. This
startled that great Prince, Lewis the 11th of France, who coming incognito to
discourse his Turnspit, and to question him what he got in his Employment, had
this Answer: Says he, I get as much as the King, for the King has but his Life,
and so have I; God feeds the King, and the King feeds me.

3. Prayer is another means: Seek his Grace, seek his Counsel: If your
Contentment be of the right kind, it is won by Prayer. Interrupt your
disquieted Thoughts, and compose your Heart to Prayer. So David in his
Dejections, and he sped accordingly. Recount to him your Difficulties and
Discouragments, and be sure then God will either make you fit for your Calling,
or provide a Calling fit for you. And so much for the fifth Requisite.

SECT. 6. Of Religiousness in a Trade.
THE Sixth Requisite for a Tradesman in his Calling is Religiousness, or true
Piety and Godliness. This compleats him, this crowns him. Here,

I. I shall show the Nature of it. II. The Inducements unto it. III. The
Exercise of it. IV. The Use and Application.
I. For the Nature of it. I do not consider it in this place in its utmost
Latitude, for so it comprehends all the beforementioned Duties. It teaches a
Man to be wise, diligent, just, true, and contented; but here it denotes only a
Man's Behavior toward God; and we may describe it to be, A due respect to God
in Heart and Life. The Scripture in the Old Testament describes it by walking
with God: Genesis 6. 9. And Noah was a just Man, and perfect in his Generation;
and Noah walked with God: He was not only just and exact toward Men, but also
he walked with God; that is, he lived in that Reverence and Respect to God, as
if God had walked with him upon Earth; or, as if he had lived and walked with
God in Heaven. In the New Testament it is called a walking in the Spirit; Gal.
5. 25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit: that is, if we
(or since we) live a Spiritual Life, if we have a distinct Principle of Life,
besides that of Nature; let us walk by the Quickening and Conduct of that good
Spirit; as on the contrary, to walk after the Flesh, is to be acted and guided
by the Motions of our carnal Concupiscence. And we find, that the Grace of God
which brings Salvation, teaches us to live not only soberly, and righteously,
but also godly in this present World; Tit. 2. 12. So that it is not enough for
a Tradesman, that he be discreet and just, etc. as before; but if he design to
be a happy Man here or hereafter, he must be a religious Man, an holy Man, and
that both in Heart and Life.

II. And for Inducements hereunto:

1. Nature teaches it. Religion is as natural to Man as Reason: It is a
Principle so firmly six'd in the Soul of Man, that he can scarce possibly raze
it thence. And tho some barbarous Nations, have mist of the true God; yet there
are none so savage, but that a Sense of Religion cleaves to them. Cicero an
Heathen, could say, Nulla est gens tam fera, nemo omnium tam immanis, cujus
mentem non imbuerit Deorum timor. So that he must divest himself of Humanity,
that denies the Obligation of Religion. It is this that does most clearly
distinguish Men from Beasts, who have some shadow, some approaches to Reason,
but they are utter Strangers to any thing of Religion. It Is true, Education
does cherish and ripen these natural Notions; but if we could conceive a Man to
be brought up from his Infancy, without any Society or Instruction from others;
he would no sooner reflect upon himself, and employ his Faculties, but he would
be sensible of a Power above him, and of a deep Respect thereunto. So that this
is no precarious Business, we need not to enlarge at all, when we propound
Religion to a rational Creature: He must be a Brute that denies it. Now if all
Mankind agree to it, the Tradesman must not think that he is exempt from it,
whom we must suppose to be somewhat refined from the Dregs of Mankind.

2. The Scripture teaches it. It is the great design of the Scripture, to make
Men Religious. And to this end, the Holy Ghost does therein lay down the
clearest Rules, propound the most excellent Examples, produce the strongest
Arguments, and provide the most effectual Means and Helps, that the Wisdom of
God could devise, or the Heart of Man desire. And as Piety and Religion is
there urged upon all Men in general; so also it is pressed upon Men, as they are
distinguished by their particular Callings. So 1 Cor. 7. 24. Brethren, let
every Man wherein he is called, therein abide with God. Mark, let him ahide
with God; that is, cleaving to God still, to whom by his religious Allegiance
he is obliged: Or, not imagining but that he may be godly in it: Or with God,
as if God looked at him, and at his Carriage in his Place: Also with God, that
is, in a godly manner, looking at him and walking with him. So that this Text
which must needs include the Tradesman, does lay an unquestionable Obligation
upon you, to add to your Virtue Godliness. Hereupon it is that the Scripture
checks those severely that say, To day, or to morrow we will go into such a
City, and continue there a Year, and buy, and sell, and get Gain: Jam. 4. 13.
without taking due notice of God. These are some of those Words by which you
may be saved, and by which you must be judged at the last day.

3. Reason teaches it. For,

(1.) Religion is the truest Wisdom: When that wisest of Men, Solomon, had
searched in vain to find out an Happiness for Man, in all the Honor, Riches,
and Pleasures which the World could afford, ( and what can the Man do, that
comes after the King?) he concludes the whole matter in these words, Eccles.
12. 13. Fear God, and keep his Commandments; for this is the whole of Man. This
is his real Wisdom, this is his grand Duty, this is his only Happiness. For
indeed there is nothing does so conduce to our Happiness in this World, as true
Religion. It is the most certain way to Health, to Safety, to Plenty, to true
Pleasure, and to true Honor. Nothing does so much perfect, and regulate the
Faculties of the Soul, nor crown it with that Peace and Tranquillity, as the
Fear of God and true Piety; and then it is plain, that it and it only leads us
to the Fruition of Eternal Happiness both in Soul and Body: Therefore unto Man
be said, Behold, the Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart from Evil,
is Understanding: Job 28. 28. And therefore let every Tradesman be truly
Religious.

(2.) There is the highest Equity in it: And that upon the account of all the
Favors and Blessings which you have received from God, and which you now
possess. Did not that God (whose Fear and Service we are now persuading) place
you in these your Callings? Did not he preserve you in your Apprentiships from
many Dangers, Diseases, and Temptations? Has not he supported you in your
Trades, when many that had better Foundations have bin ruined? Has not he
given you all that Estate ye have? and if that be too little, is not he ready
to give you such and such things? Has not he plucked you out of diverse
Dangers, Pains, Diseases, and kept you alive, when some of your Neighbors
round about you are hid in the Grave? Besides the great things which he has
done for your Souls and for your Families. Now for all this, what does the Lord
your God require of you? Only fear the Lord, and serve him in Truth with all
your Heart, considering what great things he has done for you: 1 Samuel 12. 24.
So that in point of Gratitude, it behooves the Tradesman to be truly Religious.

(3.) There is the soundest Comfort in it. There is, it is true, a kind of
Pleasure in sinful Ways, which bewitches those that follow them; but as it
cannot affect the whole Soul, for there is Conscience in the most profligate,
which as it is vexed in them, in the midst of their Follies, and consequently
their Satisfaction cannot be entire; so it leaves a Sting which is both
inseparable, and unsufferable; and when all is done, this Pleasure is mortal,
and commonly is but momentary; it is but like the crackling of Thorns under a
Pot, which makes a great noise, but is soon extinguished. But now Religion as
it does permit to you all innocent Pleasures, you may have an equal Liberty
with others, to all that is worth the having in them; so it fills the Soul and
entertains all the Faculties thereof, with those Delights, that are most
congruous to them, and also feasts it with the sweet review of an holy Life.
The Fear of the Lord is clean, rejoicing the Heart. It affords Laughter without
a Sting, Mirth without a Reckoning. It will support and comfort you under your
Losses, and give you Songs in the Night, while others are eaten up with their
Cares, or wallowing in their Puddle. And therefore it is your real Interest to
be truly Religious.

(4.) There is the greatest Necessity of it. Our wise and blessed Savior told
Martha, Luke 10. 41, 42. Thou ant careful, and cumbred about many things; but
one thing is needful, which you see was the business of Religion; hearing the
words of Eternal Life. For as sure as you have mortal Bodies, so sure it is,
that you have immortal Souls; and as sure as there is (you see) a visible World
with respect to the Body, so certain is it, that there is an invisible World
for the invisible Soul. Now if you must needs care and labor to sustain the
Body, and it is your common cry, Rent must be paid, Bread must be had; so let
me oppose, our must against yours; God must needs be served, the Soul must
needs be saved; and in order to it, Knowledge must needs be got, Sin must needs
be pardoned and mortified, a new Heart must be procured, and a new Life led;
and here is Religion.

Yea it is necessary for the procuring a Blessing upon all your Affairs; for
Godliness is profitable to all things, having the Promise of the Life that now
is; 1 Timothy 4. 8. If you will truly serve him, he will certainly bless you. He
will establish the Work of your Hands upon you, yea he will establish it, if
you earnestly seek it: Psalm. 90. 17. All that he does shall prosper; Psalm. 1.
3. Survey the Book of God, and you will generally find, when the Kings were
most religious, they were then most prosperous; 2 Chronicles. 26. 5. And as long as
Uzziah sought the Lord, the Lord made him to prosper: See the whole 112th
Psalm. Indeed one may prosper by other Courses, but that Gain is clear Loss,
and the Prosperity of such Fools shall destroy them. And you should do well to
consider, whether many of your Losses, and Crosses, and Decays be not the just
Punishment of your Neglects in Religion. For when the People of God of old
neglected God's Service; Hag. 1. 6. He that earned Wages, earned Wages to put
into a Bag with Holes. God can easily blast your most effectual Endeavors
about this Life, if you be negligent about the things of a better, and so you
may come to lose two Worlds, for want of one Religious Heart.

Object. 1. It may be you will object the Difficulty of Religion, that the
Lessons of it are too hard, and that the way to Heaven is too narrow for you.

Answ. But I answer. There is nothing so hard in Religion, but the Grace of God
will make it easy. Your Trades seemed very hard at first, but now you find them
easy enough. As a new Suit of Clothes pincheth you a little at first, but in a
few days they are easy enough; so being a while habituated to a godly Course,
the Difficulty will vanish, and the Suavity will abide. To live in Idleness and
perish for hunger, looks easy; but who will therefore choose it? No, you will work,
and sweat, and die with Labor, rather than live in want. And why should
Difficulties in Religion only fright you? But if you will believe God, you must
acknowledge, that his Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light; that his ways are
ways of Pleasantness, and all his Paths are Peace. Or, if you will credit those
that have tried them, they will unanimously avouch, that there is more Comfort
in the Hardships of Religion, than in the Pleasures of Sin. But what do we
dispute about Difficulty, when Necessity is in the case; you must be holy now,
or miserable for ever: and you that cry, how hard a thing it is to get into
Heaven, will find it an harder matter to get out of Hell.

Object. 2. O but (you object) it will be prejudicial to us. It will take up
our Time, hinder us in Business, and cut off some ways of Gain, which now we
live by. We would gladly read such a good Book, go and confer with a good
Minister, but we have not time for these things.

Answ. This is but the old Song, when Israel should go to sacrifice, than
Pharaoh calls to work. But it is a mere Evasion, how much time do many of you
squander away in sleeping, eating, smoking, and visiting? You can stay with
any body, but with God; and can find time for any thing, but the saving of your
Souls. How busy soever you are, your Work on Earth will be done best, when your
Work in Heaven is done first. You would not like it, that your Apprentice
should tell you, he could not do your Business, because he had some Business of
his own to do. You are the Lord's, and your time is his, and to postpone his
Work for any thing else, is a far greater Affront to him. And tho the Fear of
God may check you in your indirect ways of Gain, yet it will make you treble
amends, by drawing down a Blessing on your well-gotten Estate, and entayling it
on your Posterity.

Object. 3. But I shall be singular herein. I see few that make any business of
Religion, and why should I be alone?

Answ. You are ignorant and uncharitable in so saying. There are hundreds, tho
you know it not, that make Religion their great Business; that both trade more,
and read, and pray more than you: but they do not stand praying in the Street,
nor expose their Piety to all Men's view. And then, there is a sober Singularity
and a superstitious. To be hypocritically or superstitiously singular is not
more abominable, than a Scriptural Preciseness is necessary. No doubt, the
wicked Sodomites laid this often in the Teeth of Lot, when his Life and Way ran
counter to theirs; ay, he is an Hypocrite, I warrant him; he is wiser than all
his Neighbors! his very Sons in Law minded him not: and how did the ungodly
Crew about Zoar in all probability triumph at his fall in the Cave? Yes, here is
one of your Religious Men, that seemed to be mightily grieved at the Wickedness
of Sodom, but trace him into private, he lies with his own Daughters. They are
all such, I warrant you, precise and severe to others, but loose enough
themselves. And the wise God does sometimes permit some of his own Children to
fall, that those who seek occasions, may find occasion to stumble at true
Godliness, and be hardened in their own Wickedness. For no body makes such
wretched Constructions and Inferences, but such as are already bent to be
wicked. And for all the sad Fall of Lot, yet his Singularity in Sodom was no
Crime. As it is better to walk alone in the Field, than to be accompanied with
a Crowd to Tyburn: so it is better to go toward Heaven with a few, than with a
multitude to Hell.

Object. 4. Yea, but there may be Danger in it. A serious course will expose me
to Scorn at least, and perhaps to greater Troubles: I love to be quiet, and to
keep out of harms way.

Answ. But did Jesus Christ, or his Apostles, or the Primitive Christians stand
upon this? Are Men, who at most can but ruin and kill thee, more to be dreaded
than God, who, if thou live not in his Fear, can and most certainly will damn
thee? Is the Fire of Hell cooler than one of Faggots? Do not imagine it.
However, practice thou first all that Religion, that may safely be done within
doors, and then we will discourse further about the rest. Has not God said, Trust
in the Lord, and do good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou
shall be fed: Psalm. 37. 3. Has not he said, Who is he that will harm you, if
ye be followers of that which is good? 1 Pet. 3. 13. It would be a sad Brand
upon the Age, if it were any crime among Christians to be a Christian: and we
press you to be nothing else. No, no, these are but the Sluggards Excuses;
Prove. 26. 13. There is a Lion in the way, a Lion in the Streets. But assure
your selves, that those who dread a Lion in the way to Heaven, will meet with a
worse Lion in the way to Hell.

Object. 5. Yes, but you say, This is needless for us, for this is the Work and
Care of Ministers; what do we support them for, but to manage these matters for
us, and it is sufficient for us to mind our Business?

Answ. I have evinced the necessity of being truly pious before. Certainly the
End is need^^^^ the great End of Man, which is to be happy for ever: if it be
indifferent whether you be saved or lost, nothing is necessary. And the means
is equally necessary: for there is no taking of Heaven without Violence.
Inquire concerning the Sufferings of Christ, were they needful? and does not
that require your Care, which required his Blood? Ask all the Saints of God,
were your Prayers, and Tears, and Diligence n^edless? The Apostle Paul said,
This one thing I do, etc. Phil. 3. 13. as tho he intended nothing else, and is
it come now to be needless?

And then; as to God's Ministers; Woe to us, if we preach not the Gospel, but we
cannot do your Work: we can execute our Commission, but we cannot change your
Hearts: It is needful for us to open the Doctrine of Salvation; and it is
needful for you to embrace it. It is needful for us to give Virtue and Vice,
Godliness and Ungodliness, their true Colors, and to describe to you Heaven
and Hell; but it is needful for you to fall to practice. God is our witness, we
choose the fittest Texts we can find, we produce the plainest Scripture, the
strongest Arguments, the soundest Directions that we can; but if you do not
concur to the saving of your own Souls, all our Labor is lost, and you are
lost. We are not satisfied with your Approbation or Applause, we long for your
Amendment; we wait to know what good Answer we may return to him that sent us.
It grieves us not to see you so diligent, so just, so rich; but that you seek
the Kingdom of God with the least Care, and in the last place; that you neglect
the Substance for Accidents, for Shadows: We would have your Credit to be good
in Heaven; we would have you to be rich toward God.

III. And so I come to the third thing under this Head, which is to show
wherein the Practice of this Godliness lies in the Tradesman's way. And that is;

1. In maintaining a Religious Frame of Heart. There is the Fountain, there is
the Root that must feed all the Branches of a Religious Life. In vain will ye
rectify some Disorders in your Actions, unless ye begin your Reformation at the
Heart: Make the Tree good, and the Fruit will be good. Your great Care must be
to get, and keep an holy Heart; that i^,

(1.) An Heart bent against Sin; for any allowed Sin will be a continual Thorn
in you Consciences, and a Canker in your Estates. You know who said, I also was
upright before him, and I kept my self from my Iniquity; Psalm. 18. 23. Consider
therefore what Sin it is, to which you are most easily inclined, what Sin you
find hardest to resist, what Sin you are lothest to leave, what Sin star'd you
in the Face in your last Sickness, what Sin your Consciences do pitch upon when
the Hue and Cry is sent out in the Ministry of the Word, and what Sin you would
most carefully conceal, or at least excuse, (they are excellent Mr. Bolton's
Marks) And set your selves against that Sin; for that is the Sin that threatens
your utter ruin. It may be conquered, it may be mortified, and you will have
more Comfort in its Overthrow, than ever you had in its Tyranny. And,

(2.) You must have your Heart set upon that which is good. Abhor that which is
evil, but that is not enough, you must also cleave to that which is good; Romans
12. 9. You must set your Affections on things above, not on things on the
Earth; Coloss. 3. 2. When the Soul leans thus the right way, you will be ready
to every good Work, it will be a marvelous Advantage to you upon every
occasion. How often might you have opportunities to meditate or pray, or to
reprove a Fault, which you will lose for want of an honest frame of Heart? And
this is a thing too much neglected; People think it sufficient to observe their
Words and Actions, but few do mind the Temper and Frame of their Souls, as they
ought. Our Conversation, says the Apostle, is in Heaven. We are Citizens of
another and better City, and we must be always driving a Trade there. No sight
to such a Soul, like a Throne in the Clouds: No Music like the Arch-Angel's
Trumpet; no Song like, Awake ye Dead, and come to Judgment.

2. The Tradesman's Religion lies in the due Exercise of Faith: Without this
you can no way please God in your Calling. If you have not a Ground, and an
Heart to believe, that your Calling is pleasing to God, every step you take in
it, is guilty. Hereby you believe that there is a Divine Providence, which
governs all Men, and all their Actions; which will quiet you in all Events
whatsoever. When others fret and fume under their Losses, or swell and stroke
themselves in their Success; this will discern the Hand of God both in giving
and taking away, and so quiet and fix the Soul aright: Thou will keep him in
perfect Peace whose Heart is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee: Isa.
26. 3. Hereby you will be able to live upon God's Promises for outward
Supplies, and will be encouraged to use the means to obtain them; yea, when the
Providence of God seems to contradict his Promises, when all things seem to
conspire against you, by Faith you will see a Bow in the Cloud, God's Promise
and Covenant to do you good by all: 2 Samuel 23. 5. Although my House be not so with
God, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things
and sure: for this is all my Salvation, and all my Desire, although he make it not
to grow: Whereas if ye only depend upon Second Causes, you shall see what you
may expect: Jer. 17. 5. Cursed is the Man that trusts in Man, and makes
Flesh his Arm, and whose Heart departs from the Lord: When a Man works and
cares so as if he had no need of God, he shall be like the Heath in the Desert,
and shall not see when good comes, as it follows there. He that trusts in Man,
makes him God; he that distrusts God, makes him Man.

This Faith will free you from that Anxiety, which torments carnal Men; who
have perhaps the greatest part of their Estate floating upon the Sea, and
therefore can scarce eat, or drink, or sleep by reason of their unworthy Fears.
Now Faith depends upon God, is not afraid of evil Tidings: for his Heart is
fixed, trusting in the Lord; Psalm. 1 12. 7. I Will do my Duty, and let God do his
Will. And then for Spiritual Mercies, which the Tradesman has daily need of,
Faith is all in all. What Is the Scripture, or God, or Christ, without Faith?
How shall he obtain Mercy and Pardon, or find Grace and Comfort in time of
need, without Faith? In a word, the Christian Tradesman must live by Faith, and
breath by Prayer.

3. The Tradesman's Religion is to be exercised In the right Performance of
Religious Worship. For the same Light of Nature, Scripture, and Reason, which
prove there is a God, do with equal strength evince that he is to be
worshipped. He that doubts of this, disputes against Principles. The Tradesman
is obliged to this, as well as other Men. How can he be said to abide with God
in his Calling, that comes not near him. By Prayer we approach to God, and by
his Word he comes near ^o us. The Tradesman must know that he has two
Landlords, one on Earth, and another in Heaven; that he holds his House and
Shop of Man, but he holds his Health and Life of God: to whom a due Rent of
Prayer and Praises must be daily paid. Rouse up your selves therefore in the
Morning, and lay the Scripture next your Hearts, read some part of it with
Understanding and Application; and then kneel you down, and lift up your Hearts
to God in sincere and serious Prayer.

And at the fittest hour, but the sooner the better, let you whole Family come
together, (unless any be unavoidably hindered) and there let a Psalm and a
Chapter be read, and then join together in Prayer: And the like course hold at
Night, withal remembering to sing the Praises of God, and let no Company or
Business (unless of present necessity) tempt you, either to omit these Duties,
or to do them unseasonably. Reckon that Almighty God is staying for you at your
due hours, and will not excuse your neglect, unless you can conclude in your
Conscience, that he himself by his Providence withholds you. Do you think in
earnest, that when your Family at eleven or twelve of the Clock at Night, are
some of them in Bed, and the rest half asleep, it will satisfy an all-seeing
God to hear you excusing your selves with a story of such Company that held
you, or such unseasonable Recreation kept you from his Service; or any other
Business which might have been dispatched, or deferred to another time. Say
not, that ye want time for this Work, for a Man must have time to eat and
sleep, and pray, whatever other Business stays. And all this excellent Work
needs not go away with an hours time in the whole day; for it is not the
length, but strength of Devotion that carries it with God. Be but serious and
sincere, God will accept a little from you, that have not time for more.

Plead not your Weariness in your Calling, that you are quite tired before
Night, (remember you cannot plead this in the Morning) that you have no
Strength nor Spirits left you. For immoderate Labor may be sinful as well as
immoderate Meat or Drink. God requires no more, nor accepts, nor will bless
such toiling as is inconsistent with the Ability of your Bodies, or the good of
your Souls. You should Reason thus with your selves, Have I taken pains all day
for a little Money, and shall not I strain my self a little at night for Pardon
and Grace? If I have tired my Legs about the Earth, shall I not weary my Knees
to get to Heaven? If I have wearied my Arms to get a Living here, shall I not
stretch out my Hands to get a Crown hereafter? O if you had but a spark of
Zeal, you would answer your selves. Zeal revives the languishing Spirits,
infuses new Spirits, makes a Man all Spirit for a time. This in a false
Religion will raise up a Man to his Orisons at Midnight, will send him some
hundreds of Miles on Pilgrimage, etc. It Is true, it works more languidly in a
true Religion; Men swim faster down than up the Stream; yet when a Man
considers, that the success of his Affairs depends upon God, and that he cannot
keep Friendship with him, if he hold not Correspondence; and that most
certainly he can and will make the Tradesman amends by the Years end, for every
minute that he sincerely devotes to his Service: This should bear down all
Difficulty, and oblige him to the constant Worship of God.

4. The Tradesman's Religion is exercised, in Observing a right Rule and End in
all his worldly Affairs. And here he guides not his Behavior by the Example of
others, nor of his Master that went before him, nor by the current of his
particular Humor, Appetite, or Interest, but by the holy Word of God, and such
Dictates of sound Reason that are agreeable thereunto. You must not conclude,
thus and thus I Will do, for so do others, or so did my Master before me, or it is
my Humor, or it is for my Interest: but what says Moses and the Prophets?
what says Christ and his Apostles? and what would they do, if they were in my
place? and this must be your Rule. And in case of doubt and difficulty you must
consult the wise and honest, and so be determined. They asked Counsel at Abel,
and ended the matter; 2 Samuel 20. 18. And this Care and Pains before, is much
better than to wound your Conscience, and give ill Example to others: He that
does Truth, comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest, that they
are wrought in God: Joh. 3. 21. Your Deeds must be wrought in God.

And Religion must teach you the like care in the End which you should aim at
in all your Business; which should be to please and glorify God. For none of us
(Christians) lives to himself, and no Man dies to himself; and indeed, he
that lives to himself, will be likely to die to himself. But whether we live,
we live unto the Lord: Romans 14. 7. This is Man's greatest Duty, this is his
highest Privilege. We reckon it a great Honor to that Nobleman, that shall put
the Crown upon the Head of a King: O how much greater is it, to put the Crown
of Glory upon God's! But of this before. Only you may ask, May not a Man aim at
Riches by his Calling, that he may have Ease in his old Age, etc. Answ. An End
is subordinate, or ultimate; a next end, or a last end. You may design to get
an Estate, but not merely for your own sake, but chiefly for God's sake; not so
much that ye may live at ease, but that ye may do good thereby. A Man may
desire a good Horse, or a good Boat to carry him to his Friend. Every step of a
Religious Tradesman, being traced to the utmost, ends at God. He would not care
for himself, but that he may be of use to glorify God.

5. The Tradesman's Piety is showed, In spiritualizing his Calling. There is in
every Calling a Temporal and a Spiritual respect. The outside of them is the
Object of Sense; a brutish Man may comprehend that, and get his Living by it;
but there is an inside, which only the gracious Eye can read. There is scarce
any thing which you trade in, but a Religious Heart may learn something of God
out of it. And this (surely) is one end of Similes and Comparisons, so frequent
in the Bible, not only that God may come down by them to us, but that we may by
them ascend unto him; he has translated the World into the Scripture, that we
may think of the Scripture in the World. This is the safest and richest
Chemistry, whereby you may extract the purest Spirits out of the grossest
Bodies. As the Be can gather Honey out of every Flower, yea, out of the very
Weeds; so may and should the Religious Tradesman gather some Spiritual Lessons,
out of his temporal Wares and Employments. Thus the Merchant may learn
something from Mat. 13. 45. And all that buy and sell from Mat. 25. 16. and
Luke 29. 15. The Writer from Psalm. 45. 1. They that work in Wool from Isa. 1.
18. and Psalm. 147. 16. The Apothecary from Eccles. 10. 1. The Carpenter from
Isa. 10. 15. and Zech. 1. 20. The Founder from Jer. 8. 29. The Refiner from
Mal. 3. 2, 3. The Baker from Hos. 7. 4, 6. The Fisher from Jer. 16. 16. and
Mat. 4. 19. The Weaver from Job 7. 6. The Potter from Isa. 6. 8. and Jer. 18.
And I think these are all the Trades expressly mentioned in Scripture, by which
the Holy Ghost directs us to spiritual things.

There are also mentioned the Goldsmiths, Neh. 3. 8. The Silversmiths, Acts 19.
24. The Spice-Merchants, 1 King. 10. 15. The Masons, 1 Kings 12. 12. The
Mariners, Ezekiel. 27. 9. The Calkers, Ezekiel. 27. 9. The workers in fine Linen, 1 Chronicles. 4. 21. The workers in Needle Work, Exodus 26. 36. The Smiths, Isa. 54.
16. The Ingravers, and the Imbroiderers, Exodus 35. 35. The Tentmakers, Acts 18.
3. The Tanner, Acts 9. 43. The Copper-smith, 2 Timothy 4. 14. The Cook, 1 Samuel 8.
13. The Barber, Ezekiel. 5. 1. The Fuller, Mark 9. 3. In general, the Chapmen, 2 Chronicles. 9. 14. and the Cunning Artificers, Isa. 3. 3. And those are (as far I
can find) all the Trades mentioned in the Scripture. But as it is said, Isa.
28. 26. concerning the plain Husbandman, His God does instruct him to
Discretion, and does teach him; so will the Spirit of God teach the ingenious
Tradesman to learn spiritual Lessons from his Temporal Calling. An ingenious
Head indeed is a great help herein, but an heavenly Heart is all in all. This
inspired our blessed Savior to make a Sermon out of a Vine, Joh. 15. 1. and to
raise Instruction from a barren Fig Tree. As we see on the contrary, how
wickedly witty a naughty Man will be, to collect base and sinful matter out of
the Objects that come before him, and turn all to Poison; surely it is as
possible, and much more noble, to extract the Gold, than the Dross. Do but keep
open the Eye of Faith to see Invisibles, pray for Skill, and fall to Practice,
and it will come. The Profit will balance the Pains. He that turns Earth into
Heaven, has an Heaven upon Earth.

6. This Religion will teach the Tradesman, To observe the Christian Sabbath in
a holy manner. Indeed this is one of the first things that God's Grace reforms
in a serious Christian. No sooner does he begin to look toward Heaven in sober
Sadness, but he begins to value, and use the Lord'sday in another manner than
before: Hence, Ezekiel. 20. 12. I gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between me
and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctify them. Remember
the Sabbath before it comes: And, if possibly you can, dismiss your Affairs a
little the sooner the day before, that you may have time over night, to reflect
on your Works the Week past, as God did on his at the six days end, and to
bewail your Sins therein; that you may have time to consider, what Mercies you
have to acknowledge, and what Blessings to beg on the Day following; that you
may solemnly renounce all your Sins, and wholly dismiss all your worldly
Business, and the thoughts thereof, till the Sabbath be past. Let not the
Guilt, nor the Love of any one Sin enter with you into the holy Ground; but
wash you Hands in Innocence, and so compass the Altar of God.

And tho upon that holy Day you may be innocently cheerful, and rejoice in the
Blessings of God; yet you should not only abstain from any vile Thoughts or
Words, but even from vain and fruitless ones: Isa. 58. 13. Thou shall call the
Sabbath a Delight, the Holy of the Lord, Honorable, and shall honor him, not
doing thine own Ways, nor finding thine own Pleasure, nor speaking thine own
Words. Yea, your Hearts must rise against all unfit Discourse, and with a
Christian Dexterity, endeavor to carry the Stream of such Discourse another
way. Be not ashamed to speak of God and Heaven, since ungodly Men have the
Impudence to speak of Wickedness. See that ye rise early, and work hard that
day in your heavenly Trade; that so you may be able all night to give as clear
an account of what you have gotten, as you can on other days.

Let no worldly Business be contrived or mentioned or done that Day, which
might have been done before, or may be done after without plain Prejudice. It
was the Men of Tire that sold their Wares on the Sabbath, whom Nehemiah
represt, Neh. 13. 16, 20, 21. and command your Families from straggling, or
foolish Sports that day: beware how you give them Liberty that Day, because you
can best spare them, to see their Friends, or to be out of your sight; for that
Day, and that Way, multitudes of them are undone; but let them spend that Day
in God's House, and in your own. Examine them of the state of their Souls, of
their Proficience that Day, and scriously catechize the younger sort in the
Principle; of Religion. O let not your Childrens Souls be neglected, while you
pamper and deck their Bodies; but show them the evil of Sin, and the beauty of
Holiness; convince them of their woeful State by Nature, and mind them of the
Vow which they are under in their Baptism; let them see you in the Pangs of
Travel for them, till Christ be formed in them: you have time for this upon
this Day; and you are bound in Equity and Piety, to recover them out of that
Condition, into which you have brought them: put good Books into their Hands
and talk with them about Regeneration, and explain the Catechism to them; that,
being well grounded in the Principles of Religion, they may rationally embrace
the Practice of it.

And then for your Servants, both Apprentices and others: Do you think it is
sufficient, that they do your Work faithfully? Have not they most precious
Souls? and have not you the charge of them? can you find in your Hearts to
suffer them to live, and for ought you know die, in a State of Ignorance and
Unregeneracy? Where are your Bowels of Compassion? Alas you should have the
same care of their Souls, as you have of your own Children! You allow to your
Beasts Food and Lodging for their Work, and will you treat Christians no
otherwise? on this day you have time, if you have but Hearts, to call them to
you, and to enquire into their Spiritual Condition: and never to give them
rest, until you have (with God's help) cured their Ignorance and Vices, or find
them incurable. Lose not therefore a minute of that precious Time, make it as
long a day as any of the rest; and when it is done, long for another Sabbath.
And heartily bless the Lord, that he has given you such a merciful Release
from the Labors of your Body, and the Cares of your Mind, and withal blessed you
with a Market Day for your Souls. I say, bless him, and let the Voice of Praise
and singing Psalms be heard in the Righteous Man's Dwellings. A joyful Sabbath
is the Suburbs of Heaven.

7. This Religion will oblige the Tradesman to the practice of constant
Watchfulness. Which is a continual care to please God in your Thoughts, Words,
and Actions, and that you offend him not in any of them. And herein lies much
of the Essence and Life of Practical Religion; as preventive Physic is much
better than curing, and Obedience better than Sacrifice. For they that have
such sinful Hearts within them, and such a wicked World, and malicious Devil
without them, had need to watch, as well as pray against Temptation. Above all
keeping, keep the Heart; Prove. 4. 23. quench the first Sparks of Sin there, O
quench them quickly! and know, that as Light only excludes Darkness, so it is
impossible to keep out bad Thoughts, without the Prevalence of good ones. Watch
over your Words, and consider what, and how, and why you speak; and endeavor
not only to speak what is lawful, but what is useful; remember that Words are
like Arrows, when once out, you know not where they may light; especially be
careful of them before your Children. And for your Actions, take a wise Man's
Counsel, Prove. 4. 26. Ponder the Path of thy Feet, and let all thy Ways be
established.

And especially watch against the Temptations of your particular Calling; for
every Trade has some particular Snare, as every Constitution has some
particular Sin, and it is the Wisdom of a Man to keep constant Watch against
it. But the Temptations that are most common to all Trades, are either
Debnuchery on the one hand, or Worldliness on the other. Your greatest
Temptation to the former, besides what is common to you with other Men, is the
obliging of your Customers or Chapmen; when to get or keep them, you will break
with God, distemper your Body, Head, Hear, tand all: Now how can you expect
that Gain to be blessed, which is procured by Sin? No, no; if you deal with
wise Men, it is the Punctualness of your Word, the Goodness and Cheapness of
your Commodity, that will oblige them sufficiently; and sooner or later, I am
sure, this will do the business* but if you deal with Fools, whom Wine and
Drink do chiefly oblige, they will disappoint you at last, and leave you in the
lurch.

And on the other hand; Take heed of Worldliness, beware of the love of Money,
or of loving the World for its own sake. For the love of Money is the root of
all Evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. It is not the greatness of an Estate, but the nearness
of it to a Man's Heart which ruins him. The Water under the Ship makes it
swim, Water within it makes it sink. They that buy, should be as if they
possessed not, 1 Cor. 7. 30. for the time is short. And worldly Wealth will not
stay long, nor satisfy the Soul while it stays. Hearken to the Voice of God,
Prove. 23. 4, 5. Labor not to be rich: cease from thine own Wisdom: Will thou
set thine Eyes upon that which is not? For Riches certainly (mark that,
certainly) make themselves Wings, they flee away as an Eagle toward Heaven.
What Wiseman will fall in love with a Bird on the Housetop? and such are
Riches. Unless you find, that you are ready according to your ability to any
good-work, and that you can find in your Heart to eat and drink, and wear
Apparel suitable to your Estate; the World is in your hearts, and you must ply
the work of Mortification quickly, and lift up your Affections from things
below, to the better things that are above.

8. The Religion of the Tradesman is to be exercised in the frequent use of
holy Ejaculations. An Ejaculation is the darting up of the Heart unto God, in a
short and lively Prayer. And they may be used, either by way of Confession, as
that, God be merciful to me a Sinner! O wretched Man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the Body of this Death? Or, by way of Petition, as that of Neh.
13. 31. Remember me, O my God, for good: Or, by way of Deprecation, as David; O
Lord turn the Counsel of Achitophel into Foolishness: Or by way of
Intercession; as, O that the Salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! Or, by
way of Thanksgiving; as that of Christ; I thank thee, Father, Lord of Heaven
and Earth, etc. Now this is the excellency and advantage of these kind of
Prayers, that as they will dispatch much business in Heaven, so they will
hinder no business upon Earth; they are like a well-plac'd Parenthesis, they
hinder not the Sense; they may be interlin'd not only in a Sermon, but in the
throng of your Employments. Nehemiah could list up such a Prayer, while the
King and Queen were all in Presence, Neh. 2. 4. Especially you that are
Artificers, whose Employment lies in manual Operation; what excellent
opportunities have you to step often to Heaven, by these kind of Prayers and
Praises!

And that you may see, this is not a new Invention, or piece of modern
Preciseness; hear what holy Augustine says, De Opere Monachorum; As vain Men
have their Fables and filthy Songs at work; quid ergo impedit* Servum Dei
manibus operantem in Lege Domini meditari, and psallere nomini* Dei altissimi
-- Cantica divina cantare, etiam manibus operantes facile, possunt, and ipsum
laborem tanquam divino celeumate consolari: that is, God's Servants should,
while they are at work, sing the Praises of God. When the Heart is inditing a
good matter, the Tongue will quickly be, as the Pen of a ready Writer. By these
you will keep in the fire of Grace between your set-times of Prayer; by these
you may meet with and quench a Temptation on the sudden. When Satan is at his
Injections and Injaculations, have you recourse to your Ejaculations. When you
feel the Guilt of Sin to pinch you, or the Sense of any Mercy to affect you, or
of any Danger or Difficulty to affright you, this will be a present Relief,
till you have opportunity of more solemn Prayer. And as no Ship is so laden,
but one may thrust in two or three small Jewels into it; so no Man's Business
is so throng, but he may interline an holy Ejaculation. And of the like nature
are Soliloquies, wherein we speak to our own Souls; either to rouse up our dull
Spirits, or to revive our drooping Souls, as we find holy David frequently,
Psalm. 42. and 62, etc. Hereby you may make Company of your selves, when (as in
some Callings) you are working alone all the day; and it is a sad thing, that a
Man shall know how to confer with Men, yea how to converse with God, and yet
cannot tell how to commune with his own Heart.

9. This Religion or Godliness in a Tradesman is showed, In exercising of Grace
in his Calling. It is not enough to have all Organs of a human Body, without a
vital Principle, and vital Acts; what is a Hand, if it work not, or an Eye if it
see not? and what signifies your Grace within, if it be not actually employed?
Joh. 4. 14. But the Water that I will give him, shall be in him, a Well of
Water springing up into Everlasting Life. A Well is always springing up, and
true Grace should be still in Activity. Most Men act only according to their
natural Humor all the week long, and others consult only their worldly
Interest; but the Christian Tradesman has not so learned Christ. He must every
day act the Graces of Spiritual Wisdom, Zeal, Self-denial, Patience, Charity,
and particularly that Truth, Justice, and Contentedness which has been
described to him: you will have more Comfort in the review of this, than of all
your other Gains. You will be frequently provoked by your Servants and others,
here ye must act both Wisdom and Patience; you will see too much Sin and
Dishonor done to God every day, here is Work for your Zeal; you will be often
presented with poor Objects, there is occasion for your Charity.

In short, you will have occasion to buy or sell every day, there is Work for
your Veracity and Equity: And the acting of these Graces is so necessary; that
you are but dead Christians without it; and so pleasing to God, that every such
Act both strengthens the Habit, and opens the charitable Hand of God to give
you more: And without these you will be but the World's drudg here, and that is
sad, and the Devil's hereafter, and that is worse. A pious Tradesman may act
Grace, as much as the greatest Rabbi. Famous is the Story of a Primitive Saint
in Egypt, Who having for many Years retired himself from the World, and chiefly
employed himself in the Acts of Mortification and Devotion; and being thereupon
tempted to think himself among the holiest Men on Earth, and longed to know who
should sit next him in Heaven, was warned to inquire for a Man in Alexandria
who was holier than himself; and who should that be but, when he had found him,
but a poor Cobbler, that worked hard most of the day, but was so circumspect in
his Life, so just in his Dealings, so thankful with his Wife for his mean fare,
and then so truly devout in the Worship of God, that the poor Hermit returned
crest-faln to his Cell, and found that the honest Tradesman was like to sit
above him in Heaven. So that the Exercise of Grace should be no uncouth
Business to a Christian Tradesman.

10. The Tradesman's Piety must be showed, In the sincere promoting of
Goodness, and discouraging of Sin. As it is the Honor of God, that he is good
and does good; so he ingraves the same image upon his Children. Whatsoever does
regularly tend to the advancing of God's Honor, or the Spiritual and Temporal
Good of Mankind, Religion inclines the honest Tradesman to further it to his
utmost Ability. It is that ingages him in Conscience, if he have any concern in
the Plantations beyond Sea, no way to encourage that ungodly Trade of spiriting
away either Christians or Infidels against their Wills, but rather to endeavor
the Instruction and Conversion of the poor Negros, who have Souls as precious
and immortal as his own; and not to be indifferent about their eternal
Salvation, much less to hinder their Instruction, as some are said wickedly to
do, to the great affront of the Christian Religion: No, he knows that no Gain
can countervail the Loss of a Soul; and that where Christ gains, he can never
be a loser. This true Piety guides him in giving his voice in any Election;
neither any private Respects, nor Inducements from others; neither the Frowns
of one, nor Smiles of another shall sway him, but his fixed Design directs him
which is the Glory of God, and the common Good. This makes him to run among the
first to further any Parish Business; this makes him ready to promote the good
of his Company, to draw out his Purse for the Maintenance of godly Ministers,
and to relieve the Poor. And if he be not the first, he will readily second any
good Work: And if things go well with him, the Country shall fare the better
for it, his Charity shall be accordingly. For he knows that pure Religion, and
undefiled before God and the Father, is this: Not only to be frequent and
devout in the Worship of God, but, To visit the Fatherless and the Widows in
their Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the World, Jam. 1. 27.

And the like Zeal he will express in discouraging Sin; for he that cannot
endure it in himself, cannot endure it any where else. He first drives it out
of his Family: to this end, reads often the 101st Psalm, a Psalm it is for
Houshoulders, and there you will find that a truly Religious Man, hates the Works
of them that turn aside, cannot abide a froward Person, will not know a wicked
Person; indures not a Slanderer, a Liar, a deceitful or a proud Person. If he
be invested in any Office, he takes that opportunity to express his hatred to
Sin by due execution of the Laws against it; for he considers, that he may
never have the like advantage again to serve God and his Generation. He sets
himself to detect and root up all Frauds, all Debauchery, and whatsoever is
contrary to Justice and Holiness. By this indeed he runs a hazard of
contracting some illwill from some ill Men; but that he still expresses a
Friendship to their Persons, and lays all fitting Obligations upon them; that
so they cannot but see, that it is Iniquity which he only dislikes, and that he
only prosecutes a common Enemy: When they come to themselves, they will give
him Thanks; and if they do not, his Witness and his Reward is above. The best
of Men will applaud him, and the worst of Men will reverence him.

Now to further a Tradesman in this his heavenly Trade, it is very convenient
that he be furnished with some good Books; with which this Nation (praised be
God) is richly stored. These will be Entertainment for him in vacant Hours, and
on Winter-Evenings; and so preserve him from Idleness, and from vain
Imaginations, and from fruitless Company. Here he may enrich his Understanding,
instruct his Conscience, warm his Affections, and increase his Graces: your
Shop-Books may help you to be rich for a while, but your Closet-Books will help
you to be rich for ever.

But herein take Direction, 1. How to choose them: Be well-advised, not to buy
every Book that you fancy, nor every Book that is commended to you, nor that
has a taking Title, nor that has a great Bulk and small Price. But consult
your faithful Minister, or some judicious Fri^nd in the buying of your Books;
unless you have a mind to throw away your Money, and which is more, your Time,
yea and your Souls too, which is most of all: For, as some have been corporally
poisoned by reading a Letter, so many have been spiritually poisoned by reading
infectious Books. Neither be covetous after more Books, than will comport with
your Estate to buy, and with your time to peruse: Too much variety confounds; a
few Books well chosen, and well read, will make you solid Christians.

Above all Books, read the Holy Bible; let no day pass without tasting of some
heavenly Manna thence. And to assist the Frailties of your Memories, buy a
Concordance. Downham and Wickens are the least; Cotton, or the
Cambridg-Concordance are larger and better; whereby, if you remember but one
Word, you may find in what Book, Chapter, and Verse the Sentence is: And then
to open to you, what is difficult in Scripture, buy Bishop Hall's Parephrase on
the hard places of Scripture, or, which is fuller, the Dutch Annotations. To
ground you and your Family in the Christian Doctrine, you may have the
Assemblies Confession and Catechisms; to which you may add, Mr. Ball's
Catechism, with the Exposition, or Bishop Usher's Body of Divinity, and also
Dr. Gouge on the Lord's-Prayer, Dr. Pearson on the Creed, Mr. Dod on the
Commandments, and Mr. Vines, with Mr. Dolittle on Sacrament; and then, the
Practice of Piety, and the Whole Duty of Man will be very useful both for your
Instruction and Devotion: Mr. Dent's Plain Man's Pathway to Heaven, Mr.
Shepherd's Sound Reliever, Mr. Baxter's Call to the Unconverted, and Mr.
Allen's Vindiciae Pietatis, will all of them be of great use, for the promoting
the Work of Conversion in your selves and Family: buy also Dr. Gouge's Book of
Domestical Duties, whereby Husband and Wife, Parent and Children, Master and
Servant will be instructed in their Relative Duties; read also as many of the
Lives and Letters of learned and holy Men, as you can, whereof you have a large
Collection in Mr. Clark's Lives, and Martyrology: You should also have Mr.
Perkins, Dr. Ames, or Bishop Hall's Cases of Couscience, to which you may
resort in dubious Cases for Direction; Bishop Jewel will largely, and Mr.
Pool's Dialogue will briefly sufficiently arm you against Popery. And then, for
Practical Divines, these following are the best I remember, Dr. Preston of the
New Covenant, and on the Attributes; Mr. Perkins, Mr. Hildersam, Mr. Rob.
Bolton, especially his Directions for a comfortable walking with God, Mr. Tho.
Hooker, Mr. Fenner, Mr. Scudder's Daily walk, Mr. Capel of Temptations, Dr.
Harris, Mr. Reyner, Dr. Reynolds, Mr. Gurnal his Christian Armor, Dr. Tho.
Goodwin, Mr. Baxter's Directory, and everlasting Rest, Dr. Manton's and Dr.
Tillotson's Sermons. And because you should have some Diversion: For History,
read Mr. Fox's Acts and Monuments, Dr. Fuller's Church History of England. And
for other History, you may have Mr. Speed's History of England. (The wealthier
may add to these, Cambden's Britannia, Sir Rich. Baker's Chronicle, Isaackson's
Chronology, and Plutarch's Lives and Morals.) And having the present State of
England, and of London in particular, and a Statute-Book, you are competently
provided for Books in the English Tongue. Tho you may read, yet you need not
buy many more. That Money which others spend in superfluous Treats and
Vanities, will in a short time furnish you with these Companions^; and that
time which they bestow in doing nothing, will serve you for this Employment,
which will advance both your Intellectuals and your Morals here, and your
Eternal Happiness hereafter. But then you must learn,

2. How to use these Books when you have them. They must not lie by you in the
dust, but they must be read, and read throughout, not by parcels here and
there; and yet not too much at once, for the Mind and Memory are frail and
finite; and you should leave them, as you should your Sermons and Meals, with
an Appetite. But besure you read with a deliberate Attention, and Application
of what you read to your own Souls, and as occasion is offered, interline holy
Ejaculations to God, to bless what you read unto you. If the Excellency or
Difficulty of matter require it, grudg not to read it twice or thrice: and if
you have time and convenience, extract and transcribe those things which most
eminently concerns you; or make some Index whereby to find them again. Lend
them also to any that will be sure to read them, and restore them; so you may
have a Trade going of saving Souls when you are asleep. Finally, let not your
reading entrench upon your necessary Business, nor make you more contentious,
proud, censorious; but more holy, and humble, and useful; that the Divinity of
your Books may be read in your daily Practice, and that your Works may commend
your Authors.

IV. Use. 1. Then I pray cast back your Eye, and review these ten Particulars,
and then turn your Eyes inward upon your selves, and your behavior in the
Premises. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your Ways, Hag. 1. 5. Has the
Fear of God accompanied you into your Shops, to the Exchange, every where? What
has been your inward frame? How have you exercised Faith? What care has been
taken of God's Worship? What Rule have you observed, and what Ends have you
propounded? What spiritual use have you made of earthly things in your
Callings? How have you kept the Sabbath? what Watchfulness? what Ejaculations?
what Exercise of Grace? what Good have you promoted, or what Sins have you
prosecuted? Of these things you will be examined, when you cannot avoid
answering. It were better to judge your selves, than to be judged by the Lord.
The Day is at hand, when the Secrets of all Hearts, and the Ways of all Men
will be discovered, and impartial Sentence pronounced. And if you do reflect in
good earnest, I conclude that you will see cause to abhor your selves, and to
repent in Dust and Ashes. You will find that some of you have been so far from
being religious in your Callings, that you have been earthly in your Devotions:
there you can spare some Looks and Thoughts about the things of this World,
when in your Vocations, you will scarce lift up one Look or Thought to a
better; instead of mixing Prayers with your Cares, you have mingled Cares with
your Prayers. Nay in many of your Houses no Prayers at all; lest you should be
accounted Fanatics, you choose to be Profanaticks. Where Is any constant
praying? If every Door were but marked, where there is no Prayer within, I fear
many Houses would stand crossed as for the Plague, with a Lord have Mercy upon
us, written upon them. We have had the Gospel in Power and Purity now above an
hundred and twenty Years, and there is yet so much barefaced Wickedness, and
so little of the Power of Godliness, that the Lord may justly say to us, as he
did to the old World, Genesis 6. 3. My Spirit shall no more strive with Man.

We preserve the Name of Christians, Reformed Christians, but we dishonor that
worthy Name, by which we are called. How do we trifle in Religion! God and
Christ, and Satan and Death are all in good earnest, and we our selves do but
dream. O the best had need to repent and amend: What then will become of them
that hate and oppose all that is serious, that ridicule all Religion, tho under
other Pretenses; they dislike the Men, not the Religion; or only their Sins,
not their Sanctity: and too much occasion for that Umbrage is given by many;
and woe to them by whom Offenses come; yea, and woe to the World, because of
Offenses, both those that Give Offense, and those that Take and improve it to
the Prejudice of Religion are in a woeful Condition: For why should not a great
deal of Goodness in a pious Man, cover a little Evil, as well as some little
Goodness in others, shall cover a great many Faults? Let a Religious Man have
never so many virtuous Qualities, and let him have done never so many good
things; yet if he have any one Fault, as if he be too passionate, or too
worldly; all the worthy things in him, or done by him, are buried, and he only
hears Hypocrite, and all that is naught on both Ears. But if a wicked Wretch
have never so many ill Qualities, and have lived in Sin all his days; yet if he
have but one good Property, as to be good humored, charitable, or the like;
all his Faults are passed over and buried in silence, and he shall be excused
them all, and cried up for a very fair conditioned Man. Now is not here rank
Partiality? Do not these Men show hereby their Hatred to God? Yes, yes, the
Malignity is at God himself. If good Men were less like to God, they might
sleep quietly with their other Faults. Who ever affirmed that the most sober
and religious were without Sin? and must they, and Religion also, be therefore
hooted out of the World? Who throws Stones at the Moon, because there be some
dark parts in it? I would advise such to beware, for Religion is the Cause of
God, who is a jealous God: and if he damn them that are without it, what will
become of them that are against it? These Arrows do penetrate Jesus Christ
himself, whom you might hear, if you had an Ear to hear, saying, I am Jesus,
whom thou persecutest: it is hard for thee to kick against the Pricks. Acts 9.
5. Dread therefore hereafter (as Saul there did) to open thy Mouth against the
unquestionable Duties of Religion, and betake your selves to the Practice of
that Piety, without which, you can neither comfortable live, nor safely die.

But more particularly, I cannot choose but lament and reprove two great
Omissions of too many Tradesmen: And the one is, of Family Prayer; which is
wholly neglected by many, partially practiced, that is, at night only by some,
and unseasonably performed by others. Assuredly, Sins of Omission deserve
Condemnation, as you may see, Mat. 25. throughout, and all your other
Profession or Virtues, will not compensate for one wilful Neglect: Jam. 2. 10.
For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend (or stumble) in one
point, he is guilty of all. If the Fear and Love of God did induce you to other
good Duties, they would also oblige you to this; and you would no more plead
Inability, Bashfulness, or Business, but seriously set about it. Till then you
live in danger of that Fury, which is prepared for the Heathen, and for the
Families that call not upon his Name; Jer. 10. 25. Better were it for you, to
break through these petty Obstacles, and either with a Book or without it,
render to God a Morning and Evening Sacrifice with your Families: For tho you
may perhaps read and pray alone, yet it is great odds, some others, who are
under your charge, have no time or mind to it, and so live without Prayer and
without God in the World.

And then, why will you that pray with them only at night, thereby curtail half
the Homage and Rent that is due to God? Does not the same Scripture that
commands the Evening Sacrifice, require the Morning Sacrifice also? Exodus 29.
38, 39. Now this is that which thou shall offer upon the Altar: two Lambs of
the first Year, day by day continually. The one Lamb thou shall offer in the
Morning; and the other Lamb, thou shall offer at Even. And have not you as much
cause to bless the Lord together for your Sleep and Safety in the Night, as for
your Mercies in the Day? Nay, have you not greater need to beg divine
Assistance, Protection and Grace, when you go out into the World, than when you
only go to bed? Think of it, and answer these things in your Consciences, if
you can.

And then, how unfit are you and the rest of your Household for any lively and
earnest Prayers, at unseasonably late hours? Do not you come to them at such
times, rather as to an unwellcome Task, than as to a gracious Privilege? and
accordingly they are performed; one sleeping in one corner, and another in
another; God has no Honor, you no Edification by them, which should be great
Ends of all Religious Duties.

And the other grand Omission of the Tradesman, is of the Lord's Supper. Some
of them can live to thirty, forty, fifty Years of Age, (I speak what I know)
without ever once approaching the Lord's Table. And yet that blessed Savior of
ours in his last Will and Testament (and dying Commands are usually observed)
commanded the frequent use thereof, to all that expect benefit by his Death.
If, Do this in remembrance of me, be not a plain Command, nothing is plain in
the Scripture: How can ye satisfy your Consciences in such a palpable
Disobedience? Besides, you lose unspeakable Comfort and Strength, which is
conveyed into the Soul of the true Beliver therein. Say not, you are not
worthy, but labor to be worthy, and let your godly Minister be judge in the
case; certainly, that Unworthiness which keeps you from the Sacrament, will
also keep you out of Heaven, and where are you then? Plead not, that you are
unprepared; for that is your Sin, which you should not sleep in another Night.
How long, I pray, will you be preparing? No, no, the plain truth is, you are
loath to be at the trouble of Self-Examination, loath to be disturbed in a sinful
and slothful course, loath to settle to the Practice of serious Piety, loath to
forgo the Sin you wot of, and here it sticks: but ( Sirs) these are the
Suggestions of your Enemy. He commonly tells Men, it is too soon, till at
length it be too late: If you could make a Covenant with Death, and escape the
Judgment that follows, it were another matter. But Sin must be repented, Grace
must be obtained, Heaven must be ensur'd; and how shall these things be, unless
you buckle to it, unless you use the means, whereof this is one? I do therefore
earnestly advise and persuade you, to take a speedy course to come, and come
worthily to the Lord's Table. Read such good Books as may direct you, apply
your selves to some faithful Minister, who will gladly assist you, and above
all, beseech the Lord to help you; to pardon your great Neglect, to cloth you
with necessary Graces, and to welcome you afterward with a Blessing.

2. Let all Tradesmen be hence exhorted, to introduce Piety into their
Callings. I beseech you to abide with God in your Callings. You cannot be truly
rich, you cannot be safe, you cannot be happy without it. It is a poor House
that has no Fire in it; it is a poor Shop that has no Goods in it: but tho
you have Fire and Meat enough in the House, and Goods sufficient in your Shop,
yet it is a miserable, a cursed House and Shop that have no Religion in them.
You may, I grant, get Estates, dispose your Children, live deliciously, etc. Go
on and prosper, but you will die like Fools, and these very Estates (as you
have been often told) will help to sink your Posterity in the spending, that
have ruined your Souls in the getting of them. Remember your Profession,
remember your Baptismal Vow, remember Eternity, and be wise for your own Souls.
If you abide with God in your Calling, he will abide with you, and then you
shall be happy here, and happy for ever. Happy are the People that are in such
a case; yea, happy is that People whose God is the Lord: Then will your
Callings be better for you, and you will not be worse for your Callings. Say
not again, it is impossible to be religious in your Calling; for tho it be more
difficult to walk with God in some Callings; yet it is possible to do it in
any. In the Apostles times, they that were Servants, yea, Slaves to very
Heathens, are required to abide with God even in that Calling. There is no
lawful Calling under Heaven, but there have been holy Men in it; and if you be
not so, it is the fault of the Person, and not of the Calling.

To this end, be restless until you have a sense of Religion in your Hearts:
Embrace Christ there, yield up your Souls to him, take his Yoke upon you.
Accept of him in all his Offices, and resign your Souls to him with all its
Faculties, and then you are past the strait Gate. It is said Mat. 22. 5. They
made light of it and went their ways, one to his Farm, another to his
Merchandise. Miserable is that Merchandise that keeps Men from Jesus Christ: If
you are too busy to go to Heaven, your Money will perish with you. But if
laying aside every weight, and the Sin that does so easily beset you, you
immediately set upon the Work of Repentance and Holiness, you will have Fruit
unto Holiness, and the end Everlasting Life. Prove. 4. 7. Get Wisdom, get
Understanding. You are all for getting; here is Gain without hazard, a great
Bargain without Money. And now what say you? What Answer shall I return to him
that sent me? As the Levite said of old, Consider of it, and take Advice, and
speak your Mind. And the Lord incline your Heart to true Wisdom! And so much
for the Sixth Requisite, and also for this Head about the right managing of a
Trade or Calling.

CHAP. VI. Of the Finishing of a Calling.
I Come now, in the last place, to speak, concerning a Man's Departing from his
Calling; in what Cases and by what Means a Man may lawfully leave his Calling:
I say, leave his Calling, for one may be interrupted from following his proper
Employment for a time, when he does not relinquish it. Some necessary and
emergent Occasions may divert the most diligent Person from his Occupation,
perhaps for Weeks or Months, but still after a dispatch of them, he returns to
the vigorous Management of it again. The restoring or preserving his Health,
the gratifying or assisting of his Friends or Relations, or his other needful
Secular Affairs, may call him abroad, and detain him for some space of time,
but he is not easy, he hastens to his own business, this is but a Parenthesis:
He and his Calling are not parted. Neither can a Man be said to leave his
Calling, when for good Reasons he lessens it, and thinks fit to drive a smaller
Trade, leaves off dealing in some Commodities* finds it better for his Soul, or
Body, or Estate to draw in his Sails, and accordingly contracts his Business,
but yet does not desert his Calling. But now a Man leaves off his Calling, when
he does totally and finally forsake it; I say, totally and finally: and this is
a matter of great moment, let a Man's Calling be what it will; and it behooves
every Man to see that he and his Calling part fair.

Now a Calling is then well left, when God does discharge or call a Man from
his Calling, whereunto he was called. There is no other way to be fairly quit
of your Calling: He that called you into it, must call you out of it. Now this
he does two ways.

First; Immediately, by his absolute Command or Inspiration; and so he
discharged the Apostles upon our Savior's Ascension and Mission of the Holy
Ghost upon them; until they had that Commission, even after the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, we find both Peter, and James, and John, at their old
trade of fishing; Joh. 21. 3. but afterward they applied themselves to their
Apostleship, and lived and died in that Profession. But no Man can now justly
pretend to be thus released from his Calling; since it has pleased God to
forbear those extraordinary Methods of signifying his Will unto us, and has
remitted us to the Guidance of his Word and Providence Let no Man therefore
pretend or trust to any Impulses, how strong soever, unless he can justify them
by the ordinary Rules, which God has left us to walk by. It was no doubt a
strong Impulse which drove Jonah to Sea, but it was directly against the
revealed Will of God, and he sped accordingly.

Secondly; God does mediately discharge a Man from his Calling two ways.

1. By the Hand or Interposition of Man; when it pleases him to invest some or
other with Authority or with Power over a Person, and by such he is discharged
of his Employment. Thus a Child, who is under the Government of his Parents,
may lawfully leave his Calling, when he is so required by them, because he is
not sui juris, nor is supposed to know what is best for him, in comparison of
their Understanding. Thus a Wife may lawfully forsake the Calling, wherein she
has been bred; when her Husband finds any considerable Inconveniences
therein, or needs her Assistance some other way: For, God has invested the
Husband with Authority to direct and govern his Wife, and she ought to be
subject to him in every (lawful) thing. Thus the Subject, being called and
advanced by his Prince to some place of honorable Trust, may lawfully leave
his former Calling, because this is supposed to tend more to the Public Good.
In like manner, when a Man is put into Restraint or Prison, either by the
Magistrate, or by the Suit of his Adversary, he is so long at least discharged
from his former Calling, and possibly made incapable thereby from ever
following it again. There may other such like Instances perhaps be given,
wherein it may be unquestionably lawful for a Man to leave his Calling; which
yet must be warily collected, and he that is concluded by them, must see that
he has his release from God, tho it be by the Intervention of Men.

2. A Man may be sufficiently discharged by the Hand of his special Providence.
And that,

(1.) When it pleases God to disable a Man's Mind. Not that every trouble of
Mind shall excuse a Man from following his Vocation: No, Means must be used and
Remedies applied, the Physician and the Divine must be consulted, and still the
Plough must go: yea, perhaps an honest Diligence in your Callings, may prove
the best cure for it. But I mean, when Reason is utterly clouded, or when the
Faculties are so enfeebled, that there is no present, nor prospect of future
Capacity, whereby to manage a Man's Calling, then God releases him. Let all
Tradesmen, therefore, while all is well within, and that their Faculties are in
due frame, take care of their Intellectuals. Be humble, be temperate, abuse not
your Parts, provoke not God, beware of worldly Sorrow, pore not upon any Loss
or Disappointment, maintain a harmless Cheerfulness in every Condition, meddle
not with abstruse Speculations, nor things that are too high for you; grasp not
after more Business than your Head can well bear; for at these Doors does
Melancholy and Distraction often enter, and then farwell the World, and all the
true Comfort of it. You must then leave your Callings, you cannot help it.

(2.) When God does disable a Man's Body, then he discharges him from his
Calling. Yet it is not every Distemper nor Pain, whether Acute or Chronical,
which will justify his deserting his Employment: for then few or none would
abide therein. Distempers are inseparable from some Constitutions, and
inseparable from some Trades too; and since Sin opened the Door, we are all
daily liable to a thousand Miseries, so that we have more cause to admire at
one hours Health, than a years Sickness and Pain. The aged and sickly Tradesman
may then be like the Pilot, who though he run not up and down the Ship, yet
sitting still he is more serviceable than all the rest; so may he by his Advice
and Guidance be highly serviceable in his Profession. But that Disability only
releaseth a Man from his Calling, which is in consistent with the managing of
it, to those Ends for which he should follow it. When his Weakness or Pain
makes him incapable, to do what is necessary in his Employment: So that his
Body suffers on the one hand, and his Employment on the other; and there is no
rational Prospect of being restored to a sufficient Ability; in this case God
signs him a Release from his Calling; it is a necessary Cessation, not a sinful
Idleness. Consider this, ye younger Tradesmen, and provide for the future.
Spend not your Estates as fast as ye get them; Go to the Ant, thou Fool, and
consider her Ways, and be wise. There is a time to get, and a time to spend:
Eccles. 3. 6. And therefore now employ your Parts, your Strength, your
Opportunities to make competent Provision for a time of Sickness. Now rise up,
that then you may lie in Bed: run now, that then you may keep your Chair;
labor now, that then you may rest. And beware of all Intemperance, and hurtful
Lusts whereby Nature is weakened, and a Door opened to many Informities, lest
you remove to the Hospital at last. Sobriety and Piety, will be Health to your
Navel, and Marrow to your Bones. Then will you have the Comfort of your former
Integrity, when you will receive but little from your present Indisposition,
your Calling and you must part, there is no remedy.

But you will Ask, May not a Tradesman, tho yet of some competent Abilities of
Mind and Body, lay aside his Calling, when he has gotten a sufficient Estate
for himself and Family? Nay, should he not in that case do it, thereby to have
some Enjoyment of his Labors, and also to give place to young Traders to
improve their Talents? I Answer, Yes, he may; provided he intend not to be
unserviceable in the World, but to employ his Parts, his Abilities, and his
Estate some way to the good of Mankind. He may rather choose a Country-Life, and
God forbid he should be denied, after his wearisom Employment, the comfort of
it. But then he must not say to his Soul, Soul, thou have much Goods laid up
for many Years, take thine Ease, eat, arink, and be merry. He must not lay up
Dainties and Treasures only for himself, but must be rich toward God, Luke 12.
20. Indeed, he must not only aim at Ease, but at Leisure to prepare himself for
the World to come. And I conceive, that the Tradesman, who has arrived at a
sufficient Estate, and is declined in Years, not only may, but should, unless
there be some other justifiable Reasons that do preponderate, give place to the
younger Tradesmen, and not stand like great old Trees, which hinder the growth
of all below them. He that conjoyns the common Good with his private Advantage,
will not be so selfish, as to prefer his own unnecessary Emolument, before the
necessary Encouragement of many. He thought it unreasonable in his
Predecessors, and therefore should not deal so with those that are coming after
him. And in this his Repose, he should not only instruct young Tradesmen in the
Virtues of Prudence, Justice, Truth, and Piety, but set himself to do all the
good he can in the place of his Retirement; and there lay out some of that
Wisdom, Religion, and Estate, which he had laid up before; so shall he come to
his Grave in a full Age, like as a Shock of Corn comes in his Season: Job 5.
26.

(3.) When a Man is disabled in his Estate to follow his Calling, then he is
plainly released from it. You must not give it up for every Loss, nor for every
Abatement in your Estate. God is pleased sometimes to try the Faith and
Patience of his dearest Children, by Ebbs and Tides in their Estates; and many
who have been reduced to a very small scantling, have recovered again in a
wonderful manner. But if a Man's Estate be reduced to nothing, and that his
Calling is such, as requires an Estate to manage it, then he is discharged; he
does not properly leave his Calling, but his Calling leaves him. But it highly
concerns this Man to review his Carriage both toward God, and toward Men; and
to find out, wherefore God has taken his Talent from him. He should consider,
whether he have served his Master with all his Strength, whether he has not
lived in some Omission, or indulged some Transgression or other? Whether he
has employed his utmost Wisdom, Strength, and Skill, in his Vocation? Whether
he has not been unjust, or uncharitable toward others? And in case he find
himself faulty, to deplore his Sin, and implore the Mercy of God in Jesus
Christ; lest those Sins which drive him out of his Shop, keep him out of Heaven
also. But in this case, he and his Calling must live no longer together; he is
starved out of it, and must seek another. For God will not give his Consent,
that he should be idle. He must be content to be a Servant, when he cannot be a
Master; and to be helpful in another Shop, when he cannot keep open his own.
And this is rather to be chosen, than to wander into Employments foreign to his
own: for tho it may be less creditable and more laborious; yet he is within the
Purlieus of his own Calling, and if he can get Food and Raiment, he ought
therewith to be content.

(4.) Lastly; God does manifestly discharge a Man of his Calling by Death. This
puts an end to all a Man's Cares and Labors, and puts a Man from his Calling
for ever. His Wares, his Books, his Chapmen, his Projects and he must part for
good and all. His Breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth, in that very
day his Thoughts perish: Psalm. 146. 4. This day will come, and it often comes
in an hour he is not aware of* When God calls to the Grave, all other Callings
must be left; Job 14. 10. Man dies and wastes away; yea, Man gives up the
Ghost, and where is he? He was wont to be in his Shop, he is not there: Where
is he? See in his Counting House, he is not there; where is he? Look for him at
the Exchange, there he is not; where is he then? why, he is gone, whither? into
another Country? No, he is gone into another World, and his House nor Shop will
known him no more.

Let my Counsel therefore be acceptable to every Tradesman;

1. Set thy Heart in order this day, defer it no longer; break off thy Sins by
Righteousness, and thine Iniquities by showing Mercy to the Poor-Repent of all
your Sins from the bottom of your Hearts; not only in the lump, but with
particular Reflection, and suitable Grief for every one of them; batter Heaven
with your earnest Cries for Pardon and for Grace. Settle your selves in a
course of sincere, universal, and constant Piety-Live in the daily Expectations
of dying; and lay up for your selves Treasure in Heaven. If you have done Wrong
to any, make them speedy and full amends: whatever you would now regret, if you
were called this night to give an account of your Stewardship, that rectify
this day. For besides the Quickness and Violence of some Diseases, which give a
Man neither Opportunity, nor Ability to think or do any thing about his Soul;
your Deathbed Repentance allows you no Opportunity to demonstrate the
Sincerity of your Purposes, by actual Amendment. They will appear to be only
Bonds made in Durance, Godliness out of Force, not out of Choice.

2. Set your House in order also with all the speed you can. To that end, keep
your Books and Accounts with every Body, as even and as exact as you can.
Suffer not any long Reckonings to lie dormant between you and others; the
which, if either of you should unexpectedly die, may turn to the Injury of the
one or the other, or else afford Fuel for tedious and costly Suits. And when
you have computed as near as you can, the true value of your Estates, then,
with the help of those that have Skill and Honesty, make your Will. Wherein,
after you have bequeathed and settled a competent Estate upon your Wife and
Children, dispose of the Remainder, if God has so far blessed you, to your poor
Relations; and forget not to acknowledge the Goodness of God to you, by devoting
some fit Proportion to pious and charitable Uses; which being done with a
sincere respect unto the Lord, is the best means, that you can invent, to
intail the rest upon your Posterity. Having done these things, you are not one
minute nearer to Death, but only readier for it. You should expect it, but you
need not fear it. You will cheerfully leave your low Calling upon Earth, when
you are going to receive the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus.
To whom be all the Glory.

Amen.
FINIS.
Books sold by Samuel Sprint, at the Bell in Little-Britain.
THE Vanity of Man's *Present State, proved and applied in a Sermon on Psalm.
39. 5. with diverse Sermons of the Saints Communion with God. By Mr. John Wilson.

A Treatise concerning the Lord's Supper, with three Dialogues. By Thomas
Dolittle, the 9th Edition.

Time, and the end of Time, in two Discourses: By Joh. Fox.

Godly Fear, or the Nature and Necessity of Fear, and its usefulness* By. R.
Allen.

The Door of Heaven opened and shut; or a Discourse concerning the absolute
necessity of a timely Preparation for a happy Eternity. By John Fox.

The Anatomical Exercises of Dr. William Harvey; with the Preface of Zachariah
Wood, Physician of Rotterdam: to Which is added Dr. James De-back his Discourse
of the Heart. Physician in Ordinary to the Town of Rotterdam.

Infant Baptism, from Heaven, and not of Men. By Joseph Whiston, in 4 parts.

Villare Anglicum, or a view of all the Cities, Towns and Villages in England,
alphabetically composed; by the appointment of Sir Henry Spelman, Knight; the
2d Edition with Additions.

The Christian Temper, or a Discourse concerning the Nature and Properties of
Grace of the Sanctification: written for help in Self-Examination, and holy
living; by J. Barret, M. A.

Argumentum Anti-Normanicum, or an Argument proving from Ancient Histories and
Records, that William Duke of Normandy made no absolute Conquest of England by
the Sword, in sense of our Modern Writers.

The sacred Diary, or select Meditations for every part of the day of every
Christian.

Manuductio; or a leading of Children by the hand, through the Principles of
Grammar; by Ja. Shirley.

The School of the Heart, in 47 Emblems, by the Author of the Synagogue,
annexed to Herberts Poems: whereunto is added the Learning of the Heart by the
same hand, the 3d Edit.

Correction, Instruction; Or a Treatise of Afflictions; by Thomas Case, M. A.

The true Christians love of the unseen Christ; by T. Vincent, Minister
sometime of St. Maudlins-Milk-street, London.

A Sermon preached at the Funeral of the Lady Brook, to which is annexed an
Account of the Life and Death of that Eminent Lady. By Nathaniel Parkhurst, M.
A.


