The Contents. Directions for the Book-binder. 1. The Author's Preface. 1
sheet, Signat.* 2. Exposition upon the Epistle to K. Edw. 3 sheets and a half,
Signat. A.B.D.E. 3. -- upon the Preface. 3 sheets* 4. -- upon the 6 Gates 19
sheets and a half, from F. to Cc. 5. and the Experiments of the Sophick Mercury
6. Breviary of Alchymy. 2 sheets, A. B. 7 An Exposition upon Sir G. Ripley's
Vision. 2 sheets, A. B.

AN EXPOSITION Upon Sir George Ripley's EPISTLE To King Edward IV.

Written by Eirenaeus Philalethes Anglus, COSMOPOLITA.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain, 1677.

Sir GEORGE RIPLEY'S EPISTLE TO King Edward the Fourth, UNFOLDED.
THis Epistle as it was immediately written to a King, who was in his
Generation, both wise and valiant; so it does comprize the whole secret, both
learnedly described, and yet artificially veiled. Yet as the Author testifies,
that in this Epistle he does plainly untie the main knot; So I can, and do
testify with him, that there is nothing desirable for the true attaining of
this Mystery, both in the Theory and Practick of it, which is not in this short
Epistle fully taught. This then I intend as a Key to all my former writings,
and assure you on my faithful word, that I shall not speak one word doubtfully
or Mystically, as I have in all my other writings, seeming to aver some things,
which taken without a Figure, are utterly false, which we did only to conceal
this Art. This Key therefore we intend not to make common; and shall entreat
you to keep it secret to your self, and not to communicate it, except it be to
a sure friend, who you are confident will not make it public: And this request
we make upon very good grounds, knowing that all our writings together, are
nothing to this, by reason of the contradictions, which we have woven into
them, which here is not done in the least measure. I shall therefore in this
Epistle take up a new Method, and that different from the former, and shall
first draw up the substance of the Philosophy couched in this Epistle, into
several conclusions, and after elucidate the same.

The first Conclusion is drawn from the Ninth Stave of this Epistle, the eight
first Staves being only complementall; and that is, That as all things are
multiplied in their kind, so may be Metalls, which have in themselves a
capacity of being transmuted, the imperfect into perfect.

The second Conclusion in the Tenth Stave is, That the main ground for the
possibility of transmutation, is the possibility of reduction of all Metalls,
and such Minerals as are of metallic principles, into their first Mercurial
matter.

The third Conclusion is in the Eleventh Stave, that among so many Metaline and
Mineral Sulphurs, and so many Mercuries there are but two Sulphurs that are
related to our work, which Sulphurs have their Mercuries essentially united to
them.

The fourth Conclusion from the same Stave is, That he who understands these
two Sulphurs and Mercuries aright, shall find that the one is the most pure red
Sulphur of Gold, which is Sulphur in manifesto, and Mercurius in occulto, and
that other is most pure white Mercury, which is indeed true Quicksilver in
manifesto, and Sulphur in occulto, these are our two Principles.

The fifth Conclusion from the Twelfth Stave is, That if a man's Principles be
true, and his Operations regular, his Event will be certain, which Event is no
other then the true Mystery.

These Conclusions are but few in number, but of great weight or concernment;
the Amplification, Illustration and Elucidation therefore of them, will make a
son of Art truly glad.

STAVE IX. In the Edition 1591: but in Esquire Ashmole's Theatrum it is Stave 8.
But notwithstanding for peril that may befall,
If I dare not here plainly the knot unbind,
Yet in my writing I will not be so mystical,
But that by study the true Knowledge you may find
How that each thing is multiplied in its kind,
And how the likeness of Bodies Metalline be transmutable,
I will declare, that if you feel me in your mind,
My writing you shall find true, and no falned Fable.

FOr the First; Forasmuch as it is not for our purpose here to invite any to
the Art, only intending to lead and guide the sons of Art; We shall not prove
the possibility of Alchymy, by many Arguments, having done it abundantly in
another Treatise. He then that will be incredulous, let him be incredulous; he
that will cavil, let him cavil; But he whose mind is persuaded of the truth of
this Art, and of its Dignity, let him attend to what is in the Illustration of
these Five Conclusions discovered, and his heart shall certainly rejoice. We
shall therefore briefly Illustrate this 1st. Conclusion, and insist there more
largely, where the secrets of the Art are most couched.

For this first, which concludes in effect the truth of the Art, and its
validity; he that would therein be more satisfied in it, let him read the
Testimony of the Philosophers: And he that will not believe the Testimony of so
many men, being most of them men of renown in their own times, he will cavil
also against all other Arguments.

We shall only hold to Ripley's Testimony in this our Key, who in the Fourth
Stave, assures the King that at Lovain he first saw the greatest and most
perfect secrets, namely, the two Elixirs; and in his following Verses, craved
his confident credit, that he himself has truly found the way of secret
Alchymy, and promises the discovery of it to the King, only upon condition of
secrecy.

And in the Eighth Stave, though he protests never to write it by Pen, yet
proffers the King at his pleasure, to show him occularly the Red and White
Elixir, and the working of them, which he promises will be done for easy
costs in time So then, he that will doubt the truth of this Art, must account
this Famous Author for a most simple mad Sophister, to write and offer such
things to his Prince, unless he were able in effect to do what he promised;
from which imputation, his Writings, and also the History of him, of his Fame,
Gravity, and Worth, will sufficiently clear him.

STAVE X.
As the Philosopher in the Book of Meteors does write,
The likeness of Bodies Metalline be not transmutable,
But after he added these words of more delight,
Without they be reduced to their beginning materiable,
Wherefore such Bodies which in Nature be liquiable,
Mineral and Metalline may be Mercurizate,
Conceive you may this Science is not opinionable,
But very true, by Raymond and others determinate.

WE come to the second Conclusion; the substance of which is, that all Metalls,
and Bodies of Metalline Principles, may be reduced to their first Mercurial
Matter; And this is the main and chief ground for the possibility of
Transmutation. On this we must insist largly and fully, for (trust me) this is
the very hinge on which our secrets hang.

First, Then know that all Metalls, and several Minerals have Mercury for their
next matter, to which (for the most part, nay indeed always) there adheres, and
is Con-coagulated an external Sulphur, which is not Metalline, but
distinguishable from the internal Kernel of the Mercury.

This Sulphur is not wanting even in common Argent Vive, by the Mediation of
which, it may be precipitated into the form of a dry Powder: Yea, and by a
Liquor well known to us, (though nothing helping the Art of Transmutation) it
may be so fixed, that it may endure all Fires, the Test and Coppel, and this
without the addition of any thing to it, but the Liquor (by virtue whereof it
is fixed) coming away entire, both in its Pondus and Virtue. This Sulphur in
Gold and Silver is pure, in the other Metalls less pure; Therefore in Gold and
Silver it is fixed, in others it is fugitive; in all the Metalls it is
coagulated, in Mercury or Argent Vive, it is coagulable, in Gold, Silver and
Mercury; this Sulphur is so strongly united, that the Ancients did ever judge
Sulphur and Mercury, to be all one; but we by the help of a Liquor, the
Invention of which in these parts of the world we owe to Paracelsus, (though
among the Moors and Arabians, it has been, and is (at this day) commonly known
to the acuter sort of Chemists.) By this I say, we know that the Sulphur which
is in Mercury coagulable, and in the Metals coagulated, is external to the
Internal nature of Mercury, and may may be separated in the form of a tincted
Metallic Oil, the remaining Mercury being then void of all Sulphur, save that
which may be called its Inward or Central Sulphur, and is now incoagulable of
it self, (though by our Elixir it is to be coagulated) but of it self, it can
neither be fixed nor precipitated, nor sublimed, but remains un-altered in all
corrosive waters, and in all digestions of heat. One way then of Mercury
Azating all Metals and Minerals, is by the Liquor Alchahest, which out of all
such Bodies as have Mercury in their Constitution, can separate a running
Argent Vive, from which Argent vive all its Sulphur is then separated, save
that only which is Internal and Central to the Mercury, which Internal Sulphur
of Mercury no corrosive can touch: Next to this way of universal Reduction,
there are also some other particular ways by which Saturn, Jupiter, Antimony,
yea even Venus and Mars may be reduced into a running Quicksilver, by the help
of Salts, which because (being corporeal) they pierce not so radically as the
forenamed Liquor does; they therefore do not spoil the Mercury of its Sulphur,
but that as much Sulphur as there in is Common Mercury; so much also there in
is this Mercury of the Bodies, only this Mercury has specificated qualities
according to the nature of the Metal or Mineral, from which it was extracted;
and for that reason, (as to our work which is to dissolve perfect Species of
Metals,) it has no more virtue then common Argent Vive. There is than but one
only humidity, which is applicable unto our Work, which certainly is neither of
Saturn nor Venus, nor is drawn from any thing, which nature has formed, but
from a substance compounded by the Art of the Philosopher. So then, if a
Mercury drawn from the Bodies, have not only the same deficiency of heat and
superfluity of faeces as Common Mercury has, but also a distinct specificated
form, it must (by reason of this its form) be so much the farther remote from
our Mercury, then common Argent Vive is.

Our Art therefore is to compound two Principles, (one in which the Salt, and
another in which the Sulphur of Nature does abound,) which are not yet perfect,
nor yet totally imperfect, and (by consequence) may therefore (by our Art) be
changed or exalted, which that (which is totally perfect) cannot be; and then
by Common Mercury to extract not the Pondus, but the Celestial virtue out of
the compound; which virtue (being Fermental) begets in the common Mercury an
Offspring more noble then it self, which is our true Hermaphrodite, which will
congeal it self, and dissolve the Bodies: Observe but a grain of Corn, in
which, scarce a discernable part is Sprout, and this Sprout, if it were out of
the Grain, would die in a moment; the whole grain is sown, yet the Sprout only
produces the Herb: So is it in our Body, the Fermental Spirit that is in it,
is scarce a third part of the whole, the rest is of no value, yet all is
joined, (in the composition,) and the faeculent corporeous parts of the Body
comes away with the dregs of the Mercury. But beyond the example or similitude
given of a grain of Corn, it may be observed that the hidden and spiritual
virtue of this our Body, does purge and purify its Matrix of water, in which
it is sown; that is, it makes it cast forth a great quantity of filthy earth,
and a great deal of Hydropical Saline moisture. For instance, make thy washings
(for a trial) with pure and clean Fountain water; weigh first a Pint of the
same water, and take the exact weight of it, then wash thy compound 8 or 10
Eagles (or times,) save all the faeces, weigh thy Body and Mercury exactly,
weigh thy faeces being very dry, then Distill or Sublime all that will Sublime,
a very little quick Mercury will ascend, then put the residue of the faeces in
a Crucible, set them on the Coals, and all the faeculency of the Mercury will
burn like a Coal, yet without fume; when that is all consumed, weigh the
remaining faeces, and thou shall find them to be two thirds of thy Body, the
other third being in the Mercury; weigh the Mercury which thou Sublimest, and
the Mercury prepared by it self, and the weight of both will not recompense thy
Mercuries weight by far: So then, boil up thy water to a skin, in which thou
made thy Lotions, for that is a thick water; and in a cool place thou shall
have Crystals, which is the Salt of Mercury Crude, and no way fit for
Medicines; Yet it is a content for the Artists to see how the Heterogeneities
of Mercury are discovered, which no Art save the Liquor of Alchahest can do,
and that in a destructive, not a generative way as this is; for this operation
of ours is made between Male and Female, within their own kind, between which
there is a Ferment which effects that which no other thing in the world could
do. In all truth I tell you, that if you should take our imperfect compound
Body, per se, and Mercury per se, and Ferment them alone, though you might
bring out of the one a most pure Sulphur, and out of the other Mercury of
Mercury, which is the Nut of Mercury, yet with these thou could effect
nothing, for Fermental virtue is the wonder of the world, and it is by it, that
water becomes Herbs, Trees, and Plants, Fruits, Flesh, Blood, Stones, Minerals,
and every thing; seek then for it only, and rejoice in it, as in a deservedly
invaluable treasure: Now know, that Fermentation works or ferments not out of
kind, neither do Salts Ferment Metals. Will thou then know whence it is that
some fixed Alcalies do extract a Mercury out of Minerals, and out of the more
imperfect Metals? Consider then, that in all these Bodies the Sulphur is not so
radically mixed and united, as it is in Silver and Gold. Now Sulphur is of kin
to diverse Alcalies, that are extraordinarily dissolved or melted with it, and
by this means the Mercurial parts are disjoined, and the Argent vive is by fire
separated. The Mercury thus separated, is spoiled of its Sulphur, when as
indeed there needs, or is required only a depuration of the Sulphur by
separating the impure from the pure; but these Salts having separated the
Sulphur, do leave the Mercury worse; that is, more estranged from a Metallic
nature than it was before; for in its Composition that Sulphur of Saturn will
not burn, for though it be Sublimed, Calcined, made Sugar or Vitrified, yet by
Fire and Fluxes it still returns to the same it was in before; but its Sulphur
being (as is aforesaid,) separated, will take fire if joined with Saltpeter,
even as common Sulphur does, so that the Salts act on the Sulphur of which they
rob the Mercury, but on the Mercury they act not for want of Ferment, which is
not to be found, but only amongst Homogeneal things. Therefore the Ferment of
Bread Leavens not a Stone, nor does the Ferment of any Animal or Vegetable,
Ferment a Metal or Mineral. So then, though out of Gold thou might obtain a
Mercury by the help of the Liquor of the first Ens of Salt, yet that Mercury
would never accomplish our work: whereas on the other side Mercury made out of
Gold by our Mercury, though there be three parts of our Mercury to one of Gold:
This Mercury I say, will (by continual digestion) accomplish the whole work;
marvel not then, that our Mercury is more powerful, which is prepared by
Mercury: For certainly the Ferment, which comes between the compound Body and
the water, causes a death and a regeneration; it does that, which nothing in
the world can do: Besides it severs from Mercury a terrestreity which burns
like a coal, and an Hydropical humor melting in common water, but the residue
is acuated by a Spirit of Life, which is our true embryonated Sulphur of our
water, not visible, yet working visibly. We conclude then, that all operations
for our Mercury, but by common Mercury, and our Body according to our Art, are
erroneous, and will never produce our Mystery, although they be otherwise,
Mercuries never so wonderfully made. For as the Author of the New light, says,
No Water in any Island of the Philosophers was wholesome, but that which was
drawn out of the reigns of Sol and Luna. Will thou know what that means,
Mercury in its pondus and incombustibility is Gold fugitive, our Body in its
purity is called the Philosophers Luna, being far more pure than the imperfect
Metals, and its Sulphur also as pure as the Sulphur of Sol, not that it is
indeed Luna, for it abides not in the fire. Now in the composition of these
three; First, our common Mercury, and the two Principles of our compound there
intercedes the Ferment of Luna, out of which though it be a Body, proceeds yet
a specificated odor: yea, and often the Pondus of it is diminished: If the
Compound be much washed, after it is sufficiently clean. So then, the Ferment of
Sol and Luna intercedes in our composition, which Ferment begets an offspring
more noble then it self a thousand fold; whereas should thou work on our
compound body by a violent way of Salts, thou should have the Mercury, by far
less noble then the Body, the Sulphur of the Body being separated, and not
exalted by such a progress.

STAVE XI.
In the said Book the Philosopher speaks also,
Therein if it please Your Highness for to read,
Of diverse Sulphurs, and especially of two,
And of two Mercuries joined to them indeed,
Whereby he does true understanders lead,
To the knowledge of the Principles which be only true,
Both Red, Moist, Pure, and White, as I have espied,
Which be nevertheless found but of very few.

WE now come to the Third Conclusion, which is, that among all Metalline and
Mineral Sulphurs there are only Two that belong to our Work; which Two have
their Mercuries essentially united with them: This is the truth of our secrets,
though we (to seduce the unwary) do seem to aver the contrary; for do not think
that (because we do insinuate two ways, therefore) we really mean as we say,
for verily (as witnesses Ripley,) There is no true Principle but one, nor have
we but one matter, nor but one way of working upon that matter, nor but one
regimen of heat, and one linear way of proceeding.

These two Sulphurs as they are Principles of our Work, they ought to be
Homogeneal, for it is only Gold Spiritual that we seek; First White, then Red,
which Gold is no other then that which the vulgar see, but they know not the
hidden Spirit that is in it. This Principle wants nothing but composition, and
this composition must be made with our other crude white Sulphur, which is
nothing but Mercury vulgar, by frequent cohobation of it upon our
Hermaphroditical body, so long till it become a fiery water.

Know therefore, that Mercury has in it self a Sulphur, which being un-active,
our Art is to multiply in it a living active Sulphur, which comes out of the
loins of our Hermaphroditical body, whose Father is a Metal, and his Mother a
Mineral; Take then the most beloved Daughter of Saturn, whose Arms are a Circle
Argent, and on it a Sable Cross on a Black Field, which is the signal note of
the great world, espouse her to the most warlike God, who dwells in the house
of Aries, and thou shall find the Salt of Nature, with this Salt acuate thy
water, as thou best know, and thou shall have the Lunary bath in which the
Sun will be amended.

And in all truth I assure thee, that although thou had our Body
Mercurialized (without the addition of Mercury, or of the Mercury of any of the
Metals) made per se, that is, without the addition of Mercury, it would not be
in the least profitable unto thee, for it is our Mercury only, which has a
Celestial form and power, which it receives, not only, nor so much from the
Compound Body or Principles, as from the Fermental virtue which proceeds from
the composition of both the Body and the Mercury, by which is produced a
wonderful Creature: So then let all thy care be to marry Sulphur, with Sulphur,
that is our Mercury which is impregnated, which Sulphur must be espoused with
our Sol, then have thou two Sulphurs married, and two Mercuries of one
offspring, whose Father is the Sun, and Moon the Mother.

The Fourth Conclusion makes all perfectly plain which has been said before;
namely, that these two Sulphurs are, the one most pure Red Sulphur of Gold, and
the other of most pure clean White Mercury.

These are our two Sulphurs; the one appears a coagulated Body, and yet carries
its Mercury in its belly: the other is in all its proportions true Mercury, yet
very clean, and carries its Sulphur within its self, though hidden under the
form and fluxibility of Mercury.

Sophisters are (here) in a Labyrinth, for because they are not acquainted with
Metalline love, they work in things altogether heterogeneal,; or if they work
upon Metalline Bodies, they yet either join Males with Males, or else Females
with Females, or else they work on each alone; or else they take Males which
are charged with natural inabilities, and Females whose Matrix is vitiated.
Thus by their own inconsideration they frustrate their own hopes, and then cast
the blame upon the Art, when as indeed it is only to be imputed to their own
folly, in not understanding the Philosophers.

I know many pitiful Sophisters do dote on many Stones, Vegetable, Animal, and
Mineral; and some to those add the fiery Angelical, Paradaical Stone, which
they call a Wonder-working Essence; and because the mark they aim at is so
great, the ways also by which they would attain their scope, they make also
agreeable, that is a double way; One way they call Via Humida, the other they
call Via Sicca, (to use their languages:) The latter way is the Labyrinthian
path, which is fit only for the great ones of the earth to tread in; the other
the Daedalean Path, an easy way of small cost for the poor of the world to
enterprise.

But this I know, and can testify, that there is but one way, and but only one
Regimen, no more colors than ours; and what we say or write otherwise, is but
to deceive the unwary: For if every thing in the world ought to have its proper
causes, there cannot be any one end which is produced from two ways of working
on distinct Principles.

Therefore we protest, and must again admonish the Reader, that (in our former
writings) we have concealed much, by reason of the two ways we have insinuated,
which we will briefly touch; There is one Work of ours, which is the Play of
Children, and the Work of Women, and that is Decoction by the Fire; and we
protest that the lowest degree of this our work, is, that the matter be stirred
up, and may hourly circulate without fear of breaking of the Vessel, which for
this reason ought to be very strong; but our lineal Decoction is an Internal
Work, which advances every day and hour, and is distinct from that of outward
heat, and therefore is both invisible and insensible. In this our work, our
Diana is our body when it is mixed with the water, for then all is called the
Moon; for Laton is whitened, and the Woman bears rule: our Diana has a wood,
for in the first days of the Stone, our Body after it is whitened grows
vegetably. In this wood are at the last found two Doves; for about the end of
three weeks the Soul of the Mercury ascends with the Soul of the dissolved
Gold; these are infolded in the everlasting Arms of Venus, for in this season
the confections are all tincted with a pure green color; These Doves are
circulated seven times, for in seven is perfection, and they are left dead,
for they then rise and move no more; our Body is then black like to a Crows
Bill, for in this operation all is turned to Powder, blacker than the blackest.
Such passages as these we do oftentimes use when we speak of the Preparation of
our Mercury; and this we do to deceive the simple, and it is also for no other
end that we confound our operations, speaking of one, when we ought to speak of
another; For if this Art were but plainly set down, our operations would be
contemptible even to the foolish. Therefore believe me in this, that because
our works are truly natural, we therefore do take the liberty to confound the
Philosophers work with that which is purely Natures work, that so we might keep
the simple in ignorance concerning our true Vinegre, which being unknown, their
labor is wholly lost.

Let me then (for a close) say only thus much; Take our Body which is Gold, and
our Mercury which is seven times acuated by the marriage of it with our
Hermaphroditical body which is a Chaos, and it is the splendour of the Soul of
the God Mars, in the Earth and water of Saturn; mix these two in such a Pondus
as Nature does require: in this mixture you have our invisible Fires, for in
the Water, or in the Mercury is an active Sulphur or Mineral Fire, and in the
Gold a dead, passive, but yet actual Sulphur; Now when that Sulphur of the Gold
is stirred up and quickened, there is made between the Fire of Nature which is
in the Gold and the Fire against Nature, which is in the Mercury, a Fire partly
of the one, and partly of the other, for it partakes of both; and by these two
Fires thus united into one, is caused both Corruption (which is Humiliation)
and Generation, (which is Glorification and Perfection.) Now know that God only
governs this way of the Internal Fire, Man being ignorant of the progress
thereof, only by his Reason beholding its operations, he is able to discern
that it is hot; that is, that it does perform the actions of heat, which is
Decoction. In this Fire there is no Sublimation, for Sublimation is an
Exaltation; But this Fire is such an Exaltation, that it is Perfection it self,
and that beyond it is no progress.

All our Work then is only to multiply this Fire, that is, to circulate the
Body, so long until the Virtue of the Sulphur be augmented. Again, this Fire is
an invisible Spirit, and therefore not having Dimensions as neither above nor
below, but every where in the Sphere of the activity of our Matter in the
Vessel; So that though the material visible substance do sublime and ascend by
the action of the Elemental heat, yet this Spiritual Virtue is always as well
in that which subsides in the bottom, as in that which is in the upper part of
the Vessel. For it is as the Soul in the Body of Man, which is every where at
the same time, and yet bounded or terminated in none.

This is the Ground of one Sophism of ours, (viz.) when we say, that in this
true Philosophical Fire there is no Sublimation; for the Fire is the Life, and
the Life is a Soul, which is not at all subject to the dimensions of Bodies:
Hence also it is, that the opening of the Glass, or cooling of the same during
the time of Working, kills the Life or Fire that is in this secret Sulphur, and
yet not one Grain of the matter is lost. The Elemental Fire then is that which
any Child knows how to kindle and govern, but it is the Philosopher only that
is able to discern the true inward Fire, for it is a wonderful thing which acts
in the Body, yet is no part of the Body. Therefore the Fire is a Celestial
Virtue, it is uniformed; that is, it is always the same until the period of its
Operation is come; and then being come to perfection, it acts no more, for
every Agent, when the end of its action is come, then rests.

Remember then, that when we speak of our Fire which sublimes not, that thou do
not mistake, and think that the moisture of the Compound which is within the
Glass, ought not to Sublime, for that it must do uncessantly; but the Fire that
sublimes not is the Metalline love, which is above, and below, and in all
places alike. Now then for a close to all that has been said, learn, and be
well advised what matter you take in hand, for an evil Crow lays an evil Egg,
as the Proverb has it; Let thy Seed be pure, and thy Matrix also pure, then
shall thou see a Noble Offspring: Let the Fire without be such, as in which
our Confections may play to and fro uncessantly, and this (in a few days) will
produce that which thou most longest for, the Crows Bill. Continue then thy
Decoction, and in an hundred and thirty days thou shall see the White Dove, and
in ninety days more the Sparkling Cherubim.

STAVE XII.
And these Two things be best, he adds anon,
For him that works the Alchymy to take:
Our Gold and our Silver therewith to make all one,
Wherefore I say, who will our Pearl and Ruby make,
The said Principles look that he not forsake:
For at the beginning, if the Principles be true;
And if so be by craft he can them also take,
In the end truly his work he shall not rue.

THus come we to the last Conclusion, which is, that if a Man's Operations be
Regular, and his Principles true, his end will be certain, (viz.) the Mastery.

O Fools and Blind that do not consider how each thing in the world has his
proper Cause and Progress in Operation; Think you, if a Seaman should with a
gallant Coach, intend to Sail to any place beyond Sea, he would not find his
attempt to be foolish; Or if with a Ship gallantly furnished, he should Row at
Random, he may not sooner stumble on an unfortunate Rock, then arrive at the
golden Coast: Such fools are they who seek our secret in trivial matters, and
yet hope to find the Gold of Ophir.

For the more exact Guiding of your Practice, take notice of these Twenty Rules
following.
Rule. I.
Whatever any Sophister may suggest unto you, or you may read in any
Sophistical Author; yet let none take you from this ground, (viz.) That as the
end you look for is Gold: so let Gold be the subject on which you work, and
none other.

Rule II.
Let none deceive you with telling you, that our Gold is not common, but
Philosophical; for common Gold is dead, which is true: But as we order it,
there is made a quickening of it, as a grain of Corn in the Earth is quickened.

So then in our work, after six Weeks, Gold that was dead, becomes quick,
living, and spermatical; and in our composition, it may be called Our Gold,
because it is joined with an Agent that will certainly quicken it: So a
Condemned Man, is called a Dead Man, though at present living.

Rule III.
Besides Gold, which is the Body or Male, you must have another Sperm, which is
the Spirit and Soul; or Female, and this is Mercury, in Flux and Form like to
common Argent Vive, yet more clean and pure.

There are many, who instead of Mercury, will have strange Waters or Liquors,
which they style by the name of Philosophical Mercury; Be not deceived by them,
for what a Man sows, that he must look to reap: If thou shall sow thy Body in
any Earth, but that which is Metalline and Homogeneal to it; thou shall instead
of a Metalline Elixir, reap an unprofitable Calx, which will be of no value.

Rule IV.
Our Mercury is in substance one with common Argent Vive, but far different in
Form; For it has a Form Celestial, Fiery, and of excellent Virtue: and this
is the Nature which it receives by our Artificial Preparation.

Rule V.
The whole Secret of our Preparation, is, that thou take that Mineral which is
next of kin to Gold, and to Mercury; Impregnate this with Volatile Gold, which
is found in the reins of Mars, with this purify your Mercury until seven
times are past, then it is fitted for the Kings Bath.

Rule VI.
Yet know, that from seven times to ten, the Mercury is made better and
better, and is more active, being by each Preparation acuated by our true
Sulphur; which if it exceed in number of Preparations, becomes too fiery; which
instead of dissolving the Body, will Coagulate it self.

Rule VII.
This Mercury thus acuated, is after to be distilled in a Glass retort twice or
thrice; and that for this reason, because some Atoms of the Body may be in it,
which were insensibly left in the Preparation of the Mercury, afterward it is
to be cleansed well with Vinegar and Sal-armoniack, then is it fit for the work.

Rule VIII.
Choose your Gold for this work pure and clean from any mixture: if it be not so
when you buy it, make it so by Purgation; then let it be made fine, either by
Filing, Malleating, Calcining with Corrosives, or any other way, by which it
may be made most subtle.

Rule IX.
Now come to your mixture, in which take of the aforesaid Body so chosen and
prepared, one Ounce of Mercury, as is above taught animated, two Ounces or
three at the most, mix them in a Marble which may be warmed so hot as water
will heat it; grind both together till they be well incorporated, then wash the
mixture with Vinegar and Salt till it be very pure; And lastly, Dulcifie it
with warm water, and dry it carefully.

Rule X.
Know now, that whatever we say out of Envy, our way is done other, and we
protest, and will protest, that neither We, nor any of the Ancients knew any
other way; for it is impossible that our secret can be wrought by any other
Principles, or any other disposition then this. Our Sophism lies only in the
two kinds of Fire in our work: the Internal secret Fire, which is Gods
Instrument, has no qualities perceptible to man, of that Fire we speak often,
and seem yet to speak of the External heat; and hence arise among the unwary
many Errors. This is our Fire which is graduated, for the External heat, is
almost linear all the work, to the white work, it is one without alteration,
save that in the seven first days we keep the heat a little slack for
certainty and security sake, which an experienced Philosopher need not do.

But the Internal governing heat is insensibly graduated hourly, and by how
much that is daily vigorated by the continuance of Decoction, the Colors are
altered, and the Compound maturated: I have unfolded a main knot unto you, take
heed of being ensnared here again.

Rule XI.
Then you must provide a Glass Tun, in which you may perfect your work, without
which you could never do any thing; Let it be either Oval or Spherical, so big
in reference to your Compound, that it may hold about twelve times the quantity
of it within its Sphere, let your Glass be thick and strong, clear, and free of
flaws, with a neck about a Span or Foot long; In this Egg put your matter,
sealing the neck carefully, without flaw, or crack, or hole, for the least vent
will let out the subtle Spirit, and destroy the work.

You may know the exact Sealing of your Glass thus, when it is cold, put the
neck where it is sealed, into your mouth, and such strongly; if there be the
least vent, you will draw out the Air, that is in the Vial, into your mouth,
which when you take the Glass from your mouth, is again sucked into the Glass
with a hissing, so that your ear may perceive the noise; this is an undoubted
trial.

Rule XII.
You must then provide your self with a Furnace, by wise men called an Athanor,
in which you may accomplish your work; nor will any one serve in your first
work; But such a one in which you may give a heat obscurely red at your
pleasure, or lesser, and that in its highest degree of heat, it may endure
twelve hours at the least.

This if you would obtain; Observe, First, that your nest be no bigger then to
contain your dish with about an Inch vacancy at the side where the Vent-hole of
your Athanor, is for the Fire to play.

Secondly, Let your Dish be no bigger then to hold one Glass with about an inch
thickness of Ashes between the Glass and side, remembering the word of the
Philosopher, One Glass, One Thing, One Furnace; for such a Dish standing with
the bottom level to the vent-hole, which in such a Furnace ought to be but one,
about three Inches Diameter, sloping upwards, will with the stream of Flame,
which is always playing to the top of the Vessel, and round about the bottom,
be kept always in a glowing heat.

Thirdly, If your Dish be bigger, your Furnace vent must be within a third
part, or a fourth as big as your Platter is Diameter, else it cannot be
exactly, nor continually heated.

Fourthly, If your Tower be above six Inches square at the Fireplace, you are
out of proportion, and can never do rightly as to the point of heat; For if you
cause it (if above that proportion) to stream with flame, the heat will be too
big: And if it stream not, it will not be big enough, or very hardly.

Fifthly, Let the top of your Furnace be closed to an hole which may but just
serve for casting in of Coals about three Inches Diameter or Square, which will
keep down the heat powerfully.

Rule XIII.
These things thus ordered, set in your Glass with your matter, and give Fire
as Nature requires, easy, not too violent; beginning there where Nature left.
Now know, that Nature has left your Materials in the Mineral Kingdom;
therefore though we take comparison from Vegetables and Animals; Yet you must
understand a Parallel in the Kingdom, in which the Subject you would handle is
placed: As for Instance, if I should Analogize, between the Generation of a
Man, and the Vegetation of a Vegetable, you must not understand, as though the
heat for one, were to be measured by the other; for we know, that in the ground
Vegetables will grow, which is not without heat, which they in the Earth feel,
even in the beginning of the Spring; yet would not an Egg be hatched in that
heat, nor could a man feel any warmth, but rather to him a numbing cold.

Since then you know that your work appertains all to the Mineral Kingdom; you
must know what heat is fit for Mineral Bodies, and may be called a gentle heat,
and what violent; First, now consider, where Nature leaves you, not only in the
Mineral Kingdom, but in it to work on Gold and Mercury, which are both
incombustible: Yet Mercury being tender, will break all Vessels, if the Fire be
over extreme; Therefore though it be incombustible, and so no Fire can hurt it,
yet also it must be kept with the Male Sperm in one Glass, which if the Fire be
too big, cannot be, and by consequence the work cannot be accomplished. So then
from the degree of heat that will keep Lead or Tin constantly molten, and
higher, so high as the Glass will endure without danger of breaking, is a
temperate heat; and so you begin your degrees of heat according to the Kingdom
in which Nature has left you.

As then the highest degree of heat which the root of a Tree feels in the
bowels of the Earth; is not by far comparable to the lowest degree of heat an
Animal has; So the highest degree of heat a Vegetable will endure without
burning, is too low for the first degree of Mineral heat as to our Work.

Rule XIV.
Know, that all your progress in this Work is to ascend in Bus and Nubi, from
the Moon up to the Sun; that is in Nubibus, or in Clouds: Therefore I charge
thee to sublime in a continual vapor, that the Stone may take Air, and live.

Rule XV.
Nor is this enough, but for to attain our permanent Tincture, the water of our
Lake must be boiled with the Ashes of Hermes Tree; I charge thee then to boil
night and day without ceasing, that in the troubles of the stormy Sea, the
Heavenly Nature may ascend, and the Earthly descend.

For verily, if we did not Boil, we would never name our work Decoction, but
Digestion; For where the Spirits only Circulate silently, and the Compound
below moves not by an Ebullition, that is only properly to be named Digestion.

Rule XVI.
Be not over hasty, expecting Harvest too soon, or the end soon after the
beginning: For if thou be patiently supported, in the space of fifty days at
the farthest, thou shall see the Crows Bill.

Many (says the Philosophers) do imagine our Solution to be an easy work; But
how hard it is, they can only tell, who have tried and made Experience: See
thou not a Grain of Corn, sow it, and after three days thou shall only see it
swelled; which being dried, is the Corn it was before: Yet thou can not say
it was not cast into its due Matrix; for the Earth is its true place, but only
it wanted its due time to Vegetate.

But things of an harder Kernel lie in the ground a far longer time, as Nuts
and Plumb-stones, for each thing has its season; And this is a true sign of a
natural Operation, that it stays its season, and is not Precipitate: Do think
then, that Gold the most solid Body in the world? will change its Form in a
short time; Nay, thou must wait and wait until about the 40th. day utter
blackness begins to appear; when thou see that, then conclude thy Body is
destroyed, that is, made a living Soul, and thy Spirit is dead, that is
Coagulated with the Body; But till this sign of Blackness, both the Gold and
the Mercury retain their Forms and Natures.

Rule XVII.
Beware that thy Fire go not out, no not for a moment, so as to let thy Matter
be cold, for so Ruin of the Work will certainly follow..

By what has been said, thou may gather, that all our work is nothing else
but an uncessant boiling of thy Compound in the first degree of liquifying
heat, which is found in the Metalline Kingdom, in which the Internal Vapors
shall go round about thy matter, in which fume it shall both die, and be
revived.

Rule XVIII.
Know, that when the White appears, which will be about the end of Five Months,
that then the accomplishment of the White Stone approaches; Rejoice then, for
now the King has overcome Death, and is rising in the East with great Glory.

Rule XIX.
Then continue your Fire until the Colors appear again, then at last you shall
see the fair Vermillion, the Red Poppy; Glorify God then, and be thankful.

Rule XX.
Lastly, you must boil this Stone in the same water, in the same proportion,
with the same Regimen, (only your Fire shall then be a little slacker) and so
you shall increase Quantity and Goodness at your pleasure.

Now the only God the Father of light, bring you to see this Regeneration of
the light, and make us to rejoice with him for ever hereafter in light, Amen.

AN ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Author having wrote many Excellent Pieces on this Subject, not so much to
manifest himself an Adept (as many have done) as to benefit the World by his
Writings, himself professing, that although the rest of his Adept Brethren had
(as we may say enviously) sworn secrecy (contrary to their received Maxim of
doing all the good they may with this large Talent so long as they live, and
longer if it might be,) yet had not he so sworn, though they supposed it; for
he had as himself confesses, an extraordinary impulse of mind, to be helpful
to all sincere searchers of this secret Art, (to use his own words) and to
stretch out his hand to such as are behind. Seeing therefore, that it was the
Authors own desire to benefit the World by his Labors, and that he gave his
consent to Mr. Starkey for Printing his Pieces, as appears in his Preface to
the Marrow of Alchimy; I know no reason wherefore his Writings should lie
concealed any longer: And great pity it was that Mr. Starkey did separate this
Author's Commentary upon Sir George Ripley's 12 Gates, which he did as I was
informed by one unto whom he gave the very Book from which he confessed he had
cut the last Six Gates; the Person demanding the reason wherefore he cut them
in sunder: he answered, that the World was unworthy of them; which nevertheless
he promised to give that Person a Transcript of, but did not, which is the
reason that they cannot yet be found; the loss of which is very much lamented.
Wherefore if any Gentleman has them by him, or any other piece of this Author,
It is humbly desired that they will send them to the Pelican in Little
Britain, London, that they may be Printed with the first Six Gates, which are
now in the Press: And that I may not be wanting to contribute what I can for
the discovery of this Author's Works, I here make bold to present the Reader
with a Catalogue of such Pieces as are noted to be writ by this Author under
the disguised name of Aeyraeneus Philalethes, part whereof are set down by Mr.
Starkey in his Preface aforenamed, and part are mentioned by the Author
himself, with several others, which he wrote (as he says) for his own
recreation, and afterward burned; which Author is acknowledged by all hands to
be an Englishman, and an Adept and supposed to be yet living, and traveling,
and about the age of 55 years, but his Name is not certainly known.

These Books in this Catalogue were written by Eirenaeus Philalethes, whereof
these 15. following are Printed.
1. INtroitus apertus ad occlusum Regis Palatium, Amst. 1667. This is
Reprinted in Germany, with the Collection of Books called Musaeum Hermeticum
of the Edition 1677. in 4o 2. -- Idem in English, called Secrets Revealed,
Printed at London 1669. in 8o. being much more perfect than the Latin
Editions. 3. The Marrow of Alchymy, in two Poems or Parts, in English Verse,
Land. 1654. and 1655. 4. Ars Metallorum Metamorphoseos, Amst. 1668. in 8o.
These are likewise in the aforesaid Edition of the Musaeum Hermeticum. 5.
Brevis manuductio ad Rubinum Coelestem, Amst. 1668. in 8o. These are likewise
in the aforesaid Edition of the Musaeum Hermeticum. 6. Fons Chymicae
Philosophiae, Amst. 1668. in 8o. These are likewise in the aforesaid Edition of
the Musaeum Hermeticum. 7. Methodica Enarratio trium Gebri Medicinarum, Land.
1678. in 8o. 8. Vade-Mecum Philosophicum, sive breve manuductorium ad Campum
Sophiae, Land. 1678. in 8o. 9. Experimenta de praeparatione Mercurii Sophici,
Land. 1678. in 8o. 10. A Commentary or Exposition upon Sir G. Ripley's Epistle
to Edw. IV. King of England, Land. 1678. in 8o. 11. -- Idem upon Sir G.
Ripley's Preface to his Compound of Alchymy, Land. 1678. in 8o. 12. -- Idem
upon the first six Gates of his Compound of Alchymy, Land. 1678. in 8o. 13. --
Idem upon the Recapitulation of his Compound of Alchymy, Land. 1678. in 8o. 14.
-- Idem upon his Vision, Land. 1678. in 8o. 15. Experiments for the Preparation
of the Sophick Mercury, Land. 1678. in 8o.
These 13. following he wrote, but we cannot as yet find where the Copies are.
1. A Comment. or Exposition upon the last six Gates of Sir G. Ripley's
Compound of Alchymy. 2. -- Idem upon Sir G. Ripley's Erroneous Experiments. 3.
-- Idem upon Sir G. Ripley's Wheel. 4. -- Idem upon Arnold's Vltimum
Testamentum. 5. Opus Elixeris Aurifici and Argentifici. 6. Brevis via ad vitam
longam, or Alchymy Triumphing. 7. Cabala Sapientum, or an Exposition upon the
Hieroglyphics of the Magi. 8. Elenchus Errorum in Art Chymica deviantium. 9.
Elenchus Authorum potissimorum in Art Chymica. 10. An Enchiridion of
Experiments, together with a Diurnal of Meditations, in which were many
Philosophical Receipts, declaring the whole Secret; with an Aenigma at the end.
11. Analysis Operis. 12. A Clavis to his Works. 13. Comments or Expositions
upon Flammel, Artephius, and Sendivogius. But these three are rather Quaeried,
then affirmed to be wrote by this Author.

