PYROTECHNY ASSERTED AND ILLUSTRATED, To be the surest and safest means FOR
Arts Triumph over Natures Infirmities.

Being full and free Discovery of the Medicinal Mysteries studiously concealed
by all Artists, and only discoverable by FIRE.

With an Appendix concerning the Nature, Preparation and Virtue of several
specific Medicaments, which are noble and succedaneous to the great Arcana.

By GEORGE STARKEY, who is a Philosopher by Fire.

^ondon, Printed by R. Daniel, for Samuel Thomson at the Whitehorse in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1658.

AN EPISTLE From a Friend of the Author's, To the READER.
READER,
WIthout addition, for I am unwilling to miscall thee, who art a stranger to
me, and I know not thy due titles or Epithites, but be what thou will, but a
Satyr, and I care not: I would not have the Fire fright thee, nor have thee
burn thy fingers, but have thee to understand, that a due and per use of that
which is a bad Master is to make it a good Servant, who when kept in discreet
obedience, can be a thousand ways profitable, and delightful to thee. I here
appear like a Prologue-speaker to a Play of Vulcan's, whose Apprentice I am, a
kind of junior Cyclops, and my Master bids me tell thee bluntly (without making
a leg, or complementing thy favor,) that if thou will have patience he will
show thee sport enough, and (if thou have wit) how not to repent of thy
twelvepence here laid out for his sake. For thus much I shall anticipate, Thou will find the lame leg cured, and Vulcan not only able to walk, but run on
both, and that so nimbly that he needs no golden balls to catch his Hippolita,
or a Net for Venus, but quickly overtakes the flying Daphne, and does then more
than Apollo could, viz. satisfy his own desires and thy wishes. This (Reader,)
thou shall be entertaind within the Sequel, which thus I blow the Trumpet to,
and hang out also a scurvy kind of picture of the strange Water-Fire-works to
be seen within, and without juggling, show thee the Sea burning, and the Fish in
a doubt, whether they are roasted or boiled, yet when the Cookery is done it
proves the wholesomest dish in the world, and if thou prove worthy to taste,
thou will confess it both food and Physic, pleasant and profitable.

If thou ask who first completed these rarities, I answer, a Noble Germane
Artist, One (with reverence be it borrowed) that like another Elijah rode here
with horses all of fire, and at length having paved his Chariot with love, and
gilded it with light, drove directly into eternity, leaving his mantle and a
double portion of his spirit upon an Elisha now traveling to and fro, and
encompassing the earth to destroy the works of that destroyer, that takes the
same journey like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. And to make up the
Triumvirate, I may present to thee this our Author, and so thou may like
Nebuchadnezar, behold the three children walking in the fiery furnace, choosing
that, rather than to fall down and worship the Image which Prince Gallen has
set up, and commanded all that are his Subjects to adore and bend their knee
to. And further (for the simile is thine, if not fourfooted,) there is a fourth
amongst them, who is like the Son of God, that true and Divine Wisdom, and
therefore the fire has no power over them, but is their pleasant garden, and
fresh walks, wherein they gather the sweetest flowers, flowers of Sun, the fair
Lunaria, apples of Paradise, Fruit from the tree of Life, and therefore are
professed enemies to death, and his armies of diseases, the leaves of that tree
being for the healing of the Nations. And wonder not, Reader, that I allude to
Eden the Garden of God, whose guardian Angel stands sentinel with a naked
flaming sword, that no man returns but he that passes through untoucht of that
flaming blade, and he that has passed thorough this fiery trial, has freedom
of access to the midst of the Garden, where (thou know) God planted his
Arborem Vitae: But without fire is no expiation, because no sacrifice, and
consequently no service: Because to him that overcomes is it only given to eat
of the hidden Manna.

But by this, perhaps I and this book grow too hot for thee to hold any longer,
and away thou throwst it; But prithee Reader which is hottest, thy ignorant
dark zeal, or that pleasant and unfeigned divider between the precious and the
vile? That (I say) which is a consuming and devouring flame of Hell, or that
which kindly heats and warmes with blessed and divine love? answer thy self.

But hold, I am now mounted, and it may be quite out of thy sight, and seem to
thee as little as nothing, and accordingly thou esteemest me. Well, I will tell
thee though where I am, even in words that thou can understand, if thou
know any thing of Aristotle, thou know the element of Fire is the
highest. Holloo (Reader) there I am, and will make bold with thy Stagirite, and
tell that Gentleman, he says not true (not to give him the lie, lest his
Champions stab me behind.) For this Fire burns, and can roast as many animals
as his worship reckons up in his muster-book of that subject, and may make a
Feast able to dine his great Patron, if he had wine enough too for the royal
Fudler. This will the Sphere of fire perform, and besides this any thing that
the Culinary does or can do. For to speak plainly of these two in the words of
Trismegist, That which is above is as that which is beneath, and this is a
truth most certain, and all for the work of one and the same thing, so that if
any difference be, it is the Culinary fire serves all the turns we use it for,
in our houses upon earth, and the Elementary does the same for the Astrologers
in their houses of Heaven. Now therefore ( Reader) I advise thee to wipe thy
eyes, I am nearer to thee then thou thoughtest. And to remove thy
prepossession, I protest to thee, I am no Persian Idolater; the fire is not my
Diety, yet all is Oracle that it speaks, there is no Amphibology and
equivocation in its expression, no, it is the sincerest Being in the World, it
can abide no masks or coverings what ever, but pulls all off, gives thee the
naked presence of all, and woe to the hypocrite (who is nothing but clothes)
that falls into it. It is all gold that lies safe in its bosom, and happy art
thou if by thy services thou winnest so much upon it, as to partake of its
bosom. It has its match no where, but only in the Water, Mrs. Aqua is its
Eve, and he is a high Priest of Nature that can join their hands and hearts,
that can reconcile that great enmity that is between them, and make them
embrace: their offspring is still wonderful, and named Wisdom, Length of
days, durable riches, true and substantial honor. Ignis-Aqua is a marriage
from which we may expect more of a universal peace then the Pope can from a Match
of the Son of Spain to the Daughter of France. He with his two Indies joined
with her nimble wit, sprightful behavior, and pleasant and paradisical
situation, cannot boast of a compleater happiness and a more rich and perfect
glory, then the uniting of these two with their Kingdoms and large Territories.
For I tell the, He and She have the Empire of the whole World, and (without
Hyperbole) the sun rises and sets within the limits of their jurisdiction.
Judge now (Reader) of his Purse, that is favorite to these two; and of his
Power, whom they will serve; of his Wisdom, whom they teach, of his
unparalelled happiness, that can call them his. But I do thee an injury to
detain thee thus long: this is the painted Flag (as I told thee,) the living
prodigy is within; enter therefore and behold all, and when thou have done,
confess thou never did see the like: wonder then, and commend his pains that
has travailed into strange Countries to fetch these home to show them to thee,
and without envy to teach thee to do the like. I have a mind (Reader,) to put
into thy Contemplations and leave thee: Consider then what a strange nature is
that thing of, which can never be fed too much, what a Symbol of infinitude
lies in a small spark. Here give thy thoughts liberty, and when thou retirest
begin again to think whence coms this same thing called Fire, and whither goes
it? what is it, and what does it? when you have taken that turn, step again
forward thus, Why does the Almighty Chemist promise to Epilogue the world with
Fire, why did he once wash it with water, and will not now cleanse it again but
with fire? why are Fire and Water the Parents of all beings visible, bringing
them forth, bringing them up, and yet at last turn Canibals, and eat their own
Children? These and 1000. the like thou may pry into without the charge of
being curious. Attend therefore to thy Master, Audi Ignis vocem, and be not
Childish in thy apprehensions; not a dull and inintelligent Auditour at the
Lectures read to thee in Schola Pyrotechnica, Hear this experienced Professor,
this Doctor illuminate, whose Text is, In the sweat of thy brows, thou shall
eat thy bread, whereof the Poet makes this, Dii vendidere sudoribus arts.
Listen not to the cry of the Vulgar, it is a Beast, and wild, and therefore
cannot endure the fire, nor to come near it; but call this World a Desert, a
Forest of Lions, Bears, Tigers, and (in this sense) it has but one part, its
all an Africa, behold thy self in the midst of this wood, see thy danger, and
the open jaws of roaring beasts, and encompasse and secure thy self with a
wall of Fire, and then let them howl, they cannot rend nor tear thee, Be not
therefore discouraged, if thou art thus engaged, Remember the World has no
Coin to pay off their debts to good men, but such as bears the stamp of evil
upon it, and indeed how can that which is all evil it self, bring any good
out of its Treasury. Therefore suspect that thy Present is evil, when it
pleases the evil world, but when it makes faces at thy Physic, and spits and
spues out thy pills as bitter, then esteem thy Potion wholesome, although the
world take it not, it is a child and without understanding.

But (Reader) the Carryer stays, I mean the Printer, and if I send not to thee
now I shall be prevented to remember my love to thee at this time: I here
therefore send it thee, be who thou will, and desire only this of thee, to
excuse me if (being not yet enough known to my self) I remain unknown to thee,
and yet subscribe

Philanthropos.

To the Honorable, Virtuous, and most accomplished Gentleman, ROBERT BOIL Esquire
My very good Friend: All temporal and Eternal happiness be multiplied and
continued.
SIR,
SInce it was my good fortune first by the occasion of our mutual Friend, Dr.
Robert Child, (whose memory being a man most learned and ingenuous, I honor,)
to kiss your Honors hand, your love to me has ever continued so real and
constant, that if I should not take such notice of it, as to my power to
acknovvledge it, I should vvorthily deserve the black note of infamy; but yet
if I should assign this love of yours as the cause of this present Dedication,
I should be very injurious both to you and to the Truths. To you, since your
deservings are so great, as to your own personal accomplishments, that were
you to me a mere stranger, yet your own vvorth may above any other that I
know in England challenge this Dedication, as one to whom the God of Nature
has been so signally propitious, as to discover many of Natures most secret
operations, in their causes and workings unkovvn to many learned men. To You I
therefore present these my Pyrotechnical lucubrations as a mean Painter may
present a draught to the Censure of Apelles, herein acknovvledging Your Worth,
and also taking off the suspicion of imposture from the things I write, which
being thrown humbly at the feet of so able a judge of their verity, desire
Your acceptance only according to their worth and reality. Take in good part
then I entreat You these Lines, (not such as I wish them,) but such as the
rudeness of my understanding could prompt me; assuring you, that though meanly
adorned in words, yet they contain such real experiments, which will be very
acceptable both to You, and to as many as have delight in the search after the
mysteries of Nature, and am confident that these operations in future ages will
praise their School, in which I have been a painful, though an unworthy Scholar.

As for my self I need not make any Apology to your honor, as being known
sufficiently to You: and Your Candor and Ingenuity being very ready to excus
for me what failings You may discover in me, Now that to such a friend, I
affect rather plainness and truth, then the garnish of words, to You, I doubt
not, but it will be the rather acceptable; let others judge of my rudeness as
they please. I would not be so bold as to prefixe this dedication before the
first part of this Treatise, which is Apologetical, and somewhat tart, against
the abuses of the Galenists, because I would not engage your honor with me in
any quarrel, that part therefore I leave to it self to sink or swim according
to the weight or lightness of its Reasons and Arguments; the Moving Cause to
which smartness, was the uncivility of the Galenical party, in reproching and
reviling this noble Art in general, and Helmont in particular (to both Your
honor and My self a deserved favorite,) whom I formerly made My Chimical
Evangelist, but do now believe, not convinced by his Arguments and Reasons, but
by experimental Confirmation, and practical ocular demonstration.

My self indeed, have from the common Enemy of the worthy Art and Artists of
Chemistry and Pyrotechny. received many uncivil abuses upon that very score; on
which grounds I may be thought to have written so sharply in revenge: but
although it is very true that Parit indignatio versum, yet I can truly affirm,
that it was not upon the score of private grudge that I was invited to take up
the buckler, but because I saw truth it self affronted, and contemned in the
persons of its most deserving Champions, such as were Helmont and Paracelsus;
Now fearing lest if such reproaches should pass without Animadversion, the
Common people who cannot read either Helmont or Paracelsus; the exotickness of
the language in which they wrote keeping them locked from most of our English
Nation, yet whose lives are nearly concerned in what they treat of, for this
Cause I put pen to paper, who otherwise had rather chosen to lie hid, and did
undertake the Apology of those, whose books otherwise I confess my self
unworthy to commend. Yet if God, who is only wise, have chosen the mean and
foolish things of the world to confound the lofty and wise, I hope no man of
understanding will contend with him, nor will any of discretion undervalue a
treasure, because in a poor earthen pot hidden: These things I write not to
Your honor, as fearing or suspecting Yourself inclinable to such a spirit of
prejudice, but as sensible of mine own undeservingness, I cannot but excuse it
to others, who perhaps know me little or not at all, being before hand
satisfied, that Your honor would be more willing to cover my imperfections,
then I (without impudence) could desire, or with reason expect. And not to
detain You longer in the entrance, be pleased to view the House it self; to
every Room whereof I shall account it my Happiness to be your Guide, who
before, and in all other things am, and must subscribe my self;

Sir, Your Honors very Servant George Starkey.

CAP. I. The Preface.
NOble and worthy to be written in Letters of Gold is that saying of Cicero,
Virtutis laus omnis in action consistit; To which agrees that of the Poet, Quo
mihi fortunam si non concesseris uti? What profit is there of curious
speculations, which do not lead to real experiments? to what end serves
Theorie, if not applicable unto practice.

And as this holds in all cases, so more especially is it true in Pyrotechny,
of which the whole would be vain and useles, unless the Theoremes of it were
demonstrable practically by the Fire.

As therefore I have in my foregoing Treatise Apologetically defended the Cause
of Chemical Medicine from the unjust reproaches of Galenists, and have proved
that their Medidicines are really (that which they falsely charge upon Chemical
Modicines) virulent and dangerous, and have moreover convinced them at large of
impotency and insufficiency, now it is time to bring on the Stage such a
Medicinal apparatus as may be, and appear both safe and effectual.

The only whine of the Galenists against Helmont, that ever I could hear, is
and has been, that he pulls down, but does not build up, labors to overthrow
the used method of Medicine, but does not introduce a better.

How far that Noble Philosopher has proceeded in the discovery of the true
Medicinal Art, there is no Candid Son of Art, but must confess it, and has
cause to bless God for the same.

But they who thus complain would be dealt with as infants are by Nurses, have
their meat not only prepared and provided, but also chewed and praemasticated
for them, which is a thing unreasonable to expect; foolish to demand.

My advice to such is, that they would once cordially lay to heart, what a
great charge lies upon them who have the care of lives, and what a great
account will be taken of them at the last day, of which knowing the terror,
they may cease from Covetousness, Idleness, and selfconceited Pride; and
acknowledging their ignorance, endeavor to attain true skill and knowledge, by
those ways and means which God has appointed.

For our Books and Writings are only as goads and pricks, and may serve for
exhortations to all that are studious and sedulous, that every one for his own
particular may endeavor to profit by his own labor and industry, so far as
the Almighty shall be pleased to assist him.

Nor do we as in other Arts, write with intent that our writings may be
understood promiscuously by every Reader, and this is peculiar to this Art, and
commanded in the Gospel, that Pearls be not cast before swine, and for this
end we so write as not to be understood.

To what end then do we trouble our selves and others, will some supercilious
Galenist object, if not to be understood? and will urge his example, who
meeting wi^h a Book he could not understand, threw it away with this farewell,
Quid mihi cum Autore qui non vult intelligi?

I answer, that practical and speculative doctrines are far different, the one
informs the judgment in the Reason of things, the other directs the hand in
the mechanical practice.

Now as to the speculative part, our demonstrations are most plain, true, and
evident, as being drawn forth of, and grounded upon, the very nature of the
things we treat of; so that of the existencie and efficacy of our Medicines, I
know nothing that can be desired, but what is fully and clearly extant already
in Helmont, Paracelsus, etc.

But as touching the practical part, we are to be excused, if we so write, as
only to be understood by Sons of Art, and that not by bare reading, but by
serious meditation, and unwearied prayer to God, joined with indefatigable
pains of searching in the Fire, which (under God) is the main Key to unlock all
our Mysteries.

These things being attended; our Books then may serve profitably as Sea-marks,
to those who shall travail in these practices, that he may by pondering our
Words, know if his operations be true or no; and if not, where his error is,
and how to amend it.

CAP. II. Of the Art of Pyrotechny in General.
THis Art, called by some Chemeia, or the Art of Separation, by some Alchemeia,
or (...), that is the Art of separating Salts, is by us called Pyrotechny, or
the Art of governing and using the Fire; because that the Fire is the principal
agent in our work.

All other Agents are either singular, and serve each of them but in some
Works, as Spirit of Wine, Vinegar, etc. or universal, and serve for the
universal solution of all Bodies, as the liquour Alchahest, yet these are
neither made nor used but by the means of the fire; therefore that is the most
universal Agent in our work, though not of most virtue; of the largest use,
though not of greatest efficacy; for we have a liquor which will dissolve and
destroy, what it cannot, and what will abide fixed and constant therein, will in
our liquor be dissolved, volatized, and separated into its Elements; yet this
is our hidden name, or Diploma not communicable: but our outward Agent (the
Fire) is visible, and of most universal use, our Agent, sinc quo non, by which
we take our Denomination, and rejoice with Helmont, rather to be per Ignem
Philosophi,) then to be created without it, by the Schools.

The Art of Pyrotechny then (in brief,) is nothing else, then by the help of
Vulcan to know how to unlock Natures secrets, which are shut up in concretes
Vegetable, Animal, and Mineral; and to exalt them to the height of their
perfection, and that by the means of hidden and secret Agents preparable in
Nature, by the fires help, and the Artists craft.

So then since our Agents themselves, owe their formal being to the preparation
of the fire, this as the more universal agent gives name to our Art, which from
the fire is Denominated Pyrotechny.

CAP. III. That all that pretend to this Art, are not to be reputed Artists.
FRom this that has been said, it may easily be gathered, that all who contend
for a share in this Art, are not to be accounted Heirs of the same; For it is
not every one that can make a Fire, or a Furnace, that is to be accounted
Philosophus per Ignem, that is an Adeptus, but he only who knows how to work
with the fire according to the true principles of Nature. Even as it is not
every one that can furnish himself with a good pen, a neat inkhorn, and fine
paper may be adjudged a good Scribe; nor any who can procure to himself a good
sword, that is to be reckoned among expert Fencers, but they only who can with
skill and dexterity use both the one and the other. Right so is it in this
case, Convenient furnaces, and fitting vessels are so necessary to this work,
that without the same, nothing can be done; yet many may provide themselves of
these external instruments, who yet in Philosophy are as blind as moles, and
as stupid as Asses.

Nor yet is it every one that can make many subtle operations in the Fire, that
is an Adeptus; for the works of God are various and wonderful, and as any
subject is handled diversely, it will produce diverse effects, which though they
may seem glorious to the eye, may yet be really trivial in value, which yet the
inventors of them (through ignorance admiring their value at a high rate,)
prate and promise, themselves know not what, concerning them; to the disrepute
at last not only of themselves, but of their Art.

Therefore that true Art may not be censured for the sake and cause of these
pretenders, who are no Artists, but at the best, are Mimicks and Apes unto true
Sons of Art, it will not be amiss to decipher some of them, and paint them in
their Colors, that so they may be known and esteemed for what they are, and
not for what they are not, nor ever were.

CAP. IV. Of erroneous Operatours more particularly.
ANd first, in this discovery, I meet with such, who having gotten into their
hands some Philosophical Treatise, forthwith have their minds on fire, till
they set about the practical part, and endeavor to effect that which in their
minds they have conceived.

These for the most part, chiefly level their aim, at the attainment of the
Golden Fleece; for this they spend and are spent, they believe what they read,
and imagine thereupon, and account nothing worth their inquiry, but the
masterie of Hermes, and think every thing unworthie their pains and trouble,
unless it be the great Flixer, no fortune can befall them unless they may
happen to stumble upon that unhappy stone.

This their design (unwilling to be ridiculous,) they will conceal to their
power, pretending to the search of some or other more than ordinarily noble
Medicine, which they prosecute with that vigor that they may, when that is
ended, cure all diseases, hoping in that time to cure the maladies of their
purse, and then as for the care of the sick they will leave that to others.

These Philosophers at their first initiation have some one thing or other on
which they dote, one on Rainwater, another on Maydow, a third on Sulphur vive,
a sourth on, a fifth on, a sixth on Tartar, a seventh on Cold, an eigth on the
Nitre of the earth, on which subject they imagine to themselves strange
Chimaereal operations, of which as often as they miss, they are still to begin
again, and when they find not what they look for, they account what they find
as good as nothing. And thus they run from subject to subject, working subtly
but to no end, for because that they hit not the mark proposed, which perhaps,
out of the subject they handle is but dotage to imagine, they never proceed to
see and seek what God and Nature has put in the subject, but as soon as often
unsuccesful Trials have convinced them, that the Philosophers stone is not
there, they straitway set themselves to another search.

These men's knowledge at best is but negative, they can tell you that there the
Philosophers Stone is not, but what is contained in those subjects, that they
know not, because they never attempted to know.

Of this kind of Philosophers there are another sort equally sottish with the
former, but far worse.

These having spent their time and moneys for a long season in these
unprofitable studies, and at last having neither money to subsist upon, nor an
Art honestly to subsist by, they fall to mere Imposture, and commend that for
all diseases of men, which would never cure any disease in Metalls, Thus one
takes the bones of men long buried, for his universal subject, and of them
distills a faetid liquour, and sublimes a volatile urinous Salt, such as
Hartshorn will give, and all bones, especially those which have lien rotting a
long time; and this he commends for an universal medicine, and sels at the
price of Gold, attributing to it, out of a vain confidence, whatever the
Philosophers have ascribed to their Great Elixir.

Another for his subject takes foot of wood, which by the heat of the bath he
promises to decoct into the great Elixir, and presuming on this as the true
subject, he distills from it a Water impregnated with a volatile urinous salt,
and a faetid Oil, which rectified twice or thrice, he calls it his Ignis
Vitae, and commends it against all diseases, and values it at half the rate of
Gold.

These dotages are so gross, that to name them is enough to confute them, and
therefore I shall leave these dregs of Chemical Artists, fit to be noted with a
black coal.

Others there are, who having tried the insufficiency of vulgar medicines, do
fly unto mineral remedies, and Chemical preparations, and they at first,
conceiving great pleasure in the preparation of the same, and perhaps finding
some greater success in some of these then in ordinary Drugs, straightway fall
to writing of their discoveries that they may appear very learned, and will
compile a large Volume of preparations, some perhaps only taken on trust, many
imagined only in fantasy, but never tried; This is a very great
disingenuitie, and to those who first give their Names to this Art, very
prejudicial, especially when they shall extol dangerous poisons for choice
Medicines, such as Turbith, and other preparations of, and many preparations
of, which are not to be reck'ned among medicines, nor are they remedies fit for
an honest man to use.

These sort of men have brought into the Apothecaries shops a great sort of
Empyrical preparations, which for gains sake, are daily more and more
adulterated, insomuch that Chemistry on this score had almost been brought into
disgrace, had not some true sons of Art, in every Age appeared, who might pluck
off the vizard from these pretenders, and show them to be indeed what they are,
empty bubbles, making a great show without any realitie, clouds without water,
not vvorthie to be accounted what they boast themselves to be, nothing less
then true Philosophers.

CAP. V. Of the true Sons of Pyrotechny.
WHoever then desires to be a true Son of Art, he must resolve to give himself
up wholy unto it, and the prosecution of the same, next unto the service of
God, ought to be his chief and main end intended and aimed at.

He must join prayer unto God, with serious meditation, and diligent
industry, this is the way to attain true knowledge; His end must be Charity
toward the sick and vveak, which God will bless, but be that out of a
Covetous mind, and with desire of vainglory shall search after these mysteries
oftimes he shall come short of his desires, Therefore is true medicine a
serious, secret and sacred art, which requires the whole man, and as it is to
be sought for charitable ends, so is it to be employed only with design to
glorify God in doing good.

There are therefore several obstacles of true knowledge, which it is good that
every one who will give up himself unto Art, be advised of; that he may avoid
and shun them: and these they are.

First of all, neglect of God, when the Artist does not seriously implore Gods
blessing, how can he expect to be prosperous in his search after these
mysteries of Nature, since every good gift is from above, coming down from the
Father of lights; It is not the reading of Books, nor is it painful search in
the sire, that can do any good; only the blessing of the Almighty, which must
be implored by earnest and daily prayer.

Secondly, vicious living, and wicked Conversation: This will make all a man's
endeavors unfruitful, nay rather, this hinders a man from an industrious
search; for he who is once infected with vice, will never seriously, as he
ought, apply his mind to ingenuitie.

Thirdly, Idleness and Laziness, when a man would fain reap a plentiful
harvest, but will neglect the breaking up of his ground, and sowing of his
seed: This is the fault of many, who if they cannot attain a thing by reading,
or by once attemting, they are discouraged and leav off.

Fourthly I ride and Conceitedness, who think that all knowledge is with
them already, and if for a short time they have labored in this inquiry, they
straight presume themselves nothing inferior to Hermes or Paracelsus; of these,
that of Seneca may be verified, Multi ad virtutem pervenire potuissent, nisi se
putass nt pervenisse.

Lastly Covetousness, when men are unwilling to venture their moneys in
search of knowledge, and finding a pompous practice accompanied with large
gain, without this expense and trouble, they embrace the cheapest and easiest
way of gain and profit, accounting money svveet, though gotten out of the
ruins of Families, and the destruction of the sick, verefiing the Maxim of an
unvvorthie Emperor, Dulcis odor lucri, ex re qualibet.

To all such my advice is to keep from meddling with these secrets, they are
not for them, but praesupposing thee, friendly Reader, rightly qualified,
Pious, sedulous, humble, and charitably endovved: I shall be thy guide, so far
as one to another may communicate, without transgressing the Rules of
Philosophy, which is to exclude all unvvorthie persons from this Art, to our
power.

CAP. VI. Of the Operations in Chemistry.
IT is not my purpose or intent, to begin with the Doctrine of Furnaces, nor
is this Treatise intended for such as know not what they are: But supposing
thee to be skilful in managing of the fire, I shall come to the matter
intended, remitting such, who do not know the Mechanical Principles of
Pyrotechny, to some other Instructor.

And to deal ingenuously; let me advise every young Artist, that he must by his
own Ingenie, contrive forms both of Furnaces, glasses, and pots, as may suit
his intended Work, and accordingly let him alter or vary the same.

Some men can make their own furnaces, others order workmen (every where to be
had) to make them for them,) this makes an Artist neither better nor worse, for
as a Fencer uses a sword which a Cutler makes, so may it be in this case, but
to direct about the form of Furnaces, so as to fit them to the Work intended,
this is absolutely required in a Philosopher.

Nor is there any thing that does quicken invention more, than a destitution of
such things as are to be desired, in want of which often times an Ingenious man,
for a shift finds out such compendious Encheiria's which he would never else
have thought on.

But Instruments being prepared, and materials provided, I advise all that will
undertake these discoveries, not to spare pains, study, nor cost, imploring
always divine Assistance. And forasmuch as the principles of this Art are most
abstruse, let a man not be wearied although he miss often, for these very
Errors he may improve greatly to his advantage, if he note all his operations,
and seriously ponder every effect. Thus by erring may errors be avoided, and to
any that shall thus search, he will perceive, that by asking, seeking, and
knocking, he shall find, receive, and have opened to him, the secrets and
mysteries of Nature.

Let his aim be at the most noble Medicines, yet so let him prosecute them,
that those of an inferior Rank, which God shall discover unto him, be not
neglected, imitating that sloathful servant, who buried his Talent, because it
was but one; but employing and improving what God does bestovv, let him
expect a greater improvement of his Abilities, which ordinarily God does grant,
and give to just and faithful servants.

CAP. VII. Of the different degrees of Medicines which are to be prepared by
this Art.
ANd thus I am brought by the good hand of God, to take a survay of Medicines,
which is indeed but the beginning of my intended task, And here on the Readers
part I crave attention, and I on my part shall promise Candor, and Truth.

Medicines therefore which are truly vvorthie to be so called, are of two
sorts; either specific, or universal, that is, preeisely applicable to some
fevv diseases, or universally powerful in all cases. This division will also
admit of a subdivision, which I shall attend in its place.

The way by which a Medicine (such as ought to be desired) works its effect,
is Diaphoretically and Diuretically, by sweat and urine, as for vomits,
purges, and the like, I leave them to such who approve them, rather consenting
to Helmont, who concludes thus, Reus sim coram Deo, nisi suasero, a
purgantibus prorsus abstinendum.

As for medicines which God has made for many (not to say most or all)
maladies, in their simplicity, that belongs not to this place: for this
Treatise only concerns such medicaments which are to be made by the fire.

And in this discovery it behooves only to rely upon Gods blessing and
assistance, and to attend the effect of all operations most dilgently, for
there is no rules that can be set down before hand, to direct one in his
search, for as the Fire is a Heteroclite Agent, so ^s products are not
demonstrable by Reason; by mean of it, Corrosives are dulcified, and sweet
things made corrosive, Coagulated bodies are resolved and fluid substances
congealed, fixed things are made volatile, and volatile things sixed: In a word
the Concrete gives very little, or no light, by which to estimate the things
produced; Nature herein is most free in her operation, wonderful in her
effects, her footsteps are veiled with much obscurity, yet by the good hand of
God, to be found out with industry.

CAP. VIII. Of the Keys of this Art in General.
THE Keys of this Science are Congelation, and Dissolution, Volatization and
Fixation, to these all Operations Chemical do tend.

Separation and Digestion, Fermentation, and Cohobation are all intended for
this end, to make that fluid and subtle that before was gross, or that volatile
which before was fixed, or on the contrary.

The mean of all (on Natures part) is Ferment, on the Artists part, the
Application of due Agents and Patients, and external heat according to the
exigencie of the thing required,

By these means is sought the hidden virtue of the Concrete, and made to appear
openly, which is so far beyond the Concrete in virtue, as it was in its crude
simplicity, as the best wine is before the crude juice of grapes in excellency.

For although some things have their virtue restrained to their form, depending
on the vita ultima of the subject, as is especially apparent in all things,
which work magnetically, yet seriously in the vast Catalogue of simples, how
few things are of use without praevious preparation or correction, either their
gross corporality, or their virulent malignity, being an obstinate obstacle to
their effectual Energie: for the Corporeous impediment, it is taken away by
Dissolution, and Volatization, in which two operations for the most part all
the malignitie of the subject is either taken away or suspended.

For the fire as it cleanses that which was foul, so it ripens that which was
crude, it digests what was virulent, and inverts its malignity; making it
appear with new qualities, and by means of it is the virtue of something
exalted, and made more noble by a thousand fold.

But because the fire alone is but the Destroyer of seminal virtue, and
whatever it masters, it does not only extinguish the same, but it does alter it
notably into strange Heterogeneities, in which that eminent Crasis (of which we
boast) is not to be seen, therefore have the Sons of Art invented and prepared
means for the praevious dissolution of compacted bodies, by which means the
bodies being opened, the more noble parts may be severed from the ignoble and
unactive, and by this their end is attained.

CAP. IX. Of the Keys in particular, and first of the Liquour Alchahest.
I Am now brought to the Contemplation of a subject of wonder, which is indeed
one of the most admirable secrets in Nature, it is an immorral Ens,
incorruptible, of power to resolve all the Concretes of the World into their
first liquid matter, destroying their corporiety, and bringing them to
volatilitie.

Its name first given by Paracelsus in the Germane tongue, sounding as much as
all Spirit, Al-gehest, may denote its nature; it is a spirit of so homogeneal a
substance, that it is not to be altered in Nature, except only by its compeer,
by which it is altered, and loses its virtue being once joined and mixed with
it.

Of this I intend here to speak very briefly, having elsewhere in a peculiar
Treatise handled it sufficiently, and clearly, nor shall I in this place repeat
what there is fully set down.

Yet because that our intent is here to give a short Systeme of the whole Art
of Pyrotechny, which cannot be, without this Liquour be treated of, since by
means of it the most noble end eminent preparations are performed, therefore it
behooves us not to neglect this so worthy a subject, lest our work may appear,
(and that most justly) to be lame and imperfect.

This liquour then is no other then that fire, of which it may be said Vulgus
igne cremat, nos aqua, which the noble Helmont calls his summum and perpetuum
Corrosivum, and his Gehennae Ignis, of which we shall discover first its
efficacy; secondly its matter and manner of making: which I prefume to a Son
of Art, will be accounted a rich Legacy.

And first it will be necessary to remove a prejudice, which unremoved may
derogate much from the esteem of what I am now about to write, and that is,
that I may not be accounted a writer at ^overs, a disputer of things which I
know not, and a Teacher of what I never yet learned. And here I must appeal to
God the searcher of all hearts, who knows, that I write not mine own
Imaginations or Fantasies, but what I know to be true, not notionally by bare
reading, but really by practical experience.

For from my tender years I always coveted true Philosophy above all
seize, not valuing any thing in the World comparably therewith.

For this I was willing to spend and to be spent. and to the glory of Gods
grace be it spoken, he was pleased so far to be propitious to me (though
infinitely unworthie,) that he discovered unto me many secrets, hidden and
concealed from most of those who seek after these mysteries, not believed by
others, though the Learned men (so esteemed) of the world.

Now above all things in this World, there was nothing by me so desirably
prosecuted as the liquor Alchahest, which I employed my self so seriously
upon, that for the space of full eight years, that was ever one of my most
painful attempted discoveries, in which tedious journie, my chief refreshing
Cordial was the consideration of its excellency and profit when attained,
though its tediousness in preparation was a grand discouragement on the other
hand, which yet never could prevail with my unbroken spirit to knock me off
from this search, til at last through the great mercy of God by seeking and
knocking, and asking from the Father of Lights, from whom comes every good and
perfect gift, I attained the true knowledge of this secret, its true original,
and manner of preparation, which I shall heartily here lay open so clearly to a
son of Art, that he shall not desire a better guide, by whose direction and
Gods blessing, he may by pains and study attain what I by the same means have
attained.

CAP. X. Of this Liquours virtue and efficacy in general.
NOW forasmuch as bonum and utile, good and profitable are so convertible, that
a thing cannot truly be denominated the former, which is not truly and really
the latter, I think it not amiss, in the next place to give an account of the
utility of this liquour, which being known, a man will be encouraged to attend
with pains in the search of the same.

The Encomium therefore of this so worthy a secret, I think fit to begin in
the words of noble Helmont. In Nature, says he, there is but one fire, which
is our consuming Vulcan, which is originally in Nature, and therefore producible
by Art, as to wit, when by striking of the flint and steel together, it is made
visible in its sparks, which being taken in tinder, are by an easy art (known
to each Kitchinmaid) multiplied into a fire as big as the maker of it pleases,
which at first though out a Spark, yet being cherished with Fuel proper to it,
becomes in short space so great a flame, as would be able to consume whatever
is combustible in the whole World, if it were put into it.

So likewise there is but one Liquour compararable to Fire, yet far more
powerful and vehement then the common flame: For those things which will abide
in this Fire, being not conquerable by it, are by the other fire destroyed, and
altered radically and fundamentally.

This Fire being distilled from any metal soft and imperfect does at first
time or second, leave them in a fusible substance like wax, of which the
Sulphur or tincture is dissolvable in the best Spirit of Wine, and from the
residue (being kept three days in a vapouring heat) quick and running may be
separated; The same may be done in harder metals, yea in the perfect metals,
in a longer time, by oftener reiterated cohobations.

But if this Fire be once distilled from vulgar, it leaves it coagulated and
fixed, so that it will endure the test of Saturn, It is left spongious like to
a Pumice stone, but heavy like Turbith minerale, brittle, and therefore
without difficulty pulverisable, which then cohobated with Water distilled
from whites of Eggs, it causes that distilled water to stink, but becomes of
the color of the best Coral, whence it is denominated Arcanum Corallinum.

This fire if it be distilled from any Gem or stone subtly pulverized, it
turns into a mere Salt of equal weight to the Jem or stone; Pearls it resolves
into a milk, which is their first Ens, so also Crabscies (as they are vulgarly
called, being otherwise no eyes, but stones found in the head of the Crab) and
all vegetable stones, as Peach stones, dates stones, or the like.

In a word, it does resolve all Vegetables, Animals and Minerals into their
first Ens, and in such concretes as contain in them Heterogeneities, it does
discover and sever, (that it makes separable,) the same.

The advice of this old Philosopher, to all who had given up their Names to
Art, is, that they should with all their might endeavor to attain this Fire,
if their aim were at Noble and more than vulgar Medicines; yet concludes it to
be so hard and high an attainment, that not every searcher, but only such as
are chosen of God, shall be masters of it; therefore that the Champions, (who
with Industry strive for this Masterie) be not discouraged with its
difficulty, which is the greater, because of the uncouth obscurity of all who
hitherto have handled this Subject, being chiefly Paracelsus, and his great
expositour Van Helmont.

I shall a little more particularly handle this hidden Mystery in its effects,
and properties, (such to wit which are to its self peculiar, and to other
dissolving liquours incommunicable) by which means the signs and marks by
which it may be known will be laid open, which to a studious Son of this
Art will be an unparaleld guide and directorie, and therefore a Work very
acceptable.

CAP. XI. Of this Liquours Virtue and Efficacy more particularly.
ANd in the first place, it may not seem from our intended purpose to
distinguish between this liquor and other Subjects, between which may be
thought a great affinity, the misapprehending whereof has caused, does cause,
and will cause many Errors, to such who have devoted themselves to this
discovery, who imagining uncertain grounds to work on, proceed as ridiculously
in prosecution of their end propounded.

Of these first are those who indistinctly confound this Liquour with the of
the Philosophers, of which sort I know many, who by no means will be beaten off
from this conceit, then which there can be none more absurd, if weighed in the
balance of right Reason.

For first these two differ materially and substantially, the one being truly
and properly so called, the other Salt, and is therefore called Sal circulatus
major, Salium summus and faelicissimus; Liquor Salis.

Secondly they differ formally and essentially, The one being not only
mettallick but a metal, to wit Philosophical, according to the Philosopher, In
metallis per metalla proficiuntur metalla, and according to the joint consent
of all masters in that science, who all conclude, that all the principles of
the Philosophical Elixir are Homogeneal, coessential one to other, and
therefore they do formally remain each with other, and are transmuted, so each
into others natures, that agents become passive, and patients active in the
progress of the great Elixir.

And therefore the Philososophers water is caled, Aqua sicca non madefaciens
manus, nec quicquam humectans, nisi quod conveniat sibi in materiae
homogeneitate atque identitate; Nor is there any difference allowed betwixt
perfect Gold, and the of the Magi, save only this, that one is ripe and
perfect, the other crude and imperfect: And Artephus, to put all out of doubt,
says it is the of Saturnine, in which no metal is dissolved or drowned but
Gold, and this he affirms to be the only Agent in the world for the Art.

Also both he and Trevisan (to put this matter beyond all controversy)
conclude and positively determine, that for their work, there is not any Agent
profitable, which does not formally abide with the dissolved bodies, so as with
them to become one thing, as the moisture of the ground does with a grain of
wheat which is dissolved in it, and therefore reject as sophistications all
dissolving liquors which are not permanent with the Bodies dissolved, and which
the bodies resolved cannot recongeal with themselves, so that the Philosophical
dissolution of the body, does cause at the same time, a congelation of the
dissolving spirit, that so they may be made one together, with an inseparable
Conjunction, for this, read Artephus his secret Book. Also Count Trevisan his
book extant in the first vol. of Theatr. Chem. and his Epistle to Thomas of
Bononia extant in the 2. vol. of Ars Aurifera.

Whereas on the contrary the Liquour Alchabest is a real Water, which will wet
either hand or any thing else; it will join with any Concretes in the whole
World, not barely moistning them; but resolving them, and remaining with them
dissolved, distilling over with them, in a fire of the second degree in sand,
and yet radically mixing with nothing, being separable from every thing, to
which it is mixed in dissolution, as Phlegm is separable from {oil} of Vitriol.

So likewise though it dissolve Gold, yet does it not abide with it when
dissolved; which is absolutely requisite in all generations: therefore in brief
we shall give the differences which are between the one and the other, and that
as they appear in matter, form, and operation.

Philosophers is Antimonial Saturnine Argent vive, a middle Substance, clear
like pure silver, (Artephus.)

The Liquour Alchahest, is a Salt of an exquisite fiery nature, the like of
which is not in the world beside, not mineral nor metalline, circulated till it
become a very Spirit, which is Algehest.

Philosophers wets not the hand, nor ought else that is not of its own (that is
a metalline) nature, nor will it join with any thing else.

The Liquour Alchahest wets the hand, or any thing besides in the World, and
will dissolve each thing according to its kind, and reduce it to its primitive
matter, and will mix with it when dissolved as a spirit with an Aquous phlegm,
but being not radically joined, is therefore separable from all things that are
dissolved by it.

In the Philosophers Gold, and Gold only, is drowned, and the dissolver and
the dissolved, after dissolution, are united with an inseparable union, so that
of both is made one.

In the Liquour Alchahest Gold and other metalline substances are dissolved,
but it abides with none of them, nor is it altered by any of them.

To conclude, the solution made by the of the Philosophers is in a way of
generation, not separating the tincture from the all part, but conjoining them
more firmly each to other, that both may grow up together to a Substance in
its own kind multiplicable.

But the solution made by the Liquour Alchahest is in a destructive way,
extinguishing the seed, as to a generative power, for it divides betwixt the
Tincture and the, so as when once severed they can never be united again,
making the Tincture volatile, which though then admirable, as to medicine, yet
is it quite alienated from its metalline nature and disposition.

To shut up then this discourse, we conclude that though both the of the
Philosophers and this Liquour are very noble secrets, yet are they so distinct
each from other, that one has no dependence on the other, being in their
matter, form, and operations, as much different, as can almost be imagined.

Others there are, who conceive this Liquor, to be a Mercurial water (of
which number the Author of the Chemical Dictionary is one, these are his
words, Alchahest, est optime praeparatus contra hepatis obstructiones) some
would have it out of Vitriol, the Spirit of it, to wit, mixed and circulated
with the pure spirit of Wine; Some would have it to be a pure Spirit of Salt,
not to mention dotards, who would have it to be an Ethereal Spiritual
water, drawn out of the Air, impregnated with an Esurine Salt; others
believe it to be a Spirit of true Nitre, which they distinguish from Saltpeter,
but, I presume, know not where to find it themselves, or to direct any body else
to find it.

For my part, I shall willingly admit, and permit, that every one should abound
in his own judgment, nor am I careful what men's opinions concerning it are.

This I know, that the subtilties which are often in speculative Theorie, prove
dotages in practice, this my own experience has to me put out of question.

The noble Helmont says positively, That in the whole World, as there is but
one Fire, so there is but this one Liquour, nor any other that has its
qualities, which the Adepti do know and can testify, this (as Scholar) I
believe, but to deal ingenuously, I know not how to demonstrate to my self, and
yet am sure, that such a liquour which he describes, I know to prepare.

He affirms it also to be, taediosissimae praeparationis, Cap. 9. de Lethiasi,
and in his chapter entitled Duelech resolutum, where he teaches the
preparation of the Ludus into Altholizoim, he says, This is almost difficult
work, not in respect of the preparation of the Ludus, for that is done in two
hours space, but in reference to the making of the Liquour Alchahest, and for
this he says, the Adepti have a proof which goes beyond all demonstration.

This demonstrable proof I must seriously profess is to me unknown, yet (as I
said) such a liquour I know to prepare, that shall do all that this great
Philosopher attributes to his, but whether mine and his be in every respect
one, as I cannot affirm, so I cannot deny it, yet I hope to prepare this which
I know, in 50, nor should I be out, if I should say 40.

Yet that, which first I did prepare, was done at uncertainty, and therefore in
making of it, as I often erred, so (I presume) I went always the longest and
furthest way to the Wood, besides, expecting many errors, I wrought on much of
the matter at once, that if one, two, or three trials should fail, I might have
matter sufficient to begin again.

Besides, it being only a discovery, I made it not my whole business, but
attended things that I knew together with it, yet since I effected my
propounded desire, I considered my operations, and if my calcuculation be not
amiss, I know many Chemical preparations, more tedious then it, unless the
tediousness of the work were accounted by Helmont on another score, then in
reference to the time, which I rather believe, and that is the noisomness of
the subject wrought on in its first preparations, which to one operator may be
much more then another, according to the way he proceeds in his working and
method he follows, or instruments he uses, for great variety may be herein,
yet all tending to one end, but this only by the by, I shall now come to the
matter intended.

This is a ponderous liquor, being indeed all Salt, without any wattie
Phlegine, it is all volatile, being wholly a Spirit, without any corporietie
left in it, of no eminent odor, for all things which send out an odor
considerable, are for the most part of a very volatile nature, or consist of
many heterogeneities Is is not therefore volatile after the manner of Spirit of
Wine, Urine, or the like, which fly with the smallest degree of heat, but
(like unto a ponderous Spirit which yields its phlegm in the first place) this
when it has dissolved any vegetable concrete, and made it volatile, will
suffer the same by a gentle heat of Baineum Mariae, to be all separated from it
self, and to ascend in its various colors, leaving this dissolving Liquour in
the bottom of the Cucurbit, no whit weakened in virtue, nor diminished in
quantity.

Thus is it an immortal Ens, that is, whose virtue is not exantlated, by
reiterated acting upon concretes, but retaining its vigor unaltered, it is of
power to resolve bodies perpetually, being subject to Casualty, but not to
mutability, (save only by its compeer,) and is therefore vvorthily esteemed by
those who know it as an unparalelled mystery.

CAP. XII. Of the Medicines which are preparable by this Liquour, etc.
FRom what has been discovered, concerning this Liquours wonderful Nature,
it may easily be imagined what a Key this is into Physic and Philosophy to
such as are masters of the same.

I need not to illustrate this, urge the admirable medicinal virtue that is in
Metals and Mineral Bodies, in Jems, Pearls, and Animal and Vegetable stones,
for it does resolve also Vegetals into their first liquid matter,
distinguishing in them all their heterogeneities, by several colors, and
distinct places, one above another; in which resolution there alvvaies seats
it self in a distinct place a small Liquour, eminently distinguishable from the
rest in Color, in which the Crasis of the whole Herb, tree, or seed does
reside.

In which retrogradation of the Concrete, by this way of dissolution, there
is no loss of virtue, but an exalting of the same by many degrees, only
whatever virulencie is in the Crude concrete, by this operation is wholy
extinct, with a preservation notvvithstanding of all specific virtues
apparent in the Concrete in its simplicity.

These preparations, (I doubt not but) you will in your mind highly commend,
and vvish with your self, that you could make the like, and to say Truth, they
are eminent and very desirable, but Velle suum cuique est, nec voto vivitur
uno. If you vvish the thing and be wise, vvish also the means of attaining it,
and that is with industry set about it, so shall you be able to resolve al
Herbs into their principles, liquid without sediment, of which part will be
unctuous and fat, especially in Trees, Gums, Seeds, and many Roots, and part
aqueous, in which the volatile Salt of the Concrete will appear to the taste,
the Liquour with its own Oil, you may circulate into an essential Salt,
which is indeed the first Ens of the Concrete, but if you would have things
done in a lesser time, make your dissolutions in a stronger heat, and distill
over your Liquour with the dissolved Body, in a due fire, so will the
Oiliness be wholy turned into a saline Spirit, which in a distillation by
Bath, will come over in various Colors, the Crasis separating it self from
the Phlegm, (both by color, taste, and smell, as also by its time of coming
over the Helm distinguishable,) and your Liquour left behind at bottom, as
much in quantity, and as effectual in virtue as before.

Thus, out of Hellebore may be made a noble specific against the Gout, the
Hypocondriack melancholy Calentures and Delitias in Fevers, out of
Colocynthida an excellent Febrifuge. and out of Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, an
excellent Antihectical medicine, as also against Lypothymy's, Deliquia's,
Convulsions Palsies, etc. In a word get this Liquour, and the most rich
excellency of vegetables shall be at your command. Of which Helmont commends
the first Ens of the Cedar for long life, and next to it the Elixir
proprietatis, provided it be prepared by dissolution in a gentle heat, like to
the heat of the Sun in the Spring, and after that digested in a like heat till
the Oil and Water be united, into an essential Salt, I should advise all
Vegetables to be prepared in the like Nature, if you desire to have their
eminent Virtue, without losing those peculiar excellencies which depend on
the vita ultima of the Concrete, otherwise a speedier preparation makes the
Medicine no less effectual for curing diseases, though less powerful as to
long life.

Yet although the blessing of long life, may be found in the vegetable family,
by means of this Liquour, in which respect these concretes deserve an high
estimation, yet is there nothing comparably of such medicinal efficacy, in
these preparations, as is in metalline extracts, which perform that in cure,
which to all vegetable means is impossible.

Of these I purpose to speak but briefly, reserving a more thorough discovery
of them to better times; for to deal ingenuously, I have traveled in these
searches, as Israel did to the promised land, through a Wilderness of
Difficulties, straits, and crosses, all caused through Gods permission, by the
malice of Satan, and the envy of unreasonable men, insomuch that from the
first time, that I was so happy as to see my labor in these searches crowned
with success, to this very day, I never had convenience of reiterating these
operations, but have lived contented, that if ever God pleased to make me so
happy as to be this way serviceable to mankind, he would grant me opportunity,
which hitherto I have wanted, and at present enjoy not, if otherwise, blessed
be his name, who having bestowed on me talents, and finding me unworthie, has
made me unserviceable to others, and unprofitable to my self.

In this Liquour many things I have seen, many things I know by Analogy, and am
confirmed of them by what I have read and meditated, and it may suffice any
ingenuous man, that what I write I know to be true, by experimental ocular
demonstration, then which no testimony on earth can be more certain.

Come we then from the Vegetable to the mineral kingdom, in which our Liquour
does approve it self, and may justly be esteemed the Physicians crown and the
Philosophers Diadem, by means of which all diseases, though never so
deplorable, may be overcome and cut down, as hay, or weeds with a Since in the
hand of a Mower.

And here we might take a survey of what it effects on metals; then on
minerals; and lastly on Salts, Stones, Pearls, Corals, etc. All which we could
represent as in a small map, or Landscape, but that we are unwilling to have this
small Treatise swell into a voluminous bulk.

The King of metals, Gold, of Nature most fixed, that endures, without the
least diminution, the most exquisite trials of Vulcan, yet if Calcined into
fine Atoms, or laminated into thin leaves, it be put into this Liquour, and
digested in a glass well closed, in a heat, such as is the heat of a boiling
Bath, in a few days, the Gold will be dissolved in the Liquour, without any
sediment; the Liquor then being distilled from it, leaves it in the form of a
Salt fusible, which cohobated often with the same Liquour, is made volatile,
and comes over in two Colors, white and red, the red is the Hematine Tincture,
and the white may be reduced into a white Mercurial Body, after the dissolving
liquour is separated from the same,

This is the highest preparation of Gold that can be made by means of this
Liquour, being its fifth Essence, and is of power to cure the most deplorable
diseases, to which the nature of Man is subject. But the magistery of Gold,
which is the first preparation of it, by means of this Liquour, is a most
eminent Medicine, against all Malignant Fevers, the Pestilence, Palsies,
Plagues, etc.

Most excellent also is the fifth essence of Silver, and Silver potable, made by
the same way and process: but the sweet Oil of Venus does exceed in Virtue both
the one and the other, and is thus made.

Calcine good Vitriol till it be thoroughly wasted, what will wast, then
dulcifie the Colchotar with pure Water, and dry it, to this dried, put an
equal part of this Liquour, for it will be dissolved easily and speedily,
distill off your liquour, and pour it back again, and thus cohobate it, at the
least twelve or fifteen times, so will all the Body of the Colchotar be
brought over the Helm, in form of a green liquour, digest this fame, in a
gentle heat, of a Bath, for about a month, and then distill it in a slow fire,
so will the whole Metalline substance of the Venus, come over, leaving the
Liquour below in the bottom of the Retort, in its intite pondus and Virtue. To
this Liquour or Spirit, put an equal quantity of {sal ammoniac}, dissolved in
as much water, as will dissolve it, so shall you separate the green Liquour
from a white sediment, which white sediment will give white metal, as fixed as
Silver, and which will abide the test of, but yet formally distinct from
Silver, which thou (if a Philosopher) shall easily perceive, however as good to
a Metallurgist, as the best Silver, the green Liquour dry up in a viol glass,
by evaporating all the moisture, for it is the Sulphur of the, mixed with the
{sal ammoniac}, by which (note that) it is fixed, so that it will abide all
Fire, this Sulphur extract with the most pure Spirit of Wine, which will
dissolve it, leaving the {sal ammoniac}, distill away then from it (thus
dissolved) your Spirit of Wine, and you have left a very fragrant green Oil of,
which is its Sulphur essensificated, by these operations, as sweet to taste as
the best Honey, then which Nature has not a more soverain remedy, for most
(not to say all) diseases: This is the true Nepenthe of Philosophers, causing
certain Rest, and asswaging all pains, but ever after sleep, leaving the
pattie, either sensibly amended, (in more violent and diuturnal diseases) or
quite well, in less rigid maladies.

Of this subject I can write more experimentally; and upon, as also on Sulphur,
and, as being of no great value, though when prepared of most transcendent
virtues, I shall be able when I make this Liquour again, to give a larger
discourse of it, being unwilling to be a relatour, of what I have on trust from
others, but what I in truth know my self: So much I have seen as convinces me,
both of the existencie and of the utilitie of this Liquour, nor do I conceive
it so long, or so tedious in making, of which I purpose to satisfy my self
(God permitting) shortly, for if it were so tedious to make, and casual in
making, neither Helmont nor Paracelsus could try so many experiments with it:
Sure I am, that what I made, and was the result of many years trials, (off and
on) but of nigh two years almost daily (I am sure weekly) search, though I was
choice of it, yet, my care notwithstanding, my glass (once in distilling)
broke, and my skill was at an end, as to practice, but during the time it was
in my custody, it was not idle night nor day: For Magisteries I made many, but
was mostly unhappy in Quintessences, partly because I was hasty, and would
have things done faster then Nature allowed, at last being about to perfect my
Sulphur of Venus as I described, I broke my glass, and lost both one and other,
being both Volatile.

But it is safer to make Magisteries, that is, to dissolve the Metalline
Calxes, and then draw away the Liquour, and if you please to repeat this three
or four times in hard Metals, then have you the Metal or Mineral left, like a
sweet Salt, of a fragrant sent, potable in any Liquour, and which will yield
its tincture, if dissolved in pure Spirit of Wine.

However, if you have sure furnaces, that will give heat to your mind, then
proceed on, not only to the making metals potable, but also volatile, separate
then the Central from the Tincture, which is the Oil or Sulphur, and fix this,
as is taught concerning the Sulphur of Venus, and so you have medicines, which
will effect whatever can be desired by either Patient or Doctor.

I should easily here, (if I should follow the dictate of my Genius) run out
into a large Volume, but I should then prejudice and lame a Treatise, which is
concerning this Liquour in Latin, which was chiefly written, while my Trials
were in the very working, and which I purpose, shall ere long see the light, in
which Reader (if thou can but attain the Liquor) thou may abundantly be
instructed how to use it, and so I shall end this discourse, and come to the
last thing on this subject promised by me, and I presume expected by thee, and
that is, to declare the matter of it, and its manner of making,

CAP. XIII. Of the matter out of which this Liquour is made, and its manner of
making,
THis Secret so efficacious, and so wonderful as it it is of unspeakable use
when found, so it has found in the World many who have attempted the
attainment of the same, and not without good reason since being attained it
abundantly recompenseth the pains, and cost laid out upon it, in its virtue and
use.

But as it is in all things, which are sought in the universe so is it in this,
there is no endeavor profitable, unless the search be made first In debita
materia, and nextly, Per debita media.

It is not every new thing, nor yet every strange thing, that is, or may be
made, that will, when produced, prove to be this Liquour, No verily; let the
Artist work his pleasure, yet will not Nature transgress her own known rules,
to make what the Operatour in his Idle Fantasy shall expect, but that only
to which she is bound by the Law of the Creator.

Now from this mastery, We shall exclude first, all mettalls, and metalline
Bodies, for first, as to the Central of them, as it is a peerless Creature, so
it is commiscible with nothing in the World, but is a single, indestructible
Ens, which being a real, will not wet any thing, but that which is Homogeneous
to it self (that is) al, and so is not the Liquour of it self, nor can be by
any Art mixed with ought else, either by Sublimation or Dissolution.

Now as for the Sulphurs of Metals, they cannot be separated radically from the
Mercurial Center, without this Liquours help, and so would come too slowly in,
to be the matter of that, which must be perfected, ere they can be separated
and had.

Now for mineral combustible Sulphurs, as they are very sluggish unactive
Bodies, so they cannot be really altered in their Nature, but they are made
passive medicaments, not active Menstrues, though these passive Medicaments, as
to the cure of diseases, are mightily operative, yet as to a dissolutive
virtue, in reference to bodies, that they have not, (unless burnt,) and so they
yield an acid Liquour.

We are therefore excused from mineral and metalline Sulphurs and es, now as
for metalline Salts, they also are to our purpose museful, since all of them
(none excepted) yield an acid Spirit, and so are contradistinct from our
Liquour, which is not acid, for so it could nor be immutable in acting,
according to the true rule in Chemical Philosophy, which is, Omnis acidus
Spiritus corrodendo corpus ipse fatiscit.

Our Liquour then being no acid, but a contradistinct Spirit from acidity, we
reject from it Salt Peter, Vitriol, Sal Gem, Sea Salt, and in a word, all Salts
naturally growing in the earth, or extracted out of the Earth, which all (none
excepted) yield an acid Spirit.

Alcalies may, above all that are named, claim the praecminence, and truly they
deserve it; their Spirits not being acid, and therefore they are dissolvents
next to the great Liquour, of highest esteem, of which hereafter we shall treat
at large.

Yet these also, though most noble Spirits, do notwithstanding spend their
virtue in dissolving Bodies, and are Coagulated upon them, into a Salt (yet
retaining its volatility,) We therefore exclude them from being the Subject of
our Liquour.

To be brief therefore in what I intend, I shall come to the matter indeed, and
with it shall discover the practice of the Liquours preparation.

It is by Helmont called Latex, in these words, Stupefacta est Religio reperto
Latice, qui, etc. In which place because the whole mystery is in few words
couched, I shall become a Candid Interpreter of his aenigmatical Sense and
meaning.

He first says, Ars indagando sollicita est corpori quod tantae puritatis
Symphonia colluderet noblscum ut a Corrumpente nequiret dissipari, etc. which
we may thus render in English, The Masterpiece at which our Art is levelled, is
to find out a Body, which may play with us in such a Symphony, or consenting
Harmony, by reason of its exquisite purity, that no corruptive principle can
find in it any Heterogeneities by which to work in it a dissipation of parts.
This is the true sense of that Paragraph, and indeed is a brief, but very full
Description or Determination of the highest object, and the unparalled
Masterpiece of out Art, For it is our (or the Chemical) Art that is
sollicitous about this discovery, the Logician (mean while) minding his
Categories, Enunciations, Moods, Figures, and Demonstrations, etc. the
Grammarian his Criticismes in Languages, the Astronomer the Course of the
Planets, and the suuation of the sixed Stars: but the honest conscionable
Physician, he minds the recovering of sick persons, and the conquering of
maladies, which that he may perform, his search is after the secret hidden
Spirit of things, for the extracting and exalting of which, he lays out with
diligence to attain the means, and those are, this Body, here hinted in this
forerecited Paragraph, and our immortal liquour, which is the product of that
Body.

This body is neither singly fixed, nor volatile, but both, one substance of two
distinct Natures, and essences, which is not obscurely gatherable out of the
words themselves, which sound thus, That a Body is sought, which may collude
with us, or make sport, play, or game with us in the Symphony, or consenting
sound of so great purity.

This Word Symphony is but a borrowed metaphor from Musicians, from whom this
Author borrows often especially when he discovers and describes these
Alchahestical operations, as for instance, where speaking of the grand
Arcana's, and their operation, he uses this expression, That they do perform
their Cures in Tono unisono, alluding to instruments of Music, which when
tuned to Unisons, do then sound in the most perfect concord, being in unity, al
other concords being but approaching steps to that perfection: to this a
second, which is the most absolute discord, is contradistinct.

But as a Symphony must always be imagined between two notes at least, so this
Metaphor denotes a duality of qualities in this Body, which yet must consent
together in Harmony, this is a Cosounding or Symphony.

That the duality is not in the Body, but in the diversity of qualities under
which this one body appears, the words are proof enough, therefore says the
Old Philosopher, Sollicita est Ars (indagando corpori, non indagandis
corporibus) which must have been said, if various Bodies had been to be taken
for this mastery, as is the judgment of some, who would have and Tartar, with
several other bodies to be used for this work, but out of this Hotchpotch can
be expected nothing, but a liquour most certainly weakened much, if not wholy
destroyed, as to any active Virtue, by Reason of this irrational mixture.

It is a Body then (not bodies) which Art desires to save her longing in this
particular, and such a Body, which being one in essence and radically, shows
to sight distinguished into a tvvofold diversity, yet only distinct in
qualities or complexion, but agreeing so fundamentally, as being touched by an
Artists hand, may in an Artists ear make a musical Harmony and melody.

Of this body, which is one in essence or kind, two in number or apparency,
may be said, that which Hermes in another (but very like) case said of the of
Philosophers and its compeer, That which is above is like to that which is
beneath, and that below like to that which is alost, and all to the production
or making out the miracles of one thing: This is our first discovery,
concerning the matter of this noble Liquour (which engrave in your mind) that
it must be one Body in Kind and Realitie, distinct with two faces, that is,
superficially and apparently.

Nor is this body easy to be found our and obtained, of which the voords are
a plentiful Witness, which run thus, Ars indagando sollicita est corpori, Art
is sollicitous, or careful or sedulously industrious, about finding out such a
Body: Where observe likewise that the word which is put for finding,
signifies such a finding as is made by studious search and inquiry, as a hound
that follows upon the sent of the Foot, is properly said, thus to find his
game, being compounded of inde and ago, and signifies an uncessant acting upon
known grounds, till the thing propounded for to be found be attained; and this
is our next discovery, concerning the matter of this noble Liquour, which
lesson I advise you so to imprint in your mind, as not to let it slip.

A third thing in this Body, which is very considerable is, that as it is two
numerically, to be found with pains and industry, yea and with difficulty,
so is it also admirable when found, enough to puzzle reason, and nonplus
sense, to consider how such a Body should be in such a subject, as it is
discovered to lie in; Therefore the profound Philosopher adds, Tandem
flupefacta estreligio reperto latice, etc. It brings the Artist to a religious
astonishment to consider what he has found and inforceth him to cry out, O
Lord, how wonderful art thou in thy works, etc.

The thing when found, the discovery when made, may truly be said to be the
work of God, and not of man, Who can bring (says Job) a clean thing out of an
unclean pure out of impure? this God alone must do.

Here are Riddles enough to amaze and amuse, both our reason and our sense,
that a subject so loathsome should yield a body so pure, that what in its felf
is so Proteus like, and mutable, that nothing can be more, should give an Ens
so unchangeable; Here is requisite a Chemical faith to believe this before
sight, which after sight, will astonish reason to contemplate it.

Not much unlike is this Mystery to the miracle of the Creation, where out of
the inform Abyss did spring so many, so rare, so admirable forms: out of the
Bosom of the dark rude Chaos, did proceed all that glory, and excellency of
beauty that did after appear in the matchless Paradise, Nor is there to reason
less likelihood, in this peerless production, where the subject is as unlikely
as a man could Imagine, no marvel then if Art be so sollicitous in this
inquiry, to find such a Body as this, (since it searches for it where it
does) which must be so pure and indissolvable an Ens, so efficacious in its
activitie, and so permanent in its virtue.

To recollect our selves therefore, and to see where we are, here to wit,
that we have found the Subject in which this Ens lies hidden so invisible, as
that it requires in a mannet a Solifidian, to believe its existency, but with
industry it is to be attained, and made visible and apparent, and then is so
incredibly differing from the subject in which it was couched, that it raises
an admiration in the Artist to contemplate the effect.

And yet if the briefness of this Treatise would permit, I could easily silence
this admiration, with the contemplation of the like, if not less probable
productions, since out of the bosom of corruption all generations do spring
forth, but that my intended purpose calls me off; as speedily as may be, I
having task sufficient to perform; after this is ended, so great, to wit, as
will swell this Treatise to a bulk beyond what I intended.

A fourth thing therefore that falls under our observation in this discovery
is, that this Body being single, contemns all mixtures with any ferment.

And inasmuch as Ferment is Parens transmutationis, since this Body will admit
no marriage with any other Ferment, it is therefore the washing of a black
More, to attempt its transmutation.

The Reason is rendered, For that it cannot find, Dignius se corpus cui nuberet.
The means operative by which it attains this dignity, and peculiar eminency,
is by reduction Ad Atomos minimos in Natura possibiles.

Thus is this Latex, which is vile and contemptible, advanced to transcendent
height of purity, and perfection, which Word is soon said, not so soon
understood, but hardest of all to be done

This operarion is in few words taught by Paracelsus, where he says in his
Treatise De Viribus memhrorum, Cap. de Hepate, The Process of the Alchahest is
(ut a Coagulatione sua resolvatur, ac deinde Coaguletur in formam transmutatam,
sicut processus coagulandi and resolvendi docet, etc.) which short process, is
the greatest light that acute Philosopher gives concerning this mystery no
marvel then if its doctrine has remained so obscure in the World to this day.

Nor is Helmonts Doctrine much more plain, this being their intent to write so
as not to be understood, intending their precepts should be only as goads to
young Artists to stir them up to a serious inquiry after such things, which
they only gave hints of, but leaving the discovery of all to God only, who
will be the dispencer of these his gifts even to the Worlds end.

But I have resolved much more apert Candidnes, knowing how profitable this
secret would be, if more commonly known unto the Sons of men, therefore I have
so far adventured the Censure of al present and future Artists, as to discover
these mysteries with much more openness then every yet has been done.

To return therefore to our task proposed, which is the explication of that
place of Helmont, which of all his vvritings, does most fully teach the Matter
and manner of making of the Liquour Alcha^est, of which We have unfolded part,
in what We have already written.

Which that we may recollect, in order to a further progress, this in brief is
his Doctrine, concerning that Liquour, It is a Body of Salt, appearing in two
forms, yet reducible to such a Symphony, that it is not corruptible for the
future, it is found in a Latex, by curious and diligent search, and considering
the subject in which it lies, it would astonish a man to Contemplate its
Nature, as it is, when perfected by Art, and so it is in its original matter, a
Subject of contempt, and in its exaltation an object of wonder.

For finding afterward, no body more noble then it self to join withal, it is
not commiscible with any ferment, and so not capable of transmutation.

Now that which is added, Sed labor Sophiae anomalum in natura fecit, is but
only a further illustration of what had been said before; for the whole that is
said of this Liquour, may very aptly be reduced to four heads.

The first is what the Artist desires: and is comprehended in these words, Ars
indagando sollicita est corpori, quae tantae puritatis Symphonia colluderet
nobiscum, ut a corrumpente nequiret dissipari, This is the sum of what the
Artist would attain, and is the chief of all which can be by art sought for.

The second is, What Art by industry does find, comprehended in these Words,
Et tandem stupefacta est Religio, reperto Latice, qui ad minimos reductus
Atomos in Natura possibiles, caelebs, omnis fermenti Connubia sperneret.
Desperata est ergo ejus transmutatio dignius se Corpus non reperiens cui
nuberet.

The third discovers the Anomality of this production, in these words, Sed Ars
Sophiae anomalum in Natura produxit, quod absque fermento commiscibili a se
diverso surrexit.

The fourth contains a short adumbration of the process, in these words,
Serpens isle seipsum momordit a veneno revixit, and mori deinceps nescit.

Thus we have discovered unto us this Liquour in its subject matter, which is
a Latex, in its production mediate, which is a body of two Natures, betwixt
which in the end must be a Symphony, so to cause incorruptibility, in its
final production, which is a Subject incapable of fetment, and beyond the
possibility of transmutation (this to be understood with due limitation:)
now let us cousider what is added, Sed Labor Sophiae anomalum in Natura
secit, etc. But the labor of Philosophy has brought forth an anomalous
product in nature, which took its being without mixture of any ferment,
Heterogeneous to it self. This serpent hit it self, revived from that Venom,
and is from thence forth immortal.

The Anomalitie of this Generation, would require a sull Treatise to unfold
and lay open, in this place I shall therefore discover it but briefly.

It is Anomalous, first in its operations, That any Agent in the World should
act without repassion (though to Heavenly Bodies natural, yet) with Sublunary
Creatures it is unusual, except Vulcan, and this Liquour.

It is Anomalous in its matter, for the tree (usually) is known by its fruit,
and the matter by its product, but here it is otherwise, for this product is
immortal, most pure, and incorruptible, though the matter of it be of all in
the World most corruptible, impure, and mutable.

It is Anomalous in its manner of production, for it self becomes ferment to it
self, so that without addition of ought, but what is of it self, this so
strange an Ens is produced.

The means of its production is by reiterated solution, and an intervening
coagulation, and thus is the Subject brought to the most subtle Atoms, of
which in Nature it is Capable.

This is the Serpents biting of it self, being indeed nothing but a Serpent
comparatively, which beginning at its tail, by degrees devours it felf, and at
last is renewed into a pure essence, over which Death has no power.

Of its mortality, and immortality, how both are true concerning it, I might
largely dispute, and enlarge this Discourse upon the Subject, into a swelling
Volume, but the brevity at first proposed to my self, and promised to the
Reader, calls me off, and my intended task minds me with what speed I can, to
pass forvvard to that which is behind.

CAP. XIV. The Conclusion of this Subject, with a Peroration unto Sons of
Pyrotechny.
THus have I (Courteous Readers) with much Ingenuitie, endeavored to unmask
unto you Nature in her Physical and medicinal secrets, shevved you the true
way and means of proceeding in these disquisitions, so as to be fuccessful in
them, having taught the necessity of Philosophical Keys, without which
nothing can be done in this Art, of which the noblest of all the Liquour
Alchahest, We would not pass over in silence, but as becomes a true
Interpreter of Nature gave it its due dignity of precedence, as being the
noblest, and most eminent of all Keys, more universal (in its operation) then
the of the Philosophers which is but a particular thing, applicable only to its
own kind, and that in reference to a generative multiplication of Species,
whereas this Liquour acts universally, and without limitation on all the
subjects in the whole world, which it destroies as to their vita ultima, and
perfectly reduces to their first matter, in whith their eminent virtue is
found, by which means those noble Medicines may be prepared, of which both
Helmont and Paracelsus glory, nor without cause, sithence by them may be cured
all the infirmities incident to the Body of man, and so the life vindicated
from the danger of diseases, which by any one of those great Arcana are
conquered, and cut down, as Hay or Grass with a Since.

It is a thing very desirable to have those medicines at command, and who would
not be willing (though with great pains and cost) to purchase the Horizontal
Gold, which being taken inwardly with a few doses, cures the most desperate
diseases, either inward or outward, to which man's Nature is subject, as the
Leprosy, Gout, Palsy, Epilepsie, Cancers, Fistulaes, Wolves, Scorbute, Kingse
vil, venereal disease, etc. and with one dose, cures all Fevers, and Agues, the
Hectic only excepted, which it cures in a month, as also any sort of
Consumption, and (in a word) is a perfect remedy for any malady, prevailing
over all, but death, (which yet by curing all the miseries of life, which reach
the health,) it makes less truculent and dreadful.

I need not instance in the Glorified Sulphur of Vitriol of Venus, otherwise
named the Sulphur of the Philosophers, nor in the Arcanum Corallinum, the
glorified Sulphur of the Metallus masculus, by Parcelsus called, his Vinum
Vitae, and Membrorum essentia, nor in the of life, the Lili of, nor in many
others, of which the Catalogue would be tedious to give, which the studious
Reader may find in both Paracelsus and Helmont, all which as being so many
precious Jewels (having this Key,) he may (unlocking Natures Cabinet) command
at pleasure, for it is but to tantalize a Reader, to commend to him what he is
scarce likely to attain, and surely such is this secret, which scarce the
hundredth thousand Artist may or shall be master of, nor any but such only whom
the Almighty by a more then ordinary grace shall bring thereto. I would
heartily wish (if it so seemed good to the Almighty) that this Secret were
more commonly known then it is, But I dare not prescribe Rules to the Most
High, knowing that he only will be the Dispenset of this Talent, unto the
Worlds end; nor shall any attain unto it whom he by a peculiar grace, shall not
bring unto this knowledge, forasmuch as it is not in him that wills, nor in
him that runs, but only in the blessing of the Lord, that such secrets are
revealed to such as he has chosen: To him only be everlasting praise, and
dominion, and eternal benediction. Yet would I advise with Helmont, that as
many as desire to be masters of the more noble Arcana's in Medicine, should
with all their might endeavor the attainment of that secret fire so much
esteemed, for its almost miraculous virtue and effects, of which may be said,
Vulgus igne cremet, nos aqua, and doubtless he that will be industrious and
diligent may be pains taking and prayer perfect his desires, to the glory of
God, his own comfort, and the relief of many thousands.

Yet would I not advise any young Artist to make this Secret the beginning of
his Chemical Studies as many do, of which fault my self was not innocent, for
this is but a preposterous course of searching into Natures secrets. This being
indeed as it were the Corollary or Topstone of Medicinal Art, (not to vie this
Secret with the Medicine of the Magi, their Aurum potabile; attained by means
of their Stone,) now, who but a madman being to climb up a Ladder, will begin
at the uppermost round, and refuse the lower steps, resolving not to step one
step, unless he may at first reach the uppermost of all, so mad is he, who
would devote himself to the study of true Medicine, and yet will account
nothing worth his inquiry, except it be the Masterie of Hermes, or this
peerless Key, the Liquour Alchahest.

From which preposterous practice, that I may seriously dehort thee (whoever
thou art) a studious Beginner in the Discovery of, and inquitie after Natures
secrets: consider with me that all the works of Nature, are concatenate or
linked together in such admirable order, that one does subornately and
successively discover another, God in his wisdom providing for the necessity
and convenience of unworthie mankind, making one thing to be a Key unto
another, and each subordinate discovery a help unto a higher.

Now that all things in the World are made for the sake and use of man, is
confirmed by several places of Scripture, and appears by experience, each day
affording Testimonies of the same.

From Hunger man is secured by a plentiful provision of food, both meat and
drink, from cold by cloths and fire, from diseases by medicines.

Nor has God adjourned the cure of the sick unto the time of the attainment of
the highest Arcana, since very few there are in an Age, that have this skill
(although I believe it to be chiefly the fault of our neglect, that so few do
know, what Legacies out Heavenly Father has left us in the Creatures) for in
simple Concretes may be found the perfect Cure of most (not to say all)
diseases, were we but as diligent, as we ought in the inquiry and search after
them.

But because the number of Herbs is almost infinite (as to our knowledge) the
virtues of them known to very few, and those which are known, are more precise
in operation, and efficacy, so that, a practice upon simples would be very
tedious, and difficult, therefore there are some simples that with an casie
preparation work admirable effects (as to instance in one Salt, to Wit, Nitre,
by which slightly prepared how many diseases may be cured, and by its Spirit
many more, and more difficult.

For verily, although many Concretes are, as nature has formed them of
singular virtue, yet the difficulty of practicing by them, may appear by
instance. As suppose a man who is troubled with Nephritical pains, would be
cured, or at least eased, by such a way of practice, for several intentions,
several Herbs are gathered, as Virga Aurea, Becapunga, Althaea, Malva Sem.
Dauci, etc. These by infusion are composed into a drink, and by it ease is
found, yet if a Phisician should have many such Patients, they would require a
large stock of these simples, which if gathered out of season, are of little or
no virtue, and therefore must be provided in due time, and because these
diseases will not be confined to such seasons of the year, in which these herbs
are in their greatest virtue, they must be therefore gathered seasonably, dried
carefully, and kept safely, else their virtue before use, may be either notably
impaired or quite lost, now to have sufficient quantity of all herbs which are
commended for all the sorts of diseases, to which man's frail Body is subject,
seasonably gathered, carefully dried, and safely kept, is a task (I fear) too
shamefully neglected by the Doctors of our Age, who commit all this Care to
the Apothecaries, in which they are so supinely negligent, that it is a shame
to consider.

But besides this trouble, herbs, or seeds, or flowers, or roots, though never
so seasonably gathered, or maturely dried, or carefully kept, yet in short time
are liable to a spontaneous loss of Virtue, which is (when gone) irrepatable,
which inconvenience to remedy, many inventions are used, but to very little
purpose.

However the Medicinal apparatus for such a practice is so great, that a man
may at easier rates remove a Ship of great Burden from Port to Port, then
transplant a well furnished Apothecaries Shop, from Town to Town, so that all
the remedy that is left, a Phisician in this Case, (unless he will be so tied
to a place, as not to be able to leave it) is to expect Apothecaries furnished
wherever he goes, and for his own part, to attend only the Goosquill practice,
(which is the Trade of all our modern Doctors) by which way he may as
confidently assure himself, or his befooled Patients of good success, as that
Mountebank could, who copying out thousands of Receipts, for several distempers,
of which he knew not one, put his patients to draw each one his Chance, at
adventure, out of a Bag, with this short prayer, God send thee good luck.

Moreover who sees not, that notwithstanding the large provision, God has made
for the cure of diseases, by the means of simple Medicaments, that scarce a
certain cure of one malady in ten, has yet been found out, in the common way
of practice, and If I should say, not one in so many, I should do them no wrong.

Therefore has the necessity of mankind put men upon the search of a more
accurate preparation of Simples to the end, that Nature being helped by Art,
through her Administration, and its Cooperation. Medicaments may be prepared,
which may effect that which before was sought for, in several Simples, and
without success, because of either ignorance of their absolute Virtue, or
negligence in their gathering, or keeping, or indiscretion in their
Application, or Administration.

Now this is done many ways, and according to the several ways of handling of
them, Medicines may be made of various Virtues, and excellency.

Bare decoction, which is the height of the Galenicalaribes Therapeucie, is a
slovenly, ignorant, biundering dotage, the unsufficiency of which kind of
preparation of Vegetables, sundry successive Ages have restified, and many
sick people to the loss of both their expectation and moneys, and not rarely of
their lives, have experimented.

Which insufficiency, several studious Sons of Art observing, have with all
possible diligence, attended the preparation of Simples, and this for the
taking away of their superfluous faeces, the maturating of their Crudities, the
extinction of their virulencie and malignitie, and advancing of the hidden
Spirit which is ethereal to its transcendent degree of putitie.

To these, in testimony of their being sent from God for the pulling down of
the old ruinous way of the blind Philosophy of the Heathens, were given
certain Diplomata, or Evidences of their mission, by the miraculous Testimony
of powerful Arcanas, commanding credit in their Doctrine, so new (as to repute)
and so Diametrically opposed to the good old way, (so styled and believed) of
the Ancients, which without such commanding Arguments, would never lose the
repute they had by long prescription gained in the World.

By this means, the Ingenuous sort being awakened, all of them seeing their own
Nakedness, some triflingly sought only for sgleaves to hide the same, others
being convinced thoroughly of the insufficiency of Vulgar Medicines, seriously
inquired after a more secure way.

And reading of the rare, and almost miraculous Virtue of some Choice secrets,
which so highly adorned, and for that cause were so highly commended by the
Antistites or Champions of this discovery, their minds were wholly inslamed
with the desire, of them, rejecting, and neglecting all other things below
these Top Secrets, as being unworthie their search.

To these, my present peroration, concerning this foredescribed Subject, is
intended, to whom I shall address my self in this sort.

That you are convinced of the insufficiency of the vulgar method, I am glad
for your sakes, I also am of your mind and opinion, and can convincingly
satisfy my self and the world, of the Truth of the same, as in the first
Apologetical Treatise I have in part done.

That you also are desirous of the most noble medicines, I commend, only
advise, that this devotion of yours be managed by discretion.

But that you should wave all practice upon, or disquisition after inferior
Medicaments, and only prosecute the Liquour Alchahest, the Horizontal Gold,
etc. it is so high an injury to discretion, as if a man who is convinced of
the realitie of the Philosophical Tinging Elixtrs, Red and White, should reject
all means of livelihood, unless he might attain this matchless way of
maintenance.

Should a man never attempt a draught of Painting unless he were certainly able
to mend Apelles his draught of Venus, it is unlikely he should ever be a good
Limner: or should a man refuse all emploiment in the Commonwealth, unless he
could attain to the Supremacy? He might and certainly would spend all his life
unprofitably, or should one absolutely resolve against all deeds of Charity,
till he were able to releeval the poor round about him he would be accounted
(and worthily) a rash resolved man, yet not unlike to him, who adjourns his
practice in medicine, till he may equal Helmont or Paracelsus in medicines.

For such a man is unerateful to God, injurious to himself, and unrighteous to
his neighbor, and with his own hands does what in him lies to ruin the
foundation of his future hopes and expectation.

If God has given thee (O man whoever thou art) one Talent; and thou shall
resolve to bury it because but one, how can thou hope to evade the doom and
destiny of the unfaithful servant; for this very sloathfulness, made an
example to all posterity.

The gifts of God are not our own to employ at our pleasure, but are to be used
for his Glory, and the good both of our selves, and such among whom we
converse, and in so doing we shall both reap comfort, and may expect an en
bettering of our Talents and Gifts, but otherwise if laid aside in
despondencie, because they are not such as please and like us, they rust, that
is, grow worse for want of using, and decrease for want of improving.

For I look upon a man, that is engaged in these discoveries of Nature, like to
a Traveller in his journie, whom every short step advances forward toward his
journies end, who if he should forbear to step a step, because a step is but
short, and makes him little the nearer to the End proposed, he will never reach
the place appointed, and to resolve to stay in one place, till he may with one
jump accomplish his desire, is both foolish to imagine, and impossible to
perform.

Just so is it in this Case, the Adept Magical skill, or knowledge, is a long
way at a distance from a young Beginner or Tyro, yet is the whole interval
filled with variety of Rarities, of admirable Virtue, and still higher and
higher in excellency, by how much nearer they approach to the perfection of
Nature, which Art can attein to, these intervening secrets are (as it were) so
many steps on ward in the journie toward perfection, and do lead to it, and which
neglected, it is very rare that any arrive the highest, unless some Chemieal
Angel by inspiration, or a Master by information, do that for the Artist which
the Angel did by Habakkuk, when he brought him, without stepping one step by
the hair of the head, out of Judea into Babylon to releeve captived Daniel,
which is not an ordinary accident.

The trodden beaten path, is by employing what Talents God bestovvs on us, to
expect an increase of the same, for first of all, the Analogy that is betvveen
Gods Creatures, is such, that by the contemplation of some in their Causes and
Operations, which are more visible, and with less difficulty attained, we
learn to order and to examine, to work upon, and prepare other things, that
are more secret, although not in fallibly, as to any particular receipt, yet
not uncertainly, as to the Philosophical Doctrine, and instruction, which we
receive thereby.

Add to this that the hidden spirit which is in all things, is in some more,
and in some less noble, and efficacious, and so proportionably is in some more
at liberty, in other things more straightly shut up, and sealed, and among
Concretes of the 3 distinct Kingdoms, Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral may be
found, and is to be seen such an agreeableness in nature that one is as it
were the Key unto the other, by which it may be opened, and both together
(through the power of a supervening serment) may be graduated to a virtue far
more noble, then was in them before,

But more over we are to be remembered, (which else we shall feel with a
Witness) that this discovery of nature is not carried on without charge, and
expense, when a man shall besides his necessary charges of meat and drink, be
necessitated to provide a house convenient for his intent, and in it, to build
surnaces, provide several sorts of instruments, besides coals, glasses,
servants wages, and all Materials, which charge if it produce nothing that
will defray it self, It makes the Philosopher only a fit subject for a
Balladmonger, to be sung to the tune of, Fortune my Foe, etc.

Such encouragement will soon make a man weary of his Philosophy, being to
himself only a subject of discontent, and to others, especially his Kindred an
object of reproach and derision, which are but very bad means to incite a man
to a resolute progress or to whet his ingeny, for a more accute finding out
the things sought for, and desired.

I shall therefore in brief give the two characters of a wise and disereet,
and of a foolish and preposterous searcher after the mysteries of nature, to
the end, that being thus personated, and represented, the Reader may the better
judge of each of them, and pr^^ound him for imitation, who may (in Reason, be
most approved, and reject the other.

CAP. XV. The Character of a Praeposterous searcher after Natures secrets.
AND first I shall begin with him, who without due discretion, enters this
field, and manageth his undertaking without prudence, or Reason, of such a one
I spoke very briefly in the fourth Chapter, I shall more largely, and lively
describe him now.

Such a one is generally credulous, and confident, and therefore seldom but
deceived, he is some way or other convinced of the insufficiency of Vulgar
Medicine, both in the method, and medicaments of it, and by some fortune or
other, he falls upon some Treatise that speaks of a more effectual way of
practice, or meets with some Artist or other, from whom either by Argument, or
ocular proof he gets Conviction of the Realitie of noble and efficacious
Medicines.

Hence he is invited to study, and entering the List, he meets with variety
of Authors, writing concerning rare secrets, and being a man of a ready
closing faith, concludes himself already an Artist, and an Adepius in
potentia, little doubting, but in short time to be Master of whatever he reads,
and to be able to do, whatever he reads or hears, has been done before him.

He is for the most part garrulous, and vainly glorious, and in defiance of
whatever is beneath his own hopes, is often declaiming of his Art, where of he
has already promised himself the true attainment; and therefore respects
himself as a Master, though of little experience, yet of infinite expectation,

He overvalues his own parts, and overweening his own judgment, is apt to
laughat such, who seek for the Art in vain, of which he is before hand as sure,
as he who sold a Bearskin before he had killed the Bear.

On this account he propounds to himself either the Liquour Alchahest, or the
Philosophers Stone, or both and by means of these (when they are effected)
wealth at will, together with rare jems at pleasure, malleable glass for
delight, the perpetual light, and Cold potable, which were the undiscoverable
mysteries of the Magi.

Helmonts and Paracelsus secrets then, shall be his trivial experiments, the
Horizontal Gold, the first Ens of Perles, the Elemental fire of the Sulphur of,
the of life, and shall be only his recreative diversions.

But stay, now it is time to see him in his devotion, he will grow gray only
in the Contemplation of Eternity, Charity shall be his Alpha and Omega, the
Cure of the poor, is the prime of his intentions, nay his only desires, but as
for Covetousness, Ambition, Pride, and Vanity, against these he declaims, as
against detected malefactors.

With consideration of what he will do hereafter, he is abundantly satisfied
and wholy taken up, and for this end he is seldom unfurnished of a device or
two in his head, that may bring to pass, and effect all this, and a great deal
more, which my intended brevitie will not give me leave to particularize.

Let us therefore come, and it is time) to take a survey of him in his
operations, his receipts (because devoted unto everlasting secrecy) I shall not
teach, though I might, as knovving not a fevv of the means, by which a
thousand rare intentions are, or have been designed to be brought about.

If it be the stone, that our Philosopher longs for, he has first of all, the
thing so exquisitely pourtraied in Idaea, that a more curious Dramma cannot be
given, what it must be, of what form, and how to be used to any of his
intentional devices.

Then he falls foul upon his matter, in which for the most part he begs his
question, namely, That such a thing, by such operations, will be the result of
that matter so prepared, on which he falls furiously to practice, still
expecting or hoping for his propounded desires

Now because that he aims at nothing inferiout to the perfect masterie, and
presumes himself Cocksure of the same, he contemns any thing inferior to the
highest seize, and so although Medicine generally be his pretense, yet
with this proviso, that when such Medicines, which he ga^es for are perfected,
then woe be to all diseases that shall dare to come in his way, and till then,
he will neither meddle with one thing nor other in practice esteeming whatever
is below what he seeks, scarce worth the thoughts that are spent in contemning
of them.

By which means he is professedly ignorant of every thing, but what is his
ultimate End propounded: and of that he cannot but be really ignorant enough,
having no knowledge of it, but what an ignorant imagination has framed unto
him. For what ever a man knows not, he may well be adjudged ignorant of,
which may easily be understood by any, and can be denied by none, now what
an Idea, any man in likelihood, can make to himself, of a thing he never savv
nor was ever instructed in, but by various books, the Authors of many of
which never savv what they desctibed, nor knevv what they treat of, in
which number many whose books are extant may be reckoned, I shall leave to
the Consideration of the Indifferent Reader.

By this means he verifies the Proverb of him, who reaching at a star stumbles
at a straw, resolving to appear nothing, unless he may equal the highest, he
lives all his life in obscurity, care, and anxietie.

Although while his hopes are in their blossom he is no small Philosopher in
his own imagination, Hermes and he differ little in his own apprehension save
that one was of larger practice, but the other was of as acute Theorie, this
opinion of himself he will nourish so long, until that gray headed experience
compel him to alter his judgment.

For so long as he can defray the charge and expense, he will never be out of
practice, and seldom out of Courage, but looking only for the Stone of the
Wise, or the Immortal dissolver of Holmont, and Paracelsus, if his Operations
miss this mark, he judges them only fit for the Dunghill and so addresseth
himself to another, (perhaps to another kind of) operation.

Thus is he daily impoverished, by expense of Coals, and Instruments of Glass,
Earth, Iron, etc. And the Charge of the Materials he uses, besides Laborers
Wages, and various Furnaces daily made and altered, which will soon sink a
fair estate.

Yet by all means, these Philosophers must have their operations cheap, and to
be done for a small charge and cost: Hovvever these receipts, what one way
and what another, (are in the conclusion) ruinously chargeable.

For were it no more, but to maintain a man's self, for ten, twelve, or
twenty years, and in the mean time to do nothing to the getting of one groat
to defray this charge, it would require a fair inheritance to perform this.

But when a man shall account himself Craesus in effect, how far this mad
dotage does stir him, who believes it to exceed his former allowance in
ordinary expense, fevv that have known any of these Philosophers (and who is
it that has not known some?) but can satisfy themselves, and then besides
this, the superadditionarie charge, of erecting Laboratories, cont^iving
furnaces, pots, glasses, etc. The variety of materials wrought on, besides
the continual vvast of Coals, does amount to such an expense, as will in short
time, sink a fair Estate, not to mention the Hydropick thirst, that they, who
once have entered this List, do express, and all to regain what they have
expended, and to better their Fortunes, according to what they have proposed
in their own Imagination and Fantasy, by which they are carried on so
eagerly in their pursuit, that nothing but the falling short of Money, can
reclaim them.

This is the usual end of these Philosophers, how great soever their Estates
or Hopes were at the first, and then they lead a life useless to the World,
and comfortless to themselves.

Against these (were it not pity to add affliction to the afflicted) I could
declaim Satyrically enough, but I shall rather choose to show both them and
others, their errors, which in the Character of a true Son of Art (who
searches in the fire, according to the true principles of discretion) may be
done most conveniently, as being the proper and due place for the same.

CAP. XVI. The Character of him, who so searches Natures Secrets, as to reap
profit thereby, and so attends Pyrotechny, as to be made, Per Ignem Philosophus.
HAving taken our view of a preposterous intermedler with Natures Secrets, and
traced him to his end, to wit, want and penury, by reason of which he lives
uncomfortably to himself, and unprofitably to mankind the reason of which is
(as we have showed at large) an obstinate addiction to one or two grand
Secrets, til the attaining of which, he adjourns all his intentions to
medicine, as scorning to appear without the grand Arcana's, we now shall come
to characterize and represent such a Student in Natures Book, who in
probability with Gods blessing, will have his searches crovvnd with success.

Such a one is from his childhood given to studiousness, and from the first of
his years of maturity, his mind is busy, and his thoughts pensive, how he may
live serviceable to God and mankind, according to the Talents, with which he
is entrusted from above.

Temporal preferments are the least of his thoughts, as being dangerous baits,
both for soul and body hazarding oftentimes both: The Gentleman's life of
pleasure is to him a burden to think of: the Lawyers Art of Contention is to
him a purgatory to embrace: and to live an idle Speculator, both odious and
itkesome.

He knovvs that this life is but a race, in which we ought (as to a Gole) to
run to Eternity, and therefore the highest emploiment, he esteems, is to
glorify God himself, and exhort others to do the same.

But because he is rare to be found, who is sufficient for these things, he is
sensible of his own insufficiency, and dares not meddle therein further then
concerns his own salvation, and being unwilling to partake in other men's sins,
and yet absolutely resolved, by no means to live out of emploiment; he therefore
(next to the glory of God, and serviceableness in advancing piety in himself
and others) accounts Medicine to be the most desirable, and highest attainment.

And truly, he that will seriously and soberly weigh and ponder matters as he
ought, cannot but conclude the same upon undeniable grounds and reasons; for
who is he who cannot experimentally conclude with him who advised to pray, Vt
sit men's sana in corpore sano? it being evident, that while we inhabit these
Cottages of Clay, bodily infirmities are (next unto sins) the disturbers of the
mind, disabling the soul in all her functions, and rendering our life more
burdensome than death, by reason of which many (with Job) wish for death but
cannot find it, that in the grave they might cease from all worldly sorrows,
miseries and infirmities.

Which though most justly and righteously inflicted for our sins, were yet the
object of Christ's mercy and compassion, who went about doing good and curing
all manner of diseases among the people, and the Apostles, who after Christ
were to publish the Gospel through all the World, they through the power of
Christ confirmed the same by Miracles, not to the Conquest, and subduing of
Kingdoms, but the Cure of Diseases and Maladies: in imitation of whom this Son
of Art is carnest at the Throne of Grace in prayer, and sedulous as to the
search after Natures secrets in the fire, that he may (through the blessing of
the most High) by seeking, knocking and asking, find, receive, and attain
medicinal Secrets for the restoring of the defects of poor afflicted mankind,
of which himself is a member, and so subject to the like miseries and
infirmities.

For this end, he takes advice of those, who went before him, according to the
Apostles rule, Proving all things, but holding fast only what is good; on
which score, he consults Galen, Hippocrates, Avicen, Rhafis Mesue, Fernelius,
Sennertus, etc. all, to wit, both ancient and modern, and this with a sincere
aim and intent to better his judgment, and ripen his skill in order to a
medicinal practice.

He does not (as many do) for company sake, rail at, and cry down the old way,
received in the Schools; but makes trial of it according to the Scholastic
promises, to bring about (with sincere intentions) his patients expectations.

But alas! upon proof, he finds the whole Art, as it is Academically taught, to
be but an Emblem of that Stable which was cleansed by Hercules, a
miscellaneous Hotchpotch, partly false, partly ridiculous, generally desperate
and dangerous.

I grant indeed, that Nature has produced almost infinite Simples of rare and
excellent virtues, which with duc preparation and application, would cure most
(if not all) diseases.

Yet considering the determinateness of the season, in which they grow and are
in their virtue, their restriction to this or that particular soil, according
to the Proverb, non omnis sert omnia tellus, their preciseness required, and
curiosity in gathering, drying, and keeping, the observance necessary in
their fitting for, and application to diseased persons, and lastly their
singularity in operation, being each of one sufficient for any case, in these
considerations it must be granted that he who would deserve the name of a
Physician, must have a larger knowledge then that of Simples, lest he often be
accused by his practice, of a lame and insufficient Method of medicine.

Add to this, the new Catalogue of Diseases, which daily appears on the
Stage, and many of them accounted by our Methodists incurable, and so added to
a large scroll of the same sort, which has long since been compiled by them,
and all because they wanted distinguishing medicines, with which a Son of Art
is stored, as evidences of his being created by and sent from God, and not the
Schools.

Considering which, a true Son of Art, finding the insufficiency of the
vulgarly professed method of medicine, does address himself to other means and
ways of furnishing himself with such medicaments which God has made for the
comfort and behoof of man.

And hearing of Medicaments, commended by Sons of Art (such who were curious to
search and study Nature, for finding out of the same, for their virtue, and
efficacy against such diseases, which to the old Methodists appear, and by
them are confessed incurable; He thereupon ingageth himself in the search of
the same, especially besides their verbal testimony, having on one hand the
evidence of Reason, and on the other hand, the unanswerable conviction of
proof, and Experiment to confirm the same unto him.

What concerns proof and experiment, the Cures of Paracelsus: Quercetan:
Suchten, and Helmont, and before them of Basilius Valentinus, etc. are beyondal
denial and question, and although that might be a sufficient conviction, to a
man rational, yet moreover, there is so clear a light of Reason, for the
authorizing of the Pyrotechnical way of Medicine, as does sufficiently convince
the Sons of Art, and inables them to stop the mouth of Gainsayers.

Of this I have spoken largely enough, in my first Chapters of this Treatise,
nor do I, nor should Loring the same in again, but that I intend this Chapter,
as a short Comprisal of what I wrote before.

To proceed therefore, a true Searcher of Nature having by practical
observation proved the insufficiency of the Old (though vulgarly adored) way
of Medicine, resolves (with Gods assistance) to spare no labor, nor study, nor
expense, in pursuance of such Secrets, which (by Reason he is convinced, and by
testimony of Artists he is confirmed) are in Nature, for the enabling of him,
who is possessor of them, unto the help of such, to whom it shall please God,
they be administered.

On these grounds he goes on, with a mind resolute and fixed, not wavering nor
inconstant to his principles, but with resolution prosecuting his attempts when
once undertaken.

And because he goes about the discovery of secret and hidden mysteries, he
provides himself accordingly, resolved not to be discouraged, though he hap to
miss again and again, nor to give over his search, although for a long time, he
fall short of his desired expectation.

He acknowledges and admireth the greater Arcana,, and could if God saw it
good wish himself a master of the highestmedicines, yet contemns he not, the
least knowledge that is true, so that, with whatsoever it is is possible for him
to do the least real good, he does it.

He ascribes the glory of his knowledge unto God, from whom acknowledging its
receipt, he dare not bury any Talent, but imploies each improvement, which God
grants him upon his labors, to do more and more good each day then other, and
thus with the help and assistance of the Almighty, he increases knowledge day
by day.

And seriously when I contemplate the Series of Natures Arcana's, I adore
therein, the wisdom of the Almighty, who in them seems to point out the Method
of a man's study, which an Artist cannot miss, if he Consider first, his
Neighbors necessity, and secondly, his own conveniencie, to both which in
wisdom, God has suited nature most exactly.

The necessity of our Neighbor may instruct us, if we consider the variety of
diseases, to which poor man is subject, not all of them, of alike difficulty
to cure, and yet, the least difficult to cure are as truculent, as any, if not
helped by Art.

To instance in a few cases, first the Fever, how general each year is it
among, and how afflictive, yea dangerous and mortal to mankind, and yet
certainly to be helped by many preparations, easily made, at any place, at any
(and in a short) time, of which kind are our Agues, by us so called, but all
known to the Latins and Greeks under one denomination.

It Is true, that the Greater Arcanas do cure all these diseases with all other,
both acute and chronical) in a short time, seldom exceeding, in any fever
(except only the Hectic; which is a real Tabes) above one dose, of these
Arcana's there are many, admirable of Virtue, but rarely given to any Artist,
yet in defect of these, there are many febrifuges, on which a careful Phisician
may confide, and adventure his credit, not will they ever blemish the
reputation of such as use them.

These particular succedaneous medicines, are the Crown usually of the
endeavors of many, to whom the greater secrets are (in Gods wisdom for a time)
denied: nor are these secrets so rare in number, so difficult in preparation,
nor require so long time, being destined, as it were by God, to be easily and
quickly provided, for the remedy of such discases which will accept of no
truce, of which sort, I could tell many, but that I reserve that discovery to
another more proper place.

Besides these, many other diseases are cured by casie medicines, which (if not
mortal are yet) burdensome to the party afflicted, rendering the life
uncomfortable, as the Scorbute, Hysterical fits. the Iaundise, Convulsions,
Cholical fits, Nephritical pains. etc. Which by Gods blessings are, have been,
and may be certainly cured, by particular Medicines, succedancous to the great
Arcana.

Yea, and those very Diseases, which are so outdaring to Phisicians, as the
Gout, the Epilepsie, etc. have their mitiora Symptomata,, which are easily
cured by particular Remedies.

Which things considered, it is a madness unexcusable, for any one who shall
engage himself in these Discoveries, to resolve against all medicinal practice,
till he may be Majorum Arcanorum Adeptus.

For since there are so many Diseases, so afflictive, nay so truculent, the
Cure of which needs not the Greater Arcana, how cruel is he to mankind, and
ungrateful to God, and injurious to Nature, who pretending to study Nature,
shall neglect the search of such medicaments which are of so great virtue and
efficacy, especially so many poor creatures in every hole and corner, standing
in need of help, which may abundantly be supplied by succedaneous Medicines to
those Grand Alchahestical Arcana, by which a Careful Philician may cure all
diseases incidental to the Body of man (though not all with one Medicine, yet)
many Acute difeases even with one, and all Chronical diseases (if not by one,
yet) each by one, two, or three medicaments varied, as Indications may require.

I know it will be objected against me out of Helmont, who in his 9. Cap. de
Lithiasi writes thus, Nemo sanaverit Lepram qui Liquore Alchahefl non sit
potitus, etc. to which I cannot answer experimentally, as never having had a
Leper for my patient, yet with all respect to that great Philosopher, I must
crave leav, to be of another mind, nor is my diversity in opinion, grounded
without a Collateral experiment to confirm me, of which, I shall take time
elsewhere to speak more largely.

I shall conclude this Chapter speedily, having a little touched at the Artists
convenience, which (I said before) was to be as it were his line and plummet in
his searches, together with his Neighbors necessity, of which I have already
spoken.

In which place, it is not unseasonable to remember what, and what manner of
men they are who usually betake themselves seriously to the study of Ingenious
Arts, they are at the best mediocris, for the most part nullius fortunae
homines, those of large fortunes in the mean time minding pleasure and luxury,
by which means their lives are shortened, their health impaired, and themselves
become objects at last of pity (as to their health) to such, whom God makes
heirs of Medicinal Science.

So that according to the Proverb, Soli Philosophantur pauperes, which is a
true Proverb suiting with our wretched Age, Philosophy formerly being reputed
an entertainment for a Prince, and such who were Philosophers being reputed the
companions, only fit for Monarchs and great Personages, whereas now, the Art
must take its fare, being admired only of the meaner (at the best) of the
middle sort of men (as to fortune) and those for their pains, by the Vulgar
reputed mad, and deserving to live in want, and disesteem, for addicting
themselves to so foolish a Science.

Of such Sons it is had in esteem, yet according to the Poet, Virtus laudatur
and alget, these favorites of Philosophy, although they love her never so
well, yet they cannot dress her out in that dress, which she deserves, to make
her seem beautiful.

Hence it is, that whoever he is that courts Nature, he had need court her for
an inheritance to have with her a Competencie, by which he may both live
comfortably, and continue in her service without distraction.

For this end, he is willing to be at reasonable expense, until he may come a
little into her inner acquaintance, expecting then from her a pension
proportionable to his service, by which he may be enabled to continue the same,
and not be compelled to court another Mistress for a livelihood, whether war,
or Courtship or the like.

And this indeed is the Courtesy of that Nymph, that she suffers none of her
servants to be long unrewarded, but does according to the time, and
faithfulness of their service, alot unto each a reward, by which he may both
comfortably subsist, and carefully go on, in his future Search, and study.

But to be master of her greatest secrets, is the Crown that few attain, and
those only such, who by an especial grace are elected thereto.

Now for any one to resolve that unless he may be the commander and disposer of
Natures most rare, and feldome bestowed secrets, he will refuse such as are
offered him, it is so high an indiscretion, as cannot be pleaded for.

Forasmuch as the search into Nature, and her secrets is not to be performed
without cost and charge, which, so soon as a man is master of any (though
inferior) secret, that will defray; for him to refuse this, because it is not
the top secret of Art and Nature, is no less madness, then for a man to refolve
to go naked, till he is able to go clad in the richest Satin.

But such as are sober Sons of Nature, they know and are sensible that each
discovery of Nature requires cost and charge, to bring it about, and therefore
vveighing the necessities of mankind, they are sensible, that many secrets of
Nature of an inferior, and some of a middle rank to the highest are very
noble, and efficacious, and so not to be slighted, without incurring the
censure of folly and madness.

These therefore he accepts of God thankfully, as pledges of future blessings
to be bestovved, or as Io shuah received the Bunch of Grapes, as an earnest of
the Promised Land, or as a Metallist accepts a Marchasite, as an Index of a
Mine, not far from discovery, many of which pledges, a careful Son of Art
shall meet with in this Travel which improved as they ought, will bring
glory to God the Giver, comfort to the Patient that makes use of them, and
support and encouragement to the Physician the Possessour of them, by
experience of which he is encouraged, and by the profit and benefit, enabled
to go on with more and more courage, until by industry and the blessing of
the Almighty, he by degrees shall discover greater and greater Secrets, till
at the last, he arrive to the highest pitch, namely the greatest Secrets of all.

Some perhaps who will seek means to Carp, and to object, may cast in my
Dish, what I in my first part (which was Apologetical) vvrote, namely, that
in nature there were so many Secrets Iucriferous, that a man should not be
compelled, to practice Physic for necessity of maintenance.

This Objection I might have let alone, till I had met with it, but (if
possible) to remove all visible, and seeming Grounds from Cavilling spirits, I
shall here anticipate it.

It Is very true, that Nature is rich and abundantly stored with variety of
choice secrets, and those very lueriferous, so bountiful a Lady she is, that
none ever yet courted her serionsly, and constantly in vain.

But yet her ways by which she rewards her servants are good to be
considered, for she does not usually requite their pains and diligence with
coined money, (as some great personages being in danger of their lives, to
divert their followers have thrown Checkeens and Pistolets among them) No
verily, her revvard consists in secrets, which are of use and benefit to
those, by whom they made use of, and upon that score, lucriferous to the
Master and Possessour of them.

Now these Secrets are of various kinds, which the studious searcher of Nature
(unless strangely led by an unfortunate destiny) cannot but meet withal, at
the least one or other of them, of which sort I might mention many, but that it
is needless in this place, by this Art the Bow Die was found out, by this Art
the whitening Yellow Pearls, and colored Diamonds, has been found out by
others, besides many particular gradations and mineral extractions, known to
many, and the product real, true, and not sophisticate metals.

But the Cure of the Sick is an Emploiment, that engages the Consciences of
all such, to whom God has given abilities, as being of a more excellent
Nature, yea a Work of Mercy, not misbecoming the hands of a Prince, as God
experimentally (for a long time taught our Kings, in the Cure of that Disease;
commonly known, and called by the name of the Kings Evil.

But if must be granted, nor can it be denied, that he who shall devote himself
to these studies, must have a Competent Maintenance, else no wise man would, or
could excuse his Philosophy of Folly, which maintenance although he might
have several ways, he only admires the goodness of God, who so many ways,
has provided in Nature for such as are studious, as they ought, but (as every
wise man is known by his choice, where he has liberty of various choices)
makes that his means of support, by which he may do most good, and lead a life
most beneficial to many, such is the life of practicing the Art of Medicine,
and so is the objection answered.

So then, it is not out of necessity of a livelihood, that a Son of Art is
compelled to practice Medicine, for he having other ways at command may make
use of any, although (out of conscience) he makes choice of that among many, by
which he may do most good, and therefore attends the Practice of Medicine, and
attending it, he Conscionably expects, and honestly reaps a living from it.

Explicit Pars Secunda.
The Third PART. Containing an Experimental Essay, and a Faithful Discovery of
Nature, in her Medicinally Chemical Secrets.
The first Chapter, being an Introductorie Historical Narration of my first
Salutation of, and first Progress in Chemical Philosophy.
IN the year of Our Lord 1644. I first began the study of Chemical
Philosophy, to which how I came first to be incited would be a discourse in
this place, both tedious and useless, only this I must say and acknowledge,
that so good grounds invited me, and so good encouragement confirmed me, that
from that time, to this present year 1658. I never repented my time bestowed,
although the pains, I have since taken therein, were irksome to undergo, and
would be tedious to recite.

My aim and intentions at my first entrance, might possibly be of the same Kind
with others, whom curiosity or other incitements allure to the Art, however my
progress was such (as to point of industry and diligence) as might become a
devoted Son to Hermes, and my aims (as to the general) only Medicine, or at
least that principally.

I had not proceeded far, nor gone on long in these Studies, before I had
gotten a reasonable number of Authors, who treat of this learning, whom I first
began to read, then to admire, and lastly to desire to imitate.

This way of Learning, found the easier entertainment, and readier acceptance
with me, as one who was in affection disingaged, from the School Philosophy,
as requiring a senseless faith to believe it, being indeed at the best, but
rotten.

This (though but a Youth) I perceived easily (as I more largely told you in my
first Apologetical part, as also in my Treatise which I wrote De Liquore
Alchahest in Latin) and on that account, I valued the time I spent in the
attainment of that Philosophy, but lost, and on that score, I readily embraced
that Philosophy, which gave its Sons, and Students better hopes.

This kind of Philosophy I accounted such, and therefore devoted my self
wholly to it, yet so, that the necessity of attending Academical Studies, for
fear of giving offense to my friends and Tutours, compelled me to bestow a
great deal of precious time, in learning that Philosophy which Cordially I
Contemned, being convinced of its futilitie.

And having (on serious and sober grounds) resolved the Study and imploiment
of Medicine. I first assaied Galen, Fernelius, and Sennertus, with others, to
see what I could find in them, and then to these I added the Chemical Writers,
hoping by the Theorie of the one, and the practice of the other, to find a
secure way of curing diseases. And to deal ingeniously) opportunity of
practice, offering it self each day, gave me opportunity to find the promises
of many proved vain, by the effect, the most absolute conviction of all, though
cursed by the Poet, -- Careat successibus opto
Quisquis ab eventu, facta notanda putet.
This daily disappointment made me to enquire after other Writers and Authors,
and at last, I got all, or at least the most eminent, whom I studied seriously,
resolving with my self, that God had not given so rare secrets to Paracelsus,
by them to Tantalize all future posterity, but that the same might by
industry be attained, to which I thought Reading would conduce, but mistook.

It Is truth, the books of learned men are of excellent use to such who join
practical operation with Reading, but to bare Readers of them, they are
useless, there scarce being one receipt barely set down in any solid Author,
that was a real Adeptus, but it was and will be found to be either trivial or
falfe.

And to give each man his due, I must needs thankfully acknowledge, that from
Helmonts vvritings I have reaped more real benefit (as to solid learning) then
from any that I have read, or met with, either Ancient or Modern, in
prosecution of whose discoveries, I have spent these fourteen years, not have
I the least cause given me since of Repentance, that ever I undertook them.

He may be truly called, Paracelsus Great Interpreter, to whose Writings the
World is more beholding then the ungratefulness of this Age will suffer to be
acknowledged, hour, after Ages will acknowledge his worth, when many Sciolists
will be buried in oblivion.

It Was first through his incitation and incouragemen that I was set upon the
search of the immortal dissolving Liquour, called by Paracelsus, his liquour
Alchahest, of which in my second Treatise, I have spoken sufficiently as the
order of the discourse did direct and lead me.

This Liquour (to be ingenious) took me up a great time, as accounting that
nothing would remain difficult in Medicine, when that was once attained, and
indeed it is a noble Ens, fit to employ the time and study of all who desire
to be Physicians.

But remembering and considering Helmonts checking Conclusion, Scientia datur
non nisi electis viris, per longam annorum and laborum experientiam,
sufficienti sanitate, and pecunia instructis, nec peccatorum gravamine,
indignitatem meritis: Which in English sounds thus, This Science or Skill, is
not given, but only to such, whom God shall choose, by means of the experience
of many years spent in labors, where those who search after it, are
sufficiently provided, both of money, and health, and by a sinful conversation,
shall not render themselves unworthie thereof.

So that unless a man have lands to live of (and such as have, are rarely
favorers, or followers of Philosophy) he must provide himself of some
lucriferous experiments, in the mean while, to defray charges, and help him to
live, or else his Philosophy will go near to be starved it self, and to starve
the Philosopher, before this grayheaded experience, which with much pains, is
the teacher of Secrets, can be reached unto.

To my comfort I can say it, that my studies and endeavors upon and for the
great Liquor, were not unsuccessful, yet do I and shall I discommend that Zeal,
that carried me on in the search of it, almost to the neglect of all other
things, which had I not done, but prosecuted each thing gradually, securing my
ground gotten, to be a support for me on all occasions; before I had proceeded
on winning new, which is the only way, I had done better, and this I recommend
to others, that they may learn by me.

Nor is it aliene from this old Philosophers advice, which is first to get a
dissolver, that may be Immortal and Homogeneall, etc. as any one may read his
Counsel in his Treatise of Fevers. But says he, If you cannot attain to that
hidden fire, yet learn to make the Salt of Tartar Volatile, that by it you may
make your Dissolutions, the Encomium of which, I leave to every one who can and
list to read, in the Author himself.

CAP. II. Of Specificks.
IN the former Book, to wit, the second, I did follow the division of
Pyrotechny, according to the distinction of medicines which it conteins, either
universal or specific, in prosecuting of which division, we came to the
distinction of the Keys, which are in the art, by them to unlock, to prepare,
and perfect Bodies, in order, and with an eye unto Medicine.

This method brought us to discourse of the Liquor Alchahest, the great
universal dissolver of all bodies, without the least loss of virtue, or
diminution of its weight.

I shall now come to the other inferior Keys, and Medicines of a lower rank,
than those preparable by that Art, and forementioned Liquour.

The Subordinate Liquour, then to the great Dissolver is the Spirit of Volatile
Alcalies, of which I shall speak here but briefly, reserving a more full and
clear manifestation of them, to an Entire Tractate on that Subject, entitled
De Mysteriis Alcalium, which I purpose shortly shall see the light.

Alcalies are Bodies of excellent virtue, according to Helmont, who says of
them, That fixed Alcalies being brought to volatilitie, equal the virtue of the
great Arcana, For being endowed with an incisive, or resolving Virtue, they do
penetrate even to the Limen of the fourth digestion, and resolve whatever
praenatural coagulation they find in the Veins: and in a word, their Spirit is
of so exquisite a penetrative Nature, that where they reach not, no other thing
in the World will be found to reach; A noble commendation and in which he is
not false in the least, and therefore I shall insist on this subject with what
fullness I may, not to prejudice that other Treatise on this peculiar Subject,
which I even now mentioned, and which I intend shortly shall come abroad into
the World.

The Generation of them, and the Philosophical speculation about their fixity
and possibility to be made volatile, I shall leave here untouched, as best
befitting an entire Philosophical Tractate of the same.

Alcalies then, through Arts craft, and Natures help, may be made volatile, and
by them, excellent Medicaments may be prepared, such to wit, by which all
Medicines absolutely required to the Cure of any disease may be prepared.

The excellent virtue and use of Alcalies appears from their applicableness to
Sulphurs both mineral and vegetable.

In it any Sulphur is extracted, out of any mean mineral or inferior metal,
insomuch, that Lead only, by mediation of fixed Salts, will suffer its
Elements of Sulphur and to be dissolved, and will become a running Argent vive,
the Sulphurous and Saline parts being imbibed in the Alcalies, by mean of which
also, they may by art be volatized.

Yea, even by bare boiling, in a strong Lixivium of Tartar, may the Sulphur of
be obtained, separated from the, or Regulus, as by fusion the same is attained
more opened and dissolved.

Hence it is, that if be melted with an Alcalie of Tartar and Salt, the Salts
which imbibe the Sulphur, being liquefied either in water, or in a moist place
of themselves, the Sulphur of the runs down, and is invisibly contained in
the Lixivium of the Salts, which because it will color the hands of such as
touch it with a Golden Color, by reason of its invisibly contained Sulphur,
which by precipitation with an acid liquor may be made to appear (together with
an intolerable stink) in a red form, is by the Tyrocynists named, Sulphur
Antimonii Auratum Diaphoreticum, a trivial toy, as by them used, but which may
be exalted to a most admirable Virtue.

Which that it may be done let these Salts impregnated with Sulphur be
dissolved, until they be red like blood, and separated from all their terrene
feces, then by Art, reduce the whole mass of Salts, with the Sulphur to a
volatilitie, in which process there will be a very unsavory stink, which will,
of its own accord pass away, and you shall have of your red lixivium, a sweet
mass, without odor, as white as Snow.

This snow is a Panacaea of, purging certainly, without vomit or nauseousnesse,
even in the weakest Bodies, and without griping, and is a cure for many (and
those Chronical) Diseases.

But to proceed to a further exaltation of its virtue, Take this snow, and
according to the right Art of distillation, proceed with it, to wit mixing it
with Potters Earth dried, and by degrees of fire distill it until all come over
(which by Cohobation is obtained,) leaving behind only a damned black insipid
Earth, the Spirit being tincted, and fragrant, to color resembling a potable
liquour of Gold, being of a deep tincture, of which five or six drops daily
administered, will not fail (even in the most deplorable cases) that may be
imagined.

Thus, if Colchotar of Vitriol, be perfectly washed from its Salt and dried,
and then boiled up with an equal part of Salt of Tartar liquefied, and then
both in a Crucible melted, and poured out, you shall find that the Colchotar
will suffer all its Sulphur almost to be imbibed in the Lixivium: This then by
mortification and regeneration bring to volatility and distill it (as was said
of the Sulphur of) and you shall have a Liquour of a yellowish green tincture,
and fragrant.

In this Liquour dissolve Argent vive, and you shall find in this Dissolution
the Argent vive embraced by the Sulphur (in the Liquour contained) and so
fixed, that in the fire both will give a real metal, but being dulcified
with Spirit of Wine, without reduction to a metal, become a true succedaneous
Medicine, to Helmonts Horizontall Gold, made by mean of the Sulphur of Vitriol
of Venus brought into an Oil, by the Liquour Alcha^est.

The same way may be used in the Sulphurs of, and, yea in the Sulphur of the
metallus masculus, which operations are not easily learned from either Helmont
or Paracelsus, Although Paracelsus in many places gives clear light to this
very thing, but especially where he says, Sunt praeterea essentiae vini
cineratae, quae aurum solvunt. etc. si in circulum dentur, ourum reducunt, etc.
By which he means the Salt of Tartar which is of Wine, and reputed by him the
best of the Wine, as having more of the essence of it, then any other part of
the Wine, this Cinerated, or brought to ashes (as is done to get the Salt of
it) and after circulated, that is volatized, till which time it cannot be
circulated) it reduces Gold, etc. Nor is Helmont obscure as to this
particular, where he says, That if the spirit of volatile Salt of Tartar,
dissolve either Luna., Cornucervi, Crabs-eies, or any other simple, it will
cure, not only the Fever, but most (if not all) Chronick Diseases. Now corroded
by any Liquor, and not fixed, is an unsafe medicine, and by this Philosopher,
in many places condemned, as not fit for an honest man to use: This Liquor
then, in dissolving it, gives it a fixation sufficient to make it a very noble
Medicine, but being united with a volatile Sulphur (as I taught before,) it
then gives it a metalline fixitie, after the same manner, though in a
subordinate degree of nobleness, with the fixation of it in Helmonts
Horizontall Gold, which is made and fixed by the Liquour Alchahest.

There are then three ways of operation upon this volatized Alcali, in order
to its application to metalline Bodies.

First the Alcali is volatized, that is, regenerated by death and life, and
brought into a totally volatile Salt (which is of great virtue of it self.)
this distilled according to Art, gives that Noble Liquour of which Helmont and
Paracelsus give such noble Encomiums, that wherever that spirit reaches not,
no other will reach.

This Spirit is volatile and saline (not acid) and therefore more difficult to
be attained by our putationers and Sciolists) it dissolves all Concretes, only
is coagulated upon them (being dissolved) into a volatile Salt, which being
then sublimed from the dissolved Calx, does in imperfect metals, raise their
Sulphur, together with it self, and in perfect metals, it by often Circulation
does the like.

Secondly then, this Alcali thus regenerated into a volatile Salt, if mixed
with the Calx of either,,, or the Metallus masculus, or with the Regulus of,
and with them distilled, it does make them volatile, and each time the
distilled Spirit being put upon the Caput mortuum, is coagulated upon it.

Proceed by Cohabation, til your sign appear, which it behooves each Philosopher
diligently to attend, Coagulate then your Spirit, in which is the metalline
Sulphur hidden, and with Spirit of Wine dephlegmed, extract the metalline
tincture from the Salt, which when the extracting spirit is drawn away, remains
fragrant and very sweet, and is of wonderful virtue, little inferior to any
glorified Sulphur, by any Alchahestical operation.

But thirdly, (and that way I rather choose) let your Alcalie be first of all
melted with the Calx of any imperfect Metal, and then you have the Sulphur
married with the Salt, and by the fusion of fire somewhat opened, this mixture
proceed with after the way of volatizing Salt of Tartar perse, and both being
thus putrified and regenerated together, do after in their volatizing, more
thoroughly unite together, which for that end, proceed with by cohobation, so
long until they be wholly volatized: coagulate the Spirit then into a volatile
Salt and use it either with the Salt united, or extract the Sulphur which is
fragrant, and sweet, with pure Spirit of Wine, and reckon your self then Master
of a medicine balsamical, which you can never enough value and esteem.

All the secret then, is to know how to make Alcalies volatile, which is a
Secret that will never come to the knowledge of a lazy person, or a conceited
Putationer, it is one of Natures secret Keys, to fix and to volatize, which
in all her three Kingdoms she performs every day uncessantly.

Let many Tons or never so little quantity of these fixed Salts, be laid in
any Field, and in few months all would be transmuted into a volatile salt,
Hence it is that Calx, and Ashes enrich grounds for Corn, and yet our
Philosophers now adays, have not learned to imitate Nature, in her most
ordinary operations.

The truth is, they who should mind these things, are idle and conceited, they
cannot endure the pains of Search, and besides pride themselves, as if all
knowledge were with them already, and in the mean time are ready to vex and
persecute any, that will not go on in the old Road with them.

However, Truth must and will prevail, and they who for long time, have
contemned it, shall find themselves justly at last contemned.

What I write, I write from the treasury of experience, and I know and am
assured, that my Book will be a welcome Jewel to many, although a goad in the
side, and a prick to the very heart of others, yet let them fret and break
their spleen, they never can, nor shall prevail against what I here write.

Are not our Princes of Zoan fools? Yes verily, while like the savage Indians,
they adore Glass, Beads, Copper Bracelets, and trifling looking Glasses, mean
time contemning Gold and Pearls.

They magnify and extol their method of medicine, in defiance of any other
way, a method, at which Democritus could not refrain laughing, nor Heraclitus
crying to see Wise men (reputed) given up to such professed folly, and poor
afflicted souls daily and hourly languishing, and cheated of both money and
lives, by those who pretending their care and Cure, could never go beyond a
Glisterpipe, or an Vrinall: to which they add the Butcheries of Phlebotomy,
Scarification, Vesication, and Purgation, and the fooleries of Barley Broths,
Iulaps, and Cordials of which every Confectioner is better stored, then the
Apothecary, as usually candying and conserving with better Sugar, Proh
tempora! Oh mores!

Yet certainly there is a remnant, (although but a remnant) who cordially mind,
and seek after the better part, and choose it with Mary, nor shall it ever be
taken from them: to them as a Friend, and Brother, I intend, and direct these
Lines, and they will hear and embrace my counsel.

And as to the rest, this is all that I (at present) have to say unto them, let
them beware, least being too peevishly addicted, to their method, they neglect
and pass by the way of being better instructed, and though perhaps they may
think scorn, to be instructed by me, yet this Pride will but hereafter bring on
them greater Confusion, and condemnation, when they shall see the Catalogue of
all they have either killed, or suffered to perish, through Pride of Spirit,
disdaining to be taught.

But to return to our purpose, from which we have a little digressed, namely,
to the mystery of preparing Medicines, which whoever undertakes the Care of
Lives, and would peforme his undertaking Conscionably, must attend carefully.

Let him therefore learn, to spoil mineral Sulphurs of their peregrine and
malignant virulencie, and in them so prepared and corrected, he shall find
medicines, that will command all diseases equally as the noble Helmont, most
excellently has written concerning them.

Of this I purpose to be a little more large and plain, for it is in truth, the
very thing that ennobles, and graces a Phisician, and therefore (studious
Reader) I shall here crave thy serious attention.

The Kingdoms in which Nature works here below, are known according to the
common division to be three, the Animal, the Vegetable, and the Mineral.

In all of these, she has provided Medicines for the infirmities of man's life,
of which the highest in the Animal Kingdom, are in the Urine and the Ploud,
the highest in the Vegetall Kingdom, in the fixed Salts, and them volatized;
either by effential Oiles or otherwise, as the Artists experience, shall prompt
him: In the Mineral Kingdom the Medicinal part consists in the Sulphurs and
in the Salts, which are as I may say, ^otum medicinalium tori, the ^es of
metals being shut, and homogeneal Substances, and such as will yield to no
familiarity with us, but as totally estranged Essences, are most straightly
looked up, and work not, nisi Sulp^urum intui^u, with respect and reference to
their Sulphurs.

Of this Subject, and of the dignity of mineral and metalline Medicines, above
and beyond either Animal or Vegetall, Helmont has discoursed sufficiently,
nor will I repeat what he has delivered, which would be to cloy, not to edify
the Reader.

But Sulphurs of themselves are either shut up too closely to be unlocked by
the Archeus of our stomach, and so do not give their desired help, nor yield
their true virtue if taken in their own Nature, or many of them (besides this)
being virulent and malignant in their crude Simplicity, they therefore require
to be opened, that both their hidden virtue may be discovered, and their mixed
virulencie and malignitie may by preparation be Corrected.

1. Of which the great and most solemn way is by the Liquour Alchahest, and to
it the succedaneous way by volatile Alcalies, of which I have given some brief
touches by way of Essay, in the former part of this Chapter, I shall a little
further illustrate, and amplify, what there I begun, and so draw to a
Conclusion of this Chapter.

2. In the operation on Metals this Liquour may very well supply the room of
the Great Solvent, and in defect of it may serve a Son of Art, to make his
dissolutions of most (or all) Concretes, and the Volatization of the Sulphurs
of Inferior metals and minerals.

3. As for the supreme metals, (viz Gold and Silver and their Compeer in
Homogeneitie, to wit,) I should be injurious to the truth, if I should not
Confess, that in the preparation of these, this succedaneous Key comes far
short of the dignity of the Liquour Alchahest, and yet its effects here, in
these Bodies, are such as may deserve the commendation of a noble dissolvent,
and not a vulgar Corrosive,

4. For let Gold or Silver be herein dissolved, the solvent, by acting on them
(in a dissolutive way,) is it self coagulated into a volatile Salt, which when
the Phlegm (engendered by this coagulation, and the Liquours spending its virtue
in dissolving Bodies) is evapoured,
will in a cool place cristallize.

5. This volatile Salt sublime 3 or 4 times from the Calx of the dissolved
Gold, and you shall find that besides the virtues of with which it will be
endowed, it will carry up with it a volatile tincture of the, leaving the
Residue very pale.

6. Yea and by an Art not difficult to an Artist, expert in Pyrotechny, the
Elements of the Gold will be dissolved, and made separable each from other,
even as in the Operation by the Alchahest, with this eminent difference, that
this Liquour by this dissolution, does each time loose its activitie, being
coagulated as often as it is applied to action, and so rejecting a Phlegm, is
every operation diminished in quantity, which the Liquour Alchahest does not
suffer.

So then as for the glorified sweet Snlphurs of, and Luna, a man that can
command these Alcalies volatile, may by their Spirit attain them without the
liquour Alchahest (although that does the work sooner, and with more ease, and
without loss of its own virtue) in lieu of which this Spirit is far sooner, and
with much more ease attainable, and he that knows the Secret of making of it,
may make as much of it as he list.

But as concerning, that by this Art may be prepared to most incredible uses
(as to Medicine) if to wit first the Sulphur of, or of Vitriol of, or of the
metallus masculus, which is Augurellus his Sulphur Glaure (according to
Helmont) be volatized with the Spirit of volatile Salt of Tartar, (and both
make one Liquour together) in this Liquour let Argent Vive be dissolved, and
draw away the Phlegm till it be dry, put on more of the Spirit, and resolve
it so often until it will coagulate no more of the Spirit, but that it come off
strong as it was put on, thus is the Mercury in these solutions embraced by
the spiritualized Sulphur inhabiting the Spirit, and so embraced that each will
not leave other but upon as difficult terms, as the of a metalline Body would
be separated from its Sulphur, and may be reduced by an easy Art into a
metalline Body, but with greater discretion, and no less ease, and abundantly
greater benefit to poor sick Creatures, may it be made into a most noble
Medicine, very sweet, and of wonderful virtue, for the Salt of the coagulated
spirit is left together with the Coagulate of the, and the Spirit of Sulphur,
and of all, thus joined, becoms a sweet precipitate, in the dose of four, or
six, or eight grains not often repeated, curing all acute, and very many (if not
most, or all) Chronicall Discases.

But were no more to be attained by it, but that it makes the Sulphurs of,,,,
or Zink, etc. volatile, it is enough to make it of value to a Conscionable
Phisician, and studious Artist.

For these Mineral remedies work beyond what any man who has not tried by
experience would believe, of which Helmont is a sufficient, and a very clear
witness. I exhort (says he) young Artists that by all means they learn to
spoil Sulphurs of their exotic and virulent qualities, under custody of which
is hid the Vital Fire, composing the Archeus to pleasant ease and quietness,
for there are some Sulphurs which being prepared and perfected, the whole Army
of Diseases will be conquered by them, etc. Which I more confidently expect
from, and have sound more eminently performed in the Sulphur of Venus, of, and
especially in the Sulphur Claure of Augurellus, etc.

The preparation by that noble Author in that place chiefly intended is
Alchahestical, to which this may justly pass, as a most noble and unparalleld
Succedane^m.

The preparation also of the Metallus masculus its Sulphur in defect of the
great dissolvent, may hence be attained, for this volatile salt, does embrace
and in distillation brings over, together with its self that Sulphur in form of
a high tincted mettalline Oil, which then coagulated on a fixed Body, the
mettalline tincture may be extracted with pure Spirit of Wine, the Salt of the
Spirit of Tartar being left behind (as being not dissolvable in pure rectified
Spirit of Wine) and is then reduced into that all Succus or Liquour, by
Paracelsus called Vinum Vitae,
of which Helmont gives so large a commendation, and so noble a Character.

I know the next question will be, how may this Liquour be attained? to which I
answer with Helmont, That it is not sufficient to turn over Books, but Coals
and Glasses must be bought, and night after night must be spent: So Helmont
did, so I have done, and still continue to do, and so thou must do, whoever
would attain these Secrets, I have done my part, taught the (...) of the
thing, and so have started a game for any one that is curious to hunt: but for
the thing it self, and the practical skill, it is Gods blessing only, and each
man's particular Endeavors, that must give that: study therefore, and take
pains, and together with prayer to God join constant labor in the Fire, thus
with Gods blessing will you find what I by the same means have found.

CAP. III. Of volatile Salts of Herbs, and their Virtue.
HAving run through the Discovery of Alcalies, fo far as to give a short view
of their virtue, in reference to mineral dissolutions, let us now come to
discover their use and serviceableness in application to Vegetables, their
Preparation, Correction, Purification, and Exaltation in Virtue.

For Vegetables are of most admirable and excellent efficacy, although
subordinate to Minerals, yet so noble in virtue, that Paracelsus glories, and
not in vain of most excellent and several cures performable by one Herb duly
prepared, as to instance in Wormwood, by which he affirms, That he knows
perfectly to cure many (and those deplorable) Diseases.

O the Care and love of the Almighty for poor mortal man! but fie upon the
pride and Arrogancy of our Lordlike Doctors, who like Tantalus are pined for
thirst in the midst of a River, and tormented with hunger, yet having so many
goodly Apples ready to bob them on the Nose, but let not their Pride and
Sloth seduce any Son of Art, to choose with them their wretched lazy, and
unconscionable life, which makes them a by word to every Porter, which they are
not at all moved at, so long as they can get money, although with the ruin of
families and lives.

Of this preparation of Herbs the noble Helmont speaks in his ^harmacapolium,
and dispensatorium modernum, where he gives counsel by way of Legacy to such
who have not tasted the Virtue, of the Circulatum majus, that is the Alchahest,
how they should prepare simples, which are of great virtue, not by Castrating
of them, or clogging them with other simples, by beating all up together into a
Miscellanie, nor yet by bare decoction, by which the Virtue of Odoriferous
Vegetals is diminished, and the gummositie of others liquified, which has the
same defects with the Crude Herbs. But by superaddition of a Ferment, for the
extraction of the hidden Virtue, by suspending their Virulencie, by
substitution of one quality for another, or by composition of due ingredients,
stirring up new qualities, such as were not in the Concretes simplicity.

Which Counsel if well attended and followed, it would in short time ruin
those Shambles of Butcherie unto thousands of poor mortals, the Apothecaries
shops, which have been more fatal unto mankind than ever was the sword, by
means of which multitudes have died, through the absolute virulencie of their
medicines (so called, but real poison, not corrected but Ironically) and many
more for want of due help, which in their Slops is not to be found.

To correct them is impossible, they have grown up so long a time, that they
seem to have made prescription upon Nature for their future settlement, I shall
not therefore wash a Blackmore in laboring to reclaim them, but instruct the
ingenuous and industrious in better preparations.

For the virulencie of some Simples cannot be corrected, nor the defects (as
crudities, etc.) of others taken away by beating into powders, (which they call
species when mingled) nor boiling with Sugar into Tablets, nor by Candying or
Conserving with Sugar or Honey, but by bringing into a volatile sacharine
essential Salt (not sacharine in taste, but so called from its resemblance of
Sugar-Candie) which is done by the superinduction of a ferment, this may be
attained.

First then, let the industrious Artist know, that by means of the fixed Salt of
any Herb, any volatile Oil may be transmuted together with the Alcali into a
volatile essential Salt, which is of a wonderful penetrative virtue, for being
saline it mixeth with the urinary principles and passes along with the Urine
and Excrements, resolving by the way all that it finds to adhere obstinately to
the Vessels, in the ways through which it passes, and being Balsamicall by
reason of the ^ils which are salificated in it, it reaches as far as any
medicine of what Virtue soever.

Moreover, being of Vegetall and not of Mineral principalls, it insinuates it
self even into the constitutive principles of our Body, and reaches the
fountain of Animal Life, which is denied to any Apothecaries Drugges.

For whatever reaches to the Balsame of Life, must be Salt, since Blood, the
seat thereof is saline, the Urine also which is an Excrement separated from the
Blood, is likewise saline, so is our sweat, and so the very tears of the eyes,
nor can any thing be admitted beyond the limits of the first digestion, but it
must be of this Nature; All Herbs the refore, and Vegetables in the Stomach are
either digested, or not, if digested, they loose what they were, being made
chile, and so become altogether of a new Nature by this formal transmutation,
by which (if they were before medicinal) they are spoiled of all that virtue,
before they come to be admitted to the second, and if they may retain a few
qualities of the Magnum oportet, yet these are too feeble to extirpate a
disease settled in any Vessel of the second, much less of the third digestion.

But if what is taken in, be not digested, it is then cast out at the draught,
if by reason of its gummousness or indigestableness it will not yield to be
macerated by the ferment of the Stomach, or if it have a mixed virulencie, it
is rejected either by vomit, if the Venom be violent and apparent, or by siege
if the venom be gummous and not so easily found, and a little more gentle, or
both ways, if the Venom be of a gummous and very fermental virtue, these
never cure but by accident as I fully discovered in my Natures Explication,
etc. and shall not therefore here repeat.

Vain therefore is the intention of cure that is pretended by these ways, and
absurd are those Idle promises of Syrups to reach and to heal the Lungs, when
as the Liver that is much nearer cannot be reached either by Syrups or
Decoctions, what ever the Galenists persuade their deluded Patients.

But Salts being of another Nature suffer not in a digestible way by the
ferment of the Stomach, but retaining their virtue pass on to the Mesenterial
and Mesaraick veins, and so resolve in their passage, whatever preternatural
they find, and so become abstersive, diuretic, and diaphoretick.

This is manifest in Sea Salt, which passing the digestion of the Stomach and
of the Duodenum, is received into the Mesaraick veins, and goes along with the
semidigested blood or cruor, until the urinary separation, in which it lies
formally the same as it was when it was taken in, and is from thence separated
in its entire substance, form and virtue.

But Alcalies in the Stomach are satiated as to the lixiviate qualities, with
the aciditie of the Stomach, and produce a neuter, neither acid nor lixiviate,
but saline of another nature, and so pass on to the urinary digestion, where
they become urinous, but increase a fixed Salt in the urine, different from what
it was at its first tal^ing.

But if they be first volatized by an inseparable union with essential Oiles,
till both become one Salt this then passes through all the digestions in which
any coagulation may be made (preternaturally, and beside the intent of the
Archeus) Which it resolves and dispels, partly by urine, and partly by sweat,
for being essential and volatile, it has access where Aclalies in their own
solitary nature could find no admission.

For a clear ocular demoastration of what has been said concerning the
vomitive and purgative qualities which are apparent in some vegetables, to
convince them to be, and to proceed from a venomous principle, I shall instance
in a few (and those most obvious) preparations.

Let Hell bore black or white, or the juice of Wild Cncumers, or any of the
most severely churlish Vegetals be prepared with any fixed Alcalizate Salt, and
they loose both the vomitive and purgative quality, and become Diuretic and
Diaphoretick, in such sort as a double or treble Dose may be taken of them
after this preparation without disturbance, of which half so much before would
have proved deadly.

I would know of any Galenist, if or no the virtue of such simples consist in
the vomitive or purgative faculty, and if so, what is become of it by this
easy preparation? There is no evasion of the demonstration, the matter of fact
an easy experiment will convince, the reason it is that I now crave of them.
Perhaps they will think to answer with their old Cavil, to wit, that Chemistry
torturing things by the Fire does by long preparation exantlate the noble
Virtues of Simples, and so impose on the credulous Vulgar with a Castration of
them instead of exalting their Virtue.

I grant that decoctions, and long digestions do alter things exceedingly, so
the Root Cassava (well known in the Indies) being raw is a mortal poison to man
or beast, as many have experimented to the killing of their swine and poultrey,
but being completely baked, it makes very pleasant and wholesome Bread, and is
eaten by many thousands, so Asarum Roots raw either in Powder or Infusion,
cause very violent Vomits, which by boiling in water (only for half an hour)
become excellently Diuretic, and are an approved Remedy for slow lingering
Fevers: So experience teaches that in the (commonly called) extract of
Rhabarb, the extraction of an ounce will not purge so much as one drachme given
in powder, the reason of which if any shall ascribe to the vanishing of the
virtue in the fire, I shall confure that Assertion by an undoubted proof made
by the fire, For let the infusion of the Rhabarbe be made in a Retort, to which
let a Receiver be fastened, that not a drop of moisture exhale out of the
Retort, which is not caught in the Recipient, and let fresh liquour be put on
as that is decanted, till the tincture cease and the remainder become as
insipid as the Powder of a rotten post, and of as little efficacy, let the
moisture then be distilled off, till it come to a Rob, and this with so gentle
a heat, as to cause not the least danger of an Empyrheume, of this Rob or
extract, give as much as may be judged by proportion extracted out of two
drachmes of Rhabarbe, dissolved in its due proportion of the water distilled
from it, and to please the Experimenter the better, let an equal part of the
remaining powder, (after the extraction) be given with it, and these two
drathmes will not purge nigh so much as half a dragme that was never extracted,
but only pulverized and taken crude, by which it is evident, that without
diminishing the Substance, one grain, the purgative quality may be diminished
notably, only by bare boiling over the Fire, without any empyrheume contracted
in decoction, yea and the water distilling off, if it be cohobated again and
again, by returning of it when half is distilled over, the Emetick and
Cathartick qualities (in no long time) may be wholly overcome, but by addition
of the Liquour of an Alcalizate Salt, this is done in half an hours time by
decoction.
Now whither is this virtue vanished that it is gone? If it be answered, That
this is the property of the fire Nova product a facere, this Answer I shall
wipe away as easily as it is given, for we will use no fire at all that is
Culinary, and yet find the same effect.

^. Therefore let any Vegetall be taken subtly pulverized and searced, and
mix it with an Alcali(e.g.) Salt of Tartar, add of White wine or any other
Liquour, as much as will make it to the consistence of Dow or a Pultis, so let
it stand, that the Alcalizate Salt may penetrate, the powders Center, and as it
dries moisten it again, or keep it in a Gally-glass comprest and covered that
it may not dry, and in six weeks time at most, the vomitive or purgative
quality will be wholly extinct, yet without loss of either the taste or Color,
or smell, more then if it had been moistened with fair Water, nor quite so much
for such an humectation only would have superinduced a Fermentation, which by
the Alcali is hindered, so then the Specific qualities remain in this last
operation, (witness the taste and the smell rather exalted then perverted) but
the vomitive and laxative qualities are extinct, and consequently justly
concluded to be none of the virtue of the Simples, but distinct from substance
and specific qualities, which remain entire with the loss of the former.

And here ingenuous Reader observe the rottenness of the Calenical structure,
who in Herbs of excellent virtue only look to the vomitive or laxative venom,
which may well be compared to the slaming sword in the hand of the Cherub, that
guards the passage to the tree of life, So this face of Venom often hides most
noble and admirable endowments in many simples, by reason of which Poisonous
outside they cannot get admittance into the more retired closets of Nature,
over which so strict a watch is kept, that the Archeus will be enraged, the
Stomach suffer Convulsions (and all the Nerves by an irradiating Deuteropathia)
and the whole Microcosme put into an Hurly Burly, rather then it will admit the
venom of Hellebore to enter the Mesaraick or Mesentexial veins, but it ejects
all with a loarhing, and detestation, but the excellent crasis of which
Hellebore may deservedly boast, is not to be obtained, nay scarce perceived in
this boisterous disturbing operation thereof, as it appears given in its
crudity, or if any of its splenetick, and Cephalic benignity chance to appear
amid these tumults, it is but as the Sun shows a glimmering of its beams
through the dark veil of a thick black cloud; or a mistie fog.

But this veil being taken away, then appear the true, noble, and specific
virtues of it, and consequently of any other churlish Vegetable, which the
Galenists by reason of their misty method, cannot endure to behold, with full
view, and open eyes, but they are discovered unto us, and taught us by the
means and through the discipline of the fire, which is out so much commended
Pyrotechny.

Fire then by little and little in a humid decoction blots out the impression
of venom, that is in Vegetals, according to the most true Maxim, Omne
Vegetabile venenum coquendo mitescit, diutina verococtione evanescit, and this
it does not by producing a new thing (as when Concretes are distilled) but by
maturating the cruditie, to which the poison is joined, according to the true
Maxim, Omue venenum, vitae concreti ultimae alligatur, Arsenick it self, if by
Saltpeter it be but fixed, that is, compelled to abide the decoction of fire,
it loses its venom, otherwise it flies, that is, it will not abide the fiery
trial, but there the venom is material, that is, corrosive and corporal, here
in Vegetals the venom is deall, fermentall, and spiritual, but abhorring
decoction, much more the fixed purity of an Alcalizate salt, on which the fire
has stamped its character and impression, that it very well may be called
Ignis filius, elsewhere by me named Cauda Vulcani.

Thus even our Bread-corn, our meat, fish, Beer, and what not, if not well
baked or boiled, are all noxious, and though the use of them may be accompanied
with nourishment, yet that this is but bad nourishment I shall appeal to young
maids, that eat raw Oatmeal, and to children that eat raw fruits, and so the
Medicinal virtue in Vegetals is clogged at best with unwholesome cruditie, of
which it is as rash to make a medicine without decoction, as it is to eat young
Cucumers without pickling, besides many have a venom adhering to their
cruditie, which provokes the Archeus to rage and fury, and so perhaps the
disease is disturbed, and a light irradiation of the benevolence of the Simple
is apparent, through the dark cloud of anxiety, vomitings, and looseness of the
belly, which the stupid Doctor marking cries out, O excellent Medicine! not
considering that if coming as an enemy, which Nature would not admit, but shut
her parlour, and closet doors against it, and mustering her forces endeavored
to throw it out of its first Room, or at least to beat it out at the back door,
and yet it left a raie (as it were) of its hidden virtue behind it, what
would it have done, had it been stripped of all its hostile malignitie, that so
Nature might have been familiar with it, and led it up and down from room to
room, and from closet to closet, to the very entrance of the privy chamber, to
which is no access, but only to the Prince, or his very entire friend, which
is far beyond a reconciled Enemy, Such as are Aromatic balsamic essences.

In a word, a humid decoction or any digestion in a heat, that is not burning,
though it ripen crudities, yet it makes no change of the species, if once the
heat be graduated above a pepantick or fermenting heat, which is putrefactive
ever (where the subject is capable) and so the Parent of Transmutation, as may
appear in meat or moist Herbs kept in a febrile heat, such as is the heat of a
Horse belly, or horsedung, which is proportionable to the heat of Man when he
is in a feverish temper, This heat incites a ferment, and that causes a
transmutation as a separating or burning heat does cause the death of the
Compound, and by Consequence a new product which is Filius Ignis, But the
seminal virtue of the Concrete, is not totally extinguished, but by open
burning, for in a close separative heat, the parts are confusedly wrought upon,
partly retaining the vita media of the former Concrete, but eminently altered
from their former specific forms, through the active impression of Vulcan,
whose Character they receive.

Whereas in an humid heat, the species is unaltered, though the crudities are
by decoction taken away, yet this may be without loss of one grain of
Substance, the formal properties of the Concrete remaining notwithstanding, So
Beef, Pork, Mutton, Fish, or Fowl, by boiling are not changed (save only from
raw to ripe) but the Specific determinateness remains still, only the Color,
Taste, Smell, etc. Which were appropriate to the rawness are changed, into
others which follow decoction, yet keeping within the bounds of the same
species, which although the decoction were continued till a Gelatina, or Ius
Consummatum be produced, yet these Iellies or Broths, keep their seminal and
formally distinct properties, so that Cockbroth, Veal broth, or Mutton broth,
are distinctly to be known one from the other, nor are they radically changed,
but by mediation of a Ferment (which is not to be found beyond the degree of a
feverish or pepantick heat) or by a burning degree of fire, which is Mors
artificialis compositi, and would prove seminum extinctor, were it but suffered
to act openly, with a free flame or burning.

To apply what has been said to our purpose, I would ask the Supercilious
Galenist what he can say to oppose the Reason of this Discourse, That wheat is
a wholesome Grain all Europe knows, yet it wants not its malignant crudities,
till it be Baked, as every Baker can tell you, and every Housewife can instruct
her self, so it is in meat, so in Fish, and so in every thing, yea although
some tender leaves of Herbs be used and approved wholesome raw, yet this only
to sound Stomachs, but to weak constitutions, and crazie healths, even these
and delicious Fruits require boiling, baking, or stewing, which convinces that
so prepared they are the more wholesome.

Only the Galenist can be content to have his medicaments crude, that is, his
Elaterium, Zalap, Mechoachan, Briony, etc. which beside cruditie have also a
malignant venom, not to be taken away without previous preparation.

Besides all vegetable concretes, at least most of them have their Crasis or
Virtue involved in a Cummous, Viscous Substance, as a Nut in its shell, which
in Herbs or vegetable grain created for man's nourishment, is the Object on
which the digestive faculty is exercised, which also if it be taken away by
Ferment, although wholesome drinks may be made of them, yet they want their
former nutritive faculty of meat, as appears in wine, and Beer, which while
Barlie, and Grapes were apt for Food, and nourishment.

But so soon as the glutinous viscous Nature was volatized by Ferment, and so
formally transmuted into a New Creature, it became of food a wholesome drink, of
virtue to refresh and cheer the spirits (if moderately taken) or to besot and
stupifie them (if immoderately used) which effects in the Grain or Grapes was
not to be found,

Whence it is evident, that when Art by the fuperinduction of a Ferment has
volatized, and formally altered the viscosity of a vegetall Concrete, it then
as to its Spirit (which was produced of the foresaid Gummous substance) is not
liable to the Stomachs dig estion, but is in it only separated, and spiritually
has access to the Heart, and the subtle arterial fibrae, which are the
conveying channels of the Spirits from one noble part to another, and their
effect is warming, reviving, refreshing, and cheering, which they do more
powerfully by how much the Liquour is more generous and spiritual.

For what ever is digested in the Stomach, is first made chile, or an acid
Cremor, which after is by the ferment of the Liver, transmuted into a sanguine
salt, and so the blood is salt, which then is not altered, but only refined,
and so sent to the Heart, where it is inspired with a spirit of life, which is
Helmonts aura vitalis, and then the Cruor Hepaticus becomes Sanguis Arterialis,
which is the conveier of the Vital spirits to all the Body, bedewing each part
with a vital breath or dew, by which the Spirits spent and impaired by the
several functions of the Body are repaired, which is the last end propounded
by Nature in her appetible desire of meat and drink.

For Nature does not in thirst desire Beer or Wine as such, but as moisture,
for the supply of the decayed Latex, though provident Art, has married the
Water to a spirit that is familiar to Nature, that at once both the thirst may
beslacked, and the Spirits cheared. But of this more fully in my Treatise
entitled, The Method and Mystery of Curing diseases, which I intend very
shortly to publish, to which I remit the Reader.

To draw then what has been said to our present intent and purpose, we shall
lay down a few Conclusions.

First, That all Vegetall Concretes have a gummous viscous Substance, which in
Vegetables created for nourishment, is the object on which the ferment of the
Stomach acts, and out of which it attracts Chile. This is apparent in all
Broths, and Extracts of Grain or Herbs, or the juice of Fruits, which (the
aquous part being exhaled) leave a Rob, or Extract, clammy thick, and of the
Consistence of Tar, although not pinguous, but viscous, and gummous.

Secondly, This Gummous body, if it be by a Ferment volatized, produces a
Vinous Spirit, formally distinct from what it was before, and then no longer a
proper object for the Ferment of the Stomach to work on, and therefore then no
longer nutritive as food, though refreshing as Spirits.

Thirdly, All Vegetables are not destined for food, some being resinous, or
woody, or otherwise of an unyeelding nature to the Ferment of the Stomach, are
rejected, and may pervert the Digestion, but never satisfy the Appetite,
others are of a malignant outside, and so the Stomach abhors them.

Fourthly, Whatever is digested, is received in Oeconomiam vitalem, into which
if it bring any peregrine quality, this straight becomes hostile, and
engenders bad Blood, and it is well if the wrong be expiated with boils, scabs,
etc.

Fifthly. Being rejected either by vomit, if the hostility be more apparent, or
by siege, if not so virulent, it is conveied (as an Enemy) to the place of
Excrements, where, when it comes to receive the ferment of the place (which
is stercorious and excrementitious,) it causes a venomous malignant Gas, and
resolves and corrupts the aliment of the Bowels, whence come those gripings,
and filthy stools which are produced.

Sixthly, for the sake of that malignity, the whole stock of Chyle that is in
the stomach, and the half transmuted Chyle, which is in the passage from the
stomach, toward the Mesaraicks is rejected as unfit for nourishment, and so
what Broth soever is taken in, isalso infected, vitiated and rejected, till the
malignant character impressed, be blotted out. This is the Noble effect of the
Galenists Art.

From whence we may gather on most unanswerable ground, that that which is
medicinal is not, nor ought to be liable to the transmutative digesstion of the
stomach, for then it becomes vital, and so no more medicinal, for what ever is
peregrine, although it be but the Vita media, yet those light qualities of the
Magnum oportet, must submit to the jurisdiction of the several digestions, or
else the whole is abhorred as hostile.

But spiritual essences, although they are materially contained in several
concretes, yet so, as not to be found, and brought to light by the only
digestion of the stomach, which makes a formal transmutation of what it can
master into Chyle, which is far different from what by Art, and the
superinduction of a different ferment might have been had, For far distinct
is that which the stomach produces out of grapes from that noble spirit, which
Art produces by first changing the juice of the grape into wine.

Yea and the product follows the disposition of the matter, as is evident in
the Juice of Grapes, which after Fermentation, the Artist may (if he please)
turn into Vinegar, and which without fermentation will only stink and
putrify, as after it may become either Vinous or Acetous, according to the
Artists pleasure, which products do strangely differ each from other, though
both from one and the same material Substance. But this only as a digression.
In my other Treatise of the Method and Mystery of Medicine, I shall fully and
purposely handle this Subject.

Three things then I briefly condemn and reprove the Galenists vegetable
Apparatus of Medicaments (for as to their Mineral stock, it rather deserves a
Satyr, than a convincing reproof) which render their Method ridiculous,
hazardous, uncertain and dangerous.

The first, and not a trivial fault is their Crude immaturitie, which no Grain,
fruit, herb, or root is without, that is formeat, witness Bread unbaked Roots
unboiled, or raw Fruits, Coleworts, or Cabbage, without previous decoction, by
which Artichokes, Turnips, Parsnips, etc. of harsh, crude and unhealthie,
become sound and whole some nutriment, Yea even Beer it self, that has
undergone a fermentation, if drunk new, requires its defect of Age to be
supplied by decoction, else both it and new Wines, new Perry, Cider, and
Metheglin, are not without sensible offense to the Body, which annoiance is
either to be taken away by full Decoction, or by Age which is equivalent to
decoction.

Now can anybe so stupid to imagine, that Rhabarb, or Zalap, etc. have not,
beside their venomous malignitie, the unnatural Cruditie of a Carroot or
Parsnip, and therefore as the one is fit meat, so the other fit medicine only
for a Hog, the Stomach of man, being by the Creatours appointment, too noble
and curious a receptacle for such crude simples, which had they no other
fault, yet this alone were enough to discommend them.

Fie upon those self-condemning Doctors, who will accuse raw Oatmeal as the
cause of the Greenfickness in maids, and raw fruit, especially unripe, as the
cause of Worms, sharp humors, indigestion, and Obstructions in Children, and
yet will prescribe raw Rhabarbe, Zalap, Mechoacan, or Seen infused (which is
all one with raw, vvitness the infusion of Malt before boiling, called
commonly Wort) for a Cure of the like griefs, I speak it to their shame, with
hopes (if possible) to amend them.

The second deficiencie in their Medicines, is the gummous terrestrictie,
which accompanies all Vegetals, which they take no care to macerate and
overcome, before the Stomach be cumbred with them.

This Gummousness I before shevved by ocular demonstration in all those mock
preparations, commonly called Extracts, which is most evident in the Resina
Zalappae, Scammonii, etc. I dispute not with what the extraction be made
with, whether with Water, or with a distilled Phlegm or Dew of Vitriol,
or any other distilled Water, or with Spirit of Wine (though that is of all
the forenamed the best) yet none of these distinguish the gummous viscous parts
from the pure, subtle, and saline parts, and so the Stomach either finds a
burden without benefit, or at least the benefit so clogged with its burden,
that the Archeus reaps not the due efficacy of the Medicine.

For as I touched before; the Stomach will not let any gummous viscous
Substance pass the Pilorus and Duodenum into the Mesaraicks, nor will the
Archeus of the second Digestion suffer such abuse, but it must be either
concocted into Chile, and so received into the oeconomie of Vital principles
and by consequence no longer a Medicine, or if it be either too refractory or
too malignant, to undergo thatstomachical maceration, it is proscribed among
Excrements, the Crasis (like the Nut) never appearing in its effects, being
clogged and made ineffectual by the gummositie, which as a shell keeps in its
benignirie from diffusing its self.

For the appetite of the Stomach craves nothing but meat and drink, and by
consequence whatever it finds too gross for drink, and unapt for food it
rejects to the Excrements, without further examination.

Most absurd then is that of many Doctors who prescribe Medicinal Herbs, in
Cock or Chicken Broth, or in Jellie made of knuckles of Veal, not considering
that meat and Medicine are two different and distinct things, and while thus
they think to beguile Nature by medicated broths, they pervert the digestion,
and verefie the Proverb, in their Patients, causing them Medice, id est, misere
vivere.

For the Archeus finding in the stomach broth or Jellies, which are the usual
fit objects for its Ferment to work upon for nutriment sake, begins to attempt
the Digestion, till finding the Fucus it rejects all, in effect crying out with
the Sons of the Prophets, O Medice! mors est in jusculo! and being often so
deluded and its ferment wearied in vain, it becomes after more wary, abhorring
all meats, for the sake of those which have so often imposed upon it. And if
any of this Chyle in which is an unnatural exotic quality, come to the second
Digestion, what fermentations, exorbitancies, obstructions, and disturbances it
produces, few who have run through a Calenical method (for some Chronical
Disease) but can tell to their Cost, and can read this Lecture in themselves,
with a Probatum est, upon their own Body.

Lastly, We accuse and condemn the venomous malignitie of many Simples, which
they most ignorantly call Medicaments, as Scammony, Elaterium, Aaron Asarum,
Colocynthida, with many others which it would be tedious to recount.

I easily grant, and admit that under the mask of Virulency, most noble virtues
for most part are hid (although it is no necessary consequence that always it
should be so) yet the Medicinal virtue confists not either in the Emetick or
Laxative sacultie of a Simple, which it works Qua Venenum, but the Specific
excellency is far more secretly hid, and not to be commanded but by a true and
Philosophic preparation. Let Fools admire those qualities as medicinal which
abate by Decoction, and by complete Decoction are wholly taken away; We know
that they are but so many Venomes, and are Concomitant accidonts of the
Cruditie, and Cummous viscosity of such Virulent Concretes, of which in the
first Ens are no footsteps to be found.

I yield moreover that there are many Simples not intended by Nature for Meat,
that are of excellent Virtue, as they are, some Diaphoretick, as Carduus,
Camomile Flowers, Rosemary, Sage, Wormwood, etc. others excellently Diuretic,
as Virga Aurea, Becapunga, Pimpernell, and many others, which have a Volatile
Alcalizate Salt, and are so far forth cleansing, yet they have also the
imperfection of Cruditie, and the Clog of a Cummous viscosity, which if they
were removed, what excellent Remedies would they afford, which are so
efficacious as Nature has produced them.

I shall shut up this Chapter with a seriousexhortation both to those who
profess, and those who stand in need of the Art of Medicine, If the blind lead
the blind, it is hazardous least both fall into the ditch.

I have heard (with blushing) the vain promises of many Doctors (and those men
of no mean repute) how they will decant on Obstructions, Inflammations, and
preternatural heat of the Liver, which they will promise to wash (as a
Laundresse foul linen) with their abstersives, and deoppilate with their
apperitive medicines, which alas never reach farther then the ordinary passage
of Excrements, unless such which have a volatile Alcaly, which do really often
times much good, if duly applied, but much less then otherwise they would, if
rightly prepared, which preparation the following Chapter will more largely
discover.

A Corollary Appendix concerning several Noble Specific Remedies, preparable
by Pyrotechny, and Succedaneous to the Grand Arcana.
IN the foregoing Chapter (Candid Reader) I did generally discourse of the
Application of Alcalies unto Vegetables, for their Correction, maturation, and
preparation, whereby they become admirable means in the hand of a careful
Paisician, for the effecting (with Gods blessing) the Cure of all kinds of
diseases, although not every disease of each Kind.

This in the foregoing Chapter we did more generally, and did there give an
account, of the crude imperfections which accompany all Vegetals, of the
gummous terrestriety which is mixed in all Vulgar infusions, extractions, or
decoctions of milder Vegetal Simples, and of the malignant poison of other more
furious Herbs, which render their Remedies against diseases, at best, lame and
imperfect, often Dangerous and Desperate.

We showed how that nothing may be admitted to the second, and consequently to
the third digestion, that is of a Corporeous substance, till it be macerated by
the ferment of the first, and whatever is so digested becomes alimentary chile,
and no longer a Medicine, and if any exotic qualities render it unfit for
Nutriment, the Archeus (who is Gods Vicegerent, and quickly perceives it)
rejects it into the draught, where when it receivs the stercoreous Ferment of
the Bowels, it excites a fermental Gas, Pontique, and Griping, causing wringing
of the Bowels, and Wind with loose Stools, by mistake called a Purging (being
indeed, only a Venomous Impression on the bowels.)

I showed that how excellent Virtues soever a Simple may have, yet that Crasis
is shut up in the Gummousness, as a Nut in the Shell, unless it be a Volatile
Alcalizateness which is apparent, in many Simples, which yet is at the best
clogged with the Viscous faeculencie, to which it is united.

I made it likewise clear, how the Stomach had appetite to nothing, but with an
eye to convert it into aliment, which nutritive object was enclosed in the
gummous substance, which if it digest, it makes Chile (not a Medicine) for
which if it be unapt it rejects it, not considering the Medicinal secrets
contained in it, of which the Stomach takes no cognizance.

I now come to the true and Philosophical preparation of real and true
medicines, whose character I shall give briefly, to satisfy the Ingenuous
Reader.

First then, In opposition to what I blamed in the Methodists medicines, their
crude immaturities are taken away either by Ferment, or addition of that which
is a Fermental Virtue, For although in the former Chapter I instanced in
decoction as a Convenient Remedy against these raw Crudities, yet I did never
intend solitary decoction for the proper mean of Medicinal preparation, and
that first, because it distinguishes not between the gummous, and the purely
saline parts which is absolutely required in the right preparation of
medicaments, and secondly because the fire, though it do not formally transmute
(in a humid decoction) yet it does notably alter the qualities of Concretes,
especially such as are odorous, and whose Crasis lies in a light essential
Sulphur, as Cinnamon, Mace, Nutmegs, etc.

In preparing of which if at any time decoction be used, yet let it be so, that
the odorous and essential parts may be saved, that so they being again married,
and more deeply united with their own more fixed substances, both may become
one Elixir together.

Secondly, Then a due preparation distinguishes between that which is gummous,
and that which is purely saline, either by separating one from the other, or by
macerating the viscous terrestriety, and by a secret digestion changing it into
either a spiritual Sulphur, or a liquable Salt, for Salts and Sulphurs are but
Seminum tori, disguises in which the Crasis of Concretes are masked, Which are
successively transmutable one into another, so the juice of Grapes (if
decocted) the aquous parts exhaling, the Residue becomes a Rob, which is
gummous and viscous, this by fermentation is made volatile, and becomes a
spiritual Sulphur, or burning Spirit, which by the rectified Spirit of Urine is
wholly turned into a Volatile Salt, then which example none can be more plain
and convincing, that these Principles, or rather several forms of the same
Substance, are convertible each into other, a terrestriety or gummous viscosity
is turned into a Volatile Spirit, wholly inflamable, and this into a real pure
Salt, not inflamable, and so on the other hand, the Transmutation of Salt, into
Sulphur is most evident in the distillation of Tartar which being wholly
Saline, and dissolvable in water, by bare distillation is turned the major part
of it into an Oil impermiscible with Water.

When the Concrete is once thus changed, then it is no longer as it was before,
liable to the stomachical digestion, but if it be an Oily Sulphur (as distilled
Oils are, those especially which rise by force of fire, and are not drawn with
water) they resist the Stomachical ferment, and so rise offensively several
hours after taking, until the greater part of them are proscribed with the
Excrements by siege, and part of them (especially Essences drawn with water)
being no way hostile, are admitted to the porch, as it were of the second
digestion, where changing their volatile fatness for an urinous saltness, they
work away by the Urine, as is evident in Oil of Terebinth, Mace, Nutmeg, etc.
of which the Urine will smell apparently some hours after the taking of them.

But if a Volatile Salt be made either of the Oils or Tinctures of Vegetals,
this then needs no farther transmutation, only the Alcaliza^eness of the Salt
is satiated with the aciditie of the Stomach, and afterward it passes to the
second digestion, and so forward to the third, resolving in its passage all
preternatural coagulations, which are the cause of obstructions, and expelling
them being resolved, by Urine and Sweat.

True, this Salt thus passing receives from the Stomachical acidity a
saturating of its Alcalizateness if it be Lixiviate, but this is no more to be
accounted a transmutation, then when an Alcaly is satiated by reiterate pouring
on of Spirit of Vinegar, in which the Alcaly receives an alteration, but not a
transmutation, proportionably understand in this case, this Salt being of a
pure liquable Nature, and no way hostile, is admitted with out scruple, and
does homage as I may say to the Ferments, that is, takes an external Character
of their qualities, at least, shows no resistance to them, and so passes
along with the Chile to the Mesaraicks, being first clothed with the external
habit of the places, through which it passes as a friendly stranger, acting as
it goes along, according to the Specific Virtues which it receives from the
Creator (which specific virtues remain, not wholly extinct till it comes to
the very suburbs of the fourth digestion) because it is admitted only as a
stranger, whereas were it to be made one with the Chile, which is destined for
nourishment, it could not be admitted to the first step of the second
Digestion, till it were totally stripped of all its qualities, which it had in
its Concrete Being, such is the difference between Being admitted along with
the digestible matter, from one digestion to another, as a Friendly stranger,
and being received formally into the Substance of what is digested, the one is
the entertainment of a true Noble Medicament, the other of food destined to
nuttiment.

Concerning this Subject many things worthy to be known might be discovered,
but the shortness of this present Task will not permit me largely to insist
hereon in this place, being intended to discover somewhat briefly, yet fully
and plainly, how a sedulous Artist may furnish himself, with a noble Apparatus
of powerful specific remedies, for the vanquishing and triumphing over all
kind of diseases, in defect of the more secret and seldom attained Arcana,
though I must grant, that the cures this way performed, require more care in
attendance on them, and more judgment in the administering of Medicines, than
those which are performed Tono unisono. And for this cause the noble Helmont
reckoning up his specific febrifugall Salts, which might succeed, in the room
and defect of his Horizontal Gold, Adds, That if these be given in a due dose,
at a due time, and the Patient duly ordered, they will never expose a faithful
Phifician to scorn and contempt.

But thirdly and lastly, Our Medicaments by a due preparation, have their
Venom wholly extinguished, then is the poison of the Viper taken away, and we
may safely make Theriacle of his flesh, thus is the passage to the Tree of life
(pardon my allusion) made open, having first reconciled the angry Cherub, whose
flaming sword before did guard it. Blessed be God for ever, who has called us
to these preparations, from out of the faeces or dregs of vulgar confusions, by
which species are ignorantly confounded, more ignorantly applied, and many poor
Souls, pay the price of their lives, on the score of this perverse blindness,
The more is the shame! The more is the pity! The Lord in his due time amend it.

Come we then, and I presume not without the Readerslonging expectation, to the
manner of preparing Medicaments truly and Philosophically, such I mean which
require not the Liquour Alchahest, for that were to tantalize, and not instruct
the Reader.

Our Art of preparation is no other than a practical Commentary on Helmonts
Legacy, to such who are not yet so far honored by God as to taste the virtue
and efficacy of the Circu latum majus, which is the impatible great dissolving
Liquor.

My advice is, (says he,) not to castrate those Simples which are of excellent
and great virtues, but by Art to make them better, and to advance them, by
suspending their virulency, by extracting their hidden qualities, by changing
offensive qualities into others, which is done by superinducing a ferntent, or
by addition of some noble powerful Medium by which this may be effected.

For the illustrating of which let me mind the Reader of what I handled more
fully before, namely, that both the crudity, and the venom are wasted in
decoction by little and little, until in the end they become wholly extinct, as
the Circles in water made by the falling of a stone do by little and little
vanish away, and at last disappear wholly,

But this we advised not as the best way of preparation, partly, because it
left the gummous vifcosity unconquered, (which is not to be mastered, but by a
ferment, that volatizeth it, or else it is to be separated by a proper agent,
which is of efficacy sufficient for that purpose) but especially because the
fire does by little and little weaken the specific Crasis of what Vegetable
concrete is decocted by it: Therefore the most desirable, and truly
Philosophical way to perform this, is by the addition of an Agent, which is
penetrative, and fermentall, that so it may without any altering sensible heat,
by a secret circulation, perform that triumphingly and perfectly, which bare
decoction does lamely and imperfectly.

Such a mean is diligently to be sought for, and highly to be prized when
found: such a mean is to be found in the Commonwealth of Alcalies, then which
next to the Grand Dissolvent, Nature has not afforded a more excellent subject
that can more accurately perform what the Artist seeks, if it fall into the
hands of a mental man, and not of a Bungling Sciolist.

I gave a hint even now, in the last foregoing Chapter, that Alcalies would at
once both ripen the crudities, separate the gummousness, and correct the
Venom, where I did but as it were Ex ungue Leonem, measure Hercules by his
foot, guess at the Valor of Apollo, by his strangling the serpent while he was
yet an Infant in his Cradle, I intended it not as a measure of the Virtue of
Alcalies, but as an essay of what might be expected from them, if by an
industrious and prudent Artist, they be governed to their ripe Age, if in their
Infancy, they do so much what may for the future be expected from them.

For an ocular proof of what before I touched, see first the Cruditie by
Alcalies maturated, and ripened, It cannot be denied but that crudity is the
cause of corruption in any corruptible thing, which is so predominant in
Vegetals, that if moist, they being compressed, will in few hours begin to
heat, a previous sign of ensuing putrefaction, if dry, in the open Air, they
lose their virtue in a few years, some in a few months, if moistened, they soon
Corrupt, Rot, Stink, breed Worms, etc. This Cruditie is but in part taken away
by solitary Decoction, for boiled Meat, or Herbs, or Seeds will grow Sower,
corrupt, and Stink with standing for a time, although not so soon, as raw or
unboiled.

But by means of an Alcaly this cruditie is tataken away, that as Myrrh and
other Aromatic Spices, used for the embalming of Carcases in Egypt, preserved
them from Corruption (usual to all dead bodies of men or Beasts,) for many
years, yea, for many Ages, so Alcalies preserve Vegetals, rindx;
both from Ferment and Corruption.

True, the species so confected have still a continual internal maturative
motion, whereby they aspire daily to more and more perfection, till they come
to an essential Salt, which terminates this their motion, but this without any
transmutative Fermentation, or putrefactive Corruption, so that Vegetables thus
confected are in a daily Motion to perfection, but it is, retaining their
formal, specific, pristine Virtues, only advanced and graduated, not perverted
or extinct, as it falls out in all Transmutations.

Secondly, the separating of the gummous terrestriety, may be most evident in
this example, Dissolve Opium in clear Water, or in Spirit of Wine (that makes
no difference here) decant it, or filter it exquisitely, that it be very clear
and transparent, then add to it equal part of a strong Lixivium of Tartar, and
straight with a strong urinous sent, you shall see a separation, not of a small
inconsiderable quantity, but a large quantity of a Resinous Curd, as it is in
the mixing of Wine, with warm Milk, let it stand in a simpering heat, till
this Coagulum be got together, then filter it again, and you shall find a
resinous, or rather gummous Substance, like unto Aloes, for Color, and
breaking, bitter and stupefying, and so it is in all other Concretes, as
Wormwood, Rue, Carduus, etc. only let the solution and infusion be as full of
the Simple as the moisture will dissolve. This is to be found also in the
ordinary elixation of malt (with us called Wort) and briefly in the decocted
liquour of all Coucretes, in them especially which are of an eminent taste: can
any man desire a more plain proof and demonstration?

Thirdly, As to the Venom of Vegetals I said sufficient in the former Chapter,
namely that there is no Vegetable so furious, so Venemons,
and deadly, but if decocted with a convenient proportion of an Alcaly, added
to the moisture, it is wholly corrected, as to the malignitie, although in
some, a few offenfive Symptoms may remain, yet such which Age will wholly by
degrees, blot out and overcome.

And here methinks I see some Tyrocynist triumphing with Archimedes (I have
found, I have found:) to whom I shall a little address my speech, with truth
and caution,

First then, I say, for the encouragement of all young conscionable
practitioners, that this slight trivial preparation, exceeds the whole
confused stock of preparations which adorn the Galenists method, and that by
many degrees, for by this means both the Crudities are overmastered, the
gummositle separated, and the venom extinguished, that so they of viscous and
malignantly poisonous, become digested, saline, and friendly to Nature and to
the Archeus of the Stomaek, and therefore (until a better way discover it self)
I shall confidently advise this as a safe way to all beginners, who seek truth
more then compliance with any man whatsoever.

But withal, let such credit me, who will not knowingly deceive them, that
this precocious way of preparation does not fully answer the Artists desire,
nay contrariwise, it in many respects falls short of it, for Alcalyes and
Concrete Vegetables although in Decoction they easily mix, yet they do not so
soon unite radically, that is, enter each others Center, or profunditie, which
I shall make plain to the eyes by an easy demonstration, For let Opium or
Aloes, or any other Concrete be Elixated by mean of Alcaly, and filtred never
so accurately, and then put into a Bottle, you shall find the sides of the
Glass and the Bottom fouled with a Viscous Gumminess and residence in a few
weeks, a most evident sign that the gummosity was not totally mastered and
severed by that speedy way of Elixation. Add to this, that the Alcaly to the
taste retains its former lixiviateness, which it will not lose till after a long
time each working on the other, at last both will cristallize in form of a
Neuter Salt, far different from the sharp lixiviate taste of the first Alcaly,
and till then you must expect some troublesome Symptoms accompanying these
preparations, which are to be attributed partly to Alcaly, whose corrosive
lixiviateness is hostile to the Stomach in some degree, partly to the Concrete,
whose Vita ultima not being wholly mastered by this trivial preparation, no
marvel if some offensive qualities (which are the Tribuli and Spinae in Vegetal
concretes) appear in their application to Medicine.

Which inconveniences Art considering, and finding a tedious digestion the
only remedy of them, studiously sought out a way of abbreviating this irksome
time for its expectation, and by ingenuous ways performed it.

For Liquid things attain their maturitie by long process of time, (witness the
making and ripening of Generous Wines, and strong Beer) and they require also
an excitation of an acid Ferment, which causes a working Ebullition, which
ceasing, a more secret still Ferment works invisibly and imperceptibly,
perfectly maturating, what the working boiling Ferment did but begin, and did
only in part, and so after a long time, the Wines become generous, sparkling,
lively, and Balsamical.

But Alcalies are absolutely repugnant to all acidities, and so no such
fermentation is to be expected in them, and thence it is that Liquours prepared
by means of them attain their highest Energie in a far more tedious time,
unless by Arts Industry that time be shortened.

And truly this is the mystery of true Pyrotechny to redeem time (then which
man has not a more precious Jewel) which to perform is not easy for a
Conceited putationer, or a perverse Sciolist. Consider then Nature in her daily
operations, how by the vicissitudes of Heat and Cold, Night and Day, Moisture
and Dryness, she brings the hardest Iron and Steel, the lasting Brass, the
durable Marble to a spontaneous corruption, by means of the Air, and Fire of
Nature, which is the fermental virtue. Consider how Ferments are proper to
their own places, and where a close,
and where an open digegestion is required, for a true Son of Art must know the
due use of both Air and Fire, Dryness and Moisture, Cold and Heat, this is true
Spagyrie, other curiosities are but idle Rapsodies.

Alcalies therefore are to be corrected themselves that they may correct other
vegetable Simples, and to be exalted in their own Natures, that so they may
draw all other Tinctures to their own excellency.

For in their Simple fixed Nature they are of a Caustic fiery Lixiviate
quality, which must be taken away, and the seminal balsamic virtue, which
they want, must be superadded, and their fixed corporietie overcome, that they
may become Volatile.

And here is to be observed that there is a great difference between Alcalies
volatile, and volatized, as there is between distillable, or sublimable, and
distilled, or sublimed, the one is in a capacity of being volatized, the other
actually so.

Alcalies distilled, or made a Spirit, are advanced to the highest pitch of
excellency, to which by nature they are ordained, and of this Spirit is that
of Helmont to be understood, That wherever it will not reach, nothing in the
World can reach.

This Spirit is attainable by diverse means, by some more, by some less in
virtue and efficacy, Study to attain this Spirit, next to the Great Solvent,
if you would be master of noble medicaments.

Now Alcalies are volatized two ways, by Alcoolization, and by Elixeration:
Pardon me Kind Reader, if I use the known Terms of Art, without which no Art
is, and which cannot be put into plain English, without a tedious Periphrasis.

Alcoolization is a feeding, or imbibing, or circulating a fixed Alcaly with a
volatile Spirit, till both be made one, a neutrall production arising between
them, distinct from each Parent.

And of this head there are three distinct kind of Spirits, Acetous, Vrinous,
and Vinous, which give the Alcaly Alcoolizated, three distinct appellations,
Arcanum Ponticitatis, Arcanum microcosmi, and Arcanum Samech.

Elixeration is performed by Oils essential, and Tinctures, until of both one
Elixir, or Volatile Salt be made, of which are so many Species, as there are
diversities of Essential and Distilled Oils.

Of these I shall here only give a brief essay, reserving a more full handling
of them, to a more convenient place.

Of all the mentioned manners of operation, that which is done by an acetous
Alcool, is the most facile, for such a contrariety there is between an Alcaly
and an acid Spirit, that they meet not without a tumultuous ebullition, which
by degrees cease, and when the Spirit, put on causes no ebullition, it is a
sign the Alcaly is satiated.

By mean of these Spirits the fixed Alcali loses its fiery corrosiveness and is
made volatile, which an expert distiller shall find totally performed by
reiterate cohobation, which may rather be called imbibition, for that Alcaly
which would no more of the spirit, but all ebullition at mixing thereof ceased,
yet if it be mingled with burntclay, and distilled, in the manner of Spirit of
Salt, or Nitre, till all that will distill over, be drawn of, the Caput mortuum
imbibe then with a new Alcool, which will take in new spirits, this do while it
is a second time satiated, and distill it then with a very strong fire, (at
last,) repeat this operation till all the Salt be brought over (with the
spirit) which will be then a most noble Spirit Alcalizate. This may be done
with Spirit of Vitriol, of Nitre, of Salt, of Vinegar, etc. or in short, with
any acid Spirit, and the Spirit thus attained may be called, Acetum forte,
Acetum Radicis, etc. As Paracelsus often names it.

But as concerning many excellent preparations that may be made by Alcalies,
they need not for them to be actually distilled, for that is a more tedious
work, it is sufficient that they be only made volatile, that is, imbibed with a
Spirit, till between them and the Alcaly, a neutral Salt be produced, an
insipid Phlegm being only rejected, with this join the corrected Tincture of
any Vegeral, and digest both together, till they cristallize in the form of a
Tincted Salt, having the Crasis of the Concrete.

Yea, and the Alcali it self by mixture with acid Spirits, as of Vitriol, of
Salt, of Nitre, Sulphur, or the like, yields noble abstersive and diuretic
medicines, that with the Spirit of Vitriol (being known commonly by the name of
Tartarum vitriolatum) if made truly (that is of pure Salt of Tartar calcined
perse, by a Potters fire, and good spirit of Vitriol poured on so long till the
coullition cease, then dried) it becomes a pleasant sweet medicine, very white
in the dose of 10, 15, or 20 gr. repeatted each morning, cleansing the Stomach,
resolving powerfully obstructions in the Mesaraicks, and is profitably given as
an abstersive, in severs, dgues, jaundite, scorb^te, worms in children, as also
against cold crudities in the stomach, causing indigestion, and many like cases.

With Spirit of Nitre a like Salt is attained, but of an easier fusion, tasting
of a nitrous cool taste, and is an excellent abstersive in burning and putrid
Fevers, gravel, heat of Urine, sharpness in the Stomach, usually called
Heart-burning, heat in the Back and Kidneys, heat in the Stomach, causing a hot
and harsh breath, and many other defects that are seated in the first and
second digestions.

And so with Spirit of Sulphur, Salt, etc. very noble preparations may be made,
but much more noble, if the purified tinctures of noble Vegetals (their
malignity being first corrected) be united with this Salt in a due proportion
(the Salt being liquesied in a convenient Liquour;) digest then the Salt, and
Tincture, til both become very clear, for at first mixing they will be muddy,
and precipitating a light Faecula, will at last be very clear, decant this
clear Liquour that is tincted, and in a slow fire draw away the moisture, till
the known sign appear, and in a cool place it will christallize into a pure
Salt tincted, with the true tincture of the Vegetal, retaining its taste, odor,
and virtue.

Thus out of Hellebore black or white, Opium or any other Simple, that will
yield a tincture in Spirit of Wine, a Salt may be made, which then is called by
the name of the Vegetal with which it is joined, as Salt of Hellebore, of
Opium, of Zalap, etc. which Salts besides the abstersive virtue of the Salt,
have a superadded Specification, according to the intention of the Concrete, by
which a sedulous, and industrious Physician, may with Gods blessing, cute many
and those deplorable diseases.

But this way of making Salts, is inferior to other preparations, to which I
shall come in order, especially such as are made with Vinegar (its spirit to
wit) which becomes what it is, only by extinction of the vinous Balsome, and so
the acidity (which moderate caused fermentation) by being over exalted,
destroies the same, and makes the body of the Wine become Pontique, corrosive,
and ungrateful to Nature, only moderately used, it whets the appetite, and so
excitatively promotes digestion of gross meats, as Beef (especially cold and
fat) or of raw crude meats, as Sallets, etc,

Yea, and the spirits of Nitre, Salt, Vitriol, etc. being distilled by a
violent fire, although they become corrosive and abstersive, yet they have in
them no seminal balsamic virtue, nor in their corrosive nature are they
altogether excusable from offense to the Stomach, for although their acidity
assuage thirst, yet this aciditie differs much from the aciditie of the
Stomach, which is fermental, and therefore it behooves it to be changed by it,
into its own nature, which how difficult it is, let Philosophers judge, for the
aciditie of the Stomach to satiate the Lixiviateness of an Alealy, is no hard
matter, if the Alcaly do not overpower it, with too much quantity, since the
antipathie between an Alcalizateness and all acidities is so apparent to the
eye, so that the superfluous aciditie of the stomach may satiate a convensent
dose of an Alcali (which it shall receive in) without trouble or detriment to
it self, and may do this daily (with very good success, where the aciditie of
the Stomach is too abundant, and the Alcaly thus satiate, becomes mild, and so
tempering it self with the residue of the acid Chyle, may pass to the second
digestion, where it is clethed with a Saline habit, but for an aciditie to work
upon an aciditie, is as improbable as for one Alcaly to work on another, and
for the stomachical aciditie, to endure a mineral aciditie (unsatiated) were to
imagine, that Nature had no discretion. This for a caution to those who are too
tampering with acid (especially corrosive) spirits, let them be sure to give
them at such a time, when there are Faeces abstergendae in primis vasibus, as
about the mouth of the Stomach, the root of the tongue, the throat, etc. and
then give them in a competent dose, and lastly continue them not too long,
unless in a very discreet dose: Hence it was that the wise and noble Helmont,
in his Tractate concerning the Tree of Life, tells a memorable story of one
that he advised to use the true clear limpid spirit of Sulphur (not that
tincted base adulterated spirit, perfidiously made, and villanously exposed to
sale to the ignorant Apothecaries, by our apostate rascal Chemists, which swarm
now almost every where) and to take, before each meaor at each meal, in his
first drink, two drops of that Spirit, and charged him not to be too
overventurous to exceed that dose, as well knowing, that such a dose daily was
enough, by its aciditie to cleanse the accidental Sordes, adhering to the
stomach, which hindered digestion, and by its Sulphurous Gas to keep the meat
and drink taken in, from putrefactive corruption, by which means the Patient
(being careful to follow this grave advice) lived to a very great age, to wit
forty years after this advice given, being then fifty eight years old, and
which was very remarkable, in all that forty years was never troubled with the
least Feverishness, although once by fall on the Ice he broke his Leg, let
the studious Reader consider the example so as to profit by it. Consider then
seriously your intention, and so apply your remedies, which if they be not as
you would have them, you must by Art make them so, or confess your self to be
no Philosophers.

All acidities, as acidities, are corrosive and fretting more or less, (witness
Crabseies in the least acid white or Rhenish Wine) but no acidity in the world
out of the Stomach is comparably the same with the stomachical aciditie, which
is a peerless Creature, variated in every several Species of Animalls, and is
an unseparable Companion of the life.

Now most acidities (nay all that have nothing of Venomous qualities admixed)
help the digestion, in as much as they are abstersive, and resolving some
foeces Which affect, and afflict (that is obstruct and hinder) the activity of
the first Organs, whether as to the appetible, or digestible faculty.

Of acidities also are various kinds, some which spontaneously are changed by
being dried, as the render leaves of Grapes, young Grapes, etc. others by
digestion, as the juice of Lemmons, and Orenges, others by a light operation on
a proper object, as Whitewine on Crabseies, and therefore experience has
taught us to cat Lemmons, and drink Whitewine with Sugar, on which acting, in
the pepantick digestion of the Stomach, they become cooling, abstersive and
diuretic.

But the aciditie of Vinegar, being a product out of Wine over eager or
fretted, is of a more resisting Nature to the Stomach, by how much it is
estranged from Wine (that is a refresher of the same) and therefore if made in
Syrup with Sugar, in no large dose, in some causes vomit, yet for strong
constitutions with strong meats, as roast Beef, or boild, Souse, etc. it is a
wholesome sauce, by some acuated with mustardseed; where note, that so much
gross meat or green herbs (which are raw and crude) are eaten with it, as will
employ its whole aciditie in fretting them, and preparing them for the
stomachical Ferment, which then the Stomach digests together with the meat, as
being afterward no more acid, and so no way resisting its fermental aciditie.

But as for Mineral acidities, and other products of the fire of Reverberation,
and which are as burning as Fire, as (to wit) the Spirits of Vitriol, Sulphur,
Sea Salt, Nitre, Salt-gem, etc. those which are minetal want not their deserved
suspicion of Arsenical malignitie, and so are to be used cautiously with
discretion, else invenomed Sulphur, and Vitriol with an Arsenical commixture,
will not only frustrate the expected hope of help from their Spirits, but also
hurt the Patient to the Physicians just and deserved Confusion.

Now as for the acid spirits of Nitre, or Seasalt, of all others they are the
most clear from suspicion of their danger as to virulencie: let him that uses
them attend both the dose and the times of repeating the Dose, that would use
them honestly and commendably.

And so much concerning the abstersive nature of acid Spirits, with some
necessary Cautions concerning their use. Now we shall add a little, as to
Alcalies, in their Corrosive lixiviate Nature, that from the view of Both, as
they are alone, and of themselves, we may make a third Neutral product, yet
partaking the abstersive Nature of either parent.

Alcalies we say then, are of an abstersive Nature as saline, but hostile to
the Stomach as lixiviate, or calcineous, the reason is obvious to a weak eye,
because of the contrarictie (pardon my expression) which is evident between
lixiviate, and acid qualities, which if both be in an high degree they resist
even to an actual flagration (as appears in slacking of quick Lime, and also in
the mixture of strong Oil of Vitriol, with a well calcined Salt of Tartar)
however the least perceptible aciditie, cannot meet with the least actual or
potential lixiviate Alcaly, but there is straight a tumultuous resistance made
of each to other, as is apparent in any Alcalizate Salt and Vinegar, or in the
least sour Vinegar, or Wine, and powdered Crabseies, nor is there any end of
this contest, till either the acid or lixiviate quality, or both, be
mortified, that is satiated, and so extinguished, unless the two opposite
substances so meet, that one overpowers the other, and then it forces the
other to submit to it self.

Hence it follows, that where the ferment of the stomach is only strong enough
(which ferment to be an aciditie we have before showed more than once) there it
must needs debilitate the appetible, and digestive faculties, (both of them
while they are taken) and this debilitation in a very weak Stomach, may prove
an extinction for a time, which is an effect not commendable nor desirable.

Hence it follows, that only where a superfluous acor is in the stomach, there
the application of Alcalies in their proper Nature is excusable, otherwise it
must make an alienation (at least) if nor a pessumdation of the appetite, and
digestion, which are both excited and performed by aciditie, to which an Alcaly
in its Nature is contradistinct.

So then although we deny not, that both Alcalies and acid Spirits are
abstersive, and commendable medicaments in their proper place, applied in due
cases with due caution, and deliberate judgment, both as to time and dose, yet
because there are many cases in which both of them may be improper, and do
actual hurt, the one in reference to its corrosive aciditie, the other to its
lixiviate Caustic hostility, we affirm and lay down for undeniable, these
few positions concerning them.

First, That the virtue that is in these forementioned Salts or Spirits,
consists not in the Corrosive or Caustic qualities, but that these are only
impressions of the fire on the Subjects, and may be taken away without doing
the Spirits or Salts any harm.

Secondly, That the operations they perform, which are Medicinal, and for the
opening obstructions, they perform far more powerfully when dulcified, than
while retaining their Ponticitie.

Thirdly, That both the Acidities, and the Alcalies being the products of
extreme fire, have neither of them any seminal Crasis in them, but act the
volatile aciditie, as a mineral acetousness, not attained but by the extreme
fire of Reverberation, the fixed lixiviate Salt, as it is a Salt, and purified
by the violent action of the Fire.

Fourthly, Then these being joined together, produce a mild temperate Salt,
cooling cleansing, and opening obstructions in the Stomach, Pylorus, and
Mesaraicks,

Fifthly, That being dulcified, such a dose may be given of them without any
offense, nay rather with much refreshment to the Patient, of which a third part
in the pristine Nature of each, could nor be given without offense at least, if
not danger.

Sixthly, I shall add that what ever Tincture of any Vegetable (being first
prepared, corrected, and purified) is joined with this Salt, and duly digested
and ordered with it, it will christallize together with it into a pure Salt,
having the odor, taste, and smell, the virtues also and efficacy of the added
Concrete.

To conclude then this Subject, let me give the Reader a taste of what benefit
he may reap by these preparations.

He shall have mineral and acid Spirits dulcified, Corrosive Salts made mild,
that so being friendly to Nature, they may have entrance to the Stomach,
Pylorus, and Mefaraicks, where becoming Diuretic, they resolve and bring away
all obstructions or Coagulations which they can Master, and what they cannot
singly perform, by addition of several Species, which according to their
kinds are made one Salt, together with them it may be performed.

For, the forenamed Salts as they are singly dulcified, have no seminal or
proper determination of their virtue, but are indefinitely abstersive, and
deoppilative, in the ways through which they pass, which virtue is
determinated to operate on the head, by the addition of Cephalic Simples,
which it does salificate, that is, makes their (otherwise clammy) tinctures, to
become faline, and to christallize, and so by addition of any other simple
Concretes, different specificated Salts may be had, as many and as diverse, as
there are sorts of Concretes to be gotten or procured.

But these preparations (though much nobler then the Galenical Conserves, or
Syrups, or Candied things which are done with Sugar, are yet inferior to those
preparations which are made by Elixeration of Tartar with essential Oiles, and
Spiritualized Tinctures, or brought into a Samech, with pure rectified Spirit
of Wine.

For by means of these the Salt is made not only volatile and sweet, and so it
becomes inoffensively abstersive and penetrative, but it is also endowed with
balsamic and aromatic qualities, and so does not salificate only the
Tinctures,
that are prepared with it, but also spiritualizeth them, for in the Salt which
is made by acid Spirits, and an Alcalie, although Tinctures by it are
cristallized, and made Salt, yet are they not so spiritualized, as to be free
from future Empyrheumes, as in these other preparations they are. So Sugar is
cristallized, and reiterately refined, yet will it burn, and be turned into
heterogeneities, foul, filthy and stinking, by the fire.

It Is true that Alcalies by Acid Spirits, if they, being satiated, are after
distilled, by cohobation are volatized; but this Spirit which is thus gotten,
is acid, as other Spirits, distilled with a strong fire, are, although it be
very penetrative, and dissolving metals, and being by them turned into a
volatile coagulated Salt, be of a most admirable virtue and efficacy in
Medicine, yet the Salt when it is barely satiated, and not distilled, has only
the abstersive and medicinal intentions of the Alcaly, and spirit of Nitre, or
Vitriol, etc. which is less noble than the other by many degrees, so that as to
application unto Vegetals, that which is made by elixerated Oiles, or a pure
vinous spirit (which is wholly Sulphur volatile) is far more noble,
efficacious, and penetrative for a medicinal use than the other, the reason is
evident, in that they have a nearer relation to them (which are this way
prepared) than they which are made of mineral Spirits, which are as remote from
Vegetables in their nature, as the subjects out of which they were drawn by the
operation of the fire.

But Alcalies and Oils essential and burning spirits are radically of kin each
to other, and so the Alcaly by them recovers what it lost by burning, that is a
seminal, vital, essential Balsom, and so becomes not only volatile, but
fermental and exceeding sociable to our Nature, and so an admirable mean of
preparing and advancing noble Vegetals, those especially which are odorous,
balsamic, and ethereal.

And here I shall before I pass, answer two objections which captious Spirits
may make, the one opposing my Doctrine to noble Helmont, the other opposing me
to my self.

For the first they will object Helmonts Doctrine, That volatile Spirits (as of
Wine, Vinegar, etc.) are fixed by means of fixed Salts, whereas I affirm, That
the Salts by their Spirits are volatized.

To which I shall answer. That both are true, for the spirit is upon the Alcali
robbed of its saline parts, rejecting the residue in form of an insipid aquous
phlegm: Thus is the Spirit (as to the Saline part of it) fixed, in respect of
what it was, yet not so fixed, but that by fire it will be made to distill over
into a Recipient, which a fixed Alcaly alone would never do, so that the Alcaly
is made more Volatile, and the Spirit more fixed than before.

And therefore Helmont speaking of this operation in his Tractate concerning
the Duelech, says, That a Spirit acting on a Body in a Corrosive way is in a
manner fixed (quodammodo fixatur) being so fixed, that it will abide a great
heat to what it would before, thus Spirit of Wine which was extremely Volatile,
so as to fly with the least heat, becomes (as to its Saline part) so fixed,
that it will not fly but in a heat equal to the Distillation of Aqua Fortis,
which may (and not unworthily) be called a Fixation.

But besides there is a great mystery in these Operations, which will be more
conveniently touched in the answer to the other objection, which I shall
therefore make, that in the answer to it, full satisfaction may be given to an
Ingenuous Reader.

The Objection then is of such who would oppose me to my self, First in that I
say that the Spirit of Volatile Alcalies is not Acid, but contradistinct to
Aciditie, whereas in another place I affirm of a Volatile Spirit of Tartar
that it is Acid, as all Spirits drawn by the fire are. And Secondly, That in my
first Tractate, entitled Natures Explication, etc. I writing of Alcalies
Elixerated by Oiles Essential, affirmed them to be the most slow for Virtue and
Efficacy of all Preparations, by which Alcalies are volatized, whereas in this
Tractate I affirm, That Alcalies by Elixeration with Oiles, or by reduction to
a Samech, by rectified Spirits, are the most noble as to Vegetal preparations.

To which Objection, in both parts of it, I answer as I did to the former, that
both are very true; only it behooves the careful Reader to consider in what
respect the one and the other may be affirmed.

To answer then the last part of the Objection first, I say still, that Salt of
Tartar (if elixerated with an essential Oil) becomes a very noble Medicament,
but as to its virtue, as an active dissolving menstrue, it is of all other the
most sluggish, according to Helmonts most true observation, Ex salibus illa
languidiora reperi, quae sequebantur Sulphurum prosapiam. So Spirit of Wine is
nothing so dissolving a menstrue as Spirit of Vinegar, especially for
mettalline Bodies, but nothing comparable to Aqua fortis, Spirit of Nitre, Oil
of Vitriol or the like. It is one thing to be a menstrue for mettalline bodies,
and a far different thing to be a noble medium to volatize and exalt vegetal
Tinctures, which want a fermental exaltation of their Natures, much more than a
Corrosive sharpness to open their bodies: each then are of use in their own way
and kind.

But besides, The question is concerning Alcalies edulcorated, and made
volatile, not actually volatized; and here we must yield the Garland to
elixerated Salts, especially to such which are exalted into a Samech, for they
have their seminal Balsamic Virtue restored to them, of which the other are
deprived by burning of the fire, and not restored by addition of acid Corrosive
Spirits, which wanting it themselves, cannot give what they have not.

These then meeting with Vegetal Tinctures, become Fermental each to other, and
advance each other into a true essential Balsom, which is of wonderful Virtue.

Now as concerning the aciditie of some Alcalizate Spirits, and the non
aciditie of others, the difference therein lies in the preparation of, and
operation upon them, and according to the variety used herein, various products
appear, and are brought to light: for the Philosopher is an instrumental helper
of, and cooperator with Nature, and the Fire is an instrumental help to the
Philosopher.

Happy is that Philosopher, that shall make his preparations so, that a gentle
heat may make the Alcalies to fly, he (without jesting) may command Natures
choicest secrets: but if he must be enforced to use the help of the extremest
heat, that will stamp a fiery Impression on the produced Spirit; and so are
the Objections answered.

However to satisfy the studious Reader, I shall add, that the Spirit
attained by means of Pontique Spirits, will be acid and pontique, and those
obtained by mean of essential Oiles, which are Vegetal Sulphurs and rectified
spirits of Wine, which are but Sulphurs in a disguise, (witness the
inflamableness of them) will not be acid: and therefore Helmont reckoning up
the Spirits of all Salts, concludes them acid, Exceptis Alcalizatis, and
Sulphurum essentialium in Vegetabilibus, etc.

Now to proceed to the Operations on Salts by means of essential Oiles, and
Alcoolizate Spirit of wine, that so I may draw to a Conclusion of this
discourse, having first fully satisfied the studious Reader.

I join the Elixeration with Oils, with the making it into a Samech, with
Spirits, as being much of one nature, and the one way convertible into the
other by the Artists craft and industry.

For essential oiles and burning Spirits are but the same thing in a various
disguise, and both of them are hard to be reconciled with fixed Salts.

Concerning essential Oiles and Salts, Helmont says expressly and truly, That
if they be joined without any water, within three months time (occulta and
secreta circulatione) they will all be turned into a volatile Salt, and of
Spirit of Wine he says, That Salt of Tartar by its bare touch does turn one
half of it into water (robbing it of its volatile Saltness, and fixing that
upon it self, with a kind of fixity) but in both, there is something
sufficiently obscure, nor easily to be understood; For first of all, in the
Elixeration of Oiles and Alcalies, the pondus is not set down, and the time is
tedious ( viz. three months) which if a man should expect and miss, he has no
comfort but to think that he erred in Helmonts (hidden and secret) digestion,
which will prove (like the Alchemists peck of Coals) but a cold comfort. So
also in the operation on Salt of Tartar, with most deflegmed Spirit of Wine,
true, the Salt by its bare touch will so transmute it, but how to make them
touch, that is the difficulty, For pure Salt, in pure spirit of wine, sinks to
the bottom like sand in fair and common water, nor will they touch each other
that is be mingled one with the other, no marvel than if several Sciolists have
complained of the tediousness of this operation, that in threescore
rectifications they could not perfect the Balsamum Samech.

For put case the Spirit of Wine be not absolutely pure, the Salt attracts its
aquositie, and so helps to deflegme it exquisitely, but does not rob it at all,
whereas if the Spirit be exquisitely deflegmed, it touches not the Salt at
all, nor will six distillations reiterated rob it one ounce, much less one
half, because there is no union, nay no mixture, and where that is not, there
can be no action nor passion.

And here my tired Coleburners are in a Labyrinth, because they know not the
mean of conjunction, which is not any superadditional Substance to the matter,
but only modus dispositionis of which if any be ignorant, let him be ignorant.

Phie, fond pretenders, to that in which you are but Bunglers: do you not see
the heavenly influences, how by a mean they visit, and make fruitful earthly
bodies: for shame learn to imitate Nature in her most ordinary operations.

Alcalies then with essential oils are to be joined, that both may make a Sapo
together, and then time by a secret fermental decoction will transmute each
into a third neuter, made of both, which is a volatile Elixar, so also Alcalies
and pure Spirits are to be joined together, that one may seem to eat up the
other, and then this touch will be like the clutches of a thief, whose hands
are bands, else no mixture, no union, and by consequence no operation each on
other. ( N.B.)

And indeed this, and this only is the Gordian knot that puzzles, and for ever
will puzzle the doting sond Alchemists, they know not the true means, to
reconcile extremes, but fancy new exotic substances, not knowing the mystery
of spiritual love (an inseparable concomitant of true life) how that it is
never without bodies, but always follows its own bodies due disposition, which
disposition is our hidden name, our diploma, our mystery incommunicable, but
the gift of God to whom, and when he pleases, To him be all Honor, and
Glory, and everlasting Benediction.

O foolish Operatours! that by your devised heats, would draw down celestial
influences, and introduce ferments (the true parents of all forms) and yet
know not by any of your heats to imitate the Sun in the Bermuda in producing
Oranges or Lemons: Cease sond Artists, and let me the meanest of Philosophers
(yet one truly regenerated by the fire) instruct you better, and pray to him
who above all is the great Master (whom no Scholar yet went beyond) that he
would be your guide and director, for here (to deal ingenuously) my speech is
misty and very obscure.

Let Alcalies and Oiles purely prepared, embrace each other in the bond of
Love, which will appear in a kind of an urinous scent, and a saponary mixture,
which will be white and thick like Cream, continue your decoction, till your
mixture end in an union, and the Oil and Salt be both dissolvable without the
least oiliness swimming at top, this solution make with Spirit of Wine, which
will mix (doubt it not) the Oil and the Salt being once radically, and
inseparably united.

This Solution in a due heat rectify, and you shall have a volatile burning
Spirit, of the odor and taste of the Oil, and after it an insipid phlegm, and
at bottom a noble tincted balsamic Elixir.

1. The volatile Spirit deflegme exquisitely, and then unite it to the
remaining balsom, and digest them together, till the Spirit be made one with
the more fixed balsom, howbeit rest assured that both are volatile.

2. Which that you may advance, yet more and more in virtue, according to the
quality of the essential Oil, cause this Balsom to dry,
and cristallize without any extraneous addition of substance or separative
culinary heat, then will this cristalline Salt (like an infant that is hungry)
feed on, and in short time transmute into its own nature, any essential Oil, or
if you please rather, the same with which it was at the first produced.

3. Feed it then, till it have at last eaten up thrice as much of the essential
Oil as was of the Alcalizate Salt, in which feeding, let there be a succession
of Humectation and Exsiccation, of cold and heat, the exsiccation and cold,
the Air will give (understood Philosophically) the humectation and heat, the
fire will give (understood not vulgarly) which are the main wheels, by which
nature Circulates all, yea the hardest things, in the great World, to a
transmutation, understand this, and neither the Secret of the Alchahest, nor
the mysteries of the Sun, and Mercury will be hidden from thee.

4. Thou see Reader, how presuming upon thy capacity, I have transgressed
near hand in my desire of Candor toward thee, I have (as it were) met thee
half way, and brought great secrets home to thy door, in a manner half naked,
and yet rouse up thy attention, and have a little more patience, and I will
proceed yet further in my Candidness, which I have already begun.

Thou have seen the Alcaly, and the Oil, their mixture, digestion. union, and
feeding, until they come to such a proportion of the volatile to be coagulated
and united, upon and with the fixed, that both by this means may become
volatile, and spiritual together.

Therefore as becomes a true Philosopher, give them fire, and in a due heat
make them fly, which if they do not easily enough to thy mind, imbibe them
(and dry them by a flow digestion as before) with a convenient Liquour, as for
instance good wine, or spirits, on which it feeds and grows each circulation
more and more volatile and spiritual, till at last it will sublime in a gentle
heat of Sand, in the form of a glorified Salt, then which the kingdom of the
Vegetables has not a more noble medicine.

For the making of Samech, let pure Spirit of Wine, and pure Salt of Tartar
(without any mixture of any thing, save only the addition of true spiritual
love which is the ethereal fire, the secret fire, and the true and only
exciter of the Ferment) be joined, and so digested, and in few days most part
of the Spirit will be retained in the Salt, separate the Phlegm carefully and
discreetly, and renew your Spirit as much as it lost (you may put on each time
of the Spirit four times the weight of the Salt) thus in four or five
reiterations (or six you may make if you please) you shall have a balsome
tincted like a pure Ruby, of a grateful taste and smell, which is a noble
medicament, called by Helmont the Balsamus, or the Arcanu^ samech.

Proceed to the highest exaltation of it thus, Let this Balsom,
without any extraneous addition to its substance be dried, without any
vaporous heat of Vulcan, then will it like a living child, thirst for its own
food, which give it by several and temperate imbibitions, till this wheel have
been seven times turned round upon it, then make it fly in a modest heat of
Sand, and it will be a most noble balsamic essential salt, which is as to
medicinal use Alcalium apex, and may worthily be reputed Medici Corona.

This operation you see has great affinity with the foretaught way of
Elixeration, by essential Oiles, now I shall teach the Coincidency of these two
ways, and both Mineral and Vegetable additions to them, by which they are
ennobled beyond what can be believed by him that has not tried.

For the conjoining both ways together, I need say no more, having taught to
dissolve the united Oil and Salt, with pure Spirit of Wine, and to distill it
with it, and after its exiccation to feed it with the like Spirit, five, six,
or seven times, or oftener, as your reason shall seem to advise you.

But besides, as to all aromatical simples, as Anise, Fennel, Cummin,
Coriander, Clove, Mace, Nutmeggs, Cinnamon, etc. who sees not, that their Crasis
lies in a light Spiritual Oil, which by distillation with pure Spirit of wine
is extracted, and becomes so one with the Spirit, that it seems for taste and
smell no whit inferior to the simple Aroma, from which it was drawn; this
Spirit Circulate with pure Salt of Tartar, after the manner of the Samechs
process, and you have both a Samech, and an Aromatic Elixir, either of
Cinnamon, which is noble for the cure of the Palsy, Epilepsie, Convulsions,
Vertigo, etc. or of any other, as your mind and reason, and intended use shall
dictate.

This Reader is a discovery, for which (unless you will be mainly ungrateful)
you cannot but be thankful, and yet I am resolved farther to oblige thee with
more, and more noble secrets.

For a mineral advancement of these preparations, take freely this Candid
instruction. Thou may read it in Helmont, and find it here confirmed, That a
Sulphur may be extracted out of, the Metallus masculus (which in a Parenthesis,
I tell thee is Zink) and so out of Lead, and Tin: But there is a natural
Sulphur, known by the name of Sulphur Vive, and was to Hippocrates, his (...) a
noble pure Sulphur, wholly inflamable, without any faeces, and consequently
has in it little danger of an adulterate mixture, which is common (and that
Arsenical, the most malignant) in the ordinary (vulgarly fold) Brimstone.

What concerns the Medicinal excellency, that is in mineral Sulphues, which
are more familiar so us, then true mettaline Sulphurs, none that is a
Philosopher, but he must acknowledge: my time and space here, will not give me
leave Philosophically to ventilate it, but in my next part of Pyrotechny, which
shall be, Its victory and Triumph, in which I shall discover ten most secret
mysteries, of which the first shall concern the mysteries of the Microcosme,
the second shall discover the mysteries of Alcalies, the third of Sulphurs, the
fourth of, the fifth of, the sixth of, the seventh of and, the eight of Mars, the
ninth of the metallus masculus, the tenth of Sol, and his Sister Luna, it will
fall in opportunely and in order and therefore to that place I shall remit the
Reader, that in this point desires full satisfaction.

To proceed then in my present intended task, this Sulphur vive, or any other
external combustible Sulphur, separated from any mineral, or soft mertal, the
extraction of which I shall heartily, and clearly teach in that my Triumph of
Pyrotechny, for its conquest and victory over all its clamorous and railing
adversaries (that being a piece intended for my Archidoxes, or most choice
secrets, with which I shall appear as with my Philosophical Diploma, or
evidence of my mission, by which it may be made out that I am sent from God,
for pulling down this rotten ruinous building of the Galenists method, and woe
be to them on whom that ruinous heap will fall, for the fall of it will be very
great, but this only as a digression.

I say any extracted Sulphur, or Sulphur vive, which is a most noble, subject,
fraught with incomparably excellent rarities, cohobate with Oil of Therebinth,
in an indifferent quick fire of sand, till the Oil have wholly brought over the
Sulphur in the form of a tincted Oil, yet faerid, the water that separates it
self in this distillation (which will be some, though not much) throw away,
with this Oil proceed to Elixeration, as with any other distilled Oil, when the
union is complete, Elixate it with pure Spirit of Wine, distilled from Cardamom
seeds, and distill off the Spirit, and the Phlegm, till the tincted balsome
remain very red, rectify the Spirit, and reunite it to its balsome, digest it
in a secret digegestion till it be dry, thus is all the foetor, wholly taken
away, and the Elixir smells fragrantly, which feed with fresh Aromatic Spirit,
six or seven times, then make it fly, and you shall have a glorious, tincted,
balsamic, essential, volatile Salt, which call Elixeratum Samech sublimatum,
and add Sulphuris Vivi, or Antimoniale, etc. according to the Sulphur which was
married to, and volatized with the Oil of Therebinth.

This Medicine is universal, and wonderfully restorative, curing all diseases
powerfully in tono unisono, a little inferior, but a noble Succedaneum to the
grand Arcana, which require an Alchahestical preparation.

This Operation, is very tedious to bring it to this height, but being so
advanced, it is a middle way to prepare the Essentia membrorum, and Vinum vitae
of Paracelsus, which (out of the Metallus masculus, especially, or out of
Antimony) besides its incredible cures by it performable, it restores the body
of man wonderfully, renewing really the hair, teeth, and skin, which Medea was
fabled, to have performed for her Father in law old Aeson.

But if your leisure or opportunity will not give you leave to advance these
Medicaments to the forementioned height, yet at least bring them to an Elixir,
and rectify this in pure spirit of wine Aromatical, either with Cinnamon, or
Cloves, or Cardamom, etc. deflegming both the Ruby, (or rather blood) red
Balsom or Samech, and the Spirit, then reunite the Spirit thus deflegmed, and
its Samech, and decoct them till they become inseparable, so is the Mineral
Faetor changed into an Aromatic fragrancy, and I will assure you a Medicine on
which you may rely with confidence, for the cure of all (unless the highest
graduated, or obstinately Chronical, hereditary) diseases.

Come we now to apply our Elixerated Samech, for I shall be cafter unite them,
since experience shows us, that these two ways, will so easily and
profitably marry each other) to the preparing, advancing, and spiritualizing
noble Vegetal tinctures, which are of excellent efficacy, and make the Samech
by many degrees more powerful then it was before, when (to deal heartily) it
was of most admirable efficacy.

And here Reader take my counsel, let the Basis of thy Elixir be Oil of
Therebinth, which I elsewhere call Oleum perpetue virentis, for which take
these few, but not trivial reasons.

First, The tree is perpetually green, yea in the most exquisite frosts, the
trees growing in the cold frozen Regions, as Russia, Newfound land, etc.

Secondly, For most part grows on high, and barren sandy grounds, yet runs so
much of that fat, that had it not vent, the Tree for farness would be choked.

Thirdly, The Oil is fragrant, admirably Diuretic and excellently Abstersive,
and healing both inwardly and outwardly, and in Conorrheas, and scalding Vrines
got on a Venereal score, it has not its peer in the Vegetal family.

Fourthly, The tree is not much unlike the Cedar, and is a wood of long
duration, if kept dry.

Whence it may be gathered, that the Oil besides a diuretic and healing
quality, does also promise, at least gives hopes (on probable conjectures) of
long life, and of amending the constitution, bringing it to a virid flourishing
temper, of youth and strength and vindicating it from the cold declining
Winter, of wasting old Age.

But lastly, It is to be had in large quantities, without the least fear of
adulteration (its price being security sufficient, for its unmixt sincerity)
and so seems to be destinated by God (the father of the poor) for the comfort
of poor people, to whose releef being elixerated alone, it may be applied an
hundred ways with excellent success, but with far more, if first distilled
with a mineral Sulphur, till both by often cohobation be married in a volatile
Oil, this then elixerated, extracted with Spirit of Wine, and with it
rectified, til it lose its faetor, and then both Spirit and tincted balsom make
one Elixir, this salificated, and fed with Spirit of Wine (enriched with
Aromatical Spirits) till it be fully satiated, then sublimed (as was taught
more at large before) or if not sublimed, but kept in a fragrant elixerated
Samech, it will be of admirable virtue and essicacie, or if it be married with
prepared Tinctures of noble Vegetables, thus,

This Alcaly thus elixerated, with twice or thrice as much Oil of Therebinth,
till both Salt and Oil will dissolve inseparably in Spirit of Wine, this Spirit
let it be enriched, with distilling it from Cinnamon, and with it dissolve your
Elixir, distill the volatile Spirit from the Balsamic (ruble-coloured) Samech,
dephlegme both, and reunite them.

Then have ready some noble Vegetal Tincture, which for example sake, I shall
instance in Myrrh, Aloes, and Saffron, and of them make an Elixir proprietatis
Samech.

These Species beaten up and mixed with equal part of pure Salt of Tartar, are
by an artificial digestion so macerated, that they will yield their full
Tincture, prepared, corrected, and advanced, this Tincture then extracted with
pure Spirit of Wine, enriched by reiterate distillation with spirit of Cinamom,
this then added to the former elixerated Samech, the Spirit abstracted (which
will be wonderfully fragrant) both the balsamic Elixir and the Spirit being
purely dephlegmed, both are then reconjoined, and by a secret digestion made
all one inseparably, that is, the Samech, the fragrant Spirit, and the
Tincture, which all make a (balsamic Sameth Elixiris proprietatis) very
fragrant, and which I am consident comes no way short of, if it exceed not, the
way of the Alchanestical preparation: Wonder not at it, Courteous Reader, God
has given to each man his Talent: Although Helmont knew the Samech, etc.
excellently well, yet this way of applying it to Vegetals, I am almost
confident he never knew, he had his convenienty for other operations, but being
through the good hand of God deprived of convenience for some other operations,
which I rather intended, and desired, could I have gotten convenient
opportunity, that is in plain terms, wanting conveniencie to distill the
volatile Spirit of Salt of Tartar for mineral operations (of which in the
second Chapter of this last part I gave a full satisfactory account) which I
had tried in small quantities, so as to know them, but wanted convenient
furnaces, and room to distill that Spirit in great quantity, I hating Idleness,
endeavored Exornare Spartam meam, to my utmost, and so tried the utmost of
Alcalies; and essential Oils, and burning Spirits, which being Balsamic, and
Vegetal, and so Fermental would be brought to their highest pitch of
excellency, with a far inferior degree of heat than would be required for the
other, this therefore I did prosecute diligently and studiously, and (blessed
be God) found my studies, watchings, and labors crowned with success, as I have
given you a can did description largely, and sufficiently plain, in the
foregoing discourse.

But to return to this Elixir proprietatis, it is made of Helmonts ingredients,
dissolved with a convenient mean, and so prepared, elixerated, and brought to a
tincture, and then inseparably married with the Arcanum Samech, which is of it
self a thrice noble medicament.

Now whereas Helmont speaking of his media Via to make the Elixir proprietatis,
which is, to be performed by bare digestion, of the three Species, an Ounce
precisely of each, well beaten and mingled together, in a large Glass, with a
convenient heat, adds, That if the Species be united with a Medium, the
product will be of no worth; He speaks that, in reference to Crollius, and
others, description of the Elixir proprietatis, according to their Fantasy,
one using the Medium of Spirit of Sulphur, another, another thing, or two. But
my way is by a mean not Corrosive, but familiar to the Vegetal Nature, the
noblest of all fixed Salts dulcified, and made Balsamical, and of a seminal
Virtue, by its own Volatile Spirit, which is so noble, that Paracelsus calls it
his Circulatum minus, by which the three Species are opened, volatized, and
made Spiritual, so that beside the fragrant spirit, there is also the
substantial tincture which is not of a contemptible virtue, and all joined with
such a Salt, which is friendly to Nature, and (by reason of its Volatile
Nature) penetrative even to the very entrance of the fourth digestion, and by
reason of its Alcalizate Nature, it is marvelously abstersive, resolving all
muccous foulness, and cutting and attenuating all tough phlegmatic
coagulations, which it finds in its passage, bringing them forth by Urine
partly, and partly by siege, and sweat.

For the oil of Thereb: is of a laxative quality, not on the score of a
venomous resolution of the parts, but as it makes the expulsive faculties
mindful of their duties.

And here note that the extreme bitterness of the Aloes, is changed into a
pleasant inoffensive bitterness, which by a more thorough preparation, and high
advancement of the medicine, would be in a manner wholly extinct.

To proceed then to the highest pitch of this preparation, take of this
Elixerated Samech, and by a secret Philosophical process, bring it first to a
spontaneous Granulation, and so by degrees to a total Exsiccation, and feed it
with Aromatical Spirits, six, seven, or eight times, each time drieing it by
the Air, and moistening it by the Fire, and Ferment of Nature, then by a modest
fire of Sand, sublime it, and thou shall have both the Samech and the
elixerated Oils and the glorified Tinctures, together sublimed, without the
least Empyrrheume which will retain the pleasant fragrancy, and the specific
excellencies of the Concretes, and in its operation (in the dose of some ten,
fifteen, or twenty grains) will show its true, and highest Crasis.

But the elixerated Samech is a noble medicine, as I said, and fragrant, and
admirable in its effects against very many diseases, and so needs not (unless
for extraordinary occasions) be brought to that pass as actually to be
sublimed, it is sufficient, that it is sublimable, and volatile, to produce
stupendous effects, the other highest preparation being exceeding tedious,
this other being not the work of a few days, nor of very few Weeks, so that to
do it as it ought to be, will require a Patient, and discreet Artist.

And this process of the Elixir proprietatis take as a rule for preparing any
tincture, whether of Hellebore black or white, with which use spirit aromatized
with Cardamom, and Coriander Seeds; or Colocynthida, with which use what
Aromatic Spirit best pleases you, but for the commixture of Species, take my
Composition; Hellebore is eminently splenetical, and Cephalical, with it
prepare Asarum roots, and Zalap, sometimes it and Opium, which I call Elixir.
Ladani Cephalicum and Spleneticum: For an Hepatick, Enula Campane roots, with
Rhabarb and Horse-Rhadish: For a Stomachick, Saffron, Rosemary flowers, and
Snake Root: For an eminent Diaphoretick, Snake root, Saffron, and Opium: For an
eminent Diuretic, Satyrion, (out of which is Paracelsus and Helmonts Aroph,
which take in a Parenthesis) Rhabarb, and Saffron: Against a Costive temper,
Colocynthis, Aloe, and Balsome of Peru: Against a Cough and Flux, Opium,
Caranna, and Gummi Gutta: and so you may vary, according as Reason shall direct
you; preparing all after the manner of the foretaught Elixir proprietatis.

As for the Alcoolization of Alcalies with Spirit of Urine, purely rectified,
and its mixture or combination with a Vinous Spirit, in this operation, I might
soon run out into a large discourse, but I shall reserve that, to that part of
my Pyrotechny triumphing, which treats of the mysteries of the Microcosme.

Only in the next, and last Chapter, I shall touch a little of the Spirit of
Urine reduced to a volatile Salt, and sweet, by which Helmonts Ens Veneris is
made, that thou (Ingenious Reader) may not want so noble a Remedy, as that
is, of so great and excellent use, concerning which thou may read
satisfactorily in Helmonts Tractate entitled Futler, and in my next concluding
Chapter, I shall speak of its use and virtue so much as is necessary, for the
information and instruction of a studious, and diligent, young Artist or Tyro.

I had determined to have concluded this treatise in this Chapter, and so to
have added a little, for a close, of the manner of using and applying those
remedies, whose ground and manner of making, I have before sufficiently
discovered, but a Cordial and Intimate Friend, who had read and perused what I
had written, while it was yet in my hands (having lent it to him for that end)
he was pleased (upon the perusal, to send me an ingenious and friendly letter,
with several important Queries, to which he requested me (on the score of our
mutual friendship) to give him satisfactory and public answer, which I
(judging it an equal request, and so indeed in effect a command) thought I
could not handsomely deny or refuse, and therefore what I intended to have
added to this, more briefly, because it must there fall in more largely and
fully, I thought good rather to omit it here, and to send the Reader thither
for his further satisfaction.

THE CONCLUSION Of this TREATISE.
Being an Answer to a Friends Letter, containing some important Queries, etc.
SIR,
YOur kind and very learned Letter, I received; perused, and in it am sensible
of the obligation that lies upon me toward you, for your Cordial love in it
expressed to me. How I have, or could deserve it, I sea not, and how to be able
to requite it I am out of hopes: Yet gratefulness compells me to acknowledge,
what inability denies me to recompense, and waving Ceremony in acknowledging, I
come, and that most willingly to answer those Queries contained in your Letter.
And pardon me, Sir, if I do not answer them in the same order as you sent them
me, but in such Order as best befits the method of my discourse, which must be
a summary explication of the whole Art of Pyrotechny.

Your Questions then, Sir, (as I understand them) are some of them, such in
which you desire to be informed, and some in which under the disguise of a
Question, you insinuate to me partly what you judge to be for my good, and
partly what you conceive either really does, or probably may be prejudicial or
inconvenient to me, that I may do the one, and avoid the other; in the latter
you show your self to me a Cordial friend, in the other an ingenious and
discreet Zetetick.

The first thing you seem desirous to be informed in, is whether I have of all
those preparations by me, of which I write, or have had of them, or (if
otherwise) whether I write of them, only upon Theoricall conjecture.

To which I answer, that every particular preparation I have not actually made,
but the making a Collateral experiment of the same extent and Reason, is so
absolute a Confirmation of the other, that no demonstration (unless actual
proof) can be plainer. As for instance, in the second Chapter I speak of the
preparation of Zink, by mean of a volatile alcalizate salt, so that the Sulphur
of it may come over tincted, and dwell in the spirit, under one form or color,
etc; if I have, (as I have) actually tried this in, and the stellate Regulus of
Antimony, I may conclude the other undeniably, the Zink yielding its Sulphur
almost as easily as the; far more easily then the stellate Regulus. But then,
where you reply, you should not have adventured to describe the color of the
oil to be of an high tincture; I answer, that I tried so much of it, as to find
in what color it is Sulphur would come over, but I rather prosecuted my
Experiment (to the End) on the Sulphur of, that being by nature vomitive, in
which the total extinction of that Emetick quality was an Experiment, I was
equally desirous of, with the knowledge of any other Circumstance, nor had I
such quantity of the spirit, nor such variety of furnaces, or accomdation of
Room, as would permit me to prosecute my experiments so far as I would, in any
mineral, nor so far in all as on, (and one or two more) therefore I wrote of
that subject more concisely, reserving a larger complete discourse thereon (and
upon the mysteries of the Microcosme) till a more convenient season, intending
those noble mettalline preparations for my next search, when God shall be
pleased to afford me a convenient settlement.

As for my present being, of which you advise me to give a public account,
because you say, That persons of considerate judgments, who have read my
Natures Explication, do censure that piece as too Satirical and invective, and
guessing it to be the Cause of my being maligned, and a little for a time
oppressed, from the supposed effect, they censure the Imaginary cause, as being
too tart and bitter.

First I must crave leave to tell you in the words of noble Helmont, That I am
not the first, nor shall I be the last, that shall sharply inveigh against
them, and I appeal to the world, if or no what I taxed, did not deserve a
severe and sharp animadversion, but besides that, I may say, Iacta nunc est
Alea, the Rubicon is cast, and it is not now a thing which will admit of advice
(whether I should have been so tart or no) though since (to deal ingenuously)
Cynthius Aurem vedit, Apollo has plucked me by the Ear, and whisperd this
counsel, Non exasperandes crabones, they are a company of Wasps and Hornets,
which will not suffer a provocation, but they will buzze about and sting, and
yet they are but Wasps and Horners, and if I can be but so fortunate as to fire
their nest (which I hope I shall) it will not trouble me to be a little stung,
since I shall do the Commonwealth of learning a remarkable piece of service,
although my self happen to smart a little.

But, Sir, you are sufficiently convinced, that my present restraint is not
upon that score, for I am a Physician, graduated as well as any that practice
in Town, and have as much Authority on my side for my Practice, and as much
Reason, and much more Truth and Experience on my side, for what I plead,
against the common Galenical method.

But my confinement for a time happens through the malice of a remarkable
adversary, considering whose crooked disposition, suited to the like frame of
Body, that which once was said of Galba in a like case, Ingenium Calbae male
habitat (having an upright noble mind in an unlike body) may here be inverted,
for if ever there were man whose mind and body did most exactly agree, he
certainly is one, of whom I might have been aware, had I remembered the Adagie,
Hos caveas semper, tu quos Natura notavit. But quondam familiarity with him
gave opportunity to his future vexation of me, which he prosecuted with such
earnestness, as if he had accounted it sufficient gain to be prejudicial to my
quiet: What moved him to it (save his own perverse disposition) a days racking
would scarce enforce me to guess, perhaps it might be desire of a future name,
which if it were, I heartily wish that he may have his desire, and if my
writings be worth future esteem, I am content that he live in them, and I doubt
not but such a name as Oporinus got by his maligning and persecuting
Paracelsus, such he may get by his causeless vexation of me, which I shall
contribute as much as I can, and I do not doubt but this shall be as lasting a
Monument ^or him, as the burning of Diana's Temple was to that conceited fool,
who could think of no other way to immortalize his remembrance to posterity:
long then let thy name live, my troublesome piece of a man: and let as many as
shall read my writings with profit or satisfactson, remember thee as my dark
shadow, my knotty whetstone to sharpen my ingenie, my pevish adversary, the
crooked Apostle, and remarkable Saint.

But Sir, although I formerly have been acquainted with him, yet at present, I
am so much a stranger to him, that your news is to me news, which I hear with
pity, (namely,) that it is observed, that since he has given up himself to
vex and disturb me, he is Eclipsed in his reputation, (both as to his skill, as
also to his morralls) being accounted a better Gamester, then a Physician; a
better Carouser, then a Christian: for which relation, I owe you both a sigh,
and a tear; For really, (though he has been to me a most perverse, wretched
adversary, and that most causelessely,) yet I so much honor him, for the sake
of the Art he pretends to, (Viz,) Chemistry, that I could wish him, not only a
pattern of Ingenie, but also of Piety; For really Sir, I must give a true
testimony of him; that he is a man of no contemptible parts, (and for his
hatred to me, let the world esteem what they please;) however, I shall do him
that right, that he wants neither wit, as a man, nor learning as a Scholar,
nor discretion as a Theoricall dissenter from the Galenical way: nor
acuteness, as a Chemicall pretender, but if he want something in nature to
make him a complete upright man, much more in grace to make him a true
Christian; (being of all the professed Christians that ever I knew, the most
Exemplarily swearing, and blasphemous) and cannot be excused in Pyrotechny, for
his defects therein, (on which score only I presume he hates and malignes me;)
pardon me Sir, if I endeavor to Conceal what I can, of his imperfections, and
(as much as in me is,) make common and public his abilities.

Therefore Sir, give me leave to advise you cordially, and indifferently; If
any man have counseled you to him, as to an able Chemist and Physician; let me
not be thought (on the score of his unworthy dealing with me) to be dissuasive
to you from him.

For what concerns his Schollarship, you need not question, and if you should,
I who know him very well, dare on my knowledge assure you, that he is (that
way) most able; His actual skill in Chemicall things, I will not, I cannot
extol; but what concerns his good will toward them, I am not altogether
unacquainted therewith, and although concerning some things I am informed that
he pretends excellent skill; yet I must inform the ingenious Reader, that he is
not, what he desires to appear, the most acute of our English Philosophers, but
has his dark intervalls, as well as the most illuminate Artists have had
theirs sometimes, which is the worst that I shall say of him, and will be
heartily glad to hear, that William Currer is once at length Adopted, among the
experimental Philosophers, and to find him among the true Adept Pyrotechnists,
who are regenetated by the Fire, and so wishing him to repent his unworthie
malicious tricks, whereby he disturbed my quies causelessly, perverted my
Attorney, produced an unconscionable Hellfaced fellow (with a bushel wide
Conscience) to swear against me, and prevaricate against the truth, by which
Oath I was considerably and unrighteously damnified, wishing him (I say)
cordial and true repentance, for all these tricks and praying heartily that God
would forgive him (as I from my heart have done and do) I come to answer the
residue of your questions.

You desire a brief account of what I have performed as to medicinal Chemistry,
which is a Natural Quere, following the former, and will satisfy the
intelligent Reader on what ground, and for what Reasons I have (on so unworthy
a score) embraced a confinement for almost this twelve-months time, being in my
power to have broken this Woodcocks yoaks and bonds at my pleasure.

For a thorough information of you herein, be pleased to understand (which I
know you are not ignorant of) the Art of Chemistrie, does by secret (and some
tedious Operations, bring to light, the obscure and hidden virtues which Nature
has put in many Simples, by which many diseases (in themselves very difficult
and impossible to be cured by the Galenical art) are by Gods blessing very
safely, easily, and certainly remedied.

You see, Sir, that my search and disquisition is not (as some were pleased
falsely and foolishly to insinuate to you) employed about vain and trivial
enquiries, but what may concern the benefit of mankind (as to the Cure of
those diseases, which most dangerously and specedily threaten man's life, or
pervert his health) has been, is, and shall be the principal object of my
Study, and the main subject of my most serious Enquitie.

Now Sir, as I at large showed in my foregoing Treatise, the diseases to which
man is subject, are various, and are by various medicaments to be remedied.

The cure which is performed by means of Simples, appropriated and specificated
to each disease, we affirmed possible, not distrusting that the divine bounty
has provided a Remedy for all diseases in the vast Catalogue of Simples that
he has made, but why a Son of Art is encouraged to search more secret ways
for the finding out adequate remedies for diseases, you may see the reason at
large in the former book of Pyrotechny, my Peroration to wit to those who are
studiously addicted to the search of Nature, as also in my Character of a sober
and discreet searcher after natures mysteries, who to wit, so seeks by the
fire, as to attein what he seeks, etc.

Of medicaments (that deserve to be so called and reputed, I showed you that
there were two sorts, such which cure (in Tono unisono) and specificks, of the
latter sort, some are so truly and nearly succedaneous to the grand Arcana that
they do in a manner aspire unto their universal amplitude and efficacy,
others are more precisely singular, yet nobly excellent and efficacious beyond
all the Galenists drugs. Many (and those very truculent) discases, I showed,
do not for their cure require the grand Arcana, nor yet the highest
succedanea's to them, but are curable by specific remedies of an inferior
rank as fevers, fluxes, coughs, etc

Now Sir, of these specific remedies, Nature seems bountiful, even unto
prodigality, (so merciful is the God of nature to unworthy mankind,) which
specificks are usually the first Crown and reward of a studious and diligent
Artists search.

And among specificks, it is to be noted attentively, that those which are of
most excellent virtue (when made) are the most tedious, and and most secret in
their preparation, yet so that one is as it were a guide, and a step to the
finding out of others.

This premised, for the full satisfaction of your Query, give me leave to tell
you, that there is nothing of which I have written, but I have through the help
and assistance of God prepared and made, yet am not always furnished with all
sorts of these medicaments, nor with the most noble sorts, for which I shall
give you (ere I leave this subject) satisfactory reasons. For as I told you
before, in this search; first less noble, and after that more commanding
medicaments do open themselves to a studious searcher, yet the less noble are
sufficiently commanding as to acute diseases, viz. fevers, fluxes, plurisies,
etc; the occasional matter of which lying, or adhering to the first vessels,
it is by abstersive and resolutive remedies dissolved and removed; these sorts
of medicaments then are of largest use, although not of largest extent; for how
many thousands yearly are afflicted with acute truculent diseases, which hazard
life, and actually destroy many both in City and country.

For which diseases although many remedies may be, and are made, yet those are
most desirable, which may be made in largest quantities, and which being made,
may be applicacable to most griefs.

Hence it is that although I know many specifiek remedies for fevers, which I
have often made, and used, yet when I find a medicine of no more difficulty of
preparation; and far larger extent in virtue when prepared, I wave the making
of others, and content my self with that one as far forth as that one will
perform, remembering the Adagy, frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per
pauciora.

And having once known the preparation of a noble medicine, my chief study is
by daily reiterated experiments, what I can to mend the preparation, by which
it may be made either with less tediousness, and difficulty; or, when made, may
be more grateful to take, or more efficacious in in its operation.

True, I make daily many experiments of the exaltation of medicaments to a
higher and nobler virtue; but I chiefly practice such which I can most
conveniently make in largest quantities. For I account it more honorable in a
Physician to be able to cure thousands of acute diseases yearly, then to intend
wholly the preparation of the more noble medicaments, which although they will
cure inferior diseases, yet they need not be there used, where a more easy
preparation will perform the Cure, nor can a man be sufficiently stored with
them for all the objects of pity and charity which annually present themselves.

I grant that if a man were fitted with conveniencie, to follovv both sort of
preparations, it were not amiss for a man to store himself with medicaments of
all degrees, but my misfortune has been that I have still wanted Convenient
opportunity, being still so straightned for conveniencie, that I could only
attend few experiments at a time, and those have usually been intended for the
preparing such remedies which were of most general, though not of most
excellent use, and ever by the by, I have still been prosecuting farther and
higher discoveries, of which I have in my foregoing Treatises touched on
several; which usually I do but in small quantities, because tedious
operations are ever accompanied with hazard, nor is it easy for one who has
done a thing in small quantities, straight way to make it in larger
proportions, for as much as the fire is an heteroclit agent, nor is it tied to
geometrical rules of proportion.

And Sir this has been the true ground of my patient acceptance of ten months
confinement, that I might (vacare experimentis) which was scarce permitted to
me while at liberty, for he that attends a medicinal practice, will find his
time taken up with multiplicity of active and passive visits, that it is not
possible for him to attend serious and tedious searches, and to commit the
management of such things to a Careless servant, is so uncertain a Course to
prove successful, that it will soon make an Artist weary who shall take that
way. In this time then I have had opportunity of trying very many things, and
have made it my business to reduce those Theoricall Contemplations, and
Conclusions, (which reading and collateral Experiments had suggested unto me)
unto practice, but to prepare any quantities of the more difficultly preparable
medicines, is a work which I adjourn to a fitter Convenience, which I hope God
will shortly give me, or else I shall retire into some other place, to find
that opportunity which is here denied me.

And thus I come in order to that query of yours, namely what I would advise
one that is intended to give up himself to a search of Natures mysteries, and
is not master of the more noble preparations.

My advise and Counsel to such a one is that which I take my self, not having
conveniencie to prepare such medicaments, which I rather desire, for I account
it one and the same thing (as to effect) to want the nobler remedies, either
for lack of knowledge of preparing them, or for want of conveniencie to prepare
them in Competent quantities.

My Counsel I say in such a case is the same with the noble Helmonts, Si
sordes primis haeserint latebris, ^^endum abstersivis, and resolutivis, natura
tuto satagente reliquum. There are many of these abstersive remedies, which
will not fail a Conscionable Physician. Of this sort are alcalyes alcoodited,
as with spirit of Nitre, or of vitriol, etc. or Elixerated with oils, or a
vinous spirit, which may be specificated with any vegetable, as the Artist
shall please; and these operations are not so tedious, nor so difficult, but
that quantity may be made of remedies, for the cure of many thousands, and that
yearly.

But then he adds, si penitiori recessu haeserius, assumenda sunt alcalia
volatilia, quae instar saponis cuncta abstergunt, etc. then in such cases
volatize your alcalyes, and specificate them with mineral Sulphurs, and you
shall attain your desire.

But in a man's practice scarce the fortieth disease will absolutely require
those highly graduated remedies, and therefore powerful and effectual
abstersives may fulfill a studious and Careful Physicians desires.

Now besides the abstersive quality of some remedies, there are they, which
have a parative disposition, and as it were by a Charm allay the fury of the
enraged Archeus, bringing it to rest and quiet, and so blotting out the angry
Idea impressed on it: of which sort in the mineral family I admire the Ens of
prepared according to Helmonts direction, in his Tractate entitled Butler,
which is made by the volatile salt of urine vindicated from it 's foetor, with
which the dulcified Colcothar of vitriol of Venus is sublimed twice or thrice,
and both become a glorious tincted Body, or rather Spirit, in the dose of 5. or
6. gr. curing Fevers, Agues, Plurisyes, etc: and giving ease in all
exorbitancyes of the enraged Archeus, nor is the operation of it so tedious,
but that it may be made in quantity, and in no long time.

In the vegetable family the true preparation of Opium is an excellent remedy,
which if prepared with the volatile Elixerated alcali of Tartar (especially by
it is Samech) is eminently diuretic and Diaphoretick, and asswages all pain in
the Body, and is an approved remedy for more then forty several diseases,
and by addition of other simples, it is made more and more noble, in it is
operation, especially by addition of Myrrh, aloes, and saffron, the basis of
the Elixir proprietatis.

And thus Sir I am come to your last Query, why I do not as Helmous did,
venalia remedia exponere, as he says of himself, which you conceive to be a
more convincing argument, then writing of large Volumes, I grant you Sir, this
to be a very effectual way of Convincing the world of the realitie of what I
contend for in writing, when a man according to his counsel, who advised
(Loquere ut te videam) shall produce experimental proofs of what he writes:
and it is a thing which I have a long time been contriving, and Sir the more
generally useful medicaments, I shall make in quantities, as Ens Veneris,
Samech nepenthes, Sal nepenthes, Samech Elixeris proprietatis, with all sorts
of alcoolited Alcalyes, with acid, and vinous, and urinous spirits, concerning
the use of which I shall give in writing brief and full directions, Epitomizing
as it were my next tractate of Pyrotechny triumphing, and sending it forth in
single sheets; and as nobler medicaments may be made in quantities, I shall do
the like by them, which you may confidently expect God willing this summer, and
thus Sir, I have, I hope, satisfactorily replied to your kind and learned
letter, and shall now take my leave of you, committing you to his protection,
who only is able to keep both you and me: to whom my prayers are, and shall
be, that he would more and more make truth glorious, and cause light to appear
daily, to the discovering those dark and rotten foundations, on which a pompous
but crazy building has been raised for many Ages, to the ruin of many families
and lives, through the passive deception of the deluded Shools, whom (...)
beseech God in his time to convince, that they may love and embrace the truth,
which hitherto they have hated and persecuted.

Sir, I am Your real servant and friend to my utmost power. George Starkey.
From my Chamber at the White Swan in Foster lane.



FINIS.

