A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Old Age, TENDING TO The Instruction, Caution and
Comfort of Aged Persons.

Tit. 2. 2, 3. That the Aged men be sober, grave, temperate, sound in Faith, in
Charity, in Patience. The aged Women likewise, etc.

Ben Syra. (...). (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50. By RICHARD STEEL, M. A.
Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed by I. Astwood, for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three
Crowns, at the lower end of Cheap Side, near Mercers-Chappel, 1688.

IMPRIMATUR,

R. M.
Apr. 10. 1688.
THE EPISTLE to the Readers.
Friendly Readers,
YOU have here a plain Discourse concerning Old Age. The Design of it is to
Instruct, to Warn, and to Comfort the Weaker sort of Ancient persons, amongst
whom I must place my self. The Wiser and stronger may find diverse things upon
this Subject collected here together, which they have met with asunder, and
which they know and practice better than I. But that which put me upon this
Attempt, was, 1. Some years Experience of Old Age in my self. 2. More Leisure
by reason of my bodily Infirmities, and other Restraints than I could have
desired. 3. An Observation, that there was no full Treatise in our Tongue upon
this Point. 4. And lastly, an unfeigned desire to be some way useful in the
World. These were the true Occasions of this Adventure. Whatsoever in it tastes
of the cask, impute that to my weakness; whatsoever is worthy, ascribe it only
to God^ Goodness. I know it is full of imperfections, but when the Principle,
Matter, and End of an action are honest, Candid persons will interpret the rest
in the best sense: Such Ancient and Modern Authors, I could meet with,
Plutarch, Cicero, Seneca, Palaeotus, Tossanus, Rivet, etc.
as have written upon this Subject, I have perused, and digested their
Observations in their places. But the Scriptures here produced are my great
Vouchers, and which I do most earnestly recommend to the Readers, for they are
worthy the highest Regard. That the Lord would enable me and you to frame our
Old Age according to these Instructions, is the earnest Prayer of

Your Servant for Jesus sake, May 10* 1688. Richard Steel.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The Description of Old Age.
Sect. 1. OF the Names for Old Age. Page. 2 2. Of the Nature of it. Page. 6 3.
Of the Beginning of it. Page. 9 4. Of the long lives of many persons. Page. 12
CHAP. II. The Causes of Old Age, and Preservatives.
Sect. 1. The Original Cause, Man's Sin. Page. 18 2. The Natural Cause, Dryness
and Coldness. Page. 23 3. The Preternatural Causes, 1. Unwholesome Air. Page. 24
2. Diseases. Page. 25 3. Immoderate Care and Labor. Page. 26 4. Intemperance.
Page. 28 5. Inordinate Passions. Page. 29
4. Preservatives. 1. Piety. Page. 32 2. Sobriety. Page. 36

CHAP. III. The Sins and Vices of Old Age.
Sect. 1. Frowardness. Page. 41 2. Loquacity. Page. 45 3. Envy. Page. 50 4.
Arrogance. Page. 54 5. Covetousness. Page. 57 6. Also, 1. Craftiness. Page. 69
2. Unteachableness. Page. 70 3. Implacableness. Page. 72 4. Speculative
Wickedness. Page. 74

CHAP. IV. The Graces and Virtues of Old Age.
Sect. 1. Knowledge. Page. 79 2. Faith. Page. 85 3. Wisdom. Page. 91 4.
Patience. Page. 98 5. Stedfastness. Page. 106 6. Temperance. Page. 113 7. Love.
Page. 120
CHAP. V. The Inconveniences or Miseries of Old Age.
Generally out of Eccles. 12. Page. 129 Particularly, Sect. 1. It is deprived
of Pleasures. Page. 133 2. Strength and Beauty decreased. Page. 139 3.
Faculties weakened. Page. 145 4. Senses decayed. Page. 151 5. Distemper and
Pain. Page. 158 6. Broken with Crosses. Page. 164 7. Attended with Contempt.
Page. 171 8. Disabled from Service. Page. 176 9. Unfit for Religious Exercises.
Page. 181 10. Terrified with the Approach of Death. Page. 186

CHAP. VI. The Privileges and Comforts of Old Age.
Sect. 1. It is greater in Authority. Page. 196 2. Richer in Experience. Page.
200 3. Freer from Sin. Page. 206 4. Proner to Piety. Page. 211 5. Riper in its
Fruits. Page. 217 6. Worthier of Respect. Page. 221 7. Further from the World.
Page. 226 8. Nearer to Heaven. Page. 232
CHAP. VII. The Work and Business of Old Age.
Sect. 1. Repentance of their Sins. Page. 241 2. Obtaining Assurance. Page. 251
3. Prayer and Praises. Page. 259 4. Instruction of the younger. Page. 267 5.
Watchfulness against the temptations 1. Of Discontentedness of Mind. Page. 274
2. Of Hardness and Security of Heart. Page. 276 3. Of Slothfulness of Spirit.
Page. 278 4. Of Expectation of long life. Page. 283
6. Providence for Posterity. Page. 287 7. Mortification, 1. To Sin. Page. 292
2. To the World. Page. 296
8. Laying up a treasure in Heaven. Page. 299 9. Meditation on Death and
Eternity. Page. 307 10. Perseverance, 1. In Doing. Page. 316 2. In Suffering
the Will of God. Page. 322

ERRATA.
PAge 41. line 4. read persons. p. 76. l. 2. r. pleased. p. 77. marg. r.
laniant. p. 80. l. 27. r. as if for unless. p. 81. marg. r. cernere --
corporis. p. 95. marg. r. senum. p. 110. l. 4. r. deprive. p. 117. l. 1. r. in
for to. p. 140. l. 18. r. let him be useless for make away with him. p. 194. l.
20. r. Prove. p. 195. marg. r. honestissimum domicilium senectutis. p. 196. l.
4. r. Authority. p. 202. marg. r. (...). p. 209. marg. r. mole^e. p. 272. l.
ult. r. self-willed. Other literal Mistakes are left to be rectified by the
Candid Reader.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Old Age:
INtending a Discourse concerning Old Age, I shall use that Method, which I
conceive will be most comprehensive, and most commodious for my purpose; which
is, 1. By making some Description thereof. 2. By showing the true Causes of it,
and the best Preservatives against it. 3. The Sins or Vices which are most
usual in it. 4. The Graces and Virtues that are most proper for it. 5. The
Inconveniences and Miseries which attend it. 6. The Privileges and Comforts
peculiar to it. And Lastly, the Work and Business that is most needful in it.

CHAP. I. The Description of Old Age.
SECT. I.
FOR the First, we must come to a 1. The Names for Old Age.
right Notion of Old Age, partly by its Name. The Words which are used for it
in the Oriental (...)
Languages, do only signify Persons or Things ^at are durable, that have
lasted long; And some of them are used promiscuously for such as are dignified
by Office, as well as for such as have filled their Days. And none of them do
direct us in the Computation, when it begins; but do comprehend as well those
Persons that are decrepit, as those that are only decayed. For in Genesis 18. 11.
Abraham was an Old Man; and in Genesis 24. 1. there he is called with the very
same word, but an Old Man, tho he was then forty years older than before. The
Hebrew commonly calling an Old Man, one full of days, or stricken in Years, tho
sometimes they are distinguished, the aged with him that is full of days,
Jerem. 6. 11. by which it should seem, that Old Age comes somewhat short of
fullness of days Senectus non est aetas ultima. Hier. in Jer. 6.
.

The Greek (...). vel quasi (...), terr^stris. Aristot. Vetus a (...) vel
quasivietus. i. e. sine vi.
words also for an Old Man do signify one that has lived long; or one that
looks toward the Earth; or whose vital moisture is dried away, and nothing
but an earthy matter left. The Latin Antiquus qui ante nos fuit. Senex, quasi
seminex, semimortuus.
words for Old Age, do signify multitude of years, or Decay of strength: Or
Precedence and Priority of Existence. But the most usual and proper word for it
denotes a Person, who has one Foot in the Grave, that is half dead already;
tho some derive it from the Diminution of the Senses, as if no body were old,
till they were decrepit and began to dote.

Our English word Old is of a German descent. The High Dutch calling an Aged
person, Alt-man. The Saxons, Eald or Olt-min; the Low Dutch, Oud-man. All which
some derive from the Latins, Alt. quasi aetate altus.
others from the Hebrews Vel a (...) alah, as^ndere in altum* Minshew*
: but none of them affording us any light concerning the proper Nature, or
distinct Time of Old Age; tho, in their native signification, it is likely they
in some sort did express the Thing in question.

It is clear, that there are diverse Periods in the life of Man, which are like
so many Stages in the Race which is set before us. Herein we have some light in
the Holy Scriptures. In Levit. 27. 3, 4, etc. where One Interval of time is,
from a Month to Five years of Age; a Second, from Five years of Age to Twenty;
a Third from twenty to sixty; and the last from sixty to the end of Life. And
men's Strength and Ability, at least in those Times and Places, may be collected
from their Valuation, which is there adjusted by God himself. Humane Authors
have variously divided the Life of Man. Some into Four parts, answering the
four parts of the Year; Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter. Others into Seven;
assign ing each part of it to a different Planet; and so Old Age to Saturn. But
Man's Age seems most fitly to be distributed into, 1. His Growing. 2. His Ripe
or consistent, and 3. His Decaying Age.

As to the First of these; we need not be so Critical, as to begin it at his
Conception, or Quickening in the Womb, tho he does then begin to live and to
grow; since the Holy Ghost in the Scripture abovesaid makes no reckoning of his
Age, until he be a Month old. Leaving therefore that State of Nonage, we may
distinguish his Growing Age into Infancy, Childhood and Youth. Infancy ends
when we begin to go and speak. Childhood reaches to the fourteenth or
fifteenth year; and Youth lasts to Twenty five. Unto these years we usually
increase in Strength or Stature. Not but that some particular Persons, or in
some Countries do ripen sooner; and also that Females are reckoned to attain to
the Second Stage of their Growing Age, two years sooner, and to the third
Stage, four years sooner than the Males; yet still the foresaid Computation
agrees with the nobler Sex, and comprehends the Generality of them.

The Ripe Age of Man follows, when the Parts of his Body, and the Powers of his
Soul are come^ to some Consistence; and therefore it may be called his Best
Estate, or as the Hebrew signifies in Psalm. 39. 5. his settled Estate: Verily
every man at his settled, or best Estate, is altogether Vanity. The former is
the Spring, this is the Summer of a man's life; wherein they who are truly wise,
will be gathering both Temporal and Spiritual Provision for the Winter of
Old Age If Youth knew what Age would crave, It would be sure to get and save.
. Now this Rational Flower is in its prime. As the Flower of the Field, so he
flourishes, Psalm. 103. 15. Many indeed are cropped and gathered in their Youth,
and others are cut off in the midst of their days: for when the Wind passes
over this Flower, it is gone. And it is observable, that Enoch in the first
World, and Elijah in the second, and our Dear Savior in the last, were called
away in the midst of their days; to warn us, that this is not our Country, but
that even in the time of Youth and Strength, it behooves us to prepare for
another World. But if the Lord do still by his Power and Patience, hold our
Soul in life, and that His visitation do preserve our Spirit, this brings us to
Old Age; and this Ripe Age commonly lasts as long as our Growing Age, and so we
may assign unto it, Twenty five years more.

SECT. II.
AND so we are comen to the Third II. The Nature thereof.
and Last Stage of Life, the Decaying Age or Old Age; which is the Subject of
the following Discourse; which may be thus described, namely, That Part of Man's
life, wherein through the Multitude of Years his Strength is decayed Vel,
corporis temperamentum frigidum and siccum quod sequitur quantitatem certorum
annorum vitae praeteritae. Rivet.
. For, 1. It is not merely such a number of Years without some Decay of Nature,
that can properly denominate Old Age; since in former times before the Flood,
when men usually lived eight or nine hundred years, he that was an hundred
years old, was a very Young man; and still we find that many are stronger at
sixty, than others are at fifty years of Age. Thus Athanasius testifies of
Antony the Monk in Egypt, that he had all his Teeth, and his Eyesight sound,
when he was an hundred and five years old. Neither, 2ly. Does the Decay of
Strength alone, determine a man Old; since Diseases and other Casualties may
weaken and wither him, who in respect of his Age, has not attained the
Meridian of his Life. Thus our Blessed Savior was guessed to be near fifty
years old, Ioh. 8. 57. when he was but little past Thirty, being a man of
Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief. But when our Strength is decayed Senecta
lass^ non fractae aetatis nomen est. Sen. Ep. 26.
through the multitude of Years, then Old Age commenceth.

From whence it follows, that neither Gray-hairs, nor Wrinkles, nor any such
separable Adjunct can be a Demonstration of Old Age; seeing Sickness, or Cares,
or Fears, or Grief may produce these Effects, without any considerable Decay of
strength, or Number of years, Prove. 12. 25. Heaviness in the Heart of man
makes it stoop. Here the Heart stoops like an old man, and that through
heaviness. And Psalm. 6. 7. Mine Eye is consumed, because of Grief, it waxes
Old, because of all mine Enemies; here Grief brings Old Age into the Eye. And
Psalm. 32. 3. When I kept silence, my Bones waxed Old: here Old age is
ante-dated in the Bones by trouble of Mind. Thus Authors tell us of those,
whose Hairs have become hoary by Sickness, and have grown black again at the
return of Health Aristot. Hist anim. l. 3. c. 11. And Cassiodorus faith, that
Seneca was so called, because he was born Gray. H^ff. L^x.
. And the Story of the Dutch Captain is famous, who being put into a Fright,
had his Hair turned Gray in the space of one Night. But all these being
preternatural and accidental, do not constitute Old age at all.

Neither does any occasional Eclypse upon the internal Faculties, the Mind,
Memory or Fancy, certainly declare Old Age; for many Accidents may produce
these Effects in the youngest persons: whereas Old Age is not incident to the
Soul. Its Organs may be weakened ormaimed either by natural Decays, or by
violent Accidents, so that they cannot exert themselves; but the Soul can never
properly be said to grow old, because the nature of it is unperishable; and
that which never perishes, can never be said to decay. But when natural Heat
begins to abate, when no food can sufficiently supply that Radical Moisture in
the Body, and when the digestive faculty is weakened; so that both the Senses
and Members begin to feel a Decay, then Old Age has taken you by the hand, to
lead you to your long home Senium est naturalis caloris tabes, mors extinctio,
Galen.
.

SECT. III.
NOW touching the precise Year. 3. The Beginning of Old Age.
wherein Old Age may be said to begin, it is not so material to be known, as it
is doubtful to be fixed. But if we allow five and twenty years to the Growing
part of man's life, and reckon five and twenty years more to the Ripe or staid
part thereof, then does Old Age ordinarily commence at Fifty years of age. And
there or thereabout many Learned men Seniores ab ano. 46 dicebantur, Gell. ab
ano. 50 ad finem vitae, Keck. Phys.
have fixed it, and then five and twenty years more will reach the End of most
men's lives, or bring them to seventy five, an age wherein commonly men grow
every way impotent, and have one foot in the Grave. It Is true, an universal
fixed period cannot be set herein; the diversity of men's natural Constitutions,
Employments, Diet, Exercises, etc. causes Old Age to come sooner to some, and
slower to others. Some persons through the happiness of their Descent, have a
better stock of natural Heat, and radical moisture at their setting out than
others, and consequently Old Age being nothing else but the cold and dry temper
of the Body, seizes upon the person more slowly. Some peoples employments do
not spend or impair their Vitals so much as others. Some persons are nourished
by more sound and vigorous Food, than others are. In short, a Cheerful Heart, a
Sober Diet, and moderate Exercise, may defer Old Age for a time; but come it
will at length, even an House of Stone will at last decay, and grow out of
repair, Job 14. 19, 20. The Waters wear the Stones: thou washest away the
things which grow out of the Dust of the Earth, and thou destroyest the hope of
Man. Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passes, thou changest his
Countenance and sendest him away.

As for the Progress of Old Age, there be some that make a First, Second and
Third part thereof The Rabbis indeed begin the first at 60. the second at 70*
and the third at 80. Galen. de Sanit: tuend. c. 12. (...)
, but they undertake not, or else agree not to determine precisely their
respective periods. But this is plain, that there is a Vigorous, and a Decrepit
Old Age. During the Former, natural Abilities are not so decayed, as to render
a Man uneasy, or unserviceable. Abraham was an elderly man, Genesis 18. 11. He
was Old and well stricken in years, Genesis 24. 1. being then about one hundred
and forty years of Age: but Genesis 25. 8. He was Old and full of years, being one
hundred seventy and five, then he was very Old. Thus Jacob was an Old man at
one hundred and seven years, for Benjamin is called a Child of his Old Age,
Genesis 44. 20. But he lived Forty years after that, Genesis 47. 28. But then he was
a very Old Man; his Eyes were dim for Age, and he was confined to his Bed. In
the former part of Old Age, many enjoy a good Consistency of Mind and habitude
of Body; whereby they are very comfortable in themselves, and very capable of
Counselling and Governing others: Yea, upon some accounts it may be esteemed
the best parcel of our Life; wherein our impetuous Passions being already
spent, we are furnished by great experience to be very useful in our
Generation. But when a Man is arrived at the latter part of Old Age, to be
impotent and decrepit, then he grows uneasy to himself, and unserviceable to
others. These days may be called Evil days, and of these years it may be said,
I have no pleasure in them, Eccles. 12. 1.

SECT. IV.
THE last Period of Old Age is 4. The long lives of diverse.
Death: Some indeed have been longer 'ere they tasted of Death, and some
sooner; there is no certain definite year, wherein that last friendly Enemy
comes.

Omnium aetatum certus est terminus, senectutis autem nullus certus est. Cicer.
de sen.
The Antediluvians lived eight or nine hundred years. Those which were born
after the Flood, did scarce live half so long; for Arphaxad, who was born after
it, lived but 440 years, Gen 11. 13. And in the time of Peleg his Grandchild,
the Age of man was shrunk half in half shorter; he lived only 239 years, Genesis
11. 21. And in the Age of Nahor, great Grandchild to Peleg, it fell to 150.
Genesis 11. 25. And so the ordinary term of man's life was by degrees curtailed,
that in Moses time, the days of his years were reckoned at threescore years
and ten; and the strongest constitutions did reach but to fourscore years,
Psalm. 90. 10. Howbeit, there have been in all ages of the world, some Instances
of such as have exceeded the ordinary standard; the causes and ends whereof are
known only to God, in whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the
breath of all mankind, Job 12. 10. Thus we read of many in the Primitive times
of Christianity that lived on mean Food, and yet overpassed an hundred years;
and Rivet in the end of his Epistle to his Brother concerning Old Age, makes a
Relation of the pious life and remarkable Death of Iacobus Faber Stapulensis,
who An. 1538. died above an hundred years of Age. Yea Eusebius Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. lib. 6. c. 10*
assures us, that Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem attained to an hundred sixty
and six years. Our late Geographers Sanson, p. 485.
also tell us of the Brazilians, that they live commonly to 150. years, and
that free from diseases. Fran. Alvarez affirms, that himself saw an Ethiopian
Bishop who was an hundred and fifty years of age. And I have read that in one
region of Italy there were found upon a survey, Fifty four persons of 100.
years of age. Fifty seven of 110. Two of 125. Four of 130. and Three of 140.
See Tho. of Ravenna who Ao. 1553. wrote a book wherein he relates in one
Chapter of such as had lived in that age above 120* years.
Yea Fern. Lopez the Portugal Kings Historiographer, gives a relation of an
Indian, who upon clear evidence was found to have lived Three hundred and forty
years: and of another Indian Prince, who was seen by M. D' Ottigni, and had
lived Two hundred and fifty years Dr. Hakewells Apal. l. 3. c. 5.
.

Thus Anacreon in Pliny Plin. hist. lib. 7. c. 48.
relates of one Arganthonius King of the Tartessians, and the like of Tullius
Fullonius of Bononia, that lived an hundred and fifty years; of Cinyras who
lived an hundred and sixty; of Aegymius that lived two hundred. And Hellanicus
in the same Author affirms, that diverse in Aetolia lived two, and some three
hundred years. In Greece, Nestors age became a kind of Proverb, attaining to
three hundred years. And Sabellicus tells of diverse in Arabia, who lived four
hundred years. Famous is the Instance of Johannes de Temporibus, who bore arms
under Charles the Great. An. 800. and was alive in the reign of Conrade 3. Ao.
1124. having lived three hundred sixty and one years. And in latter times
Masseus tells us, in his Indian Histories of One in the last age but one, that
lived three hundred thirty and five years, whose teeth had several times fallen
out, and new ones came in their stead, his hoary hairs returning by degrees to
black again.

There have been also in our Age and Country many Instances of such as have
attained to an extraordinary Age. In Northumberland an Old Minister of Gods
Word, called Mr. Michael Vivon, who in the year of our Lord, 1657. being then
one hundred and ten years of age, had within two years time before, three young
teeth sprung up; and though for the space of forty years before, he could not
read the largest Print without Spectacles; yet afterward he could read the
smallest without them, having also new hair come^ upon his head, and had five
children after that he was fourscore years old. And it is but Ao. 1635. that
Thomas Parr died in London, who had lived in the Country above one hundred and
fifty years; In all. 152. years and nine months. Yea there were two Brothers
and a Sister, Richard Green, Philip Green, and Alice, who lived but a while ago
not far from Marlborough, that were alive together, and each of them above an
hundred years old; the last of them, which was Richard, dying about Ao. 1685.
at an hundred and fifteen years of age. And a modern Historian Dr. Plot. Not.
hist. of Staffordsh. c. 8.
of our own tells us, that Ao. 1588. one James Sands of Harbourn in
Staffordshire died, aged one hundred and forty, his wife also being 120. And
produces several others, that lived to see their Grandchildrens Grandchildren.

Yea, even Women, though the weaker Sex, yet have sometimes survived unto a
great Age. The Scripture relates, that Sarah Abraham's wife lived 127. years,
Genes. 23. 1. the only woman whose Age is recorded in the Book of God. Pliny's
Note of Terentia Cicero's wife that lived an hundred and three years, or of
Clodia that lived an hundred and fifteen, is rendered inconsiderable by examples
of our own. For it is recorded of Dame Hester Temple of Stow in Bucking
hamshire, who having four Sons and nine Daughters, lived to see. seven hundred
extracted from her own body. And the instance of holy Mistress Honywood of Kent
is well known, who lived to see Three hundred of her offspring alive together:
and both these must needs be full of days. Yea, it was but about Ao. 1670.
that one Mrs. Pyfield died in Ireland, who had lived one hundred thirty and six
years. But the R. H. the late Countess of Desmond exceeds all late examples in
these Countries; who, when she was an hundred and forty years old, had a set of
young teeth, and was able to walk many miles, who died within our memories,
being, as it is credibly affirmed, an 184. years old.

In all which Instances, as the strength of Nature was great, so the Power and
Goodness of the God of Nature was greater; to the honor whereof I have
Collected and mentioned them: not that any of us should deferr our Repentance
or any Good Work, upon an expectation of arriving at the like term of Life;
since an hundred thousand are dead and rotten, for one that reach such Longevity.

CHAP. II. The Causes of Old Age, and Preservatives.
SECT. I.
HAving thus Described Old Age, and Cap. 2. The Causes of Old age.
selected some of the most eminent Examples thereof, I come now in the Second
place, to inquire into the true Causes of it, and Preservatives against it. For
the Causes thereof.

First, the Original meritorious Cause. 1. The Original cause of Old Age.
is Man's Sin and Defection from God. The truth is, it may seem somewhat
strange, that Man being created at the first in the Image of the Immortal God,
placed but little lower than the Angels, crowned with glory and honor, and
made Ruler over all other creatures, should have his life burdened with so many
sorrows, and then so soon arrive at Old Age and Death. And some of the Heathens
did foolishly charge Nature with Envy and Cruelty toward Man, in causing so
noble a creature to tarry so short a time in the world, and to grow old as soon
as he begins to grow ripe; And Others as wisely concluded, that Men were sent
into this world only for their Punishment, for crimes committed in others
Bodies before. And indeed, if you set the Scriptures aside which resolve the
Case, it is somewhat unaccountable to have so short an History of so noble a
creature. If a curious Architect should frame and rear up a firm and stately
pile of Building, and being completely furnished, the same should presently
shrink, and in a short time decay and fall to the ground; Passengers would be
apt to call in question the sidelity or skill of him that made it; or
exceedingly wonder by what means it came to ruin, till they come to know, that
the Inhabitant himself undermined, plucked down, or fired his own house: So in
the Case before us, it is matter of grief and astonishment to see the most
exquisite piece of Gods workmanship upon earth, to become decrepit in so short
a space, and to be reduced so soon into dust and ashes.

We must know therefore, that Man at his first Creation being made up of a Body
and a Soul, was neither in his own nature so unchangeable and immortal as the
Angels, nor so frail and weak as other creatures below. Not so unchangeable, I
say, in his own nature; for having a body that was to be continually supplied
with food, that is, repaired, it follows that, that which needs repair, is
liable to decay; but yet while the sweet harmony, wherein it was first formed,
was not disturbed, the frame might well have endured for a long time;
especially, if the Tree of Life in Eden were intended, as some of the Learned
Viv^bat homo in Paradiso sicut volebat; quam diu volebat quod Deus jusserat:
cibus aderat, ne esuriret; potus ne sitiret, lignum vitae ne illum senectus
dissolveret. August de Civ. Dei. c: 26.
thought, to support, strengthen, and perpetuate Life. But the dismal Fall of
our first Parents did so crush the Body, and wound the Soul, that neither of
them can be recovered in this Life. For immediately that Death, which was
threatened to him, by degrees seized upon his Body; and fear, shame and sorrow
entered into his Soul. And though the divine Providence permitted Him and diverse
of his posterity to live many hundreds of years, that the naked world might be
peopled, and that Religion with all other useful knowledge might be procured,
preserved and propagated in the world; yet we date his decaying and dying state
from that word, Genesis 3. 19. For dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return.
That righteous Sentence brings our hoary hairs upon us. Thou turnest man to
destruction, and say, Return ye children of men -- In the morning they are
like grass which grows up. In the morning it flourishes and grows up, in
the evening it is cut down and withers. Psalm. 90. 3, 6. If you inquire
therefore into the ruins of humane nature, the answer will be, that Sin is the
moth, which, being bred therein, has fretted the garment, withers the man, and
lays his honor in the dust. Every decay therefore of our Strength should mind
us of our Apostasy from God by the Fall, and should renew our grief for the
same. Whether Adam wept as often as he looked toward Paradise, is uncertain; but
surely when we find our Eyesight fail us, our Skin to wrinkle, and the pillars
of the house to tremble, we should mourn for that woeful Disobedience and
Ingratitude, which was the Original cause of the decays of Nature. When your
Eyes cannot do you service in Seeing, let them do it in Weeping for this root
of sin and misery.

Say not, that you are unconcerned in what was done by another, time out of
mind. For certainly we should never feel the effects, which we daily find to
cur smart, if we had no hand in the procuring cause of them. They who would
persuade you, that no sin is inherent in you, but that its only contracted by
imi^ation and custom, must needs yield that the Decays, the ^eebleness and
the Dyscrasy, even of the temperatest man in the world, must proceed from some
wound upon humane nature, which the Creator would never have inflicted without
a fault. O therefore let us not only lament our Actual and daily offenses, but
let us go up to the Spring, and bewail that first rebellion, which is the root
of evil both of sin and punishment. I say again, when thy bones ache, and when
thy hand shakes, let thy heart mourn for the Sin that has poisoned thy nature,
and made thee miserable. The body which was the Instrument in the crime, is
justly the Subject in the punishment.

SECT. II.
THE Second which is the Immediate 2. The Natural cause of Old Age.
and Natural Cause of Old Age, is the Dryness and Coldness of the Temperament
of the Body. There is according to the Old Philosophy, a certain Native Heat
and Radical Moisture ingenerated in all mankind at their Conception, whereby
Life is preserved: The one is like the Flame, the other like the Orl that feeds
it. Diseases and Disasters are like a Thief in the Candle, that makes it wast
the sooner: but if no such thing happen, yet the Lamp will consume, and at last
extinguish. All the supplies of Food and Physic, are not able to maintain nor
repair that Heat nor that Moisture, but a cold and dry temper grows upon the
Body, till it be quite exhaust and wasted.

It is true, some there be who have derived to them from their Progenitors, a
greater measure of radical Heat and Moisture, and therewith more lively and
vigorous Spirits; and these, meeting with no external Inconveniences, do
continue longer in their strength, as may be observed in some Families every
where: as some generous Wines will preserve themselves from decay much longer
than others; but at length they grow acid and spiritless: so in tract of time
that Moth of Mortality, which lurks in all our Bodies, will fret that Garment
into Rags. Things which are Compounded must dissolve; contrary Qualities in the
same Subject, tho never so equally tempered, will work out one another. No care
or Art can preserve these Houses of Clay, for as much as their foundation is in
the Dust, Job 4. 19.

SECT. III.
THE Third sort of Causes, which. 3. The Preternatural Causes of Oldage.
may be termed Preternatural and Adventitious, that do accelerate or hasten
Old Age, some of them are such as these.

1. Unwholesome Air. For the Air, being the constant Food of the Vital parts,
must needs contribute much to the Repair or Decay of the Body; and the more
impure it is, must consequently impair and weaken it. Hence and from the
Corruption of Food it is not improbable, that the Age of Man, after the Deluge
became so much diminished; insomuch as Arphaxad, who was the firstborn in the
New World, lived scarce half so long as those before the Flood; as appears by
comparing, Genesis 5. 27. with Genesis 11. 13. the Air being now become more impure
and unwholesome, than it was before. However it is most evident, that people do
commonly at this day grow weak, crazy and impotent, who live in those places,
which mourn under a malignant Air; and others are fresh and lusty at the same
years, that enjoy the blessing of a purer breathing.

2. Secondly, Diseases are another Cause that brings on Old Age. For these must
needs weaken that strength of Nature, whereby our life is supported, Psalm. 39.
11. When thou with rebukes do correct man for Iniquity, thou make his
Beauty to consume away like a Moth: and not only his Beauty, but his Strength
and Spirits, for the Hebrew runs there, -- Thou make that which is desirable
in him to melt away. And thus it was with holy Job. Thou have filled me with
wrinkles, which is a witness against me, Job. 16. 8. His grievous Distempers
had made him old before his time. Thus we daily see diverse persons, who, in
respect of the number of their years, have not passed the Meridian of their
Age, yet by reason of their Sicknesses, and especially the Dregs which some
kinds of them do leave behind them, are old in their very Youth. These are like
Storms without, which battering the best built House, will the sooner bring it
unto ruin. Holy David said of himself, Psalm. 119. 83. I am become like a B^tle
in the Smoke, that is, my natural moisture is dried, burnt up, and withered.
And Hezekiah by reason of sickness complains, Mine Age is departed, and is
removed from me as a Shepherds Tent, Isa. 38. 12. Thus the Lord does sometimes
weaken a man's strength in the way, and shortneth his days, Psalm. 102. 23.
implying, that a man's life is like a Journey through this into a another World;
now by Diseases he weakens us in the way, as we are traveling through the
World, causes us to commence Old per saltum, and shortens our days: so that by
this means, some have but a winters day of life, while others enjoy a longer.

3. Thirdly, Another Cause which hastens Old age, is, immoderate Care or
Labor. Each of these, when they exceed a due proportion, do exhaust the
Spirits, and produce early wrinkles; whenas, being moderately used, they do us
no hurt, but good. It is indeed a part of the Curse pronounced at the Fall, on
Adam and all his posterity, Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat
bread, till thou return unto the ground; and the carking Heart and sweating
Face, hastens man to the Ground. One of these alone, immoderate Care, or
immoderate Labor will do the work; but when the mind within is eaten up by
continual thoughtfulness, and the Body without is harrast with extreme Labors,
no wonder that Weakness, Languishment, and Old Age hasten on a pace: (...).
Hesiod. Op. and Di. l. x.
then does our strength give place to labor and sorrow, for it is soon cut
off, and we fly away, Psalm 90. 10. Great indeed is men's folly thus to ruin
themselves; since it is certain that neither our immoderate cares, nor our
immoderate labor, do us any good at all: less Care and more Prayer would avail
us much more; yea, and they do us much hurt, they disquiet the Mind, they
disturb the Body, they provoke God to leave us to our selves; and then we shall
soon find, that it is vain to rise early, to sit up late, and to eat the Bread
of Sorrow: whereas the blessing of the Lord, it makes rich, and he adds no
Sorrow with it, Prove. 10. 22. Assure your selves, if moderate care and labor
will not bring in Riches, then they are not good for you; and whatsoever is
gained otherwise, has a Curse in it, and will bring misery on the Body, or on
the Soul, here or hereafter.

4. A Fourth Cause which hastens Oldage, is Intemperance, that is, excess in
Eating, or in Drinking, or in lustful Embraces. Any of these, especially the
last, do bring Old Age into youthful years. Sad it is, that our Life being in
its utmost extent so short, and our Bodies by nature so frail; we, that have a
desire to live, and who for that end will be content to use the most irksome
remedies, should yet so commonly invite distempers by our Luxury, and so
shamefully dig our Graves with our Teeth, and deprive our selves of the residue
of our years. In so much, that although in St. Hieroms time he affirmed, that
there were reckoned five thousand Martyrs for every day in the Year, save one,
yet we may sadly conclude, that Bacchus and Venus have had daily more Martyrs,
if we may so call them, in one place or other of the World, than Jesus Christ.
In this sense does Seneca De Brevit. vit. cap. 1.
truly say, Non accepimus brevem vitam, sed fecimus. From whence come for the
most part those pains of the Gout, Stone, Dropsy, Convulsions and Apoplexies,
with such other Distempers, but from Intemperance in some of the foresaid
Objects? A moderate use of Meat, Drink, and conjugal rights, as it does tend
much to the alacrity of the mind, so does it no less to the Health of the Body:
but excess in any of them, does either suffocate Nature, or else impoverish and
exhaust it; as it is observed of the more lecherous Creatures, that they are
short-lived in comparison of others.

If therefore you would arrive at a good Old Age, good in respect of the
comfort of the Mind, or in respect of the welfare of the Body, oppose and check
your unruly Appetites Pont gulae metas, ut sit tibi longior aetas. Esse cupis
sanus? sit tibi parc^ manus.
; resolve with the Grace of God, Hitherto thou shall come and no further:
conclude, I am a Man, yea, a Christian, and not a Brute; and consequently, am
not to be guided by Sense, but by Reason and Religion, which teach me to use
all these outward comforts, so far as they will promote the Glory of my Maker,
and the present and future good of my Body and Soul.

5. Fifthly, Inordinate Passions of the mind are another means to bring on
Oldage; such as Anger, especially Sorrow. For these do manifestly prey upon the
Spirits, and also produce such bodily Distempers, as do hurry people into
Old Age before their time. Nihil est quod senectuti magis noceat ac dies
hominis abbreviet, quam tristitia, languor animi, and ira. Nihil enim bilari
senectute jucundius. Cass.
Hence it was, that Valentinian the Emperor, by an excessive straining of his
Voice, in an angry reply against some Offenders, fell into a grievous Fever,
which at length brought him to his End. And for Sorrow, the wisest of men tells
us, Prove. 15. 13. A merry Heart makes a cheerful Countenance; but by Sorrow of
the Heart, the Spirit is broken It Is mirth that nursethlise and blood, Far more
than wine, or rest, or food.
And when the Spirit is broken, the Body must sensibly wast and decay. For
these Passions like a Torrent or Land flood break down, and overthrow all
before them: you know a River, while it proceeds with its usual stream, passes
harmlesly, yea, profitably through all the Fields and Meadows, and makes no
breaches on the Banks on either side; but when a sudden and excessive Rain
swells it up, then it lays about it without mercy, and tears up the Ground, the
Fences and Trees on every side: And even so our Passions being moderate, are
innocent and useful; but he that has no rule over his own Spirit, is like a
Flood of Water broke loose, or like a City that is broken down, and without
Walls.

Yea, there have been Instances of such, as by sudden Grief have grown Gray in
a few days time; and there be hundreds that carry the Badge of their great
Sorrows on their Heads, long before a due course of years would have brought
them.

Let us not therefore suffer these Vultures to feed upon our Hearts, nor yield
our selves Slaves to these unruly Passions; which war not only against the
Soul, but even against the Body, and will ruin both, except they be restrained
and mortified by the Grace of God. Philosophy has gone far in this work, God
forbid but that Christianity should go much further.

There are also other both Moral and Natural Causes of Old Age, but these may
suffice. The curious may satisfy themselves elsewhere See To. Bacons cure of
old age, with Dr. Browns Notes.
And by these Causes, you may easily discern what are the best Preservatives
against Old Age. For tho no Art or Care can prevent the unavoidable access
thereof, yet effectual Means may be used to deferr it. It Is true, Galen tells
Lib. de marcore. c. 2
us of a Philosopher, who affirmed, that there was a way to prevent it, and
wrote a Book of it, when he was forty years old; but the said Author takes
notice, that when he was arrived to eighty, he was wasted to skin and bones,
and could not any way cure himself. But the most effectual Preservatives, are,
1. Piety, and 2. Sobriety.

SECT. IV.
FIrst, serious Piety. By which I 4. The Preservatives of Old Age.
mean, a Course of life in the Faith, and Fear of God, and in holy Obedience
unto him. This is that Godliness, which has the promises of the life that now
is, as well as of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. This is the best Antidote
against that Poison which has originally infected our Nature, and which makes
it swarm with Distempers, that hurry us to Old Age, and Death at last. This is,
certainly, the best Means whereby to avoid that fatal Curse so early
pronounced, or else to turn it into a Blessing. If thou will walk in my ways,
to keep my Satutes and Commandments, then I will lengthen thy days, 1 King. 3.
14. What man is he that desires Life; and loves many days, that he may see
good? Depart from evil, and do good, etc. Psalm. 34. 12, 14. It is the
observation of Hierom Hier. Psalm. 91. in unde vide tur nomen hoc sanctis non
longae aetatis ratione sed authoritatis ascribi.
, and of Origin Orig. in Genesis 18.
before him, that Abraham is the first person called Old in the Scripture, tho
Adam and Methuselah and many others were richer than he in years, but not in
Faith and Obedience. I know, that some of the worst of men have, without this,
flourished long, and some that have been most Religious, have withered
quickly.; and therefore do conclude, that all such Outward blessings and
afflictions are conditionally promised and threatened: and yet it abides
certain, that the ordinary way to a vigorous Age, and a long Life, is the true
fear of God; and that which makes it short and miserable, is Ungodliness. And
the Holy Scripture is express herein, Prove. 10. 27. The fear of the Lord
prolongeth days: but the years of the wicked shall be shortened. For doubtless,
our Lord God, who is the giver of Life, is also the Conserver of it; and whose
word we may rely upon, as the best Prescription and Preservative in this case.
This Holy course does contribute to this end

1. In a Natural way. And that, 1. By Mortifying and discarding those Sins
which do more directly hurt the Body. Such are those Passions and Excesses
abovenamed, such is Anger, Envy, Covetousness, Ambition, and many such like,
which like wind in the Intrails of the Earth do rend and shatter it. I think
there is no Sin, whatsoever, but it has a malignant influence upon the Body;
either to disorder and inflame it, or to macerate and dispirit it: Now the Fear
of God obliges a man not only to restrain, but to pluck up all such by the
Roots. Those are the Weeds, which both rob the sweet Flowers of their
nourishment, and also depauperate the soil where they grow; which being cast
out, the whole man fares the better after them. And 2. True Piety refreshes
the Body with the Comforts of a good Conscience. That Peace, that Hope, that
Joy which result from a Conscience, that is pacified by the Blood, and purified
by the Spirit of Christ, do most efficaciously cherish the whole man, they
daily feast him. This is that merry Heart, that is called a continual feast,
Prove. 15. 15. And that does good like a Medicine, Prove. 17. 22. There is that
Intimacy between the Soul and the Body, that whatsoever refreshes the one,
does also cheer the other. Whereupon the Learned have judged, that Hope, Love
and Joy are great prolongers of Life, by the influence which these have upon
the Humors and Spirits in the Body: much more when these Affections have
heavenly and eternal things for their Object: and the Holy Scripture speaks
that way, when it says, Prove. 19. 23. The fear of the Lord tends to Life,
and he that has it, shall abide satisfied. 3. True Piety is the best
Preservative against Old Age in a Spiritual way, to wit, by Procuring the
Blessing of God. For when the Body is consecrated to him, and employed for him,
we may expect it to be blessed by him; it is under his peculiar care and
Providence. When it is united to Jesus Christ, it will receive influence from
Him for its good. So that true Religiousness, tho it more immediately tend to
the recovery and felicity of the Soul, yet it is really most friendly also to
the Body. He that fears God, and walks in his ways, shall see his Childrens
Children, Psalm. 128. last. And on the other hand, all those destroying, and
life-shortning Diseases mentioned, Deuteronomy. 28. 27. 61. even every sickness, and
every plague, are denounced to the ungodly. And fully Eccl. 8. 12, 13. Tho a
Sinner do Evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know
it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before him. But it shall
not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a
shadow, because he fears not before God. Therefore you that would protract
the time of your flourishing strength, learn to love and fear God, devote your
selves to him, bestow your Hearts upon him, employ your time and strength to
please and honor him: abide not in a State of ungodliness, rest not with a
form of Godliness; but resolve upon that Real Holiness, which will produce a
long and happy life in this World, and a longer and happier life in a better.

2. The Second Preservative against Oldage, which indeed is contained in the
former, is Temperance and Sobriety Pugnandum tanquam contra morbum est, sic
contra senectutem. Habenda ratio valetudinis: utendum exercitationibus modicis.
Tantum cibi and potionis adhibendum, ut reficiantur vires, non opprimantur.
Cic. de se^ct.
. I mean that gracious Virtue, which retains the Sensitive Appetite within the
bounds of Reason and Religion, whereby we keep a Mediocrity in the use of
Meats, both in respect to their Quantity, neither loading nor pining the
Stomach; and in respect of their Quality, neither debauching it by too much
Variety, nor injuring it by things noxious. The same care in Drinks, lest the
Quality of them be pernicious, or the Quantity of them prejudicial. That the
Marriage Bed be moderately used, so that the vital Spirits be not exhausted.
Now man's sinful Nature above all other Creatures inclines to excess in all
these: and it is pleasant to the Flesh; but it is the pleasure* of poison: At
last they bite like a Serpent, and sting like an Adder, Prove. 23. 32. not the
Soul only, but the Body. They do insensibly, but infallibly weaken nature,
disorder the Harmony of the parts, breed the most fatal distempers, and render
him, as we may daily observe, old in infirmities, that is but young in years.
So that if they who give themselves up to Gluttony, Drunkenness or
Lasciviousness, did truly love their own Souls, or yet their own Bodies, they
would bridle their unruly Appetites for their own sakes, and not pay so dear
for that which must be repented of. And as a plain and even way is much more
delectable, than always to be going up Hill and down; so certainly there is a
thousand times more ease and sweetness in an even and temperate course, than in
the perpetual unevenness of intemperance. How should that body hold out, that
is daily clogged and inflamed with preternatural excesses? The intemperate man
is constantly feeding an Enemy, whom it is charity to starve; and deals with
his Body as the Ape, who is said to hugg her young to death. Whereas a wise
Sobriety is health to the Navel, and marrow to the Bones; by it the Humors,
the Blood, the Spirits are all maintained in order and in vigor. His meals are
pleasant, and his sleep is sweet, and he is a Stranger to those crudities, and
consequent distempers which pester others. Thus Plato by his careful temperance
spun out his life, tho a great Student, till he attained above fourscore; and
Galen to above sevenscore years; and Seneca Sen. Ep. 58*
concludes, that there is no way to retard Old Age like a frugal Sobriety.

Let me then persuade all such, as are lovers of pleasures, more than lovers of
God or of their own Souls, to have some pity on their poor Bodies. O break off
your destructive Course, sow not the Seeds of consuming Maladies in your own
Flesh. Be not among Wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of Flesh. Put a Knife
to thy Throat, if thou be a man given to Appetite, Prove. 23. 1. 20. Give not
your Strength unto Women, nor your ways to that which destroys Kings, Prove.
31. 3. Let not the Beast captivate the Man, nor your Reason be enslaved by
Sense; but recover a just dominion over your blind and brutish affections, that
your days may be long and lively in the Land which the Lord gives you.

If it be here Objected, that the most Religious and temperate persons grow old
as soon as others. It is Answered, that tho in these external things, all
things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous and to the
wicked; yet every wise man will take the likeliest course for the blessing he
desires. Tho some Children that have had no good Education, nor good Example,
have afterward proved eminent men; yet who but a desperate man will hereupon
resolve, I will take no care about the instruction of my Children? but the
prudent Parent will conclude, tho some of the best Education do miscarry, and
some with the worst do flourish, yet I ought and will take the likeliest course
to bring up my Children in the fear of God: Even so in this case, the Old Age
and Death do seize upon diverse pious and circumspect persons, as soon or before
they come upon others, yet is it the Interest and Duty of all such as regard
God, or wish well to themselves, to use the fittest means to preserve their
strength and vigor, until their time and work be done.

For it is certain, that when the success answers not the means, and that
Distempers, notwithstanding our Piety and Sobriety, do overtake us; then it is
permitted and ordained by the Wisdom of God for the setting forth some way of
His Glory, and for the real Good of the party affected. For an Holy and Good
God never makes Exceptions to his General Rules, but in Cases reserved for his
greater honor, and his Servants greater good. For all the paths of the Lord,
tho never so cross and crooked, are Mercy, I say, Mercy and Truth to those that
keep his Covenant, and his Testimonies. Psalm. 25. 10. And thus you have had
some Account of the true Causes, and the best Antidotes against Old Age, which
is the second Point to be handled.

CHAP. III. The Sins of Old Age.
SECT. I.
I Come in the Third place to treat of Cap. 3. The Sins of Old Age.
the Vices and Sins, which are most incident to Old Age: for the best Wine that
is, has some Dregs. And tho there be none of Old-folks Sins, but they are
found in some Young-folks breasts; yet there are some particular vices, which
are more proper, because more common to Aged pesons, than to others.
Nevertheless as the work of Sanctification has been deeper, and the care in
Education greater, so far the less liable shall the Aged persons be, unto these
Corruptions Haec morum vitra sunt, non senectutis. Cicer. de Senect.
. He that bears the Yoke in his youth, will be happily fortified against them
in his age. I do not therefore charge every Old man or woman with the following
Faults; for many have better learned Christ, and are as free from them as any
other: but for the most part Old people are propense to these Vices.

First, Frowardness or peevishness, whereby they are prone to be morose,
wayward 1. Peevishness.
and hard to be pleased; easily angry, often angry, and sometimes angry without
a cause. Seldom are they pleased with others, scarce with themselves, no not
with God himself: yea, they think, as poor Jonah did, that they do well to be
angry. Too apt they are to aggravate every fault to its utmost dimensions, and
so never want matter for unquietness.

Now this is both a Sinful and Miserable distemper. It is displeasing to God,
and it is very uncomfortable both to themselves, and to others. Its true, that
Anger in it self is not evil: our Blessed Savior was once angry, but it was at
Sin, and it was accompanied with Grief for the hardness of their Hearts. Mark
3. 5. When we are angry at Sin, we are angry without Sin. And it is also true,
that Old people by reason of their knowledge in matters, do see more things
amiss and blameworthy, more Sin, and more evil in Sin than others do; and
having liberty by reason of their Age and Authority to speak their minds, they
are too prone to express, that which others must digest with silence; and
withal In fragili corpore odi^sa omnis offensio est. Cic. de senect.
their bodily distempers dispose them to more testiness than others, whose
continual health and ease makes their Conversation more smooth and quiet; and
lastly, they discern themselves in some danger of being despised Contemni se
putant despici, illudi. id. ibid.
, and therefore are tempted to preserve their Authority by frequent and keen
reproofs and reflections, and so iniquum petunt, ut justum ferant, they require
too much, lest they should receive too little.

But tho these things may abate the faultiness of this Sin, yet they are far
from being sufficient to justify the same Severitatem in senectute probo, sed
eum modicam; acerbitatem nullo modo. Cic. de senect.
. Say, that this froppishness is their Disease rather than their Sin; yet the
Disease is the effect of Sin, and the cause of Sin, and Sin it self. The mind
is distempered by it, both your own and others; the Body is disordered;
unjustifiable words are spoken; the Soul unfitted for any serious devotion; and
the proper ends of reproof seldom attained; for as the wrath of man never works
the righteousness of God, so it rarely cures the iniquities of men. The
plaster being too hot, burns more than it heals Si is qui corrigere nititur,
ira superatur, opprimit antequam corrigat. Greg. Mor.
; and the frequency of finding fault, tempts the faulty to heed it the less;
yea, they are prone to harden themselves in evil, by retorting your unquietness
upon you, as a Sin you live in without reformation.

Strive therefore against this infirmity: pray earnestly unto God for a meek
and quiet Spirit: connive at smaller slips; be not severe against involuntary
faults: expect not the same Wisdom or Circumspection in young people, as you
have in so long time attained: bridle the first emotions of anger; and weigh
the nature and quality of a miscarriage, before you let fly at it, and do not
kill a Flea upon the Forehead of your Child or Servant with a Beetle. Learn of
Plato an Heathen, who being incensed at his Servant, desired his Friend
Xenocrates, who then came in, that he would correct him; for now, says he, my
anger surmounts my reason. Or rather go to School to your heavenly Master,
Christ Jesus, who was meek and lowly, who being reviled, reviled not again, and
when he suffered, threatened not. Give place to any one rather than to the
Devil. Resolve if others cross you, that yet you will not punish your self; for
frowardness hurts no body so much as ones self. And mortify Pride, from
whence, for the most part, these passions spring; for we are apt to assume so
much, and value our selves so highly, that we think every one should humor us;
and they that expect much, will meet with many disappointments.

Say not, that the cure is impossible; for in all ages there have been
Instances of victories in this case. There was Patricius the father of St.
Augustine, and there was Mr. Calvin, both of them naturally of hot and hasty
spirits; yet did so moderate their temper, that an unbeseeming word was scarce
ever heard to come from them: yea diverse of the Heathen In moribus est culpa,
non in aetate: moderati enim, and nec difficiles senes nec inhumani,
tolerabilem agunt senectutem. Importunitas autem and inhumanitas omni aetati
molesta est. Cic. de senect.
were eminent herein; and doubtless the Grace of God will not be wanting to
you, if you sincerely seek it, which will of lions make you lambs.

SECT. II.
A Second Folly incident to Old Age, is. 2. Talkativeness.
Loquacity or Talkativeness; that is, an exceeding proneness to speak much; so
that it has passed into a Proverb, Senex psittacus, an old person is a Parrot.
Herein they are twice children, whose faculty you know lies this way.

Speech is a most wonderful and excellent Faculty conferred only on humane
nature, and for their common good, and it is great pity that it should be
abused. As our Reason begins to work, so our Speech comes in; which shows that
all our words should be governed by Reason. And yet how unruly is this little
member! insomuch as the Apostle James, c. 3. 6. calls the Tongue, a World of
iniquity; the hand is not called a world of iniquity, for that cannot reach
very far; but with the tongue we can walk over the whole world, and by the
venom of it hurt even all mankind. And Old people, whose eyes and ears, whose
hands and feet are much decayed and disabled, are apt to make the greater use
of their tongues.

And whereas the noblest and best subject of Discourse is the ever blessed God,
his Properties, Word and Works, too few of them deal in this argument; but the
ordinary Theme of their speech, is concerning Other folks, and concerning
Themselves: and here you may find in their tongues the Perpetual Motion. About
Others, their tongue travelleth round about, and few of their neighbors escape
the scourge of it. It is their delight to be judging, censuring, and condemning
all mankind. How much good might the same breath produce, if it were employed
in good instruction, in faithful counsel or in wise reproof? But their talent
lies not that way, but rather like Zoilus of old, who being asked, why he
carped so much at others, answered, that he spoke ill of them, because he could
do no other ill to them; so the impotence of old people must be a plea for
their ill language: but God will reprove thee, and set this and all thine other
sins before thee, because thou sit and speak against thy brother, and
standerest thine own mothers son, Psalm. 50. 20, 21.

But their most pleasing Harangues are concerning Themselves. What they have
bin, what they have done, what they have had, what Strength, what Beauty, what
Estates, what Affairs they have managed, what adventures they have made, what
victories they have gotten; in sum, wherever the Story begins, it shall be
sure to end at their dear selves, the feats they have done, or the respect they
have received.

Now all this must be nauseous to every ingenuous hearer, and is most loathsome
in the sight of God. For He and his Glory is the only center, toward which all
our words and actions should tend. All other discourse is no other or better,
than wherein Turks and Pagans may vye with you: and our Blessed Book assures
us, Mat. 12. 36. That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the day of judgment. If all your extravagant words in one
day should be written down, and presented at night to you, it would amaze you;
how then will ye answer whole volumes of them at the day of Judgment? say not,
that words are but wind; since they are such a wind as, if irregular, will blow
the soul into Hell; for by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned.

Bridle therefore this unruly member. Nature has placed two bars unto it, the
teeth and the lips; but except watchfulness and prayer be added to them, they will
be too weak. If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, Jam. 3.
2. and you will confess, that every man should labor to be perfect in his
Profession; especially you that are Old disciples, and should exceed others in
strict holiness, as much as you do in years.

Consider, that he who often said, let him that has ears to hear, hear; said
not, let him that has a tongue to speak, be ready to speak. No, he has given
to men two ears, and but one tongue; to show that we should be swift to hear,
but slow to speak. It is true, as Elihu grants, Job 32. 7. Days should speak,
and multitude of years should teach wisdom. Their knowledge and experience
qualifies them for it; and if young people would but see their own weakness,
and were modest and humble, they might with much ease learn those things of the
Elder, which they have dearly bought. Dissi^ibus ac morosis senibus a^res
libenter prebeto; qui proverhiorum sententiis adolescentes ad recta studia
(...). Hieron. Ep. ad Aug.
So that the Talkativeness, which is culpable in Old persons, is utterly
intolerable in Young ones. But yet even by those that are Old, both the Matter
and the Measure of their talk is to be observed; and you should consider, What
good shall I now procure by speaking? Whither is my Tongue walking? What hurt
by holding my peace? What words are these, that are bursting out? It is
Plutarchs Counsel. And the same Lib. de garr^l.
Author a Heathen resolves, that we should never speak, but when it is some way
necessary, or useful to our selves, or others. And that was a nipping answer,
which Zeno the Philosopher gave to some Ambassadors that were come to Athens,
and had feasted some Learned men there, who had talked liberally to them: And
what, said they to him, have you to tell us? Why, says he, tell those that
sent you, that you met with one Old man, who knew how to hold his peace. And a
wise man resolves, that he that has knowledge, who of all men may best speak,
spares his words, Prove. 17. 27. And you whose humor prompts you to be
sparing, should not be so prodigal herein. He was a wise man, that Si^onides.
said, he had often repented that he spoke, but never that he held his peace.

Let the Glory of God, and the Profit of the hearer be still the measure of
your talk. Hunt not after the applause of men, which is but empty Air; and
remember, that you may never justly commend your self, but when you are
unjustly accused by another. And then consider withal, that the more a Man
speaks, commonly the less he is heeded; and therefore if you would have people
to mind what you say, check your loquacity Oportet ut senilis sermo non solum
sit gravis, s^d etiam brevis. Aug.
, and take notice how the Wise man places Silence before Speech, saying,
Eccles. 3. 7. A time to keep silence, and a time to speak.

SECT. III.
THE Third Sin more peculiar to Oldage, 3. Envy.
is Envy, which is an inward Grudging at those who do in any thing excel us.
Now because they which are Old do see many that surpass them in strength,
beauty, riches or esteem, they are too apt to look at them with an envious Eye,
and to grudge them those blessings, which God has vouchsafed them. Hence it is
but too usual with them, to lessen their deserts, to carp at their enjoyments,
to abound in all such reports and stories, as may degrade or blacken them;
thinking by a great mistake, that what is detracted from others, is added to
themselves. Thus when an House is decaying, all the props men can get, they
will buttress it up withal: but these are but rotten Pillars, and will but
expose you to more contempt.

For this is an odious sin in it self: from hence proceeded the Fall of the
first Adam, and the Death of the Second, for which mischiefs we should hate it
the more. And indeed it is a very unreasonable thing to envy those mercies to
others, whereof we have had our share as well as they. Are they strong, comely
or respected? You have in your time partaken of them, and why should you grudge
at those that do but come after you? It is like as if the Southern Husbandman,
who has inn'd his Harvest in July, should repine at them that live more
Northerly, whose Harvest is in September: why, the former had his Harvest as
well as the Other; and has reason rather to be thankful to God, than to envy
them that follow him. Besides, would you have two Harvests? What answer can you
give to our Saviors questions, Matthew. 20. 15. Is it not lawful for me to do
what I will with my own? is thine eye evil, because I am good? He that grudges
at Gods gifts, would make a miserable distribution of them among men, if they
were at his disposal. No no, younger people have their proportion of
comeliness, strength, estate, honor and parts, and you have yours; and they
are distributed by a wise Hand, who is ever righteous in all his ways, and
holy all in his works.

And therefore labor with all your might to extinguish this cursed flame.
Remember that wrath kills the foolish man, and that envy slays the silly
one, Job 5. 2. You envy others, but you hurt your selves. Few sins have a more
malignant influence upon Mind and Body, than this Sin of Envy. On the other
side, if you bless the Lord for other mercies, you have the comfort of them
T^lle in^ and hab^s quod m^um est. Aug.
; if you repine at them, you lose the comfort of your own. I know that the
spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy, Jam. 4. 5. but to them that seek
it, God gives more grace. Be contented with such things as ye have: it is not
said, with such things as 1. you have had, or such things, as 2. others have,
or such things as 3. you would have, but with such things as ye have, because
he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. If you have him, you
have enough; if you have him not, you have too much.

Let him who is infinitely wise have liberty to dispose his gifts as he
pleases: and instead of grudging at the excellencies of others, labor you for
something in your selves to balance them. Your Gravity will be as valuable as
their Beauty, your Wisdom as their Strength, your Grace as their Wealth. They
do but surpass you in things that will fade as yours have done, but you may
excel them in things which are everlasting.

Besides, you should consider, that we are all fellow members of the same body,
and so we should rejoice in their welfare and in their comforts; that is the way
to bring them to sympathize with us in our defects; and they that pay respect
to those above them, shall most usually receive it from them below them;
whereas the Envious man takes pleasure only in punishing of himself.

SECT. IV.
THE Fourth Vice too common to. 4. Arrogance.
Old Age, is Arrogance and Conceitedness. An humor whereby they assume so much
to themselves, as if they had a Monopoly of Wisdom to themselves, and that
their word must be a law in all cases, so that they can endure no
contradiction. It is likely enough that Jobs friends had a spice of this
distemper: for they were very aged, Job 32. 6. and we find them very wise in
their own conceit. And it is most true, as before, that Days should speak, and
that they are most likely to be in the right. Happy had Rehoboam bin, if he had
acquiesced in the counsel of the Old men: for which is abler to advise, they
who are only helped by some natural parts, a working fancy and a fluent tongue,
or they who have read many men, as well as many books, and have weighed things
as well as words, and by experience are grown wise? These persons may certainly
expect, that a great regard be given to their opinions. But yet as Job, c. 32.
9. Great men are not always wise, neither do the aged understand Judgment. All
aged people have not a Patent for Infallibility, nor any at all times. If old
Nicodemus his notion of Regeneration must have passed for Orthodox, what kind
of Divinity should we have had? he knew not what it was to be born again,
though he were a Teacher in Israel; and I greatly fear he has his fellows in
all Ages and Places. Sometimes Old men dream dreams, and young men see visions,
as Joel 2. 28.

The Almighty will not confine his Gifts, no more than he does his Graces to
any order of men; and therefore no man should think of himself more highly than
he ought to think, but to think soberly, as God has dealt to every man, Romans
12. 3. And accordingly, the Aged are exhorted, Tit. 2. 2. in the first place to
be Sober. It becomes no man to abound always in his own sense, or to dictate
in every company; but rather according to that Levites method, Judge. 19. last.
Consider the matter, take advice, and then speak your minds. The Spirit of God
dwells not in a proud heart: Pride, and arrogance, and the evil way, and the
froward mouth he hates, Prove. 8. 13.

Check therefore and mortify this sinful Temper. Mind the Apostles counsel,
Romans 12. 16. Be not wise in your own conceits. Let not your Determinations beg
respect by the number of your years, but command it by the weight of your
Reasons; so there will be more of God than of man in your Counsels. Believe it,
neither great Age, nor great Honor, nor both together do infuse wisdom; for
Solomon has said, Better is a poor and a wise child, than an Old and foolish
King, who will no more be admonished, Eccl. 4. 13. Why should you therefore
imagine, that Wisdom must needs live and dye with you? that your words must be
always Oracles? O Labor for more Humility, and be content with your proper
measure. Know for certain, that all conceitedness comes from Pride, which Sin
cleaves to a man even to the grave. Consider how the Scripture disgraces this
humor of yours, Prove. 26. 12. See thou a man wise in his own conceit? there
is more hope of a fool than of him. Reflect sometimes, how often you have bin
mistaken, even wherein you have been extremely confident. He must be
omniscient, that is always infallible. Let God be true, but every man a liar.
Young Elihu may sometimes outstrip Job and his three friends, and no mere man
is wise at all times.

SECT. V.
THE Fifth and most Epidemick. 5. Covetousness.
Sin of Old Age, is Covetousness or Worldly-mindedness, that is, an inordinate
love of Riches, which is shown in an insatiable endeavor to procure them, and
in an unreasonable lothness to part with them. Though this Vice be frequently
found in young people, as in that young man, Matthew. 19. 22. who was free from
other gross Sins, but infected with this; yet it is a Disease more peculiar to
Old Age. They feel the decays of Nature, and think to support themselves by
their abundance. They must have some Recreation, and are by reason of their Age
incapable of other pleasures, and so do place their delight in heaping up
Riches, as some Simonides ob avaritiam culpatus respondit, se per senectutem
reliquis spoliatum voluptatibus, unica lucrandi voluptate gravem recreare
aetatem. Plutarch.
of them have ingenuously acknowledged* They also know that their weakness and
infirmities do expose them to contempt, and therefore endeavor to obviate that
by their Wealth, and so make themselves considerable by their Estates. These
are the ^rutches, which when weakness overtakes them, they lean upon and
support their fainting spirits withal.

And they want not variety of Pretenses whereby to justify their course: as
that they are only providing for a rainy day, for troubles and Casualties that
may besall them; that they ought to lay up for their Children and Posterity, or
else they were worse than Infidels; yea, that they are gathering only to bestow
it at their death on some pious or charitable use. And Satan is not wanting to
nurse this humor in them, by suggesting to them expectations of a long life, a
distrust in the Providence of God, and continual fears of want: which is nursed
by the coldness of their temper, and by their consciousness of their inability
to get much by their labor: And these meeting with that inveterate Self-love,
which is inherent in them, and consequently an uncharitable frame of mind
toward others, hardens them in their tenacious temper; so that as they grow
weaker, this lust grows stronger Omnia in homine senescunt vitia: sola avaritia
juvenescit. Aug. Sermon. 48. ad fratres in eremo.
; until Divine grace does open their eyes, or else the Earth at last stop their
mouths.

This bitter root spoils their Devotions, interrupts their prayers, renders the
word of God tastless, becramps them to all God Works; this disturbs their Rest,
the thoughts and cares about these things do visit them last at night, and meet
them first in the morning, and disquiet them the day throughout; for where the
treasure is, there will the heart be also. Oh the cares, the fears, the
vexations that possess a covetous heart! but only that we can digest any thing
that we delight in, though it be never so bitter, else no man could endure the
life of a covetous miser. But it is the Old-mans recreation; the best of his
time and the strength of his spirits are consumed, either about the keeping of
what he has, or about getting more: for as he has no vent for his abundance,
so he observes no limits for his desires. As the bladder, the more it is filled
with wind, it stretches the more; so the more his riches increase, the more his
heart is set upon them; so that he sees more beauty in his Money, than in the
Sun in the firmament Gratius aurum intuetur quam solemn. Ambros.
. No thoughts, no discourse, no design pleases them, except it end in gain:
but when there is an opportunity of doing good, the heart is cold, and the hand
is lame. Nay some of them will not afford conveniences, scarcely necessaries to
their families or to themselves, but run in debt to their own backs and
bellies, to their children and servants, and foolishly choose to live poor,
that they may die rich.

Now this Vice in it self it is plain Idolatry, and the root of all evil,
leading men into temptation and a snare, into many foolish and hurtful lusts,
which at last drown men in destruction and perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. For the
worldly man gets and keeps his Estate with travel to his Body, vexation to his
Spirit, scruple to his Conscience, with danger to his Soul, with envy of his
neighbors, with suits to his children, and with a curse to his posterity. Do
but turn to Job 20. 15. and read that chapter out. But in no sort of men is
Covetousness so unaccountable, so very foolish as in Old people. For what can
be more absurd (said a Heathen Avaritia vero senilis quid sibi velit non
intelligo; potest enim quicquam esse absurdius quam quo minus viae restat, eo
plus viatici quaerere. Cicer. de sen.
) than to be so much concerned for traveling Expenses, when we have so small a
part of our way to travel? Or as St. Augustine Gravioribus sumptibus se onerare
f^stinat, cum jam pervenerit quo tendebat. Aug. ser. de temp. 247.
expresses it, to load our selves with the greatest Burdens, when we are
nearest the end of our Journey? It is no doubt a plain infatuation, and an
instance of the power of the Prince of this World on men's minds, and of the
Corruption of our Nature to effect this; that those who have seen the Vanity of
all these things, the uncertainty, the unsatisfactoriness, the vexatiousness of
them, should so dote upon them: that they who not only know, but even feel in
themselves, that they must shortly, and may suddenly leave them all, and
perhaps have no thanks at all from them that enjoy them; that yet these
persons, wise in other things, should set their Hearts upon them, and hunt
after a World that is flying from them. How much Fugientem sequimur mundum.
more comfortable were it, to do all the good they can? to feed the hungry,
cloth the naked, to procure the Prayers of the distressed, while they have
opportunity? to make Friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, to be esteemed
of men, to be loved and honored of God! A good man shows favor and lends:
he will guide his affairs with discretion. Surely he shall not be moved for
ever, the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance, Psalm. 112. 5, 6.

The Pleas which they produce for their Justification or Excuse, are all
insufficient. Have you no other Recreation? Surely, there are more and better
Diversions, Natural, Artificial, and Spiritual, than heaping up riches.
Instance but in the last of these, Psalm. 119. 14. 72. I have rejoiced in the
way of thy Testimonies, as much as in all Riches: yea, The Law of thy mouth is
better unto me, than thousands of Gold and Silver. Again, Do you think that
these will defend you from Contempt? True Piety and Charity is a far better
way, Psalm. 112. 9. He has despersed, he has given to the Poor; his
righteousness endures for ever: his Horn shall be exalted with Honor. Think
you, that in your decays of Nature, there be no better supports, than your
Riches? Yes, the favor of God, the love of Christ, the comforts of the Spirit,
the feast of a good Conscience, and the joyful hopes of eternal Happiness, are
as much beyond them, as the Sun i^ brighter than^ Glowworm. Will providing for
Contingencies excuse you? Alas, your Riches will be no certain refuge for you,
Prove. 18. 10, 11. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower: the Righteous runs
into it and is safe. The Rich man's Wealth is his strong City, and as an high
wall (but it is only) in his own conceit. That bond, Heb. 13. 5. sealed to us,
is worth all your Specialties, and all your Estates: He has said, I will never
leave thee, nor forsake thee. Can you justify your immoderate scraping by a
just provision for your Children and Relations? No, no, That Is but an excuse;
for they that have no Children, are as sick of this Disease as others. But if
you have Children, this course of yours is the way to undo them. A moderate
care for Posterity, is a Duty, wherein we may expect a Blessing: but the
Covetousness of the Parent, does but provide for the Luxury of the Child, and
so the Parents Soul is ruined in the getting, and the Child's in the spending of
what is so gotten. If your posterity fear God, they shall want no good thing,
they shall have enough: but if they do not, they will have too much. God will
be dishonored, and themselves undone for ever.

Neither will religious purposes of doing some Good with your Estates, excuse
your present penuriousness: for that is to do evil that good may come of it.
Hear what God himself says to this, Isa. 61. 8. For I the Lord love judgment,
I hate robbery for a burnt Offering. They that will part with nothing while
they live, nothing will be accepted from them when they dye. Plead not your
unspotted Justice, Honesty and Equity, against this charge; as if a Man could
not be covetous, that meddles only with his own. For tho fraud, injustice and
oppression be sometimes the Effects, yet the Nature of covetousness stands in
overloving the World; and so you may be damnably guilty of this Sin, tho you
keep you within the limits of your Estate. For as a man may be guilty of
uncleanness with his own Wife, and be drunk with his own drink, so a man may be
covetous with his own Riches. We do not find that the rich Fool, Luke 12. nor
that the rich Glutton, Luke 16. did other folks wrong; nor those on the left
hand of Christ, Mat. 25. that they robbed the poor or wronged the needy, but
yet all guilty of this accursed vice.

Strive therefore to break this snare; And to this end, 1. Consider these few
things, namely, The absolute Vanity of all these worldly things; that is, they
are not able to satisfy the Mind, or to cure the Body, or to imbelish your
Name, or to lengthen the Life, or to save the Soul: and all this has been
proved, and concluded by Solomon a King of vast knowledge and experience. And
their Vanity is yet further seen in their uncertainty, there being an hundred
ways to rend them from you, and as many ways to rend you away from them. And
are they not vain then? And why will thou set thine Eyes upon that which is
not? For riches certainly make themselves Wings, they fly away as an Eagle
to^ards Heaven, Prove. 23. 5. Consider again the End for which these things are
bestowed upon you, which is, that you should employ them, and use them for him.
God does hereby try you, whether you will deny your self, whether you will
glorify him, whether you will lay out your Talent, or lay it up. He makes some
persons poor, that he may exercise their patience and humility; and others
Rich, to exercise their bounty and their charity. In short, Riches were never
given to any man to spend upon his Lusts, or to hoard them up without just
cause; but to do good withal, first to your selves, then to your Families and
Relations, and then to others: when they are not thus employed, you utterly
pervert the End for which you are entrusted with them. Consider also, that you
are but Stewards in your Estates, and you must give a just account of them to
him. All that you possess is His Stock only in your Hands, it is not your own.
The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness of it. If you really believed this, you
would never pinch or grudge to your self or others, that which is convenient.
For what is it to a Steward, when his Lord and Master shall order him to abate
so much to his Tenant, or pay so much to another poor man? He sticks not at it,
he knows it will pass in his account, and there is an end. And why cannot you,
who are only Stewards to the God of Heaven and Earth, of that Estate which is
in your hand, when you can discern that he requires it; I say, why cannot you
give, forgive, lend, lay out freely, for none of it is your own? and whether
will it pass better in your accounts; so much left in Bags or Bonds, or to a
prodigal Heir; or so much of it spent in hospitality, so much in well-plac'd
bounty, and so much in prudent charity? And lastly, consider the plain Command
and blessed Promise of God in that foresaid, Heb. 13. 5. Let your Conversation
be without Covetousness -- For he has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. q. d. Thou shall have that which is sufficient, or, thou shall
have him that is All-sufficient.

2. Pray earnestly against this Sin. Let your Eyes be ever toward the Lord, to
pluck your Feet out of this Net. Without his divine Grace, this snare will be
too strong for you. There are Medicines to purge choler, and such Humors which
feed our Corruptions, but none to purge Covetousness: No, this Lust is rooted
only in the Soul, the bodily Complexion is very little concerned: and therefore
you have the more need to cry earnestly to God with David, Psalm. 119. 36.
Incline my Heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to Covetousness.

3. Labor for Faith. To believe what God has revealed, and to rely upon what
he has promised. I have read of a certain Person, that in a change of times,
after some debate about what was then imposed, swore by his Faith, he must
live; but another of the same Cloth answered, that he would learn to live by
his Faith: so when you plead for your selfish penurious course, that you must
live, I counsel you to learn the life of Faith: for if you did believe the
Revelation which God has made of his Nature and Covenant, if you did believe
the Judgment to come, and the everlasting World after it, if you did believe
the Promises or the Threatenings, which referr to this affair, you would readily
despise all the things of this World, and set your affections on things above;
you would, as you ought, be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, laying up in store for your selves a good foundation against the
time to come, that since this life is slipping from under your feet, you may lay
hold on eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6. 18, 19.

SECT. VI.
AND these are the most proper Sins 6. Other Vices of Old Age.
of Old Age: some other there are, which because they are neither so common to
all ancient people, nor yet peculiar to them, and yet are more often found in
them than in others, I shall not wholly conceal them, but rather more briefly
handle them. Which are,

1. Craftiness, which is Prudence degenerate. Old people have had much dealing
in the World, and have seen, yea, perhaps felt the effects of other men's
sinister Carriage; and being too much devoted to a selfish interest, do
thereupon too often strain a point of equity and integrity, to compass their
own ends. If this subtilty were only employed for their own security, it were
less culpable; but when it is an Engine to ensnare, or to overreach their
Brother, it is inexcusable. When a Crafty old Miser, has a young Prodigal in
his Tallons, what work does he make with him? What cunning arts, what tricks
and stratagems has he to distill his Estate into his own Coffers? But this is
a baseness unbecoming a Moral Heathen, who would put himself into another
case, and deal with him as he would be used by him: how enormous then is it for
a Christian, that ought by no means to live to himself, that should remember he
is but a Stranger in this Earth, and is seeking a better Country, that is a
professor of self-denial and sincerity!

Beware therefore of this unworthy Trade: believe, that what you save or gain
by indirect ways, brings to you a Curse along with it; resolve, that if you
cannot stand by plain dealing, to fall with it, your fall will be glorious.
Esau was a cunning Fellow, but Jacob was a plain man, and so should all his
Offspring be. But if you will needs be exercising your Talent, employ it in a
wise contriving, which way to do good to your Neighbor. So did St. Paul, 2
Cor. 12. 16. Being crafty, I caught you by Guile, but he sought not theirs, but
them. You may also exercise your utmost prudence, in the preserving your
outward Estate and Credit; provided always, you do it not out of an inordinate
affection to these things, nor to the injury or prejudice of any other: for
that which does harm to your Neighbor, will never do good to you, there being
a just God that, Job 5. 13. takes the wise in their own Craftiness, and the
counsel of the froward is carried headlong.

2. Unteachableness. When the fault is only in the understanding or memory, it
is rather matter of pity, but when it is in the will, it is highly criminal.
Now this is a fault very incident to Old Age, yea, the more ignorant, the more
obstinate (...).
. Hence we read, Eccl. 4. 13. of an old and foolish King, who will no more be
admonished. They think it a disgrace to learn; they are more ready to teach,
than to learn. It Is grown proverbial, They are too old to learn. Indeed if the
things propounded be unnecessary and useless, you may safely remain in your
ignorance; but if they be proper either to your civil or spiritual Calling, it
is a greater shame to be ignorant of them, than to learn them: especially in
the great Points that are necessary to Salvation. How many instructive
Discourses have you heard about these things, and how little have you learned?
You have your Lesson to get, and your Master is just coming.

O therefore beg of God and Man to teach you, and do not grudge to take
somewhat the more pains to redeem your former negligence. Cato learned the
Greek Tongue, when he was an Old man: and Solon (...).
glories in this, that he was still learning something in his Old Age. How many
famous Divines have learned the Greek and Hebrew in their Old Age? Why should
you think your selves too wise or too good or too old to learn whatsoever may
make you more useful here, or more happy hereafter? It will be small comfort
for you to say, I am rich, Quid miserius misero non miserantem seipsum?
and have need of nothing, when you shall be found at last, to be poor, and
blind, and naked.

3. Implacableness is charged as a fault common with Old People. That is, such
a deep resentment against such as offend them, as is scarce abolished. On the
one hand, their impotence is such, by reason of their Age, that they cannot
easily revenge themselves; and on the other, their thinking, Sedentary, and
wakeful condition gives, them opportunity to roll their disgusts in their
minds, till they are boiled into a settled rancour. Thus they who in malice
should be Children, and in understanding should be Men, are on the contrary men
in malice, and Children in understanding: not apt to forgive, not easy to
forget. What an implacable Spirit was in Aristides and Themistocles of old in
Athens, until the wisdom and integrity of the former, did somewhat assuage it
for a time in the latter? The melancholy and stiffness of Old Age, will not
suffer such impressions to wear off, and their Humor disposes them to
aggravate things to the utmost. So that the contentions of Old People, like
those among Brethren, are like the Bars of a Castle. They will owe a Man an
illturn seven long years together, and then pay him at last.

But this is an inhumane, and ungodly temper. Would you have every one deal so
by you? have you offended no body in all your course? What Brute is it, that
continues an everlasting Rage? Would you be so treated by the great God, when
you have offended him? How can you pray in this condition without Cursing your
selves? If you do not forgive, you cannot be forgiven. I am sure the affronts
and injuries which you have received from men, are not to be compared to those
which you have offered to God. Away then with this devilish Distemper; make
your Neighbor sensible of his offense, by a cool representation of it to him,
by your self if possible, or else by some fit Friend, perhaps you may gain him.
By revenge you can be but even with him, but hereby you will get above him, and
conquer him. However do not you punish your self for his aversion, by suffering
a Fire in your Bosom, which will hurt your own Soul, more than it does your
Neighbor. And do not nullify all the good that is in him, nor all the
kindness that you have received from him, but muster up all his worthy
qualities, and all the former respects and benefits that you have received from
him, and this will melt you into a better temper. And especially make it your
earnest request unto God, to root up this Gall and Wormwood out of your Heart,
and that he would make you tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God
for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

4. Speculative wickedness is another Sin too incident to Old Age. That is,
either Reflecting upon former Sins, or Fancying others with delight. There is a
Threefold complacence in sin; before its commission, by contrivance; in the
Commission by present satisfaction, and after the Commission by remembrance:
and as the set purpose before, so the delightful reflection afterward, is a Sin
before God. Now weakness of Body, poverty in Estate, or other impediments may
hinder Old people from those Exorbitances, which they inwardly love, or in
which they have heretofore actually lived: but yet they ruminate on them with
pleasure, and Re-act them in their fancy. They do not, and perhaps they cannot
now profane the Lords day as they have done, fight and quarrel as they have
done, nor commit uncleanness as they have done, nor drink and debauch
themselves as they have done: but they can reflect upon these things with
content; strength and opportunity is wanting, but their Hearts are as wicked as
ever. Hence it is, that you shall hear diverse Old people rehearsing their
former disobedience to Parents, their refractoriness to their Masters, their
petty purloynin^s, and other extravagances, with as fresh delight as they were
at first committed.

Now this is in effect to act over those Sins again: Ezekiel. 23. 19. She
multiplied her Whoredoms in calling to remembrance the days of her Youth,
wherein she had played the Harlot in the Land of Egypt. Yea, perhaps this guilt
will be found in some respects greater than the first: because it is likely that
then there was less knowledge, and more temptation, than now there is. This
contemplative wickedness nails on the former guilt, and contracts more: this
demonstrates, that the man would be always sinning, if he could; and that he is
a mere stranger to true Repentance. I deny not, but that the first sudden
glance of the memory upon former Vanities may be pleased, but it is only a
surprise; every pious Soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in
it. Thus Holy Augustine in his Confessions reflects upon his Robbing an Orchard
in his younger days, with all the heartbreaking Aggravations imaginable. Thus
Holy David cries out, Psalm. 25. 7. Remember not the Sins of my Youth, nor my
Transgressions. Labor you to write after their Copies; let the remembrance of
your former follies be always bitter: never dwell upon the thoughts of them,
but with a Sigh. O what a Fool, what a Beast have I been! O what have I done! I
am ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I bear the reproach of my Youth,
Jerem. 31. 19. Make not the Wound to bleed again by rubbing it afresh, lest it
fester and grow incurable at length. Let it appear some way, that it is not
want of power, but want of will that makes you Sober. A diligent care to avoid
the Sins of your present Age and State, will be a good proof, that you would
not commit the faults that are past, if you were to live over your life again.
A better Life is the best Repentance Optima poenitentia, nova vita. Luther.
.

And so much shall suffice upon this unpleasant but necessary Subject,
concerning, the Sins of Old Age: which as they should be matter of our hearty
Grief, so they should be the subject of our holy Iealousy and continual
Caution. For tho perhaps we may not be guilty in them all, yet it is as
unlikely that we are clear in all. So that whereinsoever the Spirit of God has
in these Papers or otherwise found us out, it is our indispensable duty to
watch and pray with all seriousness and constancy against the same; and tho
they be rooted never so deep, we must mortify and pluck them up, tho we should
(they are grave Seneca's words) pluck our very Hearts up with them Projice
quaecunque cor tuum lamiant, quae si aliter extrahi nequirent cor ipsum cum
illis revellendum erat. Sen. Ep. 51.
. For as one Disease is sufficient to kill the Body; so any one Sin
unmortified, is able to send Body and Soul into Hell. On the other hand, it
will be one special token, that we are upright before God, when we keep our
selves from our own Iniquity, Psalm. 18. 23.

And yet this is but the one half of our bounden Duty. For if you pluck up all
the Weeds out of your Garden, it will be but a desert place, unless you procure
some Herbs and Flowers therein: so tho we should clear our Hearts of these
Vices, we shall have but naked and empty Souls, unless we be furnished with
such Graces as are proper for us: which is the next point now to be treated of.

CHAP. IV. The Graces of Old Age.
SECT. I.
FOrasmuch as Old Age is liable to so Cap. 4. The Graces of Old Age.
many vicious Habits, it greatly concerns all that are in Years, to excel in
some eminent Qualifications, which may praeponderate the other; or else Old Age
would be a Miserable Age indeed. Now tho we may well hope, that they having
been so long in Christ's School, have thoroughly learned Christ, that they are
endued with every Grace, and instructed to every good work; yet there be some
Peculiar Graces, wherein the Aged do or should excel. Not that any of them is
confined to Gray Hairs alone: for as all the Sins abovementioned may be found
in those that are young; so also the following Graces do apparently shine in
many of them, whereby they promise a plentiful Harvest in after-time, if they
hold on or mend Sunt quidem in juventute senes, and alii juvenes in senectute.
Ambros.
. For alas, to speak the plain truth, too few possess them all, and too many
are strangers to them all. And therefore where I describe them with the
following Excellencies, understand it rather by way of Instruction, in what
they should be, than by way of Assertion of what they are, and you must
remember also, that the Denomination is a part potiori, the better sort have
them, and all should endeavor after them: for since they are actually
possessed by some, they may be certainly obtained by all.

The First Grace most proper for Oldage. 1. Knowledge.
is Knowledge. They have or might have a great measure of all kind of
Knowledge, having read so much in the Book of Nature, and in the Book of
Providence. But there is a nobler Object of their Knowledge, which is God
himself, his Word and his Ways: Herein the Aged person has been versed for a
long time, 1 Ioh. 2. 13. I write unto you, Fathers, because you have known him
that is from the beginning. There is no Truth, Duty, Case, Sin, or Temptation,
but they have either heard, or read something concerning it, and that often;
and therefore must be supposed to have a more clear and distinct knowledge in
all these things, than younger people A Temple was once dedicated in Spain to
Old Age, as to the mistress of Knowledge. Dr. Sheafe of Old age.
. Young people think that they know much, but Old people cannot choose but sigh
and smile at their ignorance. They find that the more Knowledge they have, the
more Ignorance they discover in themselves; and wherein they have been
confident in their younger years, they see cause to alter their sentiments
afterward.

For Knowledge is either Infused, or Acquired by Study, Reading and Converse.
In these the Aged must needs outstrip the Young, as having been much longer
conversant in the use of them: and for the former, the Holy Ghost does commonly
impart these Habits in the use of means; and so every way the Old man has the
advantage in this accomplishment. Now Knowledge is that, wherein the Image of
God partly consists, it is the glory of Angels, and it is the honor of Man.
Those therefore were a strange sort of Friars in Italy, that Luther writes of,
called Fratres Ignorantiae, that took a solemn Oath, that they would know
nothing at all, but answer to all questions with Nescio: unless men were
resolved to renounce both Divinity and Humanity at once. No, doubtless, saving
Knowledge is to the Soul, as the Eye to the Body, of great excellency and of
great use. It Is this that Crowns the hoary head, and conveys Beauty unto
wrinkles, Prove. 14. 18. The prudent are crowned with knowledge. Its true, many
there are, who have tasted of the Tree of Knowledge, that have never tasted of
the Tree of Life; and knowledge of it self puffs up, so that a man may have
all knowledge, and yet no Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 2. Yet as it is true, there may
be much knowledge without a grain of Grace; so it is certain, there cannot be
one spark of Grace without Knowledge As Lumen is the Vehicle of influence, so
the foundation of Regeneration is Illumination.
. For how shall a Man know Sin, unless he understand the Law of God: how can he
embrace Jesus Christ aright, except he know him? or build for Heaven without a
Foundation?

Now the Aged person has lived long, has conversed both with Men and Books,
has the Rust of natural Ignorance well scoured off Tum maxim mentis oculus
acute cernere incipit, cum primum diflorescit corporis oculus. Plato in conviv.
; and if he have not more Riches than others, yet surely he has more
Knowledge, especially if he has put on the New Man, which is renewed in
knowledge, after the Image of him that created him, Colos. 3. 10. And therefore
tho it be a Brutish thing in any body, to be ignorant in those things that
concern their Happiness, yet it is intolerably absurd for one that is Old in
Years, to be a Child in understanding: to be like the Old man, which Mr. Pemble
tells of, who, tho by a probable computation, he had heard two or three
thousand Sermons, being above sixty years old, yet being examined by a Minister
on his Deathbed concerning his Knowledge of God, he thought he was a good Old
man; concerning Christ, that he was a towardly young Youth; concerning his
Soul, that it was a great Bone in his Body; and concerning his future Estate,
he said, if he had done well, he should be put into a pleasant green Meadow:
what a woeful thing is this, that a constant Hearer, and seeming Lover of the
Word of God, as this man was, should live and dye in such gross Ignorance? No
Trade how difficult soever, but seven or eight years will teach it; what a
shameful thing then is it to be sent into the world, purposely to learn to be a
true Christian, and after fifty or sixty years to remain ignorant in the
mysteries of it? To be ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3. 7. On the other side, Josephus tells us, speaking of
the Jews, Every one of our Nation being demanded of our Laws, can answer as
readily, as tell his own Name; learning it as soon as we come to the use of
Reason, it is imprinted in our minds. Certainly an ignorant Old person is the
shame of Christianity, yea, of Humanity it self.

Let it therefore be your Study that are ripe in years, to be ripe in Judgment,
to be well-grounded in the Knowledge of God and Godliness: whilst others are
heaping up Riches, do you treasure up Knowledge. The Knowledge of Natural
things, as also of Civil affairs will adorn you; the least dram of this is more
excellent than many Talents of Gold; but the least grain of Spiritual and
divine Knowledge, is more valuable than all the Natural and Civil knowledge
under Heaven. Hence it is reported of Albertus Magnus, that, before his Death,
he prayed that he might obtain the oblivion of all former vain knowledge, which
might hinder his happiness in the knowledge of Christ. Hear also the Apostle,
Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss, for the excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, Philip. 3. 8.

Be not discouraged with the seeming impossibility of attaining a sufficient
measure hereof. He that taught Old Nicodemus, will teach you. Industry and
Resolution will facilitate your achievement. You must be convinced, that
Ignorance will never excuse those that have the means of Knowledge; that tho
God does nor require the same degree of knowledge from all Christians, but does
allow for men's Education, Parts and Employments; yet he does indispensably
require, so much as is necessary to the forming of the new Creature, to the
necessary Doctrines and Duties of Christian Religion; that neither the
spiritually dumb, nor the blind, can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Awake
therefore ye that sleep, out of your stupid negligence, and Christ will give
you light. Redeem some time daily for Reading, Meditation and Prayer. If thou
cryest after Knowledge, and liftest up thy Voice for understanding. If thou
seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as for hidden treasure: Then thou
shall understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God, Prove. 2.
3, 4, 5. Especially improve the Lord's Day to this end. There are variety of
Books, which handle the Grounds of Religion, some more briefly, some more
largely. Take not upon trust the Doctrines of your Salvation, but endeavor to
be able to give a reason of the hope that is in you. You should be able to
instruct others; for shame be not you Children in Knowledge your selves. And ye
that are competently knowing, should thirst for more, and grow in Grace, and in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. This is the
fittest Covetousness for an Old Man or Woman Discamus in terra ea quarum
scientia nobis perseveret in coelo. Paraei scitum Script. in Auditorio suo
Theologico.
: this will make you like unto God, honored of wise men, and useful to all men.

SECT. II.
THE Second Grace proper for Oldage, 2. Faith.
is Faith, whereby the Soul does embrace Fides est amplexus Christi. Dr: Redman.
Jesus Christ as Mediator, and also rely upon the Promises Circumferentia fidei
est Verbum Dei; centrum fidei est Verbum Deus. Dr. Arrowsmith.
of God for all good things needful. Now although this Grace be needful for every
Christian, insomuch as he is said to live by Faith, a life unknown to all
unregenerate men; yet it is or should be the particular Jewel of Old Age. For
as Gods Word and Ordinances are the usual means to work Faith, and herein young
and old stand upon the same level, they have equal capacity for the attaining
of it: so still further Grounds and longer experience, are proper helps for the
strengthening and increasing thereof. So that as Reason is much improved by
Learning, so is Faith by use and experience, hereby Recumbence is advanced into
Plerophory. Thus Abraham is represented, Romans 4. 19, 20. Not weak in Faith,
when he was an hundred years old, and so staggered not at the promise of God
through unbelief. Tho his years rendered the Promise very unlikely, yet those
years had taught him, that the performance would be certain, and so being
strong in Faith, he gave Glory to God. As they have heard, so have they seen it
in the City of God, and what they have often seen, they may well believe.

They have seen the wicked in great power, flourishing like a green Bay Tree,
and yet suddenly they have passed away; and therefore they are not so startled
at the prosperity of ungodly men, as younger people may be. They have also seen
the righteousness of the upright brought forth as the light; and so are hired
to believe, that it shall be well with the righteous, and it shall go ill with
the wicked at length. They themselves have been in outward straits and dangers,
and then wonderfully preserved and provided for, and does not this strengthen
their Faith? And then in case of spiritual wants and troubles, when their
Spirit is overwhelmed, the Old Man can say with Asaph, Psalm. 77. 5. I have
considered the days of old, the years of ancient times, and so prop up their
Spirits in their greatest dejections. If you that are Old want Faith, it is an
arrant shame for you. For you have been so often told and assured of the
Veracity, the Power, and the Goodness of God; and then you have so often seen
these Properties of his exemplified to others, and to your selves, so many
wonders of Providence done in your remembrance, that ye your selves must be the
greatest wonder, in case you do not believe and trust him. When your Soul is
cast down, you may do as David did, remember God from the Land of Jordan, and
of the Hermonites, from the Hill Mizar: that is, you may review the help and
comfort which you have had in this and the other place of your Pilgrimage, and
so hope still in God, that the Help of his Countenance will be the Health of
yours. Psalm. 42. 5, 6, 11.

Learn therefore this life of Faith; and endeavor as you grow weaker in body
to grow stronger in Faith. 1. For Temporal mercies. You may be tempted to fear
want in your Old Age: here is now occasion for Faith, whereby you are firmly to
believe either that you shall want nothing, or else no good thing, Psalm. 34. 9,
10. That the Lord will either supply your wants, or enrich you by your wants.
It was a memorable saying of an Ancient pious Woman, I have made many a meal
upon the Promises, when I have wanted bread. And Christ has said it, that Man
lives not by bread only, but by every word that comes out of the mouth of God,
Matthew. 4. 4. So that a child of God shall never want a livelihood, so long as
there is a Promise in the Book of God. But then he had need of Faith, and the
stronger the faith, the chearfuller life he lives. For as by it he injoyes God
in all things in case of plenty, so by it he injoyes all things in God in case
of want. 2. For Spiritual blessings it concerns you to live by Faith (...). St.
(...) the Bp. of Winchester could say, Though Justification by Faith were not a
good breakfast for men in the hea^ of youth, yet it was a good Supper for
Oldage.
, to wit, for Pardon, Grace and Comfort. You have bin long conversant with the
Promises of God for these mercies, and have had often Experiences of the Grace
and Mercy of God unto you; and so may conclude with the Psalmist, The Lord has
bin mindful of us, be will bless us, Psalm. 115. 12. He that forgave you ten
thousand talents upon your first Repentance, will readily forgive an hundred
pence upon your second. And he that gave you good Desires, when you were not
worth a good thought, will surely give you your Desires of more grace, when
your hearts are now fully set upon it. And he that spoke Peace to your
Consciences, when you were younger; will restore unto you the joy of his
Salvation, as soon and as far as is good for you, now you are older; though at
present you walk in darkness, and see no light. For an old servant he never
utterly casts off.

Cast not you away therefore your confidence, which has great recompense of
reward; the dimmer the eye of your sense grows, the clearer let the eye of your
Faith become; by which you may see, as Moses did on mount Pisgah, into the
promised Land, and may Comfort your hearts with the foretasts of Glory. By this
Faith it was, that Isaac when he was blind through Age, blessed Jacob and Esau
concerning things to come. By this Faith Jacob when he was dying for Age,
blessed both the Sons of Joseph, and worshipped leaning upon the top of his
Staff, Heb. 11. 20, 21. In short, nothing is more needful for the Old person,
whose limbs are weak, eyesight weak, memory, all weak, than a strong and
lively Faith.

And this you must labor for by earnest and frequent Prayer; for every one
that asks, receives; and he that seeks, sindeth; Cry out therefore with
the Apostles, Luke 17. 5. Lord increase our faith; and when you find it waver,
then cry again with the man, Mark 9. 24. Lord, I believe, help mine unbelief.
We Will relieve a poor Old man, when we pass by the younger; and he that has
planted that Compassion in us, has much more in himself. And then consider
often of the Truth and Faithfulness of God, whose Word is as sure as Deed. For
all his promises are Yea and Amen in Christ. Which Promises you ought to store
up and study; instead of counting over your Coin or surveying your Bonds,
review the rich and precious promises of God, and clear your Interest in them;
and they will beget new blood and spirits in your Souls, so that your youth
will be renewed as the Eagles. And as long as ye are able, attend upon the
Preaching of Gods Word; for as Faith comes, so it comes on by hearing. The same
Texts, the same Truths, the same Promises which you have often read and heard,
will still afford new strength to your Faith and Hope, as long as you live.

SECT. III.
THE Third Grace proper for Oldage. 3. Wisdom.
is Wisdom: which we take here in the largest and yet truest sense, not once
regarding that mere worldly wisdom, which is not only earthly and selfish, but
wicked and devilish; that is only skilled in getting an Estate by hook or
crook, and in keeping it without respect to God or our Neighbor. No, this
cannot in any tolerable sense be called Wisdom. It Is absolute folly to lose,
yea to venture a Soul, for what may be utterly lost to morrow. But I speak here
of true Wisdom in its latitude, teaching men to live safely and comfortably
here, and happily hereafter; as it fixes upon a right End, and chooses and uses
the proper Means to attain it. This Grace directs a man to make choice of God
for his Happiness, and then diligently to apply himself to know, love, serve
and enjoy him. This also guides him in all his employments in this world, to
attempt nothing but what is possible, honest and useful; to choose the fittest
means for the attainment of his just ends; to place his words and actions in
their proper circumstances; not always to take the next, but the safest way to
his desires; and in short to order his affairs with discretion.

And this is the crown of Old Age In senibus gravitas, in juvenibus alacritas,
in adolescentibus verecundia. Bern. de ordin. vitae.
: Every Aged person is or should be truly wise; multitude of years should
teach wisdom, Job 32. 7. The crown of youth is their strength, but the glory of
Oldage is their wisdom. And wisdom is better than strength, Eccl. 9. 16.
Wisdom strengthens the wise more than ten mighty men in a city, Eccl. 7. 19.
By this the Aged are better enabled to discharge their duties to Husbands,
Wives, Children, Servants and Neighbors, than ordinarily younger people are;
to dispose Spiritual and Secular duties in their right places; to temper and
guide that zeal and affection, which without it is foolish and dangerous. The
Rashness of young Counsels is evident in the case of Rehoboam, 1 King. 12. who
following the heady and fierce advice of his Young Courtiers, lost ten Tribes
in one day, which the sage Counsel of his Old Counselors had certainly
preserved. And it is known, how often the Commonwealths of Athens, and Rome
were endangered by the folly and rashness of young heads, had they not bin
ballasted by the Sober and wary Interposition of graver persons.

Younger people may excel in feats of activity, but the Ancient do exceed in
the skill of managery Temeritas est florentis aetatis, prudentia senectutis.
Cicer. de senect.
. And upon this account that famous Fabius was called Maximus, and was esteemed
more useful to his Country by being the Buckler, than Marcellus who was the
Sword of the Commonwealth. Young people indeed may sooner apprehend a
business, and may more strenuously execute it; but the Old man by comparing and
weighing all circumstances can make a better judgment of it, and so give better
directions for the execution of it Senex plus prospicit, melius consulit, minus
decipitur, certius judic^it. Palaeol.
. As it is said of young Musicians, that they may Sing tunes better, but the
Old Musician can set lessons better. The Aged have not only read and heard, but
also seen such variety of Actions and Events, that it renders them much more
circumspect and wary in their courses. This made that Roman soon answer the
Consul M. Castritius Placentinus Carboni consuli. Val* Max.
, that boasted he had many Arms by him; Yes, said he, and I have many Years.
And the wisest of men concludes, Eccl. 9. 18. that wisdom is better than
weapons of war. And this is rarely found in Novices, they are too young to look
backward, and too rash to look forward. But the Aged person being taught by
things past, has a clearer sight of things present, and consequently does more
cautiously provide for things future. Words and Shows and Appearances do more
easily deceive the Young; but the Old see through all such varnish, and
penetrate into the inside of men and things Difficile est verba dare seni.
Proverb.
: and so are strangely stupid, if they be not much accomplished with this
virtue. Miserable is that Old Age, says Cicero Misera quippe est senectus,
quae praeter rugas and canos nil senile habet. Cicero.
, that has nothing grave besides gray hairs and wrinkles. But any man that
has made but common Observations of what has fallen out, with their Causes
and Effects, during the space of forty or fifty years, must needs understand
better, What, and How, and When a thing is to be done, than those that have
neither read, seen, or observed half so much Senectus aetate fit doctior, usu
tritior, processu temporis sapientior. Hier. ad Nepotia.
. Hence that Expression, Psalm. 119. 100. I understand more than the ancients;
which implies, that the Ancients have ordinarily the greatest stock of
understanding. Hereupon Themistocles is said to be sorry to dye, when he began
to be wise, being Ut aequalium usus dulcior, it a senex tutior est. Amb. de
offic. c. 43.
then an hundred and seven years of age: which is the common fate of mankind,
to dye even just then when they begin to know how to live; and therefore no man
should deferr his careful endeavors to get wisdom, since there is a price put
into our hands for that end, if we have but an heart to it, Prove. 17. 16.

Let it therefore be your study to get and increase in all wisdom Senectus
nostra albescat canis sapientiae, non marcescat carnis vetustate. Aug: in Ps.
112.
: chiefly for the attaining everlasting happiness. For unto man God has said,
Behold the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil, that is
understanding, Job 28. 28. For as it would be curious folly to contrive a neat
House, and then set it upon a quick-sand; so doubtless all the policy of
worldly men to get riches and a name, if they do not truly fear God, is but
like an house upon the sand, or a spiders web in the cieling, which will
quickly vanish. It Is true Wisdom for every man to choose the Chiefest Good for
his ultimate End, and then to take Gods Counsel how to obtain it. I have seen
five Princes, (said Sir Io. Mason, on his deathbed,) and bin Privy Counselor
to four, I have seen the most remarkable Observables in foreign parts, and bin
present at most State-transactions for Thirty years together, and I have
learned this, after so many years experience, that Seriousness is the greatest
Wisdom, Temperance the best Physic, and that a good Conscience is the best
Estate: yea, I would change the whole life I have lived in the Palace, for one
hours enjoyment of God in the Chapel. O that all young persons would believe
and consider this sage Observation of a dying man! For judge your own selves,
Is it wisdom to do that daily and wittingly, which must be undone? To pretend
the End, happiness; and neglect the Means, holiness? To maintain strong hope,
and yet to have no ground for it? To choose the worst of Evils, before the chief
Good? To live in Sin, and yet expect to die in Christ? To defer the greatest
business, till we have the least fit time, and strength to do it? and yet this
is the wisdom that passes current in this world.

Endeavor also to store your minds with Prudence to order your affairs aright.
There is no time, or place, or business, but there is use for this; not such
constant use for Justice, Fortitude, or many other virtues. This will render
your gray hairs really comely. I had rather, says Nazianzen, have one drop of
Prudence, than a Sea of worldly riches. Integrity and Wisdom are good
Companions. A Serpents Eye is a singular ornament in a doves head. Hereby you
will be useful to your selves, helpful to others, beneficial to all. Happy is
that City, said Plutarch, where the counsels of Old men, and the arms of Young
men concur for the Common good Consilia senum, hastas juvenum esse.
. Your time will be rightly divided, your household affairs calmly and
constantly managed, and your mind freed from the hurry and perturbation, which
fills the lives of other men. Then I saw that wisdom, excels folly; as far
as light excels darkness, Eccl. 2. 13. The first Direction which the Apostle
gives to Old men, is, Tit. 2. 2. That the aged men be sober, grave -- The
infirmity of your bodies should promote the sobriety of your minds Infirmitas
corporis est sobrietas mentis. Ambros. Hex. lib 1. c. 8.
: and folly is no where less excusable than in an aged person.

You should therefore pray incessantly unto God for this Blessing. Jam. 1. 5.
If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, and it shall be given him. And
improve your Thinking time; for meditation inriches the mind, and helps us to
draw such Inferences from what we have read and heard and seen, which will
serve for Rules of practice in every case. And especially Converse with the
Scripture, which will make you wise to Salvation. Surely there is no book under
heaven, which affords such Rules of ture Prudence for the conduct of our lives,
as the Book of Proverbs. And still remember this, that the more wisdom, the
liker you will be to God, and the more useful you will be to men. And certainly
Usefulness is next to the fruition of God, the greatest happiness of man upon
earth.

SECT. IV.
THE Fourth Grace that Old Age does ^. 4. Patience.
or should excel in, is Patience. Which is a quiet and cheerful undergoing
whatever Difficulties, or Troubles, are incident to us in this world Patientia
est honestatis and utilitatis causa, rerum arduarum ac difficilium voluntaria
and diuturna per^. Cicero.
. It extends indeed, in its largest sense, to comprehend, both Waiting Gods
time for the Blessings we want, and Bearing what crosses he inflicts upon us,
either by his Own hand or by Others. When we neither sink by Despondency, nor
rage by inordinate Passion either at the stone, or at the hand that throws it.
And this not by virtue of a Stoical insensibleness, or of some moral Arguments
which might quiet some of the Philosophers under pain or losses, but could
never do it under disgrace. But that Patience which is directed by the Example
of Christ, and strengthened by the Grace and Spirit of Christ, keeps the Soul
from secret repining, or open murmuring at any event, saves from distraction at
present and from ruin hereafter.

And herein Old Age does or should excel Patientia servunt Domino, dominum Deo
commendat: faeminar exornat, virum approbat; amatur in puero, laudatur in
juvene, suspicitur in seen. Tert. de pat. c. 15.
. They have met with many troubles in their pilgrimage; and the Scripture tells
us, that tribulation works patience, Romans 5. 3. consequently, the more
troubles, the greater patience. They have bin taught to wait for some Mercies
which they have desired, for many years; and so have bin taught Patience, which
when they have well learned, then the Mercy has been conferred. They have been
tried with many Afflictions from the hand of God, either upon their Bodies, as
Sickness, Pain, etc. sometimes by acute, sometimes by chronical Distempers; and
these have exercised and taught them Patience; or upon their Souls, as
Desertions, or other Impressions of divine Displeasure, and thereby have
learned quietly to wait for the Salvation of God; or by the Death of their dear
Consorts or Children; all which, by the blessing of God concurring therewith,
have like continual burdens on the shoulder, inured and strengthened them in
this Excellent Grace. The Aged Person has also had many provocations, losses,
and injuries from Men, which have both tried and tamed his mettle. He has been
either uncomfortably Matched, whereby his Patience has been put to it every
day; or crossed in his Children, or fixed near some unquiet Neighbor; or
harrass'd by a costly and tedious suit of Law; any of which have forced him to
exercise this Grace: Or else he has been smitten in his Reputation, or maimed
by some great loss or disappointment in his Estate, where he has had no Remedy
but Patience. I know these things do too often work the wrong way, that is,
they produce fretfulness, rage, melancholy, and other dismal effects; but in
the upright man, they sortifie his Spirits, they break the pride, security and
stubbornness of his Soul, and make him by patient continuance in well-doing,
seek for glory, honor and immortality, and so fit him for Eternal Life.

And the Aged do or should exceed those that are young herein. For the tender
shoulders of these cannot well bear these burdens: As Ephraim once, so they are
like bullocks unaccustomed to the yoke, which fret and fume, and are galled
under the aforesaid trials: Tho the Holy Ghost has told us, that it is good
for a man to bear the yoke in his youth: But commonly it is some tract of time,
before this yoke is quietly and evenly carried. Old age does most perfectly
teach this lesson. He that in his youth would quickly have answered the Lie
with his Sword, will then answer it with a smile. The tears which in our youth
we spent upon any trivial occasion, we then reserve for better purposes; and we
come to learn manners to wait Gods time for the mercies we desire. Time and
trials have taught the Old Man to digest hard words, and hard things, rather
than to fight it out. Good David could better bear Shimei's Curse when he was
grown into years, than Nabal's Uncharitableness, when he was younger: Now it
was nothing but kill and slay, at least every Male in Nabal's house; but
afterward, so let him Curse, because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David:
Who shall then say, Wherefore have thou done this? 2 Samuel 16. 10. And those
Disciples of our Savior, who in their younger years would have had Fire sent
from Heaven, to revenge the incivility of the Samaritans, they in their riper
years had learned, when reviled to bless, when persecuted to suffer it; and to
bear all indignities not only with much patience, 2 Cor. 6. 4. but with all
patience, 2 Cor. 12. 12. Such is the effect of years and experience by the
blessing of God.

And you that are in years must be inexcusable, if you be defective in this
Grace, because you have been for a long time Scholars under a Patient Master,
who has lest us an Example, that we should follow his steps; who when he was
reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2. 21,
23. You have also read and heard many convincing Discourses upon this Subject;
you have seen the folly and madness of Impatience, and of Revenge in others;
and you have had so many Crosses of your own, that it is the absurdest thing
imaginable for you to be destitute hereof. No great wonder to see an unback't
Colt to winch and curvet at the spur or whip, but if the old tried Beast do so,
he is better fed than taught. No, you should be Patterns of Patience to others.
We may well feel things as Mortal men, (says Mr. Hooper) yet overcome them as
Christian men. Outward Afflictions may prick us, but yet they should not pierce
us. The Old Soldier will not fret at hard Marches, hard Weather, hard Usage,
for he has been beaten to them: The Old Mariner repines not at the boisterous
Winds, or the threatening Waves. You are too Nice my Brother, says Hierom, if
you grudge to be Tried below, yet expect to be Crowned above.

Labor therefore to get and increase your stock of Patience: Let Patience have
her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing, Jam. 1.
4. This Grace you will daily need, and daily use. For we have need of Patience,
that after we have done the Will of God, we may receive the Promise, Heb. 10.
36. It will be like a Buckler, to save you harmless from the evil of
Affliction: Though you have Faith, Virtue, Knowledge, Temperance, yet ye must
add unto these Patience, that ye may never fall, 2 Pet. 1. 6. This will not
only bridle your Tongue, but quiet your Mind, and keep you, when dispossessed of
all other things, in possession of your own Souls Patientia iram temperat,
linguam fraenat, mentem gubernat, pacem custodit. Cyprian.
: For an impatient man, whilst he is afflicted by another, even then punishes
himself, and so is his own greatest tormenter. Alas! you must still expect a
succession of troubles, and unexpected crosses, until your Course be finished;
and if you escape these from abroad, yet you may find occasion enough for your
Patience with your own Children and Servants, and perhaps with nearer
Relations; and though you should miss of these, yet your own Distempers will
try your Patience; when you can neither eat your meat, nor live without it;
neither sleep with refreshment, nor lie awake with ease; neither endure
company, nor be contented alone; when you will be weary of every place, of
every posture, and without Patience, weary of your self: And therefore it
greatly concerns you to store your selves with this needful, this useful Grace.

And to that End, Inure your selves unto it by degrees: Strive to digest lesser
wrongs, provocations and losses, which will prepare you to be quiet under
greater. Whilst others are endeavoring to out-wit, or out-power their
adversaries, be you laboring to overcome your own resentments, to conquer your
selves: And then set before you that mirror of Patience, the Lord Jesus
Christ, who always had Right and Power on his side, and yet patiently bore the
anger of God, the reproaches of Men, and the rage of Devils. It is reported of
that noble Elziarius, that he would set himself to think of the Injuries done
to Christ, 'till he was fully contented to digest his own: For alas, each of us
deserves infinitely greater, and yet we suffer infinitely less than He did. And
this prevailed with the Apostle James and other Martyrs to express such
Patience at their Sufferings, that even that convinced some of their very
Persecutors to declare themselves Christians. Above all, Pray earnestly to him
who is called, Romans 15. 5. the God of Patience, for a sufficient portion of
this Grace: No Philosophical Arguments will compose the Mind like the Grace of
God. I have read of a Learned Man, it was Iustus Lipsius, that being on his
Deathbed, One of his Friends told him, it was needless to suggest arguments of
Patience to him that was so well read in the Writings of the Stoics;
thereupon, instead of an answer, turns him to God, saying, Da mihi, Domine
Jesus, patientiam Christianam; Lord Jesus bestow upon me the Christian Patience!
So will your Burdens be tolerable, your Life amiable, your Relations
comfortable, your Mind calm, and your Body easy.

SECT. V.
THE Fifth Excellency that does or 5. Stedfastness.
should adorn Old Age, is Stedfastness: Which is a fixed settledness of the
Soul, influencing our Life and Actions; and is opposed to that Levity and
Inconstancy which is incident to young persons. The Aged man is Steadfast in his
Mind and Judgment, and not easily unhinged there; he is Fixed in his Will, and
not easily charmed or drawn from his well-chosen Objects. In respect of God and
the things of Religion, a person in years is or should be like a Rock,
unmovable, not like the Ship that is tossed to and fro. Having considered and
weighed their Principles, no worldly consideration, no plausible harangues, no
loss or punishment will induce them easily to alter the same. In respect of
Others, their Friendship being grounded upon a firm bottom is constant, and
they have learned to overlook ordinary failings, and to put the best sense on
the words and actions of a Friend. So likewise their Conjugal Love, though the
frothy fondness of it be worn off, yet the strength and substance of it is
unquestionable and unalterable. And then as to Themselves, their Passions are
by long endeavors so moderated and regulated, that as their temper is far more
even and uniform, than once it was; so also their Actions and course of life
are more steady and consistent, than in the days of their Vanity.

I will not contend that all Aged People excel in this Stedfastness,
especially when Dotage invades Old Age; but that generally it is so, and
universally it should be so; and particular exceptions do always confirm
general conclusions: Nor do I conclude that all young People are light and
inconstant, but it is too manifest to be denied, that Childhood and Youth have
usually the large Sails, but Old Age has the solid Ballast, and and therefore
does sail more steadily and more safely. Every Wind will make impression on the
Young Tree, but the Old Oak stands firm against the Storms. The young Horse may
go more nimbly, but the tried Beast goes more steadfastly and surely. Youth is
the unsettled age; the Head unsettled, the Heart unsettled, and the Life
unsettled. When the Wise man exhorts to remember our Creator in the days of our
Youth, Eccles. 12. 1. that word Youth comes of a root signifying Choice; which
seems to imply, that Youth is a time wherein Persons are undetermined; they
have their Religion, their Relations, their Vocation to choose; but when a man
is crowned with years, then he is in a settled estate: Settled in Judgment,
settled in his Purposes, settled in his Practice, and commonly settled in his
Comfort: When the Apostle Paul was near his End, then he could say, 2 Timothy 1.
12 I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded, etc.

For indeed the Constitution and Temper of the Aged disposes them hereunto:
Their Sanguine and Mercurial days are done; their Phlegm and Melancholy further
their Stedfastness, either in good or evil. They have seen the World, the
vanities and varieties of men and things, of opinions and practices, they have
tried all things, and therefore are likelier to hold fast that which is good.
And as there is a wearisomness of the Body, so there is a certain weariness of
the Mind, which makes it desirous to be fixed, and to be at rest. And having
often heard, read and pondered the things of Religion, and also tasted the real
comfort and sweetness in them, they are not easily either flattered, or
frighted out of them. Their approach to Death adds also to their Constancy; why
should they through fear recede from their Principles, that in a short time
must dye of necessity? Hence that saying of Archbishop Whitgift, Two things
help men to be resolute in a good Cause, namely Old Age and Want of Issue. And
it is recorded, that when all the City of Athens yielded to the Tyranny of
Pisistratus, Solon only opposed him; and being interrogated by him, what made
him have such Confidence, he answered, It was his Oldage: He knew the Tyrant
could not despise him of many years; and he that cannot lose many years, needs
not fear other losses; and so may well be steadfast and unmovable in his Duty.

Let it be your Care therefore to be rooted and grounded in the Principle and
Practice of true Piety: Be not like Children tossed too and fro with every wind
of Doctrine. It is an arrant shame for you that are Old, to have your Religion
to choose, or to change it every month: It is not for you to follow fashions in
Religion: But you should be rooted and built up in Christ, and stablished in
the Faith as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving, Colos.
2. 7. Ability and Stability should be your peculiar honor. Young Persons may
have a land-flood of Devotion and Zeal: You ought to pass like a still and
constant River; you should be constant in Prayer, in Watchfulness, in Charity,
etc. While the goodness of many young People is as a morning cloud, and as the
early dew that passes away; your path should be as the shining light, that
shines more and more unto the perfect day. As the the motion of natural
bodies, when they approach their center, is more swift; so your motions should
withal be more steady. It was no honor to that Noble Marquess He dyed at 107
years, having lived in nine Kings and Queens reigns.
, who being asked how he could maintain his standing in the reign of four
Princes, who also were of different Sentiments in Religion, to return this
Answer; he performed it by imitating the twining Willow, and not the sturdy
Oak. No, it is impossible to be upright without Courage Pius esse nequit, qui
non est fortis, Dr. Sanderson.
. That Is the happy man, either young or old, who is like Athanasius, Magnes and
Adamas; of a temper and converse to attract Love and Respect; and yet of
Principles and Resolutions to withstand, in a good cause, all opposition. The
weakness of your Limbs and Senses, should be compensated with stability and
strength in your Spirit. The Aged mind alone grows young Sola men's senescens
juvenescit. Plutarch.
. We faint not, says the Apostle, but as the outward man perishes, so should
your inward man be renewed day by day, 2 Cor. 4. 16.

For this purpose, you should weigh and examine your Principles well. Those of
Religion, by the Rule of the Scriptures; those of humane Life, in the scales of
Reason: and having once well fixed them, alter them not upon every Suggestion.
The manifest cause of most men's Unstedfastness, both in Judgment and Practice,
is their rash embracing of those Points that should have been well weighed at
the first: for what they have swallowed down by Wholesale, they will Vomit up
again by Retail in time of trial. My Lord Verulam's observation is very true,
He that begins in doubts, will end in certainties; and he that begins in
certainties, will end in doubts. Add to this, a conscionable Practice of your
sound and honest Principles (...). Nazian.
. This will acquaint you with that comfort and sweetness, which will stablish
your mind in them more and more. A rotten Heart is apt to produce a giddy Head;
whereas righteousness both directs, and keeps him that is upright in the way,
Prove. 11. 5. with chap. 13. 6. All the parts and learning in the World will not
fix the Head and Heart, like Sincerity: It is good that the Heart be
established with Grace, Heb. 13. 9. Experience in Religion, will make you
steadfast in Religion. And lastly, Pray earnestly unto God to make you steadfast.
See how emphatically the Apostle Paul mentions this, 2 These. 2. 17. Now our
Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even our Father -- stablish you. For we are
weak Creatures, yea, Knowledge and Grace are but Creatures; but earnest Prayer
will engage the help and support of Almighty God, who can and will stablish,
strengthen, settle you, 1 Pet. 5. 10.

SECT. VI.
THE Sixth Grace wherein Old Age 6. Temperance.
does or snould excel, is Temperance and Sobriety Sobrietas corporis and
mentis. Rivet.
. That Is the Injunction of the Apostle, Tit. 2. 2. That the Aged men be sober,
grave, temperate. By this Temperance, I understand that Fruit of the Spirit
which bridleth our inordinate affections in all outward mercies; or more
strictly, which observes a right mean in desiring, and using the Pleasures of
the Senses: and so in respect of Meat, it is Abstinence; in respect of
Drinking, Sobriety: in respect of other carnal pleasures, Chastity. All these
the Temperate man curbs by holy Reason, and by holy Force. Hereby he sti^es the
inordinate Desire, and restrains the Use within its due bounds; he mortifies
the unlawful, and moderates the lawful pleasures and recreations of the Body;
He neither absolutely refuses them, nor inordinately desires or uses them.

Now this Grace is very proper, tho not peculiar to Old Age. They especially do
or ought to excel herein. There is indeed a Proverbial saying, that Wine is
the Vinum lac senum.
Milk of Old-men: some intemperate men there may be of every age, but God
forbid that this Proverb should be adaequate to Old Age. True it is, that where
there be the decays of Nature, there is more need of reparation, and that the
most reviving means are expedient for that end. Whereupon Plato permits ancient
Plato de legibus Dial. 2.
persons to drink more liberally, to alleviate their troubles, and to soften
their Spirits, as Iron is softened by the Fire. But commonly the Aged are by
Gods Grace, weaned from the excesses of Youth. The Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust
of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life have, too usually, their distinct Seasons of
rule, or at least molestation in the Soul of man. And the First having had its
course in the time of Youth, its reign is expired, and the Aged must now
combat the other Two as well as he can. The Decays of natural strength are
great helps to the Old-mans Temperance; he cannot, if he would, Eat and Drink,
and act his Lust as heretofore; and although this Inability does not make him a
Temperate man, yet hereby the Discontinuance of the Acts weaken the Habit; and
his contentedness therewith, and his hearty thankfulness for this reformation
may be accounted real Temperance Habeo senectutis magnam gratiam, quae mihi
sermonis aviditatem auxit, potionis and cibi sustulit. Cato in Cicerone.
: especially when he can reflect upon his former disorders with Grief, Hatred
and Shame. Now they find by experience, that a man may live more comfortably,
and healthfully with less Meat, less Drink, and less Sleep, than young people
indulge themselves withal: and other carnal pleasures are indifferent to them,
because desire does fail: and it is much better and easier to want desires,
than to fulfill them; as it is far better not to Itch, than to have the
pleasure of scratching where it itcheth.

But now the pious Old person has really crucified the Flesh with the
Affections and Lusts; His Sins did not leave him, but he has left them. They
have not heard and read the Scripture so long in vain, which every where
disgraceth and condemns all excess and riot, all Chambering and Wantonness,
and obliges all Christians to deny themselves, and to pluck out the right Eye
that does offend them. They have found by experience that as true Virtue, so
true Satisfaction is only found in a Mediocrity; and that all extremes and
inordinacies, are offensive both to the Mind and Body. I said of Laughter, it
is mad, and of Mirth, what does it? Eccles. 2. 2. This was the Verdict which
wise Solomon brought in his Old Age, when he had not withheld his Heart from
any joy, etc. yet then he concludes, all was vanity and vexation of Spirit, and
there was no profit under the Sun, Eccles. 2. 10. Besides, they who have lived
long, have seen the woeful Effects of Drunkenness, Uncleanness, and Luxury; how
many Bodies they have destroyed, how many Estates and Families they have
ruined, and what small pity the miserable Spend-thrift meets with in those
persons and places, where he has consumed his substance. These and such like
observations have contributed to the Aged man's Sobriety, they have been Pillars
of Salt to him.

So that any Licenciousness in a person of Years, as it is most pernicious to
him, so it is intolerable to him. It makes them the objects both of laughter,
scorn, and detestation. Every excess in them debilitates their Nature, sullies
their Reputation, and shakes their Grace exceedingly. When Old people fall,
they fall with a great weight, and are crushed more than younger people, and
perhaps they have more difficulty to rise again. Far more excuses are found for
the Lapses of young people, than can be pretended by the Aged; their faults are
crimes, and their crimes are prodigies Amor in puero, pudor; in virgin, rubor;
in f^mina, fur^r; in juvene, ardor; in seen, risus. Epictet.
. As their Diseases, so their Exorbitances are far more dangerous.

Let it therefore be your constant care to keep your selves within the bounds
of Temperance and Sobriety. And that both for Others sakes, and for your Own.
You should be examples, O be not stumbling Blocks to younger people. Your vices
may propagate when your persons are past it; and those that are Eye or
Ear-witnesses of your follies, may derive the practice of them to the Child
that is yet unborn; and although you may recover by true Repentance, yet they may
stumble upon you, and fall and never rise again. Entail not a Curse upon your
Posterity, do not nourish in them, that natural depravation, which in equity
you ought rather to cure. And for your Own sake be sober, be vigilant; for you
are upon the confines of the everlasting World; a World wherein all sensual
enjoyments will be for ever out of date; endeavor to go off the Stage without
a Blemish. When some Courtiers were sent to Sr Fr. Walsingham, being sick and
sad, to make him merry, God, said he, is serious in his Law, Jesus Christ was
serious in his Death, the Holy Ghost is serious in his dealing with our Souls,
all in Heaven and Hell are serious, and shall a Man that has one Foot in the
Grave, Laugh and Jest? Take warning by poor Noah, One hours Drunkenness
discovered that, which Six hundred years Sobriety had concealed. If his
inexperience did in any degree excuse him, you can make no such pretense. If
you have any regard to the Health and Vigor of your Bodies, to the quiet and
welfare of your Souls, to the pleasing and honoring of God, bridle your
appetite and check the pleasures of your Senses. In short, there is, as we
observed before, no better way to spin out your lives, to make Old Age
pleasant, and Death easy, than the exercise of this Virtue. The instance of
Cornaro a learned and rich Venetian is common, that with a sparing and orderly
Diet lived to a great Age with little inconvenience. To deny a man's self, is
the way to please himself at length; and by opposing the preternatural desires
of the Body, we contribute to the true happiness even of the Body it self.

And here comes in the use and exercise of Mortification, wherein tho a wise
man may make some steps, yet the work cannot be done without the assistance of
Gods Holy Spirit. If ye through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the Body, ye
shall live, Romans 8. 13. Implore therefore the aid of this good Spirit, who can
make you mortally to hate that which you now do ardently love; and will pluck
up the roots of that, whereof Morality does only shave the Hair. Set the
Spectacle of Death often before you, and of that endless Estate to which you are
such near Neighbors; and think how unsuitable a vain life is, to a serious
Death. Be much in Prayer, and if need be add Fasting thereunto, that your
moderation may be known unto all men, seeing undoubtedly to Old people, The
Lord is at hand.

SECT. VII.
THE Seventh Grace proper for Oldage, 7. Love.
is Charity or Love. Not that sensual or carnal Love which is proper or rather
common to Youth, and which has long since dropped off, like Leaves, in the
Autumn of their Age; but that Grace which disposes the Heart to think the
best, the Tongue to speak the best, and the whole man to promote the Welfare of
Others. The Seat or chief Mansion of this, is the Heart, which being filled
with this Grace, it is diffused every way, and the whole man is tinctured with
it. It obliges a man to Think the best of every man. Charity thinks no evil,
believes all things, hops all things, bears all things. By this we are
ready to account the Certain good things in Others, better than they are; the
certain Evils in others, less than they are; the good that is but doubtful in
others, certain; and doubtful Evils, none Charitas dicit alioram bona certa,
m^liora; certa mala, minora; bona dubia, certa; dubia mala, nulla.
. And it rests not in Opinion, but works by Desire, whereby the Heart does
unfeignedly desire the Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal good of all men. Neither
does it rest there, but shows it self in Endeavor, and that both by Word and
Deed; speaking To them, Of them, For them to God and man what may conduce
thereunto; in their Lips is the Law of kindness. Charity vaunteth not it self,
is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly, is not easily provoked, 1
Cor. 13. 5. Neither will Words satisfy it, but does actually help and
cheerfully succor every Body, as their occasion requires, and his own ability
extends.

And in this Grace does every good Old Man and Woman excel. This was the
eminent Grace of the Evangelist John in his Old Age, for he lived longer than
any of the Apostles; and his Swanlike Song still was Love, as is evident in all
his Epistles: yea, some Church Historians affirm, that when he could go no
longer by reason of his Age into the Christian Assemblies; yet he was instant
to be led or carried there, where the substance of what he was able to say,
was, little Children, love one another. And you may find, how pathetical was
Paul the Aged in his tender charity to Onesimus, Philem. 9. Being such a one as
Paul the Aged, for loves sake I beseech thee for my Son Onesimus. And this
Spirit did continue in the Ancient Christians in the Primitive times Occultis
se notis noscunt and amant mutuo pene antequam noverint. Min. Fell.
, who loved, as Tertullian tells us, as Brethren, and were ready to dye for one
another. We that did hate one another, says Justin Martyr, now do live
familiarly together, and do pray for our Enemies. In all Ages, as men have
increased in Piety, they have increased in Charity, and come to relent of their
rigor and keenness. It was Age, Experience and Consideration, as well as a
Prison that melted Bishop Ridley to accost his Brother Hooper in this manner:
However in some bymatters and circumstances of Religion, your wisdom and my
Simplicity has a little jarred, yet now I sincerely love and embrace you. You
know Rehoboams Old Counselors were for lenity, when the young were stern and
furious. It Is true, the natural tempers or painful distempers, may incline some
Old people to too much Acrimony; yet all Aged people that are considerate, have
taken more degrees in Charity, than young people have. It was an Old man in
Gibeah that had more of this Grace, than all the City besides, Judge. 19. 16.

For besides the advantage they have had of Gods holy Ordinances, the Scope
whereof is to increase our Faith and Love Principium vitae, fides; finis,
charitas: haec duo perficiunt Dei hominem. Ignatius.
; they have found by experience, that the Life and Soul of Religion lies not in
these lesser matters, that have caused the greatest noise in the World; that
every difference in Religion makes not a different Religion: so that
wheresoever they see any thing of Christ, these they love. Their Consciousness
of their own mistakes, and of their own imperfections, has forced them to more
charitable thoughts of others. They have observed, that true Grace has lived
in the midst of great infirmities; yea, they have found this Flower in diverse
persons, where they thought there had been nothing but Weeds. Being conversant
most at home in their own Souls, they have in their long experience discovered
so much Vanity and Iniquity there, that they are are very charitable Judges of
all other persons. They grow like the famous Pliny, who so past by others
offenses, as if himself had been the greatest offender; and yet was so severe
to himself, as if he would pardon no body: their Charity covers a multitude of
Sins. In short, their Age and Afflictions have so happily humbled them, that
they are ready to esteem every one better than themselves; and so they are far
from that uncharitable Censoriousness, which tears men's Names in pieces, and
keeps up a continual civil War among mankind.

And then for other Acts of Charity, who should be more ready to Give a part,
than they that know they must shortly leave the whole? who should be good in
his Stewardship, but he that is sure he must shortly be out of it? But the
noblest Charity is that which respects the Soul, which consists in Counselling,
Persuading, Reproving and Praying for Others. And Old Age is evidently
qualified for these above the young. Their Wisdom and Authority gives them a
great advantage herein: and they have found by experience, that sometimes a
word of good Counsel and charitable Reproof fitly spoken, has been like Apples
of Gold. And then for Prayer, it is observed that the Charity of young persons
therein, does begin and end at themselves; whereas the Prayers of the Aged are
much employed for the good of others. Few Children pray for their Parents, as
the Parents pray for their Children. Yea, they have learned to love and pray
for their Enemies, as well as for their Friends; and for the ungodly, as well
as for the godly. And the poorest Old Man or Woman may be rich, in these acts
of Charity.

Therefore as ye abound in every thing, in faith, in utterance and knowledge,
see that ye abound in this Grace of Charity also. It is the Apostles
Exhortation, 2 Cor. 8. 7. We use to say, that in Winter the natural heat
retreats inward, and there resides about the vital parts: ye that are in the
winter quarter of your life, let this warm Grace dwell richly in your Hearts,
and then it will influence all your words and actions. It is the Image of God,
for God is Love; it is the fulfilling of the Law, and it is the great command
of the Gospel; and tho you have Knowledge, Faith, Wisdom, Riches, etc. yet if
you have not Charity, you are nothing. You are going out of the World, now is
your time to exercise this Grace. In the World where you are going, there will
be no infirmities to cover, no poor to relieve, no injuries to forgive, no
ignorant persons to instruct, no miserable Creature to pray for: and you have
but a short time for these employments. Yea, perhaps you are reprieved all this
while for these Services; and to be useful in these and such like ways is the
greatest happiness on Earth, it is the next step to eternal Glory. Yea, nothing
should hire an Old person, or make him content to live out of Heaven with such
a Body of Sin about him, but only that they may do God and Man that service,
which cannot be done in Heaven.

And for the obtaining this sweet Grace, the Scripture tells us, that it is a
Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. and there it is ranked in the first place: It
must be sought then in the Word of God, which is the vehicle of the Spirit;
where, it being carefully read and heard, we shall find an account of the
infinite love of God to us, and of the stupendous love of Christ. There we
shall discern how nearly we are related to all men, especially to all
Christians, and how unnatural it is for one hand to be unkind to the other. And
in short, we shall there find, that Love and Charity is still the Character of
good men, and hatred and uncharitableness of the bad. And you must beg this
Grace of God, that the Spirit of Love, would plant this Grace of Love in your
Hearts. You will feel your hearts warming as you are praying, and the Lord will
fill you with this Charity which is the bond of perfectness.

And so I have done with the Virtues and Excellencies of Old Age: Whereby you
may perceive that all Old things are not to be cast away: But as Old Wood is
best to burn, Old Wine best to drink, Old Authors best to read, and Old Friends
best to trust; so Old People, if they have improved their Time aright, are good
for something Old Fish, old Oil, and an old Friend are best. Ital. Proverb.
; yea are eminently good for their Knowledge, for their Faith, for their
Wisdom, for their Patience, for their Stedfastness, for their Temperance, and
for their Charity. And so much for the Fourth Point concerning Old Age, viz.
The Graces most proper for it.

CHAP. V. The Inconveniences of Old Age.
I Am come now in the Fifth place to Cap. 5. The Inconveniences of Old Age.
examine the Inconveniences and Disadvantages of Old Age; adding withal
somewhat toward the Mitigation thereof, as I pass along. Some here set
themselves with immoderate vehemence to cry down Old Age, and to load it with
such intolerable Miseries, as might affright one: And to this purpose they
muster all the Evils which are either the effect of men's Vices, or other
separable Accidents of their Age, and put all these upon its score to inflame
the reckoning Male a particulari ad universale argument antur nec distinguere
volunt aut valent interea quae proprie senectuti convenient and ea quae ei ex
accidenti adveniunt; and quae omnibus vitae gradibus aut communia sunt aut non
infrequentia. Rivet desen. bona.
: Insomuch that some of the Old Philosophers took upon them to quarrel with
Providence, for giving man Life, and thereby involving him in a continual state
of misery. And all this, partly out of their Ignorance of man's Primitive
happiness, and woeful fall, and partly out of their dim-sightedness about his
endless felicity; about all which material points they lived in great
uncertainty.

Others on the Contrary have been ready so to mince the matter, as if there
were nothing in Old Age, but what is desirable, guilding its hairs and
smoothing all its wrinkles; as if the Spiritual advantage did annihilate the
corporal burdens. The truth dwells, as I conceive, between these extremes: And
it must be granted, that as the dreggs of the purest Wines are left in the
bottom, so Old Age has many Inconveniences peculiar to it Senectus mare
malorum. Plaut.
; for which cause those days are called Evil days, wherein the man has no
pleasure, or with which he is greatly displeased Extreme displicent. Geier. in
loc.
, Eccles. 12. 1. But yet the same Old Age has diverse Privileges to balance
them; and their pressures are not properly Miseries, because there is abundance
of Comfort, and Benefit, which mitigate them Miseria est copia tribulationis
and inopia consolationis.
.

We have an Elegant Description of many of them in that Twelfth Chapter of
Ecclesiastes, verse. 2, 3, etc. Then the Sun, and the Light, and the Moon, and
the Stars will be darkened; that is, all Outward Comfort or Prosperity, whether
by Day or by Night will be eclypsed and withdrawn from us: And the clouds will
return after the rain, that is, one bodily Distemper and outward Trouble will
successively follow another. Then will the keepers of the house tremble, that
is, the arms and hands which defend the Body, will by reason of their cold and
dry temper, shake and quiver. And the strong men will bow themselves, that is,
the thighs and legs, which have strongly born up the structure of the Body,
will be weak, and need the support of a staff to assist them. And the grinders
will cease, because they are few, that is, the Teeth which chew and grind our
meat, will break, rot, and fall out, so that being reduced to a few, they will
be unable to do their office. And those that look out of the windows, will be
darkened, that is, the Eyesight will fail, the Organs of the Eye, through
which, as through a window, the Soul looks out, being dried up and weakened. And
the doors shall be shut in the streets, that is, the Lips and Mouth will be
disabled from speaking, or eating. When the sound of the grinding is low, that
is, Digestion which is furthered by chewing, and perfected in Chylification,
Sanguification, etc. will be obstructed. And he shall rise up at the voice of
the bird, that is, our Sleep will be so shallow, that the least noise will
awake us, and so short, that it will prevent the Cock-crowing. And all the
daughters of music shall be brought low, that is, our Ears will grow dull, so
that as we cannot so we care not for the sweetest music. Also they shall be
afraid of that which is high, that is, we shall by reason of weariness,
dizziness, or shortwindedness, be afraid of mounting up to high places, and
attempting such high things, as in youth we adventured upon. And fears shall be
in the way, that is, we shall be afraid of and in our Iourneying, lest we dash
our weak and weary foot against a stone. And the almond-tree shall flourish,
that is, our Head will grow hoary, like the almond tree which soon ripens. And
the grasshopper shall be a burden, that is, the least weight shall load our
infirm Body; yea we being then like enough to grasshoppers, will grow burdens to
our selves and others. And desire shall fail, that is, our Appetite to meat,
and our desire to Marriage-imbraces will be cooled and cease by degrees. At
length the silver cord will be loosed, that is, the Chine-bone with its marrow,
and the Nerves and Fibers thereunto belonging will be resolved and weakened. And
the golden bowl will be broken, that is, the vessel and membrane that contains
the Brain, which is aptly called golden, both for its color and value, will at
last be shattered. And the pitcher will be broken at the fountain, that is, the
Veins will cease from doing their office, at the right Ventricle of the Heart,
which is the fountain of life, and so our blood stagnating we are soon
extinguished. And the wheel will be broken at the cistern, that is, the great
Artery which is knit to the left side of the Heart, by which the Blood is
derived into the parts, ceases its action and the Pulse with it, which are the
immediate forerunners of Death. And then the Dust returns to the Earth as it
was, and the spirit returns unto God who gave it. Thus you see Man's Body, like
some curious Edifice, first battered by various Storms, at length the Roof and
Walls decay, and at last falls to the ground, but our Blessed Redeemer has
provided for the Inhabitant an house not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens.

SECT. I.
AND now let us more distinctly survey. 1. It is deprived of Pleasures.
the Inconveniences of Old Age; the chief whereof are these following.

First, The Aged are Deprived of many Pleasures. They cannot divert themselves
by Hunting, Hawking, Fishing: They can neither well ride abroad, nor walk about
home. They have done with Visits, and Feasts, and Music: All the recreations
of sense are generally tastless to them. Yea, they have scarce any pleasure in
their meat, and drink, and sleep: So that their Condition seems to be sad and
lamentable. And we have the substance of all this confessed by an Old man
himself, namely Barzillai, 2 Samuel 19. 35. I am this day fourscore years old;
and can thy servant taste what I eat, or what I drink? can I hear any more the
voice of singing men and singing women? q. d. These things will signify
nothing to me; they have forsaken me, and I value them as little. Here you have
the Verdict which Barzillai brings in the Case. Yea instead of Pleasure, a
constant Sadness takes place in their Countenance without, and, as may be
judged, in their Hearts within. Sobs and sighs are the accent of their
language, and their complaints are frequently mixed with tears. Their Condition
then must needs be miserable, when they have such constant heaviness within,
and no recreation without to alleviate it. Company burdens them, and
Solitariness saddens them. Yea they are loath that any body should be merry
about them: So that they seem to lead a dolorous life, and to be estranged from
all manner of Pleasure.

Now Pleasure is the life of Life: What is Life without Delight? why do men
toil to get Estates, but for the pleasure they take in them? why do others hunt
for Applause, and climb for Honor, but to please their fancy and their humor?
even the Scholar would take leave of his Books, if he had not Delight in them:
So that Pleasure acts all mankind, and rules the world. Now those years are
lamentable, wherein a man shall say, I have no pleasure in them. And this makes
some Old People weary of their lives, they reckon that a Life stripped of joy and
comfort, is not worth the keeping.

Nevertheless, Old Age may support it self very well under this Inconvenience:
Inasmuch, as the Pleasures they are deprived of, are in themselves and to their
experience, dangerous Enjoyments: For nothing is more apt to disorder and fully
the Soul, than carnal Pleasure. Those very Recreations which may be harmless in
themselves, yet too commonly lead to Intemperance, to Lasciviousness, to
Quarrels, and other mischiefs. Now if a Dish be never so palatable, yet if
there be but danger of Poison in it, no wise man will meddle with it: Therefore
Tully brings in Cato congratulating with himself, that he was delivered from
the slavery of Pleasure, and concludes, that it is a singular Privilege of
Old Age, that it frees us from that which is most pernicious in youth Magnum
munus senectutis est, quod id nobis aufert, quod in adolescentia est
vitiosissimum. Cicer.
. And whatever regard weak men may have to these Vanities, the wisest among the
very Heathens have concluded, that there is no plague so deadly to man as the
pleasures of the body Nulla capitalior pestis est, quam corporis voluptas.
Architas Tarent.
. And that comes to pass through the depravation of our Natures, whereby we can
hardly enjoy them, but we run mad upon them; we exceed the limits, and miss the
ends which should be observed in the using of them. Wherefore Cicero tells of
Sophocles, who being ask^d, whether he did still converse with Womankind,
answered, The Gods have done better for me, I have willingly left that furious
Master Dii melipra libenter (...) tanquam a Domino ^urioso pro^ugi. Cicer. de
senect.
. Indeed the greatest part of the Pleasures aforesaid, do belong only to the
brutal part of man, and consequently the defect of them little concerns the
Rational Creature. For, as a late worthy Author Gentleman's Calling.
says, None can think God so unkind to his own Image in humane nature, as in
dispensing Felicity to assign the larger share to the Beast. No, all these
sensual Pleasures are so distracting, or so fulsome, or so transient, that the
utmost fruition of them, cannot make a man happy, nor the want of them
miserable. And this is the more Evident, in that the wisest men have found the
greatest Pleasure, in refusing those pleasures; and as an Epicure has eaten
for his pleasure, so many an Abstemious man has professed, that he has forborne
for his pleasure also.

Again, as the Aged person is deprived of these Pleasures, so he is freed from
any Desires after them. As his sensual Delights fail, so his Desires to them
fail also. As he has not the Pleasure of Scratching, so he is free from the
trouble of Itching, and what man ever complains of such a want? We are never
molested by the want of any thing, which we do not desire Nihil autem molestum,
quod non desideramus. Non caret is, qui non desiderat. Cicer.
. Neither is Old Age without it is particular Pleasures. Tully tells us of
diverse Old-men, that diverted themselves with great delight in their Studies.
And for those that have any smattering of Learning, there is no Earthly
Pleasure comparable to that of penetrating into the works of Creation and
Providence, of observing the Natures, Causes, and Effects of those things, the
Surface whereof only is known to younger people.

Furthermore, the Religious Old person has an unexpressible Pleasure in the
Reflection of a well-spent Life, and upon the various Preservations and
Deliverances, which the Lord has vouchsafed him, out of many Temptations and
Afflictions. They have also the solid comfort of seeing their Posterity grow up
in the endowments of Mind, Body or Estate; and so of a Generation after them to
serve and honor God, while the World stands.

There are also several honest Recreations, in which their Years do not hinder
them. And however, it can be no disparagement to them, if they can take as much
Pleasure in Reading and Meditating upon Gods Word, as ever they did in any
other Divertisement whatsoever (...). Plato.
. This is certain, that their Pleasures are more Pure, more Sound, more Strong,
and more Lasting, than the frothy and unsatisfactory pleasures of Sense and
Sin, which are but for a Season.

Finally, Sickness of Body or Trouble of Mind, to both which the Young are
equally obnoxious as the Old, are able to divorce the youngest persons from all
sensible Pleasures, and to cloth their Faces with sadness: so that this
Inconvenience must not be so appropriated to Old Age, but that any Age may
partake thereof. Even St. Augustine tells us, that in his younger years, he had
contracted such sadness upon his Spirits upon occasion of his good Mothers
Death, that nothing could comfort him. He went into the Bath, hoping for some
refreshment thereby, but his sorrow met him when he came out again. A thousand
Accidents may fix such sorrow even upon young people, which all the Pleasures
in the World cannot remove.

And tho the consideration of their own and others Sins, and of the Effects of
them, do make them often sad, yet there is both a secret comfort at the bottom
of it, and a certain Joy at the end of it; they know what belongs to the
Laughter of the Soul, and have frequent tastes of the joy that is unspeakable.

SECT. II.
A Second Inconvenience which attends 2. Strength and Beauty decreased.
Old Age, is this, That their Strength and Beauty is decreased (...). P. mi^.
. Those Arms and Hands which once were able and useful for any employment, are
now scarce strong and steady enough to feed themselves. The Legs and Thighs
that have carried them many a pleasant journey, yea, to many an holy Exercise,
are grown stiff and weak, and grudge to carry them up Stairs to Bed. Yea, that
Back which was the support of the whole building, and many a Load that was
piled upon it, begins to bow and bend, and can scarce carry it self erect.
Their Parts and Members in general are quite enervated and spent, as if they
were weary of their Employment; so that there seems to be left little of a Man
but his Shape: according to the Proverb, Senex est, and non est. He is old, and
so is Nobody. Like some ruinated Palace, here was the stately Porch, there the
fair Staircase, the shape of a fair Parlour below, and the shadow of an
handsome Chamber above: so here, the Carcass of the Man remains, but the Beauty
is changed into wrinkles, and the Strength into weakness. They had a pleasant
prospect in their Glass, but their Flesh has bid them farewell, their Roses
and Lillies are withered, and a wan duskishness has taken possession: their
Strength and Beauty are buried both together: So that it was a Saying among the
Romans, Sexagenarius de ponte dejiciendus. He is sixty, make away with him.

For when a man's Strength is gone, he seems to be useless. He can neither
defend himself, nor help others. He can neither fight in War, nor labor in
Peace. Whether he be in the Temple, or in the Campaign; whether he be in the
Shop or in the Field; he is quickly weary. He that could run to Sin, can hardly
creep to Church. He that had Strength to vanquish his Adversary, has now
scarce strength to wrestle with his Cough: and the burden of his discourse is,
I have known the time, that I could have done this and that. Thus Milo that
prodigious man of strength, when coming in his Old Age to see them exercise in
the Olympic Games, is said to look down with tears on his own Arms, and to
cry, Alas, these now are dead. Yet this Loss some Aged persons can better bear,
than Others can digest the decay of their Beauty. O to be lean, withered, and
deformed vexes them at the Heart. They cannot look upon themselves with
Patience: and they conclude, that when they be so unwelcome to themselves, they
must be unacceptable to every body else, Job 14. 20. Thou changest their
Countenance, and sendest them away.

But yet neither of these Inconveniences are chargeable upon Old Age it self.
For as Tully well observes Intemperans Adolescentia effaetum corpus tradit
senectuti. Cicer.
, the defects of strength, whereof we are sensible, do rather proceed from the
Vices of our Youth, than from the fault of Old Age. An intemperate Youth
transmits a weak body unto the time of Old Age Ista ipsae defectio virium,
adolescentiae vitiis* efficitur saepius, quam senectuti. Id.
, and then we lay all the blame on Age. Galen in one place tells us, About the
28th. year of my Age, when I knew there was a certain way to preserve Health, I
followed the same all my life after, so that I was never Sick but of an Ague
for a day, and that seldom, and thereby he was vegete and brisk at Sevenscore
years of Age. And M. Valerius Corvinus was strong enough to be the sixth time
Consul, when he was an hundred years old. Whereas on the contrary a Luxurious
youth, produces a loathsome Age. As the Thief in the Candle wastes it more than
the Flame; so any Intemperance or Incontinence, does wast the Strength and
Beauty more than years.

Neither is Old Age alone subject to these Evils. For one Weeks Sickness, to
which Youth is as liable as Old Age will ruin your Strength and spoil your
Beauty, as much as twenty years time can do. How many are crippled in their
Youth? how commonly does the Smallpox disfigure their beauty! David himself
complains, Psalm. 102. 23. He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my
days. And he cries, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days. So
that these Decays must not be impropriated to Old Age; any Age may be
afflicted with them as well as that.

Neither is this Loss so insupportable, if we consider the true Nature and
Value of these Mercies. They are but bodily accomplishments; they are not the
endowments of the Soul. Many Brutes surpass the youngest in Strength, and many
Flowers surpass them in Beauty. Why should I, says Cato in Tully, now more
desire the strength of a Young man, than I should, when young, desire the
strength of a Bull or Lion? There is the like absurdity in both these desires.
Or as he says in another place, we may as reasonably in our Youth, call back
the State of Childhood, which few will do, as in Old Age to expect the Strength
and Beauty of youth, which is past and gone. You have, if it be not your own
fault, the Privileges proper to your Age, and according to the Old Observation
it is far better to want the strength of Milo, than the Wisdom of Pythagoras
Non sunt senibus vires; nec postulantur vires a senectute. Cicero.
. Every Age has its peculiar Talent, to have them in perfection is not to be
expected upon Earth. We should be Thankful for the Strength and Features we
have had, and bewail our abuse of them, and conclude, It Is well that all our
Comforts have not left us together.

But the great support under these defects is, As the outward man perishes, to
find the inward man renewed day by day: what the River loses on the one side,
it gains on the other, and then all is well enough: the inward man is the
better man. Let strength and beauty go, since they will not stay, strive that
you may be Strong in Grace, and Beautiful within. Those things may make you
acceptable unto Men, but these will render you lovely both unto God, and to all
wise men. When you can say with him in the Poet Euripides.
, tho my foot be slower, yet my mind is swifter. When Severus the Emperor was
sick of the Gout at York, he was asked by one of his Nobles, how he being so
Lame, could rule so vast an Empire; he told him, that he ruled the Empire with
his Brain, not with his Feet. While the Head and Heart are strong, it passes
less, how it fares with the Arms and Legs. Faith, Hope and Charity are
Beauties, that will not fade Quid times ne te abjiciat in tempore senectutis
cum defecerit virtus tu^? Immo tunc in te erit virtus ejus, quando defecerit
virtus tua. Aug. in Psalm. 70.
: and the decays of the Body do by the blessing of God, further the true vigor
of the Soul. For the Soul is a distinct Substance, and as the House may be
battered by a Tempest, and yet the Inhabitant merry in it all the while: so an
holy Soul may prosper very well, tho the Body be lame and crazy. And this
Decrease of Strength and Beauty are very useful, to awaken the Soul from that
Lethargy, which is natural to it; they deprive us only of that which is the
fuel of our Lusts, and of our security. Our strength has not weaned us from
the World, God will try what feebleness will do. Briskness and Beauty has been
a snare, these being removed, perhaps He may now speak with you, and be heard.
When you have seen an end of all perfection, then he will show you that his
Commandments are exceeding broad, Psalm. 119. 96.

SECT. III.
A Third Inconvenience upon Old people; 3 Faculties weakened.
is, That they are weakened in their Faculties. Their Apprehensions dull, their
Phantasy barren, their Memories broken, and their Affections dry. Formerly they
could have penetrated into things, they could have learned any thing; now they
are so clouded, that they fumble at the plainest things. They could have soared
by their Fancy, and coined variety of notions; which they found to be a great
help to their devotion and otherwise, but their Invention now is grown poor,
and their Notions flat. But the most sensible loss is of their Memory, whereby
formerly they could have produced things both new and old; but now their Memory
is so woefully shattered, that this day forgets what yesterday said and did. O
the excellent things that they have heard and read: and now they are like water
spilt on the Ground, no notices left that ever such things had been within.
Time was, their Love and Zeal for God, and their Hatred to Sin was strong as
Death, and ardent as the Coals of Fire, which has a most vehement flame: many
waters could not quench it. Their holy Ioys and Sorrows were transcendent;
penitential Tears were frequent with them: But now their Hearts are cold, and
their Eyes are dry. These Wheels of the Soul are gone, and thereby their motion
is sadly interrupted.

Now this manifest stroke upon their Faculties, is a very sensible
Inconvenience. The Decay of the Outward man might be someway tolerable, but
this inward Decay sinks their Spirits. When holy David said, Psalm. 6. 2. My
bones are vexed, his distress was great, but when he adds in the next verse, my
Soul also is sore vexed, his case was more lamentable. What comfort can a man
have, when his Apprehension is grown blunt? What Is a Knife good for, when the
mettle is gone? When a man can attain little, and retain nothing? The
deficiency of these is a great impediment in all humane affairs, but of greater
consequence in Religious matters. The Communion which the Soul has with God is
in the Word and Prayer. How disconsolate must the Heart be, when one can
remember almost nothing of what he reads or hears? When his affections flagg,
and his words freeze in Prayer? Why, he thinks he has lived long enough, he
feels himself more than half dead already. The House is left standing, but all
the rich Furniture is gone, and what can be said to mitigate this misery, or to
reconcile any body to Old Age?

To stop any further Impatience, Consider, 1. That this great Decay in the
Faculties does not befall every Aged person. Diverse there are and have been,
that retain the free use of their Faculties till they dye. How many does Tully
name, as Simonides, Stesichorus, Isocrates, Hesiod, Homer, Pythagoras,
Democritus, Socrates, Plato, etc. who lived long, and yet continued a course of
Studies as long as their life? In omnibus iis studiorum agitatio vitae aequalis
fuit* Cicer.
And he tells us there particularly of Sophocles, whose Sons accused him for a
Dotard in his Old Age, till he before the Judges repeated the Tragedy of
Oedipus, which he had newly written, and so was by them acquitted. And Seneca
tells of himself then in years, that he was able to repeat Two thousand Names
in Order, so faithfully did his Memory stick to him in his Old Age. And there
are many Instances every day of fresh and lively parts in withered Bodies. Yea,
for the most part we may observe that according to the Old saying, Omnia quae
curant Senes meminerunt. What old people most regard, they best remember. They
seldom as Tully observes, forget their Bonds, their Mortgages, what they owe,
or what is owing unto them, or where they have laid up their Treasure. So that
this charge lies not against all Old people, nor in all cases.

2. These Decays proceed not from Old Age only, but many times from Sloth and
Negligence. Their Faculties would continue more entire to them, if they did
exercise them with Study and Industry. but the best metal will rust with
disuse, and the meanest by constant use will be kept bright and in good order.

3. The blastingof Parts is not peculiar to Old Age. For many Diseases and
other Accidents do often Eclypse our Faculties as well as Old Age. Witness
Messala Corvinus, who was so weakened in his Head, that he forgot his own Name.
Yea, many a man's bad Morals have spoiled his good Intellectuals, before he has
made one step into Old Age. And therefore this misery is not to be confined to
Old Age, which neither attends all old people, nor only such, nor merely upon
the account of their Age.

4. There is this Comfort, that tho all these Decays be the fruit of Sin, yet
in themselves they are rather Afflictions, than Faults, and so are more
ordinable to our good. How much better is the Decay of our faculties, than the
perver^ use of them? Nay, how many things may we afford to forget, rather than
choose to remember? Again, as there may be quick Apprehension, clear fancy, and
firm memory without one grain of Grace; so there may be strong Graces, where
there are but lame Faculties. You may have a warm Heart, tho you have but a
weak Head. The Favor of God is not determined by our natural parts, but is
disposed according to his everlasting Covenant; according to which he will
require no more than he gives. He will welcome him that improveth his Two
talents to Four, with the same words as he was received, that made Ten of his
Five.

And finally, It is a Mercy that the use of your Faculties is not wholly lost;
that you are able, in some measure, to expound the Book of Ecclesiastes
concerning the Vanity of all things below, though you cannot so clearly unfold
the Book of Canticles; that you are able to understand and choose the best
things; that you can press others, to the things that you cannot now perform
your selves. An Old man can direct, though he cannot work. When David was
almost spent, yet if you read 2 Samuel 22. (...) 23 Chapters, you will find his
Last words were not in vain. In short, in unavoidable Shipwracks, as these are,
we must not vainly murmur at what we have lost, but thankfully and diligently
improve what we have left; for it is certain, that in this case habenti
dabitur; to him that has and improveth what he has, it shall be given, and he
shall have abundance.

SECT. IV.
A Fourth Inconvenience incident to. 4. Senses decayed.
Old Age, is the (...) (...) their Senses; and especially in ^ose which are
called Senses of Discipline, Seeing and Hearing, by which as through windows
Light is derived into the Soul. For as in Natural things nothing is found in
the Understanding, which was not before in the senses; so in Spiritual things,
the Mysteries of Religion are not invented by our Minds, but conveyed to us by
the sacred Oracles. And therefore it is very probable that Satan bears a
particular spite to these, as some have observed from the Persons possessed by
him, whom he so frequently struck deaf, and dumb, and blind. But it is evident,
that as by these Doors sin entered into the Soul, so we find our Decays sooner
in them, than in our other Senses. The Eye it grows dim, and the Ear it grows
dull, and both grow worse and worse, and that without hopes of Cure. This was
the case of the Patriarch Isaac, Genesis 27. 1. And it came to pass, that when
Isaac was old and his Eyes were dim, so that he could not see, etc. whereupon
using his Hands for Eyes, he was mistaken in his own Sons. Indeed the Degrees
of these Decays are different, in some less, in some greater: but as in Houses
the Windows suffer first and most; so in our houses of Clay, the Organs of
sight and hearing, do more or less, wax out of tune, before the Fabric fall.

Now the Decays of the Eye and Ear are grievous Afflictions; when one can
scarce discern one thing, or person, or one letter from another; to continue in
a perpetual night or twilight, how uncomfortable must it be? Or, to see people
speak, and yet scarce to hear what they say, it is next to being buried alive.
For man is a sociable creature; and the All-wise God saw that it was not good
for Adam himself, to be alone: but the Privation of these senses leaves a man
to himself alone. He sits alone and keeps silence, because he has born it
upon him. He is liable to be abused and injured both in word and deed, and is
incapable to help himself. He is also rendered useless; hereupon T. Manlius
Torquatus excused himself from the Consulship, saying it was not fit he should
be entrusted with the Lives and Fortunes of others, that could not see or hear,
but with others eyes and ears: yea, which is worst of all, such persons are
precluded from the Means of Grace and Salvation. There is no better company
sometimes than a good Book, but they cannot see a letter. And then Faith comes
by Hearing, and it is preserved, and increased by the same means; but let them
press never so near, they can scarce hear a distinct word, much less a whole
sentence: and what a dry and dead Soul must that be, that lives out of the road
of these ordinary helps?

It is some Question whether of these losses is the greater, of the Eyesight
or of the Hearing. And upon some accounts the latter seems to be the sadder
loss of the two; partly because God has ordained Hearing, to be the ordinary
Means of Grace and Comfort: partly because there are no such, at least no such
ready and commodious Helps yet found out, for the Dullness of the Ear, as there
are for the Dimness of the Eye. However, the Decays of either of them,
especially of Both these senses, are a great Disadvantage, and a heavy burden
upon Oldage.

Notwithstanding all this allegation, Old Age is not altogether so miserable as
it is painted. For there are many Aged People, of whom it may be said, as it
was of Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 7. his Eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated:
So it pleases the Lord to continue to many Aged persons Constant Visus and
Auditus, nec quicquam in iis imminutum experior. Guil. River. aetatis 70.
, very great vivacity in both those Senses, the greater cause they have to be
thankful for the same. But though it must not be denied, that for the most
part Old Age is dim of sight Nec dum caligant oculi eo usque ut perspicillis
opus sit. And. Rivet. aetat. 78.
and dull of hearing; yet it is as true, that even these decays are incident to
younger persons. How many young people may we meet with, that are defective in
one or other of them? Some that are purblind, others dim-sighted, some from
their birth, some by casual accidents, some by distempers: nay, it is one of
the wonders of Gods Providence, that considering the folly and rashness of
Children, any of us carry our Eyes untouched unto elder years: so that neither
is this affliction to be confined to Old Age. Yea, if we grant that these
Defects should unavoydably befall Old people, yet they do not always make them
useless, and then all is well enough. Even Blind and Deaf persons have bin more
serviceable in their places, than multitudes of some people, that have their
eyes and ears. Tully tells of diverse, that were wholly dark, yet Ornaments to
their Country. In particular, he relates of Appius, that was old and blind,
yet retaining his Authority, he governed a great Family with that dexterity,
that his Children feared him, his Neighbors respected him; and when a
dishonorable Peace was likely to be made with Pyrrhus, he caused himself to be
carried in his Chair to the Senate, and there did effectually interpose to
hinder it.

But that which should chiefly support a wise and good man under these Decays
of the Senses, is, The comfortable review of the right use he has made of
them, that he has not used them as Instruments of unrighteousness unto Sin,
but as the Instruments of righteousness unto God; or an hearty Grief for his
Abuse of them: And the joyful Prospect of the Resurrection, when all our
Imperfections will be done away, and our vile bodies made like Christ's glorious
body. There Is no body much grieved at the want of repair in a House which he is
leaving, when he is ready to go to one that will need reparation no more. Yea,
there is cause of Thankfulness, that we have enjoyed the use of these Senses so
long, whereas we might have bin born blind, and deaf, and dumb: but especially,
that God has given us a spiritual Eye, and an inward Ear. Let that Soul
exceedingly rejoice, said Basil, that has an Eye to discern invisible things,
even to behold him with whom it shall dwell for ever. And thus Antony the
Hermit comforted Didymus. You should not, says he, take it heavily, that you
want such Eyes as Mice and other brute Animals enjoy, but rather reckon your
self a blessed man, in having such eyes as Angels have, whereby you may behold
God himself. Sozom. lib. 3. c. 14. Hieron. ep. ad Abigaum.


And through the Goodness of God it often falls out, that these outward Defects
are more than compensated with greater measures of Understanding and of Memory.
He may well be contented to lose an Eye or Ear, which must perish at last, that
in lieu thereof receives a greater portion of Faith, Love, Wisdom and Patience,
and so becomes the better man, and the better Christian.

It is also some alleviation of this Affliction, to consider that all these
Visible things are but Vanity, yea vanity of vanities. That the Eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the Ear filled with hearing, Eccles. 1. 2. 8. And
that whose wants his Sight or Hearing, escapes many a Temptation, which do
frequently surprise the Soul through those Windows: and that, as at other
times, so especially in the Service of God. How often does the Heart walk after
the Eyes, and so steal away from God? How apt is every noise, to disorder the
Soul? so that as we are deprived of the comfort of these Senses, so we are
freed from the snares that attend them. And the Answer is not to be forgotten
which Maris the Godly Bishop of Chalcedon gave to Julian the Apostate, who
upbraided him, that his God had not cured him of his Blindness; which was, That
he praised his God with all his heart for his Blindness, whereby he was kept
from seeing such an ungracious face, as his was.

And lastly, let us that feel these Decays, greatly magnify the Lord, who has
directed us to the use of Glasses and Spectacles, whereby we have in a manner
new Eyes put into our Heads, and are enabled to read, and write, and work, even
to the very Sunset of our Lives. This is so great a Mercy, that we should do
well to take thankful notice of it, every time we use them, to the Praise of
God, who is the Father of Lights, and from whose holy Spirit comes the
knowledge of witty Inventions.

SECT. V.
THE Fifth Inconvenience incident to. 5. Distemper and Pain.
Old Age is, That it is burdened with Distemper and Pain. Thus Asa, 2 King. 15.
23. in the time of his Old Age was diseased in his feet. Then Aches and
Diseases take possession of every part. Megrims and Dizziness seize on the
Head; Catarrhs; Ptisick and Astma's on the Lungs; Palsyes on the Nerves;
Weakness and Pain on the Back and Loins; Gravel and Stone on the Reins and
Bladder: The Gout on the Joints; The Hypochondriack Melancholy on the Spleen;
The Colic on the Gutts; and lastly, a Dropsy or an Hectic, which carry the
man away. So that an Aged person is Senectus incurabilis morbus.
a very Hospital, and Old Age is it self an incurable Disease, and any other
added to it makes the case desperate. Some of them indeed speed better than
others, but usually if they escape Acute diseases, some Chronical distemper
attends them to their Graves.

Now this is a very sensible Inconvenience: None of these afflictions are
joyous, but grievous with a witness. They vex and torment the Body, that a man
has no mind to live, and yet no power to dye. Hear Job, c. 7. 20. I am a
burden to my self. Job 10. 1. My soul is weary of my life. The Old person cries
out with him, Job 16. 12. I was at ease, but he has broken me asunder, he has
taken me by my neck and shaken me to pieces; -- he cleaves my reins asunder,
and does not spare, he pours out my gall upon the ground. He breaks me with
breach upon breach, etc. These Distempers and Pain imbitter all worldly
comforts; House, goods, Money, Friends, Relations, they are all dead to a man
that is sick and in pain. They deprive a man of himself, he has Ears and Eyes,
but no comfortable use of them: those things that used to refresh him, now
offend him; his Meat, Chair, his Bed tires him; his Friends, their absence
offends him, and he is disturbed with their presence; poor wretch! he is not
well, and nothing is well about him, as to the giddy all things turn round.
These also waste his Estate, what will not one spend for ease and health? one
Remedy is commended and used, and then another; one Physician employed, and
then another; skin for skin, all shall go for Life and Health. Yea, these have
a sad influence upon the Soul. When it is lodged in a ruinous body, it is
stifled within it self for want of motion, and move it cannot, or but lamely
for want of Organs Dr. Harris his Sermon on Hezekiah's recovery.
. It is like a traveller with a tired Horse; he spurs and strains, but his
Horse is foundred; so here, the Soul would pray, and meditate, and fly upward,
but the dead weight of a crazy Body hinders; so that both his flesh upon him
has pain, and his Soul within him does mourn, Job 14. 22.

But yet this Burden is not to be appropriated to Old Age, as if they and they
only were the subject of distempers and of pain. For, if we observe it, we
shall find Diseases more common yea and more dangerous among Young people, than
among Old Facilius in morbos incidune adolescentes, gravius aegrotant, tristius
curantur. Cicer.
. In the Sacred Story you will meet with more young People brought to our
Savior for Cure, than Old. There was Iairus daughter, there was the Noblemans
son, there was the Syrophenicians daughter, and then the Centurions servant,
with many others. In contagious Diseases it is evident that they are sooner
infected, and every Register will inform us, that a far greater number of
Infants and Young People are yearly carried to their long home, than of Aged
Persons. And then for Casualties, there are far more of young and middle-aged
persons, that are slain and taken captives, than of the Old.

Neither are all Aged people so laden with these pains and distempers; many of
them having a very convenient measure of health to their lives end. Thus Tully
brings in Cato at eighty four years of age declaring, that notwithstanding
these years, he was well enough to appear in the Senate, to defend his Client,
and to entertain his Friends: And Masinissa, King of Mauritania, that at
fourscore and ten years old, he would not be persuaded to ride in his journeys,
or to be covered on his head in the hardest frost, or sharpest storm. And one
of the old men mentioned in the first chapter, made nothing of walking twenty
miles to dine with a Relation, when he was above an hundred years old. Neither
are these Diseases always the fruits of Old Age, but rather of an heedless and
intemperate youth. This lays up such crudities, surfeits and noxious humors,
which lurk in us till Old Age, and then seize upon us; and then we find fault
with the Choler in our Stomach, but forget the sweet meats which have caused
it. So that this Inconvenience does neither befall all Old People, nor only
them, nor only upon the account of their Old Age.

The best Supports however for the Aged under their Maladies, are a deep Study
on the Wisdom, Power, Goodness, and Promises of God. His Wisdom, whereby he
knows what condition is best for us. His Power, whereby he has all Diseases at
his Command, as the Centurion had his servants. His Goodness, whereby he pities
us more than the tenderest Parent does his weak Child; who also knows our
frame, and remembers that we are but dust, Psalm. 103. 13, 14. His Promises,
that he will not afflict without need, Lam. 3. 33. that he will correct in
measure, Jer. 30. 11. that he will not leave us, Psalm. 23. 4. that all shall
work for the best, Romans 8. 28. that he will cease, when his good Ends are
accomplished, Lam. 3. 22.

And then we should revolve the great Benefit and use of them. For by our
Distempers the Lord is pleased to show us more effectually the frailty of our
Condition, the Evil of sin, the Vanity of the World, and many other Lessons
that are not commonly learned otherwise. It Is plain, that these are fair
warnings to us to provide a better house for the Soul, that will endure. In
this Disease, said Old Olevian, I have learned to know aright what sin is, and
what the Majesty of God is. Nay, said that Learned Rivet near his death, I have
learned more Divinity in these Ten days of my Sickness, than in Fifty years
before; it has sent me home into my self. And now who would not be Content
with such useful Discipline? To conclude, try it who will, there is no
Condition of Life without some Inconvenience. Marriage is desired, they are S.
Basil's words Hom. 11. in Hex.
, but how many troubles in it? Children are longed for, but how many griefs
with them? rich People are counted happy, but how many thorns are found there?
These are the tributes of Life, which if a man know how to bear patiently, his
Soul will be bettered, and his Virtues adorned. Our business is to prepare for
them beforehand, to lay up a stock of Prayers, of Patience, of Promises, of
Faith, of Evidences; and when they come, to possess our Souls in patience, to
resign up our selves to the holy will of God, and if we cannot turn off this
our Burden, to carry it with all the ease and satisfaction we can; and to keep
a sound mind, if we cannot have a sound body.

SECT. VI.
A Sixth Inconvenience in Old Age, is,. 6. Broken with Crosses.
that it is broken with Crosses and outward Troubles. These, though they meet
us in every stage of our life, yet a whole troop of them commonly fall upon us
in Old Age. Then does Poverty often come as an armed man: His getting days are
gone, now his spending time is come: And if he have need of much, and yet has
little in store, he seems to be in a miserable Condition. The Cynick
Philosopher, when he was asked, what was the most calamitous Creature in the
world, confidently answered, It was an indigent Old person. Likewise every body
is ready to injure and run down the Aged, reckoning that they are least able to
defend themselves. For as to the weakest part of the body, there is a
confluence of all humors, which settle there, so very often it falls out, that
a combination of troubles seize upon Aged people, Ioh. 21. 18. Verily, verily,
I say unto thee, when thou wast young thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst
whither thou would: but when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thy
hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou would not.

And of these Troubles, the sharpest are from their Relations; the Disobedience
of some, or the Death of others. How does the pride, prodigality or wilfulness
of Children or Grandchildren provoke, and grieve the hoary head! And how many
Aged persons see husband, wife, children, and other dear Friends, and Relations
posted to the grave before them, which do each of them, as it were, tear away a
piece of him, and leave him as a sparrow alone upon the housetop? In short,
Old Age is recorded as the Sink of man's life, into which run all the miseries
incident to humane nature.

And that which makes this Burden more grievous, is, That these seize upon the
persons when their strength is spent, their spirits low, and their bodily
infirmities many. They are within sight of the shore, and yet in danger to be
sunk and wracked, with the storms which beat upon them. When they had thought
all their troubles had been blown over, it frets them sore to meet them again.
And especially, if they have had plenty and prosperity in the course of their
lives, their straits, losses and troubles, now aggravate their affliction.

Now to Mitigate these Pressures we must know, 1. That these Crosses are common
to all. As they do not infallibly attend all Aged persons, for many have fair
weather all their journey long; so they befall all mankind indifferently in
every part of life. If these be Miseries, there is no mortal man without his
Misery. We are in this World, as Israel was in the Wilderness, who had no day
without a Cloud, but then they had no night without a glympse of light. Where
dwells the man, or of what Cloth is his coat made, who has not met with
straits, and with vexations? that has not buried many of his Relations and
Friends? so that we must quarrel with every age, as well as Old Age, yea with
the Providence of God by this argument.

2. These Crosses and Losses are absolutely Hurtful to none. They are not
properly and entirely Evils. Criminal evils are real Evils, poenal Evils are
not so. These fluunt a summo bono, are inflicted by Him that is eminently Good;
ducunt ad summum bonum, they guide and help us toward the greatest Good; erant
in summo Bono, they were upon him who was entirely Good. Prosperity has, but
Adversity has never hurt a good man. Yea some of the Heathens Nihil infelicius
mihi eo videtur, cui nihil unquam evenit adversi. Seneca.
have been bold to judge those men miserable, that have never met with any
troubles. They are our Physic, which may disturb us; but Sin is our Poison,
which will destroy us. The bitterest Physic is better than the sweetest Poison.

3. They are Useful to those that are good. Though they be briars, thorns and
thistles in themselves, yet by the blessing of God, they prove sweet-bryars and
holy-thistles to holy men. How many things do we count Evil, that are most
wholesome for us? They Exercise our Faith, our Wisdom, our Patience, and the
trial of these is more precious than of fine gold. They teach us, as was said
of Diseases, many lessons more effectually, than the Word it self without them
can do. The Chyrurgeon and the Executioner do both bind men, but to different
Ends; the one does it to bereave of life, the other to preserve it Chamier.
. When the good man is bound in fetters, and holden in cords of affliction,
Then the Lord shows them their work, and their transgressions that they have
exceeded. He opens also their ears to discipline, Job 36. 8, 9.

4. These Crosses and Afflictions are most fit for Old men. They are or should
be ^ost strong to bear them; they have (...) a long Summer, to lay up for a
sharp Winter: If they have not stored up a great deal of Faith and Patience,
they have slept in harvest: They also have been trained, and inured to them
before this time of day, by long experience. They have received much good at
the hands of the Lord, and therefore may the better receive evil. As Cato in
Tully answers Caecilius, who objected this against Old Age, that living long a
man sees many displeasing and uncomfortable events; Yea, said he, and perhaps
many comfortable things also Quod diu vivendo multa quae non vult videt: R. Et
multa fortasse, quae vult. Cicer.
. But the true and only Remedy against this Inconvenience, is Faith and
Patience; which the wise God has largely prescribed in the 11th. and 12th.
Chapters of the Hebrews. By these a sound Christian shall not only bear these
Onsets, but overcome them, and adorn the hoary head with trophies. We cannot,
says a Foreigner to Christianity, change the course of things, but we can take
a good heart, a masculine spirit, to bear sad accidents with substantial
courage, and to be reconciled to Providence Quo fortiter fortuita patiamur and
naturae consentiamus. Senec.
. And presently again, It is our best way to abide what we cannot amend, and to
attend God without murmuring, from whom all ailments come; for it is an ill
Soldier that follows his Commander grumbling Optimum est pati, quod emendare
non possis; and Deum, quo auctore cuncta proveniunt sine murmuratione comitari:
malus miles est, qui Imperatorem gemens sequitur. Sen.
. But we have a more sure word of prophecy, Romans 8. 28. All things, mark it,
all things work together for good to them that love God, that are called
according to his purpose: Which blessed word, if it be understood, believed and
considered; and our love to God and effectual calling evinced, is alone able,
Gods spirit accompanying it, to settle, quiet, and comfort our hearts under all
troubles whatsoever.

Let it therefore be the chief care of all Aged Persons to make their calling
and election sure, to strengthen their Faith in God, and by their hope to
travel into the other World; for then only will our afflictions feel light,
while we look not at things seen, but at things unseen. The thoughts of the
grave will mortify us to things seen, and the thoughts of the Country beyond
the grave will realize the unseen World, and then our troubles will be easy,
and our crosses blessings. The sight of the approaching shore, will make an
Aged Person bear the present storms with cheerfulness, knowing that he shall
shortly be well, either under Heaven, or in Heaven: None of these things move
me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so that I may finish my course
with joy, Act. 20. 24.

SECT. VII.
THE Seventh Inconvenience that is. 7. Attended with Contempt.
charged on Old Age is, That it is attended with Contempt. Old People commonly
are despised, especially when they are not supported with good Estates. Most
People avoid them, and treat them as superfluous Creatures. For the generality
of men do value others not for their Wisdom, or real Virtue, but either for
some likeness of disposition, or some usefulness. Now the Ancient are not, by
the disparity of their years, so complaisant, nor by their disability so
helpful as heretofore; and thereupon they are contemned by younger people:
Especially also when they are grown decrepit, and confined to their chairs or
chambers; then are they an eyesore to their successors, who secretly wish them
well in Heaven, or any where out of their way upon Earth. It is too evident,
how unpleasing their groans, their coughing, and their other weaknesses are.
They that can brook the peevishness, and the uncleanliness of their Children,
cannot bear with it in their Parents: All their former parts and pains are
forgotten, and they are beheld, as last years Almanacks, wholly out of date.

Now this is a sore Affliction, and touches man or woman to the quick. For such
as have been regarded and reverenced, to be neglected and despised, grates even
the most ingenuous spirits. Job 29. 30. Unto me men gave ear, and waited, and
kept silence at my counsel: but now they that are younger than I, have me in
derision; they abhor me, they flee from me, etc. Miserrimum est fuisse felicem.
The respects and honor that one has formerly had, makes his present contempt
more intolerable. Not but that a good man is satisfied with himself; but he is
aware, that hereby he is rendered unuseful to others: For when the Person is
despised, his Example nor his Counsel, let them be never so profitable, will be
regardable or useful: He passes for an old Dotard, and there is an end. The
truth is, every man would be beloved, and in some sort esteemed, but when on
the contrary, he perceives that he is nothing set by, what should he do in this
world? That man is a burden to himself, who discerns that he is a burden to
every body else.

But yet as we have observed in other Cases, This Inconvenience is not peculiar
to Old Age, as if they only were despised, or set at naught: For they that will
contemn them, will set light by any other sober and wise Person also, yea they
will contemn God himself. Plain is the connection, Levit. 19. 32. Thou shall
rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man, and fear thy
God: I am the Lord. They that will despise an Ancient Person upon that score,
will despise the Ancient of days himself; so that they are not alone under
this Inconvenience. Neither is this Contempt universal; some young persons have
that Wisdom, which teaches them to value, and respect their Elders. Thus Tully
again brings in Cato answering Caecilius, who had said, that there was nothing
more miserable in Old Age, than to find themselves odious to others; nay, says
Gato, I believe such Old men as we, are very acceptable to such young men as
you, Scipio and Lelius: And so goes on, showing that look as Old men take
pleasure in virtuous young men, though far inferior to them, in age and
wisdom; so all Judicious young men take delight, and yield great respect to
grave and Ancient men: And thus Plato brings in Socrates saying, I love to hear
the Discourses of Old men, seeing they have already traced the way that I must
go. And most commonly those Ancient People meet with most Contempt, who by
their Frowardness or otherwise do lessen themselves, and alienate the respects
of others from them; or such as have lived merely to themselves, without regard
to the good of others: Or else* perhaps to repay into their own bosoms that
neglect and contempt, which they heretofore have been guilty of, either to
their Parents, or other Seniors.

But however it be, this Inconvenience is not the fault of Old Age, but rather
of such undutiful Relations, who have forgotten the Law of Nature; or of such
inconsiderate people, as never foresee that the case will e're long be their
own; and they must look for the same measure, which they have meted to others,
to be repaid into their bosoms. The Infirmities of Old People should rather
breed Pity, than Contempt: Inasmuch as though, by reason of their Age, they are
become twice Children, yet even their Angels behold the face of their heavenly
Father. And though, by reason of their impotence or poverty, they cannot
vindicate their just Authority, or punish their Contemners; yet God will
certainly take their parts, and revenge their wrongs.

In the mean time they must comfort themselves in the Favor and Protection of
the most High, in the Promises which he has made, in the Judgment and esteem
which he has of them, in the Integrity of their hearts, in the former
Usefulness of their Lives Beatus juvenis qui been vivit, sed magis beatus est
senex qui been vixit: quod enim juvenis sperat, adeptus est senex. Ambr. de
Jacob. and vit. beat. c. 8.
, and in the Hopes they have to be shortly out of the reach either of envy or
contempt. What matter is it for the esteem of a company of worms, when a man is
well accounted of among the Angels? how easily may he want the respects of Men,
that enjoys the smiles of God? Alas we are but strangers in this world, and
therefore must not grudge to be strangely used; he greatly forgets himself, and
the country to which he is traveling, that is much concerned either with the
Admiration, or Contempt of foolish men.

Yet it should be the Care of all Ancient people, to use all good Means to
prevent, as much as may be, this Inconvenience; to wit, to watch against all
Peevishness, Covetousness, Envy, and all the other aforesaid Vices of Old Age:
For there is nothing does so much vilify, yea nullify a person as sin. And
then to study and practice Wisdom, Patience and Charity, and those other Graces
before specified: For there is nothing does so much command Regard as the Image
of God. Sincere Piety will procure respect, more than birth or riches; and you
have seldom seen Old People despised but for some real or supposed failings.
Particular instances do never invalidate, but establish general Rules; and that
is, Them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30.

SECT. VIII.
THe Eighth Infelicity of Old Age is,. 8. Disabled from Service.
That it is Disabled from Service, and rendered incapable of doing good in
their Generation. Which though it be an Effect of some of the former, yet is a
distinct Affliction. When the Faculties are impaired, the Strength exhausted,
Pains and Diseases inflicted, alas! what Service can such a one do for the
Church! how little for the Commonwealth! how little for their own Family?
Hence the Levites, Numb. 8. at Fifty were discharged from the substance of
their work. Hence the Soldier at Sixty was Miles emeritus. For how should the
Head, Heart or Hand be serviceable, that are shattered with breach upon breach?
His useful days are done: He must now be laboring for Life, who before lived
for Labor. They see things out of order in the places where they live, but
they cannot amend them. He that formerly could have Studied many hours, is
spent now with a few minutes; and those that have served at the altar, are now
glad to sit by the fire. Hence the old Roman Proverb beforementioned,
Sexagenarios de ponte dejiciendos, that is, Let those that are sixty years old
be turned off the bridge: Their work is done, they live to no purpose.

Now this is a heavy Trouble to a Good man, yea to any Ingenuous man. Such do
know, that Usefulness is the End, and Happiness of Life: Take that away, and
what is Life good for? A man is thenceforth but a Cipher, yea and worse; for he
eats, and drinks, and troubles the world, and no way helps the Inhabitants of
it. Hereupon in a certain Country, its said, that the Old people, when they
found themselves decrepit, went into an adjacent Climate, where by the quality
of the Air they were soon extinguished: Which Remedy is not to be liked, though
their sense of unserviceableness is to be remarked. For Plato (...). Plato.
could say, The more beneficial we can be to mankind, the liker we are to God.
To become therefore disabled from Service, is Death to an active useful spirit.
Besides, as Employment makes improvement, so on the other side Rest breeds
Rust, and they that leave off the Acts, lose the Habits, and become more empty
and insignificant, than ever they were before. Upon all which accounts this
Disability is a most disconsolate Affliction, and sufficient of it self to sink
their weak spirits with despair.

But as we have observed in other Cases, this Grievance is not peculiar to
Old Age. But people of all Ages have diverse ways become unable to serve their
generation. Some by the hand of God, inflicting such Distempers on their Minds
or Bodies, as have made them useless in their places. Some by the Procurement
of Men, by whom many in the prime of their time have been laid aside; sometimes
justly, sometimes unjustly, and all opportunity taken from them of doing good
in the World. Neither are all Aged persons rendered useless: For many there be
of both Sexes, that persevere in well-doing to the last. Cato pleaded causes,
when he was past fourscore years, and Isocrates wrote excellent things at
fourscore and fourteen years of age. And not only the Tongues, but the Hands of
very many Old people are found as nimble to good works, as of younger Persons.
They that have been useful in their strength, will scarce ever become useless
in their weakness. Plutarch observes that an industrious Be, never degenerates
into a Drone, in its Old Age. Too many there be of every Age that live only to
themselves, that neither Serve God, nor observe Man, but in order to their own
Interest, or Appetite: These are good for nothing, young or old; but they that
understand, and embrace the true Ends of life, will be useful one way or other,
to their lives end.

And the great Service that the Ancient do perform, is by their sage Advice.
When the Levites were at fifty released from the labor of the Sanctuary, they
are said yet to be Judges in their Cities. So that although they cannot do that
service, which younger persons may, yet they do greater: For the greatest
things are compassed, not by strength, but counsel. They cannot be counted
useless, says Tully, that prescribe to the more raw and ignorant their work.
Like as a Pilot, who tho he run not up and down the Ship, but sits at the helm,
yet is the most useful person in the ship: So the Aged head is the most useful
part in a family or Commonwealth, though it be confined to the fire side
Nullane res seniles sunt, quae vel infirmis corporibus, animo tamen
administrentur? Cicer.
Hence Homer brings in Agamemnon, wishing rather for ten Nestor's, an Aged wise
man among the Greeks, than so many Ajax's, who was a man of Arms, for the
winning of Troy. And it is well known, that the grand Magistrates both in
Greece and Rome were the Ancients of their Cities; and thereupon they were
called Senators, and the great Council of Rome, The Senate, being composed of
Aged men.

Yea if they should by reason of their Age be wholly unserviceable, yet their
Example is useful. To see a man or woman deprived of all outward comfort and
respect, and laden with heavy Distempers, yet patient and thankful, serious and
devout, it is a powerful Lecture to all the spectators; and may teach them to
be doing their own great work with all their might, to be thankful to God for
their present strength and ease, to beware of slothfulness and selfishness:
That when they arrive at that decrepit estate, they may have the pleasant
prospect of a fruitful life behind them, and the joyful prospect of a blessed
life before them.

SECT. IX.
THe Ninth Disadvantage of Old Age. 9. Unfit for Religious Exercises.
is, That it is unfit for Religious Exercises. When we are in years, we are
indisposed to Prayer and Fasting, to Hearing or Reading, and in general to all
such Spiritual Employments, wherein the Soul and Body must concur. They need
these Helps as much as Others, and perhaps desire them as much as Others; but
the dead weight of a crazy body sinks down the towering of their precious Souls.
To will is present with them, but how to perform the same, they find not; and
no wonder, having not only a law of sin within them, but a body of death
without them. Their senses are grown weak, their faculties weak, their spirits
weak: How then should they wrestle with God in Prayer, or continue instant
therein? Let the Rider be never so good a Horsman, yet he must travel as his
Horse will give him leave: So let the Soul be never so active, it can operate
only as the organs of the body will permit it. Instead of taking pains about
their Souls, they are forced to prop up their decrepit bodies. Their weaknesses
keep them in bed, while the holy zeal of others is burning in Devotion. And as
the Old woman in Plautus being asked why she went no faster, answered, because
she carried so great a load, to wit of eighty four years on her back; so the
load on Old peoples back either hinders them from coming to holy Assemblies, or
else causes them to travel thither very slowly; so that they are constrained to
live, in a mannet, without God in the world.

Now this Affliction to an holy heart is a very heavy burden. When a poor man
is cut short in all his other Comforts, and as it were besieged with all the
Calamities of this life; yet while he has this River of Gods Ordinances free
and open, thereby he receives continual supplies from Heaven, the streams
thereof make glad the City of God: But when this is stopped, the Soul grows sad,
and dry, and barren. Hence holy David in his Exile, never mentioning his
temporal losses, yet cries out, Psalm. 42. 4. When I remember these things, I
pour out my soul in me: for I had gone with the multitude to the house of God.
This went nearest to his heart. For when a man is harras'd with cares and
troubles all the week long, yet he is relieved and refreshed in his approach
unto God upon his own Day: But with the decrepit Old man, every day is alike,
and his Soul is left destitute of spiritual supplies in an ordinary way. And
this Affliction is saddest of all, when by disuse of the means of Grace, the
Soul grows stupid and unconcerned in the matter; as without special Grace, we
shall be apt to be: So that the misery is great in the want, and greater when
insensible of the want. No great wonder therefore that when all these miseries
meet together, a man cry out with Job, I would not live always. So that
Tiberius Caesar had a saying, as Plutarch tells us, that it was a shameful
thing for a man that was past sixty, to stretch out his hand to a Physician;
reckoning that it was fit he should then be content to dye.

But yet, if we weigh the matter well, the Case of Ancient people is not so
desperate as it seems. For to proceed in our former Method, it is evident that
many others besides the Aged are cut short in the means of Grace; some
willingly in Factories beyond the Seas, some wilfully by their own Atheism and
Ungodliness, some unwillingly by Distempers and other hindrances. And on the
other side, diverse Ancient people have been capable to attend the Service of
God even to their dying day. Thus Ahijah, though his Eyes were set for Age, yet
was enabled to prophecy to Ieroboam's wife. And Jacob could worship God,
leaning on the top of his Staff. And St. John was an Evangelist, when he was an
hundred years old. And there was Anna, a widow of about fourscore and four
years, yet departed not from the Temple, but served God with fastings and
prayers night and day, Luke 2. 37. So that all Aged persons are not precluded
from spiritual exercises.

And though they should become unable to frequent the Public Ordinances of
God, yet they may pray, and sigh, and meditate in their chambers; and these,
proceeding from a sincere and sensible Soul, are most acceptable unto God. As
for the external Acts of Religion, they avail nothing without faith and love,
which lodge in the heart. The immanent Acts of the Soul, which are to
understand, to meditate, to will, and to desire, do most perfect the same. And
where the Deed cannot be done, God does accept the will for the Deed. The
weakest and poorest Old man or woman may have high meditations under a low
roof, and a large heart within narrow walls.

No Aged person therefore should be discouraged by their Inability for Gods
Service; since He knows their frame, he remembers that they are but dust.
The Lord has said, When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and
their tongue fails for thirst: I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel
will not forsake them. I will open Rivers in high places, and fountains in the
midst of the valleys, I will make the Wilderness a pool of water, and the dry
Land springs of water, Isa. 41. 17, 18. In the want of ordinary supplies, I
will provide them with extraordinary supports: the wilderness shall produce a
pool of water rather than any Child of God shall die for thirst. When they
cannot wait upon God as before, he will wait to be gracious to them, he will
come to them, and teach, and comfort them. If indeed a man be inwardly pleased,
that his weakness excuses him from his Devotions, he has cause to blame
himself; but if he has the same desires and holy affections with others, the
old Law shall stand; to wit, he that stays by the Stuff, shall part the
Spoil, with him that goes out to battle. You have a trade going in every Ship,
an Interest in every holy Assembly in the World.

SECT. X.
THE Tenth and last Inconvenience in. 10. Terrified with the approach of Death.
Old Age, is, That they are Terrified with the approach of Death. For Death is
a word hard of digestion to any man. The Philosopher counted it of all
dreadful things the most Terrible. And Mr. Latimer observes of Hezekiah, that
he was more afraid of Death, than of all Senacheribs Army. Now Old Age is a
near neighbor to it, and the aspect of it always before them, is not very
pleasant. Most men, says Seneca, are miserably tossed between the fear of Death
and the miseries of Life, are unwilling either to live or die Plerique inter
mortis metum and vitae tormenta miseri fluctuant: and vivere nolunt, and mori
nesciunt. Sen. Ep. 4.
. Especially they who have had their portion in this life, and have made no
provision for a better. This made Lewis 11th of France to charge all about him,
to forbear the mention of Death. The strict Account which follows it, and the
long Eternity which follows that, makes Death a most serious matter. No wonder
if the hand tremble, when it is going to take that Cup, which will mend or end
them. Now the Old man is at the door of this fatal place. Though a Casualty may
bring Death suddenly, though a sickness may bring it probably, yet Oldage
brings it certainly Casus nunciat mortem latentem; infirmitas apparentem;
senectus presentem. Ex incertituditudine, timor; ex infirmitate dolor; ex
certitudine afflictio. Palaeot. ex Hug. de claustr. anim.
. Peradventure there are fifty weeks or days remaining in their life,
peradventure but forry five; perhaps but forty, but thirty, yea but twenty, as
Abraham said of Sodom; nay, since it is dubious every moment, and no mortal man
knows at what Wat^ of the Night he shall be called, the (...) person that is
but a step from death, must be through fear of Death in continual bondage.

But the Lion is not so terrible as he is painted, neither is Death so
formidable as it is by many represented. Though it be against the Desires of
Nature, yet it is not against the Series of Nature Every thing is good that is
agreeable to Nature; what more natural, than for an old man to die?
. For if we consult this, we find Autumn kindly after Summer, and Winter after
Autumn; and Death is as natural after Oldage. And the Light of Nature taught
some of the Heathens to reckon the worthy men, especially that are dead, to be
most truly alive, in that while we live in this world, the Soul is imprisoned
in the body, and is set at liberty by Death. Thus Xenophon brings in Cyrus
discoursing to his Children on his Deathbed. Think not, O my Sons, that I
leave you quite, and am lost when I dye; perhaps you will not see me, neither
do you now see the most Essential part of me, nor never did: only by my actions
you believed it was in this body, and that will live out of this body as well
as in it. The Godly in Death is alive. Hebr. Prove.
And if Pagans set so light by Death, what notion should we Christians have of
it, that can look more clearly beyond it? It is styled a falling asleep, and
what is more welcome to an Aged person than a sound sleep? And from that
Expression, 1 Thessalonians. 4. an Old Toletan* Council ordained that the dead should
be followed with Psalms of Praise to their Graves.

In short, 1. All Aged People are not oppressed with the fear of Death. Too few
there are that think at all of it. Men generally put far from them the evil
day; and it will be an evil day to such as put it far from them. Most people
can think of any place in the Parish rather than the Churchyard; yea, I doubt
it be one of the Faults of the Aged to think seldom of Death, and they who
think little of it, are in no danger of being frighted with its thoughts.

2. The Young have the same reason to be concerned about Dying as the Old. For
Youth has more ways to Death than Age has. And far more dye in their Youth,
than that dye for Age. It Is true, they hope to live longer, but their hopes
have no good ground at all. They have neither Promise nor Experience to build
their hopes upon. And in Young Peoples Death, they being in their strength,
Nature receives a more violent shock, whereas the Aged are more quietly
extinguished, like a Candle in the Socket.

3. No good man need be affrighted at the approach of Death. For the power and
sting of Death is utterly taken away by our Saviors Death, and so it can do us
no hurt Vita Christi instruxit nostram; mors Christi destruxit nostram. Bern.
. A Child of God does not so much as taste Death. The true Believer now has not
to do with Death, but with its shadow, with a toothless Dog, with a dead Lion,
with a Wasp without a Sting, with a conquered Enemy. What man in his wits is
afraid after a tempestuous Voyage, that he is drawing nigh his Haven. It was a
sweet saying of S. Ambrose, near his end: I have not so lived, that I am
ashamed to live among you, neither do I fear to die, going to so good a Master.
The unprepared and the ungodly may dread Death. As Aristippus told the wicked
Mariners trembling in a Storm; You may well be afraid, going to receive your
just punishment, but hoping for my reward in the other Life, I am not amazed
with this at all. But now when a man has set his House and Heart in order, and
finished his work, he may sing his Nunc dimittis with comfort, and say as that
holy Woman x, I am one that neither wishes Death, nor fears his might, but
as merry as one that is bound for Heaven. z Mrs. Ann Aiscough.


4. There is much Folly in this slavish fear of Death. A holy Care to prepare
for it, is far better than an unprofitable Fear. For the passion of Fear is
planted in us for the avoiding of things hurtful, but there is no avoiding of
this fate Mortem timere dementis estquia certa expectantur, dubia metuuntur.
Senec. Ep. 30.
. There is no man that has power over the Spirit, to retain the Spirit, and
there is no discharge in that War, Eccles. 8. 8. That disquiet is therefore
foolish, that torments but profits not. How can the mind be quiet at any time,
which is afraid of what is impendent at all times Nulli potest secura vita
contingere, qui de producenda nimis cogitat. Id.
It is observed by Seneca, that neither Children nor Idiots are afraid of
Death; and he infers, that it is a base thing, that Reason (I add the
Scripture) should not work as much security in us, as Folly does in them. Shall
learned Old men fear that, which foolish Young men do not? O wretched Old man,
said Tully, that in so long life have not learned to despise Death! I end this
with the Observation of Judicious Mr. Calvin: He that cannot quiet his Heart in
the holy contempt of Death, has profited but little in the Faith of Christ.

Let it therefore be the business of each Aged person to be reconciled to
Death; to be dying daily, by Mortifying your affections to all the vanities of
this life, and by meditating on the life to come. Never fret at that Death
which leads you to immortality. Rather rejoice, that you are taking leave of a
World of Sin, and taking flight into a Land of uprightness; O Father (said an
Officer to a noble Ancient Persian Minister, that trembled at the approach of
Death) shut your Eyes but a little, and you shall see God in Glory. And thus I
conclude this Particular, that too many Old people never fear Death, for they
never spend thoughts about it; that the young have as much reason to apprehend
it, as the Old; that a slavish fear of it is folly in any; and that no good man
needs to be affrighted, but rather comforted with it.

So that upon a just Survey of all the Inconveniences of Old Age, all Aged
persons may answer, as Tully tells of one Gorgias, who being 107 years old, was
asked why he was contented to live so long? Why, said he, I have nothing
whereof to accuse Old Age; and the truth is, it seems perverse and
unreasonable, that all people should desire to attain unto it, and then when
they have attained it, to dislike it (...). Menecrates.
. Difficulties and Disadvantages there are with it. Whereof no Age or condition
is free, but they are Tolerable and Ordinable to the good Valiant s^olidi illi
qui, dum abest senectus, eam optant; dum adest, accusant. Cicer.
of all that fear God. And so much may suffice for this fifth Point to be
handled.

CHAP. VI. The Privileges of Old Age.
SECT. I.
I Proceed now in the Sixth place, to Cap. 6. The Privileges of Old Age.
discourse the Privileges, and Comforts of Old Age. That there is some
peculiar Blessing and Dignity in Old Age, is evident, both by the Light of
Scripture, and the Light of Nature. The First Commandment with promise is,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the Land, which
the Lord thy God gives thee: The like Promise you will find, Psalm. 91. last.
With long life will I satisfy him, and show him my Salvation. Which shows that
Old Age, whatever Inconveniences it is attended withal, is in its self a
special Blessing. And on the Contrary, it is threatened as an heavy Judgment
unto Eli, that God would cut off his Arm, and the Arm of his Fathers House;
that is, he would take away his might, and the strength of his Family, in that
there should not be an Old man in his House, 1 Samuel 2. 31. And in general, that
bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days, Psalm. 55. last.
Whereupon holy David prays, Psalm. 102. 24. O my God, take me not away in the
midst of my days. Finally, the Holy Ghost assures us, that the Beauty of old
men, is the Gray Head, Psalm. 20. 29. By all which it plainly appears, that
Old Age is a desirable Mercy, in the judgment of God himself.

Agreeable hereunto is the Ancient Hebrew Proverb in Ben Syra, to this effect,
Senex in domo, bonum signum in domo. And if that be a real good thing which all
men desire, then certainly there is some peculiar Goodness in Old Age, for that
all men desire to attain it. So also we mingle among our good wishes to others,
this of a long life. When Kings and Grandees are saluted, this is the common
Acclamation, that they may live long Ad multos Annos:
, and if it were possible, live for ever. And Antiquity is so valuable a thing,
that not only Families and Cities, but Nations have had long and sharp disputes
about the Antiquity of their respective people, as the Egyptians, Phoenicians,
Scythians. And the Athenians had this Character affixed upon them, that they
could discourse well, but the Lacedaemonians could do well; because an aged
person coming upon a time into a great Assembly at Athens, had no Respect given
him; but at Sparta in the like Convention, they all rose up to seat him. So
that it grew Proverbial, That Old Age dwelt most like its self at Sparta (...).
Proverb.
. So then as there are some Inconveniences in Old Age, which yet as you have
seen, have diverse things to mitigate them, so it has many Privileges and
Comforts Lacedemone esse honestefri domi inline senectutis. Cicero.
which do overbalance them. God has set the one over against the other, to
the end that man should find nothing after him. There is only this difference,
that all our Troubles spring from below, but all our Mercies drop from above.
The particular Privileges and Comforts of Old Age, are these following.

First, Old Age is Greater in Authority, 1. It is greater in Authority.
than any other Age. There is an Authory resulting from the Law of Nature, as
well as that which is conferred by Civil Laws; the former is that wherewith
Old Age is invested. God himself, who is the Fountain of Honor, has given
them a Patent for it: so that their Authority has something in it divine, and
they seem to have a kind of Natural Government over others. Hereby the Sentence
or Opinion of the Aged may well conclude, as much as the Arguments of the
younger; and he must have a great deal of Wisdom or of Confidence, that shall
contradict what a wise Aged person has asserted.

That there is a certain Authority in Old Age is plain from diverse Scriptures.
As, Isa. 9. 15. The Ancient, and the Honorable he is the Head. Now we know
that the Head is the Seat of Rule. When Moses had occasion for some Coadjutors
with him in Judgment, the Lord caused Seventy of the Elders of Israel, to be
set apart for that work, Number. 11. 16. And so the Judges who constituted the
Sanhedrin, were made up of Seventy two Elders. Again, when the Apostle would
most efficaciously persuade Philemon, ver. 9. he accosts him with his Title of
Honor, being such a one as Paul the Aged. And the beloved Disciple authorizeth
his two latter Epistles with this Periphrasis. The Elder to the Elect Lady, and
the Elder to the wel-beloved Gaius Qui cum refugeret Apostolum se scrsbere,
senioremscripsit. Ambros. in Psalm. 37.
. And as this Preeminence proceeds from the Will of the All-wise God, so it is
the Sense of wise Men. The Philosopher Arist. polit. lib. 7. cap. 14.
affirms, that the Elder do naturally precede the younger. And Tully tells us,
that as any one exceeded in years, so he had a kind of Ruling voice in debates
Ut quisqaetate antecellit, ita sententiae principatum tenet. Ci^r
. Yea, Pliny and Solinus report it of the Elephants, and of the very Ants, that
when they go by Troops, the Elder commonly go before the others.

And there is a very rational Ground for this Authority in Old Age. In that the
greater Seniority any one has in years, the nearer, even upon that account, do
they approach to the likeness of the Eternal God, who is called the Ancient of
Days, Dan. 7. 9. whose Garment is represented to be white as Snow, and the Hair
of his Head like the pure Wool. Withal, it is presumed that the Aged know more,
for that they have seen and heard more than the younger Senibus Authoritas
major (...)* quod plur^ nosse and vidisse credunt^r. Quintil. lib. 1^. c c 4.
. Now Wisdom and Knowledge do challenge Authority, by a certain Natural right,
because the determinations proceeding thence, are ever supposed to be grounded
on the soundest Maxims.

Now this Authority is a considerable Privilege, being as is supposed in the
hand of a wise person, insomuch as it is called by Cato in Tully, Senectutis
apex, the Crown of Old Age. For it derives weight unto all their Counsels,
Reproofs, or Instructions. The Judges Decrees are held ponderous by reason of
his years, as well as from his Office. The Ministers Advice becomes venerable
by the Authority which his Age has clothed him withal. The Old Physician can
sway by his Authority more than the younger. So that Authority is a Talent,
which being well employed, does much further our Usefulness in the World: yea,
their Example is more effectual than others; for one may learn much from such
an one, though he say never a word Multum est quod a sapiente vel tacente
proficias. Senec.
. The more Authority any man has, the more conspicuous he is, he is like a
City set on a Hill, and his way and carriage are still instructive. The dignity
of the person ever adds luster to the example. And therefore all Aged persons
had need to be circumspect in their ways, lest instead of leading others in the
narrow way to life, they do by their Example lead them in the broad way to
destruction.

It does therefore greatly behove all those that are in years, to be Sober,
Grave, Temperate, etc. For the hoary Head is a Crown of glory, if it be found
in the way of Righteousness, Prove. 16. 31. That which is the Crown of Glory on
the hoary Head, is the Wisdom and Piety that lodges in the heart. The Heathen
could say, Gray hairs and wrinkles do not presently create Authority, but the
former life well managed, makes the latter part justly respected Non cani*
no^rugae repent authoritatem aferre possunt, s^d honest acta superior aetas
^ructus capit authoritatis extremos. Cicero.
. So that Old age, simply considered, will not always pass for a leading
demonstrative Argument; as if it were enough to say, I am an old man, and
therefore you must needs believe or yield unto me; no, true worth and wisdom
must lead the Van: but it is a good Second, and carries with it a great
presumption, that Prudence and Piety dwell there. And hence it is, that in all
Societies and Assemblies, whether Civil or Religious, that Dignity is allowed
to Seniority, that commonly the Eldest presides in the company, and guides the
affairs thereof.

SECT. II.
THE Second Privilege of Old Age is, 2. Richer in Experience.
That it is Richer in Experience, than any other age. This is manifest on the
first view, that Experience is the consequent of a long life Serus venit usus
ab annis. Ovid. Met.
. We have a confused knowledge of things by Hearsay, or Instruction, but by
tract of time we arrive at an experimental knowledge thereof. Job could say, I
have heard of thee by the hearing of the Ear, but now mine Eye sees thee, Job
42. 5. By which it appears, that ocular demonstration is the most certain,
wherein Old Age has the greatest advantage (...) Sophocl.
. They have lived long enough to find, in matters Speculative, what is true and
what is false. We owe the knowledge we have of the Celestial Bodies, to the
Study and observation of Aged men. We discover what is Safe, or Dangerous in
matters of Practice, to the well-tried Maxims of men in years. What was it,
which found out the nature and use of herbs and druggs, but long observation?
It Is true, Experience is a dear Mistress, but yet it is a sure one, and the
Instructions we have that way, stick fastest to us. We far sooner forget the
particulars of those Countries of which we have read, than of those which we
have traversed our selves. The Aged person can tell experimentally of the
wisdom and justice of Gods Providence, of the Truth of his Promises and
Threatenings, of the Devices of Satan, of the Deceitfulness of Riches, of the
Wisdom of Integrity, of the Vanity of all carnal Delights, of the wickedness of
his own Heart. Old Age is rich in the Experience of these things, whereby they
are able to govern themselves, and to advise others.

As for themselves, by this Experience Experience is a sedious b^t a sure
Master.
they are taught to avoid many Dangers, which others fall into. For it is made
up from long observation of particular things, to wit, of Memory of things
past, Knowledge of things present, and Providence of things future. And as
their long trial of the effects of Diet, and Exercise, have made them capable
of the Conservation of Health; so their manifold Experience of the
deceitfulness of the Flesh, of the World, and of the Devil, has enabled them
to countermine and conquer them. And as to Others, their Experience renders
them able to give the most prudent Counsels, and to forewarn them of those
Consequences, which they easily foresee. Aeschines says, that among the
Athenians by an old Law of Solon, the Oldest did first make his Speech to the
people, and after him each according to his age; for, says he, they thought,
that the Eldest through their Experience counseled best for the City (...)
. And without doubt in Public affairs, the Experienced man out-strips the
learned man. For as the Philosopher Arist. l. 1. Met.
observes, Art teaches only General Notions, but Experience acquaints us with
Particular Actions, by conversing with which we arrive at Skill and Conduct.
Justin relates it of Alexander the Great, that Justin. lib. ^1.
he would have his Squadrons led by none under Sixty years old. For who will
choose him for a Captain that is well-read in martial affairs, and that is all?
Who will trust his life in the Hands of a Speculative Physician? No, Experience
goes further in all these things than Learning.

For the Aged and Experienced person having seen such great mistakes in himself
and others, is cured of that vain Credulity, which has ruined young people;
and having met with so many disappointments in the World, is well freed from
that carnal Confidence, which has undone others. And yet their great
Experience of the power and faithfulness of God, is a mighty Bulwark to their
Faith. As they have heard, so have they seen in the City of God, what he has
done to vindicate his Attributes, and to verify his Promises. Hence holy David,
Psalm. 37. 25. I have been young, and now am old: yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging Bread. This was the advantage he had
by his Old Age, to trace out the Providence of God toward the posterity of
good men, that walking in their Parents steps, they were seldom or never
reduced to want, at least to common beggary; or if so, yet were never quite
forsaken of God, as himself found, when though, 1 Samuel 21. 3. and 25. 8. he was
glad to ask supplies of men, yet was he still supported and owned of God.

The good Old man can say, Thou art my King of old, O God, Psalm. 74. 12. He can
say, I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord, and have comforted my self,
Psalm. 119. 52. And thus he may direct others. I will guide thee with my Eye,
Psalm. 32. 8. And thus a man may vindicate and honor God: Concerning thy
Testimonies, I have known of old, that thou have founded them for ever, Psalm.
119. 152. The unexperienced Newness of any case or trouble, is apt to stagger
the strongest faith or courage. Such things assault a man by way of Surprise,
but when we have had an experience of them, we are corroborated to grapple with
them. No doubt the first Night was a strange thing, to them that had seen
nothing but Light before, but when when they found by Experience the return of
the Light again, they could brook it well enough. So the Burden that did at
first affright us, by often carrying it, we easily bear it, Psalm. 63. 7.
Because thou have been my help, therefore in the shadow of thy Wings will I
rejoice. And it is conceived, that this caused David to speak so of Goliahs
Sword, 1 Samuel 21. 9. There is none like that, give it me. He might have found
another Sword of equal mettle, but he had Experience of the goodness of that,
and so there was none like that.

From this long Experience, the Aged person not only contemns many things which
others admire; but grows able to give a great guess concerning future events,
both in public and particular Cases. So that such persons may well be resorted
unto as to common Oracles, if they have treasured up wisdom according to their
years.

To conclude this, there lies a double Duty upon Aged persons in reference
hereunto; the One is, to take due Notice of all such passages of the Providence
of God, or the Improvidence of men, that come within the sphere of their
Cognizance, and not heedlesly to neglect them; another is, to store up in their
memories such Observations. For experience is made up of diverse Memories of the
same things Ex multis memor^is ejusdem rei conflatur experientia. Palaeot.
, Psalm. 143. 5. I remember the days of old, I meditate on all thy works, I muse
on the work of thy hands. And then to produce these in time and place
convenient, either for their own, or others direction, caution or consolation.

SECT. III.
THirdly, another Privilege of Oldage,. 3. Freer from Sin.
is, That it is freer from Sin. The Corruption of Nature, and the Fruits
thereof, are the great blot, and woeful plague upon mankind, and the first thing
which every person, arrived at the use of Reason should seriously set about,
should be to be healed of it. But instead of that, most people meeting with
temptations without them, and finding Strength and Youth within them, forget
the care of their Hereditary Disease, and pursue their iniquities with
greediness. Some are tickled with applause, and so they hunt after an airy
renown, and an ungrounded reputation; others let the reins loose to sensual
delights, and wallow in the pleasures of Sin for a Season; Others setting aside
all fear of God, and love to their Neighbor, are set upon Revenge, and will
run down every one that stands in their way; and others hoping for that
fatisfaction in Riches, which they will never find, set their minds to grasp
after a plentiful Estate, by hook or crook. Now tho some young people do
happily escape these snares, as was the case of Obadiah; and some Old people
are unhappily intrapt in them, as was the case of Solomon; yet most commonly
Youth, by reason of it is inexperience and unmortifiedness, is full of Sin. Job
could reflect on the Sins of his Youth, and David saw cause to cry for the
pardon of those offenses. Hence Aristotle would scarce admit them capable of
Moral Lectures. And indeed that ardour and vehemence which is almost
inseparable from that age, makes them an easy prey to many Temptations.

Now when Old Age takes possession, the proud, the furious, and the wanton
spirits are spent. As Wine at first is mixed with dregs, till by time it settles
and is refined; so the Passions of youth, if they be not mortified by the Grace
of God, yet they are weakened and deaded by the age of men. As Tully has it,
when Pleasures have almost depraved both body and mind, then age comes and
cures that, which Wisdom could not; and it is an happiness to be rid of such
unruly Guests any way.

But you will say, though one sort of sins are gone, yet others succed in their
room: and it is too evident by what has been said before, that Old Age has
it is sins, as well as Youth. The Objection must be answered with Tears: No age
in this World without it is temptations; this Leprosy will not be fully
cleansed, until the House be taken down: but yet as we find Children and Youth
more apt to breed vermin, than aged persons; so there are fewer Enormities in
this age, than in that Id ago senex ne videar velle, quae puer volui. Sen. Ep.
61.
For Transgressions do generally proceed either from Ignorance, which Old Age
does usually inform and heal; or from the strength of Passions, which are much
rebated and represt in Old Age; or from Malice, now the wiser a man is grown,
the less likely he is to choose evil: the more divine Strokes and Judgments one
has seen upon evil doers, the more he should be afraid of tampering with it:
the nearer a man is to his end, the more in all reason he will beware of
clogging his Conscience; so that dying lusts are fittest for a dying Body, and
an holy Heart for an hoary Head.

And this is a great Privilege, for as much as Sin is the Disease of the Soul,
and the greatest Evil in the World: so that that State of life, which is freest
from it, must needs be the happiest. For it is this that helps to complete our
felicity in Heaven, that no Sin lodges there, and the Aged person is hastening
thither, and consequently strives to break this Yoke, and fit himself for that
Estate. As the pleasures he has had in these is gone, so his desires after
them are gone also. He now finds that there is more Satisfaction, in not
desiring them, than there is in enjoying of them, and so is far from being
grieved at his releasement from those Shackles Qui se libidinum vinculis
laxatos no^ molesti ^errent. Cicer.
. He would not live over again his sinful life for all the world; and he is
concerned, not because they are past, but because at any time they had
dominion. Yea, he finds more real content in his Poenitential Tears, than ever
he had in his Youthful Frolicks: with what contempt does he behold the
Debaucheries, the Duels, and the frothy Follies of the roaring Sparks, which
they triumph in, as in an Heaven upon Earth? But he has fathomed them, and
found them empty as vanity, and filthy as the Mire. He now believes what he had
often heard, that the pleasures of Sin are but like a golden dream, which leave
nothing but Pensiveness behind them, till God upon his repentance, restore unto
him the joys of his Salvation. Now the Varnish of his Sin is worn off, he sees
the filthy and ugly nature of it, and wonders that any rational person should
ever love it. He is now frighted at the remembrance of those Pranks, that he
formerly committed without remorse; and in short, he is well pleased, that he
has a weak body instead of his strong corruption; and is ready, with that
excellent Philosopher Non sentio in animo aetatis injuriam, cum sentiam in
corpore: tantum vitia and vitiorum ministeria senu^runt; vig^t animus and
gaudet non multum sibi cum corpore; magnam partem oneris sui deposuit; Exultat
and mihi facit controversiam de senectute, hanc ait esse ^orem suum; credamus
illi, bono suo utat^r. Sen. Ep. 26.
to count his Old Age, his flourishing age, because he only finds his Vices,
and the fuel of them withered, and that his mind began now to be freed from
the Snares, wherein it was held by the Body, etc.

Let every Aged person labor to find these blessed Effects, and so be content
with the fall of that House, which was continually haunted with such Furies One
may desire the Death of this Body, to be delivered from the Body of this death,
Mr. Caryll.
But take heed of being only Passive in this parting; these Fires should not
only go out of themselves, but should be quenched by true Mortification. It is
not sufficient, that Sin be dead in you, but you must be dead to it: you must
be Active in the Crucifixion of it, or else the Corruption of one vice will be
the Generation of another. If ye through the Spirit* mortify the deeds of the
Body, ye shall live, Romans 8. 13.

SECT. IV.
THE Fourth Privilege of Old Age. 4. Proner to Piety.
is, That it is Proner to Piety. True and solid Piety is the Dominion of Gods
Fear and Love, in the Heart of Man, and exerts its self in the constant
Practice of all the Duties of Religion, in a conscientious manner. For in
Religion there is a Body and a Soul. The Body of it consists in the Form of
Godliness; the Soul of it, is that which animates all the outward Acts, and is
fitly called the Power of Godliness; for that the Activity and force of any
thing proceeds from the Soul, or inward Principle. Now the separating this form
and power of Godliness, like as that of the Soul and Body, is the death of
Godliness. And therefore, though we prefer the Soul, or inside of Religion, yet
we divorce it not from the Body: but do take Piety in it is just Latitude,
comprehending the Acts of Devotion, from a right principle, in a right manner,
and to a right end, and expressing it self in a sober, righteous, and godly
life. And however the profane Atheist may wickedly deride it on the one hand,
or the rotten Hypocrite falsely pretend it on the other; yet there is a
wonderful excellency in it, and an absolute necessity of it, even the
Consciences of it is greatest Enemies, first or last, being Judges.

To this serious Piety, Old Age is more propense, than any other age of man.
Insomuch as we find diverse in Scripture, and other Stories bent for Heaven in
their declining years, who in the former parts of their lives minded nothing,
but the World and the Flesh. They whom no Persuasions, no Ordinances, no
Afflictions could fully reduce to the obedience of Christ, yet the lively sense
and feeling of their own decay, and of their approach to the eternal Judgment
obliges them to true repentance, and to make their calling and election sure.
So that it has passed for an Observation, that they who are not fair at
twenty, strong at thirty, wise at forty, rich at fifty, pious at sixty; are
never like to be fair, or strong, or wise, or rich, or religious. When any man
is warned out of the House he lives in, laying aside all other unnecessary
business, he sets himself to provide another Habitation: Now every decay of
strength, of sense; every gray Hair, or Wrinkle is a sensible warning out of
the earthly House of his Tabernacle; and he must be strangely stupid Quid enim
stolidius fieri posset, si men's ad perfectionem non contendit, quando totus
corporis habitus senectute confectus ad interitum properat? Cyprian.
, that buckles not, in good earnest, to provide for his Soul, when not only it
may suddenly, but must shortly go either to Heaven or Hell. These kind of
Sentiments caused that learned Grotius to profess, when he approached Death,
that he would gladly exchange all his Learning and Honor, for the plain
integrity of one Iean Urick, who was a devout poor man, that spent eight hours
of his time in Devotion, eight in Labor, and but eight in Sleep, and all other
Refreshments. So also that great Statesman, St Tho. Smith, Secretary of State
to Q. Elizabeth, some time before he fell sick, sent for Directions to two
Bishops, how he might live most piously and make his peace with God Dr. Lo^d
Fair warning, p. 162.


Besides, all the unruly Passions being now cooled by time and years, Reason
obtains a fair hearing, and the Spirit of God gets a complete victory over the
Heart, that had resisted so long. Even as a City which has been long besieged,
and often summoned to surrender, yet stands it out, till provisions begin to
fail, and that the defender of it sees the Walls terribly shaken, and then he
finds it high time to capitulate and deliver it: so Almighty God calls, and
cries, and knocks time after time at the sinners Heart, but it is heedless of
these calls, it is feasted and filled with the Vanities of this present life;
but when it finds all the Fabric ready to fall upon it is Head, and no
provision made for a future and eternal State; it is high time to be getting
Oil, and laying up a good foundation for the time to come. And for those who
have been well disposed before, yet Old Age is a great Incentive to greater
holiness. As a Man in sailing, says Mr. Bradford, the nearer he comes to the
Shore, the nearer he would be; so the nearer I am to God, the nearer still I
would be. A person of years must needs have a more clear and comprehensive
knowledge, of the Doctrine and Duties of Christianity, of the life of Faith, of
Mortification, of the extent of the Divine Law, of the Nature and Power of
Godliness; and having more leisure, and being somewhat retired out of the
throng of worldly business, they are fitter to recollect these things, and to
reduce them into practice.

And this certainly is a great Privilege, to have a greater Aptitude to that
which is good. Alas, young people are under a great disadvantage herein: it is
true, their Faculties are more nimble, and their Memories more fresh; but then
they come into the World like raw Soldiers into the Field; they are compassed
and daily allured with diverse Temptations, and have boisterous lusts within
themselves, and so they are in a more remote distance from true Piety. They are
like an unruly Colt in a large and fat Pasture, there is no coming near them,
till they are driven into a Corner, till their way be hedged up with Thorns,
and then you may catch them. Such is the fate of young people, they are born
like a wild Asses Colt, Job. 11. 12. they care not for any thing that is good,
they fear not any evil, adding Iniquity unto Iniquity, until it come to snow
upon their Heads, and that their Arms and Legs begin to fail them; and then the
Voice of God will be heard, and his counsel shall be followed. So that though
Old Age will not bring a man to Heaven, yet it will fit a man for it, it
removes the Obstacles of repentance, and promotes the Exercises of Religion.

And it is high time it should be so; their activity for this world is past, if
they do not grow active for another, they will be good for nothing. They cannot
work, O but they can fast and pray, and that is better. The Aged person
remembers, that he is going into an holy world, and labors to have on Earth
some suitableness to the life of Heaven; because men begin their Heaven or Hell
upon Earth. And this age fits his purpose, being proper for Mortification and
Meditation. The more knowledge, and holiness he arrives at here, the riper and
fitter he is for that place to which he is ready to go Hae^ aetas optime facit
ad studia, jam despumavit, jam vitia adolescentiae domita, lassavit: non multum
superest, ut extinguat: si quis quaerat, quando proderit, quod in exit^
discitur, aut in quam rem? In hanc, ut exeat melior. Senec. Ep. 78.
.

Let every Aged person then, endeavor to verify this Privilege by their solid
Piety in all the instances thereof. Let there be a Principle of holiness
within, and the Practice of it without in all manner of Conversation, for as
you were told, then is the hoary head a crown of glory, when it is found in the
way of righteousness, Prove. 16. 31.

SECT. V.
THE Fifth Privilege of Old Age is,. 5. Riper in Fruits.
That it is Riper in its Fruits, than any other age. That is, their Judgments
are more refined, their Passions more sedate, their Devotions more strong,
their Actions more regular and uniform, and their spiritual Stature taller.
This may be gathered, a fortiori, from the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 11. When I was a
child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child: but
when I became a man, I put away childish things. The words and the thoughts
then of an Aged experienced man must, by a just inference, be very solid and
weighty. Every man must needs observe the rawness of his younger conceptions,
and the lightness of his former assertions: that Dies diem docet, every day
learns somewhat of that which went before it; and so I may allude to that
passage, Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night adds knowledge.
Yea the Psalmist ex^sly tells us, that the righteous shall (...) bring forth
fruit in Old Age, yea that they shall be fat and flourishing, Psalm. 92. 14. And
to this do other Authors Senectus enim ipsa in bonis moribus dulcior, in
consiliis utilior, ad constantiam subeundae mortis paratior, ad reprimendas
libidines firmior. Ambros. Hex. l. 1. c. 8.
, and Experience bear witness. Trace some Aged good men from morning to night,
you shall still find them (humane and unavoidable infirmities excepted) so
discreet in their Charity, so grave in their Counsels, so savoury in their
Discourse, so constant in their Devotion, so considerate in their Resolutions,
so faithful in their Reproofs, so poized in their Temper, so charitable in
their Censures, and so uniform and useful in their Lives, that their Practice
may be a perpetual Sermon, and Copy to teach others their duty to God and man:
So that it was no small Title of Honor, which was given to Mnason. Act. 21.
16. That he was an Old Disciple.

And there is a rational account to be given of this; seeing the Aged person
has had Time and means to sift and weigh all vulgar Notions, to observe the
frailties both of himself and others, to distinguish realities from
appearances, and to penetrate through the surface unto the substance of
spiritual things, and of temporal. They have past through all Relations, and
having been Children and Parents, Husbands or Wives for a ^ong time, and many
of them Servants and Masters; they are hereby enabled both to speak and to act
in all cases, with the greater solidity and efficacy. Add to this, that their
long acquaintance* with God cannot but assimilate them unto him, and make their
fruits holy, just, and good. Let observation be made, and it will be commonly
found, that the Discourses, the Sermons, the Books See Dr. Sheafe's Vindication
of Oldage, written by Him at 80. Dedicated to Dr. Chaderton who was 100. and
published by Dr. Gouge at 65. A. D. 1639.
that proceed from persons of years, tho they may want the external ornaments
and ardour, which are usual with younger persons, yet have that congruity,
weight, and wisdom that raise their value, and render them more truly useful:
So that we may well say in this Case, that the best wine is reserved to the
last.

Now this is a valuable Privilege. For who does not rather choose the fruit
that is ripe, than that which is raw? if it be not to some palates more
toothsome, yet it is to all bodies more wholesome: Summer fruit may be more
luscious, but Winter ( Old Age) fruit is more solid, and will keep longer. The
stony ground were they that received the Word with joy, but having no root,
they soon withered: But the good ground were they, that kept the word, and
brought forth fruit with patience. And that which puts a value upon these ripe
and welldigested fruits, is that they tend more eminently to the glory of God;
hereby they show forth the virtues, and so the praises of him, that has called
them: And they do more largely conduce to the good of all, that have occasion
to use them, or are conversant with them. To which purpose Plutarch observes,
Plutarch. An. seni, etc. p. 519.
that as they who teach Music do by their own singing, direct their Scholars;
so they that would instruct young men in private or public affairs, must not
only outwardly dictate good axioms and rules to them, but by their own steady
course in word and deed, endeavor to frame their minds to virtue. There is an
incredible charm in Example, and thereby a good man is a common blessing.

Let all you Aged persons then, consider what fruits ye bring forth. It does
not become you to be credulous in what ye hear, nor rash in what ye speak, nor
precipitate in what ye do: Whatsoever savours of youth is unseemly in you. You
must study to live as patterns, you should do more than others. They that have
been long at a Trade, should be accurate in it. The Apostle puts much upon the
Time, Heb. 5. 12. When for the time ye ought to be teachers, etc. you have been
long in Christ's school, you should be perfect in the Rules of Christian life
Ille ergo been senescit, qui been senserit. Ambr.
. They who had received Five talents, will not be accepted, unless they bring
ten again. If your figs be not good, very good, it is probable they will be
bad, very bad. If an Aged person be not ripe for Heaven, let him take heed he
be not ripe for Hell.

SECT. VI.
THE Sixth Privilege of Old Age is,. 6. Worthier of Respect.
That it is worthier of Respect, than those of an inferior Age. I mean hereby,
both an Inward Reverence, and the External expression thereof; and the former
is and ought to be the foundation of the latter. An Aged person, even on that
account, though neither ric^ nor wise, though neither noble nor pious, yet
deserves a respect for the Priority of his Being. The Veneration d^ to them is
founded on the Law Magna fuit capitis quondam reverentia cani. Ovid. 5. Fast.
of Nature. Hence Plato appoints that ever^ one should honor the Aged both in
word and deed, and this he often repeats. And it was much observed in Three
Indians once in Paris, that kept strictly to the order of their Age in
speaking, without any Directour but the Law of Nature. All the disputes about
the Antiquity, and consequently the Dignity of Families or Cities is grounde^
on this foundation. Why should Ol^ Monuments, Old Coins, yea even Ol^ Ruins be
regarded, and not Old men and Old women? This is also directly enjoined in the
Fifth Commandment, where by Father and Mother that are to be honored, Divines
do rightly determine, that such as are Elders by Age, as well as those that are
so by Relation, and Office are intended. And Honor in that Precept means an
inward Esteem, and Reverence in the heart, and the same expressed by a suitable
behavior toward them, in word and deed. And this is expressly specified,
Levit. 19. 32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of
the old man, and fear thy God: I am the Lord. The Jews indeed had a Tradition
hereupon, that it was not only fit to rise, when an Aged person was passing by
us, but that we should rise up, when they were four cubits distance from us;
and then we should presently sit down again, thereby to manifest that we rose
up in honor to them: But the plain scope of that Command is only, that we
ought to make all due expression of Respect to the Aged. And the indefiniteness
of the Precept shows, that it is due to all that are Aged; even that pale and
wrinkled face challenges a regard; and the fear of God is joined with it: q.
d. As you fear God, honor the Aged: and because the young, the rich, and the
proud will be loath to stoop herein, therefore he adds, I am the Lord: Whose
Authority is unquestionable, and whose Will is the highest Reason, who will
reward the keepers of this law, and punish the breakers of it. Agreeable to
this is that, Prove. 23. 22. Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and
despise not thy mother, when she is old. Likewise, 1 Timothy 5. 1, 2. Rebuke not
an Elder, but entreat him as a father, and the younger men as brethren, the
elder women as mothers. Where you see the Apostle interpreting the Fifth
Commandment as abovesaid; elder men as fathers, elder women as mothers.

Accordingly it is threatened as a sore Judgment, when the child shall behave
himself proudly against the Ancient, Isa. 3. 5. and so it was resented, when it
was executed, Lam. 4. 12. When the faces of the Elders were not honored. And
we have a Comment upon this in a heathen Poet Credebant hoc grande nefas and
morte piandum, Si Iuvenis vetulo non assurrexerat -- Juv. Sat. 13.
, who tells us that they held it for a wickedness worthy to be expiated by
Death, if one that was young did not rise, to show respect to one that was Old.
Let those consider this, who make no difficulty to take place of their elders,
merely because themselves are somewhat richer. And upon this very Principle the
Eldest son is by a natural right concluded to be heir, and I question whether
he should be defeated of it for any defects or immoralities. Upon all which it
is apparent, that there is a special Respect and Reverence due to Old Age.

Now let us consider what Privilege there is herein. If there were nothing in
it but a matter of Preference or precedence, it were no great attainment;
though many an Estate has been spent, and many a Life lost for the compassing
of these. But this Respect is chiefly valuable for its Use. For hereby the Aged
person is fenced from Contempt, unto which he is liable enough through his
impotence, poverty, and infirmities; and any ingenuous man had rather dye with
comfort, than live in contempt. But principally, they are hereby preserved in a
capacity of doing some good; their example, their instructions, their reproofs,
and their advice will become significant. We generally value men's Judgments and
Determinations according to the persons that give them. Great care they should
have how they advise, and a great deference should be given to their advice. So
the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5. 5. Likewise ye younger submit your selves to the elder.
And hereupon I would exhort and charge all young people, that shall cast their
eyes on these papers, to remember their place and duty, to deny themselves,
their own humors and preconceits, and to strike sail to their Seniors. They
were praying, perhaps before you had a being; they had done God and their
Country good service, before you had done one stroke of work. Holy Paul laid
something upon seniority in Grace, Romans 16. 7. Andronicus and Iunia, who were
in Christ before me; and by the like reason, it is some Dignity to be in the
world before others. Insomuch as when the Latins would express their esteem of
any thing, they use this word of Antiquity Nil habui antiquius.
to express it by. Away then with that unchristian, yea unmanly, and unmannerly
pertness and disrespect too frequent every where, toward Aged persons: Instead
whereof reckon it to your good Breeding, yea charge it upon your Conscience, to
give Honor to whom honor is due.

SECT. VII.
THE Seventh Privilege of Old Age. 7. Further from the World.
is, That they are Further from the World than younger persons are. These are
in the midst of it, and of all its troubles, and temptations; but those have
traveled through them, and are now almost past them. There are Two things in
the World that make it uneasy, Sin and Suffering. Sin that makes it uneasy to
Good men, Suffering that makes it uneasy to All men. A good man has
contracted a deep hatred against sin, and yet he cannot be rid of it. He meets
with it in every place; among the looser sort of people it swarms, he sees and
hears that every day, which vexes his righteous soul; and returning home he
finds it in his own heart, and that grieves him most. He is chained to a body
of death without any remedy; and the more knowledge and grace he has, the more
he hates it, and abhorrs himself by reason of it. It meets him in every
Employment, in every Prayer, and vexes him at the heart. He is like a man who
lives by a bad Neighbor, or that is yoaked to a froward Wife, that cannot live
comfortably with them, and cannot live possibly without them: Hence he cries
out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
Death? Now the young person, is in the midst of these Philistines; the
corruption of his Nature meeting, as is said before, with the temptations of
the World, is as tinder to the sparks, too easily set on fire with lust, anger,
gluttony, and such like; wherewith he must be either in continual and sharp
conflict, or else miserably ruined. Now the Aged person has gotten many
victories in this spiritual warfare, whereby his enemies are grown weaker, and
he bolder and stronger. He knows this bickering will not last long, and sees
the reward of his victory, and so pleases himself with his Condition. This
made the Apostle, when Aged, to say, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith, and henceforth there
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness: And is not this a Privilege? would
he accept a new lease to live over his life again? not for the whole world.
Seneca could say, if some God would indulge me so far, as that I might return
into my cradle again, I would earnestly refuse it: I would never yield, when I
have almost run my whole race, to return quite back again Quod si quis Deus
mihi largiatur ut ex hac aetate repuerascam and in cunis vagiam, valde recusem:
nec vero velim, quasi decurso spatio, a calce ad carceres revocari. Seneca.
.

And for the Sufferings in the World; man whether he be born to an Estate or
not, yet is born unto troubles as the sparks fly upward. We meet them in every
stage of our Life; we come into the world with Cries, and go out with groans;
and a great part of the space between, is replenisht with sighs, and cares, and
troubles. Some inflicted by the hand of God, and some by the hand of Man. One
while pain or sickness upon the body, another while wants or losses in our
estates; sometimes wounded in our names, and sometimes in the unhappy life, or
untimely death of our Relations; yea if we escape these, and have a perpetual
Sunshine, yet the cares and troubles that attend Prosperity are not few nor
small. So that when God surveyed the world at first, he pronounced all was
good; but when the wisest of men had made his survey of it since the Fall, he
pronounced all things in it to be vanity, and vexation of spirit; and the Aged
man can conclude it by his own experience, to be a sea of storms, a sink of
sins, and a very prison to the soul.

Indeed it is a Stage whereon we have opportunity to honor God, and do some
service to our fellow creatures; but otherwise the best Notion of it, is only a
convenient Inn for Pilgrims in their Journey. And upon this account we ought to
be content while we are in it, and and very well content to be released out of
it. For what wise man but is glad to part with the most convenient Inn, to be
going toward his own home Nec me vixisse poenitet; quoniam it a vixi, ut
frustra me natum non existimem: and ex vita ista discedo, tanquam ex hospitio,
non tanquam ex domo: commora^di enim Natura diversorium nobis, non habitandi,
dedit. Senec.
? Alas, they who are Old have seen so much of the falseness of the world, of
the deceits of men, of the divisions of the Church, of the weakness of good
men, and of the wickedness of evil men, that they are sick of this world, and
could not be hired with all it can give, to abide in it one day after their
work is done. When a man has found something above, beyond, and after this
world, he is weary of it Nihil de seculo desiderare potest, qui seculo major
est. Tertul.
.

So that the Privilege of Aged persons who are even past the World, is really
great. They have escaped those rocks and gulfs, of which younger persons are
yet in danger. They may look back with pity on younger persons, who are to
grapple with the difficulties, which they have overcome. They have also
attained that, which all young men desire, for these would live long, and the
Aged have lived long At senex est eo melior condition quam adolescens, cum id
quod sperat ille, hic jam assecutus est. Ille vult diu vivere, hic diu vixit.
Cicero.
. They have seen an end of all perfection, and that is a poor perfection that
has an end; and after all they find, that this is not their rest, because it
is polluted. Although they have been crucifying the world a long time, yet they
cannot make it wholesome enough to feed on, without much caution and jealousy.
And finding it so dangerous a Master, and so troublesome a Servant, they are
glad to be rid of it, and glad that they are near parting: So that he who has
tried the world, and yet loves it, is bewitched by it. As a man that has
surfeited on any thing, his Stomach rises against it: so is it with the Aged,
they have too long surfeited on it, and now their Hearts rise against it
Solenne in confinio mortis positis, res humanas ex ignota quadam and
supernaturali causa fastidire. P. Suav: Histor. Conc. Trident.
. The World and they are easily parted, for it cares little for them, and they
care less for it. Farewell (think they) thou false and flattering World, that
promised me content, and never performed it; that pretended to be my good
Friend, and have proved my constant Snare, my deadly Enemy; I am now going to a
peaceable holy and endless World. Hence it was that when the Physicians once
told holy Mr. Dod, in a dangerous Sickness in his Oldage, that they had good
hopes of his Recovery; he answered them, that the news pleased him no better,
than if one should tell the weather-beaten Mariner that was putting into the
haven, that he must turn back to conflict with the Storms again. No certainly,
they who are almost got safely through this dangerous World, would be loath to
venture into it again.

Indeed if a man have no portion but in this Life, if he have no house but Hell
to go to, when he leaves the world; it is no wonder if he be loath to part with
it: but they who are dead to this world, and ripe for a better, would not live
here always, but rejoice exceedingly, and are glad, when they can find the
grave, Job 3. 22. And this leads me to

SECT. VIII.
THE Eighth Privilege of Old Age, ^ 8. Nearer to Death and Eternity.
which is, that it is Nearer to Death than in the Course of Nature, younger
persons are, and consequently if they be in Christ, nearer to the Everlasting
Life. For though it is possible for the Young to dye soon, yet it is impossible
for the Aged to live long Of young men die many, Of old men escape not any.
. Their manifest Decays are a certain presage of their approaching
Dissolution, and no Medicine has yet bin found to cure Oldage. The graves are
ready for them, and the Worms wait for their last repast upon them. The moth of
Mortality, which is bred in our Nature, will still be fretting the Garment of
our Bodies, till they be consumed. Death is already got into the Aged persons
Eye, and Ear, and in a short time will bring him unto the dust. Now though this
be an unwelcome Messenger to those that live at ease, yet to an holy Old man
and woman it is a blessed Privilege: for as looking backward they see a
tempting troublesome world, so looking forward they see by Faith a state of
perfect Holiness and Happiness prepared for them. This Faith assures them, that
the end of their fight, is the beginning of their Victory, and as they part
from their labors, they take possession of their honors Pugnae finis est
initium victoriae, and dum finiuntur labores, accedunt honores. Rivet. de
senbon.
. And does not any Apprentice rejoice, when the time of his service is near its
expiration? I know Nature recoils at the approach of Death in the best, but
Faith is then of greatest need and use, and the just may be said to die, as well
as to live by his faith. Thereby he sees Life and Immortality just before him,
and one only miry step to pass, and then he is well. Indeed the idle man
desires not to go to bed, but to all that take or suffer pain, says S.
Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 49. in Matthew.
, an end of it is sweet; the traveller gladly beholds his Inn; the hireling
often computes when his year is out; the husbandman greedily expects harvest;
the pregnant woman waits for her expected deliverance and the Aged person for
his Writ of Ease.

One would wonder what shift even the Heathen made to render Death desirable,
who had such weak glimmerings of any other life. And yet even they would thus
argue: Death, either it annihilates us, or else translates us: Annihilation
will but reduce me into the State wherein I was; and if it translate me, it
will put me into better lodgings; my Soul can be no where so penned up, as here
it is in the Body Mo^ quid est? aut finis est, aut transitus: nec desinere
timeo, idem est enim quod non coepisse: nec transire, quia nusquam tam anguste
ero. Senec. Ep. 65.
. What boast would they have made of Death, had they but firmly believed
everlasting life? For this it was which enabled the Apostle to make this
expression, Phil. 1. 23. -- Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ,
which is far better. For where should the Spouse desire to be, but with her
husband? or where the members, but with the head? And upon this account, that
good Lady Falkland would usually say, when she was going to bed, Now am I
nearer Heaven by one day than ever I was. The Aged person sees a woeful
wilderness behind him, and the blessed land of Promise before him, and
therefore no wonder that, with Moses, he longs to be in it. And the nearer the
holy Soul approaches its perfection, the more earnest and almost impatient it
is to attain it.

And one great Advantage of the Aged lies in this; that the Meditation of
Death, which is then in view, is of great use to compose the Mind, to keep us
in the Fear of the Lord all the day long, and our Consciences void of offense
toward God and men, to work in us a great contempt of the World, and a
singular freedom of spirit and of speech. It will make us neither much to fear,
nor much to hope, or desire any thing, that the world can do for us, or against
us Facile contemnit omnia, qui semper cogitat se esse moriturum. Hieron. ep. ad
Paul.
; and finally does greatly conduce, to keep us steady and constant in faith and
holiness.

And if some Ancient people do not make this use of their approaching
dissolution, what would they or others do, if they did not grow Old at all?
what a careless worldly and vain life would men live, if they had no certain
Indications of their dying? Surely the nearer to Heaven, the more heavenly we
should be: as any man when he is come to the confines of another Country, will
frame himself to the guise thereof, so he that has this hope in him, does
purify himself as he is pure, and will begin the Life below, which he expects
to live above.

And the other Privilege herein contained is this, that being weary, they are
near to their Journeys end. They have bin long tossed upon the Sea, and now
they see the Haven, and rejoice that they are ready to put into it. This could
make Cato in Tully to say, My old age is herein pleasant to me, that by how
much I approach nearer to death, so much sooner do I, as it were, descry land,
and after long sailing am ready to enter the Port. Not that a good man should
desire to dye for ease, only to be freed from the troubles of life: all the
tribulations of that blessed Apostle Paul, never made him cry out, O wretched
man that I am! but his body of death forced him to it. But whilst we carry
these earthly Tabernacles about us, even the Sufferings of this present time
will make us rejoice in hope of the glory of God. Especially when we behold
that innumerable company of Angels, the general assembly and Church of the
first born, the spirits of just men made perfect, yea God the Judge of all, and
Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, amongst whom we are going to reside in
perfect bliss; then will our heart and our flesh cry out, O when shall we come
and appear before God! And this is the Privilege of Old Age, that there is but
one feeble life between them and a Crown; and you know that he who is shortly
to be invested in some Dignity, feasts himself with the hopes of it O preclaram
di^, cum ad illud amicorum concilium coetumque profi^iscar and cum ex hac turba
and colluvione discedam! Cicero.
. Yea this is the constant relief of the Aged man under all his bodily, and
other temporal afflictions, that they will last but for a moment. Hold out
Faith and Patience, the Iubilee is at hand.

Therefore it behooves all that are in years, to lay up for themselves a good
foundation for the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life: to get
some unquestionable evidence of their right to the tree of life, of their part
in Paradise; and then their thoughts of what is beyond death, will support them
against all events on this side it, or in it. That Death is never to be
dreaded, says an Heathen Poet Ennius.
, which is followed with Immortality. All your riches, reputation, or friends
will then nothing comfort you, like a lively sense of Christ in you, the hope
of glory. He that has lived to God, will cheerfully go to him; and they who
have run with difficulty, will dye with ease Ante senectutem curavi, ut been
viverem; in senectute, ut been moriar; been autem mori est libenter mori. Sen.
ep. 61.
.

And thus you have an account of some of the many Privileges of Old Age: for
besides all these; it is a Privilege to attain to such an Age, as that we may
our selves see to the Education, and Disposal of our Children; and also to have
the comfort of their piety and prosperity. Thou shall see thy childrens
children, and peace upon Israel, Psalm. last. Hereupon it is recorded among, and
as the crown of the Blessings bestowed upon Job, after his restoration, that he
lived an hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons sons, even
four generations, Job 42. 16. From all which we may conclude, that although
every Age of man's life has its peculiar bitterness and sweetness, yet all
things well weighed, a quiet and honest Old Age is to be preferred before any
other age. It is the assertion of the learned Petrarch O veneranda ante alias
senectus! O diu optata! O nequicquam formidata mortalibus! Et si nosse
coeperis, faelix aetas: Indignus est ad te pervenire, qui te metuit: Indignus
pervenisse qui te accusat. Petrarch. lib. 8. ep. ^enil. ep. 2.
, who thereupon breaks forth into the praises of it; concluding them unworthy
to arrive at it, that are afraid of it, and them unworthy to possess it, that
accuse it. So that though we commonly say, That every thing is worse for its
age, yet a pious Old person is the better; and therefore no man needs to be, as
too many are, ashamed of their gray hairs. Forasmuch as Old Age, is Greater in
Authority than any other age, Richer in Experience, Freer from sin, Proner to
Piety, Riper in its Fruits, Worthier of Respect, Further from the World, and
Nearer to Eternity. And so much for the Privileges of Old Age, which is the
Sixth point to be handled.

CHAP. VII. The Work of Old Age.
SECT. I.
AND so I come in the Seventh, Cap. 7. The Work of Old Age.
and Last place to treat, concerning the Work and Business of Old Age: What
special and proper Employment, besides their necessary and ordinary affairs,
their Years obliges them unto. Their laboring and traveling days are done,
but yet they have much Work to do. Since they have not yet apprehended, this One
thing they must do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching
forth unto those things which are before, they must press toward the mark.
There is no complete rest for the body, on this side the grave; nor for the
soul, on this side Heaven. They that were Idle in the eleventh hour, were
checked with, Why stand ye here idle all the day? Matthew. 20. 6. You have been
busy a great while for Time, it is but reasonable, you should take some pains
for Eternity. The shadows of the Evening have overtaken you, ye have but a
little time to work in. It was wise counsel of the Wise man; Whatsoever thy
hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go, Eccles. 9. 10. Behold
and see how fast the sands of your glass are running; hearken how fast the
Pendulum of your Clock hastens. The Bills of Mortality, besides other Diseases,
contain some weekly that dye for Age; and which week your Name will be called,
you know not: But when it is called, you must go, no Bail is taken by Sergeant
Death. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes, finds so doing.
And therefore to use the Prophet Ioel's words, Joel 1. 2. Hear this, ye Old
men, and give ear all the inhabitants of the land: Suffer the word of
Exhortation, and buckle in sober sadness to these Employments of Old Age.

The First Work of Old Age, is Repentance. 1. Repentance of their Sins.
of your sins. This is a bitter Pill to flesh and blood, but it must be
swallowed here or hereafter. When it is tasted here, it is only bitter-sweet,
there is comfort in it, there is comfort after it: It is like the pains of an
honest woman in travel, the remembrance of the loving Father supports her at
present, and the birth of a comely child revives her after; but if it be
deferred, and placed on the wrong side of Death, then it will be bitter,
bitter; there is no present, no future comfort: Then it will be like the
gnawing pains of a woman with a Cancer, though infinitely sharper, and
infinitely longer. So that it is not referred to the Old Man, or any man else,
whether he will Repent or not, for it cannot be avoided; but whether he will
repent for a time, or repent for ever; whether he will repent with hope, or
repent with despair.

Now Repentance may be considered, in a Double respect. 1. Initially, at the
first Conversion of the Soul to God; and 2. Secondarily, at the Renewing of the
acts thereof afterward. It concerns Ancient people to be acquainted
respectively with both. This needful message then is directed,

1. To such Aged persons, who are yet in the state of unrenewed Nature; who
have never past through the Newbirth, nor know any thing by experience of
Regeneration, which was the Case of Old Nicodemus, though a Master in Israel,
Joh. 3. 9. Now that a Fundamental Repentance or Conversion, call it how you
will, is necessary to all that shall be saved, I should think is past dispute.
For it cannot be denied, that we come into the world in a sinful state: And it
is manifest, that Baptism does not cure the Soul of that Disease; but that all
people in general have a strong propensity either to the lusts of the flesh, or
to the lusts of the eyes, or to pride of life, until an inward Change be
wrought in the heart; which is the effectual Calling of a careless Sinner, to
turn to God and Godliness. Now if an Aged person have been a stranger to this
Grace, though perhaps he has led a sober, industrious, just, yea a charitable
life, and also has complied with the outward acts of devotion in use: Yet
except the tree have been made good by Regeneration, it cannot have its fruit
unto holiness, nor the end everlasting life.

I would therefore conjure all such Unconverted Old people, to apply themselves
with all speed and seriousness to this First Repentance; to be renewed in the
spirit of your minds, to make you new hearts and new spirits, or else
infallibly you must dye. Say not with Nicodemus, How can a man be born when he
is old? For the Work is possible and the Method is plain. Harder it may be for
an Old man to become a New man, than for the younger; hence the Proverb, An old
naught, will never be ought: That is rarely, or difficulty, according to the
Greek saying (...).
: For that the Faculties of the Soul are enfeebled, and the Habits of Sin
strengthened by continuance; former guilt and negligence, makes men to doubt of
future assistance or acceptance. But since God does call Old people to Repent,
since he has spared you alive hitherto, and to them that are joined to the
living there is hope; since there be innumerable instances of Old Converts: In
fine, since God looks upon men, and if any, mark, if Any say, I have sinned
and perverted that which was right, and it profits me not; he will deliver
him from going down to the pit, Job 33. 27, 28. Never question the possibility,
but set about the work. Set the Necessity against the Difficulty, it is Turn in
Time or Burn in Eternity; for Truth has said, Except a man be born again, he
cannot see the kingdom of heaven. How can you imagine that a limb of the Devil,
should become a member of Christ, a child of wrath become a child of God, but
by Regeneration? Outward Reformation may shave the hair, but this Leprosy must
be cured inwardly.

O lay to heart the long time you have lived in sin, and in enmity to God I
repent of all my life, but that part I have spent in communion with God, and in
doing good. Dr. Donn^ on his Deathbed.
; the short time you have to live in the world; that Death makes no Converts,
and Sickness but a few: Consider what mercies and deliverances you have
received from this good God; and how little true service you have done him, and
whether it be not now high time to turn unto him with your whole heart and not
feignedly. If that Holy man would not be in an unregenerate state but one hour
for all the world, left he should dye in that hour, what is your pillow, or
rather your heart made of, that you can sleep so long in a state of
Condemnation? To be born in sin is sad, but to live and dye in sin, will prove
a thousand times worse. Remember that the destroying Angels began, at the
Ancient men before the house, Ezekiel. 9. 6.

Its true, late Repentance is seldom true, but yet true Repentance is never too
late. O then lay all business aside, and set your selves about the New
creature. Now or never, now and ever. If you turn the deaf ear unto God now,
beware lest he deny you either the space, or the grace to repent hereafter;
lest he answer you, Ubi consumpsisti farinam, etc. where thou have spent the
flour of thy life, there bestow the bran of it. Take warning by that Penitent
in story, who had often determined to begin his Amendment from some eminent
time, as the First day of the year, or his Birth day, that so his Repentance
might have some Remarkable date; but when that Time came, he was ready to
adjourn it till another time: Who thereupon concluded, that he would make that
present Day, though it were obscure in the Calender, yet memorable to his Soul
by his turning, through divine assistance, unto God.

Do you not perceive how you are in danger to be trapann'd by Satan, who
suggested to you in the time of youth, that Repentance was then too early, and
who will now persuade it is grown too late? ye have de^err'd this work long
enough already, now you must use double diligence about it. It is said of the
Mulberry tree, that it casts out its buds latest, but then thrusts them all out
in a night: You are late in the Vineyard, you must work the harder. The whole
business of your life hitherto stands for nothing; if you be not new born, you
will cease to be in this world, before you begin to live Quidam tunc vivere
incipiunt, cum desinendu^ est: si hoc judice^ mirum; adjiciam quod magis
admireris, quidam ante vivere desierunt quam incipiunt. Sen. Ep. 23.
; if your last change get the start of this first change, you will curse the
day of your birth to all eternity.

Now for your Direction in this great Work, your present business is to get a
Competence of Knowledge, in the Doctrine of Religion: and then searching your
own Hearts to compare them with the holy Law of God. For example, look your
face in the glass of that hundred and nineteenth Psalm, or of the Fifth, Sixth,
and Seventh of Matthew, and then, through Gods help you will presently find the
dissimilitude, yea the contrariety between them. And then fix your mind upon
the Wrath of God, hanging over all persons in your Condition, and upon the
sufficient satisfaction made by Jesus Christ for all that believe and repent,
and apply all this to your selves. Frequent the serious Preaching of Gods word,
and begin to pray in good earnest, Turn thou me and I shall be turned* and be
assured, that Spirit, which inclines you to the use of these means, will breath
life into your dead and dry bones, and make you new Creatures.

And in case you find your selves at a loss in this affair, repair to some Able
and faithful Minister of Christ, and be not afraid or ashamed to lay open your
Condition, and follow his guidance therein. For if men are not content, in case
of an Infirmity of body, to hear the Physic Lectures, or to read books of
Receipts, but will state their own case to the Physician himself; and will do
the like to the Lawyer in weighty cases concerning their Estates, how much more
need have you of a Godly Divine, to direct and assist you in an affair, wherein
body and Soul are at stake, and that for Eternity? And so much for that First
and fundamental Repentance, so absolutely necessary for such Ancient people, as
have spent their lives in the service of the world, and the flesh, and were
never truly converted unto God.

But besides these, Repentance in the renewed Acts thereof, is a proper and
necessary work for All Old people whatsoever. You have lived a long time, and
through Omissions and Commissions have contracted abundance of guilt Nonne tota
vita ob commissa damnabilis, vel ob omissa inutilis? quid restat, o peccator,
nisi ut in tota vita deplores totam vitam. Anselm.
. Trace your selves therefore from place to place, from one period of your life
to another, and strictly reckon with your selves. Study the Ten Commandments in
their true extent; they are called Ten words, but they command ten thousand
Duties, and forbid ten thousand Sins, many whereof you have ten thousand times
failed in, and in diverse of them with great aggravations: and then sit down and
cry out, O that my head were a fountain, and mine Eyes rivers of tears, to
bewail these offenses against a gracious God In quantum non peperceris tibi, in
tantum Deus, creed, parcet. Tertul. de poen. c. 9.
. Upon this account did holy Augustine in his Old Age write his Confessions;
wherein he makes no difficulty to shame himself, that he might give glory to
God. And the Book of Ecclesiastes is judged to be the Poenitenials of King
Solomon, in his Old Age; wherein he plainly confesses his Vanity, in seeking
for Happiness in a vain and vexatious World, and warns all young men to beware
of such like folly. Alas if you had fallen but seven times a day, yet in
seventy years those Sins would have amounted unto almost Two hundred thousand
offenses; and can you reflect upon this without amazement; nay it is a wonder
that we do not, as Nectarius his Accuser of old, weep out our Eyes for very
grief O that this flesh had bin composed of Snow, Instead of Earth ^ and bones
of Ice, that so Feeling the fervor of my sins, and loathing The Fire I feel, I
might be thawed to nothing. Quarles.
. When the leaves are fallen from the trees, as is aptly observed by One, the
birds nests are easily seen, which were invisible before; so when through Age
our frothy vanities are withered, we may palpably discover, the sallies of
Pride, Wantonne^s and Folly; yea those nest of vermin, and vipers which
replenished our youthful days.

It was the sober Advice of that Statesman, Sir Thomas Randolph in his Old Age,
after he had been eighteen times Ambassador in foreign parts, to Sir Thomas
Walsingham Secretary of State: It is now time, says he, for us to leave the
tricks of State, and to employ our time before Death in Repentance* for the
Sins of our Lives. And Blessed be God that has appointed this Remedy, and the
Blood of Christ without which all our tears could not wash out one Sin, that
poor Sinners have this after-game of Recovery, when they have been undone by
Sin! when we have eaten so much of the forbidden fruit in our youth, we have
need of this wormwood in our Old Age. Renew therefore daily the Acts of
unfaigned Repentance, and take account duly of your selves, as some of the very
Heathens Quid quoque die dixerim, audiverim, egerim, commemoro vesperi. Cato in
Tully.
have done, since you must give account to God very shortly; and he that daily
reckons with himself, will have but one day to reckon for, when he comes to dye.

But be sure you mistake not the Nature of Repentanee. For it is not only a
Trouble, an Anger, a Sorrow; but it is made up of Grief, and Hatred: Grief for
the Offense to God, and Hatred of the Sins we grieve for. So that Repentance is
a turning to God from all sin, with grief for it and hatred of it. And the best
Proof you can give of your Repentance for the Sins of your Youth, is a watchful
care against the Sins of your Old Age: otherwise, your Sins are not forsaken,
but changed. Withal, if your Repentance be sound, it is attended with a will
and endeavor to make Restitution, wherein you have injured any in their Souls,
Bodies, Names, or Estates. This will be as Letters Testimonial of the truth of
your Repentance: you must not, nay, you cannot be quiet, if your Repentance be
sound, until you have seriously endeavored, as far as in you lies, to recover
the Souls, to restore the Bodies, to heal the Reputations, and to repair the
Estates, which you have injured: without which, there can be no true Repentance
on Earth, and without which, there will be no Remission in Heaven An melius est
damnatum latere, quam palam absolvi? Tertul: de poen^ c. 10.
.

SECT. II.
ANother work of Old Age is, obtaining. 2. Obtaining of Assurance:
Assurance of Salvation. I mean hereby, not only a General Certainty, that some
good people shall be saved; for the Devils believe this, and rage at it, which,
I think, is the same with Objective Certainty; nor that Assurance which may
come by special and extraordinary Revelation, since we find few or no examples
in Scripture of such a thing; but rather that the Apostle Paul himself grounds
his Assurance of the Crown, upon the righteousness of God, which he extends to
all them, that love Christ's appearing, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Neither do I mean a
Conjectural Hope of Salvation, which admits both of anxiety and of slavish
fear; fith the Scripture represents it by Faith, and full assurance, and
produces Earnests and Seals for confirmation. Nor lastly, is this Assurance
confined to Grace at present, but extends to final Salvation. Thus the Apostle,
2 Timothy 1. 12. I know whom I have believed; there is Assurance of his present
State, but was he certain of his Perseverance? Yes, that follows, and I am
persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against
that day.

That such Assurance has been attained, is clear enough from the Instances of
Job 19. 25, 26. of David, Psalm. 16. 9, 10. of Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. and many
others. That it may be attained, is as clear; since there is no intimation that
these, or the rest, had any extraordinary Discovery thereof unto them, but
arrived thereat in the use of those means, and by the consignation of that
Spirit, unto which we have access as well as they. And the Apostle does
expressly comprehend the generality of Believers in this Privilege, 2 Cor. 5.
1. For we know, that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, etc. That it ought to be endeavored by all true
Christians, is most evident from the plain commands to that purpose, 2 Pet. 1.
10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give diligence to make your calling and
election sure, etc. That few do labor to attain it, thinking it to be
impossible or unnecessary, is to be bewailed. That many deceive themselves with
a false persuasion of present Grace and future Glory, is manifest by Scripture
and daily Experience. And that it is most proper and needful for Old people,
the thing it self speaks.

For you cannot deny but that you have Souls, immortal Souls, which being
Spirits cannnot dye, but must return to God that gave them: and are these Souls
of so small value to be left to a Hazard, to an everlasting venture? And it is
as evident, that this life is uncertain: we may say as Isaac, Genesis 27. 2.
Behold now, I am Old, I know not the day of my Death; and therefore it is time
for us to go about this work without delay. Children desire the time of youth,
and youth longs to be at man's age, and they then would live to be Old, but
Old Age has no further Age to desire August. Ep. 110.
, it has none other to succeed it here, and they are wholly uncertain how long
it will last; and therefore it is absolutely necessary, that they should be on
sure grounds for Eternity, and then the day of death will be better than the
day of their Birth. You know how much of your life is already spent, you can
see the Sands that are run into the nether end of the Glass, but the upper Part
is covered with a Mantle, you know not how few Sands are left there to run.
Nay, you cannot but perceive, that Death is approaching very near you. You are
filled with Wrinkles which is a Witness against you, and your leanness rising
up in you, bears witness to your Face, as it is, Job 16. 8. For as it is
observed of All men, that they are Mortales, apt to dye, and of all Good men,
that they are Mortificati, dying to Sin; so it is of all Old men, that they are
Morituri, about to dye. And for such to have Oil to seek, when they should have
it to Use; Evidences to procure, when they should have them to produce, is an
unexcusable neglect.

Especially knowing, that your last Breath wafts you into an unalterable
Estate. What Journeys and Presents were heretofore made to the Oracles, to
assure the Votaries concerning the Event of some temporal affairs! and how many
do now Hazard their Souls by seeking to Necromancers, to know the success of
their Marriages, Voyages, and such like; and yet a miscarriage in these things
is remediable, there may be some alleviation in them, there may be some end of
them: but you are lanching into the Ocean of Eternity, and are at no certainty,
whether it be eternal Happiness, or eternal Misery. What an anxious and
uncomfortable State must this be? If you were not loose in your belief of
future things, you would be restless in this condition: you owe your Ease to
your Let^argy; if you were not half Infidels, you would be more than half
distracted. Which brings to mind the course which some Eminent persons among
the Heathens C^rneades and Chesila^s.
took, they durst not dye sober, but drank great Draughts o^ Wine, saying, That
no voluptuous person can go in his Wits into an invisible Estate* With what
poor comfort must that man dye, that must cry out with that Old Philosopher; I
dye in great doubt, and know not whither I am going; yet out the Soul must go,
ready or unready. Then will the careless sinner gnash his Teeth for rage at his
slothful and sinful life, which he has spent as a Tale that is told. Then will
he have time enough, to curse all the worldly business, or wicked Company, that
has devoured his precious time, and left his Soul to shift for it self for
ever.

Do not we in all other cases strive to be at a point? will May-be's and
Peradventure's satisfy us in any material humane affairs? The Tenant who is
warned out of one House, cannot enjoy himself, until he be sure of another; The
Steward that was discharged of his Office, Luke 16. took present course to be
provided of some other Subsistence; The poorest man is uneasy, when his old
Suit of Clothes is worn out, till he have a new one; what then are your Souls
dreaming on, which find the Garment of the Body quite worn out, your earthly
House ready to fall upon its Head, and yet Sleep quiet only with some weak
ungrounded hopes of endless happiness? Have you left your outward Estates under
no better Assurance? your Conveyances, your Fines and Recoveries will rise up
in witness against you, and you will be found at last to be wise in trifles,
and Fools in the things of moment. Yea, you will see, when Friends and
Relations will leave you, your Estates and Pleasures leave you, Life it self
leave you, that they who make not sure of Heaven, are sure of Nothing.

Think not, that your Outward Blessings are any certain Arguments of Gods love
to you; that, because God has done much for you in this World, he will
therefore Crown you in another; or because ye have lived long here in the day
of his Patience, that you must live always with him in Heaven. No, no, Job 21.
7. 20. Even the wicked live, become old, yea, and are mighty in power: yet his
Eyes shall see his Destruction, and he shall drink of the wrath of the
Almighty. Many a man has been strangely saved from Death, that will not be
saved at last from Hell: and men do hold temporal mercies by one Tenure, and
Eternal by another.

Be advised therefore to set about this ^eedful work, with all possible speed
and care. And to that end, choose out ^wo or three Scriptures, which do most
^vidently describe a Sanctified Heart; ^ch as Mat. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Or
^om. 8. 1. 5. 9. and endeavor by the best h^lps you have, to know the true.
Gen^ine meaning thereof: Then compare your own Hearts with them. And whatsoever
doubt you have of your Conformity thereunto, examine it to the bottom; and in
case of any insuperable difficulty consult with some discreet Messenger of God.
And when you have thoroughly sifted one Scripture, go to another, and another,
that in the Mouth of two or three witnesses, your Assurance may be established.
And this done, betake you to your Knees, and spreading these tried Evidences
before God, humbly beg the help of his Holy Spirit; both to clear your
understanding, to guide your Conscience, and to seal you up to the day of
Redemption. And then you must patiently wait in the use of all the means of
Grace, Sermons, Prayers and Sacraments, until His Spirit witness with your
spirit, that ye are the Children of God.

SECT. III.
THE Third Work of Old Age, is Prayers. 3. Prayer and Praises.
and Praises. 1. For Prayers. I do not here mean only the Ordinary Devotions,
which I presume every good Christian uses, both Old and Young, and whereby
indeed the Soul Breaths; for a true Believer lives by Faith, and breaths by
Prayer: whereof that excellent Bishop Hall thus concludes, I may truly say,
that man has no Grace nor Goodness in him, that Prays not by Himself, and with
his Family: but also that they should be frequent in Prayer. It is said of
Luther, that he spent daily at least Three hours in Prayer. And holy David
says, Psalm. 55. 17. Evening and Morning and at Noon will I Pray, and cry
aloud: yea, in his Old Age we may conclude, that he dyed with a Prayer in his
Mouth, from Psalm. 72. last. The Prayers (and belike the life) of David the Son
of Iesse are ended together. And therefore the Egyptian Hieroglyphick of an
Aged person was a Swan, whom they imagined to dye Singing: for there is no
Music so sweet in the Ears of God, as hearty Prayers and Praises.

And if you find your selves unable to hold out in the more stated and solemn
Prayers, you should be more frequent and fervent in shorter Addresses; for it
is not the length, but the strength of a Prayer that carries it with God. And
in case of the want of Ability, or Opportunity for this frequency, for every
poor crazy Old Man or Woman has them not, you may and should abound in holy
Ejaculations, or short Elevations of the Soul to God; sometimes by way of
Confession, sometimes by way of Admiration, sometimes by way of Petition, and
sometimes by way of Thanksgiving, of all which there are various Instances in
Scripture. And these you may dart upward, as you sit by the fire, as you lie in
your beds, as you put on and off your clothes. Thus ye may pray without
ceasing, as it is, 1 These. 5. 17. And the Lord will accept of these, coming
from a sincere and holy heart, and which in its present circumstances can do no
better. But still Prayer is the proper Province of the Aged person, and both
you and your Pictures will look best, when they are (as Paul the Hermites
carcass was) found in a praying posture.

For as was noted before, your laboring and traveling days are done, your
Hands and Feet have done their work: the best service you can now do is upon
your knees. There you may do much, therein you may engage Him who can do All:
nothing can stand before the prayer of Faith. And therefore, when you reflect
upon the slips and falls in the course of your Life, so that your hearts begin
to ache and faint for fear, then enter into your Closet, and pour out your
hearts before God, and that will revive you. When that coward Satan sets upon
an Aged man or woman, with his Assault and Battery, either to weaken their
faith, or to unravel their repentance, or to cloud their comforts, their only
course is to run to God by Prayer; God is a refuge for us. When we feel the
decays of Nature, and are almost overwhelmed with Distempers or Troubles, then
let us by Prayer cast our burden upon the Lord, and he will sustain us. Thus
that learned and holy Rivet Rivet. ep. de bona senectute.
did every day in his Old Age repeat the seventeenth and eighteenth verses of
the seventy first Psalm. O God, thou have taught me from my youth, and hitherto
have I declared thy wondrous works. Now also when I am Old and grayheaded, O
God, forsake me not, until I have showed thy strength to this generation, and
thy power to every one that is to come.

And here the Aged shall do well not only to plead their own Cause with God,
but to lay up a stock for Posterity, that the generations yet unborn may be the
better for them. Thus David, in that Psalm. 72. 1. Give thy Judgments to the
King, O God, and thy righteousness to the Kings Son, etc. What you are now
sowing, may be reaped by your Posterity hundreds of years afterward. And
perhaps this will be the best Intail which you can make of your Estates, for
hitherto whatever Settlements the Will of men has devised, the Wit of men has
defeated; but by faithful Prayer, God himself is made Trustee, who only can
establish your Purposes.

So also you should be instant with the Lord for his Church, Truth, and Gospel.
So was David, Psalm. 122. So was Paul, always in every Prayer of his. And we
cannot better approve our selves to be members of that mystical Body, than by
our incessant Prayers for the Increase, the Unity and the Happiness thereof.
And when you are thinking of your Country, of your Kindred, and of your
Friends, add an Ejaculation to every of these your thoughts for a blessing upon
them. These are Employments fit for a Christian Aged person, and will become
them better, than endless Complaints, or groundless Presages. Pray, pray, and
do not Prophecy, was holy Mr. Palmers saying to those, that were always
boding misery. I tell you, that you may do your selves, the Church, the Nation,
and Posterity more service by your fervent Prayers, than you have done by the
cares and labors of your whole life.

And then, 2. For Praises; when you consider all the Good which God has done
In you, the Good he has done For you, and the Good he has done By you, you
cannot sure be silent. Reflect upon your own Hearts, and remember what a plight
you were in, when his Grace and Mercy found you out; what Methods he has used
to recover you; what light and love and life he has bestowed upon you; what
outward Means and inward Motions he has vouchsafed you; how he has rescued
you out of various temptations, recovered you out of sad relapses, stablished
you in times of trial and defection, and brought you within sight of the
Promised Land. And then review your whole Life, and consider what great things
he has done For you. Observe Old David's course. Psalm. 71. 6. By thee have I
bin holden up from the Womb, thou art he that took me out of my Mothers bowels;
my praise shall be continually of thee. Remember the care he took of your
Education, the wonderful Preservations in your Childhood, and Youth, when your
rashness and folly did every day precipitate you into palpable dangers; how
many sicknesses and distempers he has either prevented or healed; in how many
Iourneys and Voyages his Angels have had the Charge of you; in what perils by
day and by night, by Land and by Sea he has preserved you. O remember the
works of the Lord, surely you should remember his wonders of old. Psalm. 77. 11.
Have you not heard of that Man, who having passed over a Plank on Horseback,
over a deep River over night, and being brought in the Morning to see his
deliverance, fell down dead with the apprehension? How many Lives have you had
given you? How many thousands have bin cut off, and you have bin spared? What a
wonder is it, that your Eyes and Limbs have bin kept safe so long! Now you are
weak, but remember how long you were strong: now you cannot eat, or sleep, as
^heretofore; but you have lost your Register, if you have forgotten the
cheerful meals, and restful nights you have en^oyed.

(...) in respect of your Outward Estate, ^emember how naked you came into the
world, how the Lord has fed you all ^our life long; he it is that has given
^ou power to get wealth, he has still spread your Table, and filled your Cup,
and ^ent you more than ever you expected, at ^east deserved. Remember how
merciful ^e has bin unto you in your Names, in your Relations, Posterity,
every way. And ^hen conclude with David, 2 Samuel 7. 18. Who am I, O Lord God,
and what is my house, that thou have brought me hitherto? My ^outh shall show
forth thy Righteousness and thy Salvation, for I know not the num^ers thereof.
I will hope continually, and will ^et praise thee more and more. Psalm. 71. 14,
15. Let Hallelujah be your Song, as ^t was the Motto of Godly Mr. Bruen, which
he wrote in the first leaf of all his Books. Let not your present weakness and
pain, bury your sense of all your former health and ease. A thankful life is a
pleasant life.

And lastly review the Good that God has done By you, that still God may have
all the praise. You have wrestled with God in Prayer, though now you are soon
faint and weary. You have measured many a step to hear Gods Word, though now
you cannot: and have read many a good Book, though now your Eyes be quickly
dazzled. Many a Soul has bin the better for your Counsel, and many bowels have
bin refreshed by your relief. Now as God is not unrighteous to forget your work
and labor of love, so your remembrance of it in this your Old Age, must oblige
you to renewed thanks and praise. Thus David in that Psalm. 18. which he spoke
unto the Lord, when he was delivered out of the hands of all his enemies,
touches all these Topics or Heads of Mercies, and then cries out, verse. 46.
49. The Lord lives, and blessed be my rock, and let the God of my Salvation be
exalted. It is God that -- Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, O Lord,
among the Heathen, and sing praises unto thy Name. Thus will you conjoyn the
Life of Heaven and Earth; you will end your Lives with that work, wherewith you
will begin your Everlasting Life.

SECT. IV.
THE Fourth Work of Old Age is, Instruction. 4. Instruction of the Younger.
of the Younger. God has in great Wisdom lodged his various gifts in diverse
subjects, that there may be a mutual dependence one upon another, and a mutual
helpfulness of each to others. Thus he intrusts the Young with Strength to
support and aid the Elder, whose strength is decayed; and the Aged with
knowledge and wisdom to guide the younger, whose judgment is yet unripe. And as
it is a great misery, when the Aged are not relieved by the strength and
industry of those that are young, so it is a great infelicity, when the Aged
are either unable or unwilling to instruct, or when those who are young are too
careless or conceited to receive Instruction. That is therefore a barbarous
Precept in the Alcoran, and like the rest of that Divinity, You are not obliged
to lead men in the right way, God guides whom he lists. But we have better
learned Christ.

The whole Current of Scripture runs for this Practice. Thus did Abraham, as we
may gather from Genesis 18. 19. Thus Jacob -- Thus Moses, leaving more especially
that excellent Chapter, Deuter. 32. just before he died, for an Instruction to
those he left behind him. The like did Joshua, in Cap. 24. when he was Aged,
and about to die. So Samuel, 1 Samuel 12. So David, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. to his Son.
And thou Solomon my Son, etc. Thus did Peter when he was ready to put off his
Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13. and the like did Aged Paul in his Epistle to
Timothy, when the time of his departure was at hand, 2 Timothy 4. 5, 6. So that we
have a whole cloud of Witnesses, showring down their counsels and directions on
the younger sort.

And the Aged are furnished for this Employment, having Ability and Opportunity
for such purposes. Their peculiar Talent lies this way; For Days should speak
and multitude of years should teach knowledge, Ioh 32. 9. You must have a stock
of Observations, and your Speech commonly is least impaired of all Faculties;
and it is best employed in communicating your useful Notions unto others. The
Vestal Virgins of old, in the First part of their time, learned the Mysteries
of their Religion, in the Second, they produced them into Practice, in the
Third, they taught them unto others Plutarch.
. One end of our learning any thing, is that we may instruct others. And the
Heathens Major pars aetatis certe melior Reipublicae data sit: aliquid temporis
tui some etiam tibi. Sen. de br. vit. c. 18.
thought, that the greatest part of our time should be devoted to the Common
good. Hide not therefore your Talent in a Napkin, but produce your Stock, and
without impoverishing your selves, enrich those that need it. You have
Opportunity, you have your Children and Posterity about you, you have some
Authority with them, let your words drop as the dew, and let your lips feed
many. What profit have they by your longevity, if you further them not in
goodness? In short, our lives are little worth, when they are not useful; and
we cannot better bestow them, than in making others better.

And here is a large field to walk in: You should be able and ready to instruct
the younger in the Word of God, in the Doctrine of the Gospel, in that great
mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the flesh. The public Explications
hereof, should be familiarly opened by you at home. You should talk of them, as
you sit in your house, as you walk by the way, when you lie down, and when you
rise up, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Thus David, Come ye children, hearken unto me, I will
teach you the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 34. 11. So also Solomon at large, Prove.
4. 1, 2. Hear ye children the instruction of a father, and attend to know
understanding: For I give you good doctrine, etc. Thus Timothy's mother, yea
and grandmother instructed him. You are to instruct them also in the Works of
God, both of Creation and Providence* wherein you may convey to them many
things, tending to the glory of you^ Maker, and the benefit of their Souls You
should acquaint them with such particular Instances of the Wisdom,
Righteousness, Power, and Goodness of God which you have read, heard or seen*
That the generation to come might kno^ them, even the children that should be
born who should arise and declare them to their children, that they might set
their hope i^ God, and keep his Commandments, Psalm. 78* 6, 7. You can tell them
also the Methods of Satan, and the wicked devic^ whereby he beguileth poor
Souls. ^ Slave who has been in Algier, and i^ redeemed or rescued, can
discover the miserable bondage there, and relate, with pleasure, the means of
his Deliverance. You can describe the intriegues of Sin, and warn young people
of the deceitfulness, and folly thereof by your own experience. They who have
been almost mir'd in a puddle or quagmire, can easily show others the place,
and direct them to avoid it. In Sum, you should instruct the younger to know,
and serve, and trust in God; and whatsoever you have observed in the course of
your lives conducive thereunto, you should impart unto them. That as ungodly
men do wickedly communicate their* sinful acts and practices, and endeavor to
propagate them unto posterity, that each generation may be *worse than other;
so all wise and good men, especially when they are in years, should transmit
the knowledge and practice of Piety to their Successors, that the next age may
be better than this; and that when we are dead and gone, yet it may be truly
said, the world was the better for us.

Besides these Instructions in the excellent matters of Religion, it lies in
the power and way of many Ancient persons, to direct and advise the younger in
many useful Observations otherwise: As concerning the Education of their
Children, and the disposing of them into Callings or Marriage; concerning the
preservation or recovery of their health. And in case they have any peculiar
Skill, Receipt, or Art useful for the good of Mankind, they ought not to bury
it in their graves, but to assign it to Posterity. And whatsoever you have
learned or observed, that may be beneficial or any way useful to the Church or
Commonwealth, to your Country, Town or Family, all these Notices you should
communicate to those that are younger, with all possible fidelity and
exactness. And if need be, commit them to writing for the benefit, at least, of
your own posterity. And although your Instructions may not at present seem to
be much regarded, yet be not discouraged by this; for the wise Counsels of the
Ancient, like the seed of the word of God, seems to dye and to be lost, and yet
in process of time it revives, and brings forth fruit.

Howbeit, there is Wisdom to be used in the Instructing of young people. For
they too commonly are proud, conceit* ed, and self-witted: your Lessons
therefore must be at such seasons, and by such degrees, as may render them most
valuable and welcome: and must be sweetened with that love and dearness, and
withal interlac'd with such pleasant Diversion, that their Appetite may not be
cloyed, nor your grave Advices be distasted. Thus the Emperor Augustus accosted
his Hearers. Audite Iuvenes senem, quem senes juvenem audiverunt; You that are
young, hearken to me, that now am old, whom Old men hearkened unto, when I was
yet but young.

Finally, your Example should be a Continual Instruction to young people. They
that will not heed your good words, yet seeing your good works will have a
constant copy before them, and be induced to write after it. The objects of the
Eye make deeper impression, than those of the Ear: When they see the constant
practice of piety and charity, prudence and patience, they conclude that your
Directions are in good earnest, that they are practicable, that they are
necessary, or else what the right hand of good Counsel builds up, the left hand
of a loose practice will pull down.

SECT. V.
THE Fifth Work of Old Age is,. 5. Watchfulness against several Temptations.
Watchfulness against your special Temptations. For besides the abovesaid Sins,
that are most usual in Old Age, there are some particular Weaknesses, to which
they are rather tempted, than overcome; wherein if they be not watchful, they
will become miserable. Such as

1. Discontentedness of mind. This is a Distemper to which Old Age is very
liable. They want this, and they want that, which perhaps they have had
heretofore, and they cannot bear these wants. One loss or cross befalls them,
and e're they have well digested this, another comes. One while this Disease or
pain afflicts them, and that no sooner over, but they are smitten in another
part, so that they are prone to perpetual murmurings. Never was any bodies life
so miserable, as theirs; they are ready to quarrel at God, at men, at any
thing, at nothing Omne p^catum impatientiae ascribendum. Tert: de pat. c. 6.
. They are neither content to live, nor ready to die; but yet seem to be fallen
out with life, and to be in love with death, whereupon their common note is, I
have lived too long, O that I were in my grave.

But this Distemper argues great weakness of Grace, yea a great weakness of
Spirit. Hence that Philosopher that sometimes resolved, that a wise and
courageous man should not flee from life, how discommodious soever; but fairly
depart from it Vir fortis and sapiens non fugere debet ^ vita sed exire. Sen.
ep. 24.
: yet at other times advised, to let the wearied Soul out of the useless body,
before its time Atsi inutile ministeriis est c^rpus, quidni oportent educere
animam laborantem, and fortasse antequam debet, faciendum est: ne cum fieri
debeat, facere non posses. Id. ep. 58.
. A crime of the deepest tincture! to snatch the Prerogative of our Sovereign
Creator out of his hands, whose rightful privilege alone it is, to give life
to men, and to take it away. And why should you be so uneasy under these
momentany trials? Is it not the Lot, which your heavenly Father has in great
wisdom, set out for you? It is better to be Old, and crazy on earth, than to
have been sent young to hell. You have your ailments, and if you were privy to
others men's, you would be reconciled to your own. It was Socrates his
Observation, that if every man's burden were laid on a common heap, each man
would be glad to take up his own again. You should rather be thankful to God
for the blessings of the former part of your life, than murmur at the troubles
of the present. You think it the only happiness, to have all the Comforts of
this World; but Others have thought it a greater, to have a Mind above them.
You have, or else the fault is your own, the Company of a gracious God and a
good Conscience Conscientia been actae vitae, multorumque been factorum
recordatio jucundissima est. Cicero.
, when you are incapable of other company. You should imitate the Grasshopper
Tithonus being very old, was, say the Poets, turned into a Grasshopper.
, to whom the Old man by some is likened, who is made the Emblem of
Contentation, because she only sucks the dew and sings; and is content with
that, hoping, for better. One Crown will swallow up all your Crosses, whereas
Discontent makes your Condition most uneasy here, and most unfit for Heaven
hereafter.

2. Another Temptation which you that are Old are in danger of, is Hardness of
Heart and Security. You ha^ sinned often, and perhaps repented bu^ seldom: you
have heard and read many convincing Sermons, and made but slender application
of them: you have seen many swept away by the hand of God, and you have
escaped: yea some of you peradventure have lived long in some sinful course,
are grown Old in adulteries, Ezekiel. 23. 43. or in oppression, or in some other
Sin. These things you have done, and the Lord has kept Silence, and now you
are ready to think, that He is such a one as your selves, and to bless your
selves in your woeful ways, till your iniquity be found to be hateful. The Aged
person surely must have either a very tender heart, or a very hard one. If Gods
Ordinances and Providence, that is Mercies and Afflictions, have made a due
impression upon you, your hearts must be very soft, but otherwise, you are in
the greatest danger of a hard heart, and a spirit of slumber.

Watch and pray therefore, in the fear of God, against this dangerous
Temptation. They are most guilty of this distemper, that were never afraid of
it Ne pergas quaerere qui^ cor durum sit, si non expavisti, tuum est. Bern.
. Preserve a due tenderness in your Consciences, suffer not any sin to ly upon
them unrepented. Endeavor to have daily a clearer sight of sin, and a deeper
sense of the evil of it. Let the exemplary Judgments upon others, startle you.
Know, that if you sleep in sin, your Preservation will be but a Reservation to
some fearful issue. Remember that though a Sinner do evil an hundred times, and
his days be prolonged, yet it shall not be well with the wicked, Eccl. 8. 12,
13. The greatest Judgment that can befall a man upon earth, is to prosper in
any sinful way.

There is a Natural hardness in All men, there is an Habitual hardness in some
men, but there is a Judicial hardness only in such, as are ripe for hell. And
the First, if it be not cured by Gods grace, leads to the second, and the
second prepares for the third. Of all sorts of men, ye that are Old have least
cause to be secure, that have one foot already in the grave. The green apple
may be plucked off, but the ripe one is falling off already. But it is not the
approach of Death, without the effectual influence of Gods Spirit, that will
soften an hardened sinner; as is too evident in the Malefactors in Newgate, that
will be drunk and swear at a dreadful rate, when they know that the
Executionday is certainly at hand. Be instant therefore with the Lord, to
deliver you from hardness of heart, from a spirit of slumber and from a
reprobate sense.

3. A Third Temptation which Old Age must watch against, is, Slothfulness of
Spirit. The decay of natural Spirits disposes them hereunto, and corrupt
Nature joins with the temptation. It is an easy thing to be idle, and flesh
and blood is glad enough of excuses from pains and trouble. Indeed, where
natural Parts, or natural Strength are wasted, much cannot be expected, Job 30.
2. Yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me, in whom old age
was perished? yet that which will release them in part, will not do it
altogether. Time is so short, so precious, so irrevocable, that it should not
be slept or trif^ed away, if we can do any thing for the ends of life. The Aged
person must consider, how much wast ground there has been in the field of his
life Exig^a pars est vitae, quam nos vivimus, non exiguum temporis habemus, sed
multum perdimus. Re omnium pretiosissima luditur. Sen. de ^r. vit.
; how many years are lost in Infancy and Childhood; how much time at riper
years in unnecessary sleep and recreations; how much has been consumed in
doing nothing; and how much in doing worse than nothing; and that it is an
easy thing to lose time, that it is an hard thing to redeem time, and that it
is an impossible thing to recall time; and therefore they who have lost so much
time, and can recall none of it, had need to redeem, and make the best of that
which is left. Few men will throw away their money, but most men squander away
their lives; being most prodigal of that wherein we may most justly be
covetous, as the same Philosopher discourses.

Let no Aged person imagine, that they are to live to no purpose. The Levites,
though at Fifty years of age, they were discharged from the most laborious
service of the Temple, yet they were not left to be Idle, but to do the work of
the Lord in some more easy employments. Tully brings in Cato telling how he
learned Greek in his Oldage, and that even at those years no body came to see
him, but they found him employed Animus fuit victor annorum. as Bernard says
of Humbertus.
: and he reports of Leontius Gorgias, who was an hundred and seven years old,
and yet never was weary of his studies and labors. The truth is, sloth is a
vice that accelerates Oldage, as you heard before, and abetts that languishment
of the Spirits which furthers it. We shall not feel it so sensibly, while we
are continually employed Semp^r enim in iis studiis laboribusque viventi, non
intelligitur quando obrepat s^ectus. Cicero.
. How much knowledge and wisdom have we neglected, which we might have
obtained, if our sloth had not beguiled us?

Hence comes Neglect of the means of Grace, to which we may add Drowsiness in
the use of them. Aged people are apt to satisfy themselves in the Omission of
Reading, Hearing, Praying by their craziness and infirmities. Indeed when we
are inevitably hindered in these Means, and are grieved for that hindrance, God
will supply those wants; but if we be glad that we have an occasion comen in
the way, whereby we may, without sin omit our duty, it savours strongly of
hypocrisy. And Old people are more concerned than others to be diligent
herein; for many of them have put off much of their greatest business to their
Old Age, and therefore their plea of Impotence will be overruled. I have lost a
World of time, said the learned Salmasius on his deathbed; If I had one year
longer, I would spend it in reading David's Psalms, and in Paul's Epistles.
Neither imagine, that you are too old to learn: for the Fundamentals of
Doctrine and Practice may easily, and must necessarily be learned, else he that
made you will not save you, and he that formed you will show you no favor,
Isa. 27. 11. As weak as you are, you could creep to the Assembly to be laden
back again with Gold; and a grain of grace is worth a world of riches. When
some outward sickness afflicts, you find a man carried in a bed to Christ, and
the house untiled to let him down through the roof, rather than continue under
it, Luke 5. 18. and will you languish in your spiritual distempers, and use no
means for healing? Be not deceived, God is not mocked: he never accepts the
will for the deed, if the deed can well be done; nor chooses Mercy before
sacrifice, where both may be offered.

And though your Years may dispose you to Drowsiness in the service of God, yet
they will not wholly excuse you. We read but of one person in the Bible, that
slept at Sermon, and he was taken up dead thereby, Act. 20. 9. It is a sin
charged on them of old, Isa. 64. 7. There is none that calls on thy name,
that stirs up himself to take hold on thee. You should use all possible
means to shake off that drowsy distemper, and set the holy God before you, and
remember that your own cause is still pleading or trying; that the diligent
hand makes rich in this world, and the diligent heart rich for ever; and that
Grace and Comfort are like the Manna, which was to be gathered early, or else
it vanished: they that loved their beds, starved their bellies. How much good
might you do and get, notwithstanding your years, if you would shake off that
slothful distemper, that haunts. you? how many have lamented at their end their
loss of time? Nothing so much troubled that Excellent Preacher, Dr. Robert
Harris, when he was on his deathbed, as Loss of time. Rouse up then your
benumbed spirits, your time of Action will last but a while. Consider, wherein
you are capable to serve your generation by the will of God, and up and be
doing. The Grave will be most irksome to the loyterer, but most welcome to the
labourer, for there the weary, and only they will be at rest.

4. The Fourth Temptation which Aged persons are liable unto, is, Expectation
still of longer life. No man is so Old, says the Orator, but thinks it very
possible to weather it out a year longer Nemo est tam senex quise annum non
putet posse vivere. Cicer.
; and such men do, upon the matter, think they may live always. It has been
an old complaint, that men eat and drink, as though they must dye to morrow,
and yet buy and build as though they must live always. How usual is it with
very Aged men and women, to contrive and appoint affairs for a month, or a year
beforehand? It is not only young persons that say, To day or to morrow we will
go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy and sell and get gain.
Whereas you know not, what shall be on the morrow. For what is your life? it is
even a vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away, Jam.
5. 13, 14. But even Old persons are apt to think the same thing. The most
decrepit person fancies he shall abide here a little longer; and when that time
is expired, still reckons to continue a little longer Quotidie morimur,
quotidie mutamur, and tamen aeternos nos esse credimus. Hieron ep. ad Helvi^.
.

The folly and ungroundedness of this Imagination, is obvious. For what should
induce one that is already dying, to think that he shall not very quickly die
out and out? Alas! Death has laid its cold hand already upon us Seni mors in
januis est. Bern. ep. 185.
. Our Eyes, our Ears, our Hands, our Legs, our Lungs, our very Vitals are
death-struck already. Death puts in for a share in every day we spend Hunc
ipsum diem quem agimus cum morte dividimus. Senec. ep. 24.
Have we taken any Lease of our lives, for a determinate time? Can we produce
any Reason, any one Reason to prove that we should live a year, or a week
longer? I am sure the provoking Sins, which are in our Souls, and the unruly
Humors which are in our Bodies, render our speedy death more likely, than a
longer life: besides the rage of Satan against us, and the many Casualties
incident to us. Now when a man expects any thing, and has no reason for such
his expectation, it is lamentably ridiculous.

But what little Reason soever there is for such an Imagination, there is some
Cause of it: And the cause seems to be a Lothness to die. Too few there are,
that are willing to part with things seen, for things unseen Mors omnibus est
finis, multis remedium, paucis [probis] etiam votum.
. They are loath to go out of this world of men and women, into a world of
Souls. Death is like a cup that will either mend or end, and such a dose is
taken with a trembling hand. And therefore the heart cries out, Let me alone
this year also. Thus men would put far from them the evil day, and it will
prove an evil day, when it is thus deferred. Alas! it is not the duration of
ones life, but the goodness and comfort of it, that is considerable. This the
dim eye of Nature saw and concluded, that a wise man chooses to live as long as
he ought, not as long as he could Non enim vivere bonum est, sed been vivere.
Itaque sapiens vivit, quantum debet, non quantum potest, Sen. Ep. 70. Quomodo
fabula, sic vita: non quamdiu, sed quam been acta, refert. Id. Ep. 76.
. I know it is a hard pluck, to have a Soul and a body that have* lived long
together, to part a-sunder: but it is irrevocably appointed unto men to dye;
and when a thing is indispensably necessary, it is the best course to consider
what will best mitigate, and render it either desirable or tolerable. Wherein
as right Reason may contribute much, so Christian Religion much more; whereby
the holy Soul is assured of a far better house, than the body, and the body of
a far better estate, after it has slept a while in the grave.

To Remedy therefore this Temptation, Consider the Folly and ill Effects
thereof. That is a foolish Traveller, who being quite spent with the fatigue of
his journey, would turn again and trave^ it over again; when as nothing is more
welcome to the weary than a quiet lodging Every bird is on the wing to its
nest. Every tratraveller his mind is still on home, home. This was Barzilla s
Song, etc. Dr. Harris.
. Upon occasion of this groundless Expectation in that rich man, Luke 12* our
Savior plainly calls him, Thou fool* For it is the rankest folly, to expect
when winter is coming, that it will relent and retire again, because we distaste
it. No more will Death forbear us, but when our Name is called, we must go.

But this vain expectation of a longer life unfits us for Death, it keeps the
Soul secure and careless, we deferr that till to morrow, which should be done
to day; we lose the present time, and dispose of the future which is not in our
hands, but in Gods Maximum vivendi impedimentum est expectatio quae pendet ex
crastino; perdis hodiernum: quod in manu fortunae disponis, quod in t^
dimittis. Sen. de br. vit. c. 9.
. This causes Men to procrastinate their Repentance, to deferr the Good works
which they have purposed to do, yea the very making of their Last Will has
been protracted hereupon by many, until they have bin incapable to do it. Let
all Aged persons therefore be advised, to set Death each morning between
themselves, and the ensuing night; and every night make that reasonable
supposition, that it may arrest you before morning: The messenger that you have
so long looked for, will not amaze you, when he comes. As the meeting of a
stroke breaks the force of it, so the Sting of death is in a great measure
lost, when we are first aware of it. He that in this respect dies daily, will
easily and happily dye at last.

SECT. VI.
THE Sixth Work of Old Age is, Providence. 6 Providence for Posterity.
for Posterity. Too many when they are going out of this World, care not what
becomes, either Temporally, or Eternally, of those that shall come after them.
And accordingly will neither plant'a Tree, nor repair an House, nor do any
thing for the benefit of Posterity. They cry, It will serve our time: and so
suffer all things to go to ruin, because they are removing into another world
themselves; yea and commit, or permit wilful wast diverse ways, for somepresent
small advantage, leaving great inconveniences to their Successors: whereas the
very Heatheus had better principles, and enjoined their Old men to plant trees,
etc. which might be useful to another Generation Serant arbores, que alteri
seculo prosint. Cicero ex Statio.
. Thus a man may be benefiting others still, after he is dead and gone, and God
may be praised for your care and kindness, by them which succeed you.

And another sort there are, that in stead of leaving any Blessing or benefit,
do lay up a Curse for their Posterity; by leaving them Estates which they have
got by Fraud and Injustice, or some unconscionable course; which is the ready
way to melt away the rest how justly soever obtained. You cannot invent a more
compendious and infallible means to undo all your Posterity, than by
transferring to them Goods or Estates indirectly gotten: for God is righteous,
and will not prosper unrighteous dealings. Those riches will perish by evil
travel, and he begets a Son, and there is nothing in his hand. Eccl. 5. 14.

But if you have any care or concern for your Posterity, lay up a stock of
Prayers for them, and leave them, as is aforementioned, wholesome and good Rules
concerning Piety, Equity and Charity. Leave them an Account of your own
Experience in all things material; that so, if they have any brains, they may
cheaply learn what you have dearly bought. And especially leave them a Copy of
your own good Example, which will be a constant Monitor, and Check to them in
the whole course of their conversation.

But these having bin touched before, that which remains for the Peace, Comfort
and good of Posterity, is a Prudent and seasonable Settling of your outward
Estate. It is strange to see the great backwardness of many Aged persons to
this work, as if making their Will would either lessen their Estates, or
shorten their Lives, a gross and groundless Opinion; whereas the neglecting of
this affair, has a train of very ill consequences; particularly, many of the
most tedious Suits of Law are occasioned thereby, mutual Love among Relations
spoiled, the poor overcome by the rich, the simple by the cunning, the Orphan
by the Guardian, and very often the whole Estate squandred away in trying for
it. What a folly is this, to neglect that which would both quiet your own
minds, and preserve quiet among them that come after? Ten lines discreetly
written, would prevent ten thousand lines when you are dead. When the Lord
therefore sent a Message of Death, by the Prophet Isaiah, to King Hezekiah, he
commanded him to set his house in order, Isa. 38. 1. as if that work must of
right go before his death. The Aged person then ought to present this Message
daily to his Soul, Man, Woman, set thy house in order. For since it is
uncertain in what place, or in what moment Death waits for us; it behooves us
to wait for it in every place, and every moment, and consequently to set not
only the heart, but the house in Order.

And in the doing of this work, let Reason and Judgment overruled Passion and
Affection. If need be, advise in Law; the neglect whereof renders the
Testaments of many persons nothing, but Bones of Contention; and so the sparing
of a small Fee at present, proves the spending of many in a short time. But
however, weigh your Purposes in a good Conscience, and remember that you are
only Deputies under God, whose you are, and your whole Estate; that it be so
Devised, as may agree with his Revealed will* Think with your selves, what
judgment wise, and impartial persons will pass upon your Disposals, when you
are in the grave. Pray therefore unto God on this occasion, that he would first
Direct, and then Establish your Purposes, which is the likeliest way to bring
them to pass.

And dispatch this affair Timcusly, while you are in health and strength. For
you can never do it as you would, nor perhaps as you should, when you are in
the power of those, that stand waiting for your Estate Dispone de rebus ante
mortem: saepe quis efficitur infirmitatis servus, testari non potest: liber
ergo testeris antequam servus efficiaris. Ber^
. They who are so weak, that they must be beholden to their Relations, for
every Refreshment they have need of, cannot have the liberty or opportunity to
order their affairs in an impartial manner. What if upon the alteration of your
circumstances, you revise your Will, and alter it every year? Is it not much
better to be at that trouble, than either to deferr it till you can make none
at all, or such as must savor greatly of your present weakness? Do not
imagine, that the Expedition of this, will hasten your Death. For what
influence or efficacy can this have, to procure any such effect? It were easy
to produce those, that have never bin without a Will written and sealed, for
Thirty or Forty years together. It affords a man great satisfaction, in case
any sudden sickness seize upon him, that he has nothing of any earthly affairs
to trouble him, nothing to do but to bear, or to be relieved of his distemper.
For when our inward State is fixed, and our outward State is settled, yet we
shall find it work enough, to grapple with the disquiets of a disease, and with
the pangs of Death.

SECT. VII.
THE Seventh Work of Old Age, is,. 7. Mor^fication to Sin and to the World.
Mortification. And the Object hereof is double: 1. That which is Evil in it
self. 2. That which is Lawful in it self. The Religious Old person has work in
both these.

1. One great work of Old Age is Dying to sin, to all sin. The time past of our
life may suffice us to have walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of Wine,
revellings, banquettings, etc. 1 Pet. 4. 3. We have sinned enough already, yea
much more than enough; it is high time to undo that which has almost undone
us. We are dying, it is necessary that our sins die before us Hoc denique tibi
citra mortem praesta: moriantur ante te vitia. Sen. ep. 27.
, and that by Faith in the death of Christ, and Repentance from dead works; for
want of which course, our Evidences prove litigious, and snarled with
inextricable doubts. It is not enough, that we want strength, or opportunity to
sin, but our wills and desires toward it, must be dead also. Sin is only
asleep, or benumbed in us, if we have not used Gods means to crucify it. It Is
not sufficient that we leave it, except we loath it. Go through-stitch
therefore with this work; do it quickly, do it sincerely: it is, Kill or be
Killed, and necessity makes the Coward resolute. Dread not any Scriptural
severities necessary in Mortification. Some Devils are not cast out without
Prayer and Fasting; and Hippocrates Hippocr. Aph. 13.
observes, that Old Age is the fittest for the use of Fasting. The wounds that
sin has made, must be searched to the bottom, and doubtless it is never
crucified, no more than Christ was, without pain.

How justly does the Scripture still stigmatize sin with the name of Folly? to
weave a Webb that must be unrav'led; and to make us spend our lives between
sinful joys, and painful sorrows. And though Old Age does not mortify sin
by it self, yet cooling our lusts and passions, it proves helpful in that work
Si vol^ptatem aspernari ratione and sapientia non possumus, magnam (...)
senectuti gratiam, q^ae effecerit, ut id non liberet, quod non oport^ret. Cicer.
: and provided, we be truly thankful unto God for that advantage, and that we
use other necessary means to that end, we may comfortably acquiesce in that
blessed effect; and rejoice that the things which are displeasing to God, are
become unpleasant to us. But we must not be content to be only passive, in the
decays of sin; we must be active in that work. If ye, through the Spirit,
mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live, Romans 8. 13.

And as All sin must be the Object of Mortification, so especially all Youthful
sins Hoc q^idem p^jus est, quod autoritatem habemus senum, vitia vero puerorum;
nec puerorum tantum, sed etiam insantum. Sen. ep. 16.
. For as Chrysostom says, An Old man acting juvenile sins, is far more
ridiculous than young persons, that commit those sins. To have our hearts burn
with Lust, or Revenge, when our veins are freezing with Age, the soul rampant
and the body dying, is monstrous Anus quum ludit, morti delitias ^acit. Sen.
. And yet we know, how S. Hierom himself complains of scalding motions, that
were ready to invade his withered body. And the Scripture gives us a sad
Instance hereof, even of Solomon the best and wisest of men alive, that had
done more for God, and God for him, than any man in the age he lived in; that
he when he was between Fifty and Sixty years of age, should be so far inslaved
to his strange wives, as to be carried by them to worship strange gods. For it
came to pass, when Soloman was Old, that his wives turned away his heart, etc.
1 Kin. 11. 4. Whereby he set in such a cloud, as has drawn his very Salvation
into question. Let it be a warning to all Aged people, to see that their
Corruptions be not asleep but dead, as far as is attainable in this life; that
the Old man, as well as the outward man perish, and which will be a good proof
thereof, that the inward man be renewed day by day. That our Thoughts, our
Words, our very Behavior and Attire proclaim, that Sin and we are parted never
to meet again. It was a good answer of a Lacedemonian to one that asked him,
why he wore his Beard so long? Answ. It is to mind me, that I do nothing
unbeseeming my hoary hairs. A light behavior in a grave person is foolish and
loathsome: For as dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send forth
a stinking savior; so does a little folly, him that is in reputation for
wisdom and honor, Eccl. 10. 1.

2. The Other Object of Mortification proper for Old Age, is The World and all
the innocent, but charming vanities thereof. Not that they are bound actually
to forsake the World, either the needful cares, or the lawful comforts of it:
But to wean and abate their desires of it, their delights in it, their cares
about it When one Similis a great Captain in Adrian's time had retired into the
Country seven years before he died, he caused this Epitaph to be prepared for
him. Smilis hic jacet, cujus aetas quidem multorum annorum fuit. Septem tamen
duntaxat annis vixit.
. This should be every Christians work, but it should be the Aged persons care,
in a more eminent measure. For they are ready to leave this world, and ascend
into another; and every one takes off their mind from an house they are
leaving. The world also is forsaking them, the pleasure they have formerly
taken in meats, apparel, building, is much decayed; the things which did
formerly ravish, are now grown insipid; and does not this call aloud to them to
real Mortification? you should most readily consent to part with them, and say,
Farewell my gold and all my gayeties, I meant not to enjoy, but use you, I can
be happy without you.

It is the absurdest sight in the world, to see one gaping and grasping after
this world, when he is going into another. Let your moderation be known unto
all men, the Lord is at hand, Phil. 4. 5. Your loins should be always girded
about, and your lights burning, and ye your selves like unto men that wait for
your Lord, Luke 12. 35. I write unto you Fathers, Love not the world, neither
the things that are in the world, 1 John 2. 14, 15. Abate your love to things
below, and increase your love to things above: Nothing can overcome love but
Love, love of earthly things, but the Love of heavenly things, as nothing can
fetch out fire like fire. O when we do love all these things for God, we will
willingly leave them all to go to God, for whose sake only we valued them.
Otherwise you will find it an hard pluck to leave them, even like the plucking
the Skin off your hand; whereas the heart that is mortified to them, can part
with them, as easily as you can draw the glove off your hand. How readi^ did
(...) g^ up into the mount, and dye! what little noise or dispute did Jacob, or
David, or Paul make about leaving ^he world? They were dead to (...) (...)* He
that said I am ready to be offer^, had said before, the world is crucified to
me, and I unto ^he world.

So that the Aged person should be mortified to Life it self; he should be very
well content to die. It was a sad Confession of Caesar Borgia that ambitious
Grandee, when he was near his end, that he was prepared for every occurrent but
Death; which was the only thing that he should have been most ready for. But
it is Grace, not years that makes us dead to the world, and to the desire of
Life Ut satis vixerimus, nec anni nec dies faciunt, sed animus; vixi quantum
satis erat: mortem ple^us expecto. Sen. ep. 61.
. When the Aged man has made it his business to honor God, to save his own
soul, and to serve his own generation, he may with unconceivable comfort say
with Old Simeon, Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart in peace; I have
done with this life, welcome be the grave, welcome everlasting life.

SECT. VIII.
THE Eighth Work of Old Age is,. 8. Laying up a Treasure in Heaven.
Laying up a treasure in Heaven. Where by Heaven I understand not only the
Place, but the Nature of the Treasures, heavenly Treasures. Some of these the
Aged will have need of Before Death, of some At Death, of some After Death.

1. You should lay up for your selves a Treasure of Prayers, and Promises to
support you before Death comes. Of Prayer I have spoken before; but there are
Promises that are very comfortable and very necessary for Old people; which
they who are assured of Gods Veracity, and their own Integrity, may apply to
themselves, as if individually directed unto them. The Apostle makes that
inference from that excellent Promise, which has more value in it, than all
the Old man's baggs and bonds, Heb. 13. 5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee; whence he inferrs, verse. 6. So that we, even we, may boldly say, The Lord
is my helper. Another Promise there is, most comfortable for Ancient people,
Isa. 46. 4. Even to your Old Age I am he, and even to hoar hairs will I carry
you: I have made, and I will bear, even I will carry, and will deliver you.
When our feeble legs will not carry us; when the pillars of the house tremble,
and in effect cry out, we can bear you no longer; then will the power and
goodness of God carry us up and deliver us, yea when we approach to Death, and
fear presents it, and the grave most formidably, we may then apply what the
Lord spoke to Old Jacob, concerning his going down into Egypt, Genesis 46. 3. I am
God, the God of thy father, fear not to go down into Egypt: For I will go down
with thee, and will also surely bring thee up again. So assuredly will the Lord
go down with us to the grave, and as surely bring us up again, and how can we
be afraid with such company, and with such a promise? Hoard on still, there is
another gracious Promise, Psalm. 23. 4. Yea, though I walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy
staff they comfort me: More yet, Psalm. 48. last. For this God is our God for
ever and ever, he will be our guide even unto death. These and such like
Promises, left by him that cannot lie, will support the sinking spirits of a
poor Christian more than all the friends, the cordials, the extrinsick comforts
in the whole world.

2. At Death you will need a Treasure of Faith and Patience. The reign of Sense
is expired; somewhat is necessary to support a dying man, more than a living
healthy man. What is it that makes Death terrible to a poor creature? The
withdrawing of all a man's outward comforts, and the Appearance of all his Sins:
When one is dying, they must leave husband, wife, children, parents, friends,
house, all. Now Faith will give us a real sight of the other world; and one
sight of that quite disgraces and annihilates all the comforts of this world.
Adieu poor house, I see a far better ready for me! adieu my dearest friends and
relations, I see those enjoyments before me, that utterly eclypse you all! And
then, when your Sins are mustered up before you, their heinous nature, and
deserved punishment, and that Satan bestirs him, to represent them with the
greatest Terror, to the Aged dying person; if Faith be dormant, the poor soul
is driven into the pit of despair. But a lively Faith flies to Jesus Christ,
runs into his wounds, lays hold on his everlasting righteousness, and so bids
defiance to Satan, yea even to the law, and all his sins, with, Who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that dyed. It is related in an Epistle prefixed to
Brentius's works, that when a certain Senator in Suevia lay dying, one like a
Scribe came into his chamber with pen and paper, calling to him to reckon up
his sins; for, says he, I am sent from God to bring an account of them to his
Tribunal: Well, says the Sick man, raising up himself as well as he could, and
perceiving that he had to do with his great Enemy, the Devil; write this down
first, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head, and thou may
write all my sins under it: Whereupon the Accuser of the brethren presently
vanished, and left the weak man in peace.

And you will have need of Patience also, that after ye have done and suffered
the will of God, ye may receive the promise, Heb. 10. 36. So acute, or else
tedious are some Distempers, that they will strain all the nerves of the Soul,
to wrestle with them. Lay up therefore, by diligent reading, hearing,
meditation, and Prayer, a stock of these Graces, before the evil day come.
These are the true riches, and which neither the fire can burn, nor the plague
infect, nor time wast, nor thieves purloyn.

3. And lastly, It behooves the Aged to lay up a Treasure, which they may meet
with After death; to wit, of Good works. In this life is your seed time for
these; and they that scatter this precious seed, shall doubtless, mark,
doubtless they shall come again with rejoicing, bringing their sheaves with
them, Psalm. 126. 6. Faith and good works may well agree in a Christian, and
though they cannot cooperate to a man's Justification, (for though both of them
are Acts of a creature, yet Faith derives not this influence from the Subject,
but from the Object; it justifies as it apprehends and embraces Christ)
notwithstanding both are necessary to Salvation, Luke 12. 33. Sell that ye
have, and give alms, provide your selves baggs which wax not old, a treasure in
the heavens that fails not, where no thief approaches, neither moth
corrupts; i. e. This treasure is neither liable to intrinsic decay, nor to
extrinsick casualty. What other treasure has escaped danger, but who can scale
the Empyrean Heaven? These the Apostle calls a good foundation, 1 Timothy 6. 19.
Charge the rich that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to communicate: Laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.
Other riches you lay up for others, yea perhaps for such as you know not; but
by doing all the good you can, you lay up something in store for your selves.
What if the advantage be not at present visible, men will lay out money upon a
good Reversion, though they never live to enjoy it. Here is a Reversion worth
the having, Eternal life.

Many useful things may be done in this life, which cannot be done by you when
this life is ended. Now you may feed the poor, cloth the naked, redeem the
captive, encourage learning, promote Soul-saving Preaching, etc. Are you any
other than Gods Stewards? and poor Christians, poor Tradesmen, poor Scholars,
poor Ministers are Gods Assigns, to whom he appoints you to do good out of his
stock in your hand, according to your ability and their necessity. You do but
draw Bills upon Almighty God by every good Work, which he will most faithfully
and fully pay in the Kingdom of Heaven. I omit the Story of Synesius; our
blessed Savior has said enough to persuade us, if we be not Infidels, from
that Parable of the unjust Steward, Luke 16. where he thus concludes, ver. 9.
Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye
fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations. Consider now before it
be too late, what a sad prospect it will be for you on your deathbed, to
review the book of a life, wherein is nothing but Blots, transgressions on the
one side of the page; and Blanks, omissions of good on the other.

Bethink your selves therefore, which way you may yet do some good in the
world. Do not live, do not dye to your selves: poor Christ in his members begs
of you to remember him. Oblige him here in the Country, and he will befriend
you at the Court. Whilst you have opportunity, do good unto all, especially to
the household of faith, Gal. 6. 10. your opportunity will shortly be over and
past; yet you have something to give, and some body to give unto: but if you
refuse or delay it, shortly you will have nothing to give, no body to relieve.
And remember Gods Counsel, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He which sows sparingly, shall reap
sparingly; and he which sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. I urge you
not, to undo your selves by doing good to others; but that ye be ready,
willing, and rich in good works, according to the talents wherewith you are
entrusted. And this will be a good Proof that your Faith is sound, when you can
part with present and visible things, upon the word and promise of an Invisible
God, for future things which are unseen.

And, if the circumstances of your Estate will bear it* let me prevail with you
to make your own Eyes your Overseers, and your own hands your Executors. For
though I would not discourage any one from making pious or charitable Bequests
in their Wills, by bewailing the uncertainty, the abuse, and loss of such
intentions: But the thing it self is no way so laudable, or acceptable; only to
part with what we cannot keep: it insinuates, that if we could always live, we
would never part with any thing; whereby there is neither that Faith, nor that
Charity exercised which becomes a Christian. Withhold not good from them to
whom it is due: mark, it is due to them, when it is in the power of thine hand
to do it, Prove. 3. 27. You are just ready to travel into another Country, take
care to send something before you, lest you lose both Earth and Heaven at once.

SECT. IX.
THE Ninth Work of Old Age is Meditation. 9* Meditation on Death and Eternity.
of Death and Eternity. Meditation in general is the application of our
thoughts to some particular Subject: which being employed about things Holy,
becomes one of the parts of Inward Religion. A most excellent and useful
exercise, and which greatly inriches the Soul (...). Periander.
. It was a clear proof of the great sanctity of David's heart, that he was so
frequent and familiar in this employment; sometimes on God, sometimes on his
Word, sometimes on his Works, both of Creation and of Providence, etc. O that
we all had the Art of it, the Heart of it, for the heart is all. Doubtless if
our Love were stronger, our meditation would be longer on these things, for
where the treasure is, there the heart will dwell also. I know some
Constitutions of body are more capable of it than others, but certainly the
more the soul is sanctified, that is, mortified to things below and vivified to
things above, the more cheerfully will it dwell upon spiritual things; such as
the Stomach is, such food will it desire.

But among other useful Points, The Aged is greatly concerned to Meditate on
Death, and the endless Life after it; which is, to pencill out before the Eyes
of his mind the time of his Departure, the serious Circumstances and
Consequences of it. We should place our selves upon our Deathbeds, gasping
there for breath, our Friends ready to close our Eyes, the dabbe of phlegm
ready to stop our breath, and our Souls just forsaking the poor carcass. When
we look upon our hands and feet, it should be attended with these thoughts,
that shortly they will be turned to rottenness; that the worms will make
furrows in our faces, and feed upon our very hearts; yea that we at present do
breed and nourish the vermin, that wait for to devour us: that e're long we
shall have nothing to do here, our house and goods in the possession of those
that would be affrighted to see us again: that we must lodge a long time in the
dark grave, and the Soul must go into an unknown world, and that unto all
Eternity. These are thoughts for Aged persons; and not to* be roving about
things past to no purpose, or contriving about things of this world to come.
This is in some sense to die daily, to wit, by serious thoughts concerning our
latter end.

The truth is, this is a duty incumbent upon all. Hence that saying, Deuteronomy. 32.
29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end. A Deaths-head is no unfit furniture, for a young persons
closet Vivere tota vita discendum est, and quod magis fortasse miraberis tota
vita discendum est mori. Sen. de br. vit. c. 7.
. The serious apprehensions of the exceeding great change, which Death will
make, would give a check to that wantonness, worldliness and vainglory, which
cleaves to us all by nature. For Death observes not our humane order, it* is
anomalous, we are not called according to our Age; it proceeds not according to
our Registers Non citamur ex censu. Sen. ^p. 12.
. Your considering of Death will not make you Older but Better. But principally
it concerns the Aged, who live in the confines of the grave. You should be
acquainted with it, for you are neighbor's to it. It is one of the Spanish
Proverbs, That the Old man's Staff is the Rapper at Deaths-door. When Cato would
awaken the Roman Senate to level Carthage, he brought in some green figs thence
among them, thereby to show unto them, how soon those their inveterate Enemies,
their distance being so small, might be with a Fleet among them; alas! how
small is the distance between an Old man and his grave! Is it not reasonable
therefore, is it not necessary, that we should be provided for this enemy? and
since we cannot escape it, ought we not to be reconciled to it, to be better
acquainted with it, yea and learn some way to overcome it. And certainly the
more we rightly think of it, the less we shall fear it or be hurt by it Non
mortem timem^s sed cogitationem mortis. -- T^ tamen ut nunquam timeas, semper
cogita. Sen. ep. 30.
. We must drink this Cup, and therefore it is all the reason in the world, that
we should take some foretasts of it, especially considering the sequel of it:
that it sets us on an everlasting shore. It Is time for Old people to bethink
them well, since a Crown or Flames are just before them: When you sit trimming
the fire ponder this, whether you can endure the fire that is unquenchable;
when you lift up those dazzled eyes toward Heaven, consider what title you have
to the blessed Mansions there. What have you to do below? your traffic now
should be in Invisibles; you have studied long enough how to live, at length
you should study how to die.

These Meditations are certainly of great Excellence, and of great Use. Better
it is to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting, for
that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart, Eccl. 7.
2. It Is more pleasant indeed to go to the house of feasting, how gladly do
people go that way? but it is better to go to the house of mourning, for there
we see what is the end of all men, and so the living will lay something that is
useful to his heart. These thoughts will quicken any rational man to do and get
all the good he can, while he is on this side the line of Eternity. The less a
poor Old creature can do about the affairs of this life, the more he should
endeavor to do about that better life. These presentiating thoughts of Death
will make us careful and conscionable in all our ways, as seeing that Change
always at hand. I write this Letter, says Seneca Hoc animo tibi hanc
Epistolam scribo, tanquam cum maxim scribentem mors evocatura sit. Paratus
exire sum and ideo fruor vita, quia quamdiu futurum hoc sit, minime pendo. Sen.
ep. 61.
, with such a mind, as if Death were to call me away, before I have done: and
being ready to go, the less I value Life, the more comfortably I enjoy it. For,
as the same Author Illorum brevissi^a and solicitissima aetas est, qui
praeteritorum obliviscuntur, praesentia negligunt, de futuro timent. Id. de br.
vit. c. 15.
says in another place; Theirs is the most anxious life, that forget what is
past, neglect what is present, and are afraid of what is to come. For certainly
they that forget their past sins, and neglect their present duty, have cause to
fear their reckoning to come. As on the the other side, he that, having an
enlightened and sensible Conscience, can think of Death without disturbance,
has made a good progress in Religion.

And yet if Death, were only the finishing of Life, these Thoughts about it
were not so necessary or considerable: but we are assured of an Everlasting
Life immediately following; that the extremest happiness or misery commences
thereupon, which also never ends. Now what Thoughts or cares can be so
momentous, as those about our endless Glory or Torment? Sit down then, compose
your selves to this Meditation; draw a Curtain over all this present World and
your Concerns therein, and open a window into Eternity, and by Faith look
steadily into it. Look Upward first, and survey those blessed Mansions, that
glorious Company, the sweet Employment, the unconceivable Enjoyment, the
transcendent Bliss of Body and Soul in the full Fruition of God to all
Eternity. And will not these Meditations nullify all the faint and fading
comforts of this Life? will they not cause you to trample under foot the
Pleasures of sin, that are but for a season? will they not easily wean you from
your dearest Relations upon Earth? will they not carry you with longing desires
to enjoy the beatifical Vision? will you not cry out with Augustine, Can no man
see thy face and live? O let me die then, to see thy face!

Again, look Downward into that Bottomless Pit, and by faith behold the
desperate condition of the Damned: lay your Ear to the Keyhole of Hell, and
hearken a while to the weeping, wailing and gnashing of teeth there. Consider
the torments of a roaring Conscience, the fury of exasperated Devils, the
unspeakable racks and tortures of woeful Bodies, which must be as much beyond
what the most cruel Malice can invent or act, as the Almighty and just
indignation of God exceeds the weak and finite wrath of Man: And these to
continue during the innumerable spaces of an unconceivable Eternity; and the
Aged man must conclude, that there is no other way for him to take at Death,
but into one of these Receptacles: and that he may justly expect by reason of
his Age very shortly to determine this point, that he is even at the door; that
he hangs over this Etenity by a slender twist, which is now almost fretted
through, and that before a few weeks or days are come, he must go the way
whence he shall not return. What agitations of heart would these Meditations
produce in us? what diligence in making our Calling and Election sure? what
contempt of all the World? what detestation of the sweetest sins? In short, the
Thoughts of Eternity would effectually disgrace the trifles of Time, and
prepare the Aged for the enjoyment of it.

How comes it then to pass, that we are so backward to the thoughts of Death
and the World to come? The truth is, it is not grateful to Flesh and Blood.
Hence, when thousands died in the Wilderness, which should probably of it self
have made impressions on the rest, yet then Moses finds it needful to beg of
God, Psalm. 90. 12. So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our
hearts to wisdom. Alas! we find that we can think on any Person in the world
rather than of God, and of any Thing in the world rather than of our Soul, and
of any part of our Lives rather than of Death, and of any place in the world
rather than of Heaven. But should Flesh and Blood be gratified, rather than our
Maker, our Redeemer, our Comforter, our own Souls? God forbid. How many
unpleasant doses do we take, to preserve or recover the health of the body? But
here the health and happiness both of body and soul are concerned. I may boldly
say, that Death will prove a bitter Cup to those that live at ease, and that
will make no acquaintance with it, before it seize upon them. We are surpised
with any thing that is altogether new, but frequent converse makes the most
fearful Objects familiar. Walk then into the place of Skulls; make room for
your Coffin in your Chambers or in your Minds, and call before you all the
solemn Circumstances of your own Funerals, and step now and then into the other
world by holy Meditation. Your natural Eye grows dim, open then the Eye of
Faith, and penetrate into things unseen. You cannot work, but you can think;
your sleeps are broken, but then you may have golden hours: When you have
various discomforts below, you may have hereby unspeakable comfort above; yea
this will inure you unto, and begin that blessed life which you hope to live
for ever. He that thus travels often to Heaven while he lives, will more
certainly and comfortably be lodged there for ever, when he dies.

SECT. X.
THE Tenth and last Work of Oldage,. 10. Perseverance to the end.
is Perseverance to the End, and that, 1. In doing: 2. In suffering the will of
God.

1. In Active Obedience. You must never be weary of well-doing, nor imagine
that your work is done, till your life is done. It was an evil Servant, that
because his Lord delayed his coming, fell to smite his fellow servants, and to
eat and drink with the drunken, Matt. 24. 48. Alas! there are many points of
your duty, which you have formerly Omitted, and there are other which you have
done by the halves, and spoiled them in your performing of them. You had need
therefore to be as busy as ever you can, to correct the Errata's in the large
book of your Lives. You should think, that there be many Persons who were born
after you, who have got the start of you in Knowledge, Holiness and Charity,
and therefore you had need to crowd as much work into your narrow time, as you
can. If your Principles be sound, you will be some way fruitful to the last.
The righteous man will hold on his way, and he that has clean hands will be
stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9. It Is Elementary fire that is apt to go out,
the celestial fire is never quenched. If you had but one grain of the right
Mustard Seed, it will grow to be a great tree. The path of the just is like the
shining light, that shines more and more to the perfest day. Prove. 4. 18. O
labor to cross that uncharitable Proverb, A young Saint, and an old Devil
Iuvenis in sanctis senibus satanizat in annis.
: rather, he that is a Saint when he is young, should be an Angel when he is
old. The nearer any thing comes to its center, the faster it moves; so the
nearer we approach perfection, the more we should hunger after it and labor
for it. No man approached nearer unto God than Moses, and no man made so
ambitious a suit, that he might draw nearer to him. And the Lord said unto
Moses, thou have found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name. And he said,
I beseech thee, show me thy Glory, Exodus 33. 17, 18. It was a complaint of old,
that few people were solicitous how well, but only how long they should live:
when as a good life might be attained by many, a long life only by a few Nemo
quam been vivat sed quamdiu, curat: cum omnibus possit contingere, ut been
vivant; ut diu, nulli. Sen. ep. 22.
. But our business should be to live well, and referr it to the wise God to
determine how long. It is said, Isa. 65. 20. There shall not be an old man that
has not filled his days: Its true, that signifies, all the Aged shall
complete their time, they shall fall ripe into their graves: But then it should
follow, that if God in his goodness please to fill up the days of the Aged,
surely they also should fill their days with some good service or other.

Hold out then to run with patience the race that is set before you. He that
sits down within sight of the goal, loses the race, and so loses the things
that he has wrought: Si dixisti, sufficit, periisti. He that concludes, I have
believed or obeyed sufficiently, is a lost man. The hoary head must be still
found in the way of righteousness, Prove. 16. 31. If our face be withered, yet
we must take care that our faith be not withered. We should make it appear,
that our spiritual heat or zeal did not result only from our natural heat and
vigor. To see a young man wise, and an Old man zealous are most grateful
objects to God and man. They are those that by patient continuance in well
doing, seek for glory and honor and immortality, that shall obtain eternal
life, Romans 2. 7.

And here let all Aged persons beware of the Rock of Carnal Security and
Presumption. Some of those that have lived long, are prone to rely upon their
very Age as an Argument of Gods favor: Whereas Old Age will save no man. It
may be a means of Salvation in a large sense, in affording you Space of
Repentance: And it will be an aggravation of your impenitence, in case you have
such space, and yet not grace to repent: But otherwise it can make no argument
for your salvation; for God has said, that the sinner being an hundred years
old shall be accursed, Isa. 65. 20.

And Others that have been serious and serviceable in their days, may perhaps
presume upon what they have been or have done, as if they might be justified
thereby; or else that they need to take no further pains about their own
Salvation or others good; whereas in the morning we must sow our seed, and not
withhold our hand in the evening; for we know not whether shall prosper, either
this or that; or whether they both shall be alike good: Which S. Hierom applies
to this matter; Say not, says he, I have been diligent while I was able; I may
rest my self in mine Old Age; for thou know not, whether shall more please
and honor God in thy Youth, or in thine Age Hier. in Eccl. 11.
. Thus we read that when Old Mr. Knox was dying, he was assaulted with this
proud Engine, what Service he had done his Master, which he presently repelled
with that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee to differ, and what have
thou that thou di^st not receive? And the same Apostle had said a little
before, ver. 4. I know nothing by my self, yet am I not hereby justified. Alas!
all our righteousness will not cover one of our Sins. We must say without a
complement, we are unprofitable Servants, when we have done our best. Neither
may we imagine that any our former diligence, will excuse our future
negligence. As long as we live we must not live to our selves Mallem mortuum
esse quam non viveres Curious Dentatus.
, but we ought to live unto the Lord, Romans 14. 7, 8. The ancient Servant cannot
do so much as he has done, but he oversees affairs, he directs others in their
employments, his head is full of cares about his Masters business, and therein
he dies and so must we. No man must think, says Seneca Non itaque quod
quenquam propter canos aut rugas putas diu vi^isse: non ille diu vixit, sed diu
fuit. Sen. de brvit. c. 8.
, that because of his gray hairs only or wrinkles he has lived long; he may
have endured long, but he has not lived, unless he have improved his life. It
was the honorable Epitaph of Abraham, Genesis 25. 8. He died in a good old age,
an old man and full -- there is no more in the Hebrew, you may add full of
days, full of Grace and Comfort, full of Heaven. And it was the comfortable
encouragement of Eliphaz to Job, which was truly fulfilled unto him, Thou shall
come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes in, in its
season, Job 5. 26. for he died old and full of days, Job 42. last: he had
lived as long as he could wish, and had lived to good purpose. He was full of
days, and his days were full of good fruits.

2. The Other branch of Perseverance is, in Suffering the will of God, or in
Passive Obedience. The Aged person must hold out herein to the end. He that
endures to the end shall be saved. Perhaps you will be followed with great
distress and of long continuance, and sore sickness and of long continuance, as
is threatened, Deuteronomy. 28. 59. You cannot reasonably expect, but that at least
some bodily distemper will last as long as your life, yea peradventure such
painful diseases as will put all your patience to the rout, if the Lord be not
your helper: but yet you must not murmur, nay you must not grudge, nor make
have; but endure the Lords pleasure, and wait the Lords leisure. I was dumb, I
opened not my mouth, because thou did it. The sight of the haven animates the
weatherbeaten mariner. Hitherto the Lord has helped you, and as a father
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. He that has put
that compassion into the heart of a father, has a surpassing infinite Ocean of
it in himself Tam pater nemo, tam pius nemo. Tert. de poenit. c. 8.
: and withal he knows our frame, he remembers that we are but dust, Psalm. 103.
13, 14. He that has the wisdom and power of a God, and the pity of a father,
will be sure to lay no more upon you, than he will enable you to bear and to
overcome.

And therefore the Aged must beware of the other Extreme, namely, the Gulf of
Despondence, and Dejection of Spirit. Their Sins are mustered up against them,
their outward strength is decayed, their Spirits broken with a succession of
cares and troubles, their distempers and pains are heavy upon them, their
friends and relations seem to be weary of them, and an unperswadable Enemy
Death stands just before them. And what flesh alive can bear up under such and
so many weights together! But besides what has been offered before, I add,
that as all these Mortifications are needful to wean us from this world, from
the love whereof even these can hardly divorce us; so all such Discomsorts
should drive the Aged person no lower than his knees, even unto God who has
said, Be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea I will
help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness, Isa.
41. 10. Have not all the Saints and Servants of God that have lived to Old Age,
passed these pikes before you? have they not born these burdens, that you sink
under. There is no temptation befaln you, but what is common to men. Where is
the faith, where are the prayers that you have been laying up for such a time?
O miserable Old Man, said the Heathen Orator, that in so long a life, have not
yet learned to despise Death; which is not at all to be feared, if it
extinguish the Soul; and greatly to be desired, if it convey the Soul into an
everlasting good condition O miserum senem qui mortem contemnendam esse in tam
longa aetate non viderit! quae qut plane negligenda est, si omnino extinguit
animum, aut etiam appetenda si aliquo eum deducit, ubi sit futurus eternus.
Atqui certe nihil tertium inveniri potest. Cicero.
. And then for the pain in Death, the same Author tells us, that if there be
any sense of pain in dying, it is but very short; especially to Old people,
that have prevented it and tasted it by degrees. And therefore never render
your life or death unquiet as many do, that even dye for fear of dying, that
create by their melancholy fancies greater torments to themselves, than Death
brings with it. Behold it through the glass of Gods word, which represents it
only as a Dissolution, to wit, out of a prison to go to Christ, Phil. 1. 23.
Going to rest, Isa. 57. 2. Finishing our course, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Falling asleep in
Jesus, 1 These. 4. 14. and a stepping out of this world unto our father, Joh.
13. 1. and why should the prospect hereof at all deject us? Yea, in case you
should have the honor to be called to suffer Death for Christ, and his Truth;
yet fear it not under its most terrible Aspect: for the Supports and Comforts
of that Trial will balance, yea surmount the fears and pains thereof. As the
sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also abounds by Christ,
2 Cor. 1. 5. Strive therefore rather to adorn, than to avoid the Cross:
considering that, as it is a great honor for you in your Old Age to suffer for
the Truth Bona senectus non vitae longevitate imbecilla ad usum; sed maturitat!
virtutis ad martyrium preparata. Ambr. in Luc. l. 10.
, so it is a great shame, that the Truth should suffer by you. It was the
worthy Resolution of Old Eleazar, when he was urged to counterfeit the eating
of Swines flesh, to save his life: No, says he, it becomes not our Age in any
wise to dissemble, whereby many young persons might think, that Eleazar being
fourscore and ten, were now gone to a strange Religion. -- And so they through
my hypocrisy and desire to live a little time, should be deceived by me, and I
get a stain to my Oldage, and make it abominable. Wherefore now manfully
changing this life, I will show my self such an one as mine Age requires. So
Polycarp, when he was tempted to deny Christ, and to swear by the Fortune of
Caesar, answered; Fourscore and six years have I served Christ, and have found
him a good Master, and should I now deny him? I have lived by him, and I will
live and dye to him. Let us resolve, by Gods grace, to write after these
Copies. Doubtless, if there be any going to Heaven on horseback, as Mr.
Bradford styles it, that is, in Honor and State, it is by Martyrdom.

Nay, it is not enough, that we be content and quiet under these
discouragements, that we who have received good at the hands of the Lord, be
content with evil also: but we should triumph over them. In all these things we
should be more than conquerours through him that loved us. Our rooted Faith,
our fixed Hope, our long Experience should lift us up to surmount all these
fears and troubles. The veterane Soldier must not be scared with such Hydra's.
We are near the promised Land, the news of these Anakims in our way should not
affright us, they are bread for us, as Joshua said. When these things come upon
you, then look up and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh
Neque enim peterit nisi and laetus and gratus semper esse, qui cu^ morti
fuisset obnoxious, factus est de immortalitate securus. Cypr.
. Be faithful unto death, and I will give you a crown of life, Rev. 2. 10.

And thus we are at length arrived at the end of the Aged persons Work, which
was the Seventh and Last thing to be treated of in this Subject.

The Practice of these things now only remains: That we study to correct the
Causes, avoid the Sins, obtain the Graces, sustain the Inconveniences, improve
the Privileges, and dispatch the Work described before us. Wherein we must
earnestly implore the gracious Assistance of God, who works in us both to
will and to do of his good pleasure, and who will not fail us therein, unless
we be wanting to our selves.

And O that all Younger people would learn Knowledge, Temperance, and Industry
There is scarce any old man, but then sees how he might formerly have improved
his talents better. Dr. Sheaf his Vind. of Old Age.
in their youth, which will be the only means to attain to an Healthy, Wealthy,
and Holy Old Age.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by Thomas Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns
at the lower end of Cheap Side near Mercers Chapel.
A Present for Teeming Women to be given to them by their Husbands or Friends.
By John Oliver Minister of the Gospel. In Octavo. A Serious Exhortation to
Self-Examination, delivered in five Sermons on the 2 Cor. 13. 5. By Thomas
Wadsworth M. A. Minister of the Gospel, sometime at Newington Butts Southwark,
In Octavo. The difference between the Spots of the Godly and the Wicked. By Mr.
Jeremiah Buroughs of Cripplegate. Scripture Warrant, sufficient proof for
Infant Baptism, being a Reply to Mr. Granthams Presumption no proof: by Giles
Firmin. In Octavo. Mr. Wadsworth's Remains, being Meditations with Respect to
the Lords Supper, etc. Thoughtfulness for the Morrow. The Redeemers Tears.
Charity in Reference to other Men's Sins. All Three by John How, Minister of the
Gospel.

