A CONFIRMATION And Discovery of WITCHCRAFT,

Containing these several particulars;

That there are Witches called bad Witches, and Witches untruely called good
or white Witches, and what manner of people they be, and how they may be
known, with many particulars thereunto tending.

Together with the Confessions of many of those executed since May 1645. in the
several Counties hereafter mentioned. As also some objections Answered.

By John Stearne, now of Lawshall near Bury Saint Edmonds in Suffolk,
sometimes of Manningtree in Essex.

PROVE. 17. 15. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the just,
even they both are an abomination to the Lord. DEVT. 13. 14. Thou shall
therefore inquire, and make search, and ask diligently, whether it be truth,
and the thing certain. LONDON, Printed by William Wilson, dwelling in Little
Saint Bartholomewes near Smithfield. 1648

Courteous READER,
TO the end I might satisfy the opinions of such as desire to be further
satisfied concerning the diabolical art, or crying sin, of Witchcraft (as I
may so call it;) For the sin of Witchcraft, and the diabolical practice
thereof, is omnium scelerum atrocissimum, and in such as have the knowledge of
God, the greatest Apostacy from the faith; for they renounce God and Christ,
and give themselves by a covenant to the Devil, the utter enemy to God and all
mankind, for in Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11, 12. God gave command to all the children of
Israel that none amongst his should be such. For those abominations were the
children of Canaan driven out from before them, and utterly destroyed and
plagued. As also Manasseth, 2 Cron. 33. 6. which wickedness of his was so
abhorred of God, as in his displeasure he mentions it many years after by
Jeremy, as cause of removing the Jews from their land, and so leading them
away captive into a strange land, Ier. 15. 4, 5. Idolaters ought to dye, as in
Exodus 22. 20. and 32. 28, 29. Nay inticers to Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13. 9. because
they worship Devils, Psalm. 106. 37. 1 Cor. 10. 20. Revel. 9. 20. But Witches
worship Devils, they invocate them, crave help of them, work by them, and
do them homage, sacrifice to them, and they do it not to stocks and stones,
and so mediately to the Devil, as other Idolaters do, but immediately to the
Devil himself, and therefore the greatest Idolaters that can be; and are not
they then more worthy of death? And to convince others who are of such an
erroneus opinion as to say, notwithstanding Gods law against them, and the holy
Scripture speaking of them, besides the laws of Nations, both heathen and
Chrian, made to punish them, that there are no witches, but that there are many
poor silly ignorant people hanged wrongfully, and that those who have gone or
been instruments in finding out or discovering those of late made known have
done it for there own private ends, for gain and such like, favoring some
where they thought good, and unjustly prosecuting others; I therefore (as my
leisure has permitted me) have given my self to the reading of some approved
relations touching the arraignement and condemnation of Witches; As also
treatises of learned men concerning the devilish art of Witchcraft; adding
withal some few things which otherwise I have learned and observed since the
25. of March 1645 as being in part an agent in finding out or discovering some
of those since that time, being about two hundred in number, in Essex,
Suffolk, Northamptonshire, Huntingtonshire, Bedfordshire, Norfolk,
Cambridgeshire, and the Isle of Ely in the County of Cambridge, besides other
places, justly and deservedly executed upon their legal trials. Now the
occasion being thus offered, and Master Hopkins dead, I desire to give some
satisfaction to the world, that it may appear, what has been done, has
been for the good of the common wealth, and we free from those aspersions cast
upon us, and that I never favored any, or unjustly prosecuted others, but that
all that be guilty of this, ought to die; as well the good or white witches so
called, as the other: and that there is, and has been more favor showed* or
at least less care taken for the discovery of such as be guilty, then by the
word* of God there ought. For how many are there now a days which could be
contented to pass by many of them, as Magicians, Negromancers and such like?
of whom his late Majesty of famous renown in his Demonologie gives a
dreadful censure, who says they are to be dealt withal, as with Socerers,
and especially the curing witch, commonly called the good witch. Nay these
rather get credit and estimation, love and liking, as did the Magicians and
Sorcerers with Pharaoh, Exodus 7. 8. with Nabuchadnezer and Belshazzar, Isa. 47.
12. Ezekiel. 22. As did also Simon Magus with the Samaritans, who was held to be
the great power of God, Acts 8. Likewise Elimas with Sergius Paulus, Acts 13.
And the Pythonesse with her Master, Acts 16. And will not many say, surely they
work by God, because they use good prayers and good words, and often name God?
but let those remember that the Devil himself can use good words, Mar. 1. 24.
and 5. 7. Acts 17. that he can counterfeit the habit and words of an holy man,
Samuel. 1 Samuel 28. 13, 15, 17. that he can turn himself into an Angel of
light, 2 Cor. 11. Therefore he not teach his servants to feign holiness and
yet be these in many respects worse then the others, and the holy Scripture
exempts none, but utterly forbids any going to them, or asking counsel of
them. I hope this my labor will excuse me, and give some better satisfaction
to those who are not yet fully satisfied herein, for that I shall make it
plainly appear, that I neither formerly, in any of my proceedings concerning
this matter, or in penning of this, aim at mine own private ends rather then
the public good, for that I shall discover, so far forth as I am able, or at
least, as civility and modesty shall give way; yet I am not ignorant how
dangerous it is for me to put my self so far forth into the Sea of common
opinion, and I cannot see that by reason of the shelves and rocks of injurious
conceits which are ready to be found on every hand I am like to pass any
adventure; having had experience already how forward many be in taking part
with many of those who have been detected to promote them forward to take the
least advantage by suit of law, thereby to aquitt themselves, when as many
times it has fallen out otherwise, and been a means to bring to their
deserved punishment, but let such remember, the Devil needs no provoker. And
though Balack sent to Balaam to pursue the people, yet we find the contrary,
for surely said Balaam, there is no enchantment in Jacob, nor divination
against Israel. And yet nevertheless craving pardon if in any thing herein I
have taken too much upon me, I have once ventured to commit my self to thy
sensure, and doubt not of prosperous acceptance, if but a charitable
construction be had of my true intent and meaning therein, as from a plain
country man, who intend not to pen any thing but what I shall be able to make
appear plainly to be truth, and then I shall reckon it as a sufficient
recompense for my labor and pains. And so with my due respects I take leave.

JOHN STEARNE.

A CONFIRMATION and Discovery of WITCHCRAFT.
MAn being borne in sin, has thereby since the fall of our first parents
lost the Image of God in which he was created, through the temptation of Satan,
and is naturally, wholly polluted with sin and corruption, whereby he is
become of very near kin unto the Devil, even his own child, 1 John 3. 10.
And that being his child, he will do the Iusts of his Father, John 8. 44. and
that no doubt in one thing as well as in another, for men love darkness more
than light, John 3. 19. Yea, and naturally are given to work all uncleanness
even with greediness, so captivated are they to their lusts, Ephesians. 4, 19. For
Satan has his wiles, Ephesians. 11. his devices, 2 Cor. 2. 11. his depths and
policies. Revel. 2. 24. his snares to catch people at unawares. 1 Timothy 3. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 26. And being thus furnished, he dare set upon any, yea upon our
Savior Christ himself, to solicit him, yea, and to a most execrable impiety,
even to have Christ to fall down and to worship him a Devil, Mat. 4. for he
watches opportunities, he seeks occasions, and the least offer he espieth
and quickly takes the same, and so prevails often, not only with the rude
and sottish, but with the greatest spirits and sharpest wits many times. For
man being given over to his unruly passion, is violent, inconsiderate and
vehemently greedy to have his desired ends, by what means soever he can
attain them; which makes him seek means of the Devil to become injoyer of
his inordinate desires, regarding more the having of his present will, than
respecting his future state after death, and is more taken up to obtain what
he likes for the body and outward estate in this world, than with the care of
his spiritual condition and estate before God in the world to come, which the
natural man very little or nothing at all regards. This being the condition
of a natural man who remains still unregenerate and given over of God unto
Satan's temptation in this kind, how can they resist? Man is weak, Satan is
strong, and withal subtle to beguile, they may easily yield, for that he has
over mere natural men a ruling power, Ephesians. 2. 2. who are already in his
snare, and at his own will are taken captive, 2 Timothy 2. 26.

Here some will say, you go about to make all subject to Witchcraft, or at
least all unregenerate persons.

I answer, it said in John 3. 6. That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and
that which is borne of the spirit is spirit: and therefore Witchcraft being as
Saint Paul says, Amongst the fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5. 20. one may fall
into this sin as well as into any other, if God prevent it not. Wherefore it
behooves man (if he would prevent the power of the Devil and whatsoever
Witches can do) to labor to entertain and uphold the preaching of the
Gospel. For where it comes, down goes the power of Witcherie, Acts 8. and
13.

History likewise tells us, where the Gospel came among the heathen, there the
hellish power of Devils and spirits greatly diminished, and we hear now by
travelers, that in other Countries where the Gospel is not preached, and where
they still remain, (as I may say) according to the abominations of the
Canaanites, I mean in such places where the Heathens still remain, as in the
Indies, where they by travelers relations, worship the Sun, Moon and
Stars, Nay I have heard in some places, the Devil himself, and where popery
and profaneness is, with contempt of Preaching or vile neglect thereof, there
Witchcraft is most rife. Therefore it behooves men to labor to bring forth
fruits worthy the Gospel and amendment of life. For God hedgeth the virtuous
man about, Job 1. so as Satan cannot come at him, without very special license
from God, and that only for a trial. The Angels of God do also pitch their
tents about such, Psalm. 34. yea, and have charge over them to keep them in
their ways, Psalm. 91. 11, 12. And to have religious duties in our families:
and as the Apostle says, to pray continually. 1 These. 5. And as Saint James
tells us, Iam. 5. 16. that the prayer of a righteous man avails much if it
be servent. David did not only serve God openly in the Tabernacle, but
returned home to bless his house, 2 Samuel 6. 20. And Job every day sacrificed
to God, and sanctified his children and family. Job 1. 5. And God gave to
Israel a law to sanctify their houses. And so going ever well armed against
these rulers of darkness, devils and evil spirits, furnished with the
heavenly furniture and spiritual weapons, of which the Apostle speaks, Ephesians.
6. 14. 18. and being thus qualified, and armed, to trust in God only, who will
keep thee under the shadow of his wings, Psalm. 91. No man shall need to fear
Witches or Devils; knowing ever this, that they cannot do the very least
harm unto any of the least creatures of God without leave from him: no, not to
enter into the heard of swine of the very Gardarens, for surely there is no
enchantment in Jacob, nor any Divination against Israel. It is the Lord, let
him do what seems him good, 2 Samuel 15. 26. It is the Lord that gives, it is
the Lord that takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord, Job 1. 21. And
therefore many yield thus far as that Satan needs no provoker to set him
forward, as the Scripture tells us. For the text says, that he compasses the
world to, and fro, Job 1. going up and down like a roaring lion seeking whom
he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. He is ready (if God give way) to be a lying
spirit in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets to seduce him, 1 King. 22. and to
beguile; and that the people which brought the possessed to our Savior,
complained only of the Devil, Mat. 15. 2. Luke 9. 39. They made no mention of
Witches, nor (for ought we know) had any suspicion of them, for we find that
God has often sent the Devil, as the executioner of his displeasure without
any means of a Witch, as amongst the Egyptians, he sent evil Angels, Psalm.
78. 49. between Abimelech and the Sichemites, Judge. 9. 23. So upon Saul, 1 Samuel
16. 15. And so we read of a Legion sent by Christ into the heard of swin, Mat.
5. 12. Thus we see Devils immediately sent from God without any instigation of
Witches. And therefore conclude that all is from the Devil by Gods permission,
and that there are no Witches at all. But whosoever thou be that art of this
opinion, and although many have gone about to prove that there are no Witches:
yet besides the former reason, the contrary tenet is undeniable true, that
there are Witches.

First, from the laws that God himself has made against them. First, in
forbidding the practice of VVitch-craft, and that none amongst his should be
Witches, VVizzards, Negromancers and such like, Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11, 12. Secondly
in forbidding any to go to them, Levit. 19. 20. Isa. 8. 19. Thirdly, his
commandment to put Witches to death, Exodus 22. 18. Fourthly, Gods judgments
against them, Deuteronomy. 18. 12. which if there were no Witches what need these
laws?

Secondly, from the history of the Bible, which names to us certain
Witches, as the Socerers of Egypt, Exodus 7. Iannes and Iambres, 2 Timothy 3. 8.
Those in Babylon and Persia, Dan. 2. 5. 7. Isa. 47 12. And amongst the Nations
driven out before the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 18. 12, 13. So we read of
other Witches which were, of Balaam Numb. 22. Ios. 13. 22. Of Israel, 2 King.
9. 22. Of Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33. 6. Of Simon Magus, Acts 8. 9. And Elimas, Acts
13. 8. Secondly, it makes mention of the practizes of Witches, Exodus 7. 2 Chronicles. 33. 6. Isa. 47. 9. Eze. 21. 21. Thirdly, it speaks of some going to
them, 1 Samuel 28. 7. and sending to them, Numb. 22. 5. Ios. 24. 9. Fourthly, it
relates how some Kings put them to death, 1 Samuel 28. 3, 9. and cut them off, 2
King. 23. 24. all this should be false If there were no Witches.

Thirdly, from some Comparisons or Similies fetched from witchcraft, by
Samuel, 1 Samuel 15. and by Isa. 29. 4. which were absurd if there were no
Witches.

Fourthly, (as before) St Paul's mentioning Witchcraft amongst the works of
the flesh, Gal. 5. 20.

Fifthly, Gods threatening damnation upon Socerers, Rev. 21. 8.

Sixthly, the Laws of Nations both Heathen and Christian against them.

Seventhly, the truth of Histories, and many relations of their Arraignement
and conviction.

Eighthly, experience amongst our selves, and in other Countries, together with
the confession of some of those Witches condemned and executed since May 1645.
in the several Counties before mentioned, Hereafter, herein expressed, I hope
will give all sufficient satisfaction that there are Witches.

Now here some may say, this is sufficient to prove that there are Witches in
some Countries, or at least have been in forms times with us here in this
Country; but how will you make it appear that there have been any since the
Gospel preached amongst us? For many are of oppinion that there are Witches in
other Countries where the Gospel is not at all, or very little regarded, but
where the Gospel is faithfully preached as with us in England and Scotland,
etc. that there are not any, no not since the coming of our Savior.

I answer that if any man can make it appear that the Gospel frees us from
sin, more then the Law did our forefathers, that then it might be so. But the
Gospel frees us not, and therefore we are as like to have such miscreants
amongst us as our Forefathers. For we are as sinful as in the time of the law.
And Satan still remains amongst us. And we are as impatient, profane, and
unconscionable as ever, having distempered passions, violent in affection,
given to ill company, and vain curiosities, not having respect of Religion, by
which occasions the Devil takes advantage and works to have his will, for he
goes thither where he is either sure or hops well for entertainment, Mat.
12. 44. He therefore watches the time when he may best offer his service to
such as any way he finds the least kind of preparedness in, as when any fall
into a passionate sorrow, accompanied with solitariness for some loss, as
husband, wife, children or such like, the Devil offers himself to comfort such
in their sorrowful melancholy mood. So in time of dearth through extreme
poverty it many times causes many to be desperately impatient; or so impatient
through poverty when they would needs be rich, even against Gods providence, as
that they be in such a distempered passion, as they would have their wants
satisfied and their desires fulfilled, be it by what means it possible can be,
(as I may say) right or wrong; or when one is enraged with anger, plotting
revenge, or is familiar with such as be Witches; As likewise when any are
addicted to the reading and study of dangerous books, enticing to the practice
of hidden mysteries, of Magic and Enchantments. Thus by these and such other
like means as may be gathered from the confessions of Witches, they prepare
themselves for Satan's temptations, to draw them to Witchcraft, as I could
instance in those innumerable examples, as you shall read hereafter more at
large when I come to speak of what sorts of people are most addicted to
Witchcraft; and therefore do you not conceive that there are still such people
remaining amongst us? yea certainly there are, and Witches likewise.

But you will still say it does not yet plainly appear to be so since the
Gospel, though all these sins still remain, for the Devil needs no provoker
as before, for he can, if God permit, greatly trouble us, and can bereave one
of his wits, and make one lunatic, deaf, dumb and blind, bow the body
together, so that one shall not be able to lift up himself, he can even enter
in and possess any really and make them invincibly strong, and work other
effects. Of all which you may read in Matthew. 9. 32 and 12. 22. and 15 22. and
17. 15. Mark. 1. 23 and 5. 5, 7. and 7 26. and 9. 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 25, 26
and in Luke 4. 35. and 7. 2. and 8. 29, 39. and 11. 14. and 13. 11, 16. and can
enter into children, Luke 13. 16. young folks, Mark 7. 26. Men, Mark 5. 1, 2,
3. women, Luke 13. 16. Matt. the 15. 22. Yea through the permission of God,
such as be the elect of God. Job 1. and 2. A daughter of Abraham, Luke 13. 11.
and Mary Magdalene, Luke 7. 2. and can counterfeit the resemblance of an holy
man, 1 Samuel 28. 12. 14. 19. yea and for along time, Luke 8. 27. from a child
till one be grown up, Mark 9. 21. even eighteen years, Luke 13. 16. and so we
read in Luke 7. 2. of seven Devils in one at once, and more Luke 11. 26. Yea
a whole legion, Mark 5. 9, 16, 14. and sometimes the Lord is pleased to send
Devils as executioners of his displeasure, as is before expressed.

To this I answer, and grant it for truth, and not to be denied, but yet
notwithstanding all this, there are Witches likewise, and yet the Devil does
all this, and more if God permit, for in Genesis 3. We may learn there that the
Devil may enter into a dumb creature, and come out of the same, utter a voice
intelligible, and offer conference (if any will hearken) to deceive as our
Witches now a days confess, and that he chooses the subtilest creature to
deceive by, and the weaker vessel to confer with, but by the confessions of
Witches now lately detected, he chooses such creatures as they themselves are
most addicted to, as you shall hereafter find by their confessions, by the
several shapes he appears in, but how ever we may read there, it was a
powerful persuasion to overcome, and yet work by Witches, Wizzards,
Necromancers, Sorcerers, Southsayers, and all kind of Magic art, As we may
read in Exodus 7. 11, 12. and 8. 7. Where we may see that Pharaoh called the
Wisemen, the Sorcerers, and the Magicians of Egypt, who did with their
enchantments in like manner as Moses and Aaron. But I pass by the proofs out
of the Old Testament for this because I desire to give such satisfaction (as I
am able) that it may appear that there be Witches now as in former ages. And if
what has been already spoken will not give satisfaction herein, you may read
in the 2. Tim. 3. 8. who they were, that were the oppsors of the truth, but
such as Iannes and Iambres, who withstood Moses, and then search who they were,
and you shall find they were such as Pharaoh called to him, as in the before
mentioned places, who with their enchantments did the like as Moses had done.

So you may read of Elymas the Sorcerer, Act. 13. 8. who resisted the Apostles
in the time of the Gospel.

So likewise in Act. 8 9. you shall read of Simon Magus a sorcerer, to whom in
the 10 verse it is said, they all gave heed from the least to the greatest,
saying, this man is the great power of God, For in the 11. verse its is said,
because that of long time he had bewitched them with sorceries, and in the 13
verse we read he was baptized, but read the 20, 21, 22, and you shall read what
Peter said to him, and so read no more of him in all the New Testament.

Also in the Rev. 21. 8. you may read how Sorcerers shall with other sinners
there reckoned up, have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone.

And so likewise we read in the Epistle of Jude the Apostle speaking there of
false Teachers, which were crept into the Church to seduce them, for whose
damnable doctrine and manners, horrible judgment was prepared, in the 11.
verse pronounces woe unto them, for they have gone in the way of Cain, and
ran greedily after the error of Balaam, by which we may plainly see that
there were Witches in the time of the Gospel, and after the coming and
ascension of our Savior, and do any doubt then, whether there be any now? do
any think that we be free from such, where sin and ignorance besides so much
abounds? or do you desire to have proof of Witches since then, you shall have
enough of their confessions to make this evident, besides the relations of
learned men writing concerning Witchcraft. But if you would but rightly observe
that place in 2. Tim. 3. 1 and so on to the 8. you shall find that in the last
days shall come perilous times, etc. And in the 8. verse it is said, And as
Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so do those also resist the truth. There
you may see plainly that there should be such to the latter end, besides in
diverse other places speaking expressly of Witchcraft; as 1. Tim. 4. 1. and
Jude 18.

Likewise of the Pythonesse which brought her mistress much gain Acts 16. 16.
Also in Rev 21. 8. And so I might nominate diverse other places, for those which
remain doubtful either of being bewitched or of Witches themselves, but
because their own confessions clear this evidently, besides the forenamed
places, I proceed to distinguish between those called bad Witches, and those
called white or good Witches, which is easily to be discerned and known.

But yet I say all Witches be bad, and ought to suffer alike, being both in
league with the Devil: for so is the good, so untruly called, as well as the
other, either open or implicit. And therefore I conclude, all that be in open
league with the Devil ought to die. And the Scripture makes mention only of
ten sorts, which speaks rather of those called the good, which the world so
much runs after, then the other. As we may read: First in Deuteronomy. 18. 10. 2
Kings 17. 1. of a Diviner foreshewing things to come. Such the people delighted
in and consulted with, Ier. 27. 9. Ezekiel. 21. 22. Such an one was Balaam, Ios.
13. 22.

Secondly, We read in Deuteronomy. 18. 10. of an Observer of times, or Soothsayer, one
which by gaping on the Heavens could also foretell something. To these likewise
did the people give ear, Ier. 27. 9. And such an one was Manasses, 2 Chronicles.
33. 6. And what was Elimas the Sorcerer spoken of in the Acts?

Thirdly, we read in Deuteronomy. 18. 10. of an Observer of times, or searcher out;
One which observed times to know when it was best to begin a business: as
Hamans Witches did by casting of lots before him. Of this Manasses also was
guilty, 2 Chro. 33. 6. To which might be added that in Hester. 3. 7. and 9. 24.

Fourthly, we read in Deuteronomy. 18. 10. Isa. 47. 12. of a Magician, one that could
deceive the Eyesight by making something to appear otherwise then it is. Such
Pharaoh called to him to oppose Moses. Herein, Iannes and Iambres, of whom
Saint Paul speaks of, were guilty, and so likewise was Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33.
6.

Fifthly, we read in Deuteronomy. 18. 11. of an Inchanter, or Conjurer; one joined in
league with another, as the Witch is with the Devil. Such an one used Charms
to tame Serpents, Psalm. 58. 5. Many such were in Babylon, Isa. 47. 9. and Eccl.
10. 11.

Sixthly, we read in Deuteronomy. 18. 11. Lev. 20. Of one which has a spirit in him
or her which does give answer to such as come to inquire of them. Such an one
was the Witch of Endor, Sam. 28. Such an one was the Pythonesse which brought
her Mistress much gain, Acts 16. In Isa. 29. 4. called a Whisperer. To such the
people had reguard, Lev. 19. 21. and encouraged one another thereunto, Isa. 8.
19.

Seventhly, we read in Deuteronomy. 18. 11. of a Wizzard, 1 Samuel 28. 9. One also
which could foretell some things, and so called for his or her foreknowledge;
as now we term them a wise man, or a wise woman. After this sort the people
sought also, Lev. 19. 31* and 20. 6.

Eighthly, we read in Deu. 18. 41. of a Negromancer, one that consulteth with
the dead. Isa. 8. 9.

Ninthly, we read in Isa. 1 9. 3. of a VVhisperer, with secret or soft words,
as our white Witches do, endeavoring to help man or beast. To these the
Egyptians sought after, as they did to their Idols, as in the last
forementioned place is expressed. These are now (as I have read) translated
Charmers.

Tenthly, we read in Exodus 8. 11. of such as Pharaoh sought to, as we call them
Iuglers, deceivers, beguiling the eyesight. Some hold them to be casters of
Nativities, which tell people their fortune by the time of their birth. These
are only expressed in the Old Testament: But the New speaks, as I may say,
only in general against VVitch-craft, which comprehends all the ten
aforementioned. And therefore it cannot be denied, besides their confessions
herafter herein expressed, but that there are such to this time, and that they
all ought to suffer alike, which have made an express league with the Devil.
An art so execrable, to renounce God, and to betake themselves to the Devil,
as for this thing only they deserve death in the highest degree: for the Law
of God says without exception, Thou shall not suffer a VVitch to live, Exodus
22. 18. If a Witch justly convicted, Death is due to such an one, Levit. 20.
27. For, for those abominations the Lord utterly destroyed the Canaanites, and
plagued Manasses, which wicknesse of his was so abhorred of God, as in his
displeasure he mentioned it many years after, as a cause of removing the
Jews from their Land, and of leading them away captive into a strange Land,
Ier. 15. 4. And did not good King Josiah put such sorts to death, that he might
fulfill the Law? 2 Kings 23. 24. And so did Saul, Sam. 28. Nay, has not the
Lord threatened great Judgments in the aforementioned places? Yea, and does he
not by the Prophet promise to cut off VVitch-crafts and Soothsayers, when he
intends to bless a Nation? Mich. 5. 12.

Now, who they be that make this express or open league, are both sorts. But
for the hurting and cursing VVitch, there is but one sort. All which makes this
express or open league; and they do it only for mischief, though several
ways: for they take their Familiars; Some for one mischief, some for another.
When as there be two sorts of the other; the one in express and open league,
for so I term it, though made never so secret, because it is done by
conference with the Devil; And the other is by implicit, or secret league,
only by confidence in believing, that such or such a thing shall produce such,
or such an effect. Now the first of these two have Familiars, as well as the
other, or at least a brand, by which they may be known and discerned by, as
well as the first. Some to set spells; Some Charms; Some to cure diseases
several ways, either by words, or washing clothes, or aanoynting the
Instrument which gave the wound to cure the wound; Some only by laying on often
their hands; Some by using and saying superstitious words, or form of prayers,
using good words to bad ends; Some by both; Some by herbs; Some to know where
stolen goods be, either by raising the Devil, or Familiar Spirits; Some only
by words, and so likewise the same for lost goods, or man or beast, and to
bring them again; and so by many such like ways and means do these work
by: Yet many times they err, all of these: For the Devil cannot perform his
promises at all times. So that it is not to be questioned, but all these sorts
are in league with the Devil. For it is not to be doubted, but before any of
them can have power to do any thing, against, or for any parry, or have any
desired ends effected, the league express or implicit is first made; be it
express then confirmed; but for the Confirmation hereof their confessions will
make it plainly appear, and plain proofs and reasons for the other, that
they confidently trust that their desires shall be effected accordingly to
their belief, as the curing Witches do of them which come to them for help.
All which I will make plainly appear, when I come to speak how they may be
known. For here some may first demand of me what sorts of people they be of
either sorts?

I answer, as for the first sort most women, and for the other most men. And
albeit there be of both sorts of both: as Elimas the Sorcerer, and Simon Magus,
and so likewise Balaam, and the Witch of Endor, and of these young, middle, and
old age, of which instances may be given; Yet of Witches in general, there be
commonly more women then men. This is evident.

First, from Gods Law against Witches, Exodus 22. In the feminine gender,
praestigiatricem ne sinito vivere.

Secondly, from Saul's speech, when he said, Seek one out, a woman that has a
familiar spirit, Sam. 28 7. 1 Chronicles. 10 13, 14. in naming a woman and not a man.

Thirdly, from experience it is found true here, and in all Countries,
especially of hurting Witches, that they are most in number, as appears by
their own confessions, with the stories and relations even from these in our
own Kingdom. As of those of Burton-Old, where there met above fourscore at a
time; And at Tilbrooke bushes in Bedfordshier, near adjacent to Catworth; in
Huntingtonsheir, where there met above twenty at one time, as John Wynick, and
others confessed who suffered at Huntington last May was two years: As also by
the confessions of some others which suffered at Northampton not long before;
So likewise were those which met at Manningtree in Essex, as Elizabeth Clarke,
and Anne Leech confessed, and those which were condemned, there being about
twenty eight, at Chelmsford, in the summer 1645. were (as I remember) all
women. And those at Bury Saint Edmunds, where sixty eight were (as I likewise
remember) condemned, most women, All at one Goal delivery, in the summer 1645.
So I could nominate far more instances in other places, and of about two
hundred executed since the said May, 1645. in the several Counties
aforementioned, the women far exceeded the men in number. And as I have read,
those in Lancasheire, where ninteene assembled, and but two men, and that those
that bewitched the Earl of Rutland were women; and that those of Warboyes were
women, and but one man. Women therefore without question exceed men, especially
of the hurting Witches; but for the other, I have known more men* and have
heard such as have gone to them say, almost generally they be men, and so
likewise find them to be so in Authors, which speak of such, and never knew
any women questioned in that way but men, and of them as hitherto not many; For
as before, men rather uphold them, and say, why should any man be questioned
for doing good; but I am certain the word of God is contrary.

Now, why it should be that women exceed men in this kind, I will not say, that
Satan's setting upon these rather then man is, or like to be, because of his
unhappy onset and prevailing with Eve; or their more credulous nature, and apt
to be misled, for that they be commonly impatient, and being displeased more
malicious, and so more apt to revenge according to their power, and thereby
more fit instruments for the Devil; or that, because they be more ready to be
teachers of Witchcraft to others, and to leave it to Children, servants, or to
some others (but that you shall find to be a great inducement thereto by their
Confessions) or that, because, where they can command they are more fierce in
their rule, and revengefull in setting such on work whom they can command,
wherefore the Devil labors most to make them Witches: for Satan is subtle,
and seeks whom he may devour, and if false teachers.

But as Saint Paul says, VVitchcraft being amongst the fruits of the flesh,
one may fall into this sin as well as into any other (if God prevent it not)
and therefore whether men or women, These sorts following are the aptest, as by
experience plainly appears amongst us now a days.

I pass by Infidels, and Heathen people in former times (from whom these
abominations mentioned in Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11. came into Israel, and savage
Nations now (amongst whom) by Travelers relations, VVitchcraft is most rise)
and will speak only of such sorts as be called Christians, and these be,

First, ignorant people whose eyes are blinded by Satan, 2 Cor. 4. 4. and are
led captive by him, as is said in another place.

This appears in those Witches commonly detected amongst us, silly ignorant
persons many of them. Elizabeth Deekes of Ratlesden, in Suffolk, a silly
ignorant young woman being found with the marks, confessed that she was
guilty, and had two crop eared Impes, as she said, which had sucked two or
three times upon those marks found upon her, which Impes (she said) came like
Mice; the one white, which she called Birds, being the least, the other gray,
which she called Teates, which Impe asked her to deny God, and Christ, and
told her if she would she should never want, but she said she then refused*
Whereupon (she said) her mother asked her to give her soul from God to the
Devil, which (she said) she likewise refused: but as she was going to bed,
either upon a pair of stairs, or ladder, her mother pulled her back in much
danger of her life, and confessed many other things then more at large. But for
her ignorance she was saved at first, when her mother suffered, yet afterward,
notwithstanding this, and her refusing those temptations, she confessed, she
did make a League and Covenant with the Devil, and sealed it with her blood,
and employed those Impes, to the much prejudice of her Neighbors and Townsmen,
as she confessed before the Justice of Peace. Also Ioane Wallis of Keyston, in
Huntingtonsheir, a very ignorant, sottish woman, confessed the Devil came to
her in the likeness of a man, in blackish clothing, but had cloven feet,
which she called Blackman, who used to lie with her, and have the use of her
body, yet she confessed he was more uglier then man, and not as her husband,
which speaks to her like a man, but he as he had been some distance from her
when he was with her, who told her, if she would be ruled by him she should
never want, but should have what she desired, and brought her two others the
third time he came, which (she said) she called Grizzell, and Greedigut, for so
(she said) they called themselves, and that those, after she had consented to
the other his demands, and confirmed the Covenant, she could and did employ as
she then further confessed, both to the Townsemen, and after to the Justice of
Peace, and some of the mischiefs she had done. Ennumerable of these instances
I could nominate in many of their Confessions, as you shall find in some of
those following. But I desire to Answer one objection before I proceed further
(that is) some say, and many will and do say; But you watched them, and kept
them from meat, drink, or rest, and so made them say what you would. A very
unnatural part so to use Christians. I answer so it were. But I never knew any
deprived of meat, drink or rest, but had what was sitting till they were
carried before some Justice of Peace to be examined, and had provision to rest
upon, as bolsters, pillowes, or Cushions, and such like, if they were kept
where no beds were; yet I do not deny but at first, some were kept two, three,
or four days, perchance somewhat baser, but then it has been, either when no
Justice of Peace was near, or when the witnesses against them could not go
sooner, but then they have had beds, and for other provision, I never knew any
kept, of what rank or quality soever, but that they had better provision,
either meat or drink, then at their own houses. For the watching, it is not
to use violence, or extremity to force them to confess, but only the keeping
is, first, to see whether any of their spirits, or familiars come to or near
them; for I have found, that if the time be come, the spirit or Impe so called
should come, it will be either visible or invisible, if visible, then it may
be discerned by those in the Room, if invisible, then by the party. Secondly,
it is for this end also, that if the parties which watch them, be so careful
that none come visible, nor invisible but may be discerned, if they follow
their directions, then the party presently after the time their Familiars
should have come, if they fail, will presently confess, for then they think
they will either come no more, or at least have forsaken them.

Thirdly, it is also to the end, that Godly Divines and others might discourse
with them, and idle persons be kept from them, for if any of their society come
to them to discourse with them, they will never confess; This was observed at
Bury Saint Edmunds in Suffolk, as I remember, when there were eighteen to be
executed; most of them kept in a Barn together, they made a Covenant amongst
themselves, not to confess a word next day at the gallows, when they were to
be hanged, notwithstanding they had formerly confessed, and some of them after
they came into the Goal, and some before the Bench and Country, but most of
them (if not all) before the Justices of the Peace, and so dyed next day
accordingly very desperately, except one penitent woman which refused their
Covenant or agreement: so she made it known, and how they made a singing of a
Psalm after they had done it. But if honest godly people discourse with them,
laying the heinousness of their sins to them, and in what condition they are
in without Repentance, and telling them the subtilties of the Devil, and the
mercies of God, these ways will bring them to Confession without extremity, it
will make them break into Confession hoping for mercy.

Now that the Impes come visible, it is true and apparent, and so watching has
produced true and strange effects, and is a great means (under God) to bring
them to confession, as for example; Elizabeth Clarke of Manningtree in Essex,
being kept three days and three nights, she confessed many things, but how
she was kept I know not well, for I came not at her during that time,
notwithstanding I lived then in Town, and was one which caused her to be
questioned, who did accuse some others which lived in their several Parishes,
the Townsemen desired me to go with her confession taken in writing by
another, to the Justices of the Peace for a warrant for those she accused, the
warrant was made for the searching of such persons as I should nominate,
whereupon, I would first go to her before the Warrant should be served, to
know of her who she did accuse; Mr. Hopkin being with me went together, and
when I had asked her who she had accused, we were agoing away; but she said to
us, if you will stay, I will show you my Impes, for they be ready to come.
Then said Mr. Hopkin* Besse, will they do us no harm? no said she, what? did
you think I am afraid of my children? you shall sit down, so we did, where
she appointed us. Then one of the company which was appointed to be with her
that night, said to her, Besse, I asked you a question of late, but you
answered not, then she said, what is it? Then he replied and said, tell the
truth, if it be the truth, say so. but if not truth, then say so, Has not the
Devil had the use of your body? she said, why should you ask such a question?
he answered, I desire to know the truth and no otherwise, then she fetched a
sigh, and said, it is true, then said Mr. Hopkin, in what manner and likeness
came he to you? she said, like a tall, proper, black haired gentleman, a
properer man then your self, and being asked which she had rather lie withal,
she said the Devil, and so particularized every thing, and how he came in,
and his habit, and how he lay with her, and spoke to her, as she then affirmed
to be truth, and so presently fell a smacking with her lips and called Lought
two or three times, which presently appeared to us eight (For there were six
which were appointed to be with her that night before we went) in the
likeness of a Cat, as she had formerly told us; for she told us before what
shapes they should come in, and so that presently vanished; then she called
again as before, Jermarah, then appeared another, like a red or sandy spotted
dog, with legs not so long as a finger (to our perceivance) but his back as
broad as two dogs, or broader, of that bigness, and vanished, and so after
that called more, as before, by their several names, which came in several
shapes, One like a Greyhound, with legs as long as a Stagge; Another like a
Ferrit; And one like a Rabbit, and so in several shapes they appeared to us,
till there were some seven or eight seen; Some by some of us, and others by
other some of us; then I asked her if they were not all come, for there were
more come then she spoke of, she answered that they came double in several
shapes, but said, one was still to come, which was to tear me in pieces, then
I asked her why, she said, because I would have swome her, and told me that now
she would be even with me, and so told in what manner it should come, black,
and like a Toade, and so afterward did come, as the rest averred that saw it,
and so she confessed their meetings, and the manner how they worshipped the
Devil at their meetings, and said to us, they that be found with these marks
that I am found withal, are without question Witches, yet said, that there
might be some Witches which had not those marks; but affirmed it over and over
again, that all those that had those marks were Witches, and had familiar
spirits which sucked of them, and so confessed what mischief she had done with
her Impes, in a very large manner, and so did next day, after she had slept;
for the Justice gave me order that she should sleep before he examined her,
lest she had not slept before, and so I did accordingly, and yet she then
confessed at large before two Justices of the Peace, and how she would have
been my death; this was the first accused, and her marks and confession, the
beginning of our knowledge: Yet I confess, the marks be difficult to find
from natural marks, as I shall hereafter declare. Rebecca West of Lamford, in
Essex, who was (as she confessed) married to the Devil, and the manner, had an
Impe came to her in the time she was kept, but of her confession more at large
hereafter. Also Elizabeth Finch of Watson in Suffolk, confessed, that about
twenty years before she was found with the marks, the Devil appeared to her
in the likeness of a smoaky colored Dog, which asked her to deny God and
Christ, which she said, upon his promises she did, and let him have blood to
seal, or confirm the Covenant or agreement; and that soon after that, there
came two more, black on the backs and reddish on the bellies, which sucked her
two or three times a week, upon those marks that were found on her, and that
sometimes she fetched blood in other places for them, and gave it to them; she
also had her Impes came visible; For she confessed in the time she was kept,
one which was with her to look to her, saw one of them, and flung it into the
fire, which she affirmed was one of her Impes, and that whilst they were busy
about that, thinking to burn it, she confessed the other came, and threw her
out of the chair she sat in, which hurt her forehead and wrest, which was
done accordingly, and so further confessed. Of these I could bring diverse
instances, but I will proceed. They come likewise invisible; as one Binkes of
Haverill had an Impe sucking of her whilst she was talking with others, and
presently confessed it* Another whilst I was in the room with her, at
Huntington, I perceived by her carriage that she was asucking her Impes,
Spirits, or Familiars so called; I laid it to her charge, but she denied it:
Yet presently after she confessed it was truth, when she was asked by the
Justice of Peace. And as I remember, it was the same woman; but I am sure of
Keyston in Huntingtonshier, and so was she, that to the thinking of two which
were with her, she sat still in her chair, when two more in the yard saw her
go out into the yard, and her going in again; This woman confessed the Devil
sat in her likeness, and she went out, and suckled her Impes in the yard, as
the other two affirmed. So in the same Town, one Clerks wife skipped out at a
hole in a stone wall, above half a foot thick, which was some nine Inches
long, and some four and a half broad, all the one side head and all, and but
little to be seen of her but one leg; and the hole was near a yard and half
from the ground, and yet one pulled her back again, and afterward went away,
no body knew how: yet I say, if those which look to them be careful, it is to
be discerned; this is apparent by that I nominated at Huntington. And so at
Codman in Suffolk, being told how a woman there carried her self, I caused
her to be searched again, and there was alteration of the marks, and the
woman presently confessed it, and made a large confession; and so it has been
common in all our proceedings, and a great cause for keeping them; for the
blood has sometimes been found on the end of the mark, or to be stroked ou't
when they be taken on a sudden, As I could instance the one half of their
confessions; but because it is so apparent, I instance no further. But now to
manifest that good Counsel will do it, and so likewise without keeping; for I
hold they two depend most upon one: Then say I, that upon good exhortations
after the marks found, they may be brought to confession, either by keeping,
though every thing necessary be afforded them, as I never did otherwise, but
now lately keep none, or not above one night till we go thence, and yet have
their confessions. Witness those executed at Elie, a little before Michaelmas
last, who made large confessions. Also one at Chatterish there; One at March
there; And another at Wimblington there, now lately found, still to be tried,
who made very large confessions, especially the first two; Nicholas Hempstead
of Greeting in Suffolk, being found, upon exhortations, and laying the
heinousness of the sin, and Gods Judgments, and Gods mercy, and the like,
notwithstanding he at first railed on me in very approbious terms, yet
presently sent for me, and would have asked me forgiveness, he presently
confessed that he had made* a league and Covenant with the Devil, and how he
had confirmed it with his blood; And the shape of his Impes, and of the Devil
when they covenanted, and how he killed a horse of one of the Constables,
because he pressed him for a soldier, and five of the best horses in Colonel
Rochesters Troop; And diverse other things he had done, making a very large
confession, with a great deal of penitency and sorrow, which he so continued
in (as I since heard) to his very execution without alteration. To this I might
add, Henry Carrs hereafter mentioned; And the boys next, after the objections
answered, and diverse others which you shall here find; but because it falls
out better, when I shall speak how to discover them, I leave here, hoping this
is sufficient for that objection, if not, I will answer more fully, as occasion
shall serve. But then some will say, you swome some of them, especially at the
first, was not that extremity? I answer, that has been used, and I durst not
go about to clear my self of it, because formerly I used it, but it was at
such time of the year as when none took any harm by it, neither did I ever
do it but upon their own request; and were to such as first were found with
the marks; but now lately, there has been no such course taken that I know
of. For I am of opinion, that it is one way of distrusting of Gods providence,
putting confidence that that shall bring such or such an effect, or event;
neither was it ever given in or taken, that I know, as an evidence against any,
nor used by any of us but the first summer, from March, or May 1645. to about
the middle of August next following; when Judge Corbolt that now is, forwarned
it; When Divines gave their opinion of the unlawfulness thereof, it has ever
since been left, and not many before so used: Notwithstanding, it was then the
desire of such persons themselves, thinking thereby to clear themselves,
whereas it fell out otherwise. Yet under favor, Let me speak one thing that I
have found in that way; that it is a true rule in one respect, that the water
enters not into any of them, when it will into a free person, though they
swim both alike; for so they will, if the water be enchanted, but the free
person will presently be choked, when the other lie topling on the water,
striving to get their heads, or themselves under the water, but cannot, neither
can they bring out water in their mouths, though they be foretold of it, nor
spit clear water; for the water enters them not when it will the other Thus
far I have observed, or further: But because it is held unlawful, I should
be sorry to speak any thing, either to give offense to any, or to be a means
to animate any in such courses. For if any did confess, rather then to go
into the water, or to come out of the water, or presently after, except they
had been shifted, and refreshed every way, and known to be in perfect memory,
it has been taken as no evidence; and so has all other forcement been. But
there is one, a very remarkable thing concerning this, that was done at Saint
Neotts, in Huntingtonshire, of a woman that had been searched two or three
times, and not found, for they can hide their marks sometimes, as you shall
hear after herein, yet was still in great suspicion of many of the Townsmen to
be guilty (the brand is difficult to find if she had notice) and the rather,
for that she fled, or went away after she was searched twice, for some are not
found at first, yet be in the end: So at her return some would swim her, and
did, she swum apparently, where they had formerly cast a freeman in, tied after
the same manner, she was not further meddled with then. But as I have heard, and
in part from the man himself, where the act should be done, A Dog was seen in
his yard, which a Mastie Dog would not seize on, but his son stroke at the Dog,
and hatt him two or three blows over the back, up to the shouldersward,
presently a gelt bitch seized on him, and bit him on the neck, and gave him
some shuckes, and then the Dog got away: so it remained, but this woman not
being seen in the street as formerly, was caused to be viewed; and found bitten
on the neck, or bruised on the other parts in a most fearful manner. These are
some similitudes, that there is something in swimming (if lawful) but to
proceed. This one more, that ignorant people are most apt to be Witches, as
before said. Of a Boy in Ratlesdon aforesaid, who was accused, when he was under
nine years of age, when all know he could not be of much capacity, he without
watching, or keeping, voluntarily confessed, that he suckled an Impe, and had
it at command to do mischief, and nominated some, as the killing of some
Chickings, and some other mischiefs he had then done, as he confessed,
together with the reasons he caused his Impe to kill the Chickens, which was,
because the man which owed them had chidden him for spoiling his grass, when,
as he said, they did it, so the next time he saw them there, he did it. This
boy being young, I (suppose the Jury had hopes of his amendment, as I confess
I then had) he was then released, and went to the Town again, where he
continued some time, and was suspected again for further mischief, and so
apprehended again, and put into prison, where he then voluntarily confessed
likewise his renewing of the league and Covenant with the Devil, and the
sealing of it with his blood, after his mother was hanged; for she suffered
for Witchcraft, about the Michaelmas 1645. and then was the first questioned,
and that he had more familiar spirits, or Impes, as they call them, and that
the Devil appeared to him, in the likeness of a black brown Mare, and would
carry him whither he desired, and confessed abundance of mischief he had
done, between the time he was released, and committed again. But after he was
in Bury Goal, not long before the Assizes, the first since these wars, the
Jailer missing a Prisoner in the morning, which he had over night, a notorious
offender, whom he kept double shackled, the Jailer questioned this boy, and
upon some threatening speeches, the boy confessed, that he was gone home on his
Mare over the walls, and showed where, and told him he should find him with
his wife; whereupon, the Jailer sent forthwith to the Prisoners house, being at
least twelve miles, and there found him at his house, as the boy had said,
having shackles on as he went out. Will this with the other give you
satisfaction? but I might add to this, superstitious and Idolatrous persons.
But I pass, intending only to take the heads, agreeing with the confessions
of Witches.

Secondly, malicious people, full of revenge, having hearts swollen with
rancour, upon the least displeasure, with bitter bannings and curses,
threatening revenge* or requitalls; this is manifest by the nature, quality,
words, and deeds of Witches convicted, who have showed themselves to be such,
as ever found so to be, as the said John Wynnick confessed, that when he lived
at Thrapston in Northamptonsheir, he having lost his purse with some seven
shillings in it, as he was in a Barn, where he lived, there in an Inn, as he
was making up of bottles of hay, he was in a passion for his purse and money,
and in such a rage of banning and cursing, that he was saying to himself,
would he knew where he might go to a cunning man for it, for have it he
would, though he went to the Devil for it; (here was a preparedness for the
Devil) for he confessed, the Devil appeared to him immediately, in the
likeness of a Bear, but not above the bigness of a Rabbit, which told him,
if he would fall down and worship him, he would help him to his purse, and
money again, and that he should have it where he stood, next day about the
same time; so he did fall down and worship him; And next day he came again,
to see for his purse and money, and found it accordingly, but confessed, that
before he could tell it, the Devil in the same shape appeared to him again,
and told him, he must fall down and worship him again, and then he fell
down, and said, Oh my Lord, my God, I thank thee, and then he asked him to
deny God, and Christ, and to serve him as Lord, and then he should never want,
which he confessed he consented to, then he demanded blood, and he bade him
take it, so he skipped on his shoulder, and fetched blood with his claw, on the
side of his head, which mark was seen at his Trial; Then he confessed, there
appeared two more, which the first told him he must worship also, and take
them for his Gods, and they should be at his command, and so he said, he did;
then that like a Bear turned like a Ratt, and so those sucked on the three
marks I found on him, after to the time he was taken, at their times appointed,
and were at his command, as he then confessed more at large, before the
Justices of the Peace, and confessed at the Gallows likewise, the last words
he spoke. Also one Moors wife of Sutton, in the Isle of Elie, in the County of
Cambridge, after she had confessed the league and Covenant made, and sealed
with her blood, confessed, that she sent one of her Impes to kill a man, or at
least to hurt to him; for that she had bought a Pigge of him, for two shillings
and two pence, and paid him two shillings, and afterward he coming by her
door, asked her for it, which man, was soon after taken sick, and in his
sickness, cried out of her, saying, he could not depart this life, until he
had spoken with her, so she was sent for, but she refused, whereupon (he lying
in such extremity) she was by some of his friends, at his request, being so
desirous to speak with her in such extremity, forced to go to him, and then
soon after he dyed, according as he formerly said; So this woman confessed
diverse other things, and seemed to be very penitent, and sorry for it; for she
wept at her trial, and confessed her self guilty before the Judge, Bench, and
Country; But what she did after, or at her Execution, I know not. Thomazine
Ratcliffe of Shellie, in Suffolk, confessed, that it was malice that had
brought her to that she was come to, meaning Witchcraft; for she confessed,
that soon after her husbands decease, above twenty years before her
confession, there came one in the likeuesse of a man, into bed to her, which
spoke with a hollow, shrill voice, and told her, he would be a loving husband
to her, if she would consent to him, which she said, she did, and then he told
her, he would revenge her of all her enemies, and that she should never miss
any thing, in which she said, she found him a liar, but said, that Satan often
tempted her to banning, swearing, and cursing, which she confessed she did use
a long time, and that many times* it fell out accordingly, and that she,
falling out with one Martin's wife, who had a child drowned, for that she
called her Witch, saying, she was the cause of the child's drowning, she bad her
go home and look to the rest, lest she lost more, and one died suddenly after.
Also Anne Randall of Lauenham in Suffolk, after she had confessed the
Covenant, for still you must remember, that is first done, before the Devil,
or their Familiars, or Impes, act, or do any thing, confessed that she had two
Impes, which were heavy and soft, but came in the likeness of Cats, or
Kitlins, of a blew color, called Hangman, and Jacob, and that those sucked on
the marks were found upon her body, some thirty years together: sometimes
once a week, sometimes once a fortnight, and that she sent her Impe Hangman
to kill a horse of one William Baldwins of Thorpe, some two miles from
Lauenham, for that she asked him to bring her in some wood, and he bad her pay
for that she had had first; and the Impe returned, and told her he had done, he
had killed two, for they were lanquelled together, so he killed them both,
which horses were killed (but in such a tempest) as was supposed by a Devil in
Thunder, until she confessed it of her self. Also she confessed, that being
at Stephen Humfries in Thorpe aforesaid, and a begging for Alms, he came home
well, and she being at the door, he chid her, or gave her such words as she
liked not of; As she went over the way from the house, her Impe Hangman
appeared to her, and asked her what he should do, and she bad him go and kill
one of his Hogs, which she saw, which she said he did before she was out of
fight, which Hog died accordingly. Likewise she further confessed, that she
being angry with one Mr. Coppinger of Lavenham, she sent her Impe Jacob to
carry away bushes, which he had caused to be laid to fence his fences, above
one load, here some, and there some, all along by the hedge side, as they were
to be hedged out, and in one night they were gone, no man knew what way, until
such time as she confessed her Impe did it. But as I have since heard, they
were known to be in another man's ground, who confessed, they came the same
night, but how, he knew not till then. Also a young man of Denford, in
Northampuonshire, who suffered for Witchery since the said time, at
Northampton, Confessed, that he sent one of his Impes, to one Cocks Cattle of
Denford, because he would not let him keep them, and the Cattle ran so
violently away foming, that the owner had much ado to catch them with a horse,
and more to get them home into his yard again; and so many other things he
confessed, as I could particularly instance. And so for this, I hope it is
sufficient, to give all satisfaction, for all confessions, or most of them at
least, tend to prove this in some part. Those that are given to over much
curiosity, to seek after vain Knowledge, in pride of heart to go beyond
others, to understand secret and hidden things, to know things to come. Such
are those, as not bounding themselves within the limits of reason, nor of Gods
revealed will, fall foul unawares upon the Devil, and are in great danger to
be intrapped by him, and made his slaves by his inticements. Thus was Parson
Lowis taken, who had been a Minister, (as I have heard) in one Parish above
forty years, in Suffolk, before he was condemned, but had been indicted for a
common imbarriter, and for Witchcraft, above thirty years before, and the
grand Jury (as I have heard) found the bill for a common imbarriter, who now,
after he was found with the marks, in his confession, he confessed, that in
pride of heart, to be equal, or rather above God, the Devil took advantage
of him, and he covenanted with the Devil, and sealed it with his blood, and
had three Familiars or spirits, which sucked on the marks found upon his body,
and did much harm, both by Sea and Land, especially by Sea; for he confessed,
that he being at Langarfort in Suffolk, where he preached, as he walked upon
the wall, or works there, he saw a great sail of Ships pass by, and that as
they were sailing by, one of his three Impes, namely his yellow one, forthwith
appeared to him, and asked him what he should do, and he bade it go and
sink such a Ship, and showed his Impe a new Ship, amongst the middle of the
rest (as I remember) one that belonged to Ipswich, so he confessed the Impe
went forthwith away, and he stood still, and viewed the Ships on the Sea as
they were a sailing, and perceived that Ship immediately, to be in more trouble
and danger then the rest; for he said, the water was more boystrous near that
then the rest, tumbling up and down with waves, as if water had been boiled in
a pot, and soon after (he said) in a short time* it sanke directly down into
the Sea, as he stood and viewed it, when all the rest sailed away in safety,
there he confessed, he made fourteen widows in one quarter of an hour. Then
Mr. Hopkin, as he told me (for he took his Confession) asked him, if it did
not grieve him to see so many men cast away, in a short time, and that he
should be the cause of so many poor widows on a sudden; but he swore by
his maker, no, he was joyful to see what power his Impes had, and so likewise
confessed many other mischiefs, and had a charm to keep him out of Goal, and
hanging, as he paraphrased it himself, but therein the Devil deceived him;
for he was hanged, that Michaelmas time 1645. at Bury Saint Edmunds, but he
made a very far larger confession, which I have heard has been printed; but
if it were so, it was neither of Mr. Hopkins doing, nor mine own; for we never
printed any thing until now. I do this (he being dead) but make no use of any
confessions taken by him, but only this, for that it falls out so fit for
this purpose: Yet I have heard, that other confessions have been printed, and
some other things besides, as if it had been of ours, or one of our doings, or
at least, by one of our consents; when as I know, he never had any hand in any,
and for my part I utterly renounce all former. Also I may add to this, one
Henry Carre of Ratlesden, in Suffolk, who I have heard was a Scholar fit for
Cambridge, (if not a Cambridge Scholar) and was well educated; yet fell into
this grievous sin, and confessed, that he had two Impes, which sucked on
those marks I found upon him, two years together, and came in the likeness
of Mice, which he felt often, and said, they were hairy and heavy, and so
seeming to bewail his condition, said, that he had forsaken God, and God him,
and therefore would confess no more, he said, until he came on the Gallows
to be hanged, for he had confessed enough for that, and then he would confess
all, and make all other known he knew of, but in the mean time, he would
confess no more, nor did; yet he was much importuned to it, but that was
always his answer, and was arraigned at the Bar, three or four times, and
yet by reason of an Allarum at Cambridge, the Goal delivery at Bury Saint
Edmunds was adjourned, for about three weeks, and he *died in the Goal in
that time: So it was conceived to be pride of heart, which was the first
original cause, by reason of his knowledge; yet I confess, he fell into
poverty before his death, but as for that, I think it is seldom or never
known, that any get estates, or thrive, that thus give themselves over to
Satan, but rather consume their estates, if they have any: yet the word of God
says, The wicked man thriveth as well as the godly in this world: But for
Witches, I never knew any. To these likewise might be added, those observers of
times, Deuteronomy. 18. And such as profess to cure diseases, by such means as have
no reason, or work of nature to do the Cure, nor have by any ordinance of
God, from his word, any such operation to heal the infirmity. And therefore
such remedies must be Diabolical, and the practisers either Witches already,
or by their implicit faith, the next door to Witchchraft. Such be they that
use Spells, Charms, and such like; and what be Juglers and legerdemain
Companions? For that they sport with such resemblances, and utter words, as the
invocating of a Spirit, the reality whereof, is called an abomination before
God, and as Saint Paul speaks, Children of disobedience. What be the Fortune
tellers, and such like? but apt to be Satan's slaves in Witchery, as they be his
otherwise in impiety; For through curiosity of knowledge, if reason and, Art
fail, will it not move men to seek help of a Spirit, who is ready at hand to
attend, to draw them into the pit of Magic, and Sorcery, and Witchchraft? as
one Mr. Cooper speaks of, in his book, called, The Mystery of Witchcraft,
Whom himself was delivered from, by Gods preventing grace; but because as yet,
these have not been so commonly found out now adays, I forbear further,
though I might instance diverse examples more. Those who with greediness gape
after worldly wealth, or fear poverty. As Meribell Bedford of Ratlesden
aforesaid confessed, that above six years before she was found with the
marks, which Witches usually have, There came a black thing to her, and called
Meribell, which asked her to deny God, and Christ, and told her, if she would,
she should never want, but should be avenged of all her enemies, which she
consented to: then she said, he had blood of one of her little fingers, to
seal the Covenant, which being done, she said, four more came, One like a
Dow, called Tib; One like a Miller called Tom; One like a Spider, or a Spinner
called Ioane; and the other like a Waspe called Nann; These she confessed were
at her command, to perform the Covenant, and did suck upon those marks found
upon her body, two or three times a week, during the said six years, and did
much harm, as she freely confessed with much penitency. To this I may add,
one Elizabeth Hubbard, widow, of Stow Market in Suffolk, who confessed, that
above thirty years, she had three things came to her in the likeness of
Children, which asked her whispering to deny God, Christ, and all his works,
and to cleave to them, and she should want nothing; These she said, as they
named themselves, were called, Thomas, Richard, and Hobb, and that they
scratched her back, and fetched blood to seal the Covenant, and that they use
to suck on those marks which were found upon her, two or three times a week,
about break of the day, and that she did say, I pray to God to do to him as
he dealt by me (meaning a man of the same Town) and he languished and died,
and many other things she said she did, but was ashamed to tell them. Alice the
wife of Edmund Wright of Hitcham, in Suffolk, confessed that she had four
Impes above threescore years; two like little Boys; one like a Lamb, and the
fourth like a gray Buzzard, and that the biggest boy spoke to her with a great
whorce voice, as if he had been grieved, and asked her to go into the field,
and she should have money, and should never miss or want any thing, and asked
her to deny God, and Christ, and to curse God two or three times, and that she
took her elder brother with her, and went into the field, but when they came
to the place where they appointed her to go, they found none, and that she
uses often to be in pain and trouble, after they had nipped or sucked her,
where her marks were found, sometimes once a week, sometimes once a fortnight,
and that she felt on them, and that they were soft, and that they came
sometimes severally, sometimes altogether, and that they often asked her to go
and do mischief, which she confessed, to some Cattle of her Neighbors, and
said, that she was much troubled and tormented, and in extreme pain, which
they have put her to for denying their demands. Furthermore, Ioane Ruce ulver
of Powstead in Suffolk, confessed, that in the field called Horsecrost or
Hog-Marsh, there appeared in a bush things like Chickens, about five or six,
and that she catched three of them and the rest ran away, and that she
carried three home, which soon after turned to the likeness of Mice, whose
names she called Touch, Pluck, and Take, which spoke to her with a great hollow
voice, and asked her to deny God, and Christ, and told her, if she would, she
should never want meat, drink, or clothes, or money, but she said she told
them, that if she denied God and Christ, she should lose her soul, but she
said, they told her again, they were more able to save her soul then God, and
that they would do more for her then she thought for, if she would consent to
them, which then she confessed she did, and then they demanded blood, and she
nipped her forefinger, and they pricked her finger with a pin, and there
dropped six drops of blood which they catched, and so had it again after the
same manner thrice, and that she did agree to give them her soul; Then I asked
her whether they brought her any money or no, and she said, sometimes four
shillings at a time, and sometimes six shillings at a time, but that is but
seldom, for I never knew any that had any money before, except of Clerks wife
of Manningtree, who confessed the same, and showed some which she said her Impe
brought her, which was perfect money: But this Ruce, further confessed the
sucking of her marks, and how she sent her Impe Touch to kill a Bullock, and
that he came back again, and told her he had stuck it on the right side, and
it died accordingly, and so many other things, and said she was stopped and
could not confess when she would, but after had ease. Here you may observe,
that if he cannot prevail for want, then he promises to free them of hell
torments, and so delude them that way. As he did Ellen the wife of Nicholas
Greenliefe of Barton, in Suffolk, who confessed that three things came to her;
one like a Rat, cold and ragged as she felt on him; The next like a Mole, soft
and cold; The third like a Mouse; and that the Mole spoke to her with a great
hollow voice, and asked her to give her soul and body to him, for he could
save her, and bad her not be afraid of him, for he could perform what he
promised, whereupon she consented, then he told her she should never want, but
be avenged of all her enemies, and so should continue her life time, if she did
not bewray him, for if she did he would have the upper hand of her, and
confessed that her wishes came to pass; as for example: she wished one goodman
Garneham might be lame, and so he was, and that Master Lockweed might have
Lice, because he formerly accused her for sending, or causing him to have some
when* she did it not, and so he had, and that her Impes used to suck her two or
three times a week, for nineteen years together; And that the Mole said she
should be questioned in some short time, but advised her to stand out and not
to confess, for if she did he would cause her to drown her self, or put her
self to death, and then he should have her soul, and after when she was kept,
before she went to the Justices of Peace, her Impe in the shape of a Mole came
to her, when those which were with her saw it not, and tore her as she
confessed, as if he would have torn her in pieces, because she had confessed.
This woman also confessed, that when she prayed she prayed to the Devil and
not to God, and that she had her Impes from her mother in Law* who she said
spoiled her; And further confessed that the Devil had the use of her body, and
used to come to bed to her, but was soft, cold, and heavier, so heavy as she
could not speak, And that her Impe like a Rat went upon her, wishing to lame
Ralph Roggards Horse or Mare, because he said he would go for the Searchers,
and so it was. Besides the former marks know this, that it is more easier to
find them on the breast then in any other place, for that the breast is all
shrunk up, and the Teate thereof extended longer then any woman's that gives
suck, be it on man or woman, with a Circkle round about it as if it were
sucked, and insensible as aforesaid, and if on a woman that gives suck, that
breast is dry, for where the Impes suck there will come no milk, but the teate
will stick out longer there then the other, and is nothing but skin, and will
be much extended as aforesaid, and easily to be discerned by feeling of it. I
should think this should give all satisfaction; that gain, Revenge, fear of
want, or poverty, or fearfulness of hell torments, or ill parents, or
company, yea and lust also, or any one may be a means to draw one to
Witchchraft.

As for ill company, bad and wicked parents, and such as are overmuch given to
lust, I will put them together, and instance some few more examples; As one
Bush of Barton aforesaid widow, confessed that about three weeks after her
husbands decease, being above fiteene years before she was questioned, the
Devil appeared to her in the shape of a young black man, standing by her bed
side, which spoke to her with a hollow voice, and came into bed to her, and had
the use of her body, and asked her to deny God and Christ, and serve him, and
then she should never want, but should be avenged of all her enemies, which she
consented to, then she said he kissed her and asked her for blood, which he
drew out of her mouth, and it dropped on a paper, and that he used to have the
use of her body two or three times a week, and then used to kiss her, and at
no other time but as beforesaid, but she said he was colder then man, and
heavier, and could not perform nature as man, and that soon after she had
consented to the Covenant and given her blood, there came two things more like
Mice, which used to suck her about twice a week during that time, and confessed
how she sent an Impe to torment a Maiden, who she thought was against her
having relief at her Masters, which was done, but afterward this Maiden went
to her and scratched her till she got blood of her, and then she confessed she
had no further power over her (but this is not always true, nor to be
observed, though it took effect there) But she confessed the killing of three
and twenty Turkies at one time, and Cowes, and how her Impes returned and told
her it was done, and other things then at large. One more which I should think
should be a warning to others, to have a care to bring their Children up in the
nurture and fear of God. Of one Anne Cricke of Hitcham aforesaid widow, that
she had three Impes about seven years together; The one in the likeness of a
Sparrow called Harrie; the other two in the likeness* of reddish dunne Mice,
called Jack and Will, and they sucked her twice a week severally, all in one
night, and the Devil fetched blood on her left Arm to seal the Covenant,
which was to deny God and Christ, and to serve him, which she said she
promised faintly, but confessed the promise was first made by her, before the
Devil had her blood; Then I asked her if she did grieve for it after she had
done it, she answered, when it was done it was too late to repent; then I asked
her why she did it, she said she was left weak, and the Devil got the upper
hand of her for want of faith, through want and otherwise, she also confessed
the Devil had the use of her body, but she said she could not tell whether he
performed nature or not, and said she could not confess before much company,
but said the Devil spoke in a hollow voice, and confessed the employment of
her Impes, as the sending of her Impe Harry to John Leverishes of the same
Town, to kill him a Hog, because she was denied Eggs and such like things,
and they burnt his ears, and she could not keep from going; it being asked
her why she went, she said they must needs go the Devil drives, and so many
such like things. Also Susan Scot of Lauenham aforesaid, complained of one
Sweeting coming to her with one Golding, who confessed the Devil used to have
the use of her body, and spoke to her with a great easy voice, and that she
had two Impes like Cats and Dogs, which sucked on those marks found upon her,
and how she was the Death of Thomazine, the daughter of one Mr. Coppinger
there, and diverse other things. Also one Richmond, a woman which lived at
Brampford, confessed the Devil appeared to her in the likeness of a man,
called Daniel the Prophet, who bad her not be afraid of him, for he was so, and
took her by the hand, and bad her trust in him and he would avenge her of all
her enemies, and* he should miss nothing, for he would curse her enemies, and
that she after falling out with her neighbor, cursed her and bad the Devil
take her, and she dyed after she had lain some eight weeks, as she said, by
her means, because the Devil promised her revenge; she confessed her Covenant
was to deny God, Christ and his Ministers, and to serve him, she said the
Devil, for she said so he was that she called Daniel the Prophet, none shall
need question it; and she confessed she had three more, One like a rugg red
brinded Dog with cloven feet, One like a Hog called Jack, and another like a
Dog called James, and confessed the Devil defired her to use cursing, and
whatsoever she desired should come to her, and so confessed many things she
did. Also Anne Goodfellow of Woodford, in Northamptonshire widow, confessed
that soon after her Aunts decease, about three years before she was
questioned, the Devil in the shape of a white Cat appeared to her, and spoke
to her with a low voice, and bad her not be afraid of it, for he was her Aunts
spirit, and asked her to deny God, Christ and her Baptism, which she said she
did, for he promised her that she should be saved, and would do for her what
she desired, and then asked her for blood to seal the Covenant, and she
further confessed that he bit her on the second finger, and got blood into his
mouth, but what he did with all she knew not, but said amongst other things
that she found him a liar, for she often wanted after. Also Elizabeth Gurrey of
Risden, in Bedfordshire Widow, confessed that the Devil had the use of her
body, and lay heavy upon her, and that through her wilfulness, and poverty,
with desire of revenge, she denied God, and Christ, and sealed it with her
blood, about five or seven years before she was found with the marks, and
confessed what she had done to one William Dickens, and another there, and the
manner how, but afterward I heard she made a very large confession. Anne Hammer
near Needham in Suffolk, of Creeting there (as I remember) confessed that
soon after her mothers decease, which was above twenty years before she was
questioned, there came two Impes to her, which she called Tom, Robbin, and Tom
like a Mole, and Robbin like a Dorr, which she sent to kill Mr. Camp a child,
which she said did (very like to be true,) for Master Camp averred that a Mole
to their thinking was seen in the house, going toward the room where the
child lay, and that they had much ado to keep it out, nor could tell what
became of it in the end, and that they used to suck her twice a fortnight on
those marks found upon her, during that time, and that the Devil in the
likeness of a Calfe asked her to deny God* and Christ, and to serve him as
Lord, and told her that if she would he would free her of hell torments, and
that she should never want any thing, but be saved, and she consented, then he
told her he would avenge her of her enemies, but she said the Devil never
performed any thing but revenge, and that the Devil in the likeness of a
black man used to come in at the key hole, and to bed to her, and have the usy
of her body, but was heavier and colder, and lay all over her as man, and used
not to speak but only to ask to lie with her, and as she thought performed
nature: But if I should go to pen all of these sorts, then I should have no
end, or at least too big a volume, and therefore but this one more; that Anne
Boreham of Sudbury, in the County of Suffolk widow, confessed that as she
awoke out of a dream she saw uglie men (as she thought) a fighting, and asked
them why they fought, who answered that they would fight for all her, and then
one vanished away, and then came to her into bed and had the use of her body,
but said he was heavier and colder then man, and lay only on part of her, and
that man asked her to deny God and Christ, and to serve him, but she said she
told him she was a poor widow, and then he said if she would serve him she
should never want, but have her desire, and then she consented, for he promised
her to free her of hell torments, yet she said he told her she must go to
hell, but should not be tormented (a fearful and subtle delusion) for I have
been with some who have confessed the same, and that he promised them that they
should only walk too and fro the earth as their Impes did, and never suffer
or feel torments. Now some may say, if all these sorts be Witches, then most
part of the world be so. I antwer no; for honest persons may be given to
these, and yet free from Witchcraft; But this is only to show when any are
given to be extreme in any of these, then is the Devil busy to work upon
them, for he does not upon all that be given to these ways, but upon such as
he finds some kind of preparedness in, as for example, Was there not a
preparedness in Boneham, and Mr. Parson Lowis, and so if you do but truly
observe little or more in all their confessions, as take but this last when she
saw that sight of fighting (as she thought) would not a good Christian have had
her thoughts upon God, rather then to have suffered one to come to bed to her,
which she knew could be no less but the Devil, and no man, for then he could
not have come into the room, for Satan appears not to them in any shape
until he find some preparedness, and then as you have heard by these
confessions past he appears in several shapes, and then makes the league,
and confirms it with blood, and then sends them Familiars more or less, and
so proceeds by degrees: So you may find as I said before, extreme poverty,
passionate sorrow accompanied with solitariness, too much enraged with anger
and desire of revenge, those of such parents, and all that I have formerly
reckoned; you see by their confessions, that the extreme makes a
preparedness, and I have heard of some scholars for want of Learning, to be
learned have grown to it, and some through overmuch, as is instanced before.
Likewise John Scarf of Ratlesden aforesaid, confessed that about three years
before he was accused to be searched, there came a thing into his house of a
gray color, of the bigness of a great Rat, of about a quarter of an ell long,
which he took up and put into a box, and kept it some certain time there, and
then took it out, and laid it down on his belly, and put it to the place
where the marks were found, where he said it sucked half an hour; (Did he
prepare himself, or was he desirous to be one?) I conceive he did desire to be
one, for he was a heathenish man, and so the agreement past; but to show his
willingness to put it to the place, for in his confession more at large, he
confessed that within a fortnight after there came two more, of a whitish dunne
color, and less then the other, which he called Tom, and Will; but the first
he called Harrie, and so proceeded. Now I will proceed to prove that Witches
may be found out.

First, from God in the giving of his Law against Witches. Exodus 21. 18. Thou
shall not suffer a Witch to live, which implies a Discovery of them, else it
could never be put in execution, and so should be a Law to no purpose.

Secondly from the History, First Divine. For it is said Saul found out
Witches, and executed the Law upon them, or put them to death, and so good King
Josiah, 2 King. 3. 14.

Secondly, we have Chronicles, and many relations made of the evident discourse
of Witches.

Thirdly, the many Trials in our own Country at many Assizes: So it is clear
that Witches may be discovered, though it cannot be denied but that there is
some difficulty therein, because the secrecy of the grounds of Witchcraft is
so close and hidden, as being one of the greatest works of darkness committed
this day under the Sun: for that natural causes may arise very strong, and
many may cunningly counterset outward appearances, and Witnesses may feign
their accusations out of malice, being transported with rage and
uncharitableness, and desire of revenge, because of the strange imagination
they have through many seeming probabilities; Some for words, or deeds, taken
in the worst sense; Some upon some sudden sight of some creature, and so
likewise upon burning any thing of the party suspected to be bewitched, if any
shall come (though peradventure accidentally) and so sometimes something else,
as thatch over the door or such like of the parties suspected to be a Witch,
and so I could reckon diverse instances of several ways, which many times have
produced strange and sometimes true effects, which means have partly been the
cause of the questioning of many, who have been found no less then Witches,
and have suffered since the aforementioned time: but I forbear to speak any
further of those ways, for I conceive them to be unlawful altogether, and not
to be used, for it cannot be conceived any less then a distrust in Gods
providence, in putting confidence that such means will make the Witch known,
and effect their desires: Yet to proceed as I have said, I cannot deny but
those may be just grounds of suspicion, and cause of questioning them, but not
always certain, besides the unlawfulness held by Divines. But these cannot
be denied to be just grounds as aforesaid. As when one shall be given to
cursing and banning, with imprecations upon slight occasion, and withal use
threatenings to be revenged, and thereupon evil to happen. As Cherrie of
Thrapston, in Northamptonshire, a very aged man, who upon a small occasion, of
falling out with one of his Neighbors in the field, where they kept Cattle,
one of the two (I do not now well remember which) scared some Cattle off the
ground, where the Cattle the other kept was to go, with a Dog; the said
Cherrie and the other fell at odds and worded, whereupon Cherrie wished that
his tongue might rot out of his head, the man was soon after strangely taken,
and his tongue did come out of his mouth, hanging only by the roots thereof
within his mouth, but could not be kept all in his mouth, and so continued to
his death, and died in a miserable condition. This Cherrie confessed himself,
and that he was his death, only upon that occasion. After which Confession,
that it came to be known, many of the townsmen of Thrapstone aforesaid averred
that he died with his tongue out, and that in a manner it rotted. A fearful
thing to be thought of, what a miserable condition the poor man died in.

Cherrie likewise confessed the death of two more, which by his confession, and
those that knew their deaths, died in a strange and miserable condition,
through his wicked cursing (as he confessed;) and so confessed many other
notorious facts he had done. And being asked whether he did not do Sir John
Washington, a Knight which lived in the same town, any harm in his cattle or
otherwise, for that he had suffered strange losses, he confessed he did, and
particularized the death of much cattle; saying, when he had reckoned up as
many as he could well remember, That he had been the death of so many of his,
that he could not reckon them all.

Then it was demanded of him, Why he would offer it to Sir John, who had been
so loving to him in affording him relief constantly. He answered; The more he
gave him, the more power he had over him to do him mischief: for he said his
Imps must be employed, else they would not let him be quiet, but torment him.

This Cherrie also confessed diverse other things and harms he had done, and the
sealing of the Covenant with the devil with his blood, to deny God and Christ,
and to serve him the devil for revenge, with promise of freedom from
hell torments: and that his Imps, the last time they sucked him, not long
before he was searched, told him they would not suck him any more but that
time, because he was an old man, and had but little blood.

This Cherrie confessed presently after he was searched, who died at
Northampton in the Goal there, the same day he should have beed tried, much
about the time the Grand Jury had found the Bill of Indictment against him,
Billa vera, as it was reported, miserably. A just judgment of God: for it was
reported, that a night or two before, his coat was all rent right down on the
back, and his mouth stopped full: and when it was pulled out, he confessed that
he had been at a bridge going into Thrapston town, and had a cord found about
his neck.

To this I might add the aforenamed Thomazin Ratcliff, who upon the falling
out with another woman about the death of a child, bade her go home and look
to the rest, lest she lost more. And one died suddenly after, as before is
expressed.

Of these kinds I could nominate diverse more, as you may observe in many of
their Confessions, and might add implicit confessions: As, when a question is
asked the suspected party, If he or she were not the cause of such or such a
thing; answer is made, He or she might have let me alone, or not done so and
so; or such like. As for example, you may observe in most of their Confessions,
they did it because they had not* such things as they desired, or used to have:
as Anne Leech of Hawford in Essex confessed in her Confession, besides the
death of two or three, the laming of a child of one Turners. It being asked
her why she did it, she answered, Her mother might have paid her for work she
had done. Likewise one Anne Parker, being asked why she did one Pryer mischief;
she answered, He might have given her money upon a Thanksgiving-day, as well as
he gave to others; but would not give her any, because she was not at Church:
whereupon she sent her spirit to him, who did accordingly. And so confessed how
the devil in the likeness of a dun Dog, had three drops of blood under her
tongue, to seal the Covenant; and had a piece of paper in his hand, and wrote
her name thereon with her consent, and so promised her money, and that she
should never want, but should be avenged of her enemies, according as is
expressed in others.

Hereto I might add such as said they have such things as Familiars suck on
them, but cannot help it. Alexander Sussums of Melford in Suffolk, confessed
that he had things which did draw those marks I found upon him* but said he
could not help it, for that all his kindred were naught. Then I asked him how it
was possible they could suck without his consent. He said he did consent to
that. Then I asked him again why he should do it, when as God was so merciful
toward him, as I then told him of, being a man whom I had been formerly
acquainted withal, as having lived in Town. He answered again, He could not
help it, for that all his generation was naught; and so told me his mother and
aunt were hanged, his grandmother burnt for Witchcraft, and so others of them
questioned and hanged. This man is yet living, notwithstanding he confessed the
sucking of such things above sixteen years together, but was suspected for
doing of mischief, yet never questioned, but as he came into a house
accidentally where I was, and so proffered himself to be searched, and presently
confessed these particulars, and so by that means brought to trial, but freed,
and living, as aforesaid.

Likewise I may add, When the party suspected makes enquiry after the party
taken sick, or desires to visit the party, or the party the suspected: For many
have confessed that after they have done a thing, they are sorry for it, but
cannot help it; as King of Acton in Suffolk confessed, to a woman whom he had
bewitched, in the time she was in her extremity, long before he was questioned:
but this woman desired him to undo what he had done; and he told her he could
not undo what he had done, but told her he was sorry for it, and told her of
another that could, as he said, and as she affirmed, that was one, as we
untruly call them, White or good Witches, and one that was then suspected, who
accordingly did it.

To confirm this, I can tell you of a very remarkable example much tending to
this particular, of one at Heddenham in the Isle of Ely in the County of
Cambridge, where a child suspected to be bewitched, was carried to the Justice
of Peace his house, where the party suspected was to be carried to be examined.
This child being very sick, was set in a chair, and held in it; but as soon as
the party who was suspected came in, on a sudden it arose of it self, and got
hold of her face to scratch her, as its strength would afford, she not
stirring. Here you may observe the former Confessions, where the Witch
confessed, that after she was scratched, she had no further power over that
party; for this woman stood still: and so you may perceive that many of them,
after they have done mischiefs, are sorry for it, and cannot help it: (This it
is to renounce God and Christ) for this woman presently confessed, that it was
she that had hurt the child, through her diabolical practice, and told him
what Imp she had sent to hurt the child, and the occasion why she did it; and
how she had sent one of her Imps a little before she was accused, (for she had
been searched, and found with the marks) to destroy or spoil a whole field of
corn in that Parish; and so made a very large Confession, with the suckling of
her Imps upon those marks found upon her, and the Covenant sealed with her
blood, (as aforesaid in other Confessions) besides other mischiefs which she
did. May not Spell-setters and Charmers be also added? for I cannot conceive
any less, when they shall say that by words they can charm, set Spells, and
help or cure mad Dogs, or any thing bitten by them, and suchlike; though it be
by their implicit league, (as some of them do) yet it is a distrust of Gods
providence, putting their confidence in their words, rather then in the living
God, who says it is an abomination to him. And I have heard some of these, not
long since, boast of their doings therein, saying they had it from their
parents, and were not their parents good Christians? and they do but use the
words for good ends. So likewise of those born of ill parents, if their
carriage be not otherwise; as I have instanced enough of those, else I could
instance more, as the aforenamed Rebecca West, who was drawn to it by her
mother, (as she confessed) after a strange manner, as she said: for her mother
asked her to go to Manningtree with her, which was about a mile, and bade her
work hard that she might go: and as they went, she told her she must not say
any thing whatsoever she saw, but consent to them, and do as they did, and then
she should be a happy woman; or suchlike inticements. But when she came
there, at the house where her mother went, there were her confederates met;
then, before she could be entertained, her mother was asked whether her
daughter was acquainted with the matter in hand; who answered She was. Then she
was entertained; and as she confessed, the devil appeared, and first kissed the
woman of the house, and so one after another, and at last her self; and so she
was asked then if she were willing to be entered into their society; who said,
She was. Then appeared Familiars, which she confessed, also the sucking of her
body on the marks, and the sealing of the Covenant with her blood. This young
woman confessed the naming of their Imps, and the manner, which I am ashamed to
express; and the initiation of a Witch, and every particular thing at large;
especially, she confessed how the devil took her by the hand, and the manner
and words were used at her Marriage, when she was married to the devil (as she
confessed:) a fearful thing to declare. But one thing observe, That the devil
imitates God in all things as he can, much after the book of Common Prayer,
then in his outward Worship. She likewise confessed that her mother prayed
constantly, (and, as the world thought, very seriously) but she said it was to
the devil, using these words, Oh my God, my God, meaning him, and not the LORD.
This I put in the rather, because you may take notice, where such meetings be,
there are just grounds of suspicion: for they cannot always do their mischiefs
according to their desires, without their meetings, and the help one of another.

I might add the apparition of the party suspected to the party sick, and
could nominate some instances thereof, as in Northamptonshire, and elsewhere:
but because apparitions may proceed from the fantasy of such as the party use
to fear, or at least suspect, I forbear, because I would not that any should be
accused, but where there are just grounds of suspicion. But those called
Wisemen, or Wise-women, called your White Witches, which will show the other in
glasses, or undo what the other have done, (if proved) is it not sufficient?

But I hope there it none so ignorant or blind, as to think or believe it is
lawful for any to go or send to such, much less to put any confidence or trust
in them, who require faith to believe they can cure, before they will undertake
it; seeing by the Law of God they ought to die, as well as the other. And the
holy Scripture utterly forbids any going to them, Levit. 2. 6. where it is
said, that he will set his face against such as shall seek after those that
have familiar spirits, and will cut them off from amongst his people; much more
then such as should be guilty themselves.

Then some will say, How shall they be known one from another, or how shall
they be found out, if these difficulties be? For it cannot be denied but that
many of them have made great shows of Religion.

I answer, It is truth: as the devil can transform himself into an Angel of
light, so have many of these Witches made outward shows, as if they had been
Saints on earth, and so were taken by some; as one of Catworth in
Huntingtonshire, who made as large a Confession, in a manner, as ever any did,
and confessed at the gallows before her death, in my hearing. Likewise one
Lendall of Cambridge, who suffered also, carried her self as if she had been no
less: and so did the mother of the said Rehecca West, and many others, which
by their carriage seemed to be very religious people, and would constantly
repair to all Sermons near them: yet notwithstanding all their shows of
religion, there appeared some of these probabilities, whereby they were
suspected, and so searched, and so by that means discovered and made known. For
if you do but observe these and suchlike other reasons as may be thereby
gathered, together with their Confessions, you shall find that they prepare
themselves in some kind or other, and that by their outward carriage, either
by ill company keeping, maliciousness, revengeful persons, or such as be born
of such parents, or go under a general suspicion of Witchcraft, or one way or
other as aforesaid, there will appear just grounds of suspicion, either by
words or deeds, whereby they may be brought to be questioned, whereby it may
appear there is a league made with the devil: for notwithstanding all former
reasons, to convict or prove one guilty of Witchcraft, is to prove a League
made with the devil: in this only act, stands the very reality of a Witch;
without which, (notwithstanding great shows of probabilities) I know not, nor
cannot conceive how any can be properly said to be Witches: For the devil
(through Gods permission) may hurt men's bodies, and kill their cattle; and ill
haps may fall out upon his or her cursing, and but grounds to make enquiry and
search, which must be for this League; which though never so secretly made, yet
it is to be discerned, seeing it is that which makes a Witch, and not to some
of their own society: For besides the former reasons, it is an heathenish
practice to seek to such, Isa. 19. 3. and 65. 4. 2 King. 17. 17. Now we should
not be like the abominable heathen in any evil, much less in these
abominations. And they which seek to them, are commonly wicked and evil people,
haunted themselves by an evil spirit, who suggesteth this course into them, as
he did into Saul, 1 Samuel 28. Yea, such as esteem of these, and think they work
in Gods Name, and by his power, are bewitched in so thinking, Acts 8. 9, 11.
For it is found true by daily experience amongst our selves, that those which
most use them, most need them, as I might instance; but only I desire to prove
the League, which is to be proved: for they that make this League, if express
as before, have a familiar or spirit, more or less: For as soon as the League
is made, the Spirit or Familiar, one or more, is familiar, as was before
sufficiently proved by Saul and Josiah in the forementioned places, when
Witches were known to have Familiars, besides the Confessions of Witches lately
executed herein expressed, and so they have now adays; by which, after their
League made, they work their mischief, as is likewise proved by their
Confessions; as the said Elizabeth Clark confessed, who averred that all were
Witches who had such marks as she was found withal, and had familiar spirits
more or less; and that there were some which had none; which I have found
true; for they have only the brand, or devils mark, as I may so call it: but
for the other, you may observe it as a genetal rule in all their Confessions;
as John Bysack, alias Gleede, of Waldingfield magna in the County of Suffolk,
confessed that the devil came in at his window in the shape of a rugged
sandy-coloured dog, which asked him to deny God, Christ, and his Baptism, which
he spoke with a great hollow voice; and he consented. Then he said Satan asked
him for blood to seal and confirm the covenant or agreement; and he bade him
take it; and that Satan with his consent had, in the shape of such a colored
dog, through his leather doublet, with his claw. Then I asked him where away
Satan had it: and he said, From his heart; and that Satan promised to free him
of helltorments, and that he would send him other things which he must let suck
his blood, and they should avenge him of all his enemies. All which he said he
consented to, and was willing withal; and then soon after those came, which he
called his Imps, and sucked on those marks or teats which I found on his body,
near twenty years together, sometimes once a week, sometimes once a fortnight,
which he confessed came in the likeness of Snails, only they differed one
from another in color and bigness. Then I asked him how they could suck on
that part of his body I found the marks on: and he said he used to lie down on
his right side to let them suck, and was willing withal: for he confessed he
oftentimes arose out of his bed, and made a fire, and lay down by it to let
them suck his blood; which rising out of his bed, and fire making, his wife
averred to be truth; yet she said she never knew or thought him to be such a
manner of person; for she said he used to tell her he was sick, and used to be
troubled with a disease which he could not help himself better for to ease
himself of his pain he used to be in, then by that means, and could not endure
his bed, his pain was so troublesome. But to clear all suspicion which after
might fall on her thereby, she was searched, and found clear, and no less
thought to be by her neighbors before and since, as I have heard. He likewise
confessed his Imps names were Sydrake, Ieffry, Peter, Ayleward, Sacar, and
Pyman; for he had six by his confession, and no less by the number of his
marks. The first was to kill all manner of fowls, which was the first he
confessed he employed. The second was to kill sheep and suchlike cattle. The
third, hogs, and suchlike. The fourth, Cows, and suchlike beasts. The fifth,
all manner of horses. And the sixth, Christians: and so particularized many
mischiefs he had done.

So they have their Familiars, some for one thing, and some for another; some
to help them at their needs, (though many times therein they fail them) and
others to work their mischiefs and revenge, as the aforesaid John Wynnicke and
many others have confessed. But I only instance their Confessions in short,
and but in part only, tending to that I quote them for as near as I can. For I
could add diverse more to this, but many of the other in effect tend to prove
this; so do most of the Confessions little or more depend one upon another: so
that I do but instance part of them, and of the effect of them, and not the
third part of those I have; for if I should, I have many larger Confessions,
which perchance might give better satisfaction to some: but I only aim at the
principal heads, and to clear and make it appear, that what has been done,
has been in a legal way, and not unjustly, as mady have surmised, but for the
good of the Commonwealth, and I doubt not but agreeable to the Word of God.
And that all that be thus in league, (as express or open league as aforesaid)
are to be found out and known by these evidences, be they of either sort, bad,
or white or good Witches so called; firsh, by Witches marks, which are most
commonly upon those baser sorts called the bad and cursing Witch; and so upon
the other called the good or white Witch, though not so easily found, (if but
only the brand, or devils mark, as it may well be termed) but the other, which
the spirits suck of, are easily to be distinguished and known from all the
other marks, but yet have as before (if an express league.)

This is not to be doubted of; it is the devils custom to mark his: God will
have his mark for his, Ezekiel. 9. Rev. 7. the Beast will have his mark, Rev. 13.
So the devil himself will have his mark, as you may see as well by the
relations and confessions of Witches, as also the witnesses of many learned
men, writing of Witches and Witchcraft. Therefore, where this mark is, there is
a league and familiar spirits more or less; which marks are to be found by
searching.

Now some will say, How shall they be discerned from natural marks?

I answer: First, as for that mark which comes by the sucking or by the drawing
of the spirit or familiar, more or less, which is most commonly upon the baser
sort called the bad witch, and so many times upon the other so untruly called
the good or white witch, for all witches are bad indeed, though peradventure
for the most part they have not commonly so many Familiars as the other, yet I
say most of them work by Familiars as well as the other, and suckle them
likewise, though not commonly above one. They are to be known by these tokens,
as by the insensiblenesse of them, sometimes like a little teat or big, that is
when it remains as the Imp or Familiar sucks thereof: if outward, then nothing
to be discerned but as a little bit of skin, which may be extended and drawn
out, and wrung, much like the finger of a glove, and is very limber, and has
no substance in it, except it be when their Imps have newly sucked them, and
then it may be there may be a little watrish blood perceived, but may be known
from natural marks several ways; for it has no scar, but at the very top a
little hole, where the blood comes out. But if it be inward, then it is beyond
all natural marks, or where no suchlike (if natural) could possibly be, and
remains but as a little red spot, much like, or litttle differing from a
flea-bite; only it is out of the flesh above it, when as the other is flat,
but this as I say is out above it, with a whitish end at the top, and may be
known both of them by a circle about them, much like the circle of a woman's
breast which has been sucked, and one may discern the place where the blood
comes out: and many times it falls out, if new sucked, the watrish blood may
be stroaked out, especially in the time they be kept, if the watchers be
careful to discern when they be in most trouble, though their Familiars come
never so insensible: and therein (as before) watching has done good (though
not deprived of any thing necessary, as before.) And the skin may be pulled one
side from the other, and differs from the other parts in color, and remains
as if it were a dead place, and so it is insensible of pricking and other
usage, if it be done in a direct manner; and so may be easily discerned from
any natural mark otherwise, if this were not sufficient to give satisfaction,
which I doubt not but it will, as I could otherwise express, if it were
neither for giving offense to some, nor a means to give some of such persons
insight so far, as thereby they might grow more experienced to make away their
marks, for that has been too common amongst them already; for which I could
instance many examples: but you find by their Confessions, that all of them
tend to manifest, that their Familiars suck upon those marks which we first
find, which are before expressed, and therefore I forbear to instance any to
that particular.

Sometimes they be like a blue spot, that is, when they make them away, and
then no more to be discerned besides the insensiblenesse thereof; but will grow
or be drawn again by the sucking of their Imps or Familiars more or less, for
they cannot hide them always: as one Marsh a woman of Brampford confessed, who
had been searched two or three times one after another, and no other marks
could be found upon her: at length, she being accused by another of the same
town, was forthwith before she had any knowledge thereof, or thoughts (as I
suppose) of being searched again, taken by the Constables there in the streets,
as she was coming homeward to her own house, and brought to be searched again,
upon the others accusation: but as she came by her own house, she desired to go
in, (as she said) to shift her self, for that she was very unwilling (as she
pretended) to go to the women to be searched with a foul shift on her back: but
the Constable having had notice of it formerly, not to suffer her to go to do
it, it being known she did it before her former searching, brought her
forthwith away to the place where she was to be searched; and when she was a
searching, she was presently found to have the marks very apparent, and had a
clean Shift on her back. But not long after, in her Confession, amongst other
things, she confessed that if she had been let go home to have shifted her
self, she had not been found with the marks, for that she had a shift so
dressed, that her marks could not have been found at present, and that she
thereby so escaped by the same means the former searches; yet she was searched
by those which were the first that ever to my knowledge found any of those
marks; and so confessed that she had made a covenant with the devil, and sealed
it with her blood, and set a round O to the paper the devil brought her, and
confessed her Familiars, with the sucking of them, and the mischief she had
done by her Witchcraft, or at least part of them, as she then further
confessed, and suffered for the same. Here you may observe, that the
diligentnesse of searching is a great matter, and one of the chiefest points of
their discovery: For I have observed this one thing in my proceedings herein,
that if all their marks, though in several places, be not found, they will
hardly confess: but when all are found, and the just number of them more or
less laid to their charge, according as they have, it is a great inducement to
bring them to confession; and that has made me careful when apparent marks
have not been seen at first, that a second or third search be made: for it is a
matter of concernment of life and death; and therefore, as I conceive, it were
fitting that those which search, and those with them, they having some
intelligence of the marks first given them, were sworn before searching, that
diligent search might be made in all places of such as be suspected in such a
case of life and death, for the detection of so great a height of sin and
implety, that none that be guilty might escape the punishment due according to
their deserts here; and so those likewise that wrongfully go under that
aspersion, be freed thereof. To which end, it were fitting that such as did it
might be such as know what belongs to an Oath, and who make conscience to
perform the same likewise; and such as be at the searching, able people, of
discretion and good carriage; for I fear that money has swayed some, and want
of knowledge others.

Sometimes the flesh is sunk in a hollow, that is, when they pull them off, and
pull them out with their nails, or otherwise cause them to be pulled off; as
one of Over in Cambridge-shire confessed, it being so found and laid to her
charge, that she heard of our coming to town, and plucked her marks off the
night before, because she would not have been found, as she confessed before a
Justice of Peace of the same town at large, both of the Covenant and her Imps,
and the harms she did both to him and others by her Imps.

But some will say, It is strange they should know when they should be
searched, if it be kept private.

I answer, Let it be kept never so private, it has been common, and as common
as any other thing, as they themselves have confessed: for so did they of
Fenny-Drayton in Cambridge-shire, who made very large Confessions, as, that the
devil told them of our coming to town, but withal told them they should be
searched, but should not be found; wherein they said they found him a liar; and
so they said they did in his promising them they should never want, which they
did: and so likewise that is usual with others; but those made very large
Confessions.

Also sometimes there is nothing to be discerned but red spots, as if the skin
were perished, (and so it is) for that is when they only cut them off, and
apply no medicine at all to it; yet the blood will appear all round within the
circle, as before is expressed. And of these I have found diverse; but for the
most part, those have been left for a second search, or a third; as occasion or
ground sufficient required. And of these though I have found diverse, yet I have
but one example by confession, and that is of one Clarke of Keyston in
Huntington-shire, a young man, who was so found, and set at liberty, expecting
to have been searched another time, when he should not know of it; but he soon
after confessed he had cut off his marks, saying they were fools that were
found with the marks, for he had made sure he could not be found with them, for
he had cut off his two or three days before I searched him. But I perceived the
blood, and showed it to the townsmen, and told them that I thought he was
naught, and guilty of that sin, and doubted not thereof, but would not take
oath, unless the marks had been apparently seen upon him.

Now some will say, notwithstanding all this that is said, There may be and are
natural marks like all these before spoken of.

I answer, For natural marks, as I conceive, there be Wens of diverse sorts; but
view these well, and next adjacent to the flesh they are very small, and hang
like a thread, but from thence like a teat or big; but feel of it, and it is
fleshie, and will not extend as the other will do.

But some will say, It may be a rent, and so a piece of skin may hang.

I answer, This, though it be nothing but as a skin, yet it comes firmly out
of the flesh, and sticks out like a big or teat, and not hang down, when I
conceive rents will either hang, or lie flat; but if hang, then I believe a
scar is to be seen, and feels fleshlike besides: but these have no scar, only
as it were a little hole on the top, where the blood comes out, which is easily
to be discerned, for I have nipped blood out. And then likewise they be
insensible, when the other be not: But I confess, if these be not pricked the
right way, they will feel it likewise. Some have Warts: but I answer, They be
out of the flesh as well as the other, but they are flat and fleshie, and
sensible, and will not any way extend: but so far unlike the other, as I will
not further speak of them. Some have Mouls; it is truth, I believe most men
have, though they be of several colors; but those be flat to the flesh always,
which is nothing like the other, nor will extend, but is sensible.

But some will say, It may be like the brand.

I answer, No: for it differs as well in color, as also it has no circle
about it, but it as the rest of the skin is on the other parts of the body,
only differs sometimes in color, but not like the other, and is sensible:
neither for the most part have any of the marks of those which have suffered
been found, where there were either Warts, Wens, or Mouls, or commonly rents,
especially of the men.

But then some will say, There are Emrod-marks, and piles.

I answer, True, but the Emrod-marks are upon the veins, though they issue out,
and are to be discerned either by the color, or by the lying up of the veins;
but if the veins be down, still, the color remains in part, and are to be
known that way: But however, they will not extend to be drawn out and twisted,
as the other will; if at all, I am sure not so much; and if a little, then it
is pain, and the other none: for therein the insensiblenesse cleers this
expressly; for it cannot be conceived that any should be Insensible upon their
veins, and the other are merely out of the flesh; for I conceive if they were
upon the veins, they would bleed after they were sucked, and would not easily
be stenched again; neither be they so inward as the Emrods marks, except the
inward marks, which are beyond them, and where no natural cause can be of that
color, and insensible And as for the Piles, I think this is a sufficient
answer for that likewise; for they be out of the veins, and are sensible
without question, and be flat, and will not be extended as the other will.

And then some others will say, But women have rents and other miscarriages by
childe-bearing.

I answer partly as before, and grant it for truth; but yet if that way will
neither scar appear, nor will it feel fleshie, but will it be extended as the
other; admit all this were truth, I will affirm the color differs, and that
there will be no circle about it, nor twisted* nor have a hole as the other
have, and be insensible likewise, and otherwise, as I could further explain
more at large, if it were fitting: for, All things (as the proverb is) ought
not to be spoken at all times, much less printed.

But if any shall hereafter make any Objections against me (as I expect they
will) I will then explain my self (through permission) as far as by experience
I have found, or by reading or otherwise my knowledge shall extend to. For I am
confident, and my conscience tells me, that those who shall be found with these
marks, are expressly guilty of that diabolical art or practice of Witchcraft,
whether they have done mischief or not, but only for that they have renounced
God and Christ, and betaken themselves to the devil, the utter enemy of God and
all the world. And I had rather be an instrument (if any such thing ought to
be) to save one who should confess and humble himself, as Manasseh did, then
any of those who, being found with the marks upon them, shall deny: but I shall
forbear herein, where it nothing concerns me, but those in authority; for I
would not give offense to any, only desire to clear my self, in giving
satisfaction to the world that my conscience is, that none of these sorts ought
to live amongst us; for by the Laws of God and the Realm, they ought to die, as
it is said in the 18 of Deuteronomy. And then remember this one place, which is
in Micah 5, where it is said, that when God intends to bless a Nation, he will
cut off or root out all Witchcrafts and Enchantments: which I should think
should give all sufficient satisfaction, that those which have these marks, are
in league and covenant with the devil, and that it is not to be doubted but
that there are Witches, and that those which have the brand be also guilty as
aforesaid, be they of either sort, and are to be found as well as the other, by
searching also; yet I confess that is very difficult to be known, and very few
ever attained to the discovery thereof: but it is to be known by the
insensiblenesse thereof, and otherwise, being drawn or shrunk up so with a
circle about it, as if the skin were stretched to that place, or shrunk up
about it; but very little by the color, for that is as if it were or had been
some natural cause, or where some issue had been, when as the skin was never
perished, as may be easily discerned; only it shows in the middle thereof, for
the most part, as if a little hole had been, except it be such as the places
where the blood is fetched to seal the Covenant, which is only like a natural
mark, either long or otherwise, as natural marks be; only it seems to be
deader and harder, and so it is, and not so tender as other places be, or where
plasters have been used: but the other is for the most part round, but
however, it has a little circle about it, just adjacent to it, as if it were
sunk in all the circle about, and then within that, next adjacent to the
circle, somewhat higher then the flesh, and harder; and in the middle thereof,
a little hole ot pit somewhat sunk. This brand or mark, if it come to be tried
for the insensiblenesse, will soon be felt, if greater care be not had in
pricking of it; for though it be insensible a little way, yet it is not so deep
into the flesh as the others be, but shows deadlike, much like as if it had
been seared with a hot-iron, and is firmly upon the body, and in no secret
place, as the other be, but differs a little in color, as a feared place does
from another; as I might somewhat in large, but I will not presume too far,
lest others should unadvisedly and rashly proceed in the discovery of such
persons wrongfully, and then fault me for the insight; as has been formerly
done by some, who when they have done that they are not able to give an account
of, or render a reason for, or perchance say those be guilty, where they find
some other evidence may be given that they be guilty, or where money will be
largely given that they are guilty, when as if they come to be further
questioned, they can only say they be such marks as such a one told me; and so
likewise can say, I have seen some have such marks in the Jail, of his finding
out, or some who have confessed: when as they themselves cannot distinguish
between natural marks, and those, neither indeed know them asunder, but
however, know but one sort of the marks* and so let many escape, and I fear
wrongfully thereby, or for lucre, accuse; a fearful thing to be considered of:
And therefore I conceive it were fitting, that when such come to their trials
in this kind, it might be done by those of knowledge and discretion, and upon
good grounds, and not by every light-carriag'd houswife, who regards more her
own ends then the life of a Christian; who can render no other reason, but that
they do but what they have learned some insight in, and so go where they are
sent for, or else they would not do it; indeed for money, and not for the
Commonwealths good, as may be seen by their want of knowledge therein: For, as
I said, it had need be done by able, discreet, honest persons, especially for
these last mentioned, and upon good grounds, and other clear evidences
concurring with them. Yet I affirm that all that have these, or any of these
marks, are guilty of Witchcraft, if plainly made appear: for I could have
spoken somewhat more, both of wrongfully accusing, and excusing, only I know
it will then be judged that I do it to take off all others, and that none, or
but such as I like of, were fitting to do it, and so thereby take all upon my
self; which I know many in the world will be ready enough to censure of me: But
for my part, where one has the least insight herein, I wish there were
hundreds in all Countries which had the whole, and more then any now have; but
only that such as be idle, or unconscionable of their ways, and careless of
men and women's lives, or at least unskilful in these ways, might not be
suffered to meddle in such a business of concernment of life and death, as
this is. As for this, and the lucre of money, I shall more fully clear in the
last Objection in the close hereof, to acquit my self thereof.

Now for the implicit or secret League, if it be asked what these be which
thus work by Satan:

I answer, in some sort, by way of similitude, from the direction of that place
in Mark 9. 38, 40. and Luke 9. 49. For Satan will be Gods ape in all things
whatsoever he can, and therefore will he also imitate Christ herein. They are
such as invocate the devil by certain superstitious forms of words, and
prayers, believing that these means can effect what they have offered them for,
and do withal earnestly desire to have them effectual. Now the devil herein
consents, and affords his power, at the utterance of the words, to bring
the thing to pass which is desired. Here therefore is a Covenant and mutual
consent on both sides: for if a man or woman be content to use superstitious
forms of invocation for help in time of need, and in using them desires in
heart to have the thing effected; if the devil work the feat, there is a secret
compact: for they have desired, and he has consented. They are such as do
know, that neither by Gods work in nature, nor by Gods ordination from his
Word, the things they do are warrantable, (but rather hear such things
forbidden) and that they also are absurd to common reason, and yet will do
them, because they find an effect answerable to their expectation.

Hereto I might add the healing of a wound by anointing the instrument which
gave the wound, Spell-setters, and Charmers, and suchlike, who many of them
are in express league as aforesaid: for the devil contenteth himself
sometimes, to wit, there where he well perceives the party will not be brought
to the other, and lets them please themselves with hope of Gods mercy,
employing them only about seeming-good things, for that in so doing they
suppose they sin not, nor are in danger of the devil, nor under Gods wrath* as
the other are, because they fall not so foully into the pit of destruction by
an express league, as the others do, and make an outward show of Religion as
well as others.

For what can be said of those who only cure diseases by laying on their
hands, and using certain words or forms of prayers? Is it not done by this
secret Compact, though ignorantly they think otherwise? For if the remedy be
not natural, then it is supernatural; if supernatural, then either from God,
and so has warrant from his Word, and is ordinary, not miraculous; for that
work of God has ceased long since: or else is from the devil, as works wrought
by Spells and Charms, and suchlike, forbidden by God. Yet these sorts of
persons, finding their practices succesful, are not against Satan, nor can
lightly speak ill of his working power, because of their secret and implicit
league they have with him, and especially because of the profit they find come
to them thereby. And herein also does the devil imitate Christ, who allowed
some, which openly as yet did not follow him, to have power to cast out devils,
Mark 9. 38, 39. who were not, as he said, against him, nor could lightly speak
ill of him, nor of his power, by reason of their secret and implicit faith,
and covenant with Christ; yet did it, because they found success in it.

So likewise in the Scripture is found the cutting off hair, and burning it,
Numb. 6. 18. the writing of words, and the blotting of them out again, and to
give them unto one, Numb. 5. 23. Also the giving of a portion, Numb. 5. 27. So
Satan teaches his to cut off hair and burn it; as the White-Witch will do to
such as come to them, advising them to cut hair, or suchlike, off the beast
they suspect to be bewitched, and to write a Charm, and to blot it out, and
then give it one; also to use portions; thus seeming, by these imitations, to
have Scripture for their warrant. And so after this manner I might reckon up
several other ways: as, the Lord had some which by cursing and threatening
procured evil upon others, 2 Kings 2. 24. Acts 13. so Satan has such, which by
cursing and threats procure mischiefs upon others, as you may plainly see by
their Confessions.

Also the Lord tied his to certain Rules and Ordinances in his Service, and
sometimes to a certain number, Josh. 6. 15. 1 Kings 17. 21. So Satan tieth his
Witches to certain words and deeds in going about his service, and to observe
numbers, and to do a thing so and so often, three times, seven times, or
suchlike, as the White Witches do: and so imitate Christ in many things, as
his Assemblies and Sabbaths, Baptism and Covenants; so Satan has all his,
after his manner, as Rebecca West and Elizabeth Clarke confessed, as well in
these as in other particulars, as you may find as well by theirs and others
Confessions, as also by the Writings of learned men who have writ concerning
the same.

And further, as the Lord had such as cured diseases by words, by prayers, and
did anoint the party infirm; as by something brought them from the sick, and
carried to the sick again, James 5. Mark 6. 13. Acts 19. 12. So has Satan such
as seem by words to cure diseases, by forms of prayers, and by oils; and also
by bringing something from the sick party, and carrying the same back again.

So the Lord by his servants raised some from the dead, 1 Kings 17. 21. Acts 9.
40. and likewise Satan makes show by his servants to raise up the dead, 1 Samuel
28.

And as the Lord makes some to be his, either by his immediate inspiration,
and speaking to them, or wins them to him by his instruments: so Satan
makes some Witches by inward suggestions, and his speaking to them, or by
using other Witches to gain them to him; as you may find also by their
Confessions. And that as the Lord spoke by a beast unto a Witch, Numb. 22. 28.
so Satan speaks to Witches, sometimes in one shape, and sometimes in another.

So likewise, as the Lord ordained Sacrifices to be offered to him, Satan has
taught his to do so too, Numb. 23.

And as the Lord promised earthly blessings, to stir up people to serve him; so
Satan, as you may find, is very large in his promises to such as will serve
him, Matthew. 4.

And so it is in many other particulars, as might well be observed, if you do
but rightly observe their Confessions, with their carriages, and Satan's doings.

But here some will say, Is there no other way to find them out, but only by
searching?

I answer, That is both the most ready and certain way, and such a way, as
that, if they which undertake it be careful, there can be no mistake,
especially in those who shall be found to have the marks; and for the other, if
in express league, then by the brand; if implicit, then by the aforesaid
reasons, and by their carriages. Yet they may be found by Witches words also,
as when he or she has been heard to call upon their spirits, or to speak to
them, or talk of them to any, enticing them to receive such Familiars. As some
of those of Rattlesden confessed that they had their Familiars from old mother
Orvis; so had Elizabeth Clarke from Anne West, and so had her daughter from
her, Anne Clarke from her mother, and her mother from another; so in many other
particulars. As also, when they have been heard telling of killing of some man
or beast, or of the hurting of them; or when they have not only threatened
revenge upon any or their cattle, but have told particularly what shall happen
to such a one, and the same found true; and their boasting afterward thereof.
Furthermore, if they have been heard to speak of their transportation from home
to certain places of their meetings with others there, as was at Manningtree,
Burton, Old, Trilbrook-bushes, and other places.

These and such like, as you may find by their Confessions, prove a league and
familiarity also with the devil.

So also by Witches deeds, as when any have seen them with their spirits, or
seen to feed some creatures secretly; or where the Witch has put such, which
may be known by the smell of the place; for they will stink detestably, which
we have often found true in the time they have been kept, if their Imps or
Familiars came to suck in the mean time, as you may find they often have. Also
when it can be found that they have made pictures; as I have credibly heard of
one of Yarmouth, who since the aforementioned time suffered there, and
confessed that she had made a picture of wax or clay, I do not well remember
which, of the proportion of a child which she was intended to work her
mischief against, and had thrust a nail in the head thereof, and so had buried
it in a place, which she then confessed; and that as that consumed, so should
the child, and did, a long time, as I was told by Master Hopkins, who was
there, and took her Confession, and went to look for the picture; and that the
child (as I have heard) did soon after mend, and grew lusty again. A hellish
invention.

And so many such Witchery-tricks, both of this kind and otherwise, have thus
been lately found out: as, the giving any thing to any man or other creature,
which immediately caused either pains or death; as was at Brampford and other
places, as you may also find by their Confessions. So likewise by laying on
their hands, or by some one or more fellow-Witches confessing their own
Witchcraft, and bearing witness against others* so as they can make good the
truth of their witness, and give sufficient proof thereof, as, that they have
seen them with their spirits, or that they have received their spirits from
them, as beforesaid; or that they can tell when they used their Witcherytricks
to do harm, or joined with them; as those of Manningtree and other places at
their meetings used to do: or that they told them what harm they had done, or
that they can show the mark upon them, or suchlike; or by the Witches
confessing of giving their souls to the devil, and of the spirits which they
have, and how they come by them, and the suckling of them, and such other like
ways, as you may gather by their Confessions.

All which, notwithstanding, principally depends upon searching, which is the
readiest way to bring them to these Confessions.

Also some witness of God himself happening upon the execrable curses of
Witches upon themselves, praying God to show some token, if they be guilty; who
by bitter curses upon themselves, think thereby to clear themselves: as one
Binkes of Haverill in Suffolk, who confessed to me that she was guilty, and
amongst other things told me, that the Fly which was seen to fly about the
chamber, was one of her Imps; but desired to speak with one Master Fairecloth,
who lived not above two miles, or thereabouts, from the Town, being an able
Orthodox Divine; who was immediately sent for, and came. This woman,
notwithstanding her confessing to me, denied all to him, wishing and desiring
withal, that if she were such a manner of person, that the Lord would show an
example upon her; and that if she had any Imps, that they would come whilst he
was there: presently after, she cries out, A just judgment of God, they are
come indeed, said she. This Imp, in the same shape it was seen formerly flying
in the room, was seen fastened upon another place of her body, not far from the
other marks, but not upon them, and so remained above half a quarter of an
hour, till some women came near a quarter of a mile, who saw it fastened on her
body, she only crying out to have it pulled off, which at first they were
fearful to do; but at length they wiped it off, as they say, with a cloth; and
what became of it after, they knew not; but it had drawn a new mark, like the
other.

Was this woman fitting to live, this evidence, with others, being against her,
by credible witnesses? I am sure she was living not long since, and acquitted
upon her trial: for she never confessed any more, but denied what she had
formerly confessed.

Here you may take notice, first, that if they have their Familiars come to
them either before or after confession, they will not confess till another
time, or deny, and therein watching is of some consequence, till they be
examined by a Justice of Peace, or else they must expect but few confessions.
This was observed as well by those at Bury, as indeed for the most part of all
those now lately detected. And secondly, the extreme pain they put them to,
especially when they first draw their marks, as most of them generally confess.

And I have observed in the time they have been kept, that if their Imps be a
sucking, it is easy to be discerned and known; for then they will either covet
to ruck or sit down upon the ground, or will lie shrinking up all of a heap,
making sour faces, as if they were in extreme pain: so that they may be easily
discerned by their carriage and gestures, whether any thing come to them, or
not, while they be kept.

Also I have read that a Witch, in some cases, has been brought to a dead
party, who has been suspected to have been bewitched by that Witch, to touch
the dead corpse; which was no sooner touched by the Witch, but the corpse bled
fresh blood.

These and suchlike evidences may sometimes, though peradventure not always be
given from God, when he is pleased to detect such malefactors guilty of blood,
as well as in other cases of murder.

And thus you may plainly see that Witches may be discovered, albeit there be
some difficulty therein, and may likewise be brought to confess their
Witchcraft; as also, that there be Witches in these our days, nay I rather
think more frequent then formerly: for if Satan be such a powerful deceiver and
seducer, who can make an Eve in Paradise (being in the state of perfection) to
believe him, the devil, before God; can he not seduce now? Yes certainly, more
desperately, to manifest his bloody malice in these later times against
mankind, and therefore he has now adays stirred up such cruel Witches as be
wholly set upon revenge, tormenting men and women, and their cattle, and making
a trade of killing and murdering: of which sort the Scripture hardly gives an
instance, except it be in Balaam, hired to curse Gods people.

Let us therefore learn to follow the Lord, and hate Witches, Wizzards,
Magicians, Soothsayers, Fortune Tellers, Inchanters, juggling companions, and
all others that deal in Sorcery and Witchcraft, beholding in them a spectacle
of man's misery, as being left of God unto the power of the devil, and so be
moved with compassion toward them, and pray for their conversions. Yet
consider, though they be left of God for a time, yet not all so left, nor so
dreadfully catched by Satan, but that they may, through the mercy of God, be
his servants, and converted, as none can deny but Manasseh was; and so put a
difference between their fearful sin and their persons; hate the one, but not
the other; hate the one in conscience to Gods commandment, utterly forbidding
to regard such, Levit. 19. 31. for it is spiritual whoredom and defilement,
Levit. 26. 6. because such as used them were Heathens, as, the Egyptians,
Canaanites, Philistines, and Caldeans. Such as in Israel followed the
Heathenish customs, were wicked and ungodly; as Saul, who was a murderer, 1 Samuel 22. a profane neglecter of Gods Worship, 1 Chronicles. 13. 3. and one whom God
had forsaken, and taken his Spirit from, 1 Samuel 16. 14. an evil spirit likewise
was upon him, neither did God vouchsafe him any answer by sacred means, 1 Samuel
18. 16. and therefore he fell to Witches.

And what was Manasseh, but an idolater, and an observer of times, and so fell
to Witchery, and to such as had Familiars? And the people which delighted in
these, were haters of true Teachers, and believed false Prophets, Dreamers, and
Diviners, Ierem. 27. 9. and with us, what are they, but vain loose livers,
superstitious Neutrals, and suchlike? But let them remember, that it will be
but bitterness in the end.

Let Saul and Manasseh be a warning to all of this kind, besides examples
abroad, and in Histories, with those amongst our selves, which may serve to
terrify all good Christians from seeking unto or regarding such: for it is
plainly said, The Lord sets his face against such, to cut them off, Levit.
20. 6. And if God be against them, what may they look for in the end, seeing
the least of these do entice people from God, in requiring faith of them, and
do cause the people to run a whoring after them? as Moses speaks, Levit. 20.
6.

Being therefore in league with Satan and abominable idolaters, enticing people
from their faith in God, they are therein worthy to die, or at least to receive
punishment according to the Statutes: for many of them are hurting Witches, as
well as curing, and certainly to be discovered and known, with far less
difficulty then the other; for they are to be discerned by their practices
here, working openly by their cures, etc. when as the other work only secretly
and in darkness. And surely let no man doubt but that the finding out of such
miscreants is an acceptable service before God, else why should the Lord have
given such command to the children of Israel, and to have driven out the
Nations from before them for those abominations, and to cause his own people
to be led into captivity for those sins, threatening judgments upon them, and
likewise against those who should suffer any such abominations amongst them; as
in diverse places both in the Prophecies of Jeremiah and Isaiah, besides many
other places of Scripture both in the Old and New Testament, aforementioned.
Nay, there are threatenings against such as shall but resort unto them, as in
Exodus 20. 6. and so in diverse other places before mentioned.

And does not the Lord by the Prophet Micah promise to cut off Witchcraft out
of the land, and that they should have no more Soothsayers, in the time that he
intended to bless a Nation? Micab 5. 12.

And in truth, was there no alteration in England at the beginning and
continuance of the suppression of this sin, and in some Counties more then
others? And who are they that have been against the prosecution of, or been
partakers with such, but only such as (without offense I may speak it) be
enemies to the Church of God? I dare not instance, not only for fear of
offense, but also for suits of Law.

For was there not above forty in Essex, (as I take it) all in
Tendring-hundred, there where some were discovered, illegally outlawed,
contrary to the Law of this Realm, upon a Writ of Conspiracy (as I have been
credibly informed) I being one of the number, as I was likewise informed by
some which were my neighbors when I lived there, by the means of one who is
reported to have been one of the greatest agents in Colchester-businesse,
within the Town; when as there was never any notice given to any upon the
Proclamations, as ought, I am sure? This man, with another who is likewise
reported to have been fellow-agent with him in that business, and the two
chiefest in it, was the cause that some were not questioned in that Town: but
for his part, I saw him labor and endeavor all he could to keep this woman,
whom he so much held withal from her legal Trial, and likewise heard him
threaten both me and all that had given evidence against her, or informed what
manner of woman she had been in her life and conversation, to their knowledge,
or as they had heard: Yea, as I since have heard, she was condemned at that
Assize, and by his procurement reprieved. Since which time, on her behalf, this
has been done.

Was not this an animation to all such people in those parts, when so many
Gentlemen and Yeomen thereabouts should be thus questioned for testifying their
knowledge? And was it not a sit object for the devil, to work upon others? Let
the world judge. For I have heard many of them say, that the devil has enticed
them to Witchcraft by some Sermons they have heard preached; as when Ministers
will preach of the power of the devil, and his tormenting the wicked, and
suchlike: as I have heard some say (I will not say, in the place where I now
live) that the devil will sit and laugh at such and such offenders when he
torments them, and will jeer at them in tormenting them, when he has got them.
A fearful thing! whenas the devil is tormented himself, and tormenteth none;
for it is the wrath of God for sins committed, and the judgments of God for
his mercies abused.

These and suchlike speeches, I have heard them say, the devil has made use
of to persuade them to Witchery; coming to them, and asking them, How do you
think to be saved? for your sins are so and so, (as he can set them out large
enough) and you heard the Minister say that I will torment you: Give me your
soul, and agree with me, and I will free you of hell torments. Ignorant people
have been thus seduced. Therefore it behooves all to be careful in giving the
devil the least advantage, and to put a difference between their fearful sin
and their persons, hating the one, but not the other, for that by corrupt
nature we are no less apt to be missed by him then they, walking in sins and
trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1.

But in obedience to the Law of God, and accomplishment of all things in the
Scripture contained, such ought not to live amongst us, lest the Lord should
deal with us as he did with others for the same abominations; much less should
any harbor such thoughts, as that there are not any: for did not the Lord
leave some of the nations, to try and prove Israel? Judge. 2 and 3. and does not
S. John say, ( Matthew. 3. 7.) O generation of vipers, who has warned you to
flee from the wrath to come? Do not they, when they covenant with the devil to
free them of hell torments, who cannot free himself of them, flee (as much as
in them lies) from the wrath to come?

As for you that are of such an opinion, surely, if neither all the threatenings
and judgments of God against such, besides their own Confessions, will not
prevail with you, methinks the mercies of God should, in that fifth of Micah;
for it is undeniably true, that there was, is, and shall be Witches, till
Christ's conquest there spoken of, agreeable with that in Revel. 20. 1, 2, 3.
which as yet cannot be: for without doubt the devil is busy in deceiving of
Nations, and that not only such as know not Christ, but others also; which
could not be, if he were bound; nor the Jews or other Nations still to come:
but other places of Scripture would be contradicted. And therefore every one
must conclude with me, that (as yet) of Witchcraft there is no end.

Now whosoever thou be that think I ever made such gain of the way, or
favored any, and persecuted others, or took bribes, I call God to witness,
that considering the charge of going to several places, and Assizes, and
Goal-deliveries, and the time I expended thereabouts, I never, one time with
another, got so much as I did by my Calling and Practice, toward the
maintenance of my family. And as for taking any money, or other thing, by way
of bribe or gift, I never did, to the value of one penny, neither one way nor
other, but what I openly took in the view of the Townsmen where I came; and
that in many places I never received penny as yet, nor any am like,
notwithstanding I have hands for satisfaction, except I should sue; but many
rather fall upon me for what has been received: but I hope such Suits will be
disannulled, and that where I have been out moneys for Towns in charges and
otherwise, such course will be taken, that I may be satisfied and paid with
reason. And for ever accusing one wrongfully, my conscience is clear before the
Almighty: and I ever desired equal punishment to all that were guilty, or at
least, if any favor, that it might be to those who confessed: but those still
suffered, and others, though never so guilty, escaped. The reason why I did
thus, was, because I desired so to satisfy the world in this particular, that
it must needs be a great error to save such, and not to question others at
all, as before mentioned, they being all guilty alike.

And in truth, concerning him who is dead, who likewise was an agent in the
business, for my part, I never knew that he either unjustly favored any, or
received bribes, or used such extremity as was reported of him; only at first,
before he or I ever went, many Towns used extremity of themselves, which after
was laid on us. And I do not deny but at first he might watch some; but to my
knowledge, he soon left it, or at least in such a way as not to make them
incapable: but if he ever did at first, evidence was not taken till after they
rested. And for my part, I never watched any at first, so as any way at all to
disturb them in their brains; but when some have been watched before I have
come to them, I have caused them to take their rest, before I would ever
question with them: but now lately, and ever since the Michaelmas after the
first beginning, I never used any but as aforesaid, with consent of the
Justices, and not otherwise, nor ever did. But to my knowledge, we have been
both much injured in words, and he since his death: but I am certain
(notwithstanding whatsoever has been said of him) he died peaceably at
Manningtree, after a long sickness of a Consumption, as many of his generation
had done before him, without any trouble of conscience for what he had done, as
was falsely reported of him. And though many of these things may seem very
strange, and hardly to be believed, yet this is the very truth; and that he was
the son of a godly Minister, and therefore without doubt within the Covenant.
Therefore let no man take upon him either to speak or write more then he
knows to be truth; for this I am able to manifest and prove to be truth.

And so I leave my self to the censure of the world, yet desire it might be
left to the Almighty, who knows the secrets of all hearts: For, blessed are
they that do his commandments, Revel. 22. 14.

FINIS.

