THE Husbandmans CALLING: Showing the Excellencies, Temptations, Graces,
Duties, etc. of the CHRISTIAN HUSBANDMAN.

Being the Substance of XII. SERMONS Preached to a Country Congregation By
RICHARD STEEL, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel.

Cant. 1. 6. -- They made me keeper of the Vineyards, but mine own Vineyard
have I not kept.

Math. 6. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and
all these things shall be added to you.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. and are to be sold by E. Calvert at the sign of the
Black spread Eagle in Barbican, 1668.

To all the Faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ in this our English Israel.
Reverend Fathers, and Brethren;
IT is not out of Presumption (the Lord he knows) that I make this Address
unto you, as if I were worthy to bespeak, much less instruct Such and So many,
but from a sincere Love to men's souls, attended with a profound Respect unto
you all. It Is you, that have the charge to bring this our Husbandman to Heaven:
from his care and labor most of your subsistence comes; You are strictly bound
by all Laws Divine and Humane, to help them to live in Heaven, that help you to
live on earth; nay, you are obliged by express 1 Timothy 4. 15. (...)
Scripture to give your selves wholly to this business, and you must certainly
give an exact account of your Stewardship, God knows how soon. Now I only
undertake to be your Remembrancer, and my own Monitor in these two main things:
1. That we would often consider the Great End of our worthy Ministry, which is
not, to please men, but Christ Jesus the Lord; not to obtain applause from the
Vulgar, or respect from Great Men, or to make ample worldly provision for our
selves, but we are purposely sent from God, to save men's souls from death, and
to carry (if it be possible) all our flock with us to Heaven. Let us revive
this often upon our souls, especially when we are casting the Net of the Gospel
among a Sea of Sinners in our actual Ministration, wherein we must consider
that our Husbandmans soul is as precious to God, as the soul of a greater man,
and should the rather be helped, because he wants often the benefit of
Education, Learning and Ingenuity to help himself. O let us think before their
Passing Bell do startle us, whether we have done our utmost for the saving of
the Man or Woman that is now sailing for eternity. 2. That in our retired
throughts we duly weigh, and then put in practice the fittest Means to
accomplish this great End. 1. In Sermons, what Texts and Subjects are most
needful to ground them, to awaken them, to convert them, and to strengthen
them; what Method is most useful to clear the will of God to them, and settle
it in their memories, what words and affections are most effectual to declare
their duty, and persuade them to it: In short, how we may so paint to the life
Grace and Glory, that the people may fall in love with them, and purchase them
at any rate; and then so describe Sin and Hell, that they may tremble to think
of them, and go from the Ordinances with their hearts penetrated, amazed,
melted and changed. That we may not fill our Sermons with sapless niceties,
impertinent quotations, choleric reflections, or with that unquiet
controversal Divinity (especially about points less momentous) which hardly
ever produce any effect, save Exasperation. And for as much as experience has
taught us, that private and particular ^dvice and Reproof does catch many, that
have slipped through more general means; let us labor as far as we are able to
take a particular care of each member of those flocks, where any of us are
Overseers; that we may warn every man, and teach every man, that we may present
every man perfect in Christ Jesus. How many Drunkards, Swearers, Covetous,
Trouble some persons are there under our charge, that either know not, or mind
not the evil of their way, whom one quarter of an hours serious Advice might
cure, and how well (generally) do men take such Counsels from us, because we
are doing the Duties of our Office, and their faithfullest part, to wit, their
Consciences are on our side? If it be possible therefore let us spare some time
to go among them, to see how our Husbandry prospers, so shall we best be
acquainted with their condions, and soonest gain their affections: Alas! if we
do not know them, we must shoot our Arrow at adventure; and if they do not love
us, they will hardly heed what we say. And then 2. In our Lives; O that they
may be a Commentary on our Sermons, full of Gravity, Humility, Piety, Peace and
Love. Let our words and ways savor of the Sermons we preach, that our Lives
may convince those whom our Lips cannot persuade; Alas we see that one
irregular practice does undermine and throw down, that which many Sermons have
been building; they will not believe that, which we plainly show, we do not
believe our selves. Though this be their mistake to take sanctuary in our
sins, who must be judged by our Sermons; yet it is a distemper that will not
easily be cured, and woe will be to them by whom offenses come, as well as woe to
them that are offended with the Truth. Let us remember Excellent Mr. Herberts
Advice (whose Tract called, the Country-Parson, is richly worth our frequent
reading) that the Minister should be a pattern of all goodness to all the Men
in the Parish, and his Wife to all the Women in the Parish, and his Children
and Servants to all the Children and Servants in the Parish, and particularly
that we be far from Profaneness, Covetousness, Contention, direct or indirect
opposition to serious Piety, or the Professors thereof. And lastly, 3. For our
Inward Affections, that we may keep always flaming in our hearts a sincere and
Paternal Love to all our Flock, that our counsels, reproofs and Sermons may
flow from a real and dear Love to them, and then they can hardly miscarry in
their effects upon them; that our Real and Visible design may not be to seek
theirs but them. That our Behavior degrade us not from that Authority,
wherewith we are vested; nor Pride keep us from that seasonable condescension,
that is so necessary among the people. But that we may be wholly taken up with
our great work, and make our other circumstances attend and further this; that
by any means we may save our selves, and them that hear us. And let us not think
much of all this work, for we were told it before, and we shall be richly
rewarded for every drop of Spirits, yea, for every drop of sweat, yea, for
every drop of ink that is spent rightly in our Masters Service; and doubly
damned, if persons of our Knowledge and Implo^ment, or Others by our Neglect,
Ignorance, Non-residence, or Evil Example, miscarry ^verlastingly. In a word,
that we may all in earnest advance the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and keep up the
Credit of the English Ministry, is the most earnest Desire and Prayer o^

Your Servant, and Fellow Servants, Richard Steel.
May 10. 1668.
To the READER.
Candid Reader:
THe substance of this Discourse was preached to a Country Congregation for
their Direction in their ordinary Calling, and appears now in the World not for
any Opinion I have of it, But

1. Because the number of Husbandman is great; the company of Husbandmen, being
the greatest of all others in this huge Corporation of the World,

And 2. There being no particular Book to Direct or Encourage them therein that
ever I could meet with in our Tongue.

And 3. I confess also another Motive, to wit, a desire to be doing some good,
which I trust (through the blessing of God, which I do humbly crave) will be
attained hereby, and especially to those that were Hearers hereof, to whom I
owe my self, and all I can do.

The matter herein is but ordinary Practical Divinity applied to the Condition
and Calling of the Husbandman. The style familiar and plain according to their
capacity; the method also fitted, as well as I could, to the most useful
things to be handled. In describing the Excellencies and Duties of this
Calling, I have rather brought in the Husbandman doing what he ought, than what
ordinary he does; for you consider, I am not writing an History, but Rules, and
therefore let no honest heart be discouraged for his coming short in these
passages, provided he aim at them. The Rule must be exact, and our life as
near it as we can. When I discourse his Sins and Temptations, and bring him
sometimes on the stage under great disadvantages; understand it rather a
Disswasive from that evil, than a Narrative thereof. I am very conscious of
many weaknesses, but know not of any Errors or Reflections herein. It will
suffice me, if it shall obtain pardon of the more acute, acceptance of my
friends, and amendment of heart and life of the poor Husbandman, for whom it
was chiefly compiled.

Though it accost only the Husbandman, yet the matter thereof for the most
past is applicable to every good Christian; and it were to be wished, that the
like particular Tracts were written about other Callings. And provided it
hinder no man from reading the Bible, and other more profitable Books, I
believe the humble and diligent perusal hereof will quit any man the Cost, much
better than trifling of his time away: But see you join Meditation and Prayer
with your Reading; One leaf so digested being more likely to do your Soul good,
than many without them. And remember still, that you be as ready to practice
what is plain, as to censure what is doubtful, and bless the Lord for what is
worthy, as well as blame the Penman for what is weak. If you receive any
profit hereby, I am made, (for doing good is the greatest preferment) and in
that case let God alone reap the praise; and Me his unworthiest Servant your
Prayers. The Blessing of God accompany this Endeavor for the Husbandmans
Direction, Comfort and Salvation! Amen, Amen.

Yours, if you be Christ's, R. S.
May, 10 1668.
The Contents.
CHAP. I.
THe Text propounded and explained, Some pr^vious Observations premised. Page I
Sect. 1. The explication of the Text. 2 Sect. 2. Observe. 1. That every man
should have a Calling. 6 Sect. 3. Observe. 2. It Is sweet to be led, and put into
a Calling by the Lord. 10 Sect. 4. Observe. 3. It Is a great privilege to be
placed in an Eden. 13
CHAP. II.
The main Doctrine delivered, an Husbandman described, and the Lawfulness of
his Calling. 15 Sect. 1. The Doctrine. Husbandry is a most ancient and
excellent Calling. Ibid. Sect. 2. An Husbandman described. 16 Sect. 3. The
Lawfulness of his Calling. 17
CHAP. III.
The Excellencies of the Husbandmans Calling. 19 Sect. 1. God himself was the
immediate Author of it. 23 Sect. 2. The Holy Ghost brings most comparisons from
it. 24 Sect. 3. He lives and depends most on God. 26 Sect. 4. It is an harmless
and deceitless Calling. 27 Sect. 5. It was the first Calling in the world, and
sustains all others. 29 Sect. 6. It is a Calling of less temptation than
others. 31 Sect. 7. God may be most read in his Creatures in it. 33 Sect. 8. It
makes a man neither too rich nor too poor. 35 Sect. 9. It is a Calling of
greatest necessity. 37 Sect. 10 It is an healthful and cheerful Calling. 39
Sect. 11. It stands on safer grounds than most others. 41 Sect. 12. It is a
greater friend to Piety than others. 42
CHAP. IV.
The Inconveniences of the Husbandmans Calling, and their Remedies. 45 Sect. 1.
His business lies in the world, his Enemy. 46 The Remedy. 47
Sect. 2. He has but little time for his soul. Ib. The Remedy. 48
Sect. 3. He is liable to many burdens and injuries. 49 The Remedy. 50
Sect. 4. He has many cares and troubles in the flesh. 51 The Remedy. 52
Sect. 5. He has less power than will to do good. 53 The Remedy. 54
Sect. 6. The infelicity of a rustic breeding. 55 The Remedy. 56

CHAP. V.
The Temptations of the Husbandman, and the Preservatives. 58 Sect. 1. Earthly
mindedness. 59 The Preservatives. 61
Sect. 2. Discontent. 63 Preservatives. 65
Sect. 3. Forgetting God, and depending on second causes. 69 Preservatives. 71
Sect. 4. Envy at his Superiors. 76 Preservatives. 79
Sect. 5. Negligence and deadness in holy duties. 84 Preservatives. 87
Sect. 6. Incharitableness and Niggardliness. 93 Preservatives 95
Sect. 7. Distracting Care. 98 Preservatives. 101
Sect. 8. Slavish fear of Man. 104 Preservatives. 106
Sect. 9. Affected Ignorance. 111 Preservatives. 115
Sect. 10. Wrong unto his Neighbor. 120 Preservatives. 122
Advice concerning Restitution. 126
CHAP. VI.
The Husbandmans Lessons in his Calling. 132 Sect. 1. Out of his Ground. 133 1.
His Original. Ib. 2. His Mortality. 134 3. From the quality of his Ground. Ib.
4. From the improving of it. 135 5. From the fencing of it. 137 6. From the
grass of it. 138 7. From the Thorns in it. 140 8. From the Stones in it. 141 9.
From the Worms in it. 142 10. From the Ant or Pismire. 144
Sect. 2. Lessons from his Corn. 145 1. From his Plowing for Corn. 146 2. From
his Sowing of Corn. 147 3. From the Springing of his Corn. 149 4. From the
Reaping and In-gathering of it. 151 5. From the Threshing of his Corn. 153 6.
From the Winnowing of his Corn. 156
Sect. 3. The Husbandmans Lessons from his Flocks. 156 1. From his Oxen. Ibid.
2. From his Kine. 158 3. From his Horse. 159 4. From his Sheep. 160 5. From his
swine. 162
Sect. 4. The Husbandmans Lessons from his Orch^d. 163 1. From the variety and
kinds of his trees. 164 2. From the planting of his trees. 166 3. From the
pruning of his trees. 167 4. From the Birds in his trees. 169
Sect. 5. The Husbandmans Lessons from his Garden. 171 1. From the flowers of
his Garden. Ib. 2. From the watering of his Garden. 172 3. From the weeds in
his Garden. 174 4. From the Bees in his Garden. 175
Sect. 6. The Husbandmans Lessons from his House. 177 1. From the
inconveniences of ^is house. 178 2. From the conveniences of his house. 179

CHAP. VII.
The special Graces requisite for the Husbandman. 181 Sect. 1. Patience. 182 1.
To Wait. Ib. 2. To Bear. 183
Sect. 2. Discretion. 185 1. In his Affairs. Ib. 2. About his Family. 186 3.
About his Estate. Ib. 4. In Religion. 187
Sect. 3. Heavenliness. 188 Sect. 4. Vprightness. 190 Sect. 5. Love to his
Neighbor. 193 Sect. 6. Contentedness. 197 1. With his Calling. Ib. 2. With his
Portion in his Calling. 199
Sect. 7. Faith. 200
CHAP. VIII.
The Abuse of Husbandry. 205 Sect. 1. By Drunkenness and Gluttony. 1b. Sect. 2.
By cruelty to the Creature. 208 Sect. 3. By drudging. 210 Sect. 4. By rash
Swearing. 214 Sect. 5. By Covetousness. 218 Sect. 6. By Base or wrong Ends. 221
How far we may make Riches, etc. our end. 222
CHAP. IX.
The Husbandmans Designs. 224 Sect. 1. The Glory and Pleasing of God. 1b. Sect.
2. The Salvation of his Soul. 227 Sect. 3. The Public Good. 230 Sect. 4. The
Education and Provision for his Children. 232 Sect. 5. To pay unto every man
his own. 235 Sect. 6. Ability to do good, and to Communicate. 236
CHAP. X.
R^es for the Husbandman in his Calling. 240 Sect. 1. Learn Prudence and
Diligence in it. 241 Sect. 2. Submit unto Providence. 244 Sect. 3. Make a
Treasure of God. 246 Sect. 4. Use the World as not abusing it. 249 Sect. 5.
What you would that men should do to you, do ye to them. 252 Sect. 6. Endeavor
after a cheerful heart. 256 Sect. 7. Take a special care for the good of your
Children. 258 Sect. 8. Purchase some choice Books, and read them well. 263
Sect. 9. Pay your great Landlord his Rent. 266 1. In secret. 268 2. In your
Families. A discourse about Family Duties. 269 3. On the Sabbath. 272
Sect. 10. The Conclusion. 274
ERRATA.
PAge 2. Line 26. Read (...) p. 14. 1. (...). (...). did. p. 20. 1 26. r. (...)
p. 24. 1. 14. r. Artificers. p. 27.1.3. r. Egypt. p. 40.1.12. r. vivit. p. 41.
1. pen. for (...) r. and. p. 59.1. 12. r. have made him. p. 70.1.18. r. how. p.
75.1.23. r. heart. p. 79. 1. 17. r. groan. p. 87.1.29. r. affected. p. 1381.14.
r. this. p. 145. Mar. r. (...) p. 212.1.3. r. cruel. p. 225.1.30. r. deporting.
p. 226.1.29. r. Gold. p. 231. 1. 13. r. die. p. 254. 1. 12. r. then. Marg. for
(...) r. Tables. p. 262. 1. 32. r. your.

CHAPTER I. The Text propounded and explained; some previous observations
premised.
Genesis, Chap. 2. Verse 15. And the LORD GOD took the Man, and put him into
the Garden of Eden, to dress it and 'to keep it.

SECTION I. I.

INtending some useful Instructions The coherence and explication of the Text.
for the Husbandman, I thought it best to take him, as God at first left him:
This Scripture being best able to speak for the Antiquity and Excellency of his
Calling, though others will prove more apposite to speak, to his present Duties
and Temptations.

The First Chapter of this Book is a most certain History of the Ancient
Things: the Author infallible, the Matter important, the Style majestic, the
Method exact and succinct, the Penman learned and honest: A Chapter to be
often read, with much Faith and great Thankfulness.

This second Chapter reviews and dilates upon the latter part of the former;
for all that is said herein, must needs be done in the sixth day: And a great
days work it was; in that day our Mother Eve was made, Eden planted, and our
Father Adam put into it, to dress it and to keep it. Well for us if there had
been no more work done that day; but the best of it is, the bones our Father
Adam broke, our brother Adam (the second of that name) has so pieced, that
they are stronger than before.

But to be short; (as our Historian is) when God had instituted a Sabbath,
verse. 2. 3. recapitulated some of the Creation, verse. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and
described the garden of Eden, (before which, in order of time, the subsequent
story of the woman's creation, should come in) He brings our first Parents in
this Text, and settles them in a calling.

So that, this Scripture is a narrative of the first employment of the first
Man in the world. Ancient matters are the Subject of men's scrutiny. 1 Chro.
4.22, 23. And these are ancient things. Speaking of those that dwelt among
Plants and Hedges for the Kings work.
Here is a piece of Antiquity. The Arcadians. long since would impose a belief
upon the world, that the Moon was their Junior, and were therefore called
(...). But here is a true History of a Man, that was but two days younger than
the Moon, and you have him here disposed into a Calling. Wherein observe,

I. The Author of his employment, [The Lord God.] The Author of our Being, is
fittest to be the Author of our Calling. And the Lord God took the Man Whom he
made, which the Greek adds here, is not to be found in the Hebrew.
, and put him, etc. Jehovah Elohim, the Eternal Being, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost.

He took him (that is, as the Rivet. Museul.
most judicious, from the place where he was created, though others hold, that
he was created in Paradise And say the word Took may well be translated Left,
as it is Judge. 3. 1.
) and put him. The word in the (...)
Hebrew signifies a gentle leading, as a mother leads her child.

Kings may possibly cause the poor to be put apprentices, but they keep their
state, and do it rather out of pity, than out of love: But the great God
conducts this worthy creature Man (...)
, This Man into his new employment. What love was there between God and Man,
before Sin came between? The Lord his God brought him to house, he brought him
to his farm, and permitted to him almost all the profits thereof for his
labor. Muse, in loc.


II. Here Is the Place of his employment, [The Garden of Eden] The sweetest
place on earth. Described at large in the seven precedent verses, 1. By its
Name, that signifies Pleasure it self. 2. By its Nature, a Garden, not for the
Quantity thereof, being (no doubt) a Demesne of suitable largeness, for the
greatest Prince then on earth; but for the sweetness and goodness of the place.
Described further 3. by its Situation, Eastward, to receive the first and most
healthy rays of the ^un. And then so wooded and watered, as no place must ever
expect the like: There was every Tree pleasant to the sight, and good for food,
There was the Tree of Life in the midst of the Garden, and the Tree of
knowledge of Good and Evil: And a most famous fourbrancht River, that watered
the Place: And here was our father Adam seated, as well as heart could with.
All which particularities argue (no doubt) that such a real place there was,
and is, however defaced: not so high as the Moon or middle Region of the air,
as some have thought, nor that it comprehends the whole Earth, as others, for
whither then was Man driven upon his fall? much less, that all this was only an
Allegory, for then (as Epiphanius well) the whole story must fall; If no real
Paradise, then no Rivers, no Tree forbidden, no Eve nor Adam. A Place (though
diverse give great light, where to * Sr. Walter Ral. Hot kins, etc.
find the situation thereof, yet) on purpose I think concealed, that we might
search for another Paradise, whence we shall fall no more.

III. Here is the Kind of his employment or Calling. The Lord God put him into
the Garden, not to divide his time between sleeping, sporting, and feeding,
though he was so great a Man; nor only to contemplate the excellency and
goodness of his Maker, though he was so good a Man: But 1. to Dress, and 2.
Keep the Garden. This word to Dress, in the Original, when it is applied to
God, signifies to worship and adore him; when it is applied to man, to obey and
serve him; when to the Earth, it signifies to till, to dress it: To subdue it,
that it may serve us; or [as the Dutch Annot.] to husband it Pros^indere,
irriga^, severe, et st^ qua sunt ejusmodi. Trem^l. n loc.
God had given Man a good estate, and his Calling was to make the best of it,
which was by husbanding the ground, from whence he was taken. And also his work
was to Keep it, which word is not used in opposition to selling or giving it,
for in that age there was no purchaser to buy, nor silver to pay for land; and
yet for all that this great Prince made all away, and put all his estate into
his mouth at once, He lost all (no intail being made) at one unhappy throw. Nor
is this keeping to be referred to Adam himself, To dress him, that is Adam, so
August. but the Hebr. femin. makes against that.
as if he were placed there, to keep himself: But the keeping here intended was
to preserve it safe from danger. And though there were no imminent peril, nor
visible enemy, yet it was proper to a Garden to be husbanded within, and fenced
without, and this was his work. Or to keep it in tillage, and in that dignity
and beauty which it received thereby. Tremel.
Indeed his Authority then was an Hedge, and the hardiest Lion durst not stir
against his Orders, no hurtful Beast durst come into all that holy Mountain:
while he had peace with God, there was a League offensive and defensive between
him and all the Creatures, so that he could dress his Garden with delight, and
keep it with ease when he had done; and yet work and care he must. Come my
Creature and my Friend (says God) you must have a Calling; Dress me this
Garden, and keep it well. Here we must gather up two or three fragments, that
nothing be lost.

SECT. II.
And first observe hence, That every man 2. An Observation.
should have a Calling. It is a dangerous condition to be destitute of a
Calling. If any man might have claimed freedom from employment, sure our
father Adam might. For his Descent and Blood, He was, says the Evangelist
(Luke 3. last) the Son of God; For his Quality, He was, says the Psalmist (Ps.
8. 5.) but little lower than the Angels, and crowned with glory and honor: For
his Estate (ver. 6.) Thou did put all things under his feet, all sheep and
oxen, and the Breast of the field; He was high Steward over all the Earth, and
all therein: For his Knowledge, Wisdom and Parts, beyond all his Posterity,
the second Adam only excepted, put all their abilities together: And for his
Grace and Holiness, He had the Image of God fairly graven upon him: And yet all
these could obtain no Writ of case for this great-man, from an employment.
Paradise served not only to feed his senses, but to exercise his hands. If
happiness had consisted in doing nothing, Man had not been employed. All his
delights could not have made him happy in an idle life; Man therefore is no
sooner made than he is set to work; neither Greatness, nor Perfection can
privilege a folded hand Bp. Hall Contempl.
. Let no man then imagine, that he can be excused in idleness, or in an
insignificant Kind of life by his Desoent, Quality, Estate, Parts or Graces.
When God Almighty had but one Child in the world, he bestowed him in a Calling.
The Angels themselves must have a Calling, They are ministering Spirits; yea our
Lord Jesus himself, though the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, yet
it is most probable, he was conversant in some employment, until he entered upon
the exercise of his Ministry.

A man may be said to be without a Calling, when he wants good employment to
fill up his time. No man has one hour to spare in all his life, but should be
spent either in doing or receiving Good; And therefore when Recreation is used
for Pass-time, it loses the true end of it. Sure I am, we are commanded in the
Scripture to Ephesians. 5.16
Redeem time, but no where to pass it away: In this sense it is a singular
happiness that is Isa 65 20
mentioned of the Old man, that Fills his days. And in general, when a man
brings no good or profit to the Church or Commonwealth, That Is one of no
Calling.

For every man should be of some use in the Body Politic, as well as in the
Body Mystical, or else he is but an Artificial member, a mere wooden leg.
Though we are Of another world, yet we are In this world at present, and we
must see that it lose nothing by us: As we are the better for it, and have our
subsistence out of it, so we must make a conscience, that it be the better for
us, and be propped up by us. And indeed it is our Safety, as well as Duty, to
be some way well employed For he that is out of a Calling, is under the Devils
Temptation, and from under Gods Protection. If our Mother Eve had been as busy
as our Father Adam, Satan had not so easily intrapped her in his temptation.
Sometimes non vacat is as good a remedy against a temptation, as non licet, I
have no Liesure will cut the tempter off, as well as I have no Leave. The
flying Fowl is seldom smitten, but the sitting; and the busy man escapes many
a snare; 1 Timothy 5.13. And not only idle, but tatlers also, and busy bodies,
etc. Its a rare thing to be idle and no worse; An idle hand has usually a
busy tongue, and those that do not what they ought, use to speak what they
ought not.

And then he that has no employment, liv^ out of Gods protection; As the
Servant, that steals out of his Masters business, if he come in harms way, he
has the amends in his own hands; If ought befall him in his Calling, his
Master will regard and help him. So if ought befall thee in thy Calling, God
will bear thee out and bear thee up; But when evil befalls thee in no Calling,
God is not bound to see to thee or provide for thee. Tertu^ian speaks of a
Christian, who going to a Stage Play was possessed by the Devil, who being asked,
how he durst possess a Christian, who was set apart for God; answered thus, I
found her in My place.

And besides all this, the Apostle lays down a golden rule 2 These. 3. 10. If
any will not work, neither shall be e^t. God may justly say, Look to your
selves, you live under no promise or protection of mine.

Let this Note stand to convince all idle and useless persons, ciphers that
stand for nothing, but to eat, and talk, and dress, and laugh, and dye: that
never spend a drop of sweat, unless to pursue their pleasures, nor a
considering thought, unless to provide for them; that bestow the one half of
the day to deck their bodies, and the other half to defile their souls. Alas
Sirs, what do you think on, if indeed you dare think of any thing unseen? If
you would not be Brutes, and love not to be Saints, refuse not to be Men and
Women; refuse not to obey Reason, you that scorn (...) submit to Religion. Can
you imagine that such noble Souls were given you for such worthless lives? will
such accounts as these pass before the Judge of Heaven and Earth? Item, Spent
each day from five of the Clock in the Morning to Three afternoon, in dressing,
painting and perfuming, and three hours more at Night in unpasting and
undressing again. Item, spent all one day in hunting, all the next in drinking,
etc. How would Adam admire that such Sons, and Eve that such Daughters should
proceed from them? How would Abraham and Sarah be ashamed of them? How will God
and Christ be ashamed to own them, or glorify them in Heaven, that never
considered to glorify him on Earth? They then shall know that unprofitable
Servants and Prodigals shall be packt together, and he that did not his Masters
will, shall go to hell as well as he that crossed it.

Receive then a word of Exhortation hence, O all Parents and Children that
would go to Heaven; you Parents, get your Children into Christ's School, and
into honest Callings, and then leave them to God; whether ye be rich or poor,
cast employments for them, most suitable for their Outward, most safe for their
Inward Man. When Adam had but two Sons, Cain and Abel, they had each a Calling;
though Cain was born to more Land than any man ever since, yet he had an
employment, Genesis 4. 2. Abel was a Keeper of the Sheep, but Cain was a Tiller of
the Ground.

And then ye Children, be willing, and earnest for honest Callings. Idleness is
sweet, but the bread of idleness has no taste; Think not that your Privilege,
which is your Punishment. Alas! ont of employment, and then you are tinder for
every spark; and if you be not fit for Earth, you are not fit for Heaven.

This in General, Our Father Adam iu Innocence had a Calling, and let every one
that descends from him, write after him.

SECT. III.
But to be a little more particular, from the. 3. A second Observation.
Author of this employment we may observe, That its sweet to beled and put into
a Calling by the Lord. As our Father Adam here By an Angel, a^ Aug. Perer.
, God took him by the hand and led him into his Calling. He that is disposed by
the Lord, is well provided for. Hagar was hard posed, Genesis 16. 8. Hagar (says
God) whence come thou, and whither wilt thougo? She was disposing her self
without her Maker, or her Masters leave, and so back again she is sent.

Now you are led into a Calling by the Lord, when your Prayers and his
Providence have made the way. When good Jacob was turned into the wide world,
he goes straight to Heaven, and there vowed this vow, Genesis 28. 20. If God will
be with me, and keep me in this way that I go, etc. Then shall the Lord be my
God. Was this vow in vain? In no wise; for his God kept him, and disposed of
him well as heart could wish, and sent him back in two Bands, though all his
stock when he went abroad, was his Staff. He that ventures into a Calling
without God, goes without his guide, who has said, Prove. 3. 6. In all thy
ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

And so when His Providence has led the way. We have, in the disposing of
Isaac into the world, both these together, Genesis 24. 14. Prayer went before, and
Providence followed after. And verse. 50. It is agreed, says Laban and Bethuel,
The thing proceeds from the Lord, we cannot speak a word against it. It is a
sweet thing to sail with the gale of Providence, and sharp to sail against it.

And then, when thy Calling is lawful, and thy ends right, it strongly argues
that God leads thee into it, and this is a sweet thing.

For then you will bring honor to God, and that is the honor of a Calling;
For whether we live, we live unto the Lord, and whatsoever we do, it ought to
be done to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. God has a greater Rent of glory
from a poor Thresher, then from many a Prince in the world.

And then when you are led into your Callings by the Lord, you will better
brook the inconveniences thereof: for every Calling has some of these, which
you will digest the better, when you are led into them by such an hand. The Cup
which my Father has given me shall I not drink? who can but cheerfully drink
the Cup that comes out of so good an hand? Lord! Here thou have put me; though
my work be hard, fare hard, usage hard, yet here I Will stay, till the same hand
fetch me off again. And so holy Jacob, Genesis 31.40. In the day the drought
consumed him, and the frost by night, and his sleep departed from his eyes, and
yet twenty years he stuck to it. God had disposed him there, and his God should
dismiss him thence, for so says the story, Genesis 31.3. And the Lord said unto
Jacob, Return to the Land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred, and I will be
with thee.

And therefore, let me advise all that make any reckoning of God or of his
blessing, Let him carve out Callings for you, and not carnal policy or carnal
friends without him. Crave his direction and benediction, your wisest
contrivances he can blast with a breath, and demolish your Castles in the Air
with half a word; whereas if thou acknowledge him, though thy beginning be
small, thy latter end he will make great, and they that are ruled by him, he
will never see them want.

SECT. IV.
IN the next place, let us observe from the 4. A third observation.
Place of his employment, The Lord put him into the Garden of Eden, That its a
great privilege to be placed in an Eden, that is Comfortably. Our Father Adam
had the finest Seat in all the Country, the sweetest on Earth, and the nighest
unto Heaven, he had the dew of Heaven and the fatness of the Earth.

Now when your temporal, corporal, and spiritual conveniences are greater then
their contrary inconveniences, then is your situation comfortable. And God
expects that you praise him more, and serve him better then others, Psalm. 16.
6, 7. The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places -- I will bless the Lord.
The sweeter Seat, the greater Rent you must pay unto God. When thou look on
thy habitation, bless the Lord; when thou walk in thy ground, bless the
Lord; many others they have barren ground, rotten house, unwholesome Air,
dangerous situation; now if it be otherwise with thee, say not I have gotten
this by my wit, or labor, or sword, but Lord thy right hand, and t^ine arm,
and the light of thy countenance, because thou hadsta favor unto me, Psalm. 44.
3.

If you did but see in a glass, the miserable houses of many a child of God,
you would bless the Lord upon your knees, and never repine at some petty
inconvenience that troubles your mind; yea make a step sometimes into the poor
man's Coat, and behold the pitiful abiding that he has, and then praise the
Lord; who sets the bounds of your habitatio^s, and who might have taken an
house for thee in Bedlam, in a Dungeon.

But this is not all, Verbal praises cannot pay off real Mercies; and therefore
see you make a suitable return of honor and service unto God. The Sun shines on
the Stars, and they reflect light on us: so seeing God has so singularly
provided for you, be singularly useful to him. If you be lean in a fat pasture,
you may be justly turned to Commons. If Israel be unfruitful in Canaan, he must
be sent to Babel, Deuteronomy. 28. 47. Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with
joyfulness and gladness of heart for the abundance of all things, Therefore
thou shall serve thine enemies in the want of all things. The nearer and liker
to Heaven thy place is, the better; howbeit, any habitation on this side Hell,
may content a poor sinner as thou art.

CHAP. II. The main, Doctrine proposed, An Husbandman described, and the
Lawfulness of his Calling.
SECT. I.
AND now we are come to the Kind Cap. 2. The main Doctrine, Description and
Lawfulness of Husbandry.
of this great Man's employment, and this was to Dress and keep the ground, to
be an Husbandman, from whence we gather this Doctrinal conclusion.

That Husbandry is a most ancient and excellent Calling.

It was a wise answer of Father Latimer, 1. The chief Doctrine delivered.
when his Enemies accused him to K. Henry 8. for his malepert preaching before
him a little while before, said He, Your Grace has many fitter persons to
preach before You than my self, and I would be glad to be dismis't. But if
there be no remedy, but that I must preach before the King, I will preach as to
a King, and suitable to his place; which answer took well, and got him off: Even
so, My dearly Beloved, since it is my lot to preach in the Country among
Husbandmen, I will preach as to Husbandmen, something suitable to your Calling,
and that from this Text and Doctrine.

In the handling of this Subject I shall show 1. What an Husbandman is. 2. The
Lawfulness of his Calling. 3. The Excellencies thereof. 4. The Inconveniences.
5. His Temptations. 6. His Lessons from his Calling. 7. The Graces requisite.
8. The abuse of it. 9. His Designs. 10. Some Rules for him in his Calling. And
first of the First, viz. What an Husbandman ^s.

I shall take him here in his largest Capacity; for since our Father Adams
time, diverse other Callings have been cantelled out of it, but he had it
entire; and as he left it, I shall take it in this place.

A Husbandman is a man that works profit The Description of an Husbandman.
out of the Earth, that makes the ground that bred him, keep him; that makes
the Earth bear his charges to Heaven. And so the Holy Agricultura est Ars quae
docet Usu ram cum serrafacere.
Ghost describes him, Jam. 5.7. The Husbandman (first works, then) waits
for the precious fruits of the Earth. At first this was done without toil, The
ground was dressed with as little pain, and as much pleasure, as now it is walked
on, or as a tree is pruned; but since the Fall, the Calling is somewhat worse,
(All Trades decay) but yet a good Husband may mend it. A Christian Husbandman,
that can husband his Husbandry, may live comfortably here, and happily
hereafter.

A Christian Husbandman is a man with his hands in the Earth and his heart in
Heaven; he lives above that which he cannot live without; he is daily Digging
his Grave, and at length lays him in it; he makes the Earth to feed him, and
at last to cover him: The Physician is bred out of the Corruption of our
Bodies, and the Lawyer is bred out of the Corruption of our Manners, The
Tradesmen live upon one another, But the Husbandman lives upon the precious
fruits of the Earth, and sustains them all.

SECT. II.. 2.

THe Second Point to be handled is, The II. The lawfulness of Husbandry.
Lawfulness of his Calling. It stands men upon to be well assured of the
lawfulness of their Callings, else every stroke they take in them is Sin. In
the choice of Callings, think of this, Is my Calling lawful? And am I lawfully
called into it? No Calling on earth has precedence to this for lawfulness. Its
true, the lawfullest Calling may be abused by a graceless man. That
transcendent Calling of the Ministry, the Sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 17. did so
abuse, that men did abhor the offerings of the Lord. Woe, woe for ever (if they
repent not) to all such Hophnites, that drive the Lords people from the Lords
offerings. But this can lay no imputation upon that worthy Calling, A Spider
can suck poison from the sweetest Flower; and so a bad Husband may make shift
to grow bankrupt on the best Calling in he World; but yet in its self the
Husbandman has as much to say for the lawfulness of his employment, as any man
under Heaven. For

1. It is a Calling of Gods choyre, and that is the best Portion that God
carves; If there had been the least sin in it, he would never have disposed our
Father Adam into it. He In old Rome if a man were degraded from the Rustic to
the Urbane Tribes, consisting of Artisans etc it was thought a great disgrace.
Plin l. 18. c. 3.
that knew all the Callings that men would invent, he pitched upon this: And he
chose it for his eldest Son, and you know men will serve the first, best. God
tells his people Israel, he would bring them to a Land, that he had spied out
for them; and if there be an happy place on earth, God can spy it out: why,
this was a Calling, that God had spied out for his Eldest Child Adam; Therefore
lawful no doubt.

2. It is a Calling of man's industry, and so the more lawful. When a Calling is
driven on only by Art and Cunning, there is sin enough in such Callings; but
the Hand is more innocent than the Head. There is no guile in innocent labor.
The sweat of the Brows is harmless sweat. If there be any flaw, it is in the
Man, not in the Husbandry, which is as innocent as the state of Innocence it
self.

Indeed most other Callings are lawful too in themselves, but they border more
nearly upon sin and temptation, than this does. They may be more profitable,
but cannot be more lawful.

Think of this, Poor Husbandman, to thy comfort; when thou art sweating at thy
Plough, This is heavy cheer, But I am in my Calling, my lawful Calling. This
Sweat needs not to be repented of, I need not wash this sweat with tears.
Though this be painful, yet it is not sinful. The lawfulness of it will make
amends for the painfulness thereof. And that is the Second Head, namely the
Lawfulness of the Husbandmans Calling.

CHAPTER III. Cap 3. The Excellencies of the Husbandmans Calling.
The Excellencies of the Husbandmans Calling.
ANd now let us advance a step higher, Some things premised.
and for the Glory of God, and the encouragement of the Husbandman, observe the
Excellencies of this Calling; yet before I proceed I would lay down these
Premises.

1. That it has Inconveniences also; for the wise God has set the one over
against the other, to the end that man should find nothing after him. The
employment without inconvenience is in Heaven: There Is Harvest without VVinter,
a fair Crop and no sweat, an House without decays, and Ground paved with
Rubies.

2. Upon some Callings God has set a fairer stamp of Honor, than on the
Husbandmans. Though his first created Son were a Tiller of the ground, yet his
first Begotten Son was an Husbandman of Souls, and did sow for Heaven. And the
Husbandman will now willingly give precedence to the Magistrate and Minister,
for the Authority of God vested in the one, and the Work of God managed by the
the other; as considering that the Magistrate is a more public good than he,
and the Soul (wherein the Minister labors) more worthy than the body.

3. The Difficulties of a Calling do not prejudice the Dignity thereof. 2 Cor.
6. 1. We then as workers together with him]. The Ministry is a most difficult
work, able to tire an Angels arms; but yet being workers together with God,
this dignifies the Calling again. It is a worthy attempt to seek out the
Philosophers Stone, which would convert Dust into Gold, but no attempt is
harder. In a pit of Marle or Limestone the Husbandman finds it, and makes a
quicker return of gain by that, than the Chemist does by the other; The poorest
things are fullest of ease, (...), the more honorable, the more hard.

4. I must premise further, That the most profitable Callings are not always
the best. The Merchant fetches home greater riches, but he brings a Disease
oftentimes with them; The Lawyer makes greater purchases; but sometimes
purchases a curse with them; The Tradesman sometimes leaves a greater Estate
behind him, but then often takes a wounded Conscience with him. Lot Gen 13. 10.
had a Plain to live in, that was even as the garden of the Lord, yet was it the
sink of sin, and shortly after a Lake of Brimstone. The sweetest meats are not
always the wholsomest; Profit is not the measure of Goodness; That is a rich
Calling that inriches God himself, that is, which most glorifies him.

5. Though Husbandry be a brave Calling, yet the Christian Husbandman makes it
much better. In this sense also that is true, 1 Timothy 4. 8. For bodily increase
profits little, but Godliness is profitable unto all things. Thy weary days
and pamful nights profit but a little, and for a little while; but Godliness
with them brings universal and eternal profit. As he that makes Instruments of
music, has a fine employment, but he who has the Art of Music, that can
tune and use them, far outstrips him: So naked Husbandry is a worthy Calling,
but the Christian Husbandman that knows how to use it to the best, and makes
heavenly Music out of it, has a great advantage. Caius Sejus bonus vir, et eo
melior quod Christianus. The meanest Calling is honorable, if God be in it.
Christ in the lowest heart, and Christ in the lowest Calling makes it happy.

6. Yet no man shall be saved by his Calling. You must not conclude from any
thing said, or to be said, that a man of such an excellent employment must
needs be saved. No, no; thy harmless Calling without an holy heart will not
save thy soul; It is Christ in you, that is the Hope of Glory. The Crown it
self cannot keep from death, nor can your Calling save you from hell, without
the grace of God.

The Ministers Calling (one would think) were sure to save him, one purposely
employed to describe Heaven and Hell to the life, whose proper Subject is
Christ, and the Soul, and another world; yet alas! all they are not saved, Mat.
7. 22. We have prophesied in thy Name, [VVe have opened the Gates of Heaven to
others, and must we be shut out our selves?] And in thy Name we have cast out
Devils, [and must we be cast to the Devil?] yea, says Christ, I do not know
you, nor never did, if you have been workers of iniquity. The poor Prophet, 1
Kings 13.24. that had substantially warned others from the Devil, could not
escape himself from the Lion, when he disobeyed. And therefore how excellent
soever the Husbandmans calling is, yet he may go to Hell from the Plough, if he
have not saving Grace. And these things to prevent mistakes being thus
premised, let us view the Excellencies of this Calling.

SECT. I.. 1.

The First Excellency of the Calling of an Excel. 1. God was the immediate
Author of it.
Husbandman is, That God himself was the immediate Author of it. So says the
Text, The Lord God put him into the Garden, to Dress and to keep it. Here are
his first Indentures drawn in the state of Innocence. And when he had forfelted
these, and broken one material Clause therein, about eating the forbidden
fruit, yet we find God again, after the fall of our Father Adam, putting him
into this Calling Nil ta^ r^gale videtur quam studium Agri colendi. Xenoph. And
tells that Cyrus that great King sowed himself a Field, and set Trees with his
own hand
again, Genesis 3. 23. So the Lord sent him forth from the Garden of Eden, to till
the ground from whence he was taken. So that this Calling was of Gods own
invention. We read Genesis 4. 20, 21, 22. who were the Fathers or Authors of this
and that Calling, but the Husbandman is Apprentice to none but God. Isa. 28.
24, 26. Does the Plowman plow all day to sow? does he open and break the clods
of his ground? -- His God does instruct him to discretion, and does teach him.
And he must be well taught that God teaches. Let us advise, says God, what
Calling shall we pitch upon for this worthy Creature? How shall we dispose most
nobly of him? what employment is worthy of him that wears our Image upon him?
Then falls in this excellent way of Husbandry; He shall be an Husbandman. Now
it is a maxim, A summo Bono nil nisi bonum. The Sun may sooner send out a
Cloud, then the Chiefest Good authorize any thing, but what is excellent. As on
the contrary, The sin of Lying has this base pre-eminence, that it was the
firstborn of the Devil, He is a liar and the Father of it; He stands the first
Liar on record; So our Husbandmans Calling has this high pre-eminence, that
God was his only Master, and he his first Apprentice. And therefore of all
employments, he has most reason to stand up for God, and depend on him.

It was the highest ambition of the heathen Artificer, to derive their Arts
from some of their Gods, but alas their Gods were men, the most vile and
wicked men: and if they accounted it an honor, to receive the original of
their Occupations from such, how much greater honor has the Husbandman, who
has the Maker of Heaven and Earth, for the Author and Inventour of his
Employment?

SECT. II.. 2.

A Second Excellency of the Husbandmans Excel. 2. The Holy Ghost brings most
comparisons from it.
Calling is, That the Holy Ghost brings most Comparisons from it. Most Books in
the Scripture full of them. Plowing, Planting, feeding, etc. The Husbandman
has scarce a Tool, but it is put into the Canon of holy Writ. If the Holy
Ghost would teach by a Parable, he goes to the Husbandman, Mat. 13. A Sower
went forth to sow. If Jesus Christ, would threaten by a Parable, the Husbandman
shall be an instance, Luke 20. A certain man let forth his Vineyard to
Husbandmen, etc. If the Holy Ghost would Comfort by a Parable, he goes still to
the Husbandman, James 5. 7. Be patient therefore, Brethren, to the Coming of
the Lord: Behold, the Husbandman waits, etc. God in these descending unto us,
because we cannot easily ascend unto him, and making use of this world to
instruct us about another. So that every business of the Husbandman, may well
be a Sermon to him, seeing God himself has taken the Text. And this I think is
one Design of Parables, not only to bring down heavenly things to our
Understandings, but to scrue up our Hearts by our sight of things below, and
employment herein, to heavenly thoughts and applications. So that it appears a
great honor, that God has done to Husbandry, to inoculate it so into the
Scripture, and to ennoble the same, by applying it so much to heavenly Uses.

Yea the Lord himself has taken the Name of an Husbandman upon him, John 15.
1. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman, etc. As the King will
be free of some Company, and a great honor it is unto them. As King James was
free of the Clothworkers Company. K. Charles I. of the Company of Merchant
Tailors. K. Charles II. of the Company of Grocers. So the King of Heaven seems
to choose to be free of the Company of Husbandmen, and that is much for their
Honor, Profit, and Instruction; so that he who reproaches the poor Husbandman,
does in a sort reflect upon God himself, who will uphold the Company of
Husbandmen to the end of the world.

SECT. III. 3.

The Third Excellency of the Husbandman Excel. 3. He depends most on God.
is, That he lives and depends most upon God. From Seedness to Harvest, he is
bound to a constant dependence on God, and from Harvest to Seedness again. He
wants Rain, and he goes to God; next he needs fair weather, and to God he must
go again. This month he would have Frost, it will cherish his Corn: Another
Month the Frost would spoil his Orchard; One while he should have Snow, it
would keep his ground as warm as Wool, at another time it would starve his
Cattle; At one time he longs for Wind, to purify the Air, at another time he
is afraid of it, least it beat down his Corn: And this continual need sends him
unto God, who gives his Snow like wool, and scatt^reth the hoary Frost like
ashes, who gives his Wind to blow, and the Waters flow, and fitleth him with
the finest of the Wheat, Psalm. 147. 14, 16, 17. So that we may say of the
Husbandman, as 'twas said of the Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 11, 11, 12. The Land is
a Land of Hills and Vallyes (not like E^ypt, which being a Plain, depended upon
the constant overflowings of Nilus, to make it fruitful, but this) drinks
water of the Rain of Heaven, a Land which the Lord thy God cares for, the eyes
of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the Year to the
end of the Year. Even so the Husbandman has a Calling, that the Lord must care
for him, from the beginning of the Year to the end of the Year, And this is the
Excellency of it. They are base Callings that depend on Man, (though many
cringing Courtiers will not think so) but they are royal Callings that depend
on God. Servants know their wages, but the Child depends; and who has the more
excellent place, think ye? The good Husbandman exercises, his Faith and
Patience every day. Some Callings find exercise for Corruption, but this
Calling finds exercise for Graces; And he when he cannot pray for Grace for his
Soul, yet can pray for fair weather for his business. Of all men he had need to
learn to pray, and that in earnest.

SECT. IV. 4.

A Fourth Excellency of Husbandry is, That Excel. 4. It is au harmless Calling.
it is an harmless and deceitless Calling. There is not naturally nor usually
that fraud and cunning in the Husbandman, as in other men. In many Callings,
deceit is half the Trade; but plain dealing is the genuine frame of the good
Husbandman, Genesis 25. 27. Esau, he was a cunning Hunter, but Jacob was a Plain
man, dwelling in Tents; void of dissimulation and deceit; And he, we must not
lose him, he was an Husbandman in our large acceptance, for our Father Adam
was not set only to dress the earth, but to keep it too, and all that fed
thereon. A plain man is the very description of an Husbandman. The Statesman
deals in policy, the Soldier in cruelty, the Tradesman in dissimulation; the
deepest policy of the Husbandman is to get bread for his Family, and pay his
Rent; his greatest cruelty is to dig into the Bowels of the earth, his
cunningest dissimulation is in fraying the fowls from his Corn, and to trappan
and draw in a Rivulet to water his Medow^: Those are his Designs. If he can but
ensnare the Birds that harm him, he will never over reach his B^thren that hurt
him not. If he can learn cunning to sow his ground in the fittest time, he
never contrives to ^eap where he did not sow. And so though his income be not
great, yet it is as solid as it seems; he has shorter Commons, but others have
a larger reckoning; and that estate which comes too soon, seldom stays too
long with any man.

Indeed in this Iron Age, too much fraud is stolen under this coat offreeze,
but in the beginning it was not so; nor yet can the Husbandman cogg and flatter
and circumvent with that impudence which others have: he Plowes not with the
subtle Fox, but with the laborious Ox; and if he cannot thereby reach a
livelihood, he will rather fare hardly, himself, than deal hardly with his
Brethren. Here, says he, I might sell bad for good, or less measure for full
measure, but so might my next Crop be blasted; and if I deal deceitfully with
men, my Kine and Sheep might next time cast their Young, and deceive me. I will
be just and honest, sink or swim. Plain dealing is my only Jewel, and though by
using it I dye a beggar, yet shall I be one of Gods poor, and then I care not.

SECT. V.. 5.

A Fifth Excellency of this Calling is, That Excel. 5. It was the first Calling.
it was the first Calling in the World, and sustains all others. There has
been great strife about the Antiquity of Countries, and many Arguments have
been tossed. The Egyptians sometimes showing fair, Cards for their praecedency,
and then the Phaenicians other grounds for theirs: But in Antiquity of
Callings, A mistake that Saturn taught it (...) to Janus and the Italians after
Jupiter had expelled him Crete, and that there was none in the Golden Age. See
Plin. de invent. Agricult. l.7
none can contend with the Husbandman: for ere the Sun had gone three days
Journey, he was busy in the field; so that the Spade or Plow is the most
ancient Coat of Arms that can be given by Herald. And then our Father Adam
liked the Calling so well, that he put his eldest Son on this employment Genesis
4. 2. But Cain was a Tiller of the ground. And so from Father to Son this
Calling has past to this very day in a lineal succession. And these Callings
that now outbrave him, were at first Colonies and derivations from this their
Founder. For man must have Raiment, and hence the Clothier; and an house to
dwell The chief estFamilies in Rome had their names first from their skill in
Husbandry and Corn. As the Bubulci, Pilumni, Fabil, Pisones, etc. Id. l. 18. c.
3.
in, and hence the Builder; and tools he must have for his business, hence the
Artificer in Brass and Iron; and some recreation when he is weary, and so Jubal
must have his Custom, Genesis 4. 21. But his Plow maintains them all. From his
sweat comes the Trades-mans living, and through his painful hands comes his
Landlords Silver-lace. Yea Eccl. 5. 9. The Profit of the earth is for all; the
King himself is served by the Field. As it is with a Ship, for all the rich
lading and gallant passengers that are in her, for all the curious works,
Cabbins, and carving on her, without the Rowe^s below and the Wind above, she
is but a fine Cipher, and an useless Bulk: So all the Tradesmen, Statesmen, and
Gallants in a Nation, would signify very little, without the cares and labors
of the Husbandman; If Gods Providence above, and his Plough below stand still,
we must all shortly beg or starve.

It is reported of Willigis, a Wheelers Son, (Nephew to the Husbandman) that
being made Archbishop of Mentz and Elector of the Empire, he gave in his Coat
of Arms, Three Wheels with this Motto (written in his Bedchamber in great
Letters) Willigis, Willigis, recole unde veneris, Remember from whence thou
came. It little becomes the Child, when advanced to honor, to forget his
honest poor and aged Parents; seeing without their concurrence he had never
received a Being: And it does as little become our splendid Gallants, or
richest Merchants, to despise or look big on the first of their Line, the poor
Husbandman, This is to forget the Rock whence they were hewn, and the hole of
the pit whence they were dug.

SECT. VI. 2.

THe Sixth Excellency of the Husbandmans Excel. 6. It is a Calling of less
Temptation than others.
Calling, is, That it is a Calling of less temptation than others. Not that he
is without temptations, as you will hereafter see, but his Temptations are not
so strong, as in most other Callings. For 1 John 2. 16. We read of many Kings
that have embraced this Calling, whenthey have left theirKingdomes; as
Dioclesian, Attalus, Hero, Archslaus, (...), Ulysses father.
All that is in the world, is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of life. Now his labor keeps down his lust, and his poverty helps to
quell down his pride, and sure his worldly Desires cannot compare with those of
vaster Estates, seeing the more a man has, the more unsatisfied are his
Desires. Joseph and Benjamin were own Brothers, but Joseph is exalted at Court,
and Benjamin is seated in the Country; and now whether proves the safer? why,
Benjamin he comes to Egypt humble, and modest, and sober; but Joseph, though
it is like the better man, yet he is gotten into the Court fashion, and has by
the Life of Pharaoh at his tongues end. Nay one and the same man, holy David,
who more chaste and innocent in the Country, among his Sheep? but he was not so
at the Court: So that as many great Oaks and Cedars fall, when Shrubs do keep
their standing in a storm, so the great and rich and mighty ones of the world
are often entrapped in lust, envy, pride, and Atheism; when the poor honest
Husbandman is kept innocent and clear.

I do not say but he has an Heart too like other men, and perhaps would be as
bad as they, if he had wherewith: But he has not so great temptations, his God
does not give him Wind and Tide, least he should drown himself: The Lace on a
proud Tradesmans Cloak, would suit the Husbandman all the Year, and one of his
Dinners would find his house the Month about; but yet he is adorned with the
orient Jewels of Grace within, and tastes more Covenant comforts at an
Ordinance, than the other does in seven years. He has not his Beauties in the
Windows to allure him, nor the sparkling Wine to entice him, the newest Fashion
is so far from entangling him, that it is ugly in his eyes; the charms of Music
do not inchant him, he is more taken with the music of his Bees than any
other. His Children are his usual Recreations, and his spare time he spends
with them. And his Dinner of herbs with the love of God feeds him more safely,
than a stalled Ox, and Gods hatred with it.

SECT. VII. 7.

THe seventh Excellency of the Husbandmans Excel. 7. God may be most read in
his Creatures herein.
Calling is; That God may be read most in his Creatures therein. So that when
others are studying self in their Callings, he is studying God in his calling.
Though it may be he cannot one letter on the book, yet he can study God in the
twofold Glass of his Ordinance and his Creatures. And he has an advantage
herein above most other callings, in that his Business lies among trees, and
flowers, and grass, and cattle, and even all the creatures of God. And Gods
creatures are a book in Folio, each creature is a word, and each part of it a
letter, out of which an holy heart may spell exceeding much of God, and
converse with him, as in an Ordinance, all the Day long.

So our Father Adam did; Loving Father, says he, Here is thy wisdom, there
thy mercy, in yonder Heavens thy Power and Glory, the whole Earth is full of
thy Riches. And thus as the Sun is best seen in the water, so does the
religious Husbandman better and oftener fee God in his creatures, than many
Philosophers and Divines in their books. Famous is that instance of the honest
Poor man, whom One of the Ancients found weeping over a Toad; to think of the
wonderful goodness of God, that had made him a reasonable creature, and not
such a Toad; whereat the learned man cried out, Rapiunt indocti coelum -- these
unlettered Countrymen run away with heaven, while we do only talk thereof.

The Schoolmen say, there is four ways of knowing a man, and so of knowing
God;

1. In vestigio, by the print of his foot, so we know that he is a man, but not
who it is in particular.

2. In umbra, by his shadow or picture, here we know how tall and great he is.

3. In speculo, In a glass, so man saw God at his first creation.

4. In Filio, In his Son, so we know a man's name and nature very much.

Certain it is, that an Heavenly heart meets God in his way in every thing: he
sees the footsteps of his power, wisdom and mercy in the creatures, his very
picture in his Saints, his glory in the glass of his Ordinances, his very
bowels in his Son.

The husbandman can read in a morning a sweet lecture of Dependence on God,
upon the fowls of the air; of the Providence of God, in the lillies of the
field; of the wisdom of God, in ordering the rivers to water the earth; of the
power of God in preserving his corn, and bringing it up. Presentemque refert
quaelibet, herba Deum.

SECT. VIII.. 8.

AN Eighth Excellency of Husbandry is, Excel. 8. This Calling makes neither
to^ Rich nor Poor.
That it makes a man neither too rich nor too poor. And this was a wise man's
choice and prayer. Prove. 30. 8. Give me neither poverty nor ri^ches: not but
that God can make either of them blessings, and many a man has gone to Heaven
out of a Palace, and very many out of a Cottage; but the middle state is the
safest, and that is the Husband-mans condition; his state is above Pity, and
below Envy. They that pity him, know not his comforts and contents; Herod. lib.
1. p. 12. The (...) at Delphos did adjudge one Aglaus most happy, who laboring
a little (...) in Arcadia, never went out of it, and desiring little wealth,
had little Trouble in his life. (...). (...).
and they who envy him, know not his cares and labors, I dare say never paid
his Rent. Solon accounted Tellus the Athenian, the most happy man, for living
privately on his own Lands; and thus the Husbandman is happy. That food is
best, that makes a man neither too lean and languid, nor too fat and foggy; and
that state is best, that gives a man food convenient for him.

For as for Riches, they are mercies, but they are dangerous mercies; Sin never
prospers more then in prosperity; it does emasculate and effeminate the
spirits, and nourishes so many weeds, that the winter of affliction has much
ado to master them: How loath are men to deny themselves, when they have a
great self to deny? how loath to dye, that have so much to leave? what cares
must needs invade their prayers, and break their Rest, that have abundance? And
how hard is it to be full and not forget the Lord, grow lazy in Religion, and
love the present world? So that a wise man will be as much afraid to be rich,
as others are to be poor. Now the Husbandman is seldom sick of a surfeit; If he
can reach wholesome meat and clothes, and pay his rent, and put his children in
a way to live, he has his desire.

And then on the contrary, Poverty is a woeful Disease, makes a man unuseful,
heartless and burdensome, and hazzards him on unlawful courses; He may be
tempted to distrust providence, and so steal, and take Gods name in vain; and
except men's hearts were softer, more will pity him than relieve him: Now the
Husbandman, though his fare be be hard, and his raiment course, yet he is kept
from stealing; instead of begging he relieves the beggar, and makes amends for
the smallness of his Alms, with the smiles that go with it. As our Holy Statist
says, though he wear Fu^ler H. S.
tin in his buttons, yet has he silver in his pocket, and if he wear russet
clothes, yet he makes golden payment.

SECT. IX. 9.

THe Ninth Excellency of Husbandry is, Excel. 9. It is a Calling of greatest
necessity.
That it is a Calling of the greatest necessity. It is none of the trades that
the world might well live without. Some callings serve the Delight of man, some
his Fancy, some his Lust, but this serves his Necessity. Now Necessity sets the
price on things. Sole and Sale nihil utilius. The Commonness of the Sun in
Heaven, or the Salt upon Earth, does not diminish from the worth of them,
because they This is a good work for necessary uses, Tit. 3. 14.
are so necessary: So the multitude of Husbandmen abates not their excellency,
we cannot live without them. You would read but faintly, nor I write this that
you are reading, but for some. Husbandmans sweating last harvest. How should
God have his Rent for all these creature comforts, but through his help? Or how
should man have a livelihood without his forecast? The Earth would quickly
return to her briars and thorns without his culture. Instead of Roses we must
have Nettles, and instead of Corn, brambles: And therefore let him have his
honor, we cannot live without him.

As Grace is the one thing needful for the Soul, it lives not a day in a true
sense without it; so Bread is the one thing needful for the body, and it dies
without it: without the staff of bread we fall to the ground; and who can
provide for bread without the Husbandman? Plutarch tells of one Pythis, a great
Prince, that having discovered some rich mines in his territories, employed so
many of his Subjects there, that tillage being neglected, a general dearth
followed. His prudent Queen, being sensible of the calamity of the Country,
when her Husband came hungry to dinner, had procured the Bread and Meat to be
artifi^lly made of Gold. The King was delighted with the deceit, till being
thoroughly hungry, he called for real meat: Nay, (says she) if you employ all
your Subjects in your Mines, you must expect to feed upon Gold, for nothing
else can your Kingdom afford. So that the digging in the mines must give place
to the Husbandmans digging in the ground, else they will dig but a while. You
remember that pretty Fable, of all the members mutinying against the Belly, for
that they did all the work, and she devoured all the meat; wherefore they
resolved to cut her short, she should labor as well as they, or fast for it.
Accordingly they deal with her, all the members refuse to help her: but e're
long the hands languish, the legs grow feeble, the eyes dim, and the head
light, and soul and body had like to have taken leave: At length they see their
error, and perceive that the belly maintained them all, and for all its (...)
they could not live without it, and so renewed their care thereof, and then
their strength was renewed even so, though the Husbandman have but a low
situation in the body politic, yet' if he be discouraged, neglected, or should
surcease, all degrees of men would be at a loss, and from the crown of the head
to the sole of the foot, the body politic would be sick.

SECT. X.. 10.

THe Tenth Excellency of the Husbandmans calling is, That it is an healthful
and Excel. 10. It is an healthful and cheerful Calling.
cheerful Calling. His labor is his Physic, and he purges through all his
pores; A Doc^our is seldom seen in his house, he lives above them, and mostly
lives without them, unless it be that College of Physicians, Dr. Diet, Dr.
Quiet, and Dr. Merryman, as you use to term them. He has no superfluities at
his Table to beget crudities in Fons, speculum, gramen (...) sunt alleviamen.

his stomach, is not inflamed with Sack, nor drowned in Green grass, clear
glass, and fountains pure,
Refresh eye sight, long to endure. Mr. Austen.

phlegm, nor sunk with poring Melancholy. He is singing at his work, when others
are puling in their chambers. And though he have not riches and honor, which
are only in Wisdoms left hand, yet he has length of days, which is in her
Right, and that is better, Prove. 3. 16.

Hence it is probable, that Vzziah, 2 Chro. 26. 3. lived and reigned longer
than any King before him, for verse. 10. it is said, He loved Husbandry, a
calling it seems not unworthy the love of a King. Sixteen years old when he
began to reign, and he reigned fifty two years in ^erusalem, which though we
cannot peremptorily The vapors of fresh earth by digging condense and refresh
the spirits. Bacon Hist. of Life and death, page 207. 28. Who says, That
moderate exercise, fresh airs, ^leasant odours, and wholesome meat and drink,
all profitable to long life, page 179 180. The Husb^ndman has all these. A
certain great Lord who lived long, had every morning at his awaking a clod of
fresh earth laid under his nose, for the smell thereof. Id.
ascribe to his love of Husbandry, yet considering their wholesome employment,
and the refreshing scents from the earth it self, together with the long life
of most of that calling, we may fairly guess at it.

It is a true saying comparatively taken, Qui medi^ vivit, misere visit, He is
a woeful slave, that is bound to the rules of Physic; when a man cannot rise,
nor walk, nor eat without exactest circumstances: This is the life of many a
Noble Man, and sickness is worse than this; a Cottage with health, is better
than a Crown with sickness: But our Husbandman is mostly freed from both these;
he is feasted and physick't too, most of the year, with the sweet smells of
fragrant flowers in the field; rare tunes of the sweetest and cheapest
Choristers of the Woods; refreshing sights of a fair crop; and finds more taste
in his dinner of herbs, than many others in their variety of dainties. And when
God has blessed him in the labors of the day, he can come home and sing and
rejoice with his Wife and Children at night, as if he had a set of Minstrels,
Psalm. 147. 12, 13, 14. Praise the Lord, -- for he has blessed thy Children
within thee. He makes peace in thy borders, and fills theewith the finest of
the wheat. It is a cheerful Calling. When Envy gnaws upon the heart of the
Great man, and fear and care upon the rich Merchant, this man commits his
affairs to God, and lays down his cares with his cloths by his bed side: And
you shall hear more hearty, I am sure more innocent laughter by his fires side,
than by his Landlords; And after all, Eccles. 5. 12. The sleep of the laboring
man is sweet, whether he eat little or much.

SECT. XI. 11.

THe Eleventh Excellency of the Husband^ Excel. 11. It is a sa^e Galling.
man's calling is, That it stands on safer grounds than most others. The highest
steps of Greatness are usually the most shppery, and all the ambitious man gets
by his climbing is, that he has the further to fall. -- Tolluntur in altum ut
lapsu graviore ruant. Claudian. (...). 1.
The greatest Statesman stands at the mercy of his Prince, and of his Enemy;
and if he fall, he never rises again, they meet with martial law, where a man
can offend but once: But the Husbandman if he fall, his corn miss, or his
cattle dye, he makes shift to get up again in time, Et qui cadit in terram non
habet unde cadat, his fall is not so high as to break his bones. The Merchant,
he meets with certain losses, and uncertain gains, one puff of wind sometimes
undoes him, one Pirate makes him a beggar; now the Husbandman has a ship
sailing in his field, which though it go slower, yet often moves surer than the
other, and the Mariner comes for more Collections abroad, than the Husbandman.

If men would be quiet, the Lawyer would be troubled; and if they would be
temperate, the Physician would be sick. So that if the World should grow wise
in her old age, those two callings would be in great hazard; but as long as
the world lives, it must have meat, and the trade of plowing will never be out
of request. Nay, the Husbandman has many sweet promises for his security. God
has promised that the Earth shall increase and multiply, that seed-time and
harvest shall not cease, Genesis 8. 22. That he will give the former and the
latter rain in its appointed season. That the diligent hand shall be made rich,
yea, that his Oxen shall be strong to labor, his sheep shall bring forth
thousands in the streets, that he shall eat of the fruit of his labor, and
that it shall be well with him.

SECT. XII.. 12. Excel. 12. This Calling is a great friend to Piety.

The Twelfth Excellency of this Calling of an Husbandman is, That it is a
greater friend to Piety, than most other Callings. Others may have more time,
but this has as much opportunity to get to Heaven. Others may have more
religious Notions, but he has more religious Motions, Others may out-wit him
in Religion, but few shall out-pray him. The Gentleman his neighbor will have
a finer Bible, but he will use it oftener to his Comfort. His learned Minister
will dispute better for the truth than he, but he will suffer for the truth as
much as he. Aegidio, a Spanish Divine, was Dr. and Reader of Divinity in two
Universities, yet was no body at Preaching till he was instructed by a plain
Countreyman. Mr. Clark Mart. page 225.
And if you trace him, you shall find as Devout a Prayer in his family, as
feeling a Grace at his Table, as where there is a finer House, and a fuller
Table. Nay, when others put off God with any scantling of Prayer, That day has
seldom past, wherein there has no Chapter been read, and Psalm sung among his
family.

Nay, his very Calling furthers him much herein. Noah that was so perfect and
upright a man in that forlorn Generation, He Genesis 9. 20. began to be an
Husbandman; Though I may not say his Calling made him an upright man, yet they
agreed mavelous well together. His Religion is not perhaps so plausible, but
it is most sound; and what he wants in Wording it, he has in Hearting, and in
Doing the whole will of God, I say his calling furthers him in it. He has such
need of Gods daily goodness, and so duly hears from him in his Mercies, That
prayers and praises are his constant fare. He is pretty well wearied in the
world, and so Prayer is welcome to him; It is an ease and refreshment (...)
him, which is work and trouble to others As sleep is welcome to a laboring
man, not s^ to Children, that care not for going to bed because they are not
weary; So Death is welcome to the Religious Husbandman, because henceforth he
rests from his labors: And while he lives, his Dross is only upon the Earth,
but his golden precious spirit is soaring into Heaven. His spiritual estate
like his temporal is herein fully as good as it seems; and in short, when the
Power of Godliness is lost every where, you may find it in his house and heart.
Cato reports, that if one were called by the name of a Good husbandman, he was
prailed in the highest d^gree. Plin. lib. 16. c. 3.


Hence it is probable, he has the name of a Good Man incorporated into his
very name, Goodman such a One, as if the Quintessence of Innocence and Piety
were chiefly in the Husbandman.

And thus you have a view of some of the Excellencies and Advantages of this
Calling, which I have put down not to puff up the Husbandman with pride, he
will meet with cares and labors enough to keep him down; nor to reflect any
disgrace upon other Callings, whose honor, ease and O fortunatos nimium, bona
si sua norint,
Agricolas. Virgil.

profit will hold up their hearts well enough; but for the Glory of that most
gracious God that led our Father Adam into it, and for the Comfort and
encouragement of the Husbandman under his burdens and troubles, that he may be
content with the Inconveniences of his Lot, and bless the name of the Lord
his God; And these I shall observe in the next place, and lay them in the other
balance, least the former fly too high; least trades men's shops should be
emptyed, and least the Husbandman should forget himself.

CHAP. IV. CAP. IV. The Inconveniences of Husbandry, and Remedies.
The Inconveniences of the Husbandmans Calling, and the Remedies thereof.
SECTION. I.. 1.

ANd now I come to the Fourth point, Inconven. 1. His business lies in the
world, his Enemy.
which is to give you an Account of the Inconveniences of the Husbandmans
Calling, where with I shall also prescribe some Remedies. It is Heaven only
that is without Inconveniences. Here we would live without them, There we
shall live without them. The wisdom of God has so ordered it, that not an
house on Earth, but has some Grievance annexed to it, that we may long for our
other House which is above. It is said of the plain of Jordan, Genes. 13. 10.
That it was like the Garden of the Lord, and Lot thought he had a great bargain
of it, and (good man) he found many inconveniences in it. So in Eden it self,
our father Adam had a Serpent; Latet anguis in herba. And if he met with
Inconveniences there, let no man think to escape them. It is our misery to
have them; It is our happiness to manage and improve them.

The First Inconvenience of the Husbandmans Calling is, That his Business lies
in the world, his grea^est Enemy. ps. 62.9. Men of low degree, Hebr. (...)
terra (...). Men of high degree called (...) (...) ignu, the nobler element. So
ps. 49.2
Indeed the world in it self is Gods good Creature, but since the fall of Man,
as it brings forth naturally thorns and briars to tear the flesh; so by the
malice of the Devil, it is full of snares to catch the soul. He has privily
instigated all the Creatures to be against God and our souls, and laid
Rats-bane here and there upon the things the Husbandman converseth in, to
poison and undo him. So that he may, e're he is aware, fall into temptation and
a snare. That is a sad Curse, Psalm. 69. 22. Let that which should Thy
occupation like the first Adam is earthly, but thy affection and conversation
should be like the second Adam's, heavenly. Mr. Swinnock
have been for their welfare, let it become a trap. Sad, that the Plough
should be a trap, and in his innocent business should be a dangerous snare. As
if a man's house stood in his Enemies garrison, it were a great Inconvenience;
though his house were never so pleasant, yet to enjoy it he ventures his life.
The world is now an Enemy to our souls, yet in the midst of it stands the
Husbandmans calling; And therefore if he will be safe he must do, as Nehemiah
4. 17. with one of his hands work in his calling, and with the other hold a
weapon.

The Best Remedy against this Inconvenience is, To be crucified to the world,
Gal. 6. 14. God forbid that I should glory in any thing save in the Cross of
Christ, whereby the world is crucified to me, and I to the world, as if he
should say, I Will glory in my sufferings, (others glory in their chains of Gold,
I Will only shake my chain of iron, and triumph in it) by which my heart is well
weaned from the temptations of the world. So let the troubles and hardships
which the Husbandman meets with in the world, crucify his heart to the
inticements of it. Get the world once under you, make it a servant, (as the
word in our Text signifies) subdue it, and then you may more safely trade in
it. And seeing it is your Enemy, deal with it as an enemy, have as little to do
with it as you can; and though you owe to it a love of Benevolence, because it
sustains you; yet beware how far you bestow upon it a love of Complacence,
because it would ens^are you.

SECT. II.. 2.

THe Second Inconvenience of the Husbandmans He has but little time for his
soul.
Calling is, That he has but little Time for his Soul. His Landlord can get up
in a morning, and read as long as he will, and then pray as long as he will,
and as often, and meditate as much as he will: But he has but little time to
pray, and less time to read, and least of all to meditate, unless it be
occasionally among his work. And his Life is divided between labor and rest,
and but that he is fully resolved, the main chance shall not be neglected, his
soul would be forgotten. He has many days, and yet but a little time; his
business calls him out, and the night calls him in again; And so he is apt to
doubt of himself by fits, because it is said, Psalm 1. 2. The Godly man's
delight is in the law of the Lord, and in that law he does meditate day and
night. He longs to read such a good Book, but Harvest or Business calls, and he
must away, longs to go and confer with his Minister about his poor soul, but
can seldom get leave of his business, either his poor soul, or his poor family
must suffer. And he finds it very much ado, to live in this world, and yet
provide to live for ever. And how shall the honest Husbandman remedy this
matter?

Your Remedy must be this, you must Work the harder, and sleep the less, that
you may pray and read the more. If the Heathens can produce a Philosopher, that
used to work most of the day, that he might be sustained to study most of the
night, how much more may you that hope for better things than they, punish the
body a little as it will bear, to furnish the soul as it has need? How late
and early can you sometimes be at a gainful market; and is there any market
where Grace is sold? Remember still that One thing, and only that one thing is
Needful in comparison, Luke 10. 42. And then, be sure the little time you can
spend for your souls, improve it well. The shorter you must be at prayer, see
you be the more serious. They who can do little, had need to do it well. And
then you may be assured, that as the Lord blesses your short Commons and thin
meals, to as much health and strength of body, as they who have their plenteous
variety, so will the same God bless to you your pulse and water, your few, but
lively duties to feed your souls, as if you had larger opportunities. It is
better to have a little communion with God, and hunger for more, than to have
larger time, and lesser appetite.

SECT. III.. 3.

A Third Inconvenience of the Husbandmans He is liable to many burdens and
injuries.
Calling is, That he is liable to many burdens and injuries: He is and must be
like Issachar, Genesis 49. 14. an ass couching down under two burdens. He must
suffer from his Superiors; many an harsh Lecture his Landlord reads him; many a
trespass and injury his Neighbor offers him; many scornful terms after all
their wrongs he must put up: he has neither power, nor will, nor skill to go
to Law, and so sits him down, and makes his moan to God. He must suffer from
his equals often: for he is known to be a man of peace, and his principle is
known, to suffer the greatest injury, rather than offer the least; and
therefore he comforts himself, that it will not last always, and so rests
content. Yea, h^ suffers even from his Inferiors, and must many times be his
servants servant. The heaviest burdens also and impositions do usually fall
(respect had to his mean estate) most heavily on him; and in public
Calamities, wherever the storm is brewed, yer usually it lights on the
Husbandman Deuteronomy. 28. 33. The fruit of thy land, and all thy labors shall be
eaten up, and thou shall be only oppressed and crushed always.
Like his sheep he is often shorn, yea almost flead sometimes. When he has
gotten a little wool on his back, it stays there but a while, his Rent day
comes, and sweeps all away.

Quest. And what Remedy has he for this Inconvenience?

Answ. For this he uses Faith and Patience, which like two Bladders keep up
his heart from sinking and dejection. 1. He does and must believe that these
things are ordered by the wise Providence of his heavenly Father, That men are
Gods Hand, as it is, Psalm. 17. 14. The men of the World are his Sword. He
believes also, that even this shall work for his good, that his burdens keep
him humble, when freedom would make him proud: he believes that Heaven will put
an end to all and make amends for all. As holy David said, Psalm. 27. 11. I
hadfainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of
the living. So the Husbandmans spirit would fail, but that his faith is strong,
and sees these are but clouds that will quickly pass away. And in the mean
time, among other provision in his house, he provides 2. Patience, with this he
eats, and sleeps, and smiles under all his load, resolving if he can possess
nothing else, yet he will possess his soul with Patience, and so with the
Prophet Jer. 10. 19. Woe is me for my hurt, my wound is grievous, but I said,
truly this is a grief, and I must bear it; God has laid it on, and God alone
shall take it off.

SECT. IV.. 4.

A Fourth Inconvenience in this Calling is, He has many cares and troubles.
That he has many cares and troubles in the flesh: he has a succession of
cares and troubles in this world; he deals in those things that have not their
name for naught, vanity, there is their Substance, and vexation of spirit,
there is their Accident. He has his house to build or to repair, that almost
ruins him; then his ground to manure, that costs him much trouble and care;
then his Rent or Fine to pay, this falls heavy on him, and comes often; he has
hardly got up his back, but the half year returns, and his Rents squeeze him
down again, so that between the cares of his mind and the pains of his body, he
has load enough for one. And then his children must be educated; though he
cannot read, yet they shall read and write, because he feels the want thereof;
and then they must be provided for, and this creates him new cares and
troubles; so that, though he have not so much fleshly trouble, yet has he
troubles in the flesh one upon another. His body is the Anvil of pain and
diseases, and his soul the Hive of unnumbred cares, sorrows, and passions. Sr.
W. Ralcgh.


It is true, Non erat laboris afflctio, sed exhileratio voluntatis, quum ea
quae Deus creaverat, humani operis adjutorio, laelius feraciusque provenirent,
unde Creator ipse uberius laudaretur. Aug. de Genesis ad Lit. 1 8.
he may thank the fall of our father Adam for many of these, but however he
came by them, now he has them. Indeed this advantage he has by them, that
they make him long for Heaven; his hard work here, makes him long to be at
rest; and though the world thus use him, yet hereby he grows out of love with
it, and is estranged to it in his heart, that uses him thus as a stranger.

Quest. But what Remedy can be given to this Inconvenience?

Answ. No way in this world to avoid them; the way therefore is to get them
sanctified and sweetened. Seeing this load cannot be cast off, carry it as
easily as you can. Let prayers therefore be mingled with your cares, and
cordials with your troubles. When you design your cares ultimately at the glory
of God, and manage them with holy hearts, you sanctify them; and a feast on
the Promises must be mingled with a meal upon troubles. And consider, that all
men have their Cares as well as you, yea perhaps the Gentleman your neighbor
has his head full of cares to make provision for his lusts, while your cares
are to make provision for your Families: And be confident that their way of
sin, is a worse life than your way of labor; and that you will rest from your
labors, when they shall not rest from their pain.

SECT. V.. 5.

THe Fifth Inconvenience of the Husbandmans He can seldom be a public good.
Calling is, That he bath more Will, then Power to be a public Good, and to
mend what is amiss in the World. To be a public Good is the highest pitch of
happiness in this world, and herein only the High and Mighty have the advantage
of the poor Husbandman. The one may have as long life, as good health, as much
comfort in the Creatures, as cheerful an heart, and as happy a life as the
other, with less danger here, and a less account hereafter; but here is the
Husbandmans disadvantage, he can but little promote any public good, nor
hinder little public evil; he cannot build Hospitals, endow Churches, erect
Schools, enact good Laws, preach Sermons, nor encourage piety: Nor on the other
hand can he reform Sin, if his life lay on it; he sees them drunk when he goes
to Market, and he hears them swear, and beholds the Sabbath broken, but he
cannot remedy it, he does as far as he can; he, where he sees it likely,
attempts to them, and where it is otherwise, mourns for them: he comes home often
with a sad heart, and wonders at the Patience of God, that lets men alone; and
when he cannot bow the hearts of others, can break his own about it. As Lot
(good man) could vex his righteous soul, when he could not cure their
unrighteous ones. Our Husbandman has a public Spirit, though he cannot be of
public use; and where many have more power than will, which will make for
their Judgment, he has more will than power, which will make for his comfort.

Quest. But what Remedy is there for this Inconvenience?

Answ. No help but his Prayers. It was the Character of a Bishop, that he could
not preach, but he could make Preachers by his liberal maintenance and
education of persons for that Calling. So though the Husbandman cannot preach,
yet he can help to furnish out Preachers by his Prayers. Ephesians. 6. 19. And for
me also, you must pray, that utterance may be given unto me -- By his prayers
both Magistrate and Minister are furthered in their Vocations; and he visits
them twice a day at least, and presents them at the Throne of Grace. He sees
much amiss every where; and though he be not so conceited, as to think (were he
in place) he could amend it, yet he refers it to God, and earnestly presses him
to mend it. And God will do much at the request of an upright Husbandman, and
when he hates the proud hypocrisies of formalists, to this man he will look, to
him that is poor, and contrite, and that trembles at his word, Isa. 66. 2.

SECT. VI.. 6.

THe Sixth Inconvenience of the Calling of He is often unhappy in his breeding
and his children.
an Husbandman is, The infelicity of a rustic unrefined Breeding, and his
inability to help his children with any better. We are naturally like the wild
asses Colt. Job 11.12.
A Colt is a rude creature, much more an Asses Colt, and most of all a wild
Asses Colt. Education breaks us, Breeding and Behavior do pollish that rude
mass, in which man comes into the world. And as in the Creation God did let in
Light, and put beauty upon the Original Chaos; so right breeding opens a
Casement into the mind, and says, Let there be Light, and there comes Light;
let there be shape, order, and beauty, and behold it comes accordingly. And
this is a great mercy to those that have it, and improve it: It pares off that
roughness of disposition and ruggedness of carriage; it moralizes, it
civilizes, yea it almost spiritualizes the party, that one can hardly discern
where Nature leaves, and where Grace begins.

Now the Husbandman seldom meets with this ingenuous breeding; in so much as
in respect of understanding, he is rather-ignorant than knowing, in Wisdom
rather simple than Judicious, in his Will rather surly than malleable, in his
behavior rather rude and homely than smooth and polite; In Learning, the
highest degree he has taken, is in Writing and Arithmetic; and by reason of
his hand-work and small estate, he can seldom bring up his children further:
and no small pains he takes to help his children to write and read, and C.
^titius Serranus was sowing his Corn field when Q. Cincinnatus brought him
Letters of his Dictatorship, bareheaded and open breasted, and full of dust, so
that he said to him, Vela corpus ut preseram Senatus mandata. Plin. 1. 18. c.
3. And the old Romans were often taken from the Plough to Rule, and when they
have done, they have returned to it again. Yea, it was observed, there was
never greater plenty in Rome, then when there were Ploughs laureat and Plowmen
triumphant. Id.
then puts them to a Trade, and (it is good Mr Dods phrase) gives them each a
Bible, and God be with them. Not but that excellent Parts are sometimes found in
persons and children of this rank, and excellent Scholars have proceeded
hence, that have honored every of the Liberal Arts and the more honorable
employments, but the usual genius and breeding of the Husbandman is but rustic.

Quest. If you ask what Remedy there is for this Inconvenience?

Answ. I answer, The wealthier sort must be advised, to accomplish their
children with better breeding; that being a portion as far beyond rich^s, as
the Soul is beyond the Body, as an entailed estate is beyond a few moveable
goods. They who read the History of the Worthies of England, shall find some of
our greatest Divines, Lawyers and Physicians, had their Originals from the
Plough E^ casa vir magnus exire potest, et ex deformi humilique corpusculo
formosus animus et magnus. Senec. ad Lucil.
and why may not God do as much for yours, and thereby make them more public
Goods to their Generation?

But for your selves, and for them that are born, and likely to live and dye
Rusticks, you must make up your want of outward accomplishment with inward
integrity. The less smooth and pollisht you are in behavior, the more sincere
and plain be you in your heart. It was the Character of the Athenians, that
they could speak well, there was the University of Learning; but the Character
of the Lacedaemonians was, that they could do well. So though you cannot speak
eloquently, yet if you can walk uprightly and faithfully, you will be Courtiers
in Heaven at the last. Though you cannot read a letter in the book, yet if you
can, by true Assurance, read your Name in the Book of life, your Scholarship
will serve. Though you cannot couch your words in order to men, yet if you can
say your Errand unto God, he will accept you. If you cannot write a word, yet
see you transcribe the fair Copy of a godly, righteous, and sober life, and you
have done well. Christ Jesus was not Magister Scholae, 'sed vitae. And if you
never get to be good Scholars, yet see you be good Christians, and then you will
fit above your Landlords in Heaven, if they do not look about them.

And thus you see the Inconveniences of the Husbandmans Calling, which I have
described to be an allay, to ballast him, lest he should be proud of his
Excellencies, and forget himself, lest being so well on earth he should forget
Heaven; And that by feeling the effects he may be sensible of the evil of our
first Fall and mourn for it, which has made his labor painful, his gain
doubtful, his troubles great, and his ability small. And yet if he lift up the
Scales, he will perceive the comforts of his Calling many, and the
Inconveniences few; and that the Lord has tempered his Cup with great wisdom,
and loving kindness, and left the best for him in the bottom.

CHAP. V. Cap. 5. The Temptations of the Husbandmans Calling, and Preservatives.
The Temptations of the Husbandman, and the Preservatives.
WE are now arrived at the Fifth Head, which is to inquire into the Temptations
incident to this Calling. Paradise it self was not without them, and in every
Calling he must expect them. There are Temptations to suffering, and
Temptations to sin; the one mentioned James 1. 2. The other, verse. 13. It is
cause of joy when we fall into temptations of suffering, especially for Christ;
many account it all joy when they escape such temptations, but we should rather
account it all joy when we meet with them. It Is cause of sorrow when we are
tempted to sin, though we are apt to think our selves made with such
Temptations: And many of these have invaded the harmless Calling of the
Husbandman. But to be forewarned is the way to be forearm'd; and though he be
assaulted, yet he is not forsaken. He has a Father that will not lead him into
temptation; which is not only his daily prayer, but his chiefest care; That
though his Mothers children have him Keeper of the Vineyards, yet his own
Vineyard may be kept.

SECT. 1.
THe First Temptation of the Husbandman. 1. Earthlymindedness.
is, Earthly-mindedness. The Earth is his Element, therein is his business, and
there he is in danger to lose his heart, as it is said John 3. 31. He that is
of the Earth is earthly, and speaks of the Earth. The Husbandman is sprung as
it were out of the Earth, and the frame of his heart is prone to be earthly,
and his words are much of the same subject. As it is impossible to behold the
Heavens above us with one Eye, and Earth under our feet with the other; so it
is a very hard business, to have the Eye of the Soul upward, and the Eye of the
Body, downward at the same time. ^e World looks little when one is in Heaven a
great way off it; but while on it, it looks vast and great. On a Mountain,
whole Fields at a distance look no bigger than a leaf of this book; but he that
is at them finds them bigger. And a small Hatt held near our Eye, will hinder
our sight of the Sun, more than a great Mountain at a distance. O Sirs, the
Husbandman is near the Earth, and it looks great in his eye, and indangers to
fill the heart and all; it swallows up his heart, and devours his time, and
dulls his spirits; he is ready to account these things the greatest things,
because they are next him, and he lives in them and upon them; he looks on his
money, and sees more beauty in it, than in the Sun that shines; and the face
upon his Silver, he thinks the beautifullest face in the world: The lowing of
his Cattle, is better Music to him, than the best Music, and a good Crop more
welcome (suppose him yet without an Eye of Faith) than all the Promises in the
Bible. Psalm. 17. 14. Deliver me from men of this world, which have their
Portion in this life, and whose belly thou fillest with hidden treasures. When
the Belly is full of the hid treasures of the Earth, the Heart is often empty
of the hidden treasures of Heaven. Described again, Phil. 3.19. Who mind
earthly things. To have earthly things is a mercy, but to mind earthly things
is a curse. And this is his Temptation-; herein is his Calling, and herein is
his Temptation. You know, it is hard to touch pitch without defilement; where
both hands a^ full, much ado to keep the heart empty; and especially when
Riches increase, the heart is set on them. O what carnal delight has a man of
the world, to see his stock of Cattle stand and increase, when his fields are
well grown, and his barns filled: The comforts of heaven only exceed it. Thou
have put gladness into mine heart, more than when their corn and wine
increased, Psalm. 4. 7.

The choicest of his thoughts are prone to be spent on these things, and his
Soul cleaves to the dust. Poor man! though he be never likely to have great
things in the world, yet his head is full of Proclamations (as we say) and his
heart of distractions. Much ado to dwell on Earth, and live in Heaven at the
same time, or for him to have the heart set on the other world, that has this
world set in his heart.

But that I may not discover the diseases of this Calling, without prescribing
some cure thereof; I shall add to each Temptation an Antidote or two, if you
will resolve not only to approve them, but apply them.

1. One Preservative from this Temptation 1. Preservative.
will be, to consider the Nature of your souls; So excellent, that they are
capable to know and enjoy God himself; they are company for an Angel, they are
Nobly Descended: Now to degrade these, to bury them in a furrow, to make them
stoop to the slavish service of the world, is unworthy and unreasonable; Rebus
non me trado, sed commodo. Senec. de Benef.
As if a man had Golden Mills to grind nothing, but for Horse-bread, with them.
It Is enough for the Serpent to eat the Dust all his days, your souls are
created for an higher end.

2. And then, consider the uncertainty of 2.
all these Earthly things you set your hearts upon, Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set
thine heart upon that which is not? Mark, it is not worth looking at, much less
setting thy heart thereon [ that which is not]; things that fade, are not, they
have no being worth speaking of. And it follows, For riches certainly make
themselves wings; if no body steal them, or take them away, yet they make
themselves wings; certainly they will away, and flee; not only depart fairly,
or run in haste from you, but flee from you; and who would mind such fading
trasn? They will sing you a sweet song, like the bird by your window, but they
are gone, you have them not in a Cage: And who will fall in love with a Sparrow
on the house top?

3. Be often in the Scriptures. That Is an 3.
Heavenly Book, and will best cure an Earthly heart. To converse with the
world, will make you worldly, but to converse with God, will make you heavenly.
There God will tell you the vanity and vexation, that is in all earthly things;
There he will show better things, yea, durable riches and righteousness. The
Devil can show you on a Mountain all the Glory of the World; but on the Pisgah
of the Bible, God can show you all the Glory of Heaven: You can hardly come out
of the Scriptures without a divine frame, if you will read them withal your
heart. The law of thy mouth is better to me, than thousands of Gold and Silver.
Two or three Scriptum est's dash't and disgraced all the Glory of the World,
and the God of it also.

4. Be exercised often in Meditation. As tillage 4. A Saint should go through the
world like one in a deep study. Mr. Swin^ck. Meditatio quasiment is ditatio.
changes the nature of some barren grounds, and makes them better; so
Meditation changes the complexion of the soul, finds it poor, and leaves it
rich, lifts up the soul to converse with God, familiarizes the invisible things
of God to the soul, and makes a man at home in Heaven, and a stranger on Earth.
He that will think with all his heart on God, can think but with half an heart
on any thing in the world. When the Soul has been a while above, what is a
house or field in comparison of God? what is a Crown or a World to Him that
sits on the Throne? Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on
Earth I can desire like thee, Psalm. 73. 25.

SECT. II.. 2.

II. The Second Temptation of the Husbandman Discontent.
is, Discontent. He has diverse crosses, and these provoke him to murmr
against God. He has but narrow comforts of this life, and this occasions some
grudgings at his own Condition. His shoe pinches him, and he cannot hide it.
Unless he be Master of much Grace, he frets, he fumes, he thinks the world is
unequally divided; he takes himself something neglected, and injured. His house
is ready to fall, his children want clothes, his rent day is near, and his
money far off; his comforts are discomforts, his things are nothings, and thus
he grudges because he is not satisfied; God himself can hardly please him. The
Lord has helped him in forty things, but he is in a strait again, and now that
is forgotten. God takes no care of poor men, his Lot is worse than every ones;
never man had such a life, would he were in his grave, he should then be quiet;
and thus poor man he thinks he has reason on his side, and that he has cause
to be angry.

And then, the injuries, calu^ies and trespasses he meets with from his unjust
neighbors, these grate again upon his angry humor, and inflame him again;
never man had such neighbors; one trespasses on him on this side, another sues
him for trespass on the other side. A Thief goes away with a sheep or an horse
this way, the Fowls and Mice they purloine away his corn another way. His
Landlord exacts upon him, every one wrongs him, and he must be a Stock or a
Stoic that were insensible. But these things meeting with a weak Christian,
weary with labor, tempt him sometimes to say, My soul is weary of my life -- I
will speak in the bitterness of my soul, Job 10. 1. and alas! so he does, if
Grace prevent not: his wife she is chidden, his children beaten, his servants
turned out of doors, his neighbors reviled; and then after all he (...) at
himself, grieves and mourns for his folly, and opening his eyes, sees Gods hand
in all, and blesses the Name of the Lord.

Preservatives against this Temptation to Discontent are, Discretion,
Supplication, and Consrderation.

1. Discretion. Most of your vexations are the effect and consequence of your
indiscretion; hence many of your straits come; had you ordered business wisely,
you had never been in them; hence many of your losses, many trespasses, and the
vexations from them have flowed; and therefore you must study to be wise, Psalm.
112. 5. A good man guides his affairs with discretion, and so comes to be able
to show favor and lend. A wise man discerns time and judgment, orders
things in their season, and so lays in little fuel for discontent, whereas the
foolish man by his rashness leaps into troubles and straits, and then fumes and
roars like a wild Bull in a net, all the house cannot hold him. And especially,
young House-holders, that have leapt into that condition hand over head, err
herein; The rashness of their youth, lays up for the discontents of their old
age. And Parents are too blame herein, that do not fill their children with
advise, and all kind of wisdom, before they lanch out into this sea of worldly
troubles: They send them away with Portions and Estates; but how few are they
that spend a day or an hour in directing them with wise counsel, whereby they
may live well here, and better hereafter. A little wisdom would prevent a great
deal of Discontent.

2. Supplication. Beg of God a meek and quiet Spirit, which is of so great
price in the fight of God; and watch after your Prayers, not only how the Lord
answers, but how you endeavor: He that prays against Discontent, binds
himself to watch and strive against it, or else his prayers are sin. Beg an
humble heart of God: The humble man is seldom discontent; he thinks the least
of mercies, is good enough for the chief of sinners. Here Is a poor house,
course fare, hard lodging, unkind usage; but it is good enough for me: Any thing
that is abated of Hell is mere courtesy: If I may have but bread to eat, and
raiment to put on, it is fair for such a one as I. And then beg a mortified
heart to all that is in the world. When the heart is dead to the world, worldly
troubles do not trouble him. When the Soldiers saw Christ our Lord was dead,
they would not break his bones. He that is dead to the world, will save his
bones whole: when crosses, straits and troubles come upon him, why, they return
to God, saying, yonder man is dead already to the world, his heart is crucified
to it, he feels nothing, so as to be distempered by it. When they strip dead
men, they struggle not; you may take all, they trouble not at it. O beg such an
heart, that God may do what he will with thee, That his will may be done; and
this prayer will procure patience, and help against Discontent.

3. Consideration; of the Evil and Folly of this Sin: It strikes at the
Sovereignty, Wisdom, Power and Love of God, at one blow. Against his
Sovereignty, as if he rul^d not things well, or knew not what to do with his
own. Hence this sin is called Rebellion, Number. 16. 14. with 17. 10. There God
calls them Rebels; and why? because, said they, thou have not brought us into a
land flowing with milk and honey, nor given us inheritances of fields and
vineyards. Thus thousands in their hearts reproach God, and say, Alas! my lot
is fallen ill, I have neither house nor ground, nor clothes, as are fit for me.
Take heed, go on no further in thy complaint; This is Rebellion.

It wounds the Wisdom of God, as if he knew not what to do for us and with us.
We would abhor to say this of God, but in effect we proclaim it by our
Discontent. His ways are sometimes dark, but always just; sometimes
intricate, but always wise. Naomi thought that she and hers were quite undone:
but even then God was providing a stay for her in her old age. No, says the
malcontent, if things had sorted to my mind, it had been far better than it
is; as if you should say, If God had taken my way, he had hit it.

Also this puts a check upon the Power of God: Can God give flesh? Can he help
me in this or that strait? O I am undone, there is no remedy: As if his ways
and his thoughts were like thine and mine. How often has he helped thee at a
dead lift, when the Lease was to tak^, ^hy Rent to pay, thy Children to,
dispose? And therefore why should you fret or repine at the straits and crosses
that do befall you, as though his hand were shortened, or his car heavy? Sure he
that helps Kings, can help Husbandmen in their need.

And then it strikes at the love of God. No Father can be so careful of the
good of his Child, or Husband of his Wives happiness, as God is of each of you
that belong to him. And why will ^e be displeased at his proceedings toward
you? Hear what he says, Jer. 32. 47. I will rejoice over you to do you good,
and will plant you in this land assuredly, with my whole heart, and with my
whole soul: as if he should say I am glad in my heart, when I can have a fit
opportunity to do you good, and I do it with my whole heart and soul. Nay,
says the discontented man, Things falls out with me to the worst, spite it
self could not order worse for me, such unexpected, such intolerable troubles
and vexations. How does this grieve Love it self, that is ordering every thing
for thy Good, and thou cryest, All these things work against me. And here is the
evil of it.

And the Folly also of Discontent is manifest; for it produces no good, and
procures much evil: No good comes of it; I report me to your experience,
whether ever your Discontent did mend the matter? From the chie^ Evil (Sin,) no
good can come. What folly is this, for a man to fret, and stamp, and play the
Bedlam, an hour or two to no purpose (...) matters nothing at all the better.
Nay, it, procures much Evil, disheartens thy Wife, discontents thy Family,
distempers thy self, and wounds thy soul and grieves away the Good Spirit of
God, and all to no purpose, O consider of these things, and never be discontent
again.

SECT. III.. 5.

III. THe Third Temptation of the Husbandman Forgeting God, and depending on
second Gauses.
is, Forgetting God, and Depending upon second Causes. His Calling lying among
the Creatures, at some distance from God, he is prone by trading with things
seen, to forget things unseen; like a man in a Mill, cannot hear the voice of
God, for the clacking and noise it makes. It is the peculiar happiness of the
Minister, that his very Calling lies about God; He dwells at Court every day;
he needs do little else, but contemplate God, and persuade others to him. But
the Husbandmans business lies much among the Creatures; He must study the
Earth, as well as the Heavens; and you know, the hired Servan^ that are out in
the fields, may more easily forget their Lord, than they who wait on him in his
chamber. There are many in the world, that have little else to do, but think of
God and their Souls; but the Husbandman he has many things to think on, many
things to care for besides: and the Moon of the world does interpose and hide
from him, the sight and beams of the Sun of Righteousness: and because God is
out of sight, he is too much out of the mind of the Husbandman. If the year be
fruitful, he is ready to give the honor thereof to the goodness of the
Ground, or to the skillful husbandry thereof. If it be unfruitful, he is apt to
conclude such and such a thing was the cause, not looking to the First Cause,
the Mercy, or Justice, or Providence of God, which does order and govern the
growing of every grass pile, and the blasting of every single ear of corn upon
the earth: But none says, where is God my maker, who gives Songs in the
night? Job 35. 10. When the rain distills, and makes the fields to smile, dow
readily does the Husbandman cry out, O the sweetness of this rain! but how
unready is he to break forth and say, O the sweetness of that God that gives
it! And to help on this neglect of God, most languages have made those words
Impersonals, that signifies Rain, Snow, and the like, which must have no
Nominative case; -- It Rains, it Freezes, etc. as if men were loath to
acknowledge God, in those peculiar works of his Providence. When this part of
his field misses, he is far proner to take notice of the badness of the Earth,
than of the Anger of Heaven. When his Cattle mismarry, his eye is quicker upon
the improvidence of his Servants, than on the Providence of his Master in
Heaven. But none says, where is God my Maker? And so, because we cannot
discern his finger, he is constrained next time to lay on his hand, and awaken
us to feel and see him.

Thus the Honor also which is due to God, is often laid at the feet of second
Causes, and men bless the hand that reaches, and not the Hand that sends it.
If Grace be not predominant in our Husbandmans heart, you shall more commonly
hear him, when he is reaping his Corn, commend the goodness of his ground, than
the Goodness of his God, and declare to his neighbors his own skill, with
great freedom and frequency, but speak of Gods blessing, which was All in All,
seldom, and with much straitness.

The Autidotes against this Temptation are,

1. A full Persuasion of the General Providence, and particular influence of
God, the First Cause over all, and into all Second Causes: hence they are
called Second Causes, because of their relation and dependence on the First.
See the Genealogy of Corn and Wine resolved into God, Hos. 2. 21, 22. Hence
some of the very Heathen, when they went to plow in the morning, they laid one
hand on the Plough, (to speak their own part, to be painfulness) and held the
other hand up to Ceres, their Goddess of Corn, to testify their expectation of
plenty from her. It is God alone that crowns the year with his Goodness, Psalm.
65. (...). He brings the wind out of his treasures, he gives the former and
latter rain in their season; he causes his wind to blow, and the waters flow,
Psalm, 147.16. Not a drop of rain, but he makes and sends it, and tells it where
it shall fall. When the Sun shines, or showers fall, do but draw by the
curtain, and by faith you may see God in the thing, Deuteronomy. 11. 15. And I will
sendgrass in thy fields for thy Cattle, that thou may eat and be full. Does
thy Grass grow well, God from heaven sent thee that grass; Does it wither,
parch and fail? God has sent for thy grass away; and that he never does
without good reason: And therefore under the Law, Exodus 23.16, 19. God called
for the first fruits of their land; partly to let them know who it was that
gave them, and charges his People, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. Beware least thou say in thy
heart, my Power, and the Might of my hand has gotten me this wealth: but thou
shall. REMEMBER the LORD thy God: for it is he that gives thee power to get
wealth. And all thy Endeavors without his Blessing are, as Caesar said of
Senecas writings, Aren^ sine calce, they fall asunder. Look thou therefore at
God in all things. The Finger of God may be seen by an e^e of Faith: There is
no Event so great, nor any so ^nall, but the hand of God is in it. And O how
can thou forget God, when thou may hear from him, and see him every
minute? Though you see not his face, yet you may discern his footsteps. Go
into the field, and he has been there; return into thy house among thy
children, and there has he ^en before thee. Thou may meet him in every
mercy, and feel him in every Judgment.

As the Wife therefore is sometimes angry with what the Servant is doing, till
he tell her, that his Master appointed him; then she says no more: So when
cross Accidents fret thee, and second Causes walk contrary to thee, remember
the First Cause has bidden them, and rest content. If the Bottles of Heaven be
stopped knock at Gods door, and he will open them, Jer. 14. 22. Are there any
among the vanities of the Gentiles, that can cause rain, or can the Heavens
give Showers? Art not thou He, O Lord our God? Therefore we will wait upon
thee, for thou have made all these things. Three Keys the Jewish Rabbis often
give him; The Key of the W^mb, the Key of the Grave, and the Key of the Clouds;
implying, that none but He can unlock these.

Learn then to see God, to seek God in all things. Satan cannot enter into an
Hogg without divine appointment. What can one think more casual and
independent on God, than the Sabeans and Chaldeans taking away Job's Cattle!
and yet he looks beyond them at God. The Lord has taken away; and this
contents him. This opens our mouths to praise him for mercies, and strikes us
dumb from repining against him in crosses. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth,
because thou d^dst it. Look through all Creatures and Providence as through a
Glass, and behold God disposing thee and them with infinite wisdom; so will thou meet God every step, and keep correspondence with him, though mediately,
all the day long. As it was with Saul and his fellow travelers, Acts 9. 7.
They all heard a voice, but none, save Saul, saw Jesus Christ: So any man
perceives the external sensible effects of providence, but it is the Christian
Husbandman, that sees God in them, and adores him. Every Rivulet guides him up
to the fountain; and seeing his works he presently ascends to the workman, and
finds his God in all things, and all things in his God.

2. A second Antidote is, the Consideration of the folly and danger of
depending on Second Causes. Folly, for nothing can move, much less help without
God; a vain thing to stir the balance of the Clock or Watch, except the Spring
and great Wheel stir. All Creatures are but poor, little Wheels, that can do
you no Good without the first Cause. God must say the word; if he hiss to the
flies, they come amain; and therefore lose thy time no more in soliciting poor
second causes, or depending on them, but knock at the right door, and you will
find God still within. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we will
remember the Name of the Lord our God. In vain is Salvation looked for from the
hills; from God the Lord is the salvation of his people. Make thy Ground as
good as thou can, but then trust not in the goodness of thy Ground, but in
the goodness of thy God for a plentiful crop; Non Solum sed Caelum facit
fructum, It Is not the Earth, but the Heaven that sends the Corn. Manure and
prune thy Trees with all thy Art, but then depend on Gods blessing for store of
fruit: for the Creature can but do what it is bidden, and therefore its folly to
depend thereon.

And consider the danger also; for when its depended on, it is in danger of a
blast, and you are in danger of a cu^e. God will not give his Glory to another,
nor suffer his Creature to wear his Crown, and therefore he many times smites
the Field, the Beast, the Horse, whereon you depend too much. If you make but a
Trench for water, and have no dependence on God, he takes it ill, Isa. 22. 11.
Ye make a ditch also, -- for the water of the old Pool; but ye have not looked
to the Maker thereof, neither had respect to him that fashioned it long ago.
Hereby also you invite a Curse upon your selves; for God has said, Jer. 17. 5.
Cursed is the man that makes flesh his arm, that trusts in man, and whose
trust departs from the Lord. And if you run such an hazard by trusting in
man, how will you escape for depending on any other inferior creature, below
God himself? Read and believe the whole truth of this, and nothing but the
truth, Psalm. 144. 10, 12, 13. It is He that gives salvation unto Kings, --
that makes our Sons as Plants, -- our Daughters as Corner stones, -- our
Garners full, our Sheep fruitful, our Oxen strong. Let the Husbandman therefore
make God his friend, and then he is at league with the very stones of the
Field, and whatsoever he does shall prosper. Be sure that he be solicited
every day by prayer, and crowned with praises; and then second Causes are thine
own. Use means, but trust not in them. Let not your Faith stifle your Industry,
nor your Industry blind your Faith. Let your hands be busy in the second
causes, but let your heart be first on the First. And as the sweet Psalmist
advises, Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord and do good: So (mark So and not
otherwise) thou shall dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed.

SECT. IV.. 4.

IV THe Fourth Temptation of the Husbandman Envy at Superiors.
is, Envy at his Superiors. And by this Temptation fell the second Husbandman
in the world. Abel sat above Cain in the favor and acceptance of God, Genesis
4.4, 5. and for this Cain was wroth, and his countenance fell. He that should
have blessed God for his Brother, and examined himself, he takes it ill at God,
and ill of his Brother, and is the death of him; as envy uses to pursue its
object to death, he kills him down right, because he was exalted in Gods esteem
above him. And ever since, the spirit that is in the Husbandman is prone to
lust unto envy. His Landlords temptation is to despise him, and his temptation
is to envy his Landlord. He can hardly come to Town, but he envies the ease of
the Tradesman: He can hardly see the fine house of the Gentleman his neighbor,
nor the fine clothes of his Wife or Children, without an envious eye; nay, the
painful life of his faithful Minister he is apt to envy, as if he had a degree
of ease and honor above himself; yea, except grace prevent and mortify, there
lies at his heart a perpetual grudg, and secret spite at all Magistrates,
Ministers, great and wealthy men, all which he thinks do him wrong, because he
sweats, and they do not; he pays the money, and they receive it; he gets it,
and they spend it, though most of it returns through his hands again. He knows
no reason, why such being made of the same mold, and perhaps born of the same
Stock with himself, should live in such brave houses, wear such costly apparel,
and fare at such an high rate; when he has his head full of cares, his bones
full of pain, and has hardly meat to eat, or time to eat it; when his
Landlords Horses lie in a finer House then he, and his meanest servant wears a
cloth beyond him.

This Temptation meeting with a proud temper, does much disfigure our
Husbandman, and makes him speak reproachfully and unadvisedly with his lips.
This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a Judge, said they of
Sodom to Lot the wealthy, Genesis 19. 9. What are these idle Gentry good for? See
their intolerable pride and height. What needs such decking of a walking
Dunghill? worser clothes might serve: Would they were tied a while to our fare.
Never good world since there was such a distinction^ between Princes and
Peasants, between rich and poor: Nay, if their humor were not curbed by grace
within or fear without, they would actually dispossess their Superiors of
their right, and deal as Abimeleck by Isaac, Genesis 26. 16. Go from us (says he)
for thou art much mightier than we.

The rich, they are sick of their poor neighbors; and the poor are as sick of
their rich Superiors: and there is a levelling Principle in the hearts of
common people, that can endure no Superior; as there is an ambitious one in
Great Ones to abide no equal. Nay, the Husbandman is apt to think that he has
Reason on his side, y^a and God Almighty also, that God loves none that are
richer than he; and because he finds that the Gospel has included the poor, he
thinks to exclude the rich; and comforts himself after all with this, that in
Heaven he shall sit above them, if at least any of them come there. Thus he
pleases, but mostly frets himself at the Grandeur of Superiors; and instead of
chearing himself, he torments himself at the comforts of his betters.

But does he well this while? Is he indeed in the right? and has Providence
done him wrong, or does God throw down riches and greatness winking, and bestow
honors at adventures? Nay, my Beloved, this is but his Temptation. The holy
Husbandman will not yield to these thoughts, he is of another temper. But
though this Cockatrice must be crushed, and Antidotes sought against this
malignant humor; yet I dare not plead for any of the excessive gallantry, or
costly superfluity, either in fare, building, or apparel, that is in use with
any; nor for an idle, unuseful life, for any man or woman in the world; (Our
Father Adam himself, if he were alive, would not desire it) I may not speak one
word for these; nay woe, woe to them, if poor men perish for want of necessaries,
while they swim in their superfluities, and relieve them not: Sadly and
certainly shall they rue it with the rich man in the Gospel, if they make their
Tenants grown by the racking of their Rents, that they may sing in the
multitude of their Frolicks. If their sitting on your Shoulders do not raise
them nearer Heaven, but only squeeze down you to the earth, they will have a
full cup of wrath made ready for them in due time. But yet in the mean while,
if ye will be Gods Husbandry, if ye will be Gods Building, ye must not envy
them, no not at all.

To Preserve you then against this Temptation,

1. Study the real evils or troubles, as well as the seeming happiness of your
Superiors. You see their Glory, but alas you do not see their misery; you envy
the bravery of their Apparel, but you would pity them if you knew the Diseases
and Distempers that are often under it; you see their stately houses, but you
see not the cares, the fears, the discontents that many times lodge within
them; you grudge at their full Tables and delicate fare, but if you consider
the great reckoning they have to pay, you would pity them at your heart. Their
^azzards, and troubles, and temptations at present, besides their danger to
come, do far surpass their enjoyments, and do rather crave your compassion,
then your emulation: For,

1. They are in perpetual danger of falling from their height. If you saw a man
advanced to the top of some high pinnacle, and there shaking by every blast,
would you not pity such a man? Who would envy that man's advancement? Such is
the condition of Great men; they are higher than you, but then their hazard is
greater, and their fall the sadder; Every wind shakes them, and their fears
drink up a great deal of their joys: And then,

2. Their troubles are proportionable to their greatness: You have small debts
to pay, and they have great debts to pay, and find it as hard to discharge
them, as you find yours; and for one Husbandman, there are two or three
Gentlemen that dye in debt: You have crosses in your Children; why, they have
greater: And the Sun and Moon in their habitations, do sometimes eclipse one
another, and cannot be fixed in the same firmament: You have injuries offered
you, and so you are drawn into suit; Alas! they are seldom out of suit: You
are provoked by evil words now and then, they likewise have their affronts,
that pierce them far deeper than yours do. And then for health, that epitome of
mercy; you are indeed sometimes sick, alas, they are seldom well: they must
eat and drink by rule, and do find far less sweetness in their meat, and sleep
than you do; and must these be envyed? And then you must needs imagine their
cares do exceed yours; and cares, you know, are the heaviest of your load, and
herein they do as much exceed you, as in their estates; care to get, care to
keep their own, care to borrow, and care to pay, care to get and keep their
reputation, and household cares must needs be many: and all these cares and
troubles are herein heavier than yours, in that they are more unexpected, and
they are less prepared for them; and you know the more tender the skin, the
deeper the iron enters thereinto.

And 3. As their Troubles, so their Temptations are very great. A wise man
would not have their Estates a year, for the Temptations they have in an hour.
The greater the Man, the greater is his Temptation. O what temptations have
they to Pride, to Flesh-pleasing, to Covetousness, to Atheism! What fuel do
their Estates lay up for these sins? How hard is it to have full barns, a vast
Estate, and that entailed, without a Soul at ease? You little think what their
danger is, how readily a man forgets God, when he is full. I dare say, thou
that enviest him, would st be worse than he, if thou had his Estate. What a
strong temptation is it to oppress, when a man knows he can do what he list?
The having of much, is a mighty incentive to hunger for more. So that every way
thy Superior, is superior to thee in temptations, and therefore his condition
not to be envied.

And then 4. If you think of their future hazard, you have small need to envy
them; for it is a thousand to one, they miss of Heaven, and go to Hell; and
therefore as the Soldier that was Sentenced for stealing Grapes, and
reproached by his fellows for eating them so busily, as he was going to
Execution, answered, Do you grudge me the Grapes, that I must pay so dear for?
So you have little reason to grudge them the Estates, for which they must pay
so dear. This is the Portion of their Cup, if they be without Christ; And if
thy Superiors be good men, thou should love and honor them, and never envy
them.

2. Study the Wisdom and Word of God. As he may do what he will with his own,
and thy eye has no reason to be evil, because His is good; so a little modesty
would tell thee, that he has wisdom to know where to bestow his gifts. Alas!
for thy part, he sees that thy neighbors high Estate, and thy high spirit
would undo thee: he knows what is fit for him, and he knows what is fit for thee:
He knows a Competence, and Heaven at the end of it, is enough for thee, if thou
be his Child; and it is too much, if thou be his Enemy. He knows the better
temper, and other usefulness he may be of, which shall not go without reward;
and while thou have more then thou deservest, what needst thou care what God
bestows upon others.

And then if you will look into the Word of God, you will quickly see their
End. Ps. 73.18.
That they are set in slippery places, that they are fatted for the slaughter,
and who envies the stalled Ox his large allowance? Ps. 49.14.
That the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning; Ps. 73.19.
That they are brought into desolation as in a moment, and utterly consumed
with terrors; That their utmost happiness is but a dream; That where the
Scripture counts Ps. 62.
men of low degree vanity, it determines that men of high degree, are a lie.
And therefore in the name and words of the most High I admonish thee, Psalm.
49.16. Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is
increased: For when he dies he shall carry nothing away; his glory shall not
descend after him.

And thus you see how much against Reason, how much against Religion it is, to
have a rising thought of envy against your Superiors; which Considerations may
work with you, and Prayer joined to them will work with God, to bring your
spirits level with your Estates, and rather to pity then envy that Crown,
that is so garnisht with Pearls without, and lined with Tears within.

SECT. V.. 3.

V. THe Fifth Temptation of the Husbandman Negligence of, and Deadness in holy
Duties.
is, Negligence and Deadness in holy Duties. I say this is his Temptation; not
that it is his usual sin, if he fear God: for you shall most commonly at his
door hear as grave and serious and pathetical a Prayer, as at the Parsons of
the Parish; but yet through the multitude of his business, and the weariness of
his spirits, he is often tempted to deadness in the Service of God in his
Family, and in secret, and sometimes to neglect and pass it over. Alas you can
have of a man but his strength; and that ere the Sun be set, is most an end
spent and gone; so that when he comes to Prayer, his heart is a sleep, and a
little thing would hire him, if he durst, to skip over that good work; by which
in very deed he gets and saves more, than by all his days work besides. As
when Moses spoke of sacrificing to God, Pharaoh still spoke of work to put them
off: So when God calls to worship, the World calls to work, or the Flesh to
sleep. Or if the fear of God, or a constant custom do engage him in his Duty,
he dreams through it, and is contented that its over, though he have done
nothing but displeased God the rein. If the Day had been two hours longer, he
would have found strength, to do more work; but he has no might for God, or
ability for heavenly business. The Fish is scarce ever weary of swiming,
because the water is her Element; but on the dry ground she is soon weary: So
our poor Husbandman has strength for two days in the Earth, which is his
Element; but hardly vivacity and ability for half an hour in the precious
service of his God: He is like a Be that has lost her sting, dull and
dronish: Alas he has lost his spirits, and has nothing, but weary limbs, and
a dead heart, to present to God.

And Soul-work never goes on, unless we have a mind to work: as they, Neh. 4.6.
They built, etc. for the people had a mind to work. O when a man hungers for
Prayer-time, more then meal-time: when all businesses are dry, and all
Companies taste of the Cask but Gods'; when a man can see more glory and beauty
in one verse of the Bible, than in all the Corn in his Field; when the Soul
does really hasten, through all other business, and cry, O When shall I come
and appear before God! then the work of God and the Soul goes on; then Duties
of worship are welcome to him, and well done by him.

And thus it is with our serious Husbandman, that uses the world that he may
enjoy God, and not the contrary, that rids his work that he may go to Prayer,
and rids not Prayer out of the way, that he may go to work. But alas, all
Husbandmen are not of this mold, happy they for ever, if they were. Abundance
of them think, when they have supped they have a Writ of ease to go to bed,
and let them pray that have nothing else to do. And though they are seldom so
weary, but they will think upon their bodies, and take their suppers with them,
ere they go to rest, yet they dare venture to forget their souls, and steal to
bed without a blessing.

And so in the morning, the World calls on so hard, that prayer is neglected
in the Morning; and at night the Flesh calls for ease, that Prayer is neglected
at Evening: or if something be done that way by reason of custom or conviction,
alas the wife she is sleeping in one corner, the child in another, the servant
in a third; when they should all of them be wrestling might and main with God
for mercy for their souls.

And then, when the Sabbath comes, the poor Husbandman lies under great
Temptations, to make it a Play-day for his body, and yet no Work-day for his
soul. He that can rise early every morning, takes his ease that morning, and
the Bells do hardly raise him up: And then in the Assembly, the easier is his
seat, the readier is he to sleep, while his weightiest affair is in hand: Or it
the Church be far, or the weather frown, or his finger ache, a small matter
shall keep him at home; though perhaps (as it was the case of Thomas the
Apostle) that very day, he might have seen Jesus Christ to his eternal comfort.

And here is the Husbandmans Temptation, Negligence and Deadness in holy
Duties. But what Preservative can we prescribe against this temptation? These
two at present. 1. More Zeal. 2. Less Labor.

1. More Zeal. Zeal is Religion boiling hot. And a warm heart in a weary body
will be active. Zeal revives the languishing spirits, infuses new spirits,
makes a man all spirit for the time. This in a false Religion will raise a man
to his Orisons at Midnight, send him some hundreds of miles on Pilgrimage, make
him sweep the Church with the Hair of his Head, lame his Knees with Prayers,
and blind his Eyes with tears. In the true Religion this works more languidly,
it is true, (men swim faster down then up the stream) but more regularly, and
does animate a gracions heart wonderfully in the ways of God; makes the lame
man to leap as an H^rt, and the tongue of the dumb to sing.

The godly Husbandman remembers, that his chiefest business every day is with
God, and the hardest of his work is on his knees; and so buckles to it, and is
in good earnest, and sweats even at his eyes. The more zeal, the more forward
to what is good, and the more unwearied in it. And it is good to be always
zealously affected in a good matter, Gal. 4.18. The service of God is the best
matter in the world, and it is not enough to be well affected to it, but to be
zealously effected in it. The wise Husbandman considers, that in all
likelihood, the load of his whole days work will be thrown off at night,
except Prayer do bind it on; that he cannot be a gainer, if his soul lose its
spiritual life and strength; he knows if he leave off his meals, he must go
with thin sides; and if he omit his Prayers, he must go with a thin soul. Alas,
what will you be the better to pay your Rent, and to run in arrear with God? to
keep your time with your Landlord, and break time with God, your Landlords
Landlord? What good can your meat, or clothes, or estate do you, if it be not
blessed by prayer? or how can God and you be friends, if you keep not
correspondence? cannot he, yea will not he make thee amends by the years end,
for an hour in a day spent with him? Alas, you may get more in half an hour by
Prayer, Psalms, Reading, to wit, some grains of true grace, than by your
hardest working all your lives, yea then all the world is worth; and why then
will you stand so with God for Something warm in a morning before you go out to
work is wholesome. So a warm Prayer in the Morning is very wholesome for the
soul. Mr. Swinnock,
a little time? He that gives you all, will you stand with him for an inch? If
your servant should tell you, when he has neglected a business of concernment,
he could not help it, for he had business of his own, would it please you? so
neither will it please God when you omit Prayer, etc. that you had other
business, and could not heed it. The very Turks, though they make their slaves
work hard, yet afford them time for food and rest, will you deal worse with
your soul, than with a Gally slave? Has not God said, Psalm 127.2. It is vain
for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows, except
the Lord give his blessing: and how is that obtained but by prayer; a constant
blessing, but by constant prayer? Alas, one mischance may half undo thee; and
were it not best then to keep in with that God, that has all creatures and
casualties in his hand? Mr. Byr. Lanc.
You have heard of that religious Gentleman, concerning whom the Witch his
Neighbor made this confession at her death, That she had waited seven whole
years to do him a mischief, but his constant Prayers had still disappoynted
her; until one Morning, that have of business had carried him from home without
Prayer in his Family; and before his return she had bewitched four or five of
his children. Miracle of mercy, and nothing else! that God has spared thee,
whose neglects in that kind have been many. What if Satan had been permitted to
do so by thee? how many Prayers might it have cost thee for deliverance? And is
it not more comfortable to spend those Prayers for preventing evil, than for
removing it? Is not that Prayer better spent that God commands, than that which
Sin procures? Nay think, when you are tempted to neglect the service of God in
your Families or otherwise, what an honor and advantage it is that you may
thus approach God. If the King should but give you liberty to come twice or
thrice a day into his presence, and there tell your whole case, and lay out all
your wants, and promise a real answer to your requests, how hard or many
soever: O how proud would you be of such a privilege, and seldom would you
miss your time, you would find something or other wanting for your selve^ or
friends, and duly improve it. How much is your Privilege greater, that may
come two or three times a day into the presence of the King of Kings, and be
heard about the great things of eternal life? O never fail your attendance;
open your mouth wide, and he wi^ fill it.

And then get more Zeal, that will heal yo^ of your deadness in holy duties.
Think seriously, whom am I before? my Maker and Redeemer: And what am I about?
The eternal salvation of my soul and body: And whither am I going? Into that
world of sou^ and spirits, that endless state, whence I mu^ never return. And
are these things to be (...) in? Are men asleep when they are beggin^ for their
lives; in a dream, when their Cau^ is trying? O remember, it is the effect^
fervent prayer of a righteous man, that avai^eth much. Though he be a righteous
man, ye^ except he put fervency into his prayer, it prevails little: Frozen
suits, meet with col^ answers from God. Put therefore Fire into thy Sacrifice,
and then it will ascend. Consider that the Lord thy God is to be loved an^
served with all the soul, and might, and strength and that he has a curse, and
not a blessing, for the deceiver, that has in his flock a Male, an^ voweth and
sacrifices to God a corrupt thing. Mal. 1.13. Nay, says God, I could see yo^
earnest enough in the Field, busy in the House busy in the Barn, busy every
where; and idl^ and cold only when you come to me; you have in your flock a
male, but you think any frame, any thing will serve me; I have no blessing for
such as you. He that wrestles with me, shall prevail; he that takes pains shall
have the Garland, and no man must be crowned except he strive, and strive
lawfully. He that has zeal, strives.

2. To prevent deadness or negligence in holy Duties, You must not (...) your
selves. Immoderate labor may be sinful, as well as immoderate meat and drink.
Then it is immoderate, 1. When it is not consistent with the strength of thy
body God requires from no man more than he has given him; he does not allow a
man a weak body, and exact from him strong labor; this were to require Brick,
and deny straw. When therefore thy pains in thy Calling, does quite dis-spirit
or distemper thy body, then it grows immoderate; and for a poor accident thou
hazardest the substance. 2. Thy labor then is immoderate, when it is not
consistent with the Duties of Religion: when secret or family Prayer must stand
or fall, at the courtesy of thy labor and business: when thy spirits are
exhausted, and thy strength so spent, that when Duties should be done, thy
heart like Nabals, is dead as a stone, thy body worn out, and good for nothing
but the Bed; then your labor becomes immoderate: And neither will it advantage
thy estate, nor thy dead duties advantage thy Soul, and so thou make a fair
Bargain. For it is certain, that what a man gets by immoderate cares and
labor, does him no more good, than what he gets by theft or oppression, Hab.
2.13. The people weary themselves in the very fire, and that for very vanity.
What a piece of folly is this? to weary a man's self, and that in the very
fire, broyling in the world, and all this for very vanity, a poor recompense.
Day-labourers are to be pitied, and the Lord no doubt pities them, and takes up
with a lesser Rent of service from them, than from their Masters; yet even they
must remember, that they have souls as well as bodies; that they have a Master
in Heaven, as well as a Master upon Earth; that a Living must be gotten for
Hereafter, as well as a^ present: and they ought (as Tertullian says of
eating) so to work, as that they remember, they must to Prayer before they go
to bed: Lest this rise up against them, that they were careful to take some
warm thing in the mor^ing for their bodies, before they went to work, and
neglected a warm Prayer or Chapter, that were much more wholesome for the^
souls. You should argue, if I have taken all this pains all day for a little
money, shall I not strain one sinew for a little grace at night? If I have
tired my Legs about the earth, shall (...) not wear my Knees to get to Heaven?
If I have wearied my Arms to get a living here, shall I not stretch out my
Hands to get a Crown hereafter? And let all resolve that the Husbandman must
give place to the Christian, the Plough must submit to the Prayer; and your
Earthly Vocation, to your heavenly Calling.

SECT. VI.. 6.


VI. THe Sixth Temptation of the Husbandman Charitableness and Nigardliness.
is, Incharitableness and Nigardliness. He can hardly part with that which he
has so hardly gotten. That which he has gotten with the drops of his sweat,
he is like to part with as the drops of his blood, 1 Samuel 25.11. Shall I then
take my bread, and my water, and my flesh -- and give it unto men, whom I know
not whence they be? said that rich Chub Nabal. So the Husbandman, must I take
pains for wealth, and give it away when I have done? Let all that will eat,
labor as well as I; and herewith he turns off the fittest objects of charity
that are, and resolves that every man must be for himself, and so will he. He
argues, that no body gives him, and therefore he will give to none. But though
this be his Temptation, yet I do not assert that Husbandmen are generally
conquered by it: For according to the proportion of his estate, he exceeds for
the most part the Gentry round about him: The poor Criple at his door, shall
have a larger alms to his power, I am sure a quicker dispatch, than at the
great pair of Gates close by him: And in public Collections for charitable
uses, the poor Husbandmans Purse is ready with his Mite, when hi^ Landlord was
not at Church that day. Neither do I affirm, that every one that asks, is a fit
object for the Charity of our Husbandman, (especially if our Laws for setting
the poo^ on work, were put in execution) no, some lusty Beggars he entertains
with a charitable Exhortation to honest labor, and tells them the benefit and
comfort that he finds by it; and sometimes sets them on work upon trial: but
because he considers, that it is safer to relieve nine needless Beggars, than to
turn away one needy one; therefore he strains himself to help the most that cry
for it, and refers himself to the Lord his God for recompense. But yet he has
much ado with his heart herein. Flesh and Blood looks thrice upon his money,
ere the Spirit and Grace can once part with it. It puts all the Faith he has
to the utmost, to give to strangers, when perhaps his own children are
unprovided for; and to relieve others, that must come (if two or three bad
years meet with him) to be relieved himself.

But if he have no Faith, but an earthly selfish temper instead of it, the poor
have cold entertainment at his door. He thinks it enough for him to be just, to
pay every man his own; let others be charitable that have greater Estates. He
must pay Taxes to the King, he must pay Rents to his Landlord, he must pay
Lewnes to the Church, and then to the poor of his Parish, and by this time he
is drained, and can do no more. And it is (to say the truth) a lamentable
thing, that so many wandering Beggars are suffered to be unimployed; and yet
more, that the burden of them falls upon the poor Husbandman; for his Landlord
lives in the City, and visits his Hall only twice a year, and the poor are
little the better for that; yea sometimes their unconscionable Rents make the
Beggars, and then the Husbandman is forced to keep them.

But yet some Preservatives must be laid before the Husbandman against this
Temptation.

1. You must consider that you are but Stewards of your Estate. The Property is
Gods, the Possession and use only yours. And so what you give is of Gods stock
in your hands; and what need you be niggardly of another stock? As long as
your Alms and Expenses will pass in your accounts, it is nothing at all to you,
how he will have it disposed: The forgetfulness of this, makes men so
close-handed. They take all they have to be their own: so Nabal, shall I give
my bread and my flesh? So the worldling cries, This is my house, my corn, my
bread, and this locks^up his hand: whereas when thou look on thy house, say,
This is the Lords, who gives me house-room on charity, and therefore any Guest
he sends, must be welcome: this Corn is Gods, and so is this Bread, I have but
the disposing of it; and so if he order it to a Beggar, I will freely part with
it, for it is none of mine, but Gods.

If some great man give you an Estate o^ twenty pounds a year freely, only he^
lays twenty shillings Rentcharge upon it: Were not you unworthy, to deny or
to grudg the payment of this Rentcharge? why, this is the case. It is the Lord
only that has given you an Estate; charitable relief of such as are in want,
is the Lords Rentcharge, which he has laid upon it; and therefore grudg not
to pay it, lest he re-enter, and seize the whole.

And especially considering that he has charged thee herein, according to thy
ability; not as earthly Landlords, that lay sometimes a great Rent on a small
living; he would only have thee to suit thy charity to thy ability. O but I am
a very poor man, and can hardly subsist. Answ. Art thou poorer than that widow?
Mark 12.42. She had not much, and Christ expected not much from her; two Mites
shall serve thy turn, if thou have but little. And our Lord Jesus himself was
low in Stock, when he was put to a miracle for money to pay his Tax; and yet
(says the text) he had a Purse for the Poor, Joh. 13.29. Think of this, when
thou have much a do to pay thy Rent, or to pay thy Tax, and grudg not something
to the hungry and naked, seeing thy Savior had a purse for the poor, though he
sometimes wanted money to pay his Tax.

2. You must believe that giving will make you rich. Well-ordered charity makes
no man poor. The way to have full Barns, is to have free hands. To this both
God and Man bea^ witness, Isa. 32.78. The instruments of the Churl are evil;
that is, he who makes empty the soul of the hungry, verse. 6. But the liberal
man devises liberal things, and by liberal things shall he stand. He devises
how he may do good, and where, and when; he lies in his bed contriving how he
may do poor men good in the best manner; I, say you, so he may quickly devise
away all that ere he has. Nay, says the Holy Ghost ^y liberal things shall he
stand: Piety, Equity, and Charity, are the best Pillars in any man's house. None
more punctually pays his debts than God; now he that gives to the poor,
lends to the Lord, and the Lord he will pay it him again, Prove. 19.17. There
is his Bond. Though all be his, yet he will accept of it as lent. Think, when
the poor crave, God has sent them to borrow for him, who will not take it
kindly to be denied. It Is true, it seems lost, and you think its as good to
cast it down the River, as give it to them. O no, it is not lost, it is Book't
in Heaven, and shall be paid on Earth. Cast thy bread on the Waters, and it
shall return after many days, Eccl. 11.1. most commonly in this life, but the
longer it s unpaid, the greater will the sum be at last. The man is yet unborn,
that has lost any thing by God. If you can but trust him, you may gain
sufficiently by him.

And to this, do all good men set their Seal, That the charitable hand is
blessed of the Lord, and he that loves to give, seldom is in need to receive.
Alas, God does litt^e less th^n miracles, in the Husbandmans house every day.
So much Rent to pay, so many Children to maintain, so many payments without any
breathing time, and yet he lives, and is cheerful, and for the most part dies
less in debt than his Landlord. Whence comes this! but from the wonderful
Providence and Blessing of God. A man would wonder whence every penny and
penyworth comes, that he gives and spends and pays: why the Scripture will
tell you, He that waters shall be watered also himself. Sirs, charity is good
Husbandry, for it brings a certain and plentiful Harvest. Let the man come
forth, that can say he ever was loser by Christ at the long run. If every bit
of bread, nay if every cup of cold water, nay if every cheerful word, nay if
every charitable thought, be not now or shortly rewarded, then murmr and hold
your hand; but till then, open your purse, open your hands, open your hearts,
and hide not your self from your own flesh.

SECT. VII.. 7.

VII. THe Seventh Temptation of the Husbandman Distracting care.
is, Distracting Care. He has so much to do, and so little to do it on, much
Brick to make, and little straw to make it with, that he is apt to be overful
of cares. What shall we eat? and what shall we drink? and wherewithal shall we
be clothed? Martha and he are sick of the same disease, to whom Christ thus,
Luke 10.40. Martha, (...).
Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things. Thy care divides thy
heart, it divides it from me, it divides it from its self, it is a care that
troubles thee, and that is naught.

There is a care of the Head, a care of Providence, Prove. 31.16. That Is
commendable. There is a care of the Hand, a care of diligence, Prove. 21.5.
That Is profitable. And a care of the Heart, a care of diffidence, Phil. 4.6.
That Is abominable: Much of this care molests our Husbandman: many cares about
his house, many about his ground, care fills his heart in Seed time, care
overfills it in Harvest: but when his Rent day approaches, his cares press him
down, care sometimes to borrow it, and then care to repay it. These invade him
in the worship of God, and make long Parentheses in his Prayers; these wait
upon him to his bed, and sometimes trouble him in it; and these visit him next
his heart in the Morning. When he should be full of the thoughts of Heaven,
these fill him with thoughts of the Earth, Yea many like co^ are swallowed up
of the earth alive. Mr. Swinnock.
and the Body robs the Soul of the cares that are needful for it; as how it
should be f^d; wherewith it should be clothed, or how its deadly wounds shall
be healed: how seldom do these break his sleep! When the Husbandman is
Reading, or at Pra^r, and running quite toward Heaven, these like a rubb to
the Bowl, make him fall short of his Mark. O says he, if this Rent were paid,
or if I had no Rent at all to pay, how freely and cheerfully could I serve God,
and take care about my soul! but this world, this world takes me off, and
whatsoever my soul does, Rent must be paid, and care must be taken: As if he
should say, If I were a Gentleman, I would be a Christian; I would take care of
my soul, if I had nothing else to do.

It Is true, care must be taken how to live in the world, but not distracting
care, not excluding care, not unseasonable care, not immoderate care, not
distrustful care. Not distracting; when the mind is drawn this way, and then
drawn that way, hurryed uncomfortably and indisposed to any good. Not excluding
care, whereby the thoughts and cares of Heaven are shut out. For (as a reverend
Divine says) either men must use the world as if they used it not, or they
will serve the Lord as if they served him not. If thou have need to pay man his
due, sure much more care is to be taken to pay unto God his due; if care how to
live thirty or forty years, much more to live forty thousand years: If you must
take care to escape the Prison, much more to escape Hell. Again, it must not be
unseasonable care; when the body should be refreshed by meet or ^ccl 5.18.
sleep, ( for it is comely and good for one to eat, and to drink, and to enjoy
the good of all his labor) nor when the soul should be refreshed with the
Ordinances of God, for one thing is needful, to wit, that better patt. Not
immoderate care, whereby the body is distempered, or the soul unfitted for the
comfortable discharge of your heavenly or earthly Callings. Nor lastly,
distrustful care, when you trust too much in your own understanding, and too
little in the Wisdom and Providence of God.

And this Temptation is so much the stronger, in that it carries so fair a
pretense, and is really spent about honest and lawful things; for about lawful
things we most often miss it, and endanger our souls where there seems least
danger at all. More men (you know) dye by meat, than by Poison. As that great
Politician used to pray, that God would deliver him from his friends, for he
should take care himself to avoid his enemies: So we have great need to be
careful about lawful things, for less care will save us harmless from things
plainly evil. And so we shall proceed to lay down some effectual Preservatives
against this Temptation of distracting care: Namely,

1. Learn to cast your care upon God, 1 Pet. 5.7. Casting all your care upon
him, for he cares for you. A most rare Duty, and a most excellent Promise.
Cast, not only put or lay it on, in part, or at leisure, but cast it wholly and
speedily. Cast what? why, your care, your distracting care, so the word
signifies; your necessary cares you must grapple with as well as you can; but
when they squeeze, torment, divide, distract the heart, then cast them away;
and not one or two of them, but All your care. In six troubles and in seven go
the same way, knock at the same door, throw them on the same shoulder: where is
that? Upon him; one able to bear and order them all, and not only able, but
very willing, For he cares for you: It is his business to care for you; his
business and design is to order all things for your eternal good. What needs
the child torture himself about a business, when the Father, that is wise and
loving, sends him word that he will take care thereof? Says God, Let present
duty be your care, and future events shall be mine; If you will trust me, I
will order it well for you.

How can you pretend to trust him for the things of another life, that you
never saw, if you cannot trust him for the things of this life, wherein you
have seen his Providence over and over? Learn then to use a moderate care about
your affairs; but when your cares oppress and disturb the quiet of your heart,
bring faith to such promises, as Romans 8.28. Heb. 13.5. Psalm. 84.11. and rest
thereby upon them, quietly expecting in the use of all good means a comfortable
issue. If the success suit not with thy expectation, believe that God saw thy
desire was not for thy advantage. If the issue fall out to thy mind, it is in
mercy; thou did thy duty, and trustedst in thy God, to which he has annexed a
certain Promise, Psalm. 37.3. T^ust in the Lord, and do good, besure you do
both, so shall thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shall be fed.

2. Consider the unprofitableness of distracting cares. It is certain, they
never do you good. Your design in them is for your good, for your advantage,
but they advantage you not: for Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord build the house,
they labor in vain that build it, and it is in vain to eat the bread of
sorrows. Is it not as good to lay those cares aside, as vex your selves with
them in vain. If indeed they could bring your matters to pass, and that success
would still attend upon your carking thoughts, somewhat might be said for them.
But alas, it is so far from that effect, that the ready way to blast any
business, is to bestow immoderate care about it. The Lord takes the wise in
their own craftiness, and brings their devises to naught; that all men may
know, that it is not of him that runs, but of God that blesses, that any
thing comes well to pass: More Prayers, and less cares, will do your business.

And therefore when they crowd in upon you, and overpress you, let out your
hearts to God in prayer, lay your straits and business before him: commit thy
way to the Lord, trust also in him, and see if he do not bring it to pass. Say,
Lord, my heart is overwhelmed in me, out of the Depths I cry unto thee, I can
do no good of it, but thou can; this knot thou can unty; my carking snarls
it the faster, I Will trouble my self no more but to do my duty; my contrivances
are Castles in the Air, but thy Understanding is infinite. And at long run you
will find this, that Real Piety, is the truest Policy. Alas the Husbandmans
head is not shaped for worldly wisdom, he is plain and simple; and again, he is
spent sufficiently by his labor, has no need to break his head and disturb
his sleep and mirth with these distractions, especially while they will do him
no good; and therefore go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink that thou
have with a merry heart, for God now accepts thy work, Eccl. 9.7.

SECT. VIII.. 3.

VIII. THe Eight Temptation of the Husbandman Slavish fear of Man.
is, Slavish fear of Man. It is true, he must keep a due Reverence for the
Magistrate, for he is the Minister of God; and therefore to contemn him
secretly, or disdain him openly, is no little crime. And a just fear and
respect he must have for his Landlord, or the Gentleman his Neighbor, because
God has placed them above him; and he has learnt that by the Father he ought
to honor, is meant all his Superiors; and himself expects the like from his
children and servants; and therefore he is far from that clownish humor of
those, that will make no difference between the King and the Beggar: knowing
that would bring confusion into the world, and break that order that God has
placed among men. And therefore in all worldly matters no man more respective
to his Superiors than the Husbandman; none more ready to all those services
and offices due from him to those above him: He Is ready, and his children are
ready, his Horses ready, and any thing he has; and that not out of base fear,
or other self ends, but out of a principle of ingenuity and kindness, and a
frame of heart to be doing good to every one. Here is his temper and duty; but
now his Temptation lies in this, That when his Landlord, or other great men
about him, do discountenance the practice of piety, and that holy strictness,
which is undoubtedly the will of God, and necessary to salvation; he is apt
either to take down his Colors, and either to waste his oil, or hide his Lamp,
lest he should bring anger or trouble upon himself.

He has a mind to have constant prayer in his family, and reading the
Scriptures, and singing Psalms, and would do so, if that course were held in
the Hall that is near him; but he is loath to go before a Gentleman, no not to
Heaven, and has cause to fear a frown or worse for so doing. And then having
but little Faith, he apprehends God far off, and his Landlord near, and will
rather venture the loss of his House in Heaven, than his House upon Earth, and
so neglects those Duties.

And so likewise in the practice of sobriety, circumspection and watchfulness,
the example and fear of Superiors, do lay a strong siege to his convictions
and resolutions, and make him (if strength of grace uphold him not) hazard the
Peace of a good Conscience, to keep the peace and quiet of his outward Estate.
Fain he would go to Heaven, if he durst; and enjoy the smiles of God and great
men also. He thinks without the favor of man he cannot live; and without the
favor of God he dare not dye; and so would conjoyn that which seldom meets,
the love of God and the love of the World too. Thus is that Scripture
fulfilled, Prove. 29.25. The fear of man causes a snare. He would fast with his
Family, but he dare not. He would read good Books, the best Books, and hear the
best Ministers, but he dare not; he would go to Heaven, but he dare not: he is
in the snare; The Lord of Heaven help him out!

Not that all of this Rank are taken in this Temptation; for there are many,
that go to Gods house for their Religion, and not to their Landlords; that if
their Prayers will not bring him with them to Heaven, his frowns shall not
bring them to Hell with him; That resolve to be in Gods Books, though they
never be in great men's. And these sometimes suffer for their presumption, their
Rents raised, or themselves dismissed; but they have cast up their accounts, and
do know that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer for it, and
are content.

Now to fence and Preserve the Husbandman from this slavish fear of man,
consult, 1. The Providence, 2. The Promise of God.

1. Consult the Providence of God. Thou look at man, and fear him: If
thou would look at God, thou would trust in him; thou would see a
thousand times more cause to trust in God, then to fear man. For the hearts and
hands of all men are in the hands of your God. Great men are in the hand of a
great God. And your greatest enemies are in the hands of your ch^ycest friend;
and he will bend their hearts to do thee good, or bind their hands that they
can do thee no hurt. He commonly makes their foes their friends, that walk
uprightly with him. And those that turn aside for fear, he suffers them to lose
the favor of great ones some other way, and the love of God also. It comes
often to pass, that they who will not suffer for Christ, come to suffer for
themselves; that they who are afraid to suffer for their holiness, prove to
suffer for their wickedness, as that Blacksmith in the Acts and Monuments,
that when he was put to it, told them he could not burn, and so escaped the
Fire of Honor; but ere long a spark kindled in his shop, and burnt him and
shop and all in the Fire of Judgment; and so he burnt for himself, that would
not burn for Jesus Christ.

Believe this therefore, if all the Great Ones on earth were set against you,
they shall not touch an hair of your head, no not an hair of your Head, till
God for your good give them a Commission. One cringe would have secured those
three Princes, Dan. 3.15. from a most dreadful peril; but behold their
integrity, constancy, and courage, and it is hard to say which was the
strongest. O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter.
If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O King. But if not, be it
known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship thy
golden Image which thou have set up. And did God forsake them in their need?
not at all. Alas he has fire and water in his hands, and can make a Gridiron
to be a bed of Down, when he pleases.

And therefore look not at man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is
he to be accounted of: Look not at the stone, but at the hand in which it is:
for as the stone cannot stir, unless it be moved by the hand; so no man can
stir one jot against you, unless God stir him up. Hence we have so often that
phrase in the old Testament, that God stirred up this and that enemy against
his people. Instead of pleasing this or that great man, whom it may be thou
can never please; or if thou do, yet there is another may do thee a mischief
as well as he: Do thou study to please God, who can according to that, Prove.
16.7. make thy Enemies to be at peace with thee. Man (says Homo li^e Deum, et
^undum ridebis. Aug.
Augustine) fear God, and thou may smile at the world. Alas, it lies in the
breast of any wretch (is he will come and swear against thee) whether thou
shall be worth a groat before night; and what foresight can arm a man against
such mishaps! No, no, It is the Lord that must be your refuge and portion in
the Land of the living. And therefore rely and rest (which you may safely do in
the way of your duty) upon his All-ruling Providence.

2. Consult the Promise of God. 1. The Promises he has made to keep you from
the troubles that your Superiors would bring on you, Isa. 41.10. Fear thou
not, for I am with thee, [Lord, who can fear, when thou art with them?] be not
dismayed, for I am thy God, [O blessed Word! if a weak Husbandman can get a
strong God for his God, what need he fear?] I will strengthen thee, yea I will
help thee, yea [let not down thy heart man] I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my Righteousness. Behold all they that were incensed against thee,
shall be ashamed and confounded, they shall be as nothing, and they that strive
with thee shall perish. If thy name be in the Eight and Ninth verses of that
Chapter, these Promises are as surely entailed upon thee, as if thy Name were
inserted, and they only made to thee. Again, verse. 14. Fear not thou worm
Jacob, I will help thee, says the Lord, and thou shall thresh the Mountains.
Hear this thou that say, O I am but a worm to them: how soon may a man crush
a worm under his feet, and so soon may these great Mountains fall upon me and
crush me: Why says God, though thou art but a worm to them, yet I will help
thee to thresh the mountains. God and a worm can do much. Somewhat a strange
sight to see a worm threshing a mountain, yet so it is. Many a poor upright
Husbandman by his Prayers and convincing life, does conquer, silence, tame or
destroy many a wicked Nimrod that would destroy him. Has not God said, Zech.
2. 8. He that touches you, touches the apple of his eye. And will God suffer
the proudest of them all, to fly at the apple of his eye? So that except it be
for your great glory and good, you may r^st securely and build upon it, That no
hand of violence shall touch you, however shall never do you hurt. This is a
maxim, No men, or menaces, or miseries, can do a Saint hurt: (...).
They may kill you, but they cannot hurt you. Away therefore with that flavish
fear, that hinders or discomforts you in your duty. God will not see his
Husbandman wronged. 2. Consult the Promises he has made, to deliver you out of
your troubles, if they befall you by your Superiors, 2 Pet. 2. 9. The Lord
knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust
unto the day of Judgment to be punished. Knows how, that is, can and will do
it. How many gracious promises has he made? In six troubles and in seven he
will ^al. 91.
deliver them. Thou shall tread on the Lion and Adder. He that has set his
love on me, I will deliver him and honor him.

Why art thou therefore so afraid of troubles? of Men or Devils? A prison is
not Hell: Loss of Goods, is not loss of the Chief Good. He that can turn thee
out of thy house, cannot turn thee out of Heaven; There he will be turned out,
and thou taken in. Man can threaten thee, but God can destroy thee. Thy great
Neighbor will trouble thee if thou pray, and thy great Maker will damn thee,
if thou do not pray: But he cannot trouble thee, whether God will or no, but
God can damn thee whether he will or no. They that now terrify thee, will run
to hide themselves; and will none of them come between thee and an angry God,
for the sins thou have committed, or duties thou have omitted, by their
inducement. And therefore, Math. 10. 28. Fear not them that can kill the body,
and have no more that they can do; but fear him that can cast body and soul
into Hell: O fear him, and let them talk.

SECT. IX.. 9.

IX. THe Ninth Temptation of the Husbandman Affected ignorance.
is, Affected Ignorance. His Intellectuals are but obtuse, and Education did
not befriend him; his occasions many, and his time scant, whereby ordinarily he
wants that necessary knowledge, that should light him to Heaven. And the abuse
of knowledge in others, and the excuse his continual labors suggest to him, do
tempt him to rest in and defend his Ignorance, and so it grows Affected
ignorance. In this he lives, and (without Gods grace) herein he dies. But God
forbid, we should charge all persons of that Calling with this evil: no, there
are many, very many have better learned Christ, able with much gravity and
distinctness to give an account of all material Points of Religion; that want
not an Argument to d^end the Truth, though they cannot put it in Mood and
Figure; yea diverse that in the Arts come not short, in the Languages exceed
some, that sit in Moses seat. And as to the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ,
that consists not so much in mental, as experimental apprehensions; multitudes
in this are excellent Scholars, that can describe Faith to the life, though
they cannot define it; that can tell how to repent, though they know not
whether this or Faith precede. In short, that can feel more than they can
speak, and that have learned to express more in their lives, than in their
words.

And some too there are, that know too much, I mean that have got more notions
into their head than they can rule, and for want of wisdom and humility grow
giddy and conceited; that they rather come to the Ordinance to judge their
Minister, than to be judged by the Word of God: and that think they could
discharge that Function better than he, and these are to be rankt among the
most intolerable sort of that Calling; of whom it were to be wished, that
either they knew less, that would make them less elevated, or that they knew
more, that would make them more humble. But I hope, the number of these are but
few. Experience of their own infirmities, together with further knowledge, will
cure them of this swelling, these Rickets in the head; and by degrees they will
find that the most they know, is the least part of what they are ignorant of.
No, the Epidemical disease of Husbandmen is ignorance, affected ignorance.

Many of them want time to read or think of spiritual matters; their Children
cry, their Business cries, their Creditour cries, and hard it is to read a leaf
without many avocations and distractions: nay worse, many of them cannot read a
word; they can see no more in a Bible, than in a stone; nor read one verse
therein, though the reading and ruminating of it might be as much worth, as
Heaven to them. Ah! that ever Heaven, the gate of heaven should be in a Bible,
and a reasonable creature, a Christian should not read it; and those that can,
yet will not labor to find it there. Nay worse yet, for many of this
Extraction and Education, are wonderful dull of capacity, and apprehend matters
(spiritual especially) with much difficulty and confusion; and then such broken
m^mories, that they can hold nothing without very much a do; so that the
Prophet J^remy might very well conclude of them, Jer. 5. 4. Therefore I said,
Surely these are poor, they a^e foolish, for they know not the way of the Lord,
nor the judgment of their God; I will get me to the great men. Alas! it is too
manifest, that ignorance prevails among that sort in all places, insomuch that
an Ignorant Peasant is the common Epithet. Their ambition being only to know
their ground, their cattle, their market, and their seat in the Church.

Who could have believed the sad story, that Mr. Pemble tells us in his Sermon
about Ignorance, if it had not an Author of credit? Of an old man on his death
bed, that had heard, in all likelihood, two or three thousand Sermons in his
life, that being then examined of his knowledge concerning God, should answer,
he thought him an old man sitting in a chair: and about Christ, thought him a
towardly young Youth: And concerning his Soul, thought it was some great bone
in his body, etc. O woeful story, That rational creatures who are able to give
account of civil affairs with sufficient discretion, and capable of the highest
knowledge; That professed Christians that have been brought up and taught that
sacred Religion, should know so little in the faith they must be saved by. To
expect to be saved by the Son of God, and yet think him to be the Sun in the
firmament, as others have expressed; That hope to go to Heaven, and yet know
neither faith nor repentance, the undoubted way thither, nor what it is to be
justified, or born again.

And more sad, that the Husbandman should plead for this his Ignorance; that
any should imagine his sin should excuse him, and bring him off before God;
That when God says, My people perish for want of Knowledge, he Hos. 4.6.
should conclude, because I want knowledge, therefore I shall not perish; yea,
and imagine, that he shall speed better, than the most knowing and conscionable
of his Neighbors; what besotted blindness is this? Who can have patience to
hear this confident folly? but who is more bold than blind Bayard? Alas, it is
ignorance that feeds his presumption. If he did but see himself in a true
glass, he would abhor himself in dust and ashes. And therefore its time to seek
some Cure of this temptation; And that is,

1. Be persuaded of the absolute necessity of saving Knowledge. That no man is
excused by his birth, poverty, or dullness, from getting so much knowledge in
the fundamentals of Religion, as will let Christ into the soul, and stear it to
Heaven. This is certain, that as no world was made without Light in the first
place, so no new world in the soul without the light of Knowledge. Gods Method
is, Acts 26. 18. To turn men from darkness to light, and so from the power of
Satan unto God. This is the way to Eternal Life, John 17. 3. To know the only
true God, and Jesus Christ. This is the first branch in the New Covenant, A
heart to know God, Jer. 24. 7. not his Name, but his Nature, to know God in
Chri^, to know his will. Can you think any man goes to Heaven in the dark, to
Heaven blind? Gods children are never born blind or dumb: must men of old be so
many years, only to learn the principles of Philosophy, and can you commence
Christian, and scarce study the Principles thereof a month? Shall your brains
be studied more about the sorriest Trade, than about that great Calling, that
teaches to live for ever? What variety of instructions do you give your
Children for Husbandry? Every day you are at it, and will less a do make them
wise for Heaven than Earth?

Tell me not of your mean Birth and Education. God requires not from you what
he he does from some others; but does he therefore give you a Patent for gross
ignorance? He expects not you shall resolve all the Questions in the Schools,
but does it follow, you should not know all the Principles of your Catechism?

And though your business be great, yet remember still, that one thing is
necessary. Though your hands and time be full, yet I hope you will find leisure to
go to Heaven. You must discharge your debts, attend your markets, pay your
rents, and bring up your children; And must you not get your blindness eur^d,
your leprosy healed, and your soul saved? The busiest of you, if you break a
bone, or be sick, will have time to seek help. Are ye too busy to go to
Heaven? God forbid. What though you are poor! Are not many poor men rich in
knowledge? Must not poor men go to Heaven? and can they come thither
hood-wink't? Though thou art but an Husbandman, yet thou must be a Christian;
and to be a Christian without knowledge of the Scripture, is like being a
Philosopher without learning.

Though thy Understanding be dull, yet when the Holy Ghost is the
Schoolmaster, it is possible to learn. If no man learn any thing that he is
dull at first about, how few would have skill in any thing. The first line in
the Horn-book is the hardest; the further you learn, the easier: Prayer and
Diligence will make it easy. And the Husbandman's God does instruct him to
discretion, and does teach him, Isa. 28.26. He that teaches you to know the
properties of the Earth, will teach you also the passage to Heaven. He that
teaches you to Plow, when you endeavor it, will teach you to Pray, when you
endeavor that.

And though others abuse their knowledge, are better Scholars and worse
Christians than thou, yet this will be no excuse to thee. Their sin does not
ease thee of thy duty; They shall go to Hell for their uneffectual knowledge,
and thou shall go to Hell for thy affected Ignorance: But alas, you argue not
thus, in the Case of riches or other things: you do not say, my Neighbor
yonder has great riches, and mispends them, therefore I will resolve to be
poor; he is proud of his fine clothes, and therefore I Will go in rags. Urge then
no more others abuse of knowledge, but seeing it is necessary, do thou obtain
it, and use it better.

2. Be resolved in the means of procuring saving knowledge, Prove. 2.2, 3. If
thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, [diligently hear the instructions of the
wise] and apply thy heart unto understanding, [set thy heart upon it, as
Scholars upon their Books, or Tradesmen on their Trades] yea, if thou cryest
after knowledge, and liftest np thy voice for understanding, [Earnestly and
continually pray for it; if it be not worth asking, it is worth nothing.] If
thou seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasure, [if thou
usest all good means, read in every book, make out to any good Minister or
Christian that can help thee] then shall thou find the knowledge of God; pains
must be taken or no good done: I cannot choose but wonder to hear illiterate men
sometimes, O, I would give all the Cattle I have, that I could but read; who
yet might with half the pains, which they would bestow to get one of them,
learn to read sufficiently, and yet will not endeavor it. Alas, they speak as
they think, but a deceived heart turns them aside: even so, you will hear some
ignorant men express themselves; I would I had given all I am worth for that
knowledge which such have; and yet when they are directed to the means, they
suddenly are weary, and show thereby they did but dally.

Notwithstanding all your business, you have one whole day every week. How rich
in knowledge would you quickly be, if every minute of that day were put to the
best. Some Divines have collected the material points of Religion into fifty
two heads, for each Sabbath one; now if the poorest Husbandman in the Land
would fix each Lords day on one of these, (and any good Minister would set you
in) and in the spare time thereof, read, or hear others read to him, or ask
questions, and confer with his honest Neighbor about it, and as he has
occasion the week following, drive in the same nail, What a blessed crop of
saving knowledge would he reap when the year is expired? This is to seek
knowledge as silver; and it is worth more pains than this, in that there is no
going to Heaven without it. If you lived in Countries where no Bibles must be
read, where there be no Ministers to teach you, and to know Christ were
criminal, there were some excuse for ignorance: but what plenty of precious
Bibles have we? what store of excellent Books, Catechisms, and principles of
Religion? what choice of Ministers that long to teach you? And to run through
all this light into eternal darkness, what excuse can you bring? how great will
be that darkness! Up therefore and be doing; let your future diligence,
compensate your former negligence, lest you hear that fatal sentence, when it
is too late to reverse, Isa. 27.11. This is a man of no understanding, and
therefore he that made him, will not save him, and he that formed him, will
show him no favor. Now God forbid that the poor harmless Husbandman should
after his painful life, be thus sentenced into a more painful state! that for
want of outward, he should be poor here, and for want of inwards be poor for
ever. Why, then prevent it, while there is time: The markets yet are open, good
eye salve to be had; The richest pearls to be had, for a little labor. God
himself will be the Master, and who will not be proud to be his Scholar? O
taste and see how good the Lord is, apply your selves to him, and he will teach
you the fear of the Lord, so shall you be rid of this temptation.

SECT. X.. 10.

X. THe Tenth Temptation of the Husbandman Wronging his neighbor.
is, Wrong unto his Neighbor; Though most other employments exceed this in
temptations hereunto, yet this Calling wants not its temptation. This wretched
Self is of such powerful influence, that it draws the plain Husbandman
himself, to strain a point of Conscience sometimes, to fulfill the lusts
thereof. Hence it comes to pass sometimes (I hope it is not often) that you may
observe deceit and dissimulation in his bargains, though not so much as a
tradesman, yet too much for a Christian: unfaithfully commending what is bad,
when he sells, and unconscionably condemning and dispraising what is good, when
he buys. Even in the words of Prove. 20.14. It is naught, it is naught, says
the buyer, but when he is gone, he boasts. Pinching the poor either in his
measure, or in his price, when he sells his corn, and taking occasion from his
straits, to deal straightly with him. Hence his unsound horse, and unproveable
cattle are brought to market, with the greatest protestations of their
soundness and goodness; Insomuch as it is grown a distinct Art, to buy or sell
any thing in the market; and to buy a Cow a man had need of as many friends as
she has legs, lest he be defrauded. And then so many fair stories, nay, so
many equivocations, nay, so many flat ly^s, nay, so many oaths, nay, so many
perjuries, swearing this price shall be the lowest, and yet abating it at next
word, that a man would wonder men should apparently venture their consciences
and eternal happiness, for so small a business, and yet be more astonished, that
this should be done by Christians, that believe the Bible, and by Christian
Husbandmen, that are the plainest hearted of all others.

And then another way whereby he is tempted to wrong his Neighbor is, by
Trespassing upon him; either his cattle being unruly, and not lawfully ordered,
or his fence neglected, (for we must descend, if we would amend the most
inferior things in our way) and these things are neglected either through
idleness, or other business, (it is hoped out of no worse design) so long that
his honest neighbor is prejudiced and provoked. And hence follows, (besides
the wrong done, which is the worst evil) grudgings, and heartburnings, and
often unkind and angry expressions, and sometimes long and chargeable suits.
How great a fire a little spark kindles? Insomuch that oftentimes, the nearest
neighbors are lest beloved, and sometimes so engaged in suits and rancour
against each other, that they lose the comfort of that mutual love and offices,
they might enjoy.

And this is a most sad and doleful thing, to be written in tears, and spoken
in sighs, that those people should so fail in Actions, whose Religion gives
laws to the Thoughts; that they should live below the Heathens, who expect to
be equal to the Angels; that some little part of that world, the whole whereof
is not worth the poorest soul in it, should so bewitch a man, to break all
bonds, divine and humane, to compass it. Let us therefore enquire out some
powerful Preservative against this temptation.

1. Observe the piercing eye of Almighty God always upon thee. When thy heart
gives thy mouth the lie in dissimulation, he observes thee all the while, and
marvels at thy folly. Would thou speak so falsely, if he with whom thou
dealest knew thy heart? Why will thou speak so, when God knows thy heart? Is he
less formidable than a worm? will thou bear such awe of one that can only shame
thee, and not bear much more of one that can both shame and damn thee? Thou will not affirm a thing if thou know a stander by can disprove thee; Why,
God is a stander by, and when thou art lying equivocating and swearing, he can
disprove thee every word, can stop thy mouth with a thunderbolt, strike thee
dumb, yea, dead in the place, as he did Ananius and Saphira, and many others
since, with their lie in their mouths. Hearken what he has said, 1 These. 4.6.
Let no man go beyond, or defraud his brother in any matter, because that the
Lord is the avenger of all such. If an ingenious argument will win thee, He
whom thou defraudis thy brother, will thou eat up thine own flesh? If a
dreadful argument will work on thee, The Lord is the avenger of all such. God
will sooner or later reckon surely with thee for it, and therefore as thou
tendrest thy safety and happiness, go beyond no man in any matter. God will not
see one man rise unjustly on another ruin with any patience, nor behold thy
cunning to make a prey of his simplicity without a sharp revenge.

Object. A man cannot live in the world without using his wits: Other men use
it more than I: These shifts are common and ^onest in comparison of others: I
do but make the best of my own: Let them look better about them, and then
there is no danger.

Answ. There is no necessity laid on any man to sin. It Is better to be poor
than sin. He would make such a bargain as would undo do him, that would tell
one lie to gain all the world. Others practice is no rule, and will prove no
excuse for thy wickedness. God has given thee to understand, that his Word is
the Rule, that must guide and judge thee; and that thou art to imitate not the
worst, but the best men, and them only in what is good. You are to know, that
by beguiling others, you make the worst of your own, and hazard all to
increase a little, and venture hell to gain a penny. That God has not given all
men the like measure of skill and perspicacity, but they are plain and simple,
and think every one else is like them; but in that case God has made thee thy
Brothers Keeper, and put him into thy hands to deal mercifully and honestly
with him.

2. Be confident, that what is got by wronging others, will never do you good;
the gain of deceit lasts but a while; or if it do, it is given thee in wrath;
like a Suit with the plague in it, it is gay and fine, but death is in it; So is
unjust gain, though it stay with thee till thou dye, yet the curse of God stays
with it, and rests if not on thy state, body or children, yet on thy poor soul,
which is worst of all; And who would be fond of a fair Suit with the plague in
it? it were better to wear leather, poor leather or russet were much better: so
it were better for thee a thousand times, to live poor, and just, and dye
blessed, than to live rich, and dye accursed. The crafty Fox in the Fable
hugged himself, that he had cousen'd the Crow of her breakfast, but when he
found himself poisoned therewith, he wished it out of his belly. Prove. 21.6. The
getting of treasures by a lying tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro, of them
that seek death. Your design perhaps is to make estates for your Children, but
alas this is not the way; for if you could rise out of your graves one fifty
years after your death, you would find the canker of your deceit and injuries
had consumed it all. The eye of Scripture, the eye of Reason, the eye of
Experience sees this every day, that -- De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius
haeres, The third heir seldom enjoys ill-gotten goods: What madness is this
for you to lose your souls in the gaining of the world, and your posterity to
lose their souls in the spending of it? and so the same purse or house damnes
both the Father and the Son; the Father by injurious getting it, and the Son by
ungodly wasting it. How many houses have you seen ruined, where the oppressor
has dwelt? How many unconscio^able Lawyers (who like you have made a prey of
the simple) have built strong houses, and made strong entails, yet in a few
Generations their names are blotted out, and they who preferred Earth before
Heaven, have neither Earth nor Heaven; and c^n you go by their houses, and not
receive instruction? will you see and know this, and yet follow them? Alas your
thriving is but the fat of a dropsy, which makes a great show, but is not
sound; brings rottenness in the end of it. Such is your present estate, Your
riches are corrupted, your Gold and Silver is cankered, ye have heaped treasu^
together for the last days. Yea, in this life, God often sends some to squeeze
these muckworms, when they have sucked themselves full. And if these things be
true, O why will will ye defraud any more? You build castles, but it is in the
air; your house wants foundation, your title to your estate is naught, and as
sure as there is a God in Heaven, and a curse in this Bible, you will be losers
by this gain; no penny that you have gotten by fraud shall ever do you or yours
good. God has said it, Psalm. 18.25. With an upright man I will show my self
upright, and with the froward I will show my self froward.

And is not here sufficient ground to move A discourse about Restitution.
you in the point of Restitution. If injurious or deceitful gain, in the
judgment of God; and experience of men, and in your own observation do no man
good, but much hurt; and inevitably entail a curse upon the man and all his
estate, whiles he keep it; Is it not Wisdom and Conscience to restore what you
have thus gotten? Would you keep a suit that has the Pestilence in it? will you
hold that which God bids you restore, and will damn you in hell, if you keep
it? whereas it will do you no good: what, run a plain hazard of losing your
honest gain, by keeping some little which is dishonest? and venture hell fire,
rather than part with some of that estate, when as if God say the word to
night, thou must part with it all before morning? Is it not better to bring it
back, and be saved, than have it fetched, and you be lost?

If ever God work savingly, I say savingly, upon your hearts, you will make as
much have to restore, as ever you did to get it; and shake it out of your
skirt, as you would brush a spark off your clothes, as Zacheus, Luke 19.8. No
sooner was salvation come to his house, but he cries out, Lord, if I have taken
any thing (mark any thing of what kind soever, of what quantity soever) of any
man, (whether good or bad, rich or poor) by false accusation I restore him,
(not I Will do it at my leisure, but upon the nail I restore him) fourfold: I Will
rather be a loser than my Neigbour; he shall have fourfold.

Object. You will perhaps object your inability and poverty, that you cannot
make restitution, or at least this would make you poor enough, and therefore
desire to be excused.

Answ. Total inability excuses restitution in the Kind, but yet there must be
restitution in the Mind. A will you must have at present, and the deed (except
remitted) if ever you be able. In the mean time, you are to be sorry, that you
have wronged your Neighbor in your actions, and can onely-right him in your
wishes. And sure there is some hand of God in it, that your estate (though
increased by your trespassing upon, and wronging of others) should be brought
to such an ebb, that you are unable to make just restitution. Surely God has
blown-upon you, with the fearful blast of his curse already, and you may find
by this, that no industry nor intail can assure ill-gotten goods. And as sure
as this curse follows you externally, so surely (without repent^nce and
restitution) will it follow you eternally. And therefore you are wide point
blank in your argument, you cannot restore, because it will make you poor; for
if you do not restore, you will be poor. Your building now is on a quick-sand,
pile up your wall as high as you can, the quick-sand under it will bring it
down, and you and yours under it. And therefore its better to be poor with Gods
blessing, than poor with his curse.

And grant it do bring you low, to restore to every man his own; alas it does
but deliver you from that estate, which would do you hurt, and strip you of
some garments, that would keep you too hot. However the event, Duty must be
done, whether we grow rich or poor by it. Poverty and piety are better company,
than riches and sin. And if you can trust God, (and otherwise you can never
come to Heaven) he can and will, if it be for your good, make you amends for
your selfdenyal, and give you goods, and a good conscience also. Take therefore
thy ill-gotten goods in thy hand, (as that Philosopher did his estate, when he
threw it into the Sea) and resolve, it is better these things be lost for me,
than with me; and let God do his will.

Object. 2. It may be you will say, I shall be shamed, my name will be posted
up for dishonesty; and it is a saying, that it is a shame to steal or wrong,
but a worse shame to bring it home again.

Answ. Sin is worse then shame. A man may stand under shame, but you cannot
stand under the guilt of sin. Augustine has determined long ago, That sin is
not remitted, till the thing be restored, wherein you sinned. If your
consciencewere tender, or your eyes open, you would more tremble for guilt then
shame. It was never better with Ephraim, than when he was ashamed, yea even
confounded (the highest degree of shame) for the sins of his youth, Jer. 31.
19. And never worse with Ephraim, than when he was given up to sin, Hos. 4. 17.
How long do you think it will be, ere you must be charged before God, Angels,
and all your neighbors, with your injurious dealings? and then what
unspeakable shame will cover your face, when it will appear that after all
these warnings, you lived and dyed in these sins? Alas! It will be but a while,
and all your heart and actions shall be laid out to the view of all; and were
it not better you prevented this your self?

But to come nearer; Pray what shame is it to do that which is good, or undo
that which is evil? It is a shame indeed to sin, but that is past, that thou
art ashamed of too: but now thou art about a work of righteousness, equity and
honesty, there is no shame in this: Nay all men, at least all wise men will
think better of thee than before: They will now conclude, certainly yonder is a
singular good man, that will part with his estate, and venture his credit,
rather than burden his Conscience, or remain under sin. All men will commend
this, and much praise will redound to God. Pray what disgrace is it to Zacheus,
that he was willing to restore all he had gotten by wrong? God and Man record
it to his honor.

But further yet, you may so order your restitution, that (if occasion be) you
never need to be known. Consider whom you have injured, and how much; and then
choose your discreet Minister, or some other faithful friend, who may dispose
the thing restored, or the value of it, to the right owner, and your name never
needs to be in question. But rather exceed, than fall short of the full value,
in your restitution. I will restore, says Zacheus, fourfold, that is, rather
more than less. And the Lord has ordered in that case, Numb. 5.7. They shall
confess their sin which they have do^ and he shall recompense his trespass with
t^ principal thereof, and add unto it the fifth part thereof, and give it unto
him against whom b^ has trespassed. This is equitable for him, who perhaps
has been prejudiced by your injury, more than the naked worth of the thing;
especially if much time be past. And it is profitable for you; when your sin
costs you dear, its likely you will not easily meddle that way again.

Obj. I, but what if the party I have wronged be dead, and perhaps there is
none left, to whom restitution may be made; or the persons at such a distance,
that it is impossible to make them amends.

Answ. Restitution must be made in the proper place, if it be possible; or if
the party be dead, to their Heirs or Executors, and pains must be taken to find
them out. It is but a reasonable penance for your fault. But if no person can
be found in whom the right of receiving remains, then hear what God says,
Numb. 5.8. But if the man have no Kinsman, (or person having right) to
recompense the trespass unto, let the trespass be recompensed unto the Lord,
even to the Priest -- Almighty God is Heir-General in all such cases; in whose
name and stead his Priests and poor are authorized to give you an acquittance;
and your sin bewailed shall through the Ram of atonement, mentioned in the
same verse, be forgiven. But till this be done or fully purposed, your guilt
remains, you are yet in your sins.

And thus I have at length, given you a view of the Husbandmans Temptations,
and their several Antidotes; not but that he has many more. As he is a
Christian, he is liable to all the temptations of a poor Christian; so as he is
Husband, Master, Subject: but I think these are more incident to his earthly
Calling, wherein if he be faithful to his own soul in the use of the
Preservatives annexed, I trust, by the blessing of God, he shall overcome, and
reign with Christ at last, where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the
weary an at rest.

CHAP. VI. Cap. 4. The Huss bandman Lessons in his Calling.
The Husbandmans Lessons in his Calling.
SECT. I.
ANd now I proceed to the Sixth Point to be handled, which is the excellent
Lessons that God teaches the poor Husbandman, who perhaps cannot skill of one
Letter in the Book; For his God does instruct unto discretion, and does teach
him; as you had it out of Isa. 28.26. And that is a dull Scholar that such a
Master cannot teach. There is hardly any thing that the Husbandman has to deal
with, but he may learn something of God out of it, when God does prompt him
thereunto. Yea God has translated the world into the Scripture, that we may
translate and think of the Scripture in the World. This (as was observed) is
one end of Similes and Comparisons, so frequent in the Bible, not only that God
may come down by them unto us, but that we may by them ascend unto him, As our
Lord Christ (excellently) by occasion of a Vine in his way, (as the Learned
conclude) raises up his and his hearers minds to learn this Lesson, That every
branch that. 1. Lessons from his Ground.
bears not fruit, shall be taken away; and the branch that does bear fruit
shall be purged to bring forth more fruit, Joh. 15.1, 2. A profitable Lesson
taught out of a Tree. Having therefore such a Copy, let us endeavor to show,
what Learning the Husbandman may and ought to get. And, I. Out of his Ground.
And here

1. He looks on it, and thinks Whence he came. He reads his Pedigree in the
Dust; and remembers his Paternal Coat is blazoned, Genesis 3.19. Out of the Ground
wast thou taken. And having much business with it, he is often minded what he
is, For Dust thou art. And there is but a remove between the Dust that lies,
and the Dust that is walking on it. And therefore the Husbandman ought to look
down, and learn humility; and then to look up, and beg it of God. And hence it
was (as some judge) that God gave to our Father Adam his name from the ground
or earth (for so his name signifies) that whenever he heard his name Adam
called, he might think of his original and be humble.

The Husbandman therefore has many Items of his frailty, and must lay it to
heart. Here is my Ground, and alas what am I but earth sifted and purified, and
molded up by the hand of God? And what cause has white and red clay to be
proud! Come down O my vain heart, and know thy place; when clay ascends, it is
against the Laws of the Creation.

2. From his ground; the Husbandman learnes his mortality; and may be often
minded of his change. For unto dust thou shall return: There is the end of his
Line. Poor man creeps out of the dust, keeps a coile in the world a while, and
then r^turnes unto dust again. Every day the Husbandman may learn this lesson.
His employment lies as it were in his grave; when he is digging or plowing in
the ground, he breaks out in these thoughts. Poor piece of creeping dust,
whither art thou going? Art thou ready to return to thy mother Earth again?
Have thou glorified God? Have thou finished the work which he gave thee to do?
What sticks it at? Thy passing Bell may be rung to morrow, and then shall the
dust return to the Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return unto G d who
gave it, Eccles. 12.7. Prepare thy self therefore, to lie down in the Earth,
which thou art now manuring: Get dying thoughts, for thou art but dying dust.

3. From the quality of his ground, he must learn his lesson. When you walk
over a fruitful Field, the sight of it pleases you: And a fruitful heart and
life would please God much more. This shower of rain has made my field better?
Did the last shower from Heaven make my heart better? Hebr. 6.7. For the Earth
that drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs
meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives blessing from God. Shall my
ground be blessed, and not my heart? Is a fruitful field a pleasant sight? O
how muc h more blessed sight is a serious growing and holy heart? Awake
therefore O my soul, lest thy ground do shame thee, and lest the Earth rise up
in Judgment against him that tills it.

Again when the Husbandman is in his barren ground, there he learns the danger
of unfruitfulness. For says the Scripture, Heb. 6.8. that which bears thorns
and briars is rejected, and nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Do I
turn that ground to Commons, that will bring neither Corn nor Grass after all
Ex terra ferlili producetur (...) (...) venenosa; et ex terra (...) pretiosum
aurum. Pint. in ^zek.
my cost? What then will become of me if I be unfruitful? Is it intolerable in
the ground, and is it not much more in earth refined? A wake my barreu heart
and fall to work. I Will ghome and mend my pace, and bring forth fruitso meet for
repentance, lest while I seem blessed on earth, I prove to be accursed from
Heaven. And thus the barren ground reads a fruitful lecture to the observing
Husbandman.

4. His fourth lesson is from the improving of his ground. He finds that the
dirty manure is necessary to make his ground fertile, Luke 13.8. Not only the
fig tree, but the vineyard must be dig'd and dung'd, else it will grow weedy,
gather moss and be fruitless^ And here our Husbandman learns the necessity and
benefit of affliction. Here Is a piece of ground; alas without much pain, I
shall reap no profit. And here is an Heart, that will bring forth little,
without much pains and cost. Afflictions are profitable, but not pleasant at
all: They fall upon us by a necessity, (If need be) ye are in manifola
temptations. 1 Pet. 1.6. Let a man live two or three years without affliction,
and he is almost good for nothing; he cannot pray, nor meditate, nor deny
himself, he gathers abundance of moss and rust; but let God smite him in his
child, or estate, or health, now he^ can find his tongue, he is awake, and is
in good earnest, now he is humble and mortified, and quite another man; O!
affliction is the growing soil. God has now as much honor again from him, as
he had before. Hereupon many good Husbands think, that improving is better than
purchasing: the Lord has such a large improvement from one of his servants
after affliction, that it brings in as much, as if he had converted a man out
of the rough. And now thinks the Husbandman; my pains and cost is well
bestowed; this crop rewards me: And so says God, This amendment pleases me;
This rod was well bestowed. And thus does God chide himself friends with his
poor children, and heales them by his stripes: and this the Husbandman learnes
from the improving of his Ground.

5. The Husbandmans fifth lesson is, from fencing of his Ground. He observes
that after all his cost and labor in his field, one gap or breach is able to
ruin all his hopes, and therefore concludes the necessity of a fence, for the
receiving of his deserved profit. Here my Corn is sown, but my labor's lost
without care to preserve it; up Sirs, let us be doing, this field must be
fenced, or all is lost. And hence the Husbandman learnes the duty of
watchfulness, and concludes that without it an everlasting soul is lost. When
God himself has sown the precious seed of Gospeltruth in the heart, and placed
many orient Graces in the soul, there is no small need of a serious and
constant watch, else Satan and his instruments, will quickly lay them wast. Let
the field of your heart be never so richly laden with knowledge, love, zeal;
yet if one gap be left open for the Boar out of the Wood, or the Foxes of the
field, to any one conscience-wasting corruption, open or secret, all will be
destroyed, Prove. 24.30. I went by the field of the man void of understanding,
and lo -- the stone wall thereof was broken down. Here was a field without a
fence; but did the passenger gather nothing hence? Yes verse. 32. Then I saw,
and considered it well, [I was thinking what I might learn from it] I looked
upon it, and received instruction. My neighbors folly taught me wisdom, I was
instructed by it; this outward object, taught me an inward lesson. So should
the Husbandman by the breaches in his neighbors wall: be taught to repair the
neglects of his ow^ watch. How soon is a pair of Floodgates (...) the
fenne-Countries drawn up? How hard^ can we draw out the waters again? Ah so i^
is (you may believe sighing experience) so i^ is with a poor soul; you may a
thousand time^ more carefully keep out a sin, and cru^ a Cockatrice in the egg,
than rid the soul of its woeful chains and fetters afterward. It Is watchfulness
and prayer, that only ca^ keep temptation out.

6. The Husbandmans fixth lesson is, from the Grass of his ground. Thus he has
daily a pleasant view of, and now and then makes a Book of it, and every Grass
is a Letter, ye^ (...) word, yea a Sermon to him? A Sermon sometimes of his own
frailty: For how does it flourish in the morning, and the many colored weeds
therein ^ile and dance? and at night they are cut down and withered, their
beauty gone in a few days, and then he reme^bers what is said Isa. 40.6, 7.
All flesh is Grass, and the goodliness thereof as the flower of the Grass: The
Grass withers, the flower fades: Sure the people is Grass. And so he goes
his way with an heart mortifyed, and weaned to the world, and all things in it,
seeing there is so little difference between his Grass and him. The Grass
sprung lately out of the ground, and so did he, only he is the Senior Grass;
and the Grass is resolved into the earth again, and so must he; only he lives
a while longer. And more particularly, the Husbandman learnes hence the
short-lived happiness of wicked men, that rise up sudd^ly in the world, and
rage as they were wooed, but like the Grass they perish out of hand, and their
places forget them. God lets them alone a while, as the Husbandman does his
Meadow, eats them not down by afflictions, but hedges them by his providence,
as if he had more care of them then of all his de^esne besides; but mowes them
down at length, and cuts them off in a moment, Psalm. 92.7. When the wicked
spring as the Grass, and when all the workers of iniquity do flourish, it is
that they shall be destroyed for ever.

And then again, the Grass Preaches to the Husbandman, Relyance upon the
providence of God. Thinks he, here I have a great family, and many Children,
and certain provision for them I have none, but Math. 6.30. If God thus cloth
the Grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into the Oven,
shall be not much more cloth me and mine, if I have any faith? Has common
providence such care of Grass, and not much more on men and women? Away
distrust, be silent all my fears, God will provide for me and mine. What if I
leave a shiftless wife, and unable children behind me: This poor Grass cannot
shift for it self, and yet its supported, and fed, and fenced, till I think it
fit to cut it down: And so shall they be fed, and fenced, till God think fit to
have them home.

7. The Seventh lesson that our Husbandman learnes is from the Thorns in his
ground It is said, Judge. 8.16. That Gideon took (...) Elders, and thorns of the
Wilderness, and b^, and with them he taught the men of S^. Hebr. He threshed
them, he taught them what it was to affront God and his instruments. And much
may a good Husband, an holy man learn out of a Theme, God being the teacher.
And here 1. The Husbandman (...) taught to remember his fall in Adam. One of
the Fathers would weep at the sight of the Rose, because before Adam fell, he
thought the Rose had no prickles, but the Fall bred them: certain it is, the
curse of Thorns began at the Fall, Genesis 3.18. Thorns also and This^les shall it
bring forth to thee. So that every prick with the Thorn, may wound thy heart
with the remembrance, of that woeful Shipwreck in thy Father Adam. Thy Rebellion
against God breeds their Rebellion against thee; every Bryar bending its sting
against their Creators Enemy, or at least giving thee a sharp memento of that
Apostasy. And 2. By them he learns the nature, use, and end of wickedmen, whom
the Lord accounts but as a brake of thorns, Ezekiel. 2.6. Son of man, be not
afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, though briars and thorns be
with thee. The Husbandman is not afraid of a Bush of Thorns: The knows the
Thorns original is but from the curse; though their use may be to fence the
Field, their end is to be cast into the Fire. And hereby he ^earns, that wicked
men are no wonder^ Since the curse there have been thorns in the Wood, as sure
as Corn in the Field, but he is content to suffer by them, foreseeing their end
to be lamentable. And at present their joys, are but like the crackling of
Thorns under a Pot. A great noise, but little heat, and less continuance:
especially considering, that God makes diverse of them fences and safeguards to
the good, against their own wills, and that God stops a gap sometimes with a
wicked man, whereby his godly neighbor is preserved: And so he is kept from
envy at them, seeing he knows the thorns grow green but till the Husbandman
has need to use them for the Hedge, and then lie there only till they be
rotten and ripe for the Fire.

8. The Eighth Lesson the Husbandman learns in his Ground is, from the Stones
of his Ground: And these, though they do sometimes bring into his mind Jesus
Christ, that living stone; and occasion otherwhiles thoughts of that White
stone of Absolution he has so long panted after, (as an industrious Christian
can get profit out of a ^int) yet from them he is most effectually taught, the
misery of an hard heart. The Plough goes through them, and yet they are stones,
nay it is sometimes broken by them, and they no softer: The Rain falls often on
them, but they are hard still: The Sun warms them, but they relent not. At the
end of his Lease, the Husbandman leaves them as he finds them, not a grain of
fruit from them in an age: Some of the biggest it man be he throws out of his
ground, but leaves the lesser in it, till the end of the World. And this
teaches him much; he looks upon them, and receives instruction. He is ill
troubled with these stones under his feet, but he is worse troubled with the
stone in his heart; he thinks on his sins, and cannot weep for them; he looks
at him whom he has pierced, and cannot mourn over him; he hears of the
calamities of the godly, and sees the wickedness of the ungodly, and cannot
break his heart for them. He knows not what to do with this stone within: He
puts in the Plough of mortification, he tears up his heart by convincing
aggravations of his sin; he puts it under the dropping of holy Ordinances as
often as he can, remembering that -- Gutta cavat, lapidem, non vi sed saepe
cad^ndo. He fasts and prays time after time, yet all would not work, but that
God comes in (that of a stone can make a Son of Abraham) and quite takes away
this heart of stone, and gives instead thereof an heart of flesh. And O that
every Husbandman would take this course, ply the means, plead the Promises, get
the heart dissolved, least it be destroyed. You get the Stones out of the
ground, O get them out of your hearts, lest for the Sin of hardness, God give
you up to the Curse of hardness, and forsake you for ever.

9. The Ninth Lesson the Husbandman learns, is from the Worms of his Ground:
These he converses with every day, and draws acquaintance to them, because they
are of kin. And the Lesson he learns from them is, his own mean and low
condition, and a potent argument against pride. If a worm should take on, lift
up it self, and be proud, then any thing may be proud, Job 25.6. How much less
man that is a worm, and the Son of man that is a worm. Here is a worm, this is
a mean creature in comparison of me; but I am a meaner creature in comparison
of God. How easily can I crush this worm with my foot? and more easily can the
great God crush me into pieces. If the Lord had no more mercy on m^, than I
have of this worm, O what would become of me? O what reason have I to be
humble, seeing these very worms, if God did say the word, could easily
vanquish and devour me: that were not afraid to set upon a King in his greatest
Pomp, when the great God did clap them on the back, and set them on, Acts
12.23. And immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God
the glory, and he was eaten up with Worms, and gave up the Ghost. The Angel
gave the first blow, to give the worms hold of him; and then every one had a
morsel of his flesh, and sucked up that blood wherein the glory of God did not
swim; an host of Maggots overthrew him, and killed him dead. What a low opinion
must he have of himself, that must say to the worm, Job 17.14. Thou art my
mother, and my sister? Thou art a reasonable worm, and that is all.

10. The tenth Lesson the Husbandm^ learns, is, from the poor Ant or Pismire.
A^ to her, God himself sends him to School Prove. 6.6. Go to the Ant thou
sluggard, c^der her ways, and be wise: which having (...) guide, overseer, or
ruler, provideth b^ meat in the summer, and gathers b^ food in the harvest.
Set thy self by a mole hill, and there stand, and behold those small creatures,
how busy they are; they stand no^ still, nor go at an idle rate, but run every
foot, they carry a burden, as bigg as themselves, every day they work, and this
with incredible cheerfulness; they murmr not, they quarrel not, but know
their place and business, and that is to provide for winter. And now what
learnes the studious Husbandman from this Book! Why, here he learnes Indust^y
and diligence; a cheerful industry in his place. Shall Nature teach this Ant,
more then Reason teaches me? Shall a blind instinct make her provident, and
shall the Bible suffer me to be profuse? See how she runs in her duty, and
shall I sleep or creep in mine? Nay will not this poor pismire rise up to
condemn me, for my neglect of treasuring up for Eternity? my winter is drawing
on, there is no providing in the Grave, and yet where is my provision for another
world? I open this hillock and see the Ants provision: But I open my soul, and
there find little or no provision. Awake, Osluggard, up and be doing, run for
thy life, work for ete^ity, treasure up that which a so u may live on in
another world; lest thy Harvest be past, thy summer ended, and thou be not
saved. Here Is a little creature, and yet a great Politician. Well, I am
convinced, I am resolved, I Will trifle no more; these Pismires are at my mercy,
and I am at Gods; and therefore I will do what I can with all my might, though
I am poor in this world, that I may be rich in the next.

These and such like Lessons, may the careful Husbandman learn out of his
ground, whereby it yields him double profit: food for his body, and a feast for
his soul.

SECT. II.. 2.

II. THe Second Book of the Husbandman Lessons from his Corn. A word (...) or
Ear of Corn.
wherein he may read something of God, is, His Corn. The same word in the
Hebrew that is used for an Ear of Corn, signifies also a Word. As if every
field of Corn were the Husbandmans Book, every Land or Butt a Leaf, every
Sheafe a Verse of praise, every Ear a Word, every Corn of wheat a Letter to
express the praise of God, and d^ty of man. In the same meal one man feeds his
Lusts, and another his Graces; and in the same field one man fills his Barn,
and another man fills his Heart: So that a good Husband has two Crops in one
year, the one keeps his body, the other helps to keep his soul alive.

And here,

1. The Husbandman learns something from his Plowing for Corn. And this teaches
him the use of Godly Sorrow, Jer. 4.3. Break up your fallow ground, and sow not
among thorns. What is fallow good for? put in the Plough, says God to some
spiritual Husbandman, I shall have no Rent hence until the plough go here;
plow me a long furrow here: O Lord, cries the soul, I can sorrow for my sin, I
am broken; plow deeper, says God, fetch up these weeds by the roots; now he
cries, An undone sinner; The Law has quite undone me; my heart is rent and
torn within me: All the world for one smile of Christ. Now, says God, thou
shall have it. I meant thee no more hurt than the Husbandman means his field.
Plowing is hard work, but it brings sweet profit. So compunction is hard work
indeed, letting one blood in the heart, this goes near; but it is profitable,
the peaceable fruits of Righteousness pay for all: the plough makes one sweat,
but the crop makes one sing; and without this plowing in tears, we should never
reap in joy, Amos 6.12. Shall Horses run upon the Rock? will one plow there
with Oxen? no man will do it; and yet, says God, there I must plow, or no
where: I must squeeze water out of a slint, and make a rocky heart mourn, or
never cure it. Thus our Husbandman learns Humiliation at his plough, and
studies a broken heart while he is breaking up his ground.

And then his plough teaches him the need of a Watchful Perseverance, Luke
9.62. No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for
the Kingdom of God. He finds the careless eye makes many a balk, and it must be
a staid and constant observation, that makes an even furrow, wherein if he
fail, he goes home with shame. And he knows the plough will do good no longer
than it is followed, and there is no leaving it, if he mean to live. And this
helps him to consider, of the constant need he has to observe his ways, to
cleave an hair, and draw an even furrow in all his courses: to beware of
extremes in being over-righteous, or over-wicked; knowing that one broad furrow
will require another to make it smooth, or else require a narrow one to drive
it even. And therefore he concludes, there is no sleeping at Plough; no throwing
up his worthy work of Religion for any difficulty in it, till his Harvest come
in Heaven, where he shall rest from his labors, and his works shall follow him.

2. The Second Lesson which the Husbandman may learn from his Corn, is, from
the Sowing of it. And hence he may learn,

1. How to hear: For so has our Lord Jesus taught him hence, Mat. 13. who
there takes the Husbandman upon himself, and reckons his and his Ministers
preaching, like the sowing of Seed. Where he finds four sorts of ground, and
but one sort sound and good. It is three to one in a Congregation, that the
hearers miscarry in hearing. Here I have precious Seed, says the Husbandman,
but if I should cast it in this highway, or among yonder thorns, or else on
the rocks, what crop could I expect? It would be cast away: and what is my
Earthly Seed, to the Heavenly Seed of my Lord and God? who not only scatters
Seed, but offers Pearls, yea Blood, the precious blood of Christ, and it is cast
away, if I bring an hard or worldly heart to the Word of God. O then what need
have I to prepare before; and to watch in the hearing thereof, lest I receive
that Grace of God in vain. How fruitless would that seed be, that is sown on
the green-sod, before the ground be plowed? I would not venture one handful of
Seed upon it. I Will therefore plow up my heart by Godly sorrow for my former
negligences, that the Lord may now Sow in Righteousness, and that I may reap in
mercy: for I know as I sow so shall I reap; when I sow Fitches, I look not to
reap Wheat; no more must I expect to sow dead duties, and reap lively returns.
I must not look to reap any thing but corruption, if I sow to the flesh: If I
expect clean corn, I must sow clean seed; and if I look for life everlasting, I
must sow to the Spirit. And herein also,

2. The Husbandman is taught Bountiful Almes-giving, for as much as he finds by
experience, He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, and he which sows
bountifully, shall reap bountifully. He observes the Increase is treble to the
laying out, and the thicker he sows, (observing rules of prudence,) the thicker
it comes up, and pays him fully, both for his labor, and his forbearance. And
he that can trust his Seed in the bosom of the Earth, can trust his Charity in
the hands of God; and therefore of that little he has, his poor Neighbors
shall have part. Heaven will repay it all, Eccles. 11.4.

3. The Third Lesson which the Husbandman learns from his Corn, is from the
Springing of it; and hence he learns the Nature, both of the first and second
Resurrection. First, he perceives hence the strange working of Grace in his
soul, Mark 4.26. So is the Kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into
the ground, and should sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should
spring, and grow up he knows not how. There he throws his seed into the cold
ground, and goes his way, and behold e're long it comes up, but he knows not
how. Just thus, cries he, was it with my heart; I feel some supernatural work
in me, but I know not how 'twas wrought. Seed I remember was cast upon me, but
how this sorrow, this faith, this love is wrought in me, I know not. What a
blessed change is here? a field of thorns, into a field of corn? Sure Lord thy
hand has been here; And it is thou must perfect the work of thy own hands. This
green corn must have many a shower, before it be ripe; this must have the
former and the latter rain: and so must I. And this minds the Husbandman of
frequenting all the means of Grace he can, and there he lays his soul under
the droppings of heaven with unspeakable delight, and goes away from every
Ordinance more green and fresh than he was before.

Hence again, he learns something of the last Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.35. But
some man will say, How are the dead raised up? Thou fool, that which thou
sowest is not quickened, except it dy^, -- It is sown in Corruption, it is
raised in incorruption. The Husbandman remembers, he sowed his Corn white and
withered, but it comes up fresh and green: it lay in the ground, till it seemed
lost and perish't, but that dying was to give it life; and that corn, which to
his sense was dead and gone, e're long to his sense is revived, and in greater
glory than before. And is it thus, says the Husbandman? Why, then this
withered body of mine, is but sown in the grave, to spring up again without
these imperfections. It is to be sown deeper, because it must spring up higher,
than my corn: what though I dye, consume and perish to the eye of sen^, yet
though worms destroy this body, in my flesh shall I see God, and though I live
and dye in dishonor, yet I shall rise again in honor. He that raises up my
corn, can raise up me. He can effect one Resurrection at last, that causes a
Resurrection in my field every year. How many thousands of men and women, shall
spring up then out of this one Church Yard? You shall see no less, I believe,
than fifty or threescore thousand come up, at the spring of the Resurrection in
this one Church Yard. How dreadful then will the whole appearance be at that
great day?

4. The Fourth Lesson that the Husbandman may learn from his Corn, is from the
Reaping and In-gathering of it. And this effectually minds him of the End of
the world, Mat. 13.39. The Harvest is the end of the World, and the Reapers are
the Angels. Beloved, the world has grown a long while; it has grown longer
than the Old world by two thousand years; so that now the fields are white to
the harvest, and I doubt if it grow longer, it will grow worse every day then
other. Now when the Husbandman sees his field is ripe, then he puts in his
sickle, sets in his reapers, and down it goes: The weeds that have escaped till
then, go down, and are bundled toge^hrr, and cast away. And so, when the holy
and wise God sees his Elect ripe for glory, and the Reprobates for ruin; then
he calls to his Angels, as Joel 3.13. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is
ripe, come, get you down, for the Press is full, for their wickedness is great.
What a brave sight will it be, to see the Angels reaping? And then those
hypocrites, that have grown in Gods field with the corn, and had their part in
the showers above, and fatness beneath with the corn it self, shall be gathered
into bundles; a bundle of proud creatures, a bundle of worldly creatures, a
bundle of wanton wretches, and cast into hell fire: there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. And then shall true Holiness be richly rewarded, which also
the Husbandman has occasion to think of in his harvest. What pains had he in
sowing? how did he sweat at plow, but now he is richly paid. The Valleys are
covered with corn, they shout for joy, they also sing, they make the Husbandman
to sing. He went forth weeping, bearing precious Seed, Psalm. 126. ult. But now
he comes again rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him. And he learns by this,
that his fasting and prayers, and self-denial, though sharp and difficult, yet
will quit the cost at the long run. He has a natural faith to believe his
pains for the Earth will pay his charge, and make him merry once in the year,
and he has a spiritual faith, to believe his pains for Heaven, will bring much
greater, surer and sweeter gains. Drudging at the harrow, that is sharp; but
sweeping down the wheat, that is sweet. Prayers and tears he finds to cost him
dear: but grace and glory pay him home. The Sluggard, Prove. 20.4. will not plow
by reason of cold, therefore shall he beg in harvest, and have nothing. The
idle hand shall have an empty Barn; he shall beg and have nothing, when harvest
comes. Here, the idle poor glean at harvest, and get something; but O what
millions of Beggars will there be at that great harvest, crying, Give us of
your Oil? but they shall have nothing: the Godly Father shall not spare the
Ungodly Child, one drop of Oil; nor the religious wife, to the graceless
husband. They who would now spare a drop of their hearts blood to save their
Relations; then will not, cannot, must not spare them one drop of Oil, to save
their souls, Mat. 25.9.

And from the In-gathering of his corn he learns this Lesson, That when his
Soul is ripe and ready, God will leave him no longer in the field below, but
will house him in heaven above, and will bring him into his grave in a full
age, like as a shock of Corn comes in in his season. And if he see a storm
coming, he will make some haste to secure him before it falls; as the
Husbandman hurries in his corn, when he sees danger of the rain. Thou long'st
till thy corn be in the barn; And Christ longs till thou be in heaven. He is
not complete without thee, John 17.24. Father, I will that they whom thou have
given me, be with me, where I am: haste home my Children unto me. And at last,
welcome O Sons of God, you have been long in coming in, but out ye shall never
go again.

5. The Fifth Lesson the Husbandman learns from his Corn, is, From the
Threshing of his Corn. And this teaches him the necessity of affliction. He
sees that Corn in the Ear will do him no good, it must be beaten out by the
Flaile; though this work be painful, yet it is needful: Threshing must be had.
Grace is in the husk, while prosperity lasts, appears little, works little, is
little: but the flaile of Affliction beats it out, makes it sensible, and
lively. How weak are we in faith, till God thresh us by some disaster or other?
God's flaile comes and cries, Come forth thou grain of Faith! and when the
heart is tough, he is enforced to lay on the more and greater blows, Isa.
21.10. O my threshing, and the corn of my floor. At length, that Grace that
lay hid in the husk, comes forth; and then O the faith, the humility, the
patience, the goodness that appears, even where little was dreamed of before!
How mellow and sweet does a fit of sickness, the loss of a child, or a prison
make the soul, to whom it is blessed? The sweetest Spices enjoy their own
sweetness, till they be bruised; then they diffuse it, and all the room
perceive their odor: and the most precious Saints are oftentimes hid, till
they be bruised by the Cross of Christ. Believe every creature that afflicts
thee, to be Gods flaile; and answer his designs therein. Fly not in his face
like the chafe, but fall down at his feet like the good corn, Isa. 10.5. O
Assyrian, the Rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is my
indignation. And God knows when it is time to thresh thee, and how many strokes
to give, Jer. 51.33. The Daughter of Babylon is like a threshing floor: It is
time to thresh her. Let him alone when and how long to thresh his corn. An hard
heart will not be cured with a little labor. How many workmen has God tired
out upon thy heart? Repent betimes, lest thou be thresht for ever.

6. The Sixth Lesson the Husbandman learns from his Corn, is, From the
Winnowing it; And therefore he learns the reason of temptation, Luke 22.31.
Simon, Simon, Behold Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as
wheat. What, an heap of grain seems to lie in the Barn? but when a strong wind
comes, it parts it, and leaves the corn in a little room. Just so the number of
religious persons looks great sometimes. Then God suffers Satan to raise a wind
of persecution, and that does so sift and fan them, that they prove but few,
that are faithful to the death: the greater half was chaff, too light for the
trial, and they are blown away. O Sirs, God will have clean wheat for Heaven;
not a tare that must come there.

Yea, in the hearts of Gods own people there is a great heap, but it is grace
and sin together. When they are tried, the grace will be found but little, and
the sin great. As in that case of Peter above. There appeared a fair show on
the floor, but it was wheat and chaff together; and upon the winnowing of
Peter, his faith and courage went into a little room, and there was much chaff
in him. But the stronger is the wind, the cleaner is the corn; and so the
sharper the trial is, the purer it leaves them that are upright in heart. This
temptation made Peter the healthier, and the better while he lived: and you may
observe his future courage, made signal amends for his former cowardice. And
usually one time or other, Jesus Christ comes with his fan in his hand, and
does thoroughly purge his floor, and then gathers his wheat into the garner, and
burns the chaff with fire unquenchable. And such Lessons as these the
Husbandman learns from his Corn.

SECT. III.. 3.

III. THe Third Book wherein the Husbandman Lessons from his ^locks.
may learn something of God, is, from his Flocks. The dullest of Cattle may
teach their Master somewhat. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters
crib, but my people does not know: See the misery of poor man, that must go to
School to the Ox and Ass; yet behold the felicity, man that learns somewhat
from the meanest creatures. It Is sad, that we have need to learn of them; It Is
well, we have the Art to learn of them. The greatest of men may learn from the
least of creatures; and the silly Ass may reprove a Prophet, when God sets in
with it.

1. The First Lesson the Husbandman may learn, is, from his Oxen. And there he
learns,

1. Patient industry. He observes his Ox, that is ignorant of the will of God,
or the reward of Heaven; yet day by day works, till he be weary, keeps his
place and furrow, though it toil him every step; carries his yoke without
grieving at it, and suffers the sharp visits of the Goad without renitency or
opposition; and expects nothing but food for his labor. And this instructs and
quiets the Husbandman in his painful Calling. He knows he has as much reason
to work for God, as his Ox has to work for him; and that he expects a far
greater reward, and therefore he is content to weary himself day by day; he
keeps in his place and furrow, though his idle neighbor would tempt him out to
vain company. His yoke is somewhat heavy, but he knows it will grow lighter by
bearing it in his youth: and though he feel the goad of domestic afflictions,
sometimes in his side, yet he frets not, but mends his pace: a night will come
at length, when the weary are at rest.

2. He learns hence Justice to his painful Minister, 1 Cor. 9.9. It is written
in the Law ^f Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that treads
out the Corn. Does God take care for Oxen? or says he it altogether for our
sakes? for our sakes, no doubt, this is written, That he that ploweth, should
plow in hope. -- The Ox gets thy corn, and thou give him some of the straw
at least. And thy careful Minister, whose charge is weighty, and whose pains
are great, has as good a right to thy Earthly things, as thou have to his
Spirituals. The Husbandman therefore that fodders his Ox, will not starve his
Minister; and therefore what the Law allows, or his own heart has purposed
besides, he supplies him with all possible speed and alacrity. He knows in
feeding his Ox he feeds his own body and children; and in supporting his
Minister, he feeds his own soul, and the souls of his.

2. The Second Lesson the Husbandman may learn, is, from his Kine; from whom he
learns daily fruitfulness. He sees they pay their tribute every day, yea^ twice
a day to him: And therefore will he every day pay his tribute unto God. The
better pasture he brings them to, the more milk they bring him home; whereby he
learns, that the greater stock or estate he has, as he pays more rent to man,
so he ought to pay more thanks and fruits unto God. He trembles, lest his soul
should prove like Pharaoh's lean Kine, Genesis 41.19. That devoured the fat, and
continued lean. It is leanness that makes them ill favored, and there is no
uncomliness like unproficiency. A lean soul under fatting means, is an ill
favored sight. He considers, that if once his Kine grow fat and not fruitful,
the next Range will be the Shambles: and thence he concludes, that outward
fullness, with leanness in the soul, is the surest preface to destruction; and
therefore he earnestly deprecates the sin of barrenness, and strives in his
place, to bring forth fruits meet for repentance. O how many may God bespeak,
as he did those, Amos 4.1. Hear the word ye Kine of Bashan? fat estates, and
fat at heart; whom Gods bounty feeds a while, and whom his Justice will cut off
for ever. Better for such they had been in the place of their poorest Tenants,
yea, in the condition of their very beasts that perish.

3. The Third Lesson the Husbandman learns from his Flocks, is, From the Horse,
and that is the misery and danger of ignorance, Psalm. 32.9. Be ye not as the
Horse or Mule, which have no understanding, whose mouth ^st be held in with bit
and bridle. The ignorant Horse is ridden any whither: and the Devil may ride
the ignorant soul to hell, and ^e not know whither he is going. O let the
husbandman therefore make a stop oftentimes, and examine, whither am I going?
A^ I in the way to heaven or hell? Alas, the ^ster I go, the sooner I shall be
at my jour^es end; and what if that be hell? Well therefore, I will seek
Knowledge as silver, and ^y after it as for hidden treasure, and especially of
my self, and of my eternal estate; that while I know my house, and grounds, and
^ttel, I may not be ignorant of my own self. Alas, if this horse knew his own
strength, he would never be used as he is; neither would ^hou be ridden at
the devils pleasure, if thou ^dst understand thy self: unhorse Satan then
^uickly from off thy soul, and let Christ and ^is holy Spirit have the guidance
of thee; so ^all every step thou take be toward hea^n, and though thy load
be heavy, yet death ^ll ease thee of it.

Nay, the Husbandman that is apt to learn learns something from all his
furniture. H^s bridle teaches him the need he has of temperance and wisdom.
The spur shows him him the need he has of afflictions now and then. The
shaking of his whip preaches to him the benefit of divine threatenings. And the
ease and use he has with this creature, shows the care and goodness of his
Creator to him.

4. The Fourth Lesson the Husbandman learns from his Flocks, is, from the
Sheep. And from them,

1. He learns Meekness. He sees the meekness of his Savior, and may learn
meekness for himself. For Christ, Isa. 53.7. As a sheep before her shearers is
dumb, so he opens not (...) mouth. You see how patiently the sheep Part^ with
her fleece, when you call for it: Christ's life was his fleece, and as meekly
did he part therewith. You see the innocence, mildness, and usefulness of your
Lambs: Behold, the Lamb of God, he was far more. The Lamb has no armor but
patience in the midst of Wolves, and so was Christ brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter: yet he was a Lamb without blemish, 1 Pet. 1.19. fair without, and
sound within. What more useful and profitable? every part of the sheep is good
for something; poor men cannot live without them. Jesus Christ is an useful
commodity. They that know themselves, cannot live without Jesus Christ. And
here the Husbandman has occasion to contemplate the death of his Savior. He
submitted to i^ without resistance: You raise not the Town to kill a Lamb.

2. Without desert. The Lamb dies for no fault of his own, but for others good:
So did our dear Redeemer. Behold, the Wolf is in fault, and the Lamb must dye.

3. Without repining. The Lamb looks cheerfully on the slaughterer. Christ
Jesus was torn like a Lamb, that could have torn them like a Lion; but instead
thereof he prays and excuses for them; Father, forgive them, they know not
what they do. And all this the Husbandman should as he is able, apply to
himself, to teach him meekness both from that Lamb of God above, and from his
own below.

And 2. He is minded here of the dangerons strayings of an unregenerate
condition, Luke 15. What man having an hundred sheep, whereof one strayed, etc.
Isa. 53.6. All we like Sheep (...) of (...) to go forth (...) of subduing,
because they are easily subdued. (...) to err. '(...) hence (...) to deny for
sear. Mr. Pa^er
have gone astray. He finds that his Sheep by straying, loses ^asture,
fleece, and life at last; that there is no safety out of his field, and flock;
and then he wonders that ever he was sought, and found: and in lieu of that
mercy, he makes after the child, servant, or kinsman that is run from God, and
uses all his art to reduce him. And it is observable, that the word for Sheep,
both in Hebrew and Greek, signifies meekness and straying, the Lessons that the
Husbandman would learn from them. But this is but a small part of what Jacob
and David learned, and the Husbandman might and would learn from his Sheep, but
that the Shepherd has taken them out of his hand, who having no other Book to
learn in, surely, learns the more in this.

5. The fifth lcsson the Husbandman does learn is, from his very Swine; In whom
he beholds the filthiness of a sinner, whom Christ himself calls no less Math.
7.7. Cast not Pearls before Swine. The Husbandman observes, that all the stndy
and care the Swine takes, is for his belly, to satisfy his brutish appetite:
He works not as the Ox, brings no fleece as the Sheep, nor milk as the kine;
All he does is to fill his belly. And this teaches him to dislike that
disposition of sensual sinners, whose only study is to eat, and drink, and feed
their lusts. If it be a hateful quality in the Swine, it cannot be lovely in
any man, but much more hateful: And therefore he resolves to eat that he may
live, and that for God; and not to live, that he may eat. And more
particularly, he learns from the Swine the danger of relapse into a course of
sin, and the difficulty of leaving sin, till the nature be changed. The Proverb
is known, 2 Pet. 2.22. The Sow that was washed is turned to her wallowing in
the mire. How sadly and truly does this set out the unregenerate sinner. He
comes to the means of grace, and those showers do wash him; he comes among good
company, (the Swine may get into the Parlour,) and that smooths him again.
Restraining grace pins him up; but after all, his filthy Swinish nature
remains, and the next puddle he comes to, he wallows in it again. O the endless
labor that out God has with us, before we be clean! And alas the worst filth
is sweet, in comparison of sin, for that is the Devils excrements, and so most
abominable; if our spiritual senses were exercised to discern good and evil. It
were better to tumble in the sink, than in thy filthy sins. A Swine is a
cleanly creature to a filthy sinner. Admire then the grace and goodness of God
that has changed thy nature: And of a Swine made thee a son. And beware thou
come no more into the mire, lest instead of being cleansing in the blood of
Christ, thou perish in thine own.

SECT. IV.. 4.

IV. THe fourth Book wherein the Husbandman Lessons from his Orchard.
may learn something for his soul, is from his Orchard. The word in the Hebrew
for a Grove of Trees signifies also contemplation, (...) a Grove, of (...) to
behold or contemplate. Mr. Page
as if a man should never go among his Trees without some contemplation. And
here in general, when he comes into his Orchard, he remembers Paradise, where
he in Adam did once enjoy God, and where by eating the forbidden fruit he lost
him! And this comes in well to qualify that delight, he takes among his Trees.
It is said that our Father Adam did never look toward Eden, the Paradise
whence he was cast, without a tear; to think of the happiness he had lost, and
the evil he had committed. However, the Husbandman has many an aching heart
here, upon the sad remembrance of his sin and fall, and thereupon he examines,
whether the guilt of that sin be pardoned to him, and whether the heart and
strength of it be broken in him. But the more particular Lessons he learns in
his Orchard are.

1. From the variety and kinds of Trees and the fruits thereof. He observes the
diversity, and choice of Christians, and of their graces shadowed out in that
Cant. 4.13. Thy plants are an Orchard of Pomgranates, with pleasant fruits,
Camphire with Spikenard, Spikenard and Saffron, Calamus and Cynamon, with all
Trecs of Frankincense, Myrrh and Aloes., with all the chief spices. Here Is
Christ's Orchard; every Tree a Saint, and every Saint variety of sweet tasting
and sweet smelling graces. Ah Lord, says the Husbandman, what plenty is here
for me, but what scarcity have I for thee? What a brave sight is a fair Orchard
with well-ordered Trees, and each filled with fruit? How much fairer a sight is
a congregation of fruit-bearing Saints, that bear the fruits and Spices that
God loves? What delight does the Husbandman take in his Orchard; and O what
delight would your God take, to walk with you in your houses, and to walk among
us here in this house, if every Seat here were filled with a row of fruitful
Trees! he would pluck our ripe fruits and graces, and take them to Heaven with
him: he would prune and purge us, that we might bring forth more fruit. And
what, must young Trees and others, that bear nothing, be cast into the fire?
Nay the Husbandman waits upon them with patience, and suffers many a Tree that
bears nothing grow in hopes; but if no industry or patience will cure them,
then up they go, and to the fire. And so does God bear with young ones in
hopes, and looks for little service from little ones, and fences and waters
many a Tree, that yet brings no fruit; but this is in hope, that their
after-diligence will pay for all. But if a man promise little, he comes as Luke
13.7. Behold these three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find
none, cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground? How near thou have been to
stocking up, none knows but God and Christ, who has diverted the blow many a
long day. But if no course will make them fruitful, then the ax is laid to the
root of the Tree, and every Tree that brings not forth fruit, shall be hewn,
down and cast into the fire. They which are not good for fruit, shall be good
for fuel. By the leaning of the Tree, he knows which way it will fall; and by
the leaning of his own heart toward Heaven, he trusts it will fall thither.

But especially the Husbandman in his Orchard thinks of Christ and his
sweetness, Cant. 2.3. As the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood, so is my
beloved among the sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his
fruit was sweet to my taste. All the Trees of the Wood must give place to the
Apple: And all creatures must stand aloof from Christ. His shade and fruit are
both sweet. O what a treasure, thinks the Husbandman, have I of my Savior! and
thereupon he tastes this Apple of Paradise; and as by an Apple, death came into
the world, so by this Celestial Apple, he recovers life again. O the solace the
poor Husbandman has under Christ's shadow in an Ordinance! O the sweetness he
tastes from his spirit! And so he returns into his house full of Christ, and
earnestly pressing him upon others.

2. The second lesson the Husbandman learns in his Orchard, is from the
Planting of his Trees, and hereby he understands the Nature af regeneration,
Romans 6.5. For if we have been planted together, in the likeness of his death.
He sees the Crab-Tree stock must be cut off, and then into it, must the Scion
be ingraffed and inoculated, before it can be an Apple in his Orchard: Whereby
the Husbandman learns, that the old man in him, though it cannot be stockt up
by the roots in this life, yet it must be cut off by compunction, humiliation,
and mortification; and the new man ingraffed into his heart by vivification,
faith, and renovation: Whereby he concludes, I must live in another, if I would
live for ever, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I live, yet
not I, but Christ that lives in me. As if the Crab-Tree stock should cry out, I
am cut off; yet I live, but not I, but the Scion that is planted in me. Old
Adam cries, I am wounded and killed, nevertheless I live; yet not I now, but
Jesus Christ, the second Adam, lives in me. And he sees, that till this work of
ingraffing be over, no fruits are to be seen but Crabs. And thence he gathers,
that till that change be wrought within, no man can bring forth fruit
acceptable unto God: All his best works are but mere Crabs; or the fruit cannot
be better then the Tree; and therefore he is restless, till this work be done
in him; He reads, he inquires, he prays, he hears, he is never quiet, until he
also be renewed in the spirit of his mind, and be made like that Tree, Jerem.
17.8. planted by the waters, whose leaf shall be green, neither shall it cease
from yielding fruit.

3. The third Lesson the Husbandman learnes in his Orchard is, from the Pruning
of the Trees; And there he learns the danger of prosperity, and the Mercy of
crosses. He sees that when there are too many branches, there is too little
fruit; and where the top is too big for the root, there is danger of being
wind-fallen. And this he considers well, and receives instruction. He likewise
has found, that the pruning of the Tree has usually made it better, and that
which seemed to hurt it, has helped afterward. And the Lord hereby teaches
him the danger of abundance, and the blessing of the Cross. He learns that an
high estate is more dangerous, and less fruitful than a mean; That i^ God had
suffered him to grow bulky, it would have been worse for his soul. He sees that
pruning is as needful as fencing, and therefore can bless God, when he takes
away a Cow, as well as when he sends him a Calf. When Flesh and Blood cries, O
I am cut, I bleed, I am undone, Faith sings, Blessed be the name of the Lord.
Any man can say, when the Lord gives, blessed be God; but to say from the very
heart, Blessed be God, when he takes away; that a good man only can say: yea
one that feels real benefit in his soul by his losses, he knows his Heavenly
Physician takes no blood from him, but what was pu^rid, and did him hurt; lop'd
off no branches, but what were suckers, and did run away with that sap, which
would have produced fruit: and thereupon he is, in cold blood, humbly content,
and thankful, for that which others fret at, and get nothing. Nay, if God prune
off a child, that lay nearer his heart than Christ, or than it ought, he is
dumb, he opens not his mouth, knowing, that God has done nothing without
reason, which he has done: And concludes, All Is for good, first or last. He
has read that Isa. 5.6. and considered it well, where God threatens his
vineyard, it shall not he pruned nor, dig'd; and the next news is, thereshall
come up briars and thorns, and the clouds shall rain no more upon it.
Therefore our wise Husbandman is afraid of ^rosperity, as others are of
troubles; and welcomes crosses as kindly as others do benefits.

4. The fourth lesson the Husbandman ^arns in his Orchard is, from the harmless
Choristers there; I mean the Birds, that are singing there. And from thence he
learns.

1. Cheerful dependence on God. For he sees the poor Birds of the Air, Aves
canoros garrulae fundunt sonos
Et semper aures cantibus mulcent su^.

when they have broke their fast, know not where they shall sup, and yet they
sing, and fly abroad without a carking thought, and find meat in due season at
the hand of God, Math. 6.26. Behold the Fowls of the Air, for they sow not,
nor reap, nor gather into Barns, yet your Heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye
not much better then they? How merry are they with a little! and why should I
be sad that have much more? Are these so sweetly provided for, that neither sow
nor reap? Much more may I trust in God, that both sow and reap: Can they sing
and rely on providence, that have no Barns of their own? How much more may I
rest in the Lord, and bless his name, that have Barns, and something in them?
Shall they sing among the branches, Psalm. 104.12. And shall I pule and pine
among my children? They can take a time to provide, and a time to sing; should
not I finda time then, to praise God each day, as well as a time to provide for
my self? Yea,

2. The Husbandman hence takes encouragement to prayer. He observes, that the
eyes of all wart upon God, and he satisfies the desire of every living thing,
Psalm. 145.16. And thereupon he grounds some hopes, that God will satisfy his
desire, especially when he perceives that God gives an ear to the Ravens, when
they cry, Psalm. 147.9. Now says he, will God hear the Fowls of the Air, when
they cry, yea, even the Raven, that is an unreason^nable creature, an Levit.
11.13, 15.
unclean creature, an unmerciful creature to other Birds, an inauspicate
creature, a Isa. 34.11.
very emblem of Gods, curse, that has an hoarse voice, unapt of all others to
move pity, nay, that cries but implicitly, and not directly to God: Then why
may not my Gracious God hear me, though I be ignorant, unclean, unable to pray,
and want an heart to desire grace as I ought? Why may not God hear my implicit
desires, when I can produce no better? I will believe, I will pray, though I
can but chatter like a Crane, though I can but cry like the Raven.

SECT. V.. 5.

V. THe Fifth Book wherein the Husbandman Lessons from his Garden.
may learn something for his Soul, is, from his Garden. And here let us
consider what our Father Adam learned there, no doubt Gardens are the purest of
humane pleasures, the greatest refreshments of the spirits of man without
which, building and Palaces are but gross handiworks. Bac. Essays. p. 266.
(...) an herb, or a trumpet.
a deal: Divines say, his knowledge of God was Natural, Revealed, and Acquired.
He read God in the Creature: but the Husbandman has the Text with an happy
Comment, God in Christ. So that a Christian Husbandman may now converse with
God, with great perspicuity, and advantage, and see him in every flower, in
every herb in his garden. It is observed, that the word for an Herb in Hebrew,
signifies a Trumpet; because the praise of God is sounded out to us by them. O
what work may a good garden, and a good heart make! It Is said, the reason
wherefore Joseph of Arimathea, and others, made their Sepulchers in their
Gardens, was, because there was their place of delectation, and there should be
their place of meditation, and the same garden should be the comfort of this
life, and the preparative to a better. In special:

1. The First Lesson the Husbandman learns in his Garden, is, from the Flowers
thereof, I cannot say with that Pagets Primmer. p. 28.
Reverend Author, that we may learn a whole Creed out of the 1
Lilly but this I am sure, that in some one flower that is checkered with white
and red the Husbandman may meet with the Obedience, Sufferings, and Sweetness
of Christ al^ together, who is that Rose of Sharon, and tha^ Lilly of the
Valleys, Cant. 2.1. If this sweetness be in these flowers, O what is there i^
him, that infused it into them? And if a Garden be so ravishing, O what is
Heaven! The Paradise of God, where the Tree of Life is (...) the midst of the
Garden. And then, as the B^ sucks somewhat out of every flower, so the
Husbandman squeezes some spiritual lesson out of each flower into his soul. The
Ros^ teaches him the fading of his Beauty, that smiles one day, and withers the
next, Psalm. 103.15. The Lilly persuades him to Innocence, and to drop, by his
gracious words, sweet smelling Myrrh, Cant. 5.13. The Cammomil tells him, the
more he is pressed down with trials and oppositions, he must grow the more. The
Marigold guides him to open his heart, in compliance with the presence of
Christ; and the Hysop minds him of Remission by his blood: Purge me with Hysop,
and I shall be clean. And thus he gathers a blessed posie of heavenly thoughts,
and puts them in his bosom, and both feeds his senses, and feasts his Soul by
the same Creature.

2. The Second Lesson the Husbandman learns in his Garden, is, from the
watering of his Garden. And thence he learns the benefit of Ordinances. He
finds that his choicest flowers must have water, either by the hand of man, or
from the hand of God, or else they wither. When the bottles of heaven fail, the
flowers on the earth hang their head. And this clears it to him, That inherent
Grace without auxiliary grace, will be green but a while. That the Soul lives
by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. And this he finds by his
constant Experience, that the work-dayes are the spreading time for his Grace,
and the Lords day his storing time; and therefore he thinks the week long, and
the Sabbath short, and in his heart cries out, O when shall I come and appear
before God? Alas! he knows, that a Garden without a fountain, or showers, will
have beauty or fragrancy but a while: And even so, he feels his ^bul to hunger
for supplies from heaven, and the disappointment of an Ordinance, is a sensible
want to him; and the enjoyment therefore does manifest it self quickly, in his
renewed beauty and vigor, Isa. 58.11. The Lord shall satisfy thy soul in
drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered Garden. Here
I have set my flowers, but they must have water: Here my gracious God has
planted the sweet flowers of his grace, and now I must see them watered. And
though he be weary with his hard labor, yet up he rises early, and labors
hard on the Sabbath, in the heavenly trade of Religion, and comes home at night
glad and merry in heart, for the goodness of the Lord. His Garden is watered,
and his Graces are revived.

3. The Third Lesson the Husbandman learns in his Garden, is, from the Weeds
therein. He finds a little Garden has many weeds; many kinds, and many of
every kind; and they come up without planting, and spring much faster then herb
or flower. He sees if care be not taken, they will overtop the flowers and
herbs; and that it will co^ both observation, and industry to pluck them up;
and when at length, the Garden is rid of them, and is clean and fair, yet they
will peep up, and spring again, and renew his trouble over again; and this
endless business he has with it, only the winter helps him, and pinches these
weeds at the roots: but yet in the spring they revive again, and give him the
same trouble he had the year before. And this teaches him the Difficulty of a
clean heart, and the industrious life of a serious Christian. He finds his
Garden within, as bad as his Garden without. What variety of sinful motions and
affections are rising there? Diverse, that he knows not whence, nor how they
come. How speedily have some Lusts got a head? His pride has sprung faster,
than his Humility, by the half. His passion is at a great height, in comparison
of his Patience. He wonders at the strange growth of his Corruptions, he
concludes that without a speedy and effectual course, his Garden will be a
Wilderness: and therefore, he awakens watchfulness, and falls to serious
mortification, repentance, and reformation of his spiritual estate; he gets to
his Knees, prays, and weeps over his evil desires, pursues them into every
corner, and at length has a clean heart created in him, and hopes now all is
well: The old man is dead and gone; but ere long he descryes that he was but
asleep; his corruption returns and exercisesh im in the same trade, he was at
before: Till some happy affliction comes, and that with Gods blessing, does
break its heart, and Death at length puts an end to this weary life. Faith is a
Rose, that grows between two nettles, Presumption and Despair. And so Humility
and Patience. Every Flower has two weeds, two extremes about it, which are
like to grow with them, but must not grow over them. And this is the good
Husbandmans task. His Garden finds him work to weed as long as he lives.

4. The fourth Lesson that the Husbandman learnes in his Garden is, From his
Bees. He sits down by his Bees, and sees their carriage. He observes, they are
ever busy either fetching materials without, or working them within; they hate
a droan: they seem to delight in their work, they grudg not to fulfill their
place, they are most industrious in getting, most curious in keeping, and most
provident in spending their wealth and provision. And hence again he learns
Diligence in his calling, and so away he goes and imployes his strength most
willingly therein; and repines no more at his lot: He is loath to be idle any
time; if he be not lab^g wit^ his hand, he is traveling in hi^ ^d; an^
endeavors to be ever doing o^ receivin^ good. He invents, and finds employment
for every one in his family; and except infant that make work, he will have all
the rest (...) some work or other, that there may be honey in the hive in
winter, for them to li^ upon. And this he does in obedience unt^ God. He
resorts to his Bees at the next l^sure, and falls to his Book again. And there
he takes notice, that the Be gets somethi^ out of every Flower, visits them
for a litt^ while, but dwells upon none; yea, the ve^ weeds afford her
something: but she re^ no where, till she return to her Hive, the^ is her
place. And thence he learns the u^satisfaction of the creature, and that God
an^ Heaven are the only rest of the soul. It m^ sometimes fly abroad in the
world, but the^ it extracts what spiritual sweetness will b^ gotten from both
Flowers and Weeds; but (...) cannot rest, till it return to the Ark, t^ The Be
sucks honey from the blossoms, even of bitter Almonds: So should we suck sweet
experience out of bitter afflictions.
God alone, who is the Center and refuge (...) the soul.

The Husbandman is angry at himself, the he cannot, as well as the Be, suck
some advantage out of the weeds of others evil example and actions, which he
daily sees; but he (...) far from sucking poison fron the objects (...)
goodness. In a word, his Bees do feed hi^ more and more constantly with sweet
lesson and instructions, than with their sweetest ho^ ney.

SECT. VI.
VI. THe sixth Book wherein the Husbandman. 6. Lessons from his House.
learns something of God is, his House. And though he studies to be cheerful at
home, and be too weary to learn much; yet he steals some notes, and gathers
instructions now and then in his habitation, though he have no Study but the
Fireside. From the loving obedience of his Wife, he learns the like carriage
to Jesus Christ, his heavenly Head and Husband. By the disobedience of his
Children, he is minded of his own unto God his heavenly Father, and laments
them with grief. The frowardness and follies he sees in them, do bring him to
remember his own at their age, which otherwise he had forgotten; but their
easy reconciliation after falling out, convinces and persuades him to be a
child in Malice, though he would be a man in Understanding: nay, he admires at
the Providence of God, that ties their infant tongues till they have some
understanding, else many a foolish word would they speak. And by seeing their
full dependence upon him for meat and clothes, and his readiness to give them
what they want, he learns the like dependence upon God his heavenly Father for
all, and trusts that he will much more give spiritual things to him, that
humbly craves them of him.

By the readiness of his Servants, he is convinced into the like, to the
commands of God; and often has occasion to consider how much Gods service is
beyond his. The heat of the Fire often preaches to him the intollerableness of
that Fire that is never quenched. And being so comfortable in the Chimney,
which would be dangerous in his Thatch, teaches him the excellency of true zeal
in its place, and the danger of zeal when it is out. He observes few meats are
good and wholesome without some heat from the fire; and thence gathers, that no
duty or work is right good without some zeal therein. The fowlness of his Rooms
do show him what need his heart has of cleansing; and each part of his
furniture does furnish him with some celestial lessons, each one worth all the
estate he has. But more especially,

1. From the Inconveniences of his House he learns, the misery of his estate
on earth. Here is my house, says he, but alas the room is strait, the air
cold, the structure rotten, dirty without, and empty within. Thus all that is
in this World is lame and imperfect; no profit without pain, no pleasure
without sting, no honor without peril: vanity, and vexation of spirit, I find
to be written, yea, entailed on all sublunary things; now who would be fond on
such a life! who would choose such a portion? If this be the World, give me
Christ. One Christ is worth many Worlds. But then with these add the
consideration of ^in, that every day besets me; such an house, and such an
heart; such miseries without, and ^uch wickedness within; and then, who would
live in such a World, that could get ^irly out of it; or fall in love with Dirt
and ^weat that believes an Heaven, and has any ^itle to it? Thus all the
Husbandmans In^onveniencies are mortifying; and make him ^ery indifferent to
live in a World that is so much his Stepmother; and he still looks up and
cries, O when shall I come unto thee! He comes home weary, but this bears up
his spirit, That there remains a rest for the People ^f God.

2. From the Conveniences of his House he ^earns, the blessedness of his
estate in Heaven. Here is my comfortable habitation, neat ^ooms, handsome
furniture, healthful air, ^leasant situation, my lines are fallen in plea^nt
places, Praised be the Lord: but this is ^ut a Tabernacle, not my settled place;
an ^arthly tabernacle, this house was made with ^ands, but yonder above I have
an house ^ade without hands. These my Convenien^es are mixed, but there they are
abstract and without mixture. That house I am going to Great without Coldness,
High without ^anger, Full without Thronging, Rich without Vanity, Ancient
without Decay: no need (...) repairs, no danger of fire, no fear of being ^t
out. There shall I have my Children a^out me without crying, my Wife without
sickness, my Servants without trouble, when there is eternal music, eternal
feasting, et^ happiness. O that my work were do^ that I might go yonder! This
is but (...) Winter house, O yonder above is my Su^ Parlour: yet a little while
and I she inhabit (though most unworthy of it) as g^ an house as my Landlord.
My fine is paid (...) my Saviors blood, Possession is taken in (...) name by a
sure Attorney; and the Rent (...) be nothing but blessing and praising the Go^
of Heaven to eternity. Thousands are wai^ing to welcome me to house, Christ
himse^ will let me in; and but one life between (...) and a Palace. And now,
what though I (...) and sweat here a while, when my Reversio^ falls I shall
live like an Angel; and then farewell my Plough and Cart, I shall sow (...)
thresh no more, my weary days and carefu^ nights farewell: there is no husbandry
(...) Heaven, there is the harvest of all my prayers where Christ shall be All
in All. And the poo^ Husbandman does much comfort himself will these hopes. And
we cannot better leave (...) than here, whither this Lesson has brough^ him.
And this is the sixth point, to wit, (...) Lessons which the Husbandman may
learn (...) his Calling.

Object. Perhaps you will say, I can never lear^ these things, I am weak and
ignorant, how should I acquire these things?

Answ. Though thou art no Scholar, y^ thou art Christ's Scholar: and if there be
^in a willing mind, thy work is half done. A dull Scholar with a skilful Master
may make shift, Psalm. 32.8. I will instruct and teach thee, I will guide thee
with mine eye: nay, God has particularly professed to help the Husbandman,
^sa. 28.26. For his God does instruct him to discretion, and does teach him. Do
but your best, keep open the eye of Faith to see things unseen, pray for skill,
and fall to practice, and it will come. The sweetness will pay for the
difficulty: he that turns Earth into Heaven, ^hath an Heaven upon Earth. And so
you have the sixth Head.

CHAP. VII. CHAP. 7.
The Husbandmans Graces.
SECT. I.
I proceed in the seventh place to The Husbandmans Graces.
prescribe to the Husbandman the special Graces he should get. Without Grace
the best Calling in the World will be unedifying and uncomfortable. Gods Graces
in a Calling, are the Grace of a Calling. True Grace can make the lowest
condition happy, and Sin can make the highest miserable. Without Grace an
Husbandman may be undone, when an Angel without Grace falls, though he were in
Heaven. And of all men he had need of it, (...) he be a drudge on earth, and
then a brand (...) hell. The Ox he drives will be in a bette^ case than he, if
he live and die without the true fear of God; for that has meat, an^ drink,
and work; but no care, or grief, no^ account to make: and the Husbandman tha^
knows not God in a saving manner, hat^ work, and meat, and withal cares, and
troubles, and a sad reckoning to come. O that the Husbandman were but
acquainted with Jesus Christ, and with his own true state! He needs not envy
the greatest Prince, if he have but Christ in him, the hope of Glory. But
though the Husbandman must have every Grace, (true Grace comes all together,
the new man has all his members) yet I shall more especially recommend these
seven following Graces to the use of the Husbandman.

SECT. I.
I. THe first Grace necessary for the Husbandman. (...) His Patience.
is Patience; he cannot live comfortably without it. 1. He must have patience
to wait, Jam. 5.7. Be patient therefore, Brethren, to the coming of the Lord.
Behold the Husbandman waits for the precious f^uits of the earth, and has
long patience for it, until he receive the early and the latter rain. And
Clemens is of opinion, that the Apostles James and Jude were Husbandmen. Well,
we see here the Husbandman has need of patience, long patience to wait for the
fruits of the Earth. Many a long day and night there is between Seedness and
Harvest, and yet he is not in despair, he waits and hopes Harvest will come at
length. The Heavens they frown upon the Earth, the Corn mourns, the Grass
withers, but yet he waits with patience upon God. He knows the bottles of
Heaven are in a good hand, and therefore relyes on God, and does his duty. His
ground is sometimes chok't for Rain, and sometimes again chok't with overmuch
Rain: But he frets not at, all, but quietly waits on Gods pleasure. He goes
into his Barn, and sees his Corn almost gone, and then goes into the Field,
and there its slow in ripening. He looks into his purse, and there is no money;
and now his patience is tried. Yet in this case he considers the wisdom and
providence of God, and arms his mind with patience till Harvest comes; and then
sometimes excessive Rain keeps him and his Corn asunder, Week after Week; and
when it comes, sometimes the poor yieldance of it utterly disappoints him, so
that he has need of patience to last another year; by that time his borrowed
Corn is paid, and his Ground Seeded, his stock is almost gone. And therefore
the Husbandman has need of patience, great, long patience, patience to wait.

2. He must have Patience to bear. He meets with a dear bargain, a hard Rent,
heavy Taxes, tempests without doors, and storms sometimes within. But this is
his Cloak to bear off all weathers, this is his harness he dare not go without:
If he fret, it will gall him worse; And he is then undone when the back of his
patience is broken. His provocations are many, his neighbors wrong him, but he
licks himself whole by his patience, his servants are surly; his children often
displease him, yea his wife sometimes lets fly her tongue against him: But he
has his Armor on, He knows they have little wit to provoke him, but he thinks
he should have less, always to observe it. According to that, Eccles. 7.21. He
takes not heed to all words that are spoken, lest he hear his servant curse
him. He finds a time to acquaint them with their duties, and miscarriages, and
bears what cannot be helped, with Patience. Alas his whole life is a trial and
exercise of this grace. He works hard, and fares hard, and lodges hard, but
patience is the pillow he lies on, the only Boots he has to ride with in the
mire, yea the Horse he rides on: The linen of his every day clothes: Its all
the Table cloth and napkin he uses; in a word its the very food he lives by.
And therefore as ever you hope for comfort in this calling, labor for this
grace of patience, meditate of it, pray for it; when it fails, renew it; study
the precept, plead the promise; consider that grand pattern of Patience, our
Lord Jesus Christ. And often think that there is more real good in it, than there
is evil in that which tryes it: That you are in a better condition, when you
have patience under a trial, than if you were without the trial. And seeing
you possess but little in the World, resolve to possess your own souls in
Patience.

SECT. II.. 2.

II. THe second Grace necessary for the His discretion.
Husbandman is Discretion.

1. In his affairs, Isa. 28.25. Does the Plowman Plow all day to sow? Does he
open and break the clods of his Ground? When he has made plain the face
thereof; does he not cast abroad the Fitches, and scatter the Cummin, and and
cast in the principalWheat, and the appointed Barley and Rye in their place?
Here you see the Holy Ghost himself, guiding the Husbandman in his Tillage; he
should be wise to manage his business in due season and order. And then, verse.
27. The Fitches must he beaten out with a staff. Bread Corn must be bruised,
etc. And even this Discretion must be taught of God, so says this Scripture,
verse. 29. This also comes from the Lord of Hosts, which is wonderful in
Counsel, and Excellent in working. He does well therefore to be inquisitive of
his elder neighbors, but he must not neglect to seek this skill of God, who is
wonderful in counsel.

And then he finds that wise fore-casting is as necessary as working, that
things may be done in their place, that he neither entertain confusion nor
idleness; but that businesses may fall in one after another, and still there
may be fit time for religious duties. And thus a good man orders his affairs
with discretion.

2. He must have discretion about his Family; that he may therein be neither a
Tyrant, nor a Cipher; that he may educate and dispose his children with that
prudence and circumspection he ought. Discretion also to correct in prudence,
not in passion, and to add sweet lessons (as God does) to sharp lashes; to keep
them at a sufficient distance, and yet not discourage them, to preserve his
authority in hischeerfulness, to choose fit Callings for them or matches when
they are ready, and to load them from him at least with good counsel. There is
nothing harder, than for an indiscreet man to command due reverence in his
house. And therefore the wise Husbandman considers, that if his Authority in
his house be gone, he is buried alive; and the life of a slave will be better
then his; that has all the charge and none of the rule. And this can never be
obtained by imperiousness, or correction, but by discretion.

3. He must have discretion for his estate; that he may neither live above it,
nor below it. That in his clothing, housekeeping and spending, he may neither
be guilty of pride nor baseness. Sr. Fr. Bacon: Essays.
His incomes are not great, and therefore that States-mans Rule, that the
ordinary expenses of him, who would keep even with the World, must be but the
one half of their income, and of him that would thrive, but the third part
thereof, I say this Rule stands him in little stead. If he can pay his Rent and
Taxes, feed and cloth his family, you shall not hear him complain. But if with
all he can yearly lay by a little toward the better education, or disposal of
his children, then you shall hear him sing. Well, all the Discretion he has is
needful hereunto, Partly to take such bargains that may afford a livelihood,
and yet herein he is afraid of weakening the estate of him that sells as well as
his own, Partly in observing the Markets for the vending of his commodities and
other ways; unless he will outlive his livelihood and leave his Children
beggars.

4. He has need of discretion in Religion; to reg^te his zeal with wisdom, to
carry the balances even between his general and particular calling, that he be
neither Monk nor Matchevellian. To know when to work and when to pray, when to
be cheerful, and when severe. In a word, his Family and his Farm are his
Kingdom; and he has need of Christian politics, as well as a Prince. And
what need have ye then to study, and pray, and seek after wisdom? First, knock
at Gods door, for he has bid us come to him, before we trouble any body else;
and his word is past, that he will give, and give liberally, and never upbraid.
All other means also must be used, especially, deliberation and advisedness. He
that thinks much, shall do more then he that can only talk or work.

SECT. III.,. 3.

III. THe third special Grace that the Husbandman His Heavenliness.
should get is, Heavenliness. He has weights to press him down, and therefore
has need of wingsto lift him up. Both his nature and his calling would conform
him to the world; and without a Divine principle, there is no rowing against
these. Its a hard thing to be in the Earth, and not of it; and to live above,
that which he cannot live without. He must have heavenly affections, and those
set and fixed that will do it. Coloss. 3.2. Set your affections on things in
Heaven, and not on things on Earth. Mark, we must not only have our thoughts on
Heaven, but our affections, affectionate working thoughts; without frequent and
lively endeavors this way, thy mind will be sadly earthified and sunk down to
a brutish temper, thy heart will be where thy heels should be. As he that is
always conversant with Books will have his mind exceedingly filled with
Notions and Observations; so much more will the poor Husbandmans heart be pressed
down, and the frame of it bent earthward, unless he study this Grace. To be
earthly in earthly business is humane: To be Heavenly in Heavenly business is
divine: To be earthly in Heavenly business is brutish: to be Heavenly in
earthly business is Christian. O therefore get thy ends always, thy heart
frequently spiritual and Heavenly; so will you do two works in one, and get
Heaven and earth at once.

Look up often to the Heavens, and withal think who dwells there, what they are
doing there, what thou will be abont a thousand years hence, how a man should
do to get thither, and how a man may know he shall dwell for ever there. No
creature upon earth has an upright countenance as man has, on purpose that he
might look up to that God that made him, and not to the earth whereof he is
made. Resolve with an Heavenly magnanimity when thou art plowing or digging in
the earth, and say, Oearth, I am not now thy equal, By Grace I am advanced to
reach after higher things, then thou can yield me any. Here I have pibbles,
but yonder are pearls; here I have clods of dust, but yonder there are Crowns
of Glory; here it is true are my Wife and children, to cherish and nourish whom
I could be content to live; but that yonder is my Father, my Christ, my noble
friend, my true joys, my real treasure, my God, and that is enough: And
therefore up O my leaden heart, and make thee wings, and fly away to rest. For
where the treasure is, there should the heart be also.

Consider that God is always in thy company, and who can be cold that lives in
the Sun? though thy employment be mean, and thou go sometimes into the lonesome
fields or the lowest employments, yet having such Royal company, such a God,
and always within the hearing, within a call of thee, how can thou be dull
and earthly? Think, would I flag thus, and have my heart under my feet thus, if
some excellent Minister were in my company; what questions would I be asking
him, whatconverse would there pass between us? O how much more Heavenly should
I be, that have a Heaven so nigh me, if not a Heaven in me? Put it therefore
into your prayers, O all ye poor Husbandmen, whose Calling lies in that which
is vanity and vexation of spirit, Lord turn away my eyes from heholding vanity,
and quicken me in thy way, Psalm. 119.37.

SECT. IV.. 4.

IV. THe Fourth special Grace the Husbandman should get is, Vprightness. His
Uprightness.
Uprightness toward God, and down uprightness toward men, to live a plain even
Scripture course. To be a Jacob, a plain man, though he dwell in Tents. Behold
this is the Husbandmans motto, To be poor and honest. ^t is a critical thing
to be a Politician; but there are few criticismes in the sincerity of an
Husbandman. He is one that will rather lose all he has, then God and a good
Conscience. And this he follows, not as an heathen ^rtue, but as a Christan
Grace. He walks in the uprightness of his heart for Conscience sake. This is
his Argument with God, this is his Bond to men. Lord, remember how I have
walked before thee in Truth -- Isa. 38.3. He cannot boast of many works, but he
can glory in an upright walk. And this pleads with God for him; even when many
infirmities, ^ccompany his actions, his heart is right. And the observation of
this even and downright carriage of his, is as good as other men's bonds. If he
verefie it, no body doubts the truth of what he asserts: His motto is, Men^iri
non possum, Prodere nolo, I cannot frame to lie.

If he promise any thing, every one beleives him; for he had rather break his
head than break his word. In his discourse he is not elegant, but he is honest;
and when his phrases and expressions are ridiculous, his integrity makes them
lovely. In his bargains, he studies Justice, and strives to do by others, as he
would be done by: In a word he is ^onest without welt or guard. And this is a
^lessed Grace, Isa. 33.14. Who among us ^all dwell with devouring fire? That
is, approach the just and holy God. He that w^eth righteously and speaks
uprightly, that (...) spiseth the gain of oppression -- He shall (...) on high;
Bread shall be given him, his (...) shall be sure. If Heaven and Earth can
(...) him amends, he shall have it; he shall dw^ with God on high in Heaven, he
shall want Bread on Earth. Mark the perfect man, (...) behold the upright, for
the end of that (...) is peace. The poor Husbandman has liv^ to see the fall
of many a cunning companion, that could stretch his Conscience to (...)
interest, and cogg, and swear, and lie (...) his gain: And them he has seen,
like green Laurel Tree; but the curse was amo^ his goods, and all is gone, he
is not wo^th groat. The little estate he has, as it was (...) hastily gotten,
so he hopes it will be slow (...) spending, and like a low house, with a goo^
foundation, stand, when the fine house (...) him will have a dreadful fall,
having (...) foundation in injustice, and its topstone in^curse, Prove. 13.11.
Wealth gotten by vani^ shall be diminished; but he that gathers by ^bour
shall increase.

O therefore study, strive, pray for this excellent Grace, this Compendium of
Grace that will make you amiable both to God (...) man, and procure the
blessing both of He^ven and Earth. Indeed this is the sinew Society; and they
who never practice it (...) of its difficulty, yet will pretend to because of
its excellencies. Begin then, (...) try this blessed trade, and you will find
that Reason, that Comfort, that Profit therein, that you will never leave it:
You will conclude with Job, Chap. 27.2, 3. As God lives, -- all the while my
breath is in me, -- my lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter
deceit: till I dye, I will not remove my integrity from me.

SECT. V.. 5.

V. THe Fifth Grace that the Husbandman His Love.
has need of is, Love. Love to thy Neighbor as thy self. And this is a great
word. It is not said, love him as he loves thee, for that may be more than thou
know, or less than he ought: nor love him as others love him, for by this
rule Christ himself, when on Earth, would have mist thy love; but as truly, as
constantly, as effectually as your selves, though not so intensely. But thou
must in thy Judgment think him as well worthy to enjoy what he has, as thou
art to enjoy thine. In thy Desires to wish him the same good things as to thy
self, that when its well with him, there may be mirth in more houses than one:
And in Deeds to do him that good, that thou desire from him; to promote his
profit next thy own, to inhance his credit, and to procure his content.

It is not said, thou shall not hate him only? as many will say, I will neither
love nor hate them, I Will neither do them good no^ hurt: but thou shall love him
as thy self; a rule which the ignorant'st may understand, and the weakest
remember.

And this Love,

1. Will teach the Husbandman to give, where there is want: for the poor has
as much right to what you can spare, as you have to what is necessary and
comfortable for you. Love will argue thus; If I must give my Enemy meat, when
he is hungry, much more must I give to this poor Creature, that never did me
hurt. Love will think, This will do him more good than it will do me hurt; and
therefore he shall have it, yea, and my heart with it: mark, the true charity
is not only when I draw forth my hand to the hungry, but when I draw out my
soul to the bungry Isa. 58.10. And then,

2. Love will teach the Husbandman to Lend, and make him really more glad to do
a courtesy, than receive one. The Good man Psalm. 112.5. shows favor and
lends; and you know who is called Good Man all about We are apt to think it
better to receive twelve pence, than to give or lend six: but Christ says,
It Is more blessed to give, than (...) receive, Acts 20.35. The Husbandman
considers, that no man can live of himself, but one must be beholden to another
every day and therefore makes no difficulty to lend (...) Neighbor, what he
can furnish him with whether money or other materials, and (...) freely: God
forbid that should lie by me in my chest, that would save my neighbors life or
state, provided that I hurt not my self to help another, but be wise as well as
kind.

3. Love will teach the Husbandman to forgive both trespasses, and injuries,
and unkindnesses, and this he has need of. As Constantine covered his Bishops
faults with his purple robe, so should the Husbandman his neighbors trespasses
with the robe of Christ. They who are best at loving, are worst at remembering
injuries; alas, it is hard to live a day, without injuring some body. The
Husbandman must believe it better to receive the greatest, than to offer the
least injury. Love is not exceptions as we say, takes things in the best sense,
is not apt to create unkindness, heeds not a cross look, or a hasty word, but
gives each man grains of allowance, because he knows he needs them himself; and
therefore when the Sun is setting, he thinks it is time to be reconciled, and
puts all wrath from him, lest the Devil should get place thereby.

Yea, 4. Love must make the Husbandman to defend his Neighbor. In his Life;
and not go by him, as the Priest and Levite did by the wounded man, as though
it were nothing to him. In his Name; and therefore when he hears a reproach
upon his neighbor, he must take himself bound to vindicate him, as far as he
can, as knowing that Reputation is like a building long in raising, (...) soon
demolish't. In his Estate he must defe^ him, and help to save that, in any
acciden^ which may befall him, as he would defi^ and expect in the like case.
And

5. The Husbandman must love his neighbors Soul, and not let that go by him
into hell without some means to stop him; and therefore is bound to pray for
him, to provoke and persuade him to holiness. God has taught you, and do you
teach them, Heb. 10.24. And consider one another, to provoke to Lo^ and good
works. The graceless wretch he lies considering, how to provoke his neighbor
to lust, passion, and sin: but the Godly Husbandman must consider, how he may
provoke him to love and good works: And in any wise reprove them, when there is
any hope of doing them good by it. As that Excellent Lady Falkland used to say,
If I let you go to hell, or you me, how am I your friend?

And 6. Love will teach you to sympathiz^ with your Neighbor; to cover and
cure his infirmities: for God will never cover his sins, that loves to uncover
others. And to carry it lovingly and peaceably, not strangely or suspiciously
to him, as knowing that all the world is akin to you in Adam, and all
Christians are akin in Christ.

By all which you see, that true love consists not in complemental civility,
not in sinful compliances, nor in a bare inoffensiveness, but in a gracious
disposition of wishing good and doing good to others. And this I earnestly
press the Husbandman to get, That this may be written on his Grave, Here lies
one that was Beloved of God, and a Lover of all men; which is the best Motto
and blessedness, I can wish him.

Let the Husbandman often think of Gods undeserved love to him: Let him study
the good qualities of others, and his own unworthiness: Let him remember
kindnesses long, and forget injuries quickly: And especially let him pray for
this Grace: Thou God of Love, plant the Grace of Love in this heart of mine!
Leave not God till he hear thee, leave not thy Heart till it be kindly
affected, leave not thy Neighbor, till he be reconciled and truly beloved.

SECT. VI.. 6.

VI. THe Sixth Grace that the Husbandman His Contentedness.
has special need of, is, Contentedness with his Calling. He finds his labor
so great, and his profit so small, that he is sometimes on very bad terms with
his very Calling. He rises early, is up late, toiles like a horse, is sunk with
Cares, worn out with Crosses, and yet all hardly reaches, he can hardly get
food and raiment for him and his: who would embrace such a Calling? The Lawyer
he can get as much in one day, as he can in three months, every Tradesman has
a better life than he. But all this is no ground (...) thee, to be discontent
with thy Calling. (...) flect upon the Excellencies before showed, and thou will find thy Calling is more wo^thy of thee, than thou art of thy Calling That
the meanness and painfulness thereof, i^fully compensated by the innocence,
healthfulness and safety of it: and thou may come to Heaven from the Plough,
as well as from the Throne. And take heed lest it be the pride of thy heart,
that thinks thy Calling below thee. Prince Adam grudged not at it, who was the
top of all thy Kin. Entertain not therefore a discontented thought against thy
Calling: For a man ought to believe (...) God has led him into a Calling, that
it is the best calling for him in the world, till the same God lead him out of
it. It was therefore wise answer of Bishop Grosthead of Lincoln to a Kinsman of
his, an Husbandman that came to him, expecting some preferment from him, being
so dignified and able to advance (...) Cousin, says he, If your Cart be
broken, (...) mend it; If your Plough be old, I Will give you new one, and Seed
to sow your Land: but (...) Husbandman I found you, and an Husbandman I Will
leave you, and so he did.

Study you therefore the Conveniences of your Calling, and not the
inconvenienc^ thereof altogether; and consider that you know the evils in your
own calling, but you know not the evils in another. They have ease and honor,
and you have health and safety. Even Crowns are lined with tears; and yet he
that has most, does but live. Think not therefore of forfaking thy calling
without good warrant. If King Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.10. had kept himself to the
care of his Kingdom, and the love of Husbandry, he might have lived with
comfort, and died with honor; but he must incroach on the calling of the
Priest, and paid dear for it. Let his example be thy caution. Let the Priests
follow their Calling, and do thou follow thine.

And 2. Contentment with thy Portion in thy calling. It often falls out, that
Poverty in comparison, is the portion of the Husbandman; as it is, 2 Kings
25.12. The Captain of the Guard left of the Poor of the Land to be
Vine-dressers, and Husbandmen. It is the poor of the Land, especially in
France, and other Countries, that are the Husbandmen. Poverty is the
Husbandmans disease; one Noble man can buy and sell five hundred of them; And
it is much ado to be poor and patient under it. You must study therefore a
cheerful contentedness with your portion, as being carved unto you by the wise
and holy God, who better knew what was meet for you, than your selves.

Rich Cordials would blow up the spirits of some persons, therefore the
Physician prescribes them not. Let God alone with your allowance, look you to
your duty. It is said, Prove. 15.4. In the house of the Righteous is much
treasure: but in the revenew of the wicked Mr. Dod used to say, There was this
only difference between the Rich and the Poor, that the poor's purse was in
their Fathers hand the Rich in their own.
is trouble. Why, many a Righteous man has hardly a penny in the house; where is
(...) treasure? O he has contentment for, (...) riches. Contentment is his
furniture for every room; this stocks his ground, nay, this serves instead of
ground: Consider, the less thou have, the less will be required of thee in this
life, and the less will thou have to account for in another life; and what has
the rich man in his riches, but only the beholding of them with his eyes?

He that has Christ has no want. It is the British Proverb, Heb Dd^w, heb
dd^ Duw a digon. Without God, nothing; Have God, and there is enough. Resolve,
Lord this portion thou in thy wisdom did allot me, and I am satisfied. The
Calling served a (...) ter man than I, to wit, my Father Adam; And for Estate,
the second Adam possessed less than I: I have an House, and he had none,
Cattle, and he had none; and why should I repine, having as good a calling as
the first Adam, and a greater estate than the second?

SECT. VII.. 7.

VII. THe Seventh special Grace the Husbandman (...) Faith.
has need of is, Faith. He must learn to live by Faith. Providence seems
sometimes to frown, Promises they at the same time smile; now what shall the
Husbandman do without Faith? The winter is long, and he longs for the spring
and seedness: but the weather threatens he shall have no seedness at all. The
Summer's long, and he longs for harvest; but the weather then threatens, he
shall have no harvest: Here Is the frowns of Providence. But now the Husbandman
turns to the Promise, and it smiles, Genesis 8.22. While the Earth remains,
seedness and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and
night shall not cease. And this his faith tells him is certain and true, and
therefore he does his work, and leaves God to his; and while others are in a
fright, hang down the head and repine, he believes in God, and is cheerful at
the heart.

Again, the Husbandman goes into his barn, and there is no corn; inquires of his
Wife, and there is no store within, and little bread; looks into his purse, and
there is no money: Then he recoils into his heart, and there is faith in God, who
has said, Psalm. 34.10. The young Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they
that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing. And this through Grace he
believes, and is satisfied: He trusts in the living God, who is the preserver
of all men, especially of such as believe. His daily bread he begs, and his
daily bread he believes he shall have. I know God will not suffer me to want,
at least any good thing. If poverty be good for me, I shall have it: and if
plenty be good for me, I shall have that: if better clothes, and fare, and
(...) were better for me, I am sure I should have them; and I resolve my Father
shall carve for me, that knows my frame better than I. Though I see no reason
of such a condition, yet I will believe there is a reason.

And then the Husbandman has need of Faith for his Children; for many times he
leaves them to the wide world, has made shift to educate them, and that is all.
And when he dies, the Lease is expired, and they must be gone. But he believes
that God will take care of poor men's Children. If he have faith, and so be in
covenant, he concludes that his children are in covenant also; and therefore is
confident that God will provide for them. That God who hears young Ravens, will
hear young Children. Though Ishmael was no better then he should be, yet God
heard the voice of the Lad, Genesis 21.17. for the old love that was between
himself and Abraham. And he often thinks with comfort on that, Psalm. 37.25. I
have been young, and now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken,
nor his Seed begging bread.

And he has need of Faith to hold up his heart, under his many wearisome cares
and troubles. Faith will find honey in the Lion, and comfort in the Bible, when
there is none on earth: and therefore when the Husbandman comes home tired with
his hard work, he takes the Bible, and there finds that every condition, all
things shall work together for good to them that love God. That when flesh and
heart fails, yet God is the strength of his heart and his portion for ever.
He finds that tribulation works patience, and patience experience. That
affliction is better than sin. That it is better to be worn out with labor,
than to be given up to lust: He believes the day, how dark soever, will end
well. O the Husbandman cannot live a day without faith. He cannot live by bread
alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

And lastly, he has need of Faith for his poor soul in the world to come. If
ever any man, sure he may say, Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted, unless I had
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the Living. This is his
refuge, when nothing else will serve; when his body and spirits are spent, when
his cares and crosses prevail against him, Heaven will put an end to this. Now
I am plowing in the Earth, but shortly I shall be reaping in Heaven; This
sweating life will be over, and my singing life will begin: yet a while, and I
shall be sent for post to Heaven. There is but one life between me and a great
Estate; my troubles will have an end, but my joy will never have an end; and my
short afflictions which are but for a moment, are all this while working for
me, an exceeding great and eternal weight of glory. And this I believe. I have
not only some slight and groundless hopes of it, but I have an Evidence for
it. I find my Name in the Scripture, and so know it is in the book of Life: And
therefore my heart is glad, my glory rejoices, my flesh also that has little
rest here, does rest in hope; my possessions are little, but my reversions
great. He that shall be rich for ever, may be content to be poor a while.

And thus you have heard what special Graces the Husbandman should have, and
which I earnestly in Gods behalf persuade you to strive for with all your
might; leave no means unused, no strength unspent, for the attaining of these
Graces. It is possible to get them, its profitable to have them, its perilous
to be without them: without these you live but little above your beasts, you do
but drudge. O therefore go to the God of grace for them, and never leave him,
till you have them.

CHAP. VIII. CHAP. 8.
The Abuse of Husbandry.
SECTION I.
WE are come now in the Eighth The Abuse of Husbandry.
place to Discover the Abuse of Husbandry. And pity it is, that so honest and
innocent an Employment should be abused: but abused it is by many. But that is
the fault of the men, not of the Calling; the Calling shall be had in honor,
when they shall dye in shame. What Calling more Excellent than the Ministry,
and yet alas how is that Calling abused? but woe to them by whom offenses come:
let that holy Calling stand innocent and honorable notwithstanding. Our worthy
Calling of Husbandry is defaced by too many; but for all that, remains
Excellent: Yet these Abuses we must detect, that you may see the extremes, and
never fall into them.

SECT. I.. 1. By Drunkenness (...) and Gluttony.

THe First Abuse of the Husbandmans Calling, is by Drunkenness and Gluttony. So
we find, Genesis 9.20, 21. And Noah began to be an Husbandman, and he planted a
Vineyard, and he drank of the Wine, and was drunken. Here we have Noah's
Employment, and his Infirmity. His employment, he began to be an Husbandman.
Though all the world was his, and his heirs for ever; yet he chose to have a
Calling, and he chose this Calling. And then here is his Infirmity; where there
are two extremes in opinion; Some making it an unpardonable crime, that an
aged, wise, and holy man should thus miscarry: not charitably considering, that
it was not Intemperance, but Inexperience that caused his fall^ And others,
holding it was no sin at all, because Involuntary, and of Ignorance: but this
annihilates it not, extenuate it may; it was ill done, but recorded purposely
to warn us from the like. Patriarchae nos docent non solu^ Docentes, sed
Err^tes: The Patriarchs Errors teach us, as well as their Instructions.

O let this instance teach the Husbandman, never to abuse his Calling thus by
drunkenness and Gluttony, I mean immoderate eating and drinking; when men eat
or drink more than does good, not only when it is too much for their heads or
stomachs, but when it is too much for their time, or too much for their estate;
which God will account Drunkenness at the last day. Though there be degrees of
it, and some worse than other, and it is worse in some men than in others, and
beseems an Husbandman as ill, as most others in the world. And yet he is prone
to think, there is no Recreation but an Alehouse; no way to quench his Cares,
but by strong drink; no exercise on a Festival, but quaffing and smoking.

But this is a fearful Abuse in thy Calling. Thy hard labor will never excuse
thy hard drinking; thy field groans that bears the grain, which thou thus
abusest. Why, this is a beastly, and deadly sin. Other sins, it is true in their
nature are many of them worse than this, but few beyond it, considering the
inseparable effects of it; namely, the rendering the man, or rather the beast
liable to all sins. A sin that by degrees will steal all the money out of thy
purse, all the comforts out of thy house, all thy credit, and all thy
conscience, and leave thee nothing but stinging sorrow.

O rectify therefore this Abuse. Have thou no Recreation but thy Ruin? no
pleasure but in Sin? no way to refresh thy body, but by wounding thy soul? have
thou so many houses near thee, where thou may be cheerful, and welcome for
thy company; and will none serve thee but the Alehouse, where thou art welcome
only for thy money? Think as thou entrest in those doors, Does God call me
hither? Can I give account of this? Is God to be met with here? would I be
found thus by Death? Shall I gratify my flesh to provoke my God? Shall I
sadden my Conscience, to cheer my Appetite? I Will away, I Will stay here no
longer. Depart from me ye Evildoers, for I will keep the Commandments of my God.

But this Excess of the Husbandman is not ordinary, but chiefly at the great
Festivals and yearly Wakes; And then he is in exceeding fault. For though it be
convenient for friends sometimes to meet together, and be cheerful, yet the
principal end of such Observations must not be forgotten, which was to praise
God, and not pamper the flesh: To spend time in religious exercises, and
feasting only to attend upon that: But by no means to dishonor God by excess,
or keep such feasts, as Jesus Christ would not keep you company in; or like
Nabal to be prodigal once a year, and penurious ever after. The wise Husbandman
will not do so. Temperance and Cheerfulness are constant dishes on his Table.
He that will be devout to God, or charitable to others, must not be indulgent
to himself.

SECT. II.. 2.

II. THe Second Abuse of Husbandry is, By Cruelty to the Creature.
Cruelty to the Creature. An unreasonable, unmerciful use of the Creature,
whereby a man beats the heart out of his Cattle, the heart out of his Ground,
yea, the heart out of his Servants and Children. It is said, Prove. 12.10. A
righteous man regards the life of his beast, but the tender mercies of the
wicked are cruel. He regards his very beast out of pity; not only out of
policy, but pity. Now to weary out, and break the spirits of the harmless and
laborious beasts, out of an immoderate desire to do much work, or get much
gain, this is an abuse in Husbandry, and a spot upon Christians. If God should
give thy Horse or Ox a tongue to speak, as he did to Baalams Ass, how
unanswerably might they ask thee, What have I done to thee, that thou have
smitten me these three times? Numb. 22.28. Why art thou so unmerciful to one,
that cannot speak for himself? You must remember, they are your
fellow servants, and you but Stewards, and not Lords over them. You are the
Lords reasonable Servants, and they are his unreasonable Servants; You are both
made of the same Mold, and it is only the goodness of God, that has made you
better, and if you want Grace, you are worse than they.

Use therefore that Mercy and Moderation, that beseems a man of Bowels, a man
of Religion. Consider, if God have not sometimes taken away some of thy Cattle,
for thy cruelty to the rest; and sometimes blasted thy business, which with so
much impatience thou have pursued. A man would think Bedlam were broke loose,
to see the mad frantic passion you sometimes are in with your Cattle, when
they give you no cause, but by being ^norant, that is, you are outrageous with
them, because they are beasts. O the heat, the rage, the oaths, the curses, the
nonsense, the stripes, nay, sometimes the maims you bestow upon them, for
little or no cause at all: where is the mercy now, where is the patience, where is
the meekness that becomes your reason, your profession? The worst of them are
more tractable to you than you are to God: your Ox knows you better, than some
of you know God; for he will follow you when you carry his meat before him, but
you will not follow after God, though all your fresh springs are in him; your
Cattle will quietly submit to the Yoke, while you wrangle and wrestle against
any Yoke that is put upon you.

Bewail therefore and amend this ^oolish Cruelty, and show mercy below thee,
as thou expectest mercy from above. For it is often found, that mild and
moderate endeavors, conduce more to thrift, than the impatient hurrying, and
cruel wringing of worldly men: Gods blessing, which alone makes rich,
accompanying that former, but seldom this latter way; who sooner or later
revengeth the cause of his meanest Creatures, upon those that cruelly oppress
them.

SECT. III.. 3.

III. THe Third Abuse of Husbandry; By Drudging.
Drudging; that is, a base merci^ Plodding in the world, an enslaving both soul
and body to it; a serving it, when a man should serve himself of it; wherefore
the Holy Ghost says, Hab. 2.13. Behold is it not of the Lord of Host, that the
people shall labor in the fire, and people shall weary themselves for very
vanity? It is a very great judgment from God, and folly in man, to do it. To
take such excessive care and pains, as even to broyle in the fire, through
extreme labor, and all this for vanity, for very vanity. It is no way fit,
that Christ's servant should be the worlds ^rudge; that thou who wast made a
little lower then the Angels, should make thy self equal with the Beasts. The
comfort of thy life is much better than the riches of the world: And it is
neither thy wisdom nor duty to destroy the Substance for the Accident; to
gain the world, and lose thy self; to get a living, and hazard thy life.

Object All our toyling will but maintain our charge; with all our drudging we
do but li^e; It Is easy to talk, but we alone feel what it is to pay such a
Rent, and maintain suc^ family: they that blame our toil, will not keep our
Children, and therefore ought to let us alone.

Answ. 1. It is most sad in outward respects, if it be so, that so excellent a
Creature as man should be forced to w^ar out his spirits to (...) a living, and
spend all his days in extreme labor for food and raiment. And (...) to such
(...) hearted Landlords, and ^ch of their (...) conscionable P^liffs also,
that impose such heavy Rents for poor men, their fellow Christians to live on.
As the Emperor said of evil Herod, it were better to be his Swine, than his
Son: so one may truly say, it were better to be their horses or dogs, than
their Tenants; for they have more expressions of love and kindness from them,
and easier service imposed on them, than their Tenants have. What a woeful
thing is it, that one man, nay, one Christian, should so ride upon, and oppress
another? That the Landlord should surfeit with plenty, and the Tenant starve
with want; the Landlord sing, the Tenant suffer; the one swim in the others
sweat and tears, and live in the others death. This is horrible injustice,
which the great Landlord of you all will revenge.

Alas! the Lace of one Suit of yours, would clothe all his family: your
extravagant Sa^ces would purchase a full belly for them, the week about. Such
an abatement of Rent as would do you no hurt, would make your Te^ant and his
Children sing all the year, and bless God for you. Did you see their
intolerable pains, their homely and scanty fare^ and hear their frequent sighs
and pitco^ moan, your hearts must be harder than rocks if they did not relent.

Abate therefore, for pities sake, of your ^gour; let not your little finger be
heavi^ than your Grandfathers loins; rememb^ you are all of the same dust, and
what (...) you that you have not received? And kno^ that your mercy will lose
you nothing: the ^ating of your Rents, shall procure the ad^ancing of your
house. Remember, the liberal man devises liberal things, and by liberal things
he shall stand. How many by such severities, have indeed gotten great wealth
for their Children; but Gods curse coming with it, that wealth has occasioned
the ruin of these Children: whereas more moderate Portions or Estates, might
have matched them with far more comfort, yea and plenty. And is there any
wisdom or forecast by bringing many families to penury, to store up a little
Mammon of unrighteousness, and therewith to undo your own souls, and your
Children, when you are gone? For he is wise that has said, Prove. 15.27. He
that is greedy of gain troubles his own house, as well as all about him.

2. But notwithstanding the hard bargains you have, this is not the proper way
to mend them. God requires no more from any man, than he can comfortably do. If
you had more Faith, you would need less toil; and lively prayers would excuse
much of your languishing pains and travel: And therefore, as the Apostle
orders, Phil. 4.7. Let your moderation be known unto all men. I bar idleness,
but persuade to moderation: work with less intensness for the meat that
perishes, than for the meat that perishes not: make not (...) life a slavery,
Eccles. 2.22. For what has (...) of all his labor, and the vexation of his
heart, wherein he has labored under the Sun For all his days are sorrow, and
his travel grief, and his heart takes not rest in the night this is also
vanity. A lively description of this abuse in question, and the censure of
wisdom upon it, it is vanity. Yea, this brutish humou^ is sometimes found in
those, that have no need do to it, Ecc. 4.8. There is one alone, and there
(...) not a second, yea, he has neither Child nor Brother, yet there is no end
of all his labor, neither is his eye satisfied with riches, neither says he,
for whom do I labor, and (...) my soul of good; this is also vanity, yea, it
is a sore travel Who are the greatest drudges many times, but they that have
enough? perhaps no Child or near Relation to care for? Away then with this
wretched and uncomfortable life; use the world, as not abusing it. Labor in
it, as being above it, and serve it not with more fervency than Him that made
it.

SECT. IV.. 4.

IV. THe Fourth Abuse in Husbandry, is, By rash Swearing.
Rash Swearing. I cannot say that he is alone, or chief in this Sin. It was
more witty wicked heads, that invented the Oaths which he does but imitate; he
does but trot after the furious gallop of greater Persons, that go before him:
but however, this fearful abuse has gotten place among Husbandmen, and that
now adays with redoubled force and frequency. What house is free from rash
Oaths a day together? what shop can you pass, but you may hear the buyer swear
he will give no more, as well as the seller, that he will take no less? what Market
but the noise of them reaches our ears? so that we may truly and sadly say
with the Prophet, Jer. 23.10. Because of swearing, the Land mourns: These
adorn their discourse, these confirm their bargains, in these they please, in
these they pride themselves: nay, sometimes in their cups, never Hare (as
Excel'ent Mr. Harris observes) was worried wo^se, and pulled in pieces by the
cruel Dogs, than is Gods own Son by cruel and bloody Swearers; one crying
sides, another heart, another wounds, so tearing in pieces again the Lord that
bought them, and putting him to an open shame: But the Lord, that looks on,
will not hold you guiltless in this abuse. Has Christ said, swear not such
oaths at all, and you his Servants speak no other language? Can thou forbear
before man, any word that might hurt thee, as words of treason, etc. and dare
thou venture to swear before thy God, which is no less than treason against
him? The more easily you escape any punishment from man, the more sharply will
this sin be avenged by God; who has fortified this Commandment in particular
with this resolution, He will not hold them guiltless, that take his Name in
vain.

If you injure your Neighbors name, the Judge shall judge you: but if you sin
thus against the Name of God, who shall entreat for you? words you will say are
but wind; but they are such a wind as will, without repentance, blow you into
hell. Peter's words cost him bitter tears: and Christ himself has said, this
word thou Fool in anger, is worthy of hell fire: you say it is but custom, and
you do it not in any ill intent: but this aggravates the fault, that you can
neither pretend profitnor pleasure for your sin, but only use, and yet will use
it: You will continue to displease God, because you are used to it: As if a
common Robber should plead before a Judge, not Guilty, because he had no ill
intent, only it was his custom, which indeed deserves the severer
Condemnation; custom can never extenuate a fault, but aggravate it.

Perhaps you will say, without oaths you cannot be believed: but experience tells
the contrary, that many a man that cannot swear, can obtain more belief, than
he that swears every word; and reason tells us, that he who dare be profane
against God, can easily venture to be deceitful toward man. And where an Oath
is said to be for an end to all strife, it is not meant of that Oath, which is
the Corruption of Man, but that Oath which is the Ordinance of God. Any man
will judge us of small credit, if not quite bank-rupt, that will pawn our Faith
and Truth, our best Jewels, ^or every small trifle. And it is better to want
^redit with men, I trow, than favor with God; better to undergo man's unjust
suspicion, than Gods just Condemnation.

If you excuse it, and say, you use but small Oaths, and do not fill your
mouths with the more bloody ones; You show hereby your ignorance of the nature
of an Oath, which as it ought to be in truth and judgment, so it is necessary
(if you will not swear as Pagans) that nothing be sworn by, but that God, which
knows the sincerity, and can avenge the falseness of the heart; which
prerogative, by your common Oaths, you give to the creat^re, and so place it in
the room of God, which instead of lessning, does greaten your fault, and make
your sin the more sinful, Jer. 5.7. Thy Children have forsaken me, and sworn by
them that are no Gods.

Some think indeed, that an Oath is an Ornament to their speech: But let those
know, that truth and soberness are the true Ornaments. To adorn your speech
with that which offends God, and all good men, is an unworthy paint, which Hell
fire at farthest will melt off. What dreadful instances could I give of Gods
Judgment on such in this life? and these all are but praeludiums to the world
to come. Mr. Dod used to send the swearer to the fifth of Zachary, the fifth of
Matthew, and the fifth of James: An arrow from Heaven in each place, against
rash swearers.

Break off therefore this thy sin by serious Repentance, and speedy Resolution,
and set a watch at the door of thy lips, lest thou blas^ that with thy Oaths,
which thou have gotten by thy sweat, and lest thou teach thy children to come
to hell after thee. It were better thou did bite off thy tongue, than provoke
God with it; better to be dumb, than speak to his dishonor. The accursed
imbroydery of an Oath, beseems not the plainness of an Husbandman.

SECT. V.. 5.

V. THe Fifth Abuse in Husbandry, is, Co^etounsess, By Covetousness.
which consists in an immoderate desire in getting, an anxious care in keeping,
and a base ^iggardise in parting with worldly goods. And this abuse, though
most ^oxious (...) others, yet is most frequent in the Husbandman. He begins
first with a little and his desires reach not after much, but yet after more
than he has: but when that is attained, he as ardently longs for more, and
when he has arrived to a competence, his desires are still more earnest than
at the first Thus some of this Calling have confessed, how they coveted first
one Cow, then two, then four, then ten, then twenty, and that not without
repining at their present case, and impatient earnestness after more. His
Neighbor has a better house than he, and he covets that: a greater flock than
he, and that he envies: And his wretched heart, (...) El^phant skin; that
stretches still as (...) fills it, widens and reaches after more and (...). No
company is pleasing to him, except (...) can get by them, nothing held
disho^st, that is but profitable, no God like Gold, (...) (...) like a h^ap of
Money.

(...) as (...) is the breeding Root, so Covetousness is (...) nourishing Root
of all ^vil. Is (...) (...) heart with many sorrows, ^Tim 6.10. Like Aqua
fortis on Steel, if it take the heart, it will not leave it, till it have (...)
out all goodness; and like the Viper that (...) out her Mothers belly, so does
it reward (...) Master for its lo^ging. O the cares, the (...), the sorrows of
a Covetous Man! Though his Barn, House, Purse, (...) full, yet his Heart is not
full; like the Disease called the Wolf, that is always eating, yet keeps (...)
body lean. He lies by his money, as a sick man, by his meat, he has no power
to take it, but only to look upon it: He covets to covet, and labors (...)
labor, and cares to care, and (...) himself as an Ass, that carries treasures
all day on his back, and at night they be taken from him, they did him no good
but load him.

And when all other sins wax old, this grows young, and is strongest when the
man is (...): what a life is this, that a man wants what he has, as well as
what he has not? for he is master of nothing, his estate is master over him.

I know you will say, I covet no man's wealth; can a man be covetous that only
keeps his own? To this learned Augustine ^swers; He is not only a covetous man,
that takes away another man's goods, but he also that greedily and niggardly
keeps his own. The rich man, Luke 16.20. that suffered Lazarus to die for
want at his door, was covetous only of his own; And they that were condemned
into everlasting torments, Mat. 25.41. were sentenced into hell, not for
robbing others, but for not giving their own. Otherwise, this Plea would excuse
most other sinners as well as you. For the drunkard may as well say, I do but
spend my own, etc. whereas indeed, if a true Inventory were taken, you have
nothing of your own but sin: You are but Stewards of all the rest. And what a
bootless thing is it for a Steward, either to be greedy to get, or loath to part
with that which is none of his own?

Let not therefore that disquieting and uncomfortable Disease enter into your
house or heart, that may increase your state, but will increase your trouble:
but covet earnestly the best gifts, be insatiable after the grace of God:
There Is riches without danger, and treasures without troubles. This know, your
immoderate desires after the world will never compass it, unless it come in
wrath to you. Grant, that you do heap up somewhat greater portions for your
children by your immoderate desires and endeavors; can that ever do them good
that you have sinned to get? or be a blessing to them, which you have gotten
with a curse? nay, do you not see many Children bestowed with nothing far more
comfortably, than others with great Dowries; and that it lies in the providence
and blessing of God, to make the best provision for you and yours, which you
are likeliest to have, while you moderately desire, and temperately labor for
the same.

SECT. VI.. 6.

VI. THe Sixth Abuse in Husbandry, is, Base By wrong Ends.
or wrong ends. A man may spoil the best Calling under Heaven by managing it
to poor and base ends, and ennoble the meanest Calling by Celestial aims
therein. Of all men, the Husbandman should dignifie his Calling by right and
noble ends; for what is more contemptible than a mean man in a mean calling,
and his ends meanest of all? every stroke a man takes in his honest calling is
made sin, by levelling his labors to base ends. A great deal of good pains is
spoiled and lost, for want of a good end. As for example; It is a low base end
to get riches, to greaten your posterity, to overtop your neighbors, to make
provision for the flesh; These are poor ends for a rational man, poor ends for
a right Christian: A Christian man must have Christian ends. Alas! if Riches be
thy end, Riches shall be thy wages. If a gre^ Estate be thy end, a great Estate
shall be thy portion: and then what a bargain have you made (...) That Is a
terrible Scripture, which some of the Fathers could never read without
trembling, Luke 6.24. Woe unto you that ar^ Rich, for you have received
consolation And that may go with it, Psalm. 17.14. Men (...) world, (...) (...)
their portion in ^his life, whose belly thou fillest with thy (...) treasures.
A sad character, and a sad discharge^ And this suits with no man better than a
base spirited Husbandman; who is a man as it were born of the world, and buried
alive therein; with hard labou^ he gets a por^on, and an estate therein, and
that is all that ever he is like to have.

Quest. But may not an Husbandman m^ke Riches, Pleasure, or Ease in his Old
Age, his end?

Answ. An end is either subordinate or ultimate; a next end, or a last end.
Riches, Pleasure or Ease may be a subordinate end, but must not be the ultimate
or last end. You may design, desire, and labor for them for God's sake; but
not for their own sake. A man may desire a good Horse, or a safe Boat, to carry
him to his friend or business, but not to dwell upon, not for themselves; even
so a man may design and desire outward ends, as riches or ease, not for the
enjoying of them, but that we may better love, serve and enjoy God. As all
causes run up, and resolve ^mselves into the first cause, so all our ends ^ld
terminate in the last end of all things, ^ich is the glory and honor of God;
for (...) him, and through him, and to him are all ^ings, to whom be Glory,
Romans 11.36. The Husbandman looks up and cries, Ah Lord, I ^ive here on Earth,
but my aims are as high as Heaven; though I be but a poor man, yet I ^ave rich
ends; I accuse not my Superiors: but if a man stand on a Tower and shoot
downward, he that stands at the bottom of (...) and shoots upward, may fly
above him. (...) poor Peasant may look as high as the Prince in this sense; and
the Plough-mans labo^ please his Maker more than the Victories (...) an
Emperor; the one serving the will of his heavenly Lord, the other sacri^ to
his hellish Lust.

And this leads us to the Ninth point, which is to set down the Husbandmans
designs in his Calling. Always provided, this point be not laid aside without
some use thereof; namely, that you bewail this Abuse of it in others, and
reform it in your selves: mend the same as far as you can, and mourn for it
wherein you cannot. As the Apostle says, Use the world as not abusing it, so
use this Calling as not abusing it; adorn it and do not shame it: A bad
Husbandman, and a good Christian, seldom go together. And so much for the
Eighth Point. ^

CHAP. IX. CHAP. 9.
The Husbandmans Designs.
SECTION. I.
WE are arrived now at the (...) The Husbandmans Designs.
general Head of this Subject which is the Designs which (...) good Husbandman
ought (...) have in his Calling. It is a (...) end that crowns or shames his
work. (...) Husbandmans ends do ennoble his Calling And they are these:

I. The chief end of the Husbandman (...) To please and glorify God.
his Calling is, To Please and Glorify God. (...) he can but attain this, he
is rich enough. The is man's greatest duty, and highest privilege. It Is the
Christians character and Motto, Ro^ 14.8, 9. For none of us lives to himself,
(...) no man dies to himself, for whether we liv^ we live unto the Lord, etc.
Mark, it is said none of us, of what sort or degree soever, liv^ to himself, but
to the Lord. It Is true the more noble, wise and learned, the more they should
contribute to these ends; but even the poor Husbandman must add his Mite: even
a Dwarf may shoot at the Zenith, and aim as high as the greatest Giant. O
therefore stir up your selves, and direct your designs on high. If thou can
any way magnify the Wisdom, Greatness, Holiness and Goodness of thy Maker,
happy art thou, and happy is thy Calling. This is an End for an Angel. They
trumpet forth his Glory, and so do thou; they sanctify his Name in Heaven,
and thou in thy lower sphere do sanctify his Name on Earth. And though thou
shootest with a weaker bow, yet aimest at as high a mark.

But alas! say you, How can I glorify my Maker, that am but one remove from a
piece of earth, yea of sinful earth. I answer, Not only the Heavens declare the
Glory of God, Psalm. 19.1. but even Beasts, and all Cattle, creeping things, and
flying foul, Psalm. 148.10. and would you know how? See verse. 8. The fire and
hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind fulfilling his word. How manifestly does the
snow, hail and tempest, preach the power, justice and wisdom of God; I say,
they do plainly preach them, and that by doing his Will, hanging in the sky,
and falling on the earth as he pleases. As well taught Children or Servants do
honor and magnify their superiors by their ready obedience: Even so at
least, may the poor Husbandman glorify his Father in Heaven, by an obedient
departing himself in his place, and doing the will of God in his vocation.

And therefore this he should aim at in his Calling; why, here I am, here I
work, and sweat, chiefly to please my God, who has set my lines, and carved me
out my employment; and hence even Servants must do service, with good will as
to the Lord, and not to men; Ephesians. 6.7. as if God himself did every (...) ing
set the Husbandman his task, and at night survey his work: with what care and
delight should such a man follow his business, that has such a Master as God
himself? Lord, says the Husbandman, I am but a mean creature, but yet I will
honor thee, as well as a mean man may do; I Will work to please thee, and by
consequence no harder nor easier than will please thee; I Will yoke and unyoke
when thou would have me, as exactly as I can discern by that prudence I have,
and those rules of Religion to be observed to thee, and pity to the Creatures.
When I come home I have but a mean feast, but yet Whether I eat or drink, or
whatsoever I do, it shall some way be terminated in that end of ends, the Glory
of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. When I go to bed, I will not forget that whether I wake
or sleep I should live to thee, for thee, with thee, 1 Thef. 5.10. Though my
work be mean, yet my aims are excellent; and brass gilded with God, will make
it glister. A poor man with rich ends, is of good account in Heaven.

It is certain, that the holiest action of an Hypocrite, if you ravel it to the
bottom, ends at self; and the meanest action of a Saint, ends at God: for
example, why does the Hypocrite pray: that he may pass well with others, or
satisfy the cries of his Conscience. And why aims he at these? That he may
have repute without, or quiet within. And why does he desire these? Why because
they do gratify carnal self. On the other side, why does the Husbandman work?
to provide for his family. And why that? That he may educate and dispose his
Children. And why so? That they may honor and serve their heavenly Father,
when their Earthly Parents are dead and gone. Well then, let this End surmount
all others, and be diligent and faithful in your Calling, to please that God
who has set you therein, and to glorify him, what in you lies, by setting
forth his Wisdom, Power and Goodness, that when he changes your Countenances,
and sends you away, you may sing that sweet song, John 17.4. Father, I have
glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou have given me to
do; And now Father glorify me with thy self.

SECT. II.. 2.

II. THe second design of the Christian The Salvation of his Soul.
Husbandman, is, The Salvation of his Soul. This he studies upon night and day.
He knows that estate is ill got that beggars the Soul; That Rent sorrily paid,
that makes him run in arrears with God: And therefore saving stakes in the
world is his by-business, but saving his soul is his main business: For what
will it profit a man to gain the whole world, and to lose his own soul? Mat.
16.26. what is he better, if he discharge all his debts, and die in Gods debt,
and be cast into the prison of hell for ever? What welcome can he have to God,
that has done every thing but what was chiefly given him in charge? That is
good counsel then for the Husbandman, Mat. 6.19, 20. Lay not up for your selves
treasures upon earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and where Thiefs break
through and steal, but lay up for your selves treasure in Heaven. Nothing you
can get in this world, that can be laid up safe; but if your soul be saved,
that will be safe for ever.

You must remember, that you were not made to work and eat, but to save your
souls in the first place. God has no where promised, that if you seek the
world, and the vanities thereof, the things of Gods Kingdom shall be added to
you; but he has promised, that if you Seek the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, all other things shall be added to you, Mat. 6.33. And
theretherefore the Religious Husbandman will secure the main chance. I must
part with my house and my ground, and my children, but my soul I must live with
for ever, and that I will secure. I know many things are useful, but one thing
is needful: And no care enters deeper than the welfare of this; no cross lies
heavier, than the hindrance of this. As in a common fire, a man will strive to
save his building; but if he cannot, he would not lose his goods; yet if these
go in the flame, he will venture far to save his Cash, his Writings and his
Jewels. So our Husbandman is careful of his other concerns, but his Soul, his
Jewel, in the thickest of his business, he will endeavor to feed, and cure,
and save, whatsoever it cost him.

The soul like some great Personage is somewhat exceptious; if she be not
regarded in the first place, she will not be served with broken meat. When that
is made a by-business, which should be the main business; when men are serious
in trifles, and trivial in serious things, that is wisdom from beneath, stark
folly before God. The Husbandman is loath to end his life with that doleful
song, Cant. 1.6. My Mothers Children made me keeper of the Vineyards, but my
own Vineyard I have not kept.

And yet alas for grief! how many such foolish Creatures are there, that like
Children sent upon some weighty errand, fall in love with this and the other
gay flower or weed in their way, and play with them, while their business is
neglected; how do such Children deserve to be welcomed home? So do they.
Almighty God has sent you into this world upon a great errand, namely to
conquer the Devil, exalt the Lord Jesus, and climb to Heaven. Ah Sirs, do not
fall in love with the fading flowers of lawful comforts, do not play with the
stinking weeds of unlawful lusts, and forget your errand. Remember, there is no
conversion after Death, no Sermons in the grave, no forgiveness in hell; lo,
this is the accepted time, this is the day of salvation, you must plow and sow
for Eternity. No seedness here, no harvest there.

SECT. III.. 3.

III. THe Third Design of the Husbandman should be, The Public Good, The
Public good.
He has learned but a little way in the book of Christianity, that sets his
private benefit above the public good. He that will Sleep in Jesus, must serve
his Generation, Acts 13.36. And the Religious Husbandman will serve his God,
and then will serve his Generation, and then will serve himself; not himself
first; no, how may I further the common Good? He plows and sows, not only
because he lives by it, but because the Common Wealth cannot live without it.
That was right Husbandry in Joseph, Genesis 41. He did not hoard corn, and let
others starve; but he hoarded it, lest others should starve: It is said, Prove.
11.26. He that withholdeth corn, people shall curse him, but blessing shall be
upon the head of him that sells it; and the wise Husbandman more values the
blessing of God upon an empty barn, than a full barn and a curse therein. He is
more pleased with the public wealth, though he lie under private wants, than
if himself had wealth, and there were public want abroad. Though he be a
private man, yet he should have a Public spirit.

It is strange, what Instances have been of this Excellent Spirit among
Heathens. One advising his Country men for the public Good, though he knew
that Advice would speedily cost him his life. Another purposely disguising
himself in the battle, that he might be there to save his Country. Another
venturing Necesse est ut eam, non ut vivam. Pomp.
to Sea in a dreadful storm to relieve his needy City with Corn, with this
conclusion, it is not necessary that I live, but it is necessary that Rome be
relieved. Shall limping Nature go thus far, that had no Bible but the
Creatures, nor Heaven but the Elysian Fields? Surely grace in the Husbandman
will not leave him behind. For he has far stronger inducements to be public
spirited, to wit, The Love of Jesus Christ, which love being shed abroad in his
heart by the holy Ghost, should make him drown his private in the Public Good.

Away then with that poorness, that baseness of spirit out of this Excellent
Calling: As David, though he had then only commenced Shepherd, yet when he
heard of Goliah's affront to the public, he had the heart of a King to
vindicate that disgrace; and took his life in his hands, and came off with
honor: So should the Religious Husbandman look above himself, above his own
silly interest, and design the public good in his labors: And as the least
pin is of use in the greatest building, so the meanest Husbandman may be of use
in the Mightiest State and the Swords that defend us would be of little avail,
without the Plough-shares to maintain them. It were a mercenary Soldier that
only would fight for his pay, no, he must fight for his Country: So that is a
Mercenary Husbandman that only works for riches, he must labor for his
Country, else he is not worthy to live in it: And therefore wheresoever his
private benefit crosses the public, as in hoarding up Corn in a time of
dearth, or any such like, therein he must deny himself; and account that
sordid, yea cursed gain, that is obtained with the general loss.

SECT. IV.. 4.

IV. THe Fourth Design of the Husbandman The Education of, and Provision for
Children.
should be, The Education of and Provision for his Children. God has given him
Children, and fain he would bring them up, and bring them up as the Children of
the Most High. He holds up Abraham for his Copy, Genesis 18.19. with whom he
resolves to charge all his, with the fear of God in the first place, and can
never look upon them with complete comfort, till they be born again.

He has it also in design to bestow reading at least upon them; and if he grow
able, is ambitious to furnish them with such education, as they are capable of.
And their aptness to it, with his ability for it, he looks upon as the call of
God, and never parts with his money more readily than for their education. He
feels the sad experience of an unpolish't breeding, and therefore gives them
all the humane and divine accomplishments that he can; and this is the top of
all his Ambition in this world, that his poor children, that are ignorant and
rude and sensual by nature, may be lick't into some form, and squared for some
use in the world. And for this end he is willing to work the harder, that he
may afford to maintain his Children at School, and fit them for some honest or
holy Calling. O if I can see my children have a title to Christ before they
have an estate in the world, I shall be well; that they be Gods children as
well as mine; that though they have but a small portion, yet they may have many
prayers with them.

And then he desires, if he can reach it without immoderate labors or indirect
means, to make some comfortable provision for them, that they may bless the
Lord for him, when he is dead and gone. But herein he is not solicitous, as
knowing what immoderate care gathers, oftentimes immoderate expenses scatters,
and the Parents sin seldom advances the Childrens happiness; much less dares
he get one penny unjustly, lest that penny consume all the pence he has.
Regulate then your designs in this respect by these rules; I will out of
Conscience to God be diligent in my Calling, and I will endeavor among other
charitable ends, to make provision for posterity, if it may be done without sin
against God, wrong to my neighbor, or uncomfortable distraction to my self.

And truly, Beloved, it is next degree to madness, too earnestly to proceed in
this design, seeing nothing is more evident and common, than Riches gotten by
the owners to their hurt, and the hurt of posterity; and that generally, when
Children after honest education, are left to work out a livelihood by their own
industry, they prove most provident, thriving, holy and happy. Reliance on
their certain inheritance securing them often in (...) negligent and idle
course: which frequent observation would wholly divert a wise man's thoughts
from storing for Posterity, but that the light of Nature and Scripture direct
to provide for our young, and that he who provides not for his own, especially
them of his house, has denied the faith, and is worse tha^ an Infidel, 1 Timothy
5.8. And therefore the Godly Husbandman aims chiefly at their education; and
if besides that, any thing remain, he blesses the Lord for it, and bestows it
among his Children, with the utmost wisdom, impartialness and kindness.

SECT. V.. 5.

V. THe Fifth Design of the Husbandman To pay each man his own.
should be, To pay unto every man his own. A little debt fills him with a great
deal of trouble, and he makes some Conscience of owing nothing to any man, as
well as of loving one another. And therefore his ambition is to discharge the
world, e're he go out of it; and because that is uncertain, he speedily takes
order herein. It is a sad thing that many of great Rank and Place, can so
quietly live and die in the debt of many a mean man, that is undone by them.
The poor Husbandman wonders, how they can sleep and laugh so heartily, when if
every one called for his own feathers, they would be left as naked as ever they
were born.

The Roman story is obvious of that Emrour Oct. August
that sent to buy the bed and pillow, such an one used to lie in, that died
much in debt a little before, as thinking there was some strange virtue
therein, to make a man sleep so soundly, that was so much in debt. The
Husbandman has no such bed: for forty shillings breaks his sleep more, than
four thousands does his Landlords. His care and design therefore is to pay
every man his own, Romans 13.7, 8. Render to every man his due, etc. And this
Scripture commands him readily to pay what is due to the Church, as if he paid
it to God himself; his due tribute to the State, well knowing that Princes
burdens must be taken up upon our knees; his due Rent to his Landlord, and
that without repining at his abundance; and his due deb^ to his friend, that
the world may be clearly quit of him.

And all this he does by reason of the Law of God, rather than the Law of Man;
and out of conscience rather than compulsion; remembering that word abovesaid,
Owe (...) man any thing, but to love one another. His debt of loan shall be
paid, though his debt of love never can. Hereupon he looks on his cattle with
this thought; here is a Cow, but she is none of mine, nay, my very meat is not
perfectly mine own, till my debts are paid. I will arise and study the first
opportunity to quit scores. I shall be in debt to God do what I can: but I will
turn every stone, to give to all men their due. And this is the Husbandman's
fifth Design.

SECT. VI.. 6.

VI. THe Sixth Design of the Husbandman To have Ability to communicate to
others.
in his Calling, is, That he may have ability to do good, and to Communicate.
He loves not Riches for themselves, but desires, if God see it good for him,
rather to give than receive, as being a more blessed thing, in the judgment of
God himself, Acts 20.35. He believes, if his Goods do no good, they are no
goods: And therefore the design of his daily labor is, that he may do good
unto all, especially unto the Household of Faith; according to that rule, Ephesians.
4.28. Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor, working
with his hands tho thing that is good, that he may have to give to him that
needs. Mark, one true end of work, not work to get and keep, nor work to
spend and riot, but work to give to him that needs. As water, if it stand, it
putrifies; if it run, it purifies: So riches if they be stored, and not used to
the Glory of God, and good of others, they rust and canker, and cry against the
owners thereof: but when they are disposed to good uses, they make a good
foundation for a man against the time to come.

It was the sin of the Rich man, Luke 16.19. and his damnation, that he fared
deliciously every day, but he suffered poor Lazarus to perish for hunger at his
door. If ever our Husbandman desired to be rich, it was not to wear fine
clothes, eat delicate meat, enjoy a writ of ease, but that he might be able to
give and lend, that he might do good and communicate, knowing that with such
sacrifices God is well pleased. And in very deed, the condition of a Prince (as
was hinted before) is better than the beggars, only for this, that they have
larger opportunity to do the Lord service, and to do good to others. The poor
man's meat and drink, and sleep, are as pleasant and wholesome to him, as his
Land^ lords, his moderate labor as acceptable as the others idleness, his
natural recreations as delightful as the others that are more studied, tedious
and costly. The poor man has troubles, so has he; and they have their suits
and affronts and vexations, one as well the (...) only herein the Great Man is
Superior to him, that he has greater opportunity and ability to honor God,
and to do good to others, more than his poor neighbor has; and happy he, if
he make use of it; and wo^ for ever to him, if he do not. If his greatness make
him more potent to sin against God; if his parts render him more ingenious, to
put a trick upon Religion; if his riches only enable him to serve his lusts
more effectually, better a thousand times for him, that he had been in his
Scullions place.

For this end our Husbandman aims at (...) Estate, to do good with it; to
minister to those that serve at the Altar, to relieve his poor Kindred and
Neighbors, to help forward the binding of poor Children to trades, or the
maintenance of the ingenious poo^ Scholar at School, or some other good work
that may glorify his God, whose Steward he knows he is, and all that ever he
has, is at his devotion. O Sirs, do these thoughts breed in your hearts? Are
ye devising to do good, as well as desiring to be great? Alas! none of your
expenses and layings out will pass in your accounts with God at the last Audit,
but what have some way tended to the glory of your Master, or the good of your
fellow servants, as well as your selves. O if God would entrust me with plenty,
and with an heart to use it to his Glory, then I were happy; but of the two,
let me rather have a narrow Estate and wide Soul, than a wide Estate and a
narrow heart. And this is the sixth Design of the Husbandman, so much plenty as
may enable him to do good, and to Communicate.

And so you have the Ninth General Head in this Subject, viz. the Husbandmans
ends and designs, which if you find written in your own hearts, bless the Lord
upon your knees. If you fall short, let me tell you, that speedy Repentance,
and rectifying of your hearts, is your wisdom and duty, that God may bless and
not blast you in all your undertakings. If your aims be only worldly profit,
ease or preferment of you or yours, What do ye more than others? Do not the
very Pagans the same? And if you care and work only to pay your Rent; alas the
Turks do so: But herein you excel, If you look not at things that are seen,
but at things that are not seen. If you aim at God, unto God you shall come at
last.

CHAP. X. CHAP. 10.
Rules for the Husbandman in his Calling.
SECTION. I.
ANd now we descry our Journies Rules for the Husbandman in his Calling.
end, and are arrived at the Tenth point to be handled in this Subject, which
is to offer some Rules to the Husbandman in the management of his Calling.
Every Calling has its Canons and Rules to walk by, as Ministers, Statesmen,
all Men: And it is a Wise Man's choice, and the Fools cross, to be regulated by
a Rule; now though you may gather Direct^ons out of the foregoing Discourse,
yet I have thought fit to specify and insist on these following on set
purpose, but on this presupposition, or (if ye will) condition, that you will
walk by them.

SECT. I.. 1.

THe First Rule for an Husbandman, is, Learn to be wis^ and diligent.
Learn Prudence and Diligence in your Calling. Prudence, this your God will
teach you, Isa. 28. 26. That you may do each thing in its season, for things
are ugly out of their time. Remember that it is the note of a good man, Psalm.
112. 5. to order his affairs with discretion. And that if any man lack wisdom,
See Cato's Rules. Plant in thy youth: Build not till thou be thoroughly stored;
be not forward to purchase; spare no pains in Husbanding what thou have; The
most sure Revenue is that which has cost least. The good Husband must be a
Seller, not a Buyer. Do each work in its season. Procure the good Will of thy
neighbors, keep no unquiet or injurious Servants, etc.
it is but ask and have. And then Diligence, 1 These. 4. 11. That ye study [ Gr.
as ambitious men for Honour] to be quiet, and to do your own business, and to
work with your own hands, as we commanded you. It was good Mr. Dod's saying, He
ever liked that Christian that would pray hard and work hard.

Thy endeavors in thy Calling should be as diligent, as if thou would win
all the world, and then as diligent in Prayer, as if thou would win Heaven,
Prove. 22. 29. See thou a man diligent in his business, he shall stand before
Kings, he shall not stand before mean men: that is, diligence is the highway
to preferment. How many have we seen removed out of the rank of ordinary men,
merely by Gods blessing on their diligent labors? Pliny reports of one
Cresinus, that The industry of the Husbandman works Miracles, by turning stones
[ lime stones and marle] into bread. Mr. Fuller. H. S.
from a little ground did, by his industry, gather so much Riches, that he was
accused of Witchcraft, by Albinus an Aedile: his neighbors could not imagine
that so small a shred of ground, should heap such treasures on him: But he at
the day of his appearance, produces his implements of Husbandry, and ranks them
in order before the Senate, and withal his Daughter, a strong Woman, and then
cries out, Veneficia mea Quirites, haec sunt: O ye Senators, these are all the
Charms I have; and so was dismissed with praise.

But yet this Diligence may pass its bounds and due limits. A man may work hard
and have no thanks of God for his labor. The Godly Husbandman is busy, not
out of love to Riches, but out of hatred to Idleness. An idle man can neither
find in Heaven, no nor in Hell, a pattern. The Angels above are ever employed,
and the Devils below are ever employing themselves. All the creatures move in
their places, and has Man any reason to have a writ of ease? There were in Old
Rome persons deputed to be Censores morum, and in Athens the Areopagi, who took
particular notice of the Diligence of persons in their Callings, and rewarded
or punished them accordingly.

And indeed, idle persons are but like wens in the body; that are nourish't,
but it is only to disfigure. It is said, Prove. 10.4. The hand of the Diligent
makes rich, and yet verse. 22. it is said, The blessing of the Lord it makes
rich. Indeed both must concur; but observe that where it is said, The blessing
of the Lord makes rich, it follows, And he adds no sorrow with it. Riches
without Gods favor shall be like gravel in your teeth, but when he sends them
in mercy, they are perfectly comforts.

Let these things, stir up the sluggish Husbandman in his Calling. For the most
part we find, that God has most graciously appeared to his people, even in the
honest discharge of their Callings. The Apostles chosen from their Nets, and
David from his sheep. And to come to Husbandry it self; where was Amos when the
Lord sent him to his people? Why among the Herdmen of Tekoa, Amos 1.1. And
where was Elisha when the Lord called him to his own work? why, plowing with
twelve Yoke of Oxen before him, and himself with the twelfth, 1 Kings 19.9.

O therefore use thy best Art and Industry. Adam's sin has hardened the
ground, and now thy sweat must soften it: but this is thy comfort, it is
sanctified sweat, and every drop of it spent in a right manner, and to a right
end, shall be rewarded with a thousand years in Glory: And thy Diligence on
Earth, will make thee long to be in Heaven.

SECT. II.. 2.

II. THe Second Rule for the Husbandman Submit unto Providence.
in his Calling, is, Submit unto Providence. Be convinced that there is a
Supreme Providence, that directs and orders all and every event in the world,
and be satisfied therein, as that which is best for you, Psalm. 115.3. Our God
is in the Heavens, he has done whatsoever he pleased. Read more in the Book of
Gods Providence, and less in the books of men's Prognostications. And this I do
purposely instance in, because the common use of these books is most foolish
and fallible; for how can One of them tell the whole Nation of rain such and
such a day, when there is usually rain in one Country, and fair weather in
another the same day? Besides, the Lord does very often alter the Scene of
these things, either upon the prayers of his people, or the sins of his
enemies. Hence that Challenge, Isa. 47.13. Let now the Astrologers, the
Star-gazers, the monthly Prognosticators stand up, and save thee from these
things that shall come upon thee. And this was spoken to the Chaldeans, the
best in those Arts in all the world. And yet there is a good use to be made of
them for signs and seasons, and days, and years; but as to any certain
foretelling of weathers or other events that depend on casual or voluntary
causes, they are matters beyond their line. And if you can know your present
Duty, no matter for fore-knowing future Events.

And then submit to the same hand of God in all things. It Is man's Prudence to
submit to Gods Providence. Labor to sec God in every thing: is thy promising
Crop blasted? it is Gods wisdom that has done it. Does the Rain cross thee?
why, the rain that hindered thee, has furthered some greater affairs. There is
mention, Ezekiel. 1.16. of a Wheel in the middle of a wheel. It is thought to
set forth the invisible Providence of God, that acts and overrules all second
causes for good ends. And you must still remember that, Romans 8.28. All things
shall work together for good, to them that love God; and therefore say, and
that withal thy heart, Father, thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
Alas Sirs, will your repining make the matter better? Is Sin a proper cure for
Affliction? No, no. The ordering of Gods affairs belong to God, and of your
affairs to you: let it rain when God will, let snow and ice come, when God
will, and then heat and drought when he will, for that belongs to him. And do
you plow and sow when you can, and reap when you can; for this is the will of
God, that you be dependent creatures, and live on him, seeing you cannot live
upon your selves.

Let not a grudging thought therefore arise in your hearts, against the
Providence of God: I say, not a grudging thought, for even that does plainly
tax his Wisdom and Government. Who can send a drop of rain without the
direction of God? Jer. 14. last. Are there any among the Vanities of the
Gentiles that can cause Rain? (as if God should say, where are they, let them
come forth and answer now, if any such there be) or can the Heavens give
showers? (alas not a drop!) art not thou he, O Lord our God? therefore we will
wait upon thee, for thou have made all these things. Repine not therefore in
the least at any of these Events. It is the Lord, let him do what seems good to
him. Do thy part, and he will be sure to do his.

Nay, in those injuries that are put upon thee, the overruling and well
ordering hand of Providence does guide and dispose the same to the best, 2 Samuel
16.10. Let him curse (says David of Shimei that reviled him bitterly without a
cause) because the Lord has said to him, Curse David, who then shall say,
wherefore have thou done so? O study Providence, believe Providence, submit to
Providence. God is Righteous in men's Unrighteousness, and he never permits any
evil to befall thee, except he can bring out of it some greater good.

SECT. III.. 3.

III. THe Third Rule of the Husbandman Make a t^easure of God.
in his Calling, is, Make a treasure of God. You are likely to be but mean and
poor in the things of this World; O labor to be rich in the possession of that
God that made it. Your harvest is doubtful, your comforts are uncertain, O make
sure of God, and then you have something sure. A few hard years will bring the
Husbandman to bread and water; had not he need then to be sure of Christ? He
whose treasure is above, can never be undone.

It was the saying of an Holy Man, to one whose crosses and troubles were so
great, that he cried out, O I am quite undone; why says he, is not God in
Heaven? Who can sink, that has Caesar with him in the ship, or be miserable
that has the possession of happiness it self? Hab. 3.18. Although the Fig Tree
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be found in the Vines, the labor of
the Olive shall fail, and the Fields shall yield no meat; the Flock shall be
cut off from the fold, and there shall be no Herd in the stall: yet I will
rejoice in the Lord, and will joy in the God of my Salvation: O blessed frame.
O divine Spirit, like that of God himself, that is content and satisfied in and
with himself, though there were nothing else in the world.

And thus the holy and mortified Husbandman sits down with God, and sings
cheerfully, The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore I will hope in
him. If I had nothing in the world, if there were no world at all, yet my soul
is completely happy in my God. I have enough, and enough, and enough. Thus a
true Saint is under his condition by Humility, but above it by Faith, and can
make a living not out of bread only, but out of every word that proceeds out
of the mouth of God: And therefore he fears God in prosperity, and loves him in
Adversity: he trembles the more for his mercy, and loves him never the less for
his frowns: And when the Barn is empty, then he can live by Faith. My God, is
riches enough for any man: The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. One
Jewel is worth an hundred load of lumber. Others can boast of their fair
houses, large demesnes, Noble Alliances, and numerous Friends, and I can glory
in the Lord, that exercises to me loving kindness, and righteousness, and
delights therein.

When the Venetians showed the Embassadour^ of Charles the 5th, their Magazine
and vast treasures, he pointed down, saying, these have abottom, but my masters
treasure (meaning the Indies) has no bottom, it is unexhaustible: So may the
religious Husbandman say to his Landlord; Sir, these are rare comforts you
have, but they have bounds and bottom, they have an end: but my treasure is
without bank, or bottom, or end, Psalm. 4.8. Thou have put gladness in my heart,
more than in the time, that their Corn and Wine increased.

O therefore repose and lay up your chief Happiness in the having of God yours,
by faith and union, and then he will order all things to the best for you. You
cannot want Grace or any thing else that is good for you, that live in God the
fountain of them all. Alas, all your other comforts are contingent, and
conditional, they are shallow and short, but Christ is all in all. Thy house is
but a shadow, nor thy ground, nor team, nor treasure, but here is thy
All Sufficiency, thy exceeding great reward. My Beloved is mine, and I am his,
is felicity enough in this world; and while this knot is tied, what though thy
bread be course, thy bed hard, thy rents heavy, thy charge great, and thy
incomes small, yet art thou unconceivably happy in having the God of Heaven and
Earth thy Friend, thy Father, yea, the strength of thy heart, and thy portion
for ever, Psalm. 73.25, 26.

SECT. IV.. 4.

IV. THe Fourth Rule for the Husbandman Use the World as not abusing it.
in his Calling, is, Use the world as not abusing it. It is the counsel of the
Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 7.31.

1. You must but Use the world. It is the Res aliae sunt quibus fruendum est,
aliae quibus utendum illae quibus fruendum est, beatus nos faciunt; istis
quibus utendum est, adjuvamur, Aug. de Doct. Christ. lib. 1.
School-mens distinction, Vti and Frui, and Augustines, before them. The chief
good that is to be enjoyed, all other things are only to be used. And this must
the Husbandman learn, if God do graciously give him much, that he is not only
a treasurer to lay up, but a Steward to lay out for God. You must know, that
the world is a place that you must lodge in for a night, not live in for ever.
And when you are on the road, you respect your lodgeing only for your journey,
not on the contrary. Alas Sirs, Your being here is only a Lease, not a
Freehold. This is not your Best, for it is defiled; yonder above the stars, is
your everlasting Rest: There you shall sit down and enjoy, and drink your
heart-fulls of endless joys. And then,

2. You must use the world, not as abusing it. If the Lord set the world upon
you, you must not set your heart upon the world. If God give you great estates,
you must not think you are better for your estates; you Thy God allows thee to
warm thy self at the Sun of worldly comforts, but not to turn Persian and
worship it. Mr. Swinnock.
must not abuse that, which was given you to help you more comfortably to
Heaven, to further you most effectually to Hell. You abuse it, when you suffer
that use of it, to which your Maker made it. When you suffer the world to
monopolize your hearts from God, then the right use of the world is perverted;
when it thrusts out religious duties or straitens them so as makes them
inconsistent with the health and welfare of the soul when the world governs
you, which was made to serve you: In a word, it is abused when it is not
crucified; when it is used to serve your corruptions, as your pride,
covetousness or lust, then it is abused: when you dig an estate out of the
bowels of the earth to dress your backs with pride, or to maintain unjust
suits, or to be drunken, or gluttonous this is to abuse the world: and thus the
creation is made to groan, and the poor creatures do even sigh under their
abuse, being unwillingly made subject to our vanities, and long to be delivered
from the bondage of corruption. Keep the world therefore in its place, and put
it not in the place of God. Remember that the heart is Gods-acre, a place
prepared for the Lord, and never meets with its match but in him, who fits all
its dimensions, fills all its desires, cures all its diseases, and answers
(...) the necessities thereof.

Remember that the world never made man happy, but the abuse of it has made
thousands miserable. It is a dangerous thing to The ship may sail well on the
water, but if the waters get into the ship all is gone^ So to live above the
world is safe, but if the world get into you, you drown. Ib.
have the full swinge of a delightful thought, in any thing in the world; You
must taste the world and the comforts of it, as the Egyptian dogs do taste the
waters of Nilus for fear of the Crocodiles, a snap and away, least taking a
full draught thereof to quench their thirst, instead thereof they loose their
life: even so must you with fear and care taste the delights of the world,
least by pleasing the body, you lose your soul. This will not hinder you from a
great estate, nor from any true comfort in the possession of it, but keep you
from a surfeit, and rescue you from the sl^very of a worldling, from being in
bondage to your servant. And take you the Apostles argument in the place before
named; For the fashion of the world passes away: who but children fall in love
with Bubbles, that are broke as soon as made? or with a face of wax, which the
Sun is melting away every moment? If you will fall in love with a world, lift
up your eyes above, and grow enamored with the world Above, whose Felicities
are real, and whose glory is perpetual.

And indeed there is no way to take off the heart from the things that are
seen, like that of setting the heart upon things that are unseen. Eternal
things are only adaequate to an immortal soul. And know for a conclusion to
this particular, That it may be most just, and is most ordinary for God, to
keep the world from them that abuse it, and to send them without it, that will
not live above it, if they belong to him; or else to give them their final
portion therein, the saddest portion on on this side hell.

SECT. V.. 5.

V. THe Fifth Rule for the Husbandman in Do as you would be done to.
his Calling, is, Whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do ye also to
them, Mat. 7.12. A principle of that weight and reason, that Alexander Severus,
an Heathen Emperor of Rome, caused that sentence to be written in each room of
his Palace; (...) then to be transcribed into every Christian heart. Judge, is
there not equity in this Rule? To do as you would be done by. Are not they
wretched creatures that transgress it? Why, it is the Divinity of Heathens.
Apply this practically: you would borrow in your need, lend then to others in
their need; you would be welcomed by your friends, saluted by your
acquaintance; see then you welcome your friends, and salute your acquaintance:
you would be saluted first, strive then to be first in your salutations: you
would not be slandered, mis-interpreted, scorned, jeared, or envied; O then
slander not others, nor misinterpret them, nor scorn them, nor jear them, nor
envy them. Here is my poor neighbor, I could now make advantage of his
necessity, and make him pay high for his commodity (...) but if I were in his
case, I would not be so used: you would not have others forward to give
offense, nor quick to take offense; see then that you be unwilling to give, and
backward to take offense.

And in forgiving injuries, let your forgiveness draw out their acknowledgment,
rather then their acknowledgment purchase your forgiveness; for so you would
gladly be used in that case: you would be melted into submission, not forced;
do you the like to them, melt them rather than force them: Yonder is my
neighbor, I could wrong him in his goods, in his good name, in his trading;
but if I were in his case, I would not be content to be so used: I should think
it hard measure done to me, and then it is hard measure done by me: I would
expect and welcome my neighbors help in my harvest, when his business is over;
why then go readily to help him in his need, when thine is over. I would not be
contented to have my cattle impounded for an unwilling trespass, deal not then
so unkindly with him in the like case: you would not be denied any implement of
Husbandry in your need, deny not then to lend any such thing, to thy neighbor
in his need: it would displease you to have ways ordinarily made over your
corn, or grass, or your gates left open to your prejudice; in the fear of God
them, do not deal so with your neighbor: his corn, and grass, and ground is as
dear to him, as yours is to you.

You would be well pleased, to have your neighbor visit you or yours in your
^ness, sickness, or the like; speed away then to visit them and theirs in the
like case; yea, its a comfort and pleasure to you, to see your neighbor
sometimes in your house; give him By the Law of the Twelve Tribes, whoever
above 14 years old sed their Cattle in another man's corn-field, or cut it down
in the night, it was death: They must be hanged or strangled to satisfy the
goddess Ceres. Plin. Lib. 18. Cap. 3.
the pleasure also of seeing you in his house would you take it well to have
your house or ground taken over your head? for shame then offer not the like
measure to others would you like it to have the old Landmark removed, or your
just bounds invaded? O do not offer to deal so by others; for the Lord (...)
the avenger of all such: You would not think well to have a sorry beast with
hidden faul^ sold to you by your neighbor; never thi^ of selling such ware to
thy neighbor.

In a word, you would have all men to be upright, loving and useful to you; see
the^ you be upright, loving and useful to others. This is the Royal Law, this
is the Golden Rule. How will you act like Christians, if you cannot live like
Pagans? How will you love your enemies, and do good for evil, if you will not
do, as you would be done to? if your Religion will not refine you as much as
morality, I will not say, it is a false Religion, but you are false to your
Religion.

Resume then your better thoughts, O all (...) Religious Husbandmen, and in all
cases between you and your neighbor, ask your own hearts this question; would
I be thus dealt with? and deal you accordingly. And yet this Rule is not only
Regula regulans, a Rule to rule to us, but also Regula regulata, a Rule to be
ruled by an higher, to wit, the Law of God. For the Adulterer ought not by
virtue of this Rule to borrow his neighbors wife, because he is willing to
lend his own; nor the Drunkard intoxicate his neighbor, because he is content
to be made drunk by his neighbor; but right Reason holding the scales, every
man ought to do to others, as he would be done to himself. And this is the
language of the Law and the Prophets. Moses and Christ are herein agreed. He
that will not maintain equity with men, must not expect mercy with God.

SECT. VI.. 6.

VI. THe Sixth Rule for the Husbandman in Labor for a cheerful spirit.
his Calling, is, Endeavor after a cheerful heart. You have many cares,
crosses and troubles, and they will press and sink you down, unless you be
supported by a cheerful spirit, Prove. 15.15. He that has a merry heart, has a
continual feast. Observe, poor Husbandmen, how you may transcend your greatest
neighbors. They have great estates, fair houses, and gallant clothes, but a
thousand to one they have either some gnawing cares, or saddening guilt, that
defeats their comfort, and even in laughter their heart is sad; and indeed it
is a rare thing to see a rich man light at heart: their Gold lies like lead at
their hearts; when you (having peace with God and a cheerful spirit) have not
only a feast every week, but even every day, yea, a continual feast.

Wash off daily your sins in the blood of Christ by faith, and fail not
solemnly to repent, at least, every night before you go to bed; work your
business off your hands, and let no cares discompose the quiet of your mind,
nor feed like Vultures upon your heart. Let to morrow care for it self, and do
you the work of the day; so will your load be light, and your spirits at
liberty to rejoice in God, and be cheerful all the day long. When distrustful
thoughts, and piercing cares come on you like a flood, run like famous Luther
to one Psalm or other, and sing them away: This will be food and physic for
you; this will solace your families after their hard labors, when they see
mirth in your face, and music in your voice. This will dispose you exceedingly
to holy duties, and divert many temptations of the Devil.

It Is true, a measure is to be observed; we easily offend in joy, and frothy
mirth is to be avoided, especially when others natural infirmities, or sinful
deformities make us merry: but yet there is left room enough, for an honest
innocent cheerfulness, which does the Husbandman good, like a Medicine, and for
which he can bless God as heartily as for his meat. Cast away therefore that
morose, dull and uncomfortable frame, which consumes your own spirits, and is a
burden to others. Remember it was Nabal's character, that he was such a man of
Belial, that no body could speak to him. A sullen frame is neither pleasing to
God nor man. God loves a cheerful labourer, as well as a cheerful giver, Deuteronomy.
12.7. You shall eat -- and rejoice in all that you put your hand unto, you and
your households. And he that has said, Repent and be converted, has said also,
1 These. 5.16, 18. Rejoice evermore, and in every thing give thanks. What is
there that should dispirit or disquiet you? You are friends with God, your sins
are forgiven, eternals joy awaits you, your temptations are but common to men;
your labors are but such as your Father Adam had before you; your weariness is
sanctified, and shall have everlasting rest; Your enemies are in your Fathers
hands, the griefs you feel are short, and short of many others; and the things
you fear, may never come upon you; you are traveling to the City that is paved
with Pearls, and your portion there shall be with the best. And why then are
you cast down? why are you disquieted? Trust still in God: for you shall yet
praise him, who is the health of your countenance, and your God.

Leave your sadness to them, whose Hell is before them, and who have their
portion in in this life; and endeavor by squeezing the promises, contemplating
Heaven, earnest prayer, and practical endeavor, to get and keep a Christian
cheerful spirit. And because the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy
increase, and in all the works of thy hands, therefore thou shall surely
rejoice, Deuteronomy. 16.15. For a merry heart makes a cheerful countenance, but by
sorrow of the heart, the spirit is broken, Prove. 15.13.

SECT. VII. Rule 7.

VII. THe seventh Rule for the Christian Take a special care for the good of
your Children.
Husbandman, is, Take a special care for the good of your Children; they are
parts of you, they are the heritage of the Lord, they are the hopes of the next
generation, and unless they be well seasoned, all the riches you can spare them
are cast away. If Religion were no reality, yet it is Policy to take pains in
their education, least they be industrious to waste, that which you have been
industrious to gather. It Is true, sometimes the pains of a Parent is lost, and
the strictest Parent has the loosest Child, but God has said, Prove. 22.6.
Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart
from it; and because it sometimes speeds well, therefore you should never be
defective in your duty: Your Crop sometimes miscarries, and you lose your
labor in the field, yet because it usually quits the cost, you plow and sow
and hope the best: therefore for their sake, for your own sake, for the Lords
sake, bring up your Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: 1. Drop
in the saving principles of Religion betimes, instruct them concerning the
woeful state wherein they were born, and how by repentance toward God, and
faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, they may come out of it; and do this with your
utmost seriousness, affection, and frequency, and water your instruction with
prayers and tears; bring good Ministers to them, and beg prayers for them, and
let good books keep them company; When the learned Junius was dangerously bent
in the business of Religion, his Father laid in every Chamber of his house a
Bible, and meeting with the first Chapter of John in one of them, he was
converted and settled thereby. The book that convinced his Child may convince
yours.

2. Be not quiet till they be Regenerate Creatures; cast about as worldlings do
to make them rich in the world, so that you may leave them rich in grace;
lighten the promises, thunder the threatenings, no pains is too great to prevent
them from being fagots in the fire of Hell.

3. Pray hard for them, yea, when you are feeding and dressing them, cry, Genesis
17.18. O that Ishmael may live before thee. A child of prayers (said good Mr.
Dod) will hardly miscarry: by these Monica won Augustine, and by these you may
win yours. Observe their inclinations to good or evil betimes, and accordingly
encourage or discourage them; discern their haunts timously, and remember
preventive Physic is the best, and that encouragement is as due as frowns when
occasion serves.

4. Bring them under the power of Gods Ordinances betimes, Deuteronomy. 31.12. young
and old, says God, must come. Samuel was young, but he had not waited long,
but he was called; use them to reading, and to tell a verse when you have read;
use them to Sermons, and to remember something that was preached; encourage them
to get choice Scriptures; fill the vessel, something will stick: Engage them to
a course of serious prayer; let them first use the Lords prayer, which he
understands, though they do not, and will accept, because they do the best they
can; but be sure to train them further by showing them their needs, by begging
and teaching them to beg the Spirit of Prayer: And then your example, and their
practice will make them perfect. You are glad to hear them speak, and Almighty
God is glad to hear them pray.

5. Fix upon them an habitual liking to Godliness, and dislike to sin; and then
they will hardly dislike what they have approved from the cradle, or love that
which they have been bred up in the hatred of. Paint out Grace so to the life,
that you may enamour them of it, and Hell so, that they may be affrighted at
it, and be often using some little Questions to them to that purpose.

6. Make them subject to your Authority, for else you lose the opportunity of
doing them good: the Reins may be easily loosed, but not so easily straightened;
by dallying with them, you may undo them; the disobedient Child seldom wants
the inheritance of a curse: and yet be wise in your Correction, take heed of
sinning in correcting of their (...), and know that one folly seldom cures
another, and yet be not afraid of using the rod: a few Rods may save abundance
of words, and when you have said all, railing is not Gods Ordinance to cure
your Children, but wise correction is, Prove. 23.13. and will prevent smart to
them, and grief to you: It Is sad, when many are more afraid to chasten their
Children, then Abraham was to sacrifice his, and so the Child goes to Hell for
his Wickedness, and the Parent for his Mercy: but beware you do it wisely, as
your Heavenly Father corrects you, with love, moderation and instruction; and
rather for a disobedient word than an unwilling fault, as the breaking of a
glass, or the like.

7. Guide them to the most useful Recreations, for Children have plenty of
Spirits, and will be active, and it is not safe to deny them, but direct them;
the-frolick Colt is not to be stifled, but tamed, nor the stream damned up, that
may profitably be diverted and used; let them be permitted Shooting, Fencing,
Wrestling, Running, Fishing, etc. for their bodies; and Histories, Riddles, and
other witty Questions for their minds, least immoderate constraints make them
worse afterward, and they grow crooked by being laced too strait.

8. Be sure you give them a good example, which will be better than many rules;
and for that end be most vigilant over your words and carriage in their
presence, for you know they are prone to imitation, and especially of their
Parents: And would it not be sad for you to answer, not only for your own sins,
but for all others that are committed by virtue of your evil example, whereby
you may do mischief many a year after you are dead and gone? for your Children
may grow loose by our example, and their children by theirs, and so for ought
you know successively to the end of the World.

SECT. VIII. Rule 8.

VIII. THe Eighth Rule for the Christian Purchase some choice Books and read
them well.
Husbandman, is, Purchase some choice Books, and read them well. I know your
purse will not reach many, nor your time serve you to peruse them; and a few
Books well read, are like ground well tilled, which is far better then a great
Demesne that always lies fallow. Be sure then that you consult and advise with
some judicious and pious Divine about the choice of your Books, that may direct
you to such as are most fit for your condition, that you may not only buy such
as are Good, but such as are the Best, because your time and money is so
precious. Perhaps you will say, your Charge is great, and your Rent is great, and
no money will be spared for these uses. A hard case, if you cannot spare two or
three shillings in a whole year for God and your Souls, when diverse that have
as great a Charge and Rent as you, and yet can spend more than that quantity in
a year, vainly and wickedly, and yet make a shift to live in the world. Alas,
God tryes you hereby, whether you can deny your selves, and abate a little from
back and belly, and give it this way to your poor souls. Resolve then to
purchase this household stuff, which (by Gods blessing) may do both you and your
children more good than thousands of Gold and Silver; yea, you may by a
discreet lending of them to your kindred and neighbors, startle and reform
them also; A practice which I would recommend to persons of Ability, whereby
they may be very instrumental in promoting the Kingdom of Jesus Christ in the
world, to wit, by buying some numbers of awakening and practical books, and
engaging their Kindred and poor Neighbors to read them over in such a time,
and return them some account thereof. And though I undertake not to determine
what books are fittest ^or your several conditions; yet of those that I have
perused, these following may be most useful for the generality of your
families, which I entreat you to buy, and read as soon as you can. In the first
place, let not your house, nor any of your grown children be without a Bible.
Though other books have much of Heaven in them, this book is all Heaven: And it
is as unfit to be without this in your house, as to be without a fire, or
without your household bread. Next, that you and yours may be grounded in the
Principles of our Excellent Religion, buy the Assemblies Two Catechismes, and
Confession of Faith, the Shorter for your Children and Servants to learn by
heart; the Other for you and them to read and consider, for your understanding
in the good knowledge of God, wherein also Mr. Ball's Catechism, with the
Exposition is most excellent and useful. Mr. Baxter's Call to the Unconverted;
and Mr. Dent's Plain-mans Pathway to Heaven will be well worth your buying,
and reading for the awakening your souls and your Children to saving
conversion. Mr. Shepheard's Sound Believer. Mr. Allen's First Part of the
Vindication of Godliness; and Mr. Dod on the Commandments, are choice Books to
help you in inside practical holiness. The Practice of Piety also, and the
Whole Duty of Man, have so many useful Instructions both about Devotion and
Conversation, that I would recommend them to you. Dr. Go^ge of Domestical
Duties will be necessary to teach your whole family their Relative Duties. Mr.
Pool'sDialogue will be very useful to settle you in the True Protestant
Religion against the Papists: and if you can reach either Diodates or the Dutch
Annotations on the Bible, after all to help you to understand the hard
Scriptures you daily meet with; though you may read, you need not buy many more
books for your souls. But when you have bought these books, let them not lie
dustie by you, but read and lend them, and read them again; but be sure to mix
Meditation and Ejaculation with your reading, and when you shut the book,
consider what profit you have gotten, and bless the Lord. Thus you may refresh
your spirits after your hard labor, and with the same exercise revive both
your bodies and your souls.

SECT. IX.. 9.

IX. THe Ninth Rule for the Husbandman in Pay your Great Landlord his Rent.
his Calling, is, Pay your Great Landlord his Rent. The Lord of Heaven and
Earth is Lord of the Soil, and Lord of the Soul also, and a Chief belongs to
him. This is that great Householder, Mat. 21.33. that planted a Vineyard, and
hedged it about, and let it out to Husbandmen, and went into a far Country. And
he has charged a Rent over and beside your earthly Landlords upon your
estate, and it concerns you to enquire what it is, what Arrears there are, and
what course to take for the constant discharge thereof; least the Lord turn you
out of doors: Your petty Landlord can but turn you into the wide World, but
your Chief Landlord can turn you out into Hell. The former indeed may imprison
you, but the latter can damn you: Alas! how little have you thought of this?
one Year returns after another; your Earthly Landlord calls for Rent, and you
make hard shift to pay him: but your Heavenly Landlord calls, and calls again,
and no Rent is paid to him: What will ye do in the end thereof?

Pray consider, though you hold your Land of man, yet you hold your Life of
God: though you have your house of some Great man, yet you have the body and
soul that inhabits it, of the Great God; you have your health of God, your
strength of God; You hold the Gospel by a tenure in Capite of God, through
Jesus Christ: now what Rent do you pay unto him? flinch not, nor start away,
but say, what Rent have you ever paid unto God? Must every one have their due
but God? can thou please him only with fair words, or content him with naked
promises? Can you pay unto men their Pounds, and cannot you pay unto God his
Pepper-corn? what? deny your Maker his pepper-corn? why, what is this
pepper-corn? I answer; It Is contained in one verse, Psalm. 50. last. He that
offers praise, glorifieth me, and he that orders his conversation aright,
to him will I show the Salvation of God.

Your Rent then consists in Holy Worship, and Holy Walking. When you sit down
to meal and rise; my Rent, says God. Be sure he have cordial praises, that you
adore him in your hearts; See your tongue be the faithful Messenger of your
very heart: so when you lie down and rise up, when you go out and come in
again; in all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy steps: but
this is not all your Rent, you live by him, you must live for him, if you ever
mean to live with him. Go to then, speak, and act for God to the utmost of your
Capacity. The little you can do for God, do it with all your might; If God
will take his rent in thoughts, in words, and in deeds, that cost you nothing,
O grudge it not, delay it not. Cry out, Lord, I am a poor man, but here is my
Rent at my day. Well done good and faithful Servant, Thou have been faithful in
a little, I will make thee Ruler over much. Whereas if Gods Rent be neglected,
he will either strain upon thee here, by some severe cross or other, or take
out all his Arrears in Hell, Where the worm dies not, and where the fire is
not quenched.

Keep up therefore your daily sacrifices unto God, both alone and with your
family, and there always offer an upright, humble and holy heart: praises and
prayers from thence will be prevalent with the Lord: I say, both alone, and
with your family, and especially on the Sabbath. About each of which, it will
be necessary to enlarge a little.

1. Some Rent you have to pay alone; for 1. In your Closets.
this, the Scripture is as clear as can be, Mat. 6.6. When thou prayest, enter
into thy closet; and when thou have shut the door, pray to thy Father which is
in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly. And
to this agrees the practice of Jesus Christ, and of the Saints in Scripture;
witness, Genesis 32.24. Nehem. 1.4. Dan. 9.3. Mark 1.35. And Reason it self
persuades, seeing that each of you have secret sins, secret wants, and secret
affairs with God, which require private converse between God and your Souls.

I do not resolve, that this Duty is indispensable twice a day, but I assert,
that the neglect of it, when opportunity may be gotten, argues a profane
spirit; and the conscionable practice thereof is a great argument of
sincerity: And in short, he that loves not, uses not secret prayer, yea and
meditation, and self-examination, shall never be rewarded openly. Footsteps
also of the use thereof, in the Morning are, Psalm. 5.3. And in the Evening,
Psalm. 141.2.

2. An Household Rent also daily must be 2. In your Families.
paid; I mean a sacrifice in and with your family; for it is not enough you
pray for them, but you must pray with them: So Josh. 24.15. I and my house will
serve the Lord. For the clearing in some measure, and settling this family
worship, too much neglected in the Husbandmans house, let these Propositions be
laid down:

1. God is not only to be worshipped on A discourse about Family Duties.
the Lords day, but every day. This is not only typified, but proved, Exodus
29.38. Two Lambs of the first year, day by day continually. Wherein, though the
offering was ceremonial, yet the time was moral, there being as much reason for
the Christians offering every day, as for the Jews. And as works of necessity
have room in Gods day, so Prayers and Duties of necessity may command room in
our days, especially seeing we have daily wants, sins, and mercies, and cannot
tell what a day may bring forth.

2. God is not only to be worshipped alone in a family, but jointly and
together. For every Christian family should be a little Church; like that, Romans
16.5. Now it is not enough, that the members of the Church worship God alone,
but it ought to be done together, The same reason holds in a family; namely,
for mutual Edification, that the stronger may help the weaker, and that all may
worship without fail. It is also much for the Honor ofGod, that many join in
his service. And the very tenor of that pattern of Prayer, Mat. 6.11. runs
plural, Our Father, which art in Heaven. And proves beside, that daily prayer
ought to be used by diverse together, Give us this day our daily bread.

3. The fittest time for family worship, is, Morning and Evening. This time of
worshipping in general, the light of Nature it self dictates. The morning and
evening being such signal periods of time, as do in their own Nature intimate
to man religious duty then to be done. Prayer being the Key to unlock the
Blessings of the Day, and to lock up the Dangers of the Night; for alas we walk
upon barrels of Gunpowder in the Day, our snares are so many; and we lie in
the shadow of death at Night, our dangers are so great.

Also at those times, we have most opportunity for such work, and therefore
when the Lord orders Parents to teach their Children, Deuteronomy. 6.6. he times it
thus, When you lie down, and when you rise up. And the Scripture also makes it
manifest, Exodus 29.39. Also Numb. 28.4. The one Lamb shall thou offer in the
Morning, and the other Lamb at Evening. And thus the Tribes, Acts 26.7. are
said to serve God instantly night and day, that is, evening and morning. By
which, things soberly considered, together with the practice of Gods people, as
a Commentary thereupon, you may evidently see, That to worship God in your
families morning and evening is the will of God; it is your duty, nay it is
your privilege.

And now to return to the Husbandman: This being his Duty, no excuse can clear
him, no plea can excuse him from paying this chief rent to the most High. His
inability and ignorance in prayer cannot help him; for one sin can be no excuse
for another. Besides, there are Helps for the weak, till strength come. And
above all, the Holy Ghost is a very present Help, to all that ask him; and a
sense of sin and danger will soon untie your tongues, and make you, if not
eloquent, yet effectual in your prayers.

Want of time, or abundance of business, can be no excuse; for a man must have
time to eat, and sleep, and pray, whatever business stay. If any thing fall
out, that will not let you stay to eat, in that case perhaps you may omit your
prayer; provided you pray as well as feed the heartier next time, and are truly
sorry for your disappointment. And you must believe, or else you have not a
faith to save you, that God can and will make you amends for all the time is
spent about your souls; see Mat. 22.25. and tremble for your neglects.

The backwardness of your relations and families will be no excuse. For Abraham
did, and every Child of Abraham must, command their Children and their
household, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19. lest God
observing you can command, and keep them to their work, but cannot command them
to Prayer, see through your hypocrisy, and pour out that dreadful curse upon
you, [from which the Lord bless the poor Husbandmans house!] Jer. 10.25. Pour
out thy fury upon the Heathen, and upon the families that call not on thy name.
Set immediately therefore on your duty, with sorrow for your former neglects,
and a settled resolution for the time to come, and be assured that God will meet
and bless you as he has promised, and what you take in hand shall prosper. Our
work on earth is done best, when our work in heaven is done first. The
Philosopher could say, he Aristippus ap. Platon de ^ranq. animae.
had rather neglect his means, than his mind, and his farm, than his soul. And
remember good Job, though his charge and business was far greater than yours,
yet Job 1.5. was constant in his religious duties; Thus did Job continually.

3. And then for the Sabbath. Remember 3. On the Sabbath.
it before it comes, to pant after it, and prepare for it. Dismiss your
business a little sooner, the day before, and discharge the very thoughts
thereof till the Sabbath be past. Let not the love of one sin enter with you
into that holy ground, but wash your hands in innocence, and so compass the
Altars of God.

And bless the Lord, good Husbandman, with all thy soul, That God has given
thee so merciful a release from the labors of thy body, and withal blessed thee
with a harvest day for thy soul. And in thankfulness to God, in love to Jesus
Christ, and in care of thy poor soul, rise up betime, and work hard for eternal
life. Let no business of the world be done that day, which might have been done
before, or may be done after without plain prejudice. Command thy family from
vain straggling, or foolish sports, and let them spend that day in Gods house,
and in thy own. Examine them of the state of their souls, of their proficiency
that day, and seriously catechize the younger sort in the Principles of
Religion. Be resolute against worldly discourse with your Neighbors, and with
a Christian dexterity carry the stream thereof the other way. Lose not a minute
of that precious time, make it as long a day as any of the rest, and when it is
done, long for another Sabbath.

And now you have the Rules, see you be ruled by them. It may be your ease to
slight them, but it will be your safety to observe them. O that you would fall
to practice, else I lose my labor, and you lose your comforts. O that Parents
would tell these to their Children, and in-still them as you do the Rules of
your Husbandry. As breaking Rules turned the first Husbandman out of Paradise,
so keeping Rules would bring you into Paradise again. I beseech you remember,
that we preach not to be applauded, but to be obeyed; and the hearing of these
things without doing of them, will make you completely miserable. And therefore
review them, study them, practice them.

SECT. X.. 10.

ANd now we are at shore, and nothing The Conclusion.
remains save matter of Practice. God forbid these things should be written or
read in vain. We can but reach the ear or eye. He that has his Pulpit in
Heaven, can teach the heart. The real profit and comfort of the poor Husbandman
I design, O disappoint not me, deceive not your selves, (...) not God. These
truths will help either to mend or end you.

Let the Lawfulness of this Calling satisfy you. Though it be painful yet it is
lawful, and see you use it lawfully. The Law is good and so is Husbandry, if a
man use it lawfully. God has made it lawful, do not by your abuse make it
sinful.

Let the Excellencies of it refresh you; you have your Difficulties, and you
have you^ Dignities, and God has set the one against the other. A Christian
Husbandman is better than a Pagan King. Bless the Lord therefore, that though
thy life be full of pains, yet thy lines are fallen in pleasant places. Think
in the midst of thy sweat and toil; It Is better to be a plowman in the field,
than a beggar at the door. I might have been begging at the door; Alas, I might
have been frying faggots in Hell.

Let the Inconveniences in your Calling humble you. If it were not for these,
pride would creep into the plow - man's house. If you should have your will, God
would not have his will, and therefore sit down content. It is better be kept
sweet in the brine of tribulation, than rot in the honey of prosperity; you
must have some thorns laid in your bed, least you should sleep too sweetly
here, and forget your Heaven.

Let the Temptations you hear of in your Calling arm you. Put on your spiritual
armor, wind up your spiritual watch: for the first Husbandman that ever was,
fell by temptation, and the second too, and you must stand by watchfulness. If
you go out without your weapons, you will come in without your Garments, 1 Pet.
5.8. Be sober, be vigilant, for your adversary the Devil goes about roaring,
seeking whom he may devour. The greatest part of men live, as if there were no
Devil to tempt at all: gird about you the sword of the spirit, which is the
word of God, so shall you not be led into temptation, but delivered from evil.

Let the Lessons you have heard exercise you; You Will make the best of every
thing, do so in this. That Is a good Chymick that can extract Gold out of Sand:
but that is a good Husbandman that can get Heaven out of Earth. Thou have had a
wicked habit to suck poison out of flowers, O get a gracious habit to suck
honey out of weeds: speak no more of the difficulty or impossibility thereof;
if you were hired with Gold for every Celestial thought, you would study for
more of them: you have fed too long upon the shell, feast now upon the kernel.
A good hearing, when you come home at night, and say, Wife I have learned one
lesson from my Ground, Cattle, etc. this day.

And then practice the Graces for your Calling. Seek first the Kingdom of God;
else you will be the Worlds drudge here, that is sad; and the Devils drudge in
hell, that is worse: you will be poor here, and poor for ever; you will take pains
now, and suffer pains hereafter: Yea, your very plowing will be sin, Prove.
21.4. What an hell is this to be working all day, and yet sinning all day?
Shine therefore in the Graces of your Calling. Brown bread, and the Grace of
God are good fare, Rags and Christ's Righteousness are good Clothing; a straw
bed, and a good Conscience are good Lodging.

Let the Abuses in your Calling warn you to beware them. Adam had your Calling
in it is prime, but he abused it, and lost it: and if abuses crept into the
Garden, they will walk into the Field much more. Watch then before, least you
wail after; if you will not watch on earth, you will wail in hell.

Let the foresaid Ends of your Calling act you. At the beginning of every year,
of every week, of every day, level your ends afresh, as you have been directed:
So will you please God the more, and profit your selves never the less: then
every Charre you do, will be a work for God; and though you fail in your
subordinate ends, yet you will never fail in your supreme end. You have a mean
Calling, you had need of Noble aims; a Celestial end ennobles a Terrene
employment.

Let the Rules rule you, and let these truths live and die with you. Let me say
to you as that great Lawgiver did, Deuteronomy. 32.46, 47. Set your hearts unto all
the words which I testify among you this day, which ye shall command your
Children to observe to do; for it is not a vain thing for you, because it is
your life, and through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the Land. When
Lycurgus had compiled some excellent Laws for his Commonwealth, he binds all
his Citizens in an Oath, that they should exactly observe them until his
return; whereupon he willingly went into perpetual Exile, that they by virtue
of their Oath might for ever be obliged to their observation. Will you my
Candid Hearers, and you the Readers also of these things enter into a Covenant,
and firm resolution, faithfully to perform these practical Directions laid
before you; so should I the more cheerfully submit to an Exile for term of
life, so that we might meet in that better Paradise, whence we shall be driven
out no more, and where the weary Husbandmen are at Rest.

FINIS.

