THE GOOD MASTERS PLEA, AGAINST THE EVIL SERVANTS CAVIL. Discovering the
vanity of those men, who judge the Service of God to be vain. Delivered in
certain Sermons upon MALACHI, 3.14. Being a taste of the labors of that
reverend, faith full, and holy servant of God, Nicholas Stanton, M. of Arts;
late Preacher of the Gospel of Christ, at the Parish of Margarets in Ipswich,
in Suffolk.

MALACHI, 1.10. Who is there even among you that would shut the doors for
naught? neither do ye kindle fire on mine Altar for naught.

LONDON, Printed for William Weekly, and are to be sold at his shop at
Ipswich, and John Rothwell at the Sign of the Fountain and Sun in Paul's
Churchyard. 1650.

TO The Right Worshipful the Bayliffes, Burgesses, with the rest of the
inhabitants of the Town of IPSWICH, And in particular, to the Authors
Christian Auditors.
Worthy, and well-esteemed friends,
THat general, and good respect, which the author of this treatise, found
amongst you, whilst he was living, has well persuaded us, that the reviving,
of any little piece of his, would be very welcome after his death.

The restoring of a dead man to life, 2 King. 13.21.
by the touch of the Prophet's bones, was an extraordinary, (and indeed, no
less then a miraculous) putting forth, of the power of God; and therefore, no
sufficient ground, for the common preserving, (much less, for the
superstitious adoring,) of the bodily relics, of Saints departed.

Yet we must needs acknowledge, that great reviving, which many drooping
hearts, have found, and felt, by the Spiritual relics, of Gods faithful
servants, in works of this nature; as it holds forth, a sweet manifestation of
the Grace of God, going along with the endeavors of his servants; so, is it no
less warrant, for the preserving, and publishing, such Posthumes as these,
whereby the authors, being dead, Heb. 11.4.
do yet speak, and (after a sort) outlive themselves; putting also a kind of
new life, into their dearest friends who (being most deeply affected with their
death,) could have found in their hearts, to have said with Thomas, (if the
will of the Lord had been so, Joh. 11.16
) let us also go, that we may dye with him: I say, the resurrection of their
labors [before hand,] (which did seem to have been buried with them,) does
not a little revive their friends, Io. 11.23, 24.
and is next in comfort to the resurrection of their Bodies [at the last day, 1
These. 4.13.14, etc.
] or to the assurance of the happy condition of their Souls, in the mean time.

For this cause, we were not a little encouraged, to bring this child of
light, into public view; being well assured, that all such as loved the
parents, will be very glad to see the face of it; And, if it should happen
(which is the sad case of many a poor Orphan) to meet with hard usage, from the
hands, and tongues of such, as use to show little kindness, either to the
living, or to the dead; we make no question but that great Lord Protector,
whose service it plead's for, will also plead for it; and (under him) we are
bold to commit it to your care, and patronage.

The work it self, speaks much of the mind, and spirit of him, that composed
it; and is like the sweet sent of a perfuming Candle, which continues a great
while after the Candle it self is put forth, and removed out of the room. It
is a work fit for these times, wherein the eyes of too man's professors, are so
dazzled with looking up to their privileges, they know not how to look down
to their duties. Heb. 13.2.


The author was (like Moses) a faithful Servant in the house of God; and we
are persuaded his maine design was, to draw Others (also) from the vassalage
of Satan, to the service of God; Act. 26.18.
in which work, Phil. 4.1.
God has crowned his endeavors with so many seals of his ministry, 1 Cor.
9.2.
(as well amongst your-selves, as in other places) that if we should hold our
peace, Luke 19.40.
many stony hearts, (converted into flesh, and made children of Abraham,) Mat.
3.9.
would speak to the praise of Gods grace, in this useful instrument.

In the opening, and applying of this Scripture, he has notably discovered,
the vanity of those men, who judge it a vain thing, to serve God. It is most
true, 1 Cor. 15.33.
that evil words, (much more evil principles in the heart,) do corrupt good
manners.

The activity, or, unactivity of men [ outwardly,] does most certainly spring,
from internal principles, most deeply rooted, and closely rivetted, in their
spirits: amongst the rest, a world of hurt is done, by this one common, and
hurtful principle in the World, [it is in vain to serve God.]

What makes men, either so desperately Active, for the worst of Masters, or so
shamefully unactive, for the best; but this secret persuasion, that comes not
of him, Gal. 5.8.
that calls them?

Now, we know, a disease, clearly discovered, in the cause, is in the highway
of cure. The wisdom, and spiritual skill, of this heavenly physician, Pro.
20.27.
has much appeared in this kind; who by the candle of the Lord, has made so
deep search into the privy Chambers of the Soul, and most inward thoughts of
men, that, by the clear discovery, of the guil, and self-deceit of their
hearts in the service of God, they might be thoroughly convinced of the error of
their ways, 1 Cor. 14.25.
and so the secrets of their hearts being made manifest, they might fall down
on their faces, and worship God, reporting that God is in his Ordinance of a
truth.

If the communicating these labors, may (through Gods blessing) conduce to
that happy end, (as, we are assured it was the maine aim of this faithful
Steward, in preaching of them) so we hope, it shall be our utmost end, in the
publishing thereof.

For this cause, Ephesians. 3.14.
we desire to bow our knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and to
beg of you, that the Authors Plantation, 1 Cor. 3.6.
may be watered by your Prayers, and tears also, that God giving the increase,
his name may have the Glory, of all that Service, which is done in obedience to
his commands, and his poor servants may enjoy the comfort, of all his precious
promises, Isa. 45.19.
who never said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain.

By the grace, and in the strength of this God, we are bold to engage our
selves, 2 Cor. 8.5.4, 5.
first to the Lord, and then unto you by the will of God,

Your Servants for Jesus sake, Matthew Lawrence, Robert Stansbye, Isaac Basil.


To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
THou shall find, 1 Samuel 14.18. Absolon having no son to keep his name in
remembrance, he set up a Pillar; this Godly Author, (whose modesty was far
enough of from affectation of Printing as all know, that knew him) having no
natural issue, ( though spiritually he brought forth many sons and daughters
unto God) his Pious Consort (while others are building Sepulchers to their
fathers and Husbands) erects him this Pillar and Monument; both for matter, and
form, of his own providing and hewing, by the help of Gods spirit while he
lived; a Monument more lasting then that of Brass and Marble: It was found in
his study, written out with his own hand (by importunity of a friend) for
private use; but as the wine was found in the Cluster of Grapes, Isa. 65.8.
and one said destroy it not, there is a blessing in it; so such as saw it,
much desired the publication of it; And his Yoak-fellow (it being a I'hoenix
springing out of his ashes, and the true child of such a father) dare not (
with the careless Mother) suppress and smother it, but call in help, 1 King.
3.19.
to hand it forth for Public use, ( which else had been stilborne, and never
seen the light,) that so he might live though dead, and that lasting Posterity
might rise up and call him blessed. honey dropped and lay upon the ground, and
Saul had kept the People by an Oath from eating; but Jonathan coming, and
tasting thereof with the end of his rod, was much revived and refreshed,
blaming his father for restraining the people; surely the people under this
godly man's ministry, were brought to a place of much honey, where the word
dropped abundantly, and was sweeter then honey, and the honey-combe, where many
a fainting and weary soul was cheered, and comforted; and you that do but
taste (as with the end of a rod) how good and gracious the Lord is, by this
little piece of him (who otherwise was abundant in labors) will lay blame
(some-where) that you are kept from more of it, (you will find such sweetness
in it) and think the Church has wrong that she wants any of her treasure; but
be assured (Reader whoever thou art) that no Ananias and Sapphira-like spirit
has held any of it back, but (that which has been a cause why the labors of
many godly Ministers have been buried with them) a necessity from the
closeness and shortness of his notes and hand, which have made it not only
difficult, but almost impossible to Midwife them into the world; and if any
imperfect Copy should be thrust forth, Genesis 38.29.
the breach be upon them; Know it comes not polished from the Authors pen, and
is of quicker delivery, then that any skilful hand could come at it. His spent
pains and labors (together with himself) are now with the Lord, finding (what
here he has taught) that his labor was not in vain in the Lord; he was a
burning and a shining light while he lived, a workman that needed not be
ashamed, and this his work will praise him in the Gates; it carries its own
letters of commendation, and if thine eye be single, to judge righteous
judgment, thou will find it full of heartbreaking, conscience-convincing, and
soule-incouraging truths, in plain and familiar, (but heavenly and spiritual)
dress: and while others are busy in tying and untying knots, spending time in
the brabbles and disputes of the times, which tend to strife, rather then
godliness, this holy servant of God, throws out the disputer of this world,
and like a good Spy, or Seer, he brings, and maintains a good report, of the
good old way of serving God; And though, possibly, there may not be wanting
some, that may call them low and legal things, not savouring (as they use to
say) of the Gospel spirit of these times; to such we answer; as Moses had his
Jannes and Jambres; Exodus 17.11. 2 Timothy 3.5. and 8.
and Paul met with some, that had a form of Godliness but denied the power
thereof: men of corrupt minds that withstood the truth; 2 Timothy 1.7.
so it may now fall out: but if thou have a spirit of love, and of a sound
mind, and have been nourished up in the words of faith, 1 Timothy 4.6, 7.
and of good doctrine, which thou have continually followed, exercising thy
self unto godliness, thou will eat and bless God, and bless his counsel;
thou will find it very profitable, if the fault be not thine own; eat, and
digest the roll, and let it be sweet in thy belly, and despise not the day of
small things; pray that the Lord of the harvest, would thrust forth more such
laborers, and that he would teach, and tell thee how vain all things else
are, but to serve God, and that godliness only is true gain: and if any man
teach otherwise, and consents not to the doctrine that is according to
godliness, he is puffed up, and knows nothing, but doteth about questions, and
strife of words, from whence comes envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings,
froward disputations of men of corrupt minds, destitute of the truth, which
think that gain is godliness, from such turn away. But lest we unmannerly
make thee stand too long at the door, ere we bid thee come into the house, we
beg thy prayers, and are thine in the service of the Gospel.

Matthew Lawrence, Robert Stansbye, Isaac Basil.


THE GOOD MASTERS PLEA, AGAINST THE EVIL SERVANTS CAVIL.
MALACHI, 3.14. Ye have said, it is vain to serve God.


THe Author, and Pen man, of this Book, (being the last of the first Testament)
was the Prophet Malachi; who was one of those (even the last of those) three
Prophets, that the Lord raised up for the help of his Church, and benefit of
his people, after that long and sore captivity which they had been in, and now
but newly delivered out of: and though they had been in a hot furnace, yet were
they not purged from their dross. There were two sins which the Prophet does
now especially charge upon them.

1. Slighting of Gods Services, and Ordinances.

2. Cavilling at his ways, and speeches.

Strange sins to be found, especially, in such a people, at such a time:

It might well have bin expected from this people, especially now, coming so
lately out of such sore troubles, that they should have laid their hands upon
their mouths, and have justified the Lord in all his proceedings; that they
should have been even hungry of offering Sacrifice, and glad of opportunity to
have done God service; resolving after this manner; well, seeing the Lord has
been so good to us, as to deliver us, out of the hands of our enemies, we will
resolve, to serve him, in holiness, and righteousness, all the remnant of our
days; and seeing we have wanted, our former opportunities of doing God
service, and offering him sacrifice, but have them (now) restored us again, we
will now double our diligence, time, cost, and pains, in serving of him.

These, and the like expressions, might well have been expected to have come
from this people, as, from such as come out of affliction; but as it is nothing
thus with many others, so neither was it with these; which were not only soon
weary of Gods service themselves, but (in their hearts at least) condemned it,
as fruitless and unprofitable for any others, for which (as here) they are
reproved; ye have said, it is vain to serve God.

These words are an answer, to their cavil, or a fresh accusation, and reply
upon their stout selfe-justifications in the former words, verse 13. What have
we spoken so much against thee? Diverse doctrines the words afford, -- as 1.
That Carnal hearts are full of proud cavils at Gods ways, Mat. 25.24. etc. 2.
That the Lord takes notice what hard thoughts men have of himself, and his
ways.

But letting them pass, observe this.

That carnal hearted people do judge the serving of God in exactness, to be
but a vain thing; or, that, they account the true service of God, to be but a
vain service.

1. I say carnal hearts do thus judge, [ye have said;] The Lord did not intend
to charge all this people with this crime, nor yet any of those, whose hearts
were upright with him, for they esteemed far otherwise of the service of God;
as appeared by their practice in the 16. verse; only, he intended, such as
were in outward covenant with him, who though they were [in] Israel, were not
[of] Israel: Again, I add, that they judge the exact serving of God to be
vain: they will acknowledge a necessity of serving God (take it in their way
and fashion) they will give it in charge to their children, and servants, when
they go to bed; Sirs, have a care and serve God, if you do not serve God, he
will not bless you, etc. But to be so exact, and precise, in serving of God, to
be so strict in keeping of his Ordinances, and in walking mournefully before
the Lord of Hosts, (as these words are partly expounded by those that follow
them) this way of serving the Lord, is every where spoken against by Carnal
hearts, as here. It is vain to serve God.

Nay, it will be no hard thing to prove, that to serve God at all; or that the
service of God in general, is held by them, to be but a vain thing and if this
be proved, the other will follow much more, as being included therein: and this
is the thing that I shall first endeavor, for the further conviction of carnal
hearts, that hereby they may see themselves, and their conditions. True, it may
be they will not believe it, and it may be they do not think, that they think
so; but, they do not know their hearts, as the Psalmist said of those wicked
men Psalm. 49.11. that their inward thought is so, and so. viz. that their
houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations,
etc. -- He seems to distinguish, between thought and thought, an outward and
an inward thought, their uppermost thought, that lies next the understanding,
and conscience, [and that is otherwise,] but there is another thought, that
lies beneath and under this, which they know not themselves [and that is, thus,
that, it is in vain, to serve God.] The truth of this is proved from Job.
21.15. what is the alnighty we should serve him? and what profit should we
have, if we pray to him? and from Isay 58.3. wherefore have we fasted and thou
see it not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul and thou take no
knowledge? And it is further cleared, and confirmed, by these evidences, or
evidenced by these particulars.

1. By their wilful and total omission of some known required duties, so
(except it be some strait-laced hypocrite one of a thousand) there is not a
carnal heart to be found, but may be taken tardy this way.

The Pharisees, as strict as they were, yet lived in the constant omission of
known required duties; and those of the chiefest sort: whereupon our Savior
told them, that, these things they ought to have done, being things of most
weight.

And that they laid aside the commandment of God. Mark 7.8.


As a man buying a large bargain, does pick, and choose, when he comes at that
which does not like him, he lays it aside, and will none of it; this is not
good, says he, I do not like this. So did they, and so do all carnal hearts;
when a Commandment from God comes at them requiring a duty, which they do not
like, they lay such a Commandment aside, as if it were an useless
Commandment, that it were in vain to obey such a commandment, that either no
reward would come in for keeping that Commandment, or not enough to
countervaile that pains, and loss, that would follow upon the keeping and
obeying of it.

And this is evidence clear enough, to prove, that in their hearts, they
think, that the whole service of God is in vain; for did they think
otherwise of the service in general, they would think otherwise, of the
several acts, and parts of the service; did they really believe, that there
were reward in keeping of any of Gods Commandments, they would also believe a
reward for keeping all, and every one.

And therefore, as he that breaks wilfully, and constantly, one point of the
Law, is guilty of the breach of the whole Law: so, they that are guilty of
judging the service of the Lord vain in any one particular, are guilty of
Judging it so to be, in the general.

They then that do omit, and neglect, prayer in the morning, do in their
hearts think it in vain to pray in the evening, etc.

Others there are, that will choose to do things that are vain, rather then be
employed in any part of Gods service; how will they spend their time? some
playing, others sleeping and ideling aaway their time, doing either nothing, or
that, that is next to nothing, and worse then nothing, rather then serve God:
is not this a clear case, that these people do think it to be vain to serve
God, or else they would not do, as they do.

Secondly, the truth in hand, appears, by their slighty performing of those
duties that they do undertake; dealing with God deceitfully, as they in Acts
5.1.2. and turning the Lord off with any thing, as these people reproved in the
text; of whom see Chap. 1.13. Mal. 13.
ye brought that which was torn, lame, and sick, says the Lord: when they had
a beast that was worried, baited, and bitten, that it was in danger to
miscarry, and dye; or good for little or nothing, that, they brought and
offered in sacrifice. Yea? will the Lord put us to such cost, and charge? and
must we of necessity offer him so many sacrifices? is there no shift for it?
etc.

Well, we will come off as good cheap as we can, he shall have the very worst we
have, those that are worth least to be sold, will we offer: now their offering
such sacrifices as these, showed that in their hearts they thought it in vain
to offer any at all; that they were but lost, and cast away, for, had they
believed that the Lord would have rewarded them for their services, and
satisfied them fully for their Sacrifices, that they should not have been
loosers by any thing that they had offered, he should then have had the very
best that they had; knowing that the better any thing is that they offer to
God, the greater is the reward that God will give to them for it. For this will
make a soul free for God; As David, who knowing what a bountiful paymaster the
Lord was, would not offer him sacrifice, 2 Samuel 24.24.
of that which should cost him nothing. -- Why? just thus, do earnal hearts in
doing the Lord service (as these people did in offering him sacrifice) they
bring him the torn, blind, and lame.

Yea, is there no help, but I must do duties hear, pray, repent, give alms,
and the like; well then, I Will shift as as well as I can; if I must hear, I Will
hear at my leisure, when I have little else to do.

If I must give, it shall be of that which I got by usury, bribery, or the like.

If I must pray in my family, it shall be the last thing I do immediately
before I go to bed, being half asleep and half awake. If I must repent, I will
do it when I am ready to dye, and go out of the world, when I feel the house
crack, and it be ready to tumble down about my ears, then will I seek out for
another habitation: and so for other duties.

This is the practice of carnal hearts, thus to turn the Lord off with the
worst, which is a clear evidence against them, that they Judge his service, to
be but vain service.

weariness in their serving the Lord, though in a slighty and formal manner;
as this people in that place before named, are charged with this very thing,
Malac. 1.13.
ye have said, what a weariness is it, and ye have snuffed at it. etc.

And thus are carnal hearts soonest weary; though in some regard they have by
far the least cause.

Of all men, one would think, that these people, should not be weary of
serving the Lord, that are at so little pains, and cost, and so formal therein.

It might rather be thought, that the people of God, which do so put out
themselves, and spend their spirits in the service of the Lord, that they,
should rather be weary, then such as are slighty, and formal therein, turning
the Lord off with lip-labor, and bodily exercise. And it is true indeed, if
weariness in the service of God, did arise from the expense of Spirits, then
the godly should be sooner weary, then those that are carnal; but, indeed,
this is not the cause of it; but rather, a dislike of the service it self,
from an indisposition in the heart (being carnal) to a duty, or service, that
is of a spiritual nature; hence it is, that the people of God (who love the
service of God) after such time as they have been much with God in the duties
of his service, and have both wearyed their bodies, and wasted their strength
and spirits, yet delighting in the Law, and Service of God after the innerman,
are not yet weary of the duty or service it self, but wish that they had fresh
strength and Spirits. For it is one thing, to be weary in the service of God,
and another thing to be weary of the service of God.

The first may befall a gracious heart, or child of God, but the latter, is the
property of those that are only carnal.

And again, there is much difference between that wearisomnesse, that arises
from inabilities to hold out any longer in the duty or service, and that which
springs from a dislike of the duty or service it self; both in the
affections, from that contrariety that is in the heart (being carnal) to the
duty or service (as spiritual,) as also, in the judgment, from secret fears
and thoughts of losing its labor, and so being in vain.

The earnal heart is weary of the service of God in this last manner, as well as
in the first, and that upon this last ground also, whereby the truth in hand is
evidenced.



By those base and hard thoughts which they secretly harbor of such as serve
God more, and better then themselves; this is a thing very commonly found in
carnal hearts, (and who will serve God a little) to be bitter in censuring of
them that serve him much, those that keep their times and go their pace and are
of their Last and strain, they can like well enough.

But such as exceed them, they suspect for too much niceness; what? will not
common Prayers please them? but they must have conceived Prayer? will not
praying with others, and in the family suffice? but they must Pray alone, and
in their closets? will not one Sermon a day content them? but they must hear all
day long? and are not Sermons on the Sunday sufficient, but they must run to
Sermons, and Lectures in the week too? etc. Thus condemning the generation of
the righteous, and such as are better then themselves.

These thoughts and speeches proceed from carnal hearts, which conceive in
themselves, that the service of God is altogether in vain: for, if they did
really believe, that it were good, and profitable to serve God a little, then
it would follow even by the rule of common reason, that it is much better to
serve him more, and so still the more, the better.

Take a man which believes, that such a work or Trade is gainefull, and
profitable, though he himself cannot work, or earne that way, by reason of
age, or infirmities, yet will not he condemn those that can, and do; but will
bless them and their condition; wishing that he were in the same, himself.
Alas (says he) I am grown old, my sight and strength decays, that my work is
gone, I can make no earnings but lose my time, etc.

Oh, but such, or such, they are happy, for they can work, and earne; I am glad
that others can, though J cannot; but I would I could work, for I know it is
profitable work, and will bring in great advantage to him that labors in it,
whereas another, it may be, slights that work, and trade, and condemns them of
folly, that follow it most: and all out of ignorance, and that, because they
think it, to be but labor in vain. Thus it is concerning the service of the
Lord, and the trade of godliness, those that are truly godly will rejoice that
others serve God, and can do it better then themselves. I am a poor ignorant
creature, a dwarf and a nurling and grow very slowly, but I am glad to see
others grow: my Spirit is straightened, and bound up, but others are large hearted
for God, and God lets out himself to others, though he be a stranger to my
Soul; I am hard hearted, and cannot mourn for my own, or others sins; and for
the afflictions of Gods Church, and people; which I, ought to do, but cannot;
Oh, but such, or such, they can do these things; well: blessed be God, I am
glad that any body can do thus. Oh! that J could do so too; this is an
evidence of a gracious heart, that knows the service of God to be a profitable
service; but on the contrary, such as speak, or think otherwise, as formerly
was said, they think the service of God to be but a vain service, and this
does clearly evidence their hearts to be but carnal.

Thus for the proof of the Doctrine, now follow the Grounds of Reasons, why
carnal hearts do Judge the service of God to be but vain.

Psalm. 14.1. The fool has said in his heart there is no God, so) many such
there be even amongst us, who though they do not verbally deny it, yet they
do not really and cordially believe it; for though this be one of those moral
principles that are engraven upon the heart of man by nature, which can never
be utterly blotted out, yet (as others, so) this lies up as a dead principle in
the Soul, and stirs little till it be enlivened; and then, they making
question, whether there be such a God to serve or no, no marvel though they
judge, and condemn the service of that God to be in vain, when the worshippers
of Baal spent much time, and pains in praying, offering of sacrifice, and
cutting themselves with Knives and Lancers, and continued thus doing all the
day, from morning till noone, and from noone till night, the Prophet that stood
by, mocked at them, and derided them; and the reason why he did so, was, because
he knew that there was no such God, as they seemed to serve, none such to hear,
and help, as they called and cried unto; and that therefore what they did was
in vain. Now that which Elijah the true servant of the true God, did to those
Priests, servants, and worshippers of Baal: the servants of Baal, of the world
and sin, do to the servants of the true God, and that upon the self same
ground (though they be mistaken.) When these carnal hearted creatures, and
atheistical spirits, look upon the faithful servants of God, and see what
time they spend, and what pains they take, in the service of the Lord, calling
and crying to the Lord by fervent Prayer, cutting, I mean rending and tearing
their hearts, by repentance, and humiliation: and that so long, and constantly
from the morning of their youth, to the noon tide of their manhood, and from
the noone tide of their middle age, till the evening of their life, etc. where
carnal hearts behold these things (I say) they secreetly mock at the servants
of God, for doing thus, as thinking in their hearts, that their labor is but
lost, and in vain; because they make question whether there be any such God to
serve or no, which if there were not, then it were in vain indeed, and though
there be, yet they questioning the truth of it, these things must needs seem
in vain to them.

Secondly, They think the service of the Lord to be a vain service, because
it is in vain to them, they are never the better for any of Gods service, which
they do, and therefore they think that no body else is; they get nothing at
the table of the Lord, nor at the throne of grace, but come away as dead
hearted, with their corruptions as strong, and they continuing as ignorant of
the my steries of Christ and life, and as unable to pray, or do God any
service, as formerly; and therefore it being thus with them, they think, it is
thus with every body else, yea, that there is no such good, as men speak of,
to be gotten in any part of Gods service. And the truth is, they dare do no
otherwise, then give entertainment, to these kind of thoughts (being suggested
to them by Satan) hereby to prevent that condemning sentence, which their own
consciences, would be ready to pass upon them, for their unprofitablenesse in
Gods service. For should they admit of this for a truth, that there were so
much good to be got in duties, and ordinances, then would conscience be upon
them, and demand why they do then get no more good thereby, and so make them
call into question the truth, and uprightness of their hearts, and the manner
of their performing duties, and doing of God service. Which to prevent, as also
to save themselves in the esteem of others (so far as they can) they cast
this imputation, upon the service of God it self. servants, that having wasted
their wages by some riotous courses, or secret haunts of expense, to save their
credits with their friends, and such as would else be ready to tax them, for
ill husbandry, in coming away without clothes on their backs, or money in
their purse, they, to save their credit, and avoid blame, unjustly accuse, that
service they dwelt in, and say that it is a stroying and wasting service, [much
work, and little wages,] that there is nothing to be gotten in it, and the
like; thinking thereby, to escape free from blame, which (it is true) they may
do, with those that know not the service, but not with those that know how
good and profitable a service it is.

Thus do carnal hearts, with the service of God, and the duties of it,
thinking, and saying, it is but vain, to save themselves; and whereas, they
cannot deny, but that some others, do thrive, and grow better, and more then
themselves, they will not acknowledge this, to be, from the duties of Gods
service, but rather from some other thing: as for instance, when they see
others grow in knowledge, and parts, whilst themselves remain, still grossly
ignorant, they will not acknowledge, that they got this, by attending upon the
means, and ordinances, but rather impute it, to good education, to the
strength of their memories, and other abilities of their own, when they see
others have gotten power over their passions, and corruptions, whilst they
remain still hare-braind, and furious upon every slight occasion, that the
wagging of a straw, will make them off the hooks, and make them little better
then Bedlams, they will not ascribe any such grace, to be power received from
Jesus Christ, through any ordinance, but rather to the goodness of their
natures. Oh, they are of a more mild disposition then I am of, my nature is
hasty, I cannot help it, etc. -- Nay, rather then they will take shame to
themselves, they will lay the blame upon God, if for want of a true change in
the heart, they remain without the spirit of God, and the spirit of
supplication, that they are still children, and babes, and cannot speak in
Prayer, further then what they have gotten from others; then will they excuse
themselves, and say, that God does not give the spirit of Prayer to every one
alike; not considering that promise, of Gods giving his holy spirit, to them
that ask it, meaning aright; it is granted, that he does not give it a like to
all his people, but yet he gives it so to all, as it will be quickly
discernable to them that have it, even this way, as many other ways beside.

third ground or reason of carnal peoples Judging thus of the service of God,
as if it were in vain, is, because they see many of those, very negligent, and
careless herein, whom they much admire; great ones, and learned ones, whom
they Judge to be so wise, that they cannot be thus mistaken. -- And therefore,
when they see them careless in the duties of Gods service, that either they
use no prayer, nor duties in their families, or but seldom, or if constantly,
yet but in a slighty formal way; (so for hearing the word and other duties,
etc.) They begin to think, surely, these things are not so needful, this same
serving of God in this manner, is not so profitable, for if it were, certainly
such and such learned men and great Scholars, (that should know better what
belong to it then so,) would not omit these things as they do: thus as the
Apostle says of them in Jude, that they had some men's persons in admiration,
so some men's Judgments, and Practices, are had in admiration, and followed as
unerring patterns, and the judgments, and examples of these men, are more to
them, then all the precepts of God, not considering that of the Apostle 1 Cor.
1.26. not many wise, or great, or noble, are called.

fourth Reason, why carnal hearts Judge the service of God a vain service --
is, because, the Lord does many times defer the paying of his servants wages,
for the service which they do, for him, till afterward. --

God does not give them outward prosperity, it may be at all; and no marvel,
because as his Kingdom, is not of this world, so neither shall his servants
live, as in a Kingdom here; nay, it may be, they attain not, to that inward
joy, and peace, which they expect, and shall be sure of, at last; together,
with other parts, of their reward; which they are incapable of, whilst they
are here, only, they must stay, as those laborers for their penny, Mat. 20.
till night; so they for their reward till death.

Now carnal people, seeing nothing coming in, having no Bird in their hand,
and wanting faith, to believe, and patience to wait, give it over, as labor
lost, and pains to no purpose, that is taken in this service, like as in their
own doing service, to the Devil, because when they have sinned, Psalm. 50.
and God is so patient, as not to reprove and punish them, for the present they
think he never will; so in the doing of good, and serving the Lord, they
think, because it is not rewarded for the present, therefore it never will,
though yet the Lord has bound himself, by many promises, to reward them;
which bonds are good debts, and the Christians reversions, which are better
then the worldlings possessions.

objection, in the way, which must be removed, before we can proceed any
further; thus some, may say, if so many do think, the service of God to be in
vain, as you say do, why then do any, that are thus natural, and carnal,
keep Gods service, or do him any work at all? you will grant, that many which
are natural, and carnal, yet do much of Gods work, pray, preach, hear, etc.

And if they thought, that all which they did, were in vain, surely, they
would not do, as they do, to lose labor.

grounds, and reasons, of their doing God some work, and service, though yet in
their hearts they think it to be in vain, I will instance in two; the oneis,
that they are haled and forced hereunto, and that they can do no less; either,
the examples of others, or a habit, gotten by practice, or powerful
ordinances, making way, and work, for an enlightened conscience, not quite
benumbed, they are hereby, forced upon that service, of God, which of
themselves, they have no love unto; two men, that are friends, dwell together,
the one of them, having much work to do, calls to the other, to come and
help, happily he will not go himself, but sends in his man, now this man,
goes to work, not out of any love to him, that he goes to work withal, nor yet
out of any hope, to be the better for working with him, for he is agreed with
his own Master, and so therefore looks upon all other work as in vain, only,
yet he goes, as sent by his own master, and so works for the other, and dare
do no less; even so it is here, God and conscience are two friends, and God
having work to do, Prayers to make, Sermons to Preach, and hear, or
afflictions to suffer, etc. conscience, that, being Gods friend, sends in its
man (for many a man is more servant to his conscience then he is to God) and he
falls to this work, yet looking upon it as in vain, and yet can do no less
then go, and work, being sent, and forced by the power of his conscience, to
which he is a Servant, and not to God, though yet he does his work. And there
is many a man that if his own Master (conscience) would let him alone, that he
could be quiet, would not do half so much of Gods work, as now he does. But
when he goes to bed, like a beast, or abroad in the morning without prayer,
conscience stuffes his Pillow with Pricks, and does so hale, gaul him, and
disease him, that he cannot be quiet, but it dogs him, and there it baits
him; thou have not been at prayer, how dare thou make such adventures as
thou do? how can thou look to be kept, or blessed without seeking God? etc.
Hereupon, he falls to work, and then conscience is quiet, and giving him, a
little cursed peace, he is quiet too, and this wages he has from his
conscience, for the work, and duties which he does; but as for any reward from
God, he has no ground, to look for any, and yet does, what he does, upon this
ground. I grant the best of Gods servants are bound to hearken to the voice of
conscience, but wicked men are more driven by the lash and accusation of
conscience, then drawn to duty by the light thereof.

The other ground, of this their doing God some work, though yet in their
hearts, they think that service of God to be in vain, is this:

They do it, to make sure uncertainties: for though (for their own parts) they
be settled in the thoughts, and resolutions, of these things, and think, and
say, as the Scripture says of them, that there is no God, or that his service
is in vain, etc.

Yet, either by some powerful Sermon, or upon the general acknowledgement of
the contrary, by others, or happily, upon the beholding, of some of Gods
people, and their carriage, in sickness, and at the approaches of death, how
comfortably they lay, and how confident they were, of a liberal reward for
their serving of God, etc. Having also some taste, and the first fruits of it
already: these things make these people begin to doubt, and question, what
before, they seemed resolved of, that many a man comes away, sighing, and
saying, within himself, well, I am afraid, that if this were my condition,
that death were coming for me, and I were under the hand of God, and so near
my end, as such a one is, I should not be so comfortable as he is, but that J
should lie like a wild Bull in a net, full of the fury of the Lord, and be at my
wits end; and therefore it may be, that I have been mistaken, all this while;
and for all this there may be a God, and there may be some reward in serving of
him, etc. and hereupon, he resolves to do something in Gods service; well, I
will resolve, to pray, hear, etc. More then I have done, that if there be a
God, and there be any reward for his service, I may have something in the Bank,
and a coming; -- thus thinking to make sure, however things go.

Countreyman, that, having no skill, nor experience in Sea-affaires, and
adventures into foreign parts, and new plantations, is quite against such
kind of trading, when the ship goes out, he gives it for lost, and all that is
ventured in it, secretly condemning them for folly, [at least] that have
nothing to do with their moneys, but to make such desperate ventures of it, as
these; and yet this man hearing, how such a one, and such a one, by putting in
a stock of money, and employing it that way, were great gainers, and and made
men for ever, as they say; this man at length, and in time, may be brought to
make some venture himself that way; reasoning thus; well, though I have no
mind that way, yet I care not, if I venture something at Sea, etc. It may be
the ship may return, and some profit may come by it, that if it does prove so,
I may be the better, and save something, but he will not venture so much as
shall undo him, if it should miscarry, but what he can easily spare: So it is
here, carnal hearts though they Judge thus of the service of God, as vain;
and that labor as lost, that is taken therein; yet perceiving (as before was
said) what others, have got thereby, are hereby brought, to do something for
God, thinking, that if there be a God, and it be not in vain to serve him, that
something may come in, in an evil day; being so simple as not to consider,
that God will be served aright for the manner, as well as for the matter:
neither will they venture much for God, to part with all for the Pearl, but
only venture so far, as to provide for themselves, how they may be happy (as
they think) without any thing coming in, this way.

The first use of this Doctrine, is, for Information, Uses.
and that in many particulars,

First; Use 1. Of information.
It informs us, of the reason, why the Lord has no more servants, to wait
upon him, and do his work. The world, and sin, have abundance, but the Lord
very few; especially of those that will wear an in tire coat without seame, or
that will venture upon any hot piece of service, if they be put upon it; here
is the true ground of it, they doubt whether the service of God, be not a vain
service, and whether there be, as good wages, to be had, for doing of Gods
work, as they have, from those Masters, whom [now] they serve, and whose work
they do.

Secondly, It informs us, of the ground, of so much lukewarmnesse, and
indifferency, as is in many that are, or seem to be, the servants of God; why?
they slubber over the Lords work, and are so slighty in his service, offering
him sacrifice, of that which does cost them little, or nothing; as in praying,
hearing, and the like; as if it were no great matter, whether they prayed, or
not prayed, whether they heard, or not heard, whether they stood, and appeared
for God, or dissembled it; especially, if it come to this, that they cannot
follow, and serve God, but it must cost them dear.

Indeed, many can be content to keep Gods service, do Gods work, and profess
religion, so long as this profession, and service, will maintain them; but if
it comes to this, that they must maintain their service, and they cannot
profess, and follow God, but it will cost them their estates, credits,
liberties, or lives, then they shrink: and here is the reason, they make a
question, [if they should disburse so much for God, and in his service] whether
ever they should see their own again, and not be losers, by the bargain. This
makes them so backward to enter upon some work, that God puts them upon, and
so slighty in that which they do, bad pay-Masters, when their work is faulted,
are ready to answer, why? it is even well enough, unless I were like to be paid
better for it, then I am; so do they here; suspecting the service of God, for
a vain service, they think the work done in it, to be well enough, how slighty
soever; whereas, did they believe otherwise, and the truth of those promises of
God, 1 Cor. 15.58.
for his bountiful rewarding of such as are his servants, it would make them
fruitful, and painful in his service.

Thirdly, It informs us, of the ground, of so much Apostasy, and backsliding
from God, why so many of his disciples, and servants go away, and fall off
daily; Yea many ancient standing professors, that seemed to have been good, and
faithful servants, and to have done God much good work; yet (now) after a long
time, they carry the Lord his livery home again, and will wear it no longer,
nor follow him any further, but are now for a new Master, and that such a one
as the times will serve them to follow, and serve without danger. The ground
hereof, is clearly this, they think to mend themselves, and to take a course,
that will be more profitable, then this service would be, if they should
continue it.

But as Moses, Heb. 11.25, 26, 27.
endured many, and great afflictions, seeing him [by faith] who is invisible to
sense; so, had people hearts, and faith to beieeve the truth of Gods promises,
and the profitablenesse of his service, all the world could not be able to hire
them out of it, nor any thing in it beat them off, or any whit discourage them.
But I would earnestly desire these people, that are backesliders from God, to
consider, how wonderfully they provoke the Lord to displeasure, who thus turn
their backs upon him, and give over his service: and indeed, there is just
cause, that the Lord should be sore displeased: For such a one proclaims to
all the world (in effect) that he has found a better service then the Lord's;
Hos. 2.5.
and that it is better to serve sin, the world, and the Devil, then to serve
God; and does, as if he should say; well friends hear me, and know my
judgment, Time was, when I was a slave to my lust, and the world, and had no
heart, to any of the duties of God's service, I never cared for prayer, the
word, nor any such thing; and so I spent my twenty, or thirty first years; And
afterward, (I know not how) going to such a place, where there was a Sermon, I
could not choose but go in, and in hearing my conscience being much stird) I
was brought to take another course, and then I gave my self to pray, hear,
read, and the like, and to profess religion; and thus I have held thus many
years; So that I have tried both masters, and tried both services; and now I
proclaim to all the world, that I judge, the service of sin, and of the
Devil, to be better then the Lord's service; for I think this, to be but a
vain service; and therefore, I leave it, and turn (as I hope) to mend my
self. Now must not the Lord needs, take this very ill, at the hands of such,
as shall thus disparage his service in this manner.

Use 2. Of reproof.
The second use is for reproof. First, to such as not only think thus, that
the service of God i^ in vain, that a man is never the better for it, but
judge it so evil, and conceive a man is much the worse; as those in Joshua, to
whom it seemed evil to serve the Lord; so some think, Josh. 24.15.
that such as give themselves to pray, and mourn for their sins, that are
zealous for God, and forward in the profession of religion are the worse; worse
in their health, worse in their estates, worse in their wits, and the like.
These are a degree above the ordinary sort, of wicked people, and shall fare
thereafter: of which see, Jude, 15. for God shall come one day to execute
judgment upon ungodly men, not only for all their ungodly deeds, but for all
their hard speeches [also] which they have spoken against him.

Secondly, It is of Reproof, to such as are guilty of this sin, in the Text.

And of this sort are many, and multitudes, even of those that (in a formal
manner) do perform many services that the Lord requires; that do hear, pray,
and profess; and yet in their hearts, have but mean, and low thoughts of
those duties of Gods service; and look upon the labor, and pains taken in
it, as lost, and in vain.

Let these know, that they are guilty of a sin, which the Devil himself was
free from. He said, Job. 1.9.
that Job did not serve God for naught; yet these think the service of God to
be vain, and fruitless: but howsoever, it is a desperate sign of a carnal
heart, and a black brand set upon the wicked, by the hand of the spirit of God,
whereby all the world may know them to be wicked, wherever they find it; And
they themselves, may know themselves so to be, much more; let them be
otherwise, never so fair, and formal, yet if they find this in themselves,
it may be conviction enough unto them, that their hearts are carnal, and their
conditions desperate. If any body should go, and raise a report upon you that
are Masters, and give great wages, that you gave your servants no wages; would
you take it well at their hands? Yet thus do you report of Gods service; at
least by your practice; by your omitting of that which God commands, and by
your committing of that which God forbids, you proclaim, the service of God,
to be nothing worth.

But suppose one should ask you, how you can tell that it is in vain to serve
God? you never tried to purpose, what it was to serve him in sincerity. If a
man should go and report (as before) that you made your servants work for
nothing, you would say, how can you tell that, seeing you never tried my
service? so may I say to such as complain of the service of God, to be a vain
service, how can you tell it is so, seeing you never made trial of it, upon
your own experience? and therefore you are guilty of speaking evil of the
things which you understand not. 2 Pet. 2.12


Thirdly, it is of use (by way of inference) to the people of God: For if it be
a fault in carnal people, much more in such as are spiritual; and yet many of
these are much to blame, even about this very thing; having strange thoughts
about the vanity of Gods service; and that upon grounds, both from themselves,
and others.

1. From themselves; and they are two. The one is, the non-apprehension of any
good gotten by that service that they ever did for God. The other is, that
indiscernable difference [in themselves,] between serving, and not serving of
God, performing, and omitting the duties of Gods service.

For the better settling of the people of God, in his ways, and service; these
grounds of their mistakings, must be removed, and their objections answered; or
else, it is not the bare chiding of them, or laying of blame upon them, that
will pacify the Soul, or satisfy doubts, and scruples.

And therefore I shall endeavor to remove these lets, and to answer these
objections.

2 King 6.33.
or waiting upon the Lord any longer? I have spent a great deal of time, and
taken a great deal of pains, that way; but I do not see, that I am the better
for any thing that I have done; as these people, here, though they had offered
many sacrifices, yet afterward, began to look upon them, as cast away: We have
offered many cattle, and creatures in sacrifice (say they,) but we had better
have sold them, and laid out the money some other way for our comfortable
subsistence: So says many a Soul, what shall I do? I have prayed, and
mourned, but nothing the better; my Prayers are not let into heaven, but shut
out; my alms are not had in remembrance before God, but forgotten; my tears
are spilt, and not bottled up; my wants are not supplied, my desires are not
answered, my corruptions are not mortified: I have taken much pains in
attending upon the ordinances of God, but have got little, or no good by them:
And not only ordinary, but extraordinary means have I used; I have joined
fasting to my prayers, and yet all will do nothing; I was amongst the people
of God such a day, and such a day, in the duties of humiliation; but, alas! I
was never the better; my heart was as hard at night, as it was in the morning:
so that I had better have been about my calling, or the world; for there I
might have done, or got some good for the body, but here I got no good, either
for body, or soul; there I might have done some good to others, but here no
body has been the better for me, but (for ought I know) rather the worse; It
may be I have been a Jonah, or an Achan, amongst Gods people, to provoke the
Lord to displeasure, and to cause him to withhold that mercy, from that
Assembly I joined with, which they might have had, if J had been from amongst
them: but however, I have deluded others, and played the hypocrite, seeming
better then I am, and fit to be amongst Gods people, which I was not; and have
hardened my heart, and am (to be sure) never the better, if not much the worse.

These, and the like complaints, are commonly made by the people of God, as if
his service were indeed altogether vain. To this I answer diverse ways.

which a Soul does, may be may be profitable to others, though for the present,
or in his own apprehension, little, or nothing so, to it self.

For the Acts, or parts of Gods service, are of diverse kinds.

Some, in which the Lord, and master himself has the chiefest hand, he being
especially the Agent, and we patients: as hearing the word, receiving the
sacrament, and duties of that nature.

Other some again, there are, in which man is more said to be an Agent, then
in the former; As in prayer, works of charity, taking up the cross, and the
like.

Now its true, for the first, if a soul gets no good at them [it self,] at the
word, at the sacrament and the rest of that kind, That service, is like to be
in vain altogether. But for the latter, it will not hold, viz. in sufferings
for Christ, and the like, though a man may seem to have lost, not his labor
only, but much other ways, in his estate, credit, liberty, and the like, (in
so much, that he may suffer the spoiling of all his goods, and himself dye in
the Jail,) yet this service may not be in vain; For (besides his own gain in
spiritual respects) the Church of God may have more light, and liberty hereby,
in after times.

Also of prayer, and seeking the Lord, the like may be said: for, as the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 12.14.
that the parents lay up for the Children; so does one Christian for another.
For these duties, are properly compared to sowing of seed: and Christ says,
one sows, Joh. 4.37.
and another reapeth. And I doubt not, but many a christian, and parent, has
prayers hanging upon Gods file in heaven, unanswered, (for their Children and
the Church of God) though made long ago; so that, [that] may seem to be
labor lost that was taken that way: But yet as Ahasuerus, Ester 6.1.
called for the Records after a certain time, and finding there, such a piece
of service done by Mordecai, not yet rewarded, he forthwith gave him wages for
his work, and bountifully rewarded him: So the Lord (in his due time) will look
over his files, (as I may so speak) and finding the parents prayers (made for
the child) and the Christians, prayers (made for the Church of God) hanging
still unanswered, he will undoubtedly return them an answer in a time accepted.

And because a parent, or a christian does not receive an answer hereof
(presently,) or wages for his work in the service of the Lord, or live to see
others the better for it, shall he therefore conclude, It is a vain service;
or the work a vain work? tilling, and sowing of his ground, though he does
not live to the harvest, to reap the crop himself, yet will he not account his
labor lost, because he can make his will of it; and his heirs, executors, and
such as he does entirely love, shall be the better for it. Even so it is here,
The Church may be the better, others the better for thy labor; And therefore
this work and service, is not to be accounted vain.

[in ready mony] (as they use to say,) exchange, giving of them something in
liew, yet always for the best unto them. Even as you pay your workmen, when
they have wrought with you, and done you service, you do not pay them (it may
be) in ready money, gold, silver, and the like; but with such commodities, as
they stand in great need of, which happily are scarce, and rare, and such as
they could not buy with their money, if they had had their wages paid them
therein. Now if these servants should go away, and exclaim on you, and on
your service, that, because you did not pay them in ready money, as they
expected; they should therefore say, that your service were a vain service,
and that they had wrought with you for nothing, and the like, would you take
this well at their hands?

Why? yet, thus do thou deal by the Lord; Thou attendest upon God in duties,
and ordinances; in hearing, praying, and the like; and thou do him some
service: Now, thou expectest to be paid down at the stub (as it were) in ready
money. That is to say, thou look to grow in parts, as, in knowledge, in
quick apprehension, and ability of expression in conference, or prayer, as
others do: and because thou do not so, thou art ready to complain, that
this service of God is vain, and that thou have but lost thy labor therein:
Whereas, it may be, the Lord has given thee, something in stead of these,
which is better and daintier, and which thou could not have purchased with
these, if thou had never so much of them. For instance, it may be he has
given thee a tender conscience, and an humble heart, instead of those other
which thou did expect.

Well; if he has thus paid thee, I tell thee, he has done thee no wrong: For
these are things which thou could not have purchased with thy parts; were
they never so great and high.

service of God is in vain, though thou think thy self never the better,
or (as yet) be never the better, for the present; unless also, thou art
able to conclude, that thou never shall be the better hereafter neither; which
I am sure, thou can not possibly do.

Suppose thy prayers (as yet) be not answered; art thou sure that they never
shall be answered? though thy corruptions, be not yet subdued, nor Satan (as
yet) trodden under foot, how do thou know, that they never shall?

Nay how do thou know, but that this delay, may be fully satisfied for, when
the Lords time is fully come.

We find how Moses speaks to the people of the Lord in this manner; Deuteronomy. 8.15
16.
who led thee through that great, and terrible wilderness, wherein were siery
Serpents, and Scorpions, and drought, where there was no water, etc. that he
might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter
end. Mark that phrase well [at thy latter end] which imports the time of Gods
showing mercy to many, even of his own people, that they shall not have the
good of Gods present dealings with them, till their latter end.

It may be, before this Message came from the Lord to this people, they began
to repent them in part, of what they had done, in following of Moses, and
putting themselves upon so many hardships, and think all to be but labor lost,
and their service in obeying the Lords commands to be in vain; but now they
are answered, and taken off from this, hearing that the time of their reward
was not yet come, but that verily it would come, and that without fail; to
wit, in the latter end.

So then, it is clear that a soul in obeying God, and in doing him service, may
be led through a wilderness, where it may meet with serpents, scorpions,
drought, and a great deal of hardship, and be much disappointed in its
expectation, and desires: And yet the Lord, may intend it good at the last, and
plentifully reward it, for all the service it does for him. And therefore, let
not any complain till they have cause; Ps. 9.18
The patient abiding of the meek shall not perish for ever; And, Ps. 58.11.
verily there is a reward for the righteous; And, Yet a little while, Heb. ^.37.
and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.

Have you never heard it rumor'd and reported, very commonly, and confidently,
that such, or such a ship has been quite cast away and lost; and yet that ship
has come home afterward richly laden. So it is often in Prayer, and other
duties; and therefore be not overmuch discouraged, though you enjoy not the
present fruit of your labors? in due time, Gal. 6.9
you shall reap if you faint.

And thus far in answer to these thoughts, and objections, that are in the
people of God, from the first ground in themselves.

second ground of this Fear follows, to be answered: Namely; That
indiscernable difference that is in themselves, between their serving, and not
serving of God:

The Soul says, surely, I cannot perceive that I am any whit the better, for
all the service that I have done to the Lord; For all my Prayers, hearing,
christian communion and the like; I am as well, when I omit serving of him, or
when I am slighty in his service, as when I serve him most, and best of all; I
prosper as well in my business, and return as safe home from my journey, when
I set forth without seeking direction from the Lord, as when I do seek him
before I go out; I sleep as sweetly, when I go to bed without Prayer, as
when I do pray; and so for other particulars: Therefore this serving of the
Lord, seems to be vain.

To this also I answer diverse ways. a sad thing, that any of Gods people,
should, Try, and Tempt him in this manner; to do, as if they should say, I Will
see what the Lord will do for me without asking, and the like; that any who
have tasted how gracious the Lord has been unto them, in a duty, or
ordinance, that, they should in the least degree, willingly omit such a duty
again, and that they should (to speak after the manner of men) disappoint the
Lord thus. That when the Lord shall go into thy Chamber, or Closet; at the
usual time of Prayer, with his ear open to the Prayer, that thou had need
to make him, that (then) thou should not be there; but he must be forced to
turn himself away, missing whom he looked for: That when the Lord brings
mercy in his hand (as it were) to bestow upon thee, that thou should not be
there to receive it, but he must be forced to carry his mercy back again with
him; and when he brings his bottle to put up thy tears, thou sendest him
empty away? This I say is a very sad thing.

no difference in thine outward man, in thy estate, body, name, and the like;
yet there may be great difference in thine inner man, and soul; and I dare say,
there is so.

Does not thy neglect of duty, beget a dislike of duty? does no disuse in Gods
service, breed an auknesse, and an indisposition thereto.

I doubt not, but, if the heart be well observed, it will be acknowledged, that
this is true, that it is thus; And is this nothing?

no difference in themselves, between the time when they serve the Lord, and
when they do not serve him, whether they do, never at no time find any
difference?

Sometimes (it may be) you find little or no difference, the Lord meets you not
in duties, but you go away empty, with hardness in your hearts, and blackness
in your bosoms, and the like; (as you conceive:) But is it [alwayes] thus? are
you never answered in the joy of your souls? does the Lord never give you a
good look, nor show you a pleased face? If you have any, Joh. 15.11.
slight them not: are the consolations of God small unto you?

Or if you have none, yet, that thou art upheld in the way, and in the work of
the Lord, to go on in his service, even this very thing is a great mercy; and
is very like to be the fruit, and wages for the former work, and service thou
have done him. And it is all one, whether the Lord does give the soul what it
would have presently, or strength to persevere in his ways, till he does meet,
and answer it.

Of the two, the last is rather the best, because the soul honors God most by
this.

as full a measure when thou do not serve God, as when thou do serve him
most exactly, yet thou can not look upon them, as such special mercies, if
they come not in the way of seeking and serving God. Psalm. 69.22
The very table of wicked men is made their snare, Prove. 1.32
and the prosperity of fools shall slay them.

2. There be also thoughts in the hearts of Gods people, about the vanity of
Gods service, arising from some ground in others; for thus they reason; Those
that have no care at all to serve God, or to attend upon the duties of his
worship, yet they seem to spread, and to fare as well, as those that serve him
most, and best of all; and therefore the serving of God seems to be in vain.

To this also diverse answers may be made. much difference in the maine, and in
that which ought most to be regarded: Though they may seem to be as well in
their outward condition, and for their body, yet not with their souls; for,
they are not in Gods ways, nor in the Road of his best mercies.

outward, and common mercies (which they have, who do not serve the Lord but
are careless therein) may be the fruit of [others] serving the Lord, though
not of their [own.] As for instance; thou art an husband, and should (as
Saint Peter speaks) dwell with thy wife as a man of knowledge, and be a
pattern for the whole family in serving the Lord; and yet it may be, thou
regardest not these things; but go to bed like a beast without Prayer, and
yet sleep quietly, when thy poor wife or child may be upon their knees
praying for thee. So thou go into the world in the morning, and set out
journeyes, without seeking the Lord, and yet it may be prosperest, and
returnest well: and why? it may be thy Minister Prays for thee, and prevails
for these mercies in thy behalf, which else thou might go without.

Laban fared the better for Jacobs sake. And Potiphar, Genesis 30.29.
and his family, Genesis 39.3.
speed the better for Joseph's serving the Lord.

A graceless child, may fare the better for the service which gracious Parents
have done him. To. 11.28.
As the Lord says of some. They are beloved for the Fathers sake: So may some
children find temporal mercies, at the hand of God, for some service which was
done him, by their parents.

great man, that has had a servant dwelling long with him, will many times
show kindness to the child of that servant. I care not (says he) if I do so
or so for him; his father was my man, or his mother was my maid, so many
years, and was trusty, and faithful in my service. So does God in this case.

prosperity of this life, is worthy of the name of a reward for Gods service:
Those things which God gives as a reward for this, are within the veil; which
the eye of sense never saw, which the heart of man cannot possibly conceive of.
And therefore, though those that do not serve the Lord, have these things
below, and thou, who do serve him, go without them, yet being the Lord
reserves a better reward for thee till afterward, complain not.

dayes-men, but others that are hired servants, or bound to them for a long
time: Now, the first sort are paid at night, or at weeks end, three pence, or
a groat a day, or some such small matter, and their Lords day dinner; and
there is all they must look for.

But as for the other, he takes his wages by the lump, his Master takes charge
of him, and makes provision for him, not only in health, and when he is hail
and well, but in sickness too, allows him attendance, protects him against
wrongs, vouchsafes him the credit of his countenance, prefers him in marriage,
and lets him have the lease of some good Farm, that he is the better for, all
his days.

Now, shall this servant go, and complain, that he serves his Master in
vain, because he has not such potty-payments as others have? His Master, may
justly take this ill at his hand. So it is here; For what the Apostle says, of
the momentany afflictions of this present life, I may say, of the momentany
comforts of this presant life; They are not worthy of that eternal reward, for
serving the Lord, which he reserved for those that are his; which is ready to
be revealed in his time.

But besides all this, there is answer enough lying wide-open in the three last
verses of this Chapter, Mal. 3.16, 17, 18.
which might quiet, and still any soul for the present, that has but the
least measure of faith in truth. There you shall find, For those that feared
the Lord and spoke often one to another, there was a book of remembrance
written, they made up as his Jewels, were etc. God putting a manifest
difference between them that serve him, and that serve him not.

and for satisfaction, unto those of Gods people, who are of tender
consciences, full of fears, and much discouraged in the ways of God; happily
carnal hearts (from hence) will be ready to reply, and plead for themselves
after this manner. Well; now we are in some more hope of our selves then
formerly we were. You told us in the beginning, that it was the property of
carnal hearts, and such as are wicked to account the service of God vain and
unprofitable; and all that while we were much afraid of our selves; because we
cannot deny (for our hearts) but that secretly we do so. But since, you have
said, that Gods own people may be guilty of this too; And therefore now again
we begin to have some better hopes of our selves then we had, and to think that
our condition may not be so bad, though we be guilty hereof.

To this I answer, Difference between the thoughts of the godly, and wicked,
about the vanity of Gods service.
that there is a wide difference, between those thoughts that are in the hearts
of the godly, about the vanity of Gods service, and those that are in the
hearts of the wicked; which is especially, showed in these particulars, which
being opened, will afford a full answer to this objection. And which also may
serve for marks of trial to discover, which are carnal hearts, and which are
gracious; which is the next thing to be showed, and then proceed.

First then, Difference. or trial.
though there be some such thoughts as these, in the hearts of the godly,
touching the vanity of Gods service, as if it were labor lost that is taken
therein; yet these thoughts are only injected, and cast in by Satan, and do
only swim, and flutter up and down in the mind, but are not seated and
settled in the heart; though the soul makes some question about this, yet it
is not fully settled and persuaded of it, that so it is. But the carnal heart,
and the wicked, is; for they have it rooted, and fastened as a firm principle
in them, that thus it is.

Now, there is a wondrous wide difference, between Doubtings, and Resolutions:
and they are easy to be discerned by such a one, as is not willing to be
deceived.

The second difference is this; namely, Difference or trial.
that though there be some such thoughts as these, in some of Gods people, yet
they are not touching the service of God it self, but about [their] purticular
service of God: They do not think that it is in vain [ for others, for every
body, or in it selfe] to serve God, but all their fear is, that it is in
vain, [to them.]

They do not make the least question, but that there are those that do speed
in Prayer, reap much profit by the ordinances, and are much the better for
serving the Lord. Only, they say, that [they themselves] are never the better,
they think [they] hear, and pray, and do all in vain.

Whereas Carnal hearts, and such as are naught, they do not accuse, or
condemn their own particular serving of God, but the service of God it self
in general. As here in the text. You have said it is vain, or a vain thing
to serve the Lord.

Now, there is a wide difference in this also; easy to be discerned: and let
every soul, try it self, by this sign.

Thirdly, Difference. or trial.
though there be such thoughts, as were spoken of, to be found in the hearts of
Gods people, yet they are not such as beat them off from the use of means;
reading, hearing, praying, and the like; but they will still serve the Lord,
though the fear the loss of their labor in their serving of him, though they
fear they pray but in Vain, yet they will pray still and so for other duties.

Many poor souls have complained much of their unprofitablenes in Gods
service, that they have but lost their labor, and all in vain which they have
done, and the like; whereupon (for their trial) they have been asked after
this manner, why, do you not then give over? why do you hear, or pray still?
To which they have made answer, that they could do no otherwise: though I
fear it is but in vain to pray, yet I cannot but pray, hear, confer, and
the like; Thus another, and thus another says.

So, that it has been evident, that there was some Principle in them; that
has carried them on, in the ways of God, and in his service, notwithstanding
the sense of their former unprofitablenesse in the same. Or if [at a time] or
for a while, they have been beaten off, and so desisted, yet it has not been
out of distaste of the duty, so much as their own unfitness, and indisposition
thereunto: though yet they themselves may, and do conceive, that they do
really disaffect the duty it self. distempered stomach may seem to loath good
meat, whilst it is distemperd, and even that which it naturally loves very
well. And so it is in this case.

Whereas a carnal heart, is willing to admit of this, as a pretense for his
sloth, that the service of God is in vain; that so, with the more peace and
quiet, he may sit still, and fold up his hands; and so he does.

So that his thoughts about the vanity of the service of God, do beat him
off, and out of the service it self. And this is a great difference.

Fourthly there is difference in the effect of these thoughts. Difference. or
trial.
For in the hearts of the Godly they are soon followed (if not attended for
the present) with much sorrow and selfe-shaming, as in the 73 Psalm. Comparing
the 13 verse with the 22 verse. Whereas they that are carall do not thus: as
for the unGdly it is not so with them: They are hardly humbled for words, or
actions, against God, much less for thoughts.

The next use to be made of this point, Use of Caution.
is, an use of Caution for Warning.

And that 1 to the wicked 2 to the Godly, 3 to all in general.


First to the wicked; Caution 1. to the wicked.
to warn them, ever hereafter, to take heed of this sin, of censuring the
service of God, for a vain service; Or them of Folly, or losing their Labor,
which keep this service, or work hard in it.

Know, that though it be in vain to you, (as indeed it Can be no otherwise, as
you go to work) yet do not think that it is in vain, to all others.

Though you get no good by the word you hear, or are never the better, by the
prayers you make, and the like, yet do not think, but that there is good to be
gotten by them, and that others are the better for them.

tradesman (out of his bad husbandry) does not thrive in his trade, shall he
go and condemn the trade it self? or censure those of folly, that drive such
a trade, as that is. Nay rather let him mend his husbandry, and follow his
trade in a better manner, and then he may thrive, though hitherto he could not:
So it is here. For men are ready to condemn this trade of Godliness, and to
suspect the worst by the service of God, because they profit no more by duties,
and ordinances; whereas the fault is not in the ordinances, but in themselves;
they prepare not their hearts to seek the Lord, they serve him not for matter,
Manner, measure, end, as they should do, which if they did, they might soon
find it were not in vain to serve God.

Secondly, Caution to the godly.
it is for Caution, and warning, unto the people of God, that they take heed
how they harbor such thoughts as these are, of the service of God. For (as a
Divine says) though you cannot hinder the birds from flying over your heads,
yet you may keep them, from making Nests in your hair; so, though such
thoughts as these may arise, or be cast in by Satan, yet suffer them not to
settle upon your hearts. This is the brand of a carnal heart. O let it not be
set upon any of you, that have any truth of grace in you.

If the Devil can but fasten such thoughts upon any of you, as to make you
think or fear, that the service of God is in vain, he will easily prevail
with you, either wholly to forsake it, or else to be very remiss, and
negligent in it.

sick and weak, and he be prejudiced against men, and means, and persuaded that
no physician, or physic, can do him good: that man is in the high way to
death; for either, he will not meddle at al with means, or else stray from the
rules that are prescribed him; and then, (though it be not in vain to take
physic yet) to be sure he will make it in vain.

And the same will people do for their souls, if they come to entertain a
prejudice against the service of God.

We find this to be the counsel of the Apostle. Heb. 10.35.
Cast not away your confidence which has great recompense of reward. It seems
then, that, that, which is of great worth, and will at length be very
profitable, is in danger to be cast away by the people of God, as vain, and
nothing worth.

It is the case, and condition of many a poor soul, to stand staggering, and
remain doubtful, as not knowing what to think of of it self; one while it
has a door of hope set open to it, it that some glimps and glimring of the
light of Gods countenance, and some confidence of his love, and mercy, which
does much refresh it; another while that door is shut, and there is nothing
but darkness, and fear in the soul: and it suspects its former confidence to
be but mere delusion, that it was mistaken, and the like; and and all on the
sudden, the soul is ready to cast away that confidence, as nothing worth. --
Oh, but (says the Apostle) hold your hand, and be well advised what you do:
be not so prodigal to cast away that in a pang, or pittish mood, which you
were so long a getting, and cost you so dear. Prove, and try your confidence
if you will, nay, it is needful you should do so, but cast it not away: Or if
Satan wring your hold out of your hand, and your confidence out of your heart,
by the strength of any violent temptation, then indeed you are to be pittyed,
and your condition, with much Christian compassion to be laid to heart; But for
you, to stand in your own light, and to throw away such a stay to your souls,
by a wilful refusal of that mercy, and denial of that grace, which the Lord
has wrought in you and given you some experience of, and that out of the pride
of your hearts, because you cannot find a ground of your holding fast of a
confidence [in your selves] but must live upon free grace; or out of
discontentednesse of spirit, that because you cannot affirm, that full
assurance of heaven, and Gods love, that you would have, therefore you will
have none at all; because you may not carve your selves, and have whole loaves,
therefore you will scorn crummes, and cast away pieces: If thus you do in
stead of pity, you shall deserve blame. And as little as this confidence, and
waiting upon God, seems worth, which you slight, and are casting away, as
worth nothing; yet believe me, it is not in vain to hold fast upon a promise,
something will come at last, though all seem but lost for the present. And
therefore cast not away your confidence, which has great recompense of Reward.

Lastly, Caution to all in general.
it is useful for all in general, to warn every one, to take heed of making
void, and vain the service of God to himself.

We have seen, and heard the evil of this sin, of accusing the service of
God, for a vain service, and how much wrong they do the Lord, and themselves,
that cast such an aspersion, and unjust imputation upon the service of God: But
now, if that should become, really so to us, which is not so, in it self, nor
to others; and that, whilst we blame others, for saying it is in vain, we
should be those, that should make it vain to our selves, this would prove
hard, and sad in conclusion.

How will this make up the mouths of carnal loose libertines, when they come
at the judgment seat; when those that would never spend time, nor take pains
in the service of God, shall fare, and speed as well as they that spent, and
took much time therein, when those that would not be brought to make any show
of goodness, or take up the practice of any duties at all, shall fare as well,
as those that had a fair form of Godliness, and were very abundant in holy
duties.

When they that had no prayer in their families, so much as once in the week,
or month, or year, shall speed as well, and alike, with those that had prayer
twice a day; in a word when those that take their fill in the pleasures of sin,
that cast off the fear of the almighty, Joh. 21.14.
saying depart from us, for we desire not the Knowledge of thy ways; That were
servants to their lusts, and not to God but run on in all excess of riot, in
sinning with high hands, and stiffenecks, shall see them thrust out from God
that wore his livery, called him master, and did much work in his service; Oh
how wide will it open their mouths? And (if it were possible to laugh in Hell)
how would it make them laugh and triumph; why, certainly, it will be thus with
very many to whom the service of God, shall be but a vain service; and they
shall lose all the time, and pains that they have spent and taken therein; see
Mat. 7 chap. in the, 22 and 23 verses. and Luke 13.26. Where you shall find,
that many, who have been in Christ's company, and stood in Christ's room, and
done Christ's work, shall yet be disclaimed by him, and excluded from him at
the last day; And therefore what need is there that we look well to it, that
though this service be not vain in it self yet that it prove not vain to us.

Which that it may not do, Directions that the service of God may not be in
vain.
I shall desire to lay down some directions in way, of prevention, which being
followed, will undoubtedly make our work, and labor in the service of the
Lord profitable unto us; but, without which, could we do never so much, and
that (in show) never so well, yet should we be accounted but evil servants;
and this is all we shall have at Gods hand at last, Isa 50.11.
to lie down in sorrow.

first thing that a soul must do, that would not have the service of the Lord
prove in vain to him, is, To get into Covenant with God, and to be at
agreement with him, for whom we do work: I do not mean to Covenant for wages,
and what thou shall have for thy work, as if, otherwise thou were in danger to
have nothing, for there is no fear of that; but only Covenant with him, to be
his servant, to be one, whom he may please to own, and look upon as one that
does especially belong unto him: This is to be in inward Covenant with God: for
you are to know, that there is a secret league, and Covenant which is made, and
passes between God, and the soul, at its first conversion. In which the Lord
[for his part] makes tender and promise of free grace, and mercy, to the poor
soul, seeing it self lost and undone: And the soul [for its part] being glad
of God, and mercy, upon such fair terms as he propounds it upon, accepts
thereof; and so the Covenant is struck, the soul is willing to become the
Lords, and to give up it self to him, and his service wholly and freely. And
the Lord [for his part] is willing to accept of that soul, and of such service
as it is, and shall be able, to do for him; to assist him in his undertakings,
to overlooke his failing, and to reward his endeavors. And so for ever after
this, the Lord looks upon this soul as a servant of his, and, as set on work
by him, and so intends the rewarding of him as his servant; which before he
does not, but says as Esaias, 1.12. who has required these things at your
hands; I do not deny, but that, I do require them, but not of you, and I will
give a reward for the doing of them, but not to you. So in the 50 Psalm. 16
verse, unto the wicked, God says, what have thou to do to declare my
statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? where had you
any commission to meddle with my work? It was an answer which they gave, in
the 20 of Mat. 6 verse why they stood so long idle because no man had hired
them, as if they should say, we had as good do nothing, as to work before we
are hired: and it is most certainly true here, that till a soul be agreed (in
the sense before mentioned) with God, It shall have no reward for the work it
does, but loses al its labor; Job. 9.29.
As Job says, if I be wicked, why then labor I in vain? so surely, all the
labor that a wicked man takes, whilst he is wicked, and in the state of sin
and nature, is but lost, he does but labor in vain. Verse. 20.
The Prophet says, Psalm 139. Thine [enemyes] take thy Name in vain; which
holds very firm in this sense; namely, That whilst people remain enemies to
God, and are not truly reconciled to to him through Christ, they take his name
(word, Sacrament, and all they meddle withal) in vain. Should they hear,
pray, do suffer or perform, never so many duties, of the Lords service, yet
all would prove in vain unto them, and they should never have comfort, nor
profit, by any thing they do.

It is a great deal of time, that some spend, of pains, that they take, and
cost that they are at, about the duties of Gods service, who yet, if they go
on, as they have begun, will lose all at the last.

Oh! therefore let me prevail with so many of you this day, as never took
this course, now, to enter upon it, get you home, enter into your chambers, and
commune with your hearts, about your conditions, and this work; labor to see
your misery by nature, and sin, and so long as you stand in emnity with God,
and God with you, beg (as for more then your lives) to be at peace with him
and be glad of reconciliation with him upon any terms; you may go on still,
in your old way of formality, if you please, without taking this course, as
long, and twice as long (if you live as you have done,) thinking, that if you
be diligent in duties, and painful in the service of the Lord, especially
with honest hearts, as you call them, that then you shall not lose your labor,
but that God will reward you, for the service you do: and it may be that some
of you, may intend so to do; notwithstanding what ever has been said against
it: and so they may, if they please, to their shame, and heart-smart, but if
this be the way to true peace, or profit, the Lord has not spoken by me.

And when they have wearied themselves, in this their way, and miss, what they
look for, (which they will most certainly do, if they look for any good,)
then will they acknowledge the truth, and necessity of this counsel, and (when
it is too late,) will bewail, that they took it not in time.

take heed of a slighty spirit, in the performing of it; and of having low, and
mean thoughts, of those duties, that thou undertakest the doing of, but labor
for high and precious thoughts, of the duties of this service, and of the
ordinances of God, which thou come to be a partaker of, that thou may
look upon the service of God, as honorable, and much desirable service, and
the parts, and duties of this service, as very profitable, and as those means,
which the Lord has ordained for thy great good. To look upon prayer, as a
profitable ordinance, and means, very forcible with God, to break open his
treasure, and to obtain all needful mercies by.

So for the word, the Sacrament, and the rest, many there be, which perform
many of the duties of Gods service, but yet come not with such thoughts as
these are, but look upon them as mean ordinary things; and that because they
know not the worth, and pretiousnesse of them, and never found, or got any
great good by them, when as the ground thereof, is, in themselves; they come
with low thoughts, and slighty estimation, to the ordinances, and then no
marvel they find them vain, and unprofitable to them.

faithful in the doing of it.

And this faithfulness is to be showed, in these five things Carfulness,
Faithfulness in Gods service to be showed in 5. things. Carfulness.
Diligence, sincerity, Belief, and Perseverance.

First it is to be showed in carfulness, of universalitie of obedience; that
a man be careful in attending, upon all Gods ways, and in doing all that
work, that God sets him about.

He is not a faithful servant, that will pick, and choose his work, to do
only that which likes him, and leave the rest: so, neither is he a faithful
servant to God that will do only some, not all: that will attend upon God in
some duties, and ordinances, but omit othersome, and that can be content to put
his hand to Gods work, but not to his neck or his back, to his cross, or
burden; doing-worke will down but not suffering-worke.

Well think better of it, and baulke none of Gods work, but take it as it
lies in order, and comes; for that part of Gods service that thou neglectest,
may be that, in the doing whereof, the Lord may intend to show thee much mercy,
and to give thee a reward for that, and other service together.

If it be secret prayer, or such a duty, that thou live in the neglect of,
thou may bereave thy self of much good in the neglect of it: for as God
meets one in some duty, rather then in other-some, so, that may be that very
duty that God may intend to Communicate more mercy to thee in, then any
other. So the like may be said of sufferings, for the Lord has let out, more
of himself sometimes in a prison, then any other way.

And therefore as David showed his faithfulness in having respect to all Gods
commandments; Psalm. 119.6
so let us.

Secondly, Diligence 2.
this faithfulness, lies in doing the work of the Lord diligently, when the
soul puts out its self in what it undertakes for God. A man is not therefore
a faithful servant to his Master, because he puts his hand to every work, and
shunneth none, if yet, he slubbereth over his work, in a lazy, and slothful
manner, and does none as he ought to do: but the doing of it to his utmost,
shows his faithfulness as well as his doing of it at all: and this is that
which the Lord calls for: Romans 12.11.
Not slothful in business, fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord.

So in another place, Eccles. 9.10
what ever thy hand, finds to do, do it with thy might; if it be not a
duty, meddle not with it, do it not at all; but if it be a duty and a duty to
God, what exactness in the doing of it can be sufficient? and therefore do
such a duty, with thy might, pray with thy might, hear with thy might, stand
for God with thy might, and so for any other duty. The want of this, is the
bane of a great many duties, and of much service, which are made void, and
unprofitable, by this very means: nay instead of a reward, they shall have
wrath, and vengeance for their wages: according to that of the Prophet Jeremy,
Ier. 48.10.
cursed be he, that does the work of the Lord negligently, or deceitfully;
that might do it better then he does, but does not put out himself. Or that
seems to do it otherwise then he does it in deed; seeming very zealous God,
when there is neither for life, nor heat within; Burning lips and a wicked
heart, (like Solomon's plate) a potsheard covered with silver dross. Pro. 26.23
Oh, hear and fear?

The third part of this faithfulness, Sincerity. 3.
is sincerity, and uprightness in heart: which is, when a soul does the
service of God, and the duties of it, in obedience to his command, aiming at
him, and his glory, in the works, and duties, that it does perform.

The Lord would have servants look through their [earthly] masters in the
service they do for them, Ephesians. 6.5.
and and to have an eye, to Christ in what they do, who is the chief Master
of all: but, much more then, ought he to be especially eyed, and aimed at in
those actions, which are immediately done unto himself; true, the eye of man,
cannot pierce the heart, to diserne, the intention of that, but the Lords does:
For however a servant may be accounted faithful, when as he does not purely
look at his Master, in the service he does, (for his Master, cannot see his
heart) yet he cannot be, nor is accounted a faithful servant, with the Lord,
unless he looks more at the Lord, then at himself or any other. In the 7 of
Zach. 5. the Lord puts this question home unto them, did ye at all fast to me;
and doubles it again, even to me? that whereas they might be ready and
overforward to make answer for themselves, and say, Yes Lord, we did, what we
did, to thee, he replies; even to me? are you sure you did it to me? that you
looked purely at me etc.

The want of this makes void, and vain, our work, and prevents that reward,
that else we might have; as is clear from Mat. 6.5, and 16 verse; as if the
Lord had said, if you look not at me in your work, why should you look at me
for wages, for the work you do?

The fourth branch of this faithfulness, required, Faith, or Believing. 4.
in the service of God, to make it profitable, is Believing: which is, that
when the soul has proved it self to be in covenant, with God, (according to
the first direction,) that then it stirs up it self, to exercise faith in
the believing, Applying, and pressing, of those promises, which it has right,
and title to, as touching assistance, accceptance, answering, rewarding and the
like.

The Apostle shows the absolute necessity of faith, Heb. 11.6.
even in the exercise of it, to be in those that approach nigh to God, in any
service of his, Iam. 1.6, 7
as in prayer; -- Saint James shows, that such an one, as does not pray in
faith, without wavering, must not look to receive any thing, as wages for his
work, from the Lord, though he may receive much from man, rewards, and
applause etc. -- Yet from the Lord, he must look for none; if he do, he is
but deceived, and so shall be.

The Lord says, to them that come to him, as he said as he said to those blind
men what? do you come to me for sight? Matthew. 9.28, 29.
according as you believe, so shall you speed, etc.

I am preswaded, that if these men, had come to our Savior in an ordinary,
formal way, led by the example of others, (that because they saw others that
were blind, and lame, go to Christ, therefore they would go too,) they might
have gone away, as blind as they came, for any sight, or benefit, that they
should have had from him. And so, if people, go to God in duties, [as in
prayer] in an ordinary formal way, because it is the order and fashion to go
to God, and pray, in time of want, they may go often enough, and pray long
enough, ere they shall obtain, and work till they be weary in the service of
God, ere they get any good reward for it: yea though a man be a believer, and
has that singular gift, and grace, of faith in him, yet this is not enough
unless he does, stir up this gift, and grace, so, as to have the use and
exercise of it, even in the time of working, and doing God service; for a
habit is only so far of use, and profitable, as it is brought forth into
act and exercise. Experience shows, that the same soul, which seems one day,
to work for nothing, and to labor in vain, with God, in the duties of his
service; another day, or by another duty is sent laden away, full of the
desires of its soul, and thinks it self abundantly rewarded; the reason will
be found, to be from hence, (if it be well looked into,) that faith was more
exercised, at one time, then at another. If therefore thou would not have,
the service of the Lord, and the duties of it, to be in vain unto thee, then
work in faith

Last of all, Perseverance. 5.
this faithfulness consists, and is to be showed, in perseverance, holding
on without fainting; Rev. 2.10.
Be faithful unto the death, that is, in persevering to the last; for thus
faithfulness is showed; he is not accounted, a faithful servant, that gives
over his work before it be done, nor he faithful to god, or his own soul, that
gives over before he speed; Psalm. 123.2.
We wait upon the Lord until he have mercy upon us; so should a Christian
refolve, not to give over, or away from God without an answer. I do not deny,
but a Christian may be held off, and delayed in his suite, and service, that he
may, even make some question, whether he has not quite lost his labor;
whether ever his prayers shall be answered, and his service rewarded, or no;
for all may seem to be in vain. 1 Cor. 4.5.
Oh! but stay a while, and Judge nothing before the time; much less this; to
say, or think, that the Lord will be so hard, and unfaithful, as not to
reward your labor; for the full and set time, of the Lord; payment, is not yet
come.

I wish, that well known place, in Mat. 24 13, were as well considered of, as
known; -- He that endures to the end, the same shall be saved. In which
words, amongst many things considerable, there be especially two, for our
present purpose, the condition of the promise, and the promise, it self.

Perseverance is the duty required, in all the parts of Gods service, and the
Lord is not tied, to give any reward, or make payment, till this duty, or
condition be performed: Mat. 20.
the Laborers that had wrought in the vineyard, were not called to take their
payment, till the evening, and end of the day.

True; sometimes the master of the field, will come in amongst his harvest men,
about noone, or some other time of the day, and give them a largess, for their
encouragement, over and above, their wages; but how ever, at night they shall
have their reward without fail; and they have no cause to complain, if they
stay till then, and have no more then their wages; even so is it here, the
Lord, is pleased sometimes to come [in] very sweetly, to a soul, whilst it is
at the work, and laboring in his service, at the word, in a prayer, in a
sacrament, or the like, and gives it some inklings of his love, and sealings of
his spirit, which are as Largesses to the soul, that glad the heart, and do
much encourage it in the ways and work of God: etc. -- But you must know,
that this is an overplus of his love, which though he does sometimes bestow,
yet not always, for it is the portion, even of some that fear the Lord, to walk
in darkness, and see no light; Isa. 50.10
for the Lord, will be left free [in this,] and it is more, then he will make
promise of, that there may be no ground of complaint to any: only the
certain, and standing wages is, salvation; and this, he binds himself by
Covenant, to give, in that sorenamed place, Mat. 24.13.
he that shall endure to the end, the same shall be saved; as if he should have
said, if there do come any thing over, and beside what I promise, and good may
it do you, take it, and be thankful: only this is that you may trust to:
[Salvation.] He shall be saved, and will not this wages be sufficient; has he
any cause, to say, that the service of God is a vain service, that shall have
this at the last? how little soever, he has for the present, he knows not
what salvation is, that thinks it will not: surely if thou were as sore a
labourer as ever wrought for God, and should bear the burden and heat of
the day, yet should all thy days, eat in darkness, and never have good
look from God, nor any encouragement in his work, yet this penny of
salvation, at the night of death, and those things that accompany the same,
would be wages sufficient; therefore cease thy complaints, and persevere in thy
endeavors.

Thus have I at large showed you what you must do, if you would not have the
service of God to be made void, and vain to you.

1 Get into Covenant with God.

2. Take heed of a slighty spirit in the service of God.

3. Look well to your hearts, that they be found faithful in the main;
especially in those five partioulars: In Carfulness, in Diligence, in
Sincerity, in Belief, and in Perseverance.

And now give me leave in the Closure of all, to speak to you, as David spoke
to the people 1 Chro. 29.5. Who now is willing [among you] to consecrate his
service this day unto the Lord? shall I help the Lord to never a servant more
by this days work? Believe it Friends, you will never meet with a better Master;
to be sure, you will never meet with so good a master, if you should travel to
the utmost parts of the Earth.

It Is held (indeed) as a discour tesie in the world, and a point of dishonesty,
to wish or procure away a servant from one master to another. But I wish with all my heart, I could this day, procure some of the worlds, the Devils or
sinn's servants to become the true and faithful servants of the most high God.

For my part, I would be willing to venture the displeasure of their old
Masters.

And you, for your part, I dare say, would be highly thankful unto me, for
wishing you to such a service.

If I could persuade any soul hear, to leave its old drudgery, and to accept
of the service of God, thou would soon be ready to say, as David said to
Abigail, 1 Sa. 25.32.33.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel which has sent thee this day to meet me;
And blessed be thy advice, blessed be thou; For I was even wearying my self in
a way of vanity, I was serving the worst master, and doing the worst work in
the world, I was about to receive the worst wages that ever poor creature
received: for the wages of sin is death And therefore blessed, and for ever
blessed, be that God that has sent forth a messenger to stop me in that way,
to let me see the vanity of that old service, in which formerly I took so much
delight and to persuade my heart to delight in that new service of the Lord,
which formerly I judged as vain, and fruitless.

Well friends be persuaded this day, (and the Lord persuade you) to dwell in
the tents of Shem. Genesis 9.27.
The Lord persuade you to accept of his reasonable service, be not afraid of
it, there is all the reason in the world you should serve him. It Is true, there
are strange reports that go about of this service: It Is a way that is every
where spoken against, Go amongst them that have much means of knowledge, and
much knowledge by the means, and they speak against it there, are any of the
Rulers, of the scribes, and pharisees so forward in the service of God. Joh.
7.48.
Go amongst them that are ignorant, and they speak against it there, as if it
were the vilest drudgery in the world; whereas, the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3.17
its perfect freedom; Ioh. 8.36.
if the son make you free, then are you free indeed. Believe it, when you
come to die, you will have more comfort, by one week spent in this service, then
in many years spent in the service of sin, and Satan.

Be persuaded therefore to accept of the service of God this day; As he makes a
gracious profer to entertain you, be content to accept of it with all
thankfulness, take Gods Festing penny, receive his earnest, subscribe to the
indentures of his Covenant; And then the match is made betwixt God and your
souls, according to that remarkable Prophecy, Esaias, 44, 5. One shall say, I am
the Lords: and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob: and another
shall subscribe with his hand, unto the Lord and Surname himself by the name
of Israel. And this was that which David preferred above the Chief flower in
his Crown even to be called the servant of the Lord, Psalm. 18. the title.
rather then a Lord of servants. Let this be the utmost ambition of each
gracious soul, that it may say as he did, Psalm. 116.16. Oh Lord, truly I am
thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son, of thy handmayd; thou have loosed
my bonds.

To every such faithful servant shall that gracious promise of our great Lord,
and Master, made good, Ioh: 12.26 If any man serve me, let him follow me, and
where I am there shall also my servant be: if any man serve me, him will my
Father honor.

Therefore to conclude, let me exhort you as Joshua did the people. Now fear
the Lord, and serve him in sincerity, and in truth, I hope it seems not evil
to any of you to serve God, but you will choose the Lord for your master, and
each one for himself, resolve, and say with him, (whatsoever others do) as
for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord.

What say ye; (before I go hence) what answer shall I return to him that
sent me? shall I return the same answer the people gave to Joshua (the Lord
persuade your hearts to the same height of resolution) God forbid that we
should forsake the Lord, to serve other Gods.

The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we Obey.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF The maine things contained in this following Treatise.
THe Doctrine is, 1. Propounded. 2. Proved. 3. Cleared. 4. Applied.


1. The Doctrine is propounded. viz. That Carnal hearts do judge the true
service of God a vain service, Page 5 2. The Doctrine is proved, 1. By
Scripture. 2. By reason.

1. That their judgment is so. (A.) 2. Why they do so judge. (B.)
(A.) 1. That their judgment is so which is demonstrated, 1. By their wilful
and total omission of some known duties. 9 2. By their slighty performance of
those duties they do undertake. 13 3. By their weariness even in those
slighty performances, 17 4. By those base thoughts they harbor of such as
serve God better then themselves, 20
(B.) 2. Why they do so judge, as, 1. Because, they question whether there be
any such God to serve, 26 2. Because it is in vain to them, they judge it to
be in vain to all others also, 29 3. Because many great and learned men are
not most forward in it; 35 4. Because God does sometimes defer the payment of
his servants wages, 37
3. The Doctrine is cleared by answering a maine Objection. Object. If carnal
hearts do judge Gods service as vain, why do they then serve God at all? 39
Ans. There are two special reasons for it. 1. They are forced and haled
thereto by Example, Custom, Conscience, powerful Ordinances. 41 2. They do
it to make sure uncertainties, in some stirrings of conscience, 44

4. The Doctrine is applied by way of, 1. Information, for it informs us, 1.
Why the Lord has no more servants to wait upon him, 50 2. What is the ground
of so much lukewarmnesse, and indifferency in Gods service, 50 3. What is the
ground of so much Apostasy, and backsliding from God. 53
2. Reproof, 1. Directly to the wicked, 1. To those who judge men to be the
worse for Gods service. 57 2. To those who judge it vain. 58
2. By consequence, to Gods own people, ( if it be a sin in carnal hearts,
much more is it so, in the people of God) 61

Quest. What do Gods people object against the service of God, that (under
temptation) they think it vain? Ans. Objections do arise in their hearts,
springing. 1. From themselves in respect of 1. The non-apprehension of any good
that ever they got by the service of God. 62 Answ. To this Objection; 1. Thy
service may be profitable to others, though not to thy self. 66 2. God pays
thee by way of exchange. 71 3. Thou shall be better for it hereafter, though
not for the present. 74
2. The indiscernable difference that is in themselves, between their serving,
and not serving of God; they thrive as well, etc. 78 Ans. To this Objection, 1.
It is a sad thing that a gracious heart should tempt God, in this manner. 80 2.
If there be no difference in thy outward man, yet there is difference in thy
soul. 81 3. Though sometime there is no difference, yet at other times there
is. 82 4. They are not such special mercies if they come not in this way. 84
2. Objections do arise in the hearts of Gods people, springing from others;
84, 85 For such as have no care to serve God at all, fare as well, (in their
apprehension) as those that serve him most, and best of all. 85 Answ. to this
Objection. 1. They fare not so well in their Souls, though they fare as well
in outward blessings, 85 2. Those outward blessings may be the fruit of other
men's service, and not of their own. 86 3. The prosperity of this life is not
worthy the name of reward. 88
Obj. If Gods people may judge the service of God to be vain, then say carnal
men, we hope our condition is not so bad, as we feared, though we also do judge
the service of God, as vain. 91, 92 Ans. To this Objection, there is a wide
difference between the thoughts of the godly, and of the wicked in this
respect; 93 For, 1. Such thoughts in the godly are injected by Satan, not
settled in the heart, as it is in the wicked. 94 2. Such thoughts in the Godly
are not about the service of God it self, but only about their particular
service of God. 95 3. Such thoughts, beat them not off from his service, as
they do the wicked. 96 4. Such thoughts in the godly are followed with sorrow
and repentance, but not in the wicked. 99
3. The Doctrine is applied by way of caution and exhortation. 1. To the
wicked, to warn them to take heed of this sin, of censuring Gods service and
servants. 100 2. To the people of God; to take heed how they harbor such hard
thoughts, about the service of God, or how they suddenly cast away their
confidence in God. 102 3. To all in General to take heed that as the service
of God is not vain in it self, so it may not prove vain to them. 108
And that it may not prove vain take these directions. 1. Get into Covenant
with him, for whom we work, as were expect acceptance, Reward. 112 2. Take
heed of a slighty spirit, and of mean thoughts of the duties of Gods service.
119 3. Be Faithful in the performance of this service. 121
This Faithfulness must be showed in five particulars. 122 1. In
Carfulness; seen in the universality of our obedience active and passive.
122 2. In Diligence; seen in in doing all Gods work, with all our might. 124
3. In Sincerity; seen in making Gods, command the principle, Gods glory the
end, of all our work. 126 4. In Belief; seen in resting upon Gods promise
for assistance, acceptance 129 5. In Perseverance; seen in holding out to the
end without wavering. 133

He that does these things shall never be removed.

His labor in the Lord shall not be in vain.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 40. for oneis read one is, page 43. it dogs him read here it dogs him,
page 57. judge so evil put out so, page 67. in the 1. line put out may be, p.
82. for, diuse r. disuse, page 91. for, they made up as his Jewel were etc.
Read they were made up as his Jewels, etc. pa 105. for, it that read, it has,
page 105. blot our And, page 107. for affirm read attain, page 115. for Esaias
read Isaiah, page 120. for, as honorable read as an honorable, page 126. for
Zealous God, read Zealous for God, and put out for in the next line, page 127.
blot out, and, 127. For disern read discern, 130. blot out as he said, 137.
for, and good r. much good, 138. for yet, read yea, 145. for made good read, be
made good.


