A Breviary of ALCHEMY; OR A COMMENTARY UPON Sir GEORGE RIPLEY'S
RECAPITULATION: BEING A Paraphrastical Epitome of his Twelve GATES.

Written by Aeyrenaeus Philalethes ANGLUS, COSMOPOLITA.



LONDON, Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain.
MDCLXXVIII.

Sir George Ripley's RECAPITULATION.
I.
FOr to bring this Treatise to a final end;
And briefly here to conclude these secrets all:
Diligently look thou, and to thy Figure attend,
Which does in it contain these secrets great and small:
And if thou it conceive, both Theorical and Practical,
By Figures and Colors, and by Scripture plain,
Which wittily conceived, thou may not work in vain.
II.
Consider first the Latitude of this precious Stone,
Beginning in the first side noted in the West,
Where the red Man, and white Woman be made one, Spoused with the Spirit of
life to live in love and rest:
Earth and water equally proportioned, that is best;
And one of the Earth is good, and of the Spirit Three,
Which Twelve to Four also of the Earth may be.
III.
Three of the Wife, and one of the Man thou must take;
And the less of the Spirit there is in this Disponsation,
The rather thy Calcination for certain shall thou make:
Then forth into the North proceed by obscuration
Of the red man and his white Wife called Eclypsation;
Loosing them, and altering them betwixt Winter and Vere,
Into Water turning Earth, dark, and nothing clear.
IV.
From thence by Colors many one into the East ascend,
Then shall the Moon be full, appearing by daylight:
Then is she passed Purgatory, and her course at an end:
There is the up-rising of the Sun appearing white and bright;
There is Summer after Vere, and Day after Night:
Then Earth and Water which were black, be turned into Air,
And Clouds of darkness over-blown, and all appears fair.
V.
And as in the West was the beginning of thy practice,
And the North the perfect mean of profound alteration:
So in the East after them is the beginning of speculation.
But of this course up in the South the Sun makes consummation.
There be the Elements turned into Fire by Circulation.
Then to win to thy desire, thou needst not be in doubt,
For the Wheel of our Philosophy thou have turned about.
VI.
But yet about again 2 times turn thy wheel,
In which be comprehended all the secrets of our Philosophy
In Chapters Twelve, made plain to thee, if thou conceive them well;
And all the secrets by and by of our lower Astronomy,
How thou shall Calcine Bodies, perfect, dissolve, divide, and putrify,
With perfect knowledge of all the Poles which in our Heaven been
Shining with Colors inexplicable, never were gayer seen.
VII.
And this one secret conclusion know withouten fail,
Our Red Man teyneth not, nor his Wife, until they teyned be;
Therefore if thou list thy self by this craft to avail,
The Altitude of the Bodies bide, and show out their profundity,
In every of thy Materials destroying the first Quality,
And secondary Qualities more glorious in them repair anon;
And in one Glass, with one Reg'ment Four Natures turn to One.
VIII.
Pale and black with false Citrine, unperfect White and Red,
The Peacock's Feathers in Colors gay, the Rainbow, which shall over-go
The spotted Panther, the Lion green, the Crow's Bill blew as Lead;
These shall appear before the perfect White, and many other more
Colors; And after the perfect white, gray and false Citrine also:
And after these, then shall appear the bloody red invariable;
Then have thou a Medicine of the third order of his own kind multiplicable.
IX.
Thou must divide thy white Elixir into parts Two,
Before thou Rubifie, and into Glasses Two let them be done,
If thou will have the Elixirs for Sun and Moon, so do,
With Mercury then them multiply unto great quantity soon:
And if thou had not at the beginning enough to sill a Spoon,
Yet thou may them so multiply, both the White, and the Red,
That if thou liv'st a Thousand Years, they will stand thee in stead.
X.
Have thou recourse unto thy Wheel therefore, I counsel thee,
And study him well to know in each Chapter truly;
Meddle with no Fantastical Multiplyers; but let them be,
Which will thee flatter, and falsely say they are cunning in Philosophy:
Do as I bid thee, then dissolve those foresaid Bases wittily,
And turn them into perfect Oils with our true Water ardent
By Circulation, that must be done according to our intent.
XI.
These Oils will fix crude Mercury, and convert Bodies all
Into perfect Sol and Lune when thou shall make Projection:
That Oily Substance pure and fixed, Reymond Lully did call
His Basilisk, of which he never made so plain detection:
Pray for me to God, that I may be one of his Election;
And that he will for one of his at Doomsday me ken,
And grant me in his Bliss to Reign with him for ever,
Amen.
A Breviary of Alchemy; OR A COMMENTARY UPON Sir GEORGE RIPLEYS RECAPITULATION:
BEING A Paraphrastical Epitome of his XII Gates.
Stanza I. Position I.
That the Art is most certainly true.

WHich wittily conceived, thou may not Work in vain. Whence observe the
Truth and Certainty of the Art; so Father Hermes, It is true (says he,)
without falsehood, certain, and most true; That which is above, is like that
which is beneath; and that which is beneath, is like that which is above, to
bring about the Miracles of one thing. So Trevisan, Flammel, Dionys. Zachary,
and others, affirm upon their own Experience: And so this our Author in his
Epistle to King Edward; his Conclusion of the Admonition concerning erroneous
Experiments, and other places of these his Twelve Gates, that I need not
enlarge on this Subject.

Stanza II. Position II.
Our Work is made of Three Principles.

WHere the Red Man and the White Woman are made one, etc. Thence it is evident,
that our Operations are made of Three Principles, yet of one Essence; the Red
Man, the White Wife, and the Spirit of Life: By the latter, the two former are
Espoused or made One. This is that which Trevisan calls his One Root, and Two
Mercurial Substances, crude at their taking, and extracted out of their
Minera's: This our Author elsewhere calls his Trinity and Unity; the Trinity
respecting the Substances as they are several; the Unity respecting their
Essence, which is entirely Homogenial; Therefore it is added, that they live in
love and rest without repugnancy, which could not be were they not Essentially
and Radically the same; For likeness of Nature is the Cause of Love, and
Oneness of Essence the true ground of Union; among different Substances can
only be expected Confusion, if not Destruction.

Position III.
Three Substances make only Two Natures, Earth and Water.

EArth and Water equally proportioned, that is best. Here it is evident, that
these Three Substances make up but Two Natures of Earth and Water: The Man and
Wife are both Bodies or Earths; the one fixed and ripe; the other Volatile and
unripe, and by Mixture make a brittle black Hermaphroditical Body or Earth
called the Philosophers Lead, as Ripley in his Preface expresses it. The White
Woman, or Female, is otherwise called the Moon by all Philosophers; and by this
Author in his Doctrine of Proportions; One of the Sun, and Two of the Moon,
till altogether like Pap be done.

Position IV.
From equal Pondus of Earth and Water, Three of Water to One of the Earth is
good, but equal is best.

THen make the Mercury Four to the Sun, Two to the Moon, etc. as it should be
in Figure of the Trinity. And so we come to take notice of the Doctrine of
Proportion between the Earth and Water, equal that is best; the same says our
Author in his Chapter of Calcination. This is the surest and best proportion,
speaking of equal Pondus of Earth and Water; and gives the Reason, because
Solution will be sooner made, viz.

The more thy Earth, the less thy Water be, The sooner and better Solution
shall thou see.

And here he affirms the same of Calcination, which goes before Solution. Yet
Three of the Water to One of the Earth, will do well, lest the Tincture should
not have room to be sufficiently dilated in the Water, and the Body opened by
it; and this is the Pondus of Roger Bacon, which requires a longer time before
the quick be killed; and by consequence, the reviving of the dead must be longer
in doing; For Calcination is nothing else, but a killing the moist with the
dry; till which be done, there is no reviving of the dry by the moist, but they
have one and the same Operation and Period of time; for one dies not, but the
other revives: nor does the Dragon die, but with its Sister.

Position V.
The White Wife in the first Conjunction is to be Three to One of the Red Man.

THree of the Wife, and one of the Man thou take, etc. From the Pondus between
the Earth and Water, come we to view the Proportion between the Man and his
Wife; Here the Pondus is laid down Three to One, and so there are Four parts of
Earth to Four of Water, or more, until Twelve; that is, Three of Water to One
of the Earth. This also is clear from the Chapter of Conjunction, where the
Woman is allowed 15 Veins to 5 of the Man, as to the Act of their Foecundity
which is interpreted of the first Conjunction by himself, that the Man must
have but 3 of Water, and his Wife 9, which is 12 of Water to 4 of the Earth; by
which it is evident, that the Woman is to exceed her Husband in a threefold
Proportion.

Or Two to One after Reymund: Or Four to One according to Alanus; but Three to
One is best.

However, in Reymind's Doctrine of Proportions cited by our Author in his Gate
of Calcination, One of the Sun is joined with Two of the Moon, which make Three
of the Body; and to these are added Four of Mercury, which is One more of the
Spiritual than of the Corporal part; and this the Author compares to Trinity
and Unity, both are good; Yea, and Alanus prescribes Four parts to One, which
may be done, but Three to One is best and equal Pondus of Spirit and Life, for
completing of the Marriage between this Royal Pair, the Sun the Husband, and
the Moon the Wife: Of this speaks this Author in his Gate of Solution; One in
Gender they be, but in Number not so; The Father is the Sun, and the Moon the
Mother, the Mover is Mercury.

This Compound according to its various Considerations, has many Relations,
and as many Denominations; Sun and Moon, Man and Wife, Body, Soul and Spirit,
Earth and Water, Sister and Brother, Mother and Son, with many others; but its
Proper Name is Magnesia.

Quest. What is the Red Man? what his White Wife? What the Spirit of Life?

It may be here questioned, what this Red Man is? what his White Wife? and what
the Spirit of Life? for that is the only knot in understanding the Writings of
Philosophers, whose various Expressions, and seeming Contradictions herein, do
obscure the Art wonderfully: Yet however they seem to differ in their Writings,
they mean all one thing, if well or rightly understood.

Answer 1st. What the Red Man is?

The Red Man betokens the perfect Body of the Sun, or his Shadow the Moon; For
Lune the Body, which is one of the Seven, is a Male, and a perfect Body, and
fixed, only wants a little Digestion; and therefore the Red is hid under its
visible White, as White is hid under the visible Red of Sol: Therefore our
Author in his Work of Albification, says, that the Sun appears White and
Bright: And Trevisan says, our King, who is clothed in Garments of pure Gold,
after he is once in the Bath, appears no more till after one hundred and thirty
days; and then he appears White, and wonderfully bright and shining. And an old
Philosopher says, Honor our King at his return from the East in Glory and
admirable bright whiteness. Therefore says Artefius, Our Water is of kin to
the perfect Bodies, to the Sun, and to the Moon; but more to the Sun then to
the Moon; (Note this well.) And in all his Books he joins the Sun and Moon the
perfect Bodies Gold and Silver for the work. So does Ripley, and so all
Philosophers; by which it is evident, that either of the perfect Metals or
Luminaries with our Aqua Vitoe, will complete the work; as Arnold expressly
says in his Questions and Answers to Boniface; and Jodocus Creverus in his
Treatise, confirms the same in these words; If so be (says he) thou be so poor
that thou can not take Gold, then take so much Silver; yet Gold is the
better, as being nearer of kin to our Water and Mercury.

Answer 2. What is the White Wife?

Secondly, The White Wife, otherwise called the Moon, is a Female; it is a
Coagulated Mercury, but not fixed: A spiritual Body, fluxible in nature of a
Body, yet Volatile, in nature of a Spirit; It is called therefore Mercury of
the Philosophers; Our Green Lion; Our immature or unripe Gold: It is Pontanus's
Fire, Artephius's middle substance, clear like pure Silver, which ought to
receive the Tinctures of the Sun and Moon, his sharp Vinegar, his
Antimonial-Saturnine-Mercurial Argent Vive, without which Laton cannot be
whitened; of which an old Philosopher says, whiten the red Laton, by a white,
tepid, and suffocated Water; of which testimony Trevisanus affirms, that
nothing could be said better or clearer. This is that which is intimated in the
Vision of Arislaus, who found a People that were Married, yet had no Children,
because they married two Males together: Such are they who mix Sol and Lune,
both Corporal and fixed together, whom the Spirit will never revive, because
there is not conjugal Love. Join therefore Gabritius to his beloved Sister
Beya, which is a tender Damsel, and straightway Gabritius will die; that is,
will lose what he was; and from that place where he appeared to have lost what
he was, he shall appear what he was not before.

Answ. 3. What is the Spirit of Life?

Thirdly, The Spirit of Life is Mercury; The Mover says this Author is
Mercury, with which the Stone is to be multiplied when it is made: And it must
be true Mineral Mercury, without any foreign mixture, as Arnold resolves
expressly in his Answer to Boniface: And so Ripley says, some can multiply
Mercury with Saturn, and other substances, which we defy; Distill it therefore
till it be clean, etc: It moreover must have all the proportions of Mercury its
ponderosity, otherwise it could not be Metalline; its Humidity, otherwise the
Feminine Sperm would be deficient, and its siccity, not to wet the hand; which
it can no sooner lose by Corrosives or otherwise; but it straightway loses its
first Mineral Proportion, and so is no longer an Ingredient of our true
Tincture.

Position VI.
As the West Latitude is the entrance, so in the North is the first alteration.

PRoceed then forth to the North by obscuration, etc. Loosing them, and
altering them, etc. The Materials being found, and mixed according to the
Proportions taught before, is called the West Latitude; because in it the Sun
sets, and afterward appears no more in his Red Robes, till he first be
clothed with a White glittering Robe, and be Crowned with a very bright
Oriental Diadem. Now the progress into the North, is a discovery of the
Profundity of the Stone, and is compared to the Winter, which is in the North,
(chiefly) long, tedious, cold and slabbery; so will it be in this Work; the
Signs are Capricorn, Pisces, and Aquarius; In this there is a retrogradation of
Sol into its first matter, in which alteration the old Form dies, the Matter
rots and putrifies; and is after renewed in the East.

This Operation (says Flammel) is not perfected in less then Five Months; and
the Colors of the Compound are dark, obscure, waterish, and at length black
like Pitch; in which blackness the Body is rotted into Atoms; which entire
blackness, and height of corruption lasts but 2 or 3 days; and therefore says
Ripley in his Epistle, the third day he shall arise; the same says Dastin in
his Rosary, where he allows four days for Putrefaction: The same says
Efferarius the Monk in his entire Treatise published with Dastin; However, the
whole time of blackness, in coming, continuing, and going away, is 150 days,
although the Sun begins to appear in 130 days, if you work aright. This I have
added for the sake of many who expect black of the blackest in 40 or 50 days,
mistaking Flammel herein; who says, the color must be black of the blackest,
and like to the color of the Dragons in 40 days, which Dragons were blackish,
bluish, and yellowish, which colors show that the Matter begins to rot into
Atoms; which rottenness is not perfected in less than 150 days. (so as to let
the Sun appear with its Rays;) First in a small Circle of Heir of a whitish
Citrine; which increases, and changes hue day by day, till whiteness be fully
completed.

Position VII.
The East denoting Whiteness, is the beginning of the Stones Altitude.

THence by Colors many into the East ascend, etc. In the Work are three
Dimensions; Altitude, Latitude, and Profundity: The Altitude is the Perfection
of the Bodies which is Inchoate in Whiteness, and complete in Redness. The
Profundity is the first Matter into which they are resolved; For Multiplication
and the Latitude is the means through which it passes from its Perfection to
be abased; and from its abasement to its Glorification.

In this passage are infinite gay colors like unto those as appeared before
Blackness, but more glorious; For note, the Stone has but three colors,
Black, White and Red: In the first when completed, it stays three, or four
days at most; in the second as long; in the last it reposeth it self for ever,
between these Periods as the Matter is moister or dryer, purer or impurer, many
intermediate colors appear, more then can be numbered; But Two, (viz.) Green
and Yellow, are of long continuance, before the White and the Red: But many
colors appear between the beginning of that Work, and the first color of
Blackness: And although several colors appear, yet are they dark, foggy, and
foul colored; by which it appears, that Blackness is the predominant, which
for a space will appear like the Egyptian darkness, and is much about the same
continuance: so between Blackness and the White, although infinite colors
appear; yet the Basis of them being Whiteness, they are bright, and very
glorious, which being only transient, pass, and go, and others come in their
place, until the White be perfected.

Position VIII.
The South or Redness is the complement of this Mastery.

OF this course in the South the Sun makes Consummation. After the White, the
Fire being continued, the Compound will become Azure, Gray, and then Citrine,
which will last a long time; and at last end in a bloody Redness.

Position IX.
He that supposes his Work ended when the Stone is brought to its redness, is
mistaken.

BUt yet again Two times turn about thy Wheel, etc. The Stone being by constant
and long Decoction brought to this pass; he who thinks the race quite run,
reckons without his Host, and must reckon again: It is Medicine of the first
Order, and must be brought to the third Order by Imbibitions and Cibation,
which is a second turning round the Wheel; and by Fermentation, which is a
third turning round the Wheel, and brings the Medicine to the third Order, and
makes it then fit for Projection, which at first it is not; For till the
Medicine will flow like Wax, it cannot enter Mercury before its flight; but the
Powder as it is made at first, is like Grains or Atoms, and is congealed in a
far greater heat, then will make to fume, yet it abides in its form of Dust or
Powder, which must be otherwise before it be fitted for Projection; therefore
the Stone tingeth Mercury into a Metalline Mass in the twinkling of an eye, as
our Author says in his Preface, even as the Basilisk kills by sight: But the
Red Sulphur converteth Mercury by a digestion of time into its own Nature,
(viz.) Powder, if it be joined in a due proportion, and digested in a due heat:
Therefore says our Author, if you give it too much, it must have a Vomit, or
it will be sick too long, but the Stone will never part with any Mercury that
is joined to it in heat; our Sulphur then is a Royal Infant, which does both
hunger and thirst; and if you can but be a Nurse to it as you ought, it will
repay both your Pains and cost: Leave not then where you should begin; but go
on till you bring it to the third Order, which Reymond calls his Oils and
Unguents; and so our Author likewise.

Three Properties there are in which the White and Red Sulphurs of the first
Order, differ from those of the third Order.

One flows as easily as any Wax in heat, or on a hot Metal: the other in a
strong heat abides a Powder.

The one is like to Glass, brittle, ponderous and shining; the other a powder
like to Atoms.

The one enters Mercury like an Oil, and Coagulates it in an instant: the other
drinks up Mercury only, as the Calx of a Metal would do, but will not retain
it, if the Fire be increased strong, nor turn it into Metal; but if the heat
and proportion be both as they ought, by a digestion of Time, it turns it into
its own Nature: And so, (as Ripley says truly,) you may Multiply both White
and Red with Mercury; That if at first you had not enough to fill a spoon, yet
in short time you may be stored for your whole life, were it ten times as long
as it is like to be.

Position X.
Our Stone must have a Specification to Metals before it will Project.

OUr Red Man teyneth not until he teyned be, etc. Our Red Man or King must be
teyned by Ferment, before it will tinge imperfect Metals: the Ferments are only
Sol and Luna, the Proportion a fourth part to the Compound let the Sulphurs be,
and three parts of Sol or Luna according as the Sulphur is: or four parts Sol
and Luna, and the Sulphur a fifth part; then with Mercury digest and putrify
your Ferment, and congeal it, and again Ferment it, till it flow like Wax or
Oil; then will that Oil fix Mercury, and turn any Metal into Perfection; which
you may then Multiply at your pleasure, or you may multiply it before
Fermentation: Then take the perfect Stone for your Body, and mix him with the
White Wife in proportion as at first, and add the Spirit of Life, as at first,
and digest it till it pass the three colors, Black, White, and Red.

Thus does our Author conclude his Erroneous Experiments also: I never saw true
work but one, says he. One he did, but it was after infinite Errors, and
other work no Philosopher ever yet saw, which he briefly describes.

Remember Man the most Noble Creature, etc. that is Gold; It is an error to
write it, (Remember that Man is the most Noble Creature of Earthly
Composition;) For Man is not of Earthly Composition, but Stones, Metals, and
Clays, etc. are. Now because we seek the Noblest of Creatures of Earthly
Composition, we must be so wise as to take it for our Principle: For as he
says elsewhere; as Fire of burning the Principle is, so the Principle of
Gilding is Gold I wis. In this noblest Creature he says, are the four Elements
proportioned by nature, which makes it incombustible, for were any predominant,
it would not abide; but as Trevisan says, the Anatical proportioning the
Elements in a metalline matter, is the very form of Gold: or that rather which
gives it its form. He adds a natural Mercuriality, which costeth right naught;
that is a pure, sincere Mineral Water: without adulteration, not Artificial out
of Saturn, Jupiter, etc. But natural not a dear Mercury: but that which is
common and cheap. He adds one of his Minera's by Art is brought, that is our
green Lion, for with our first Menstrue, we Calcine only perfect bodies; but
none which are unclean, except one, which is usually called by Philosophers the
Lyon-Green, into this the clearness of the Sun, or of the Moon, secretly
descends: that is, by this the Mercuriality, or profundity of the Sun and Moon
are manifested by exuberation, but is hidden from sight a long time; till after
putrefaction, it exuberates and appears openly, bleeding and changing colors,
and at first being clothed in a glorious Green: of which says the Rosary, O
happy Greenness, without which nothing can spring? This exuberate- Mercury is
our hidden Stone, that is, Potentially, for when that appears; repugnant
natures are tied to Unity, that is our Green-Lyon, or Minera, or vegetable
humidity, or Mercuriality natural, which costeth right naught, or our first
Menstrue, and the noblest Creature of Earthly composition, which is either the
Sun, or Moon, but especially the Sun: In each of which the Mercuriality is
invisible, and appears not to sight; but by effect, that is, in the quality of
clearness, with Whiteness in one, and with redness in the other, these three
being United, the Mercury of the Sun exuberates and appears at first green,
then is the Eclipse near, and the Northern progress, the process after all this
is short; this one thing putrifies, then wash him in his own broth, till he
become White, then Ferment him wisely; there is the beginning, middle and end.
Glory be to God.

FINIS.
These Books are Printed lately for William Cooper at the Pelican in
Little-Britain, London.
THe Philosophical Epitaph in Hieroglyphical Figures. -- 8o A Brief of the
Golden Calf the Miracle of Nature. -- 8o Glauber's Golden Ass, to get Gold from
Stones, Sand, etc. -- 8o Jehior, the Three Principles or Original of all
things. -- 8o A Catalogue of Chemical Books in 3 parts. -- 8o Simpson' s
Philosophical Discourse of Fermentation. 8o -- Aeyrenaeus Philalethes' s
Secrets Revealed; Or the Shut Palace opened. 8o -- -- His Exposition upon Sir
G. Ripley's Epistle to K. Ed. IV. 8o -- -- Upon Sir G. Ripley' s
Recapitulation. 8o --
These are Printing.
Aeyr. Philalethes his Exposition upon Sir G. Ripley' s Vision. 8o -- -- Upon
Sir G. Ripley' s Preface. 8o -- Upon Sir G. Ripley' s first 6 Gates. 8o
FINIS.

