Minervas Laureate breaths, whose face
Is here acquainted first with brass:
His lofty style, yet smooth and trim,
Can make even Tumors beauteous seem
Romes Orpheus, who creates a GROVE,
Which t'o there is Music could but move:
Singing Thebes's Ruins, he does teach
The listening stones to mend the breach
Would know him! read his strains Thoust find
This shows his face, but Those his Mind.


AN ESSAY UPON STATIVS: OR, THE FIVE FIRST BOOKS OF PVBL: PAPINIVS STATIVS his
THEBAIS.

Done into English Verse By T. S. With the Poetic History Illustrated.

JUVENAL. Sat. 7. Tunc par ingenio pretium: nunc utile multis
Pallere, and toto vinum nescire Decembri.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-Lane. 1648.

NOBILI AMICORUM PARI, Do. GULIELMO PASTON BARONETTO, ET Do. GULIELMO D'OYLY
EQV: AVRATO, MVSARVM EXVLVM ASYLIS, ET RELIGIONIS PROFLIGATAE ASSERTORIBVS,
PATRONIS EIVS PLVRIMVM HONORANDIS, THOMAS STEPHENS VOTO ET MANCIPI CLIENS
ADDICTISSIMUS, HASCE STATIANAS PRIMITIAS, IN GRATI ANIMI TESTIMONIUM, L. M.
M.M.D.D.C.Q.

To the ingenuous Reader.
READER,
THou art here presented with a piece of Statius metaphrased: The Author was
twice crowned Laureate, in the most Po^ticke, and best judging Times. It is not
the least part of his glory, that he deserved Juvenals envy, as some
judiciously suspect the applauding Satyrist. I intend to pick no quarrels with
his Name or Country: but shall be well satisfied, if thy courtesy will allow
him to be Naturalized amongst us. For those Critical pens which have published
their ingenious disputes, between Ursulus and Surculus, (although, I conceive,
neither were of kin to our Statius) would have deserved better of the
Commonwealth of Learning, if they had held a torch to the dark and mysterious
places of the Poem: Which, I dare say, would not be so much neglected, but that
it is so little understood. The subject matter of the work, is the most
ancient of any History recorded by the Poets: And were it not preserved in our
Author, it had been, long since, worn out by Time: Appearing now like old
ruins, which preserve the memory of a place, although the form be wholly
d^cay'd. For those Homer ( applauded by Pausanias:) Autimachus, Pon^icus, etc.
teeming wits, which have been delivered of Poems on the same subject, (the
comparing of which, would have been the best light to an interpreter:) have
nothing but their Names, now remaining The iniquity of Time! which has not
only defaced Thebes, but robbed us of that Poesy which might repair it: at
least with paper-wals, more lasting then Amphions stones.

The translation was meditated, midst all the clamor and employments of a
public School; and so, cannot be so accomplished, as might be expected from a
vacant retiredness. And, when I shall tell thee, that it was intended for a
help to my Scholars, for understanding the Poet, thou will not wonder at my
marginall explications of the Poetic story. Those grander proficients, who
have digested that in their own brains, may save themselves a labor of
glancing on them: (I would provoke no man to look asquint:) For others that
want bladders, however in honor perhaps they had rather sink, safety will
persuade them to swim with this inferior help.

I know the common Fate of Translations, which are seldom read entire, but by
snatches; and such pieces only, as are pre-judg'd by the critic Reader, where
the Translatour is sentenced, according as he jumps with the others fancy. Yet
censure me as thou will: So I benefit any, I have my end: And if any thing here
prove satisfactory to my candid, ingenuous Friends, it will encourage my
progress in that work, which otherwise here receives its period. Farewell.

In Statium omnibus numeris accurate Anglica Poesi donatum, a doctissimo viro
D^o. Stephens.
-- Nee diguius unqu^m
Majestas meminit ses^ Romana lo^utam. Claudian.


Quis novus hic Hermes vatem felicibus umbris
Evocat? and Lucim (...) cultore superbum
Elysi^^ viduat? Manes, quibus esse sodalis
Dignatus (...), m^^rent; passim innuba laurus,
Et P^^bi^ marcent myrti, florentqu^ cupressi.
Post C^^m quisn^m Vencrem teniaret Apellem?
Hoc facts! Authoris tamen hic Veneres, Charitesque
Spirat, and in vers^ redivivus Statius omni.
Enibeus ille calor vatis migravit, and in Te
Congestus: major collectis viribus exit.
Atque erit ^mbiginon populo fortasse nepotum,
Interpres potius fueris dicendus, an Author.
Tam similis vix ipse sui est: Sic garrula vocem
Nympha refert, repetitque sonos, ^inguae aemula nostrae.
Non adeo similes, peperit quos Led^, gemelli;
Lactea utrique coma est, par frons, cademque genarum
Purpura, consimiles acceudunt lumina flammae.
Thebanae portenta domus, Iocasta marito
Quos peperie fra^res, confusae aenigmata stirpis
(Heu! male virgineam quae incestant nomi^a chartam)
Dum recitas, alto superas ea monstra Cothurno.
Argia and Deiphile.
Si pulchras pingas (fucus decet iste) puellas;
Si non illarum, flagramus amore Poetae:
A facie nullae, veniunt sed ab Art sagittae,
Lib. 2.
Sin (...) celebres, and casti federa lecti,
Frigida corripitur ta^ pura ^oe^ia flamma,
Imactaque rapi velle^^, vel spoute Sabinae.
Personat and jam festus Hymen, ducuntur ad aras
Nativoque crocus mutatur sanguinis ostre.
Sponsae, virginco (...) pepla rubore.
Lib. ^.
Sive sitim ca^^es, nobis sitis alicrae crescit,
(Tan^ah^ hi^ ^ieri quis ^^llet* sola levare
Ham Aga^ip^^ae pot^rit Permessidos unda.
Quo pede ^apisti fauste pergas, iterumque
Th^bam surgent meliore Amphioue muri.
Reginaldus Bekenham.
To his approved friend, and late reverend Master Mr. Thomas Stephens on his
judicious, and incomparable Translation of Statius.
DIamonds form diamonds: who'd know the just
Length of your worth, by your own labors must
Take measure. Honor to my verse it is
(Admired Sir) to dawnei'th' frontispice
And usher day, which flowers in each page
Of your learned Paraphrase: which should my rage
(Misguiding-folly rather) fondly praise
'Bove the deserving text and Authors bays,
Swear the anger kindled in the brethrens pile,
Duels more sprightly in an English style,
'Twould injure him and you. To overdraw
Were error in Apelles against the Law
Imagery commands, since in these arts
The beauty of the liknesse wonder darts,
And makes the miracle, Hence flows your fame,
We can but only say it is not the same.
The short-lived issues then of such, whose brain
Needs others works as bladders in the maine
Of wit and fancy, these we term Translation;
You^'s brook no other Title then creation.
From the old Latin stock new stemmes are sprung*
Statius newborn, speaks a new mother tongue.
Live then bright Suns of Masculine Poetry
Phoenix and heir at once, Parelii.
These and all else are weak, except that one
Between your selves there is no comparison.
Rob: Baldocke.
To my honored friend Mr. Thomas Stephens on his admirable Comment and
Translation of the first five books of the Thebaids.
ARt, Sir, works miracles: she can Revive
Men dead, in years and Fame, and bid them Live;
And speak a Language which they knew not, and
More sense perhaps, then They did understand.
(Some Comments courteously belly, and wit
Authors into more Raptures, then they writ.)
Your Statius never knew English sure: scarce we
Know it our selves, but by Dictionary;
It Is so new cast, and molded, we often look
For our own Mother Tongue in the constring-booke:
Yet here he speakes't so in the mode and trim,
The Finers selves envy both you, and him;
Who is your debtor for his stuff, and glase;
His text owes wit unto your Paraphrase.
Which you so turned, wrought, sweat until you hit
What Statius in English should have writ.
Which cost you so often watchings, it pleads right
To shine now: Day's due, after so many nights.
Five Books, so absolutely just, and best,
There Is nothing wanting to them, but the rest:
For Comment and Translation so agree,
They show the Beauty, and they help us see.
Strange Artist! who do thus miraculously
Paint Shapes: And then paint'st Day to view them by.
Clem: Paman.
To his much honored friend, and late reverend Master, Mr. Thomas Stephens, on
his deserving Translation of Statius.
THe world's refined, we see; and golden wits
Spring up in the iron age; more tersenesse sits
On Pallas's smoother brow; and every river
Can nobler streams then Helicon deliver.
If so, why are those The Quinquatria, in which Statius was crowned.
Festivals forbid
That crowned our Author? where is the baies that did
Enrich his glorious head? shall virtue rise
To a higher pitch, and have a cheaper price?
Yet with neglect there is safety: Seldome's praise
Secure, but aemulation blasts the baies.
If thou wrot'st Laureate too, others we see
Have envied Him, his Ghost would envy Thee.
Pereg: D'oyly.
To his highly esteemed friend, Mr. Thomas Stephens, on his incomparable
Translation of Statius.
WE thank you (Noble Sir) you have caused to be,
What we have wished, but yet despair to see:
Statius translated; One, all Sphinx to us,
Till we had met with Thee, an O Edipus.
T'incounter whom, it is far more glory then
Tydeus his conquering of the fifty Men.
And thus Etheocles with his Brother, are
In Thee more glorious, then in Thebes they were.
Thou writest of Princes, yet I Would rather be
Author, then subject of thy Poetry:
And yet be Prince too; since thou art of all
Minerva's train, the ^it imperial.
The Muses here had never been free from doubt,
Had no^ Thou Hermes come to help them out.
It Is that which raises wonder to thy Book.
To see therein light out of darkness struck.
Lucan and Ovid, with such easy men,
Are a fit work for a mere Rimers pen:
And cryptick Iuvenal, though dark he be,
We see unnighted is by Farnaby.
'This makes me praise thy choice; thou'st taken a Poet,
Which to translate, is to be Author of it.
For had we not thy clear invention seen,
Statius to us had not half published been.
Methinkes, I hear the Authors ghost repine,
To see his own work thus out-vied by thine.
Now let dull Rabbis, that learn nothing better,
Then to pick quarrels with an Hebrew letter;
(Of which crook'd Characters, to find the way,
They make their faces more deformed, then They:)
Let them contemn thy Book: Thy Noble strains
Are made for clever, and unwrinckled brains.
Go on; make up the rest; and let us know
The perfect height, that Art can reach unto:
That so the learned World may owe Thee more
Then to the Authors self it did before.
When thou have thus displaid the Thebane war,
'Twill be more during, then it is Ancient far.
Thomas Poley.
In eruditissimum Statianae Thebaidos interpretem, olim Praeceptorem ejus
observandum.
QUaliter in mundi votis, aviumque querelis,
Nata recens, surgit gratior inde dies:
It meliore coma, flavos spondetque capillos,
Lanugo tenerae lucis, Apollo, tuae:
Nostratis Stati, sic dum crepuscula spargis,
Optamus totam, quae sine nube, diem:
Sylvae ut detonsae, coelo videantur aperto;
Nulla sit obscuro textilis umbra loco.
Sic erit; and Iaetam faciet nunc Statius urbem:
Thebais and populo fiet amica uovo.
Gulielmus Copinger.
To his ingenious friend Mr. Tho: Stephens concerning his judicious Translation
of Statius his Thebais.
I AM not ambitious that the Press should sweat
In torturing the harmless Alphabet
To print my rural Genius; nor do I
Pride it to list my common Poetry
Amongst those Commander-wits which lead the Van
Of thy Heroicke wars, whose each pen can
Muster an Army of Poetic strains.
To rout those Rebels of the vulgar brains
Ignorance, envy, obloquie, and scorn
And truly make all their base hopes forlorn:
No it is thy love, it is thy word of Command
In thy Battalia's front makes me thus stand
And dare the peevish world to charge thy wit
Censure-proof with what e're would pistol it.
Let envy squint her venomed lightning, Thou
Shall stand unblasted with thy Laureate brow.
Ch: Woodward.
ERRATA.
Reader, thy ingenuity will correct those literal errors, which do not much
pervert the sense; especially if thou ^ave reference to the Latin Copy. The
most material I have thus observed.

Page 1. in the Comment, lin. 1. read, ravished. p. 4. ver. 93. r. Then ^ear;
1. p. 17. dele lineam primam. p. 43. in the Comment, ^. 14. r. venomous;
Lytarge. (y) --. p. 56. v. 715. r. Jove's. p. 72. ^. 308. r. Harmion^. p. 78.
in the Comment, l. 6. r. Oicles. p. 83. ^. 629. r. stumps and rocks. p. 109. v.
613. r. hatted God. p. 115. in the Comment. m r. almost all winter. p. 116. v.
761. r. shrill. p. 118. v. 814. r. sleep. p. 118. v. 827. r. curdled. p. 119.
in the Comment l. 1. ^nterpone, m, A fountain or well in the Nemeaean wood. p.
120. v. 889. r. Curetes. p. 122. in the Comment. l. 5. interpone, ^. on whose
banks laurels. and l. 6. r. Thessalian river. p. 123. r. now is the. p. 126. v.
89. r. women. p. 130. v. 196. r. angry (y) God. p. 131. in the Comment, r. *
solvit sua Brachia. p. 137. v. 426. r. stern. p. 138. v. 441. r. corn p. 140.
v. 499. r. close flames. in the Comment, interpone, d, Son to Thiodomas, squire
to Hercules. and in the Comment, l. 6. r. Heroes (d) (...) loss. p. 141* v.
523. r. and nurse.

Argument. Lib. 1. Statii Thebaidos.
Blind O Edipus, the incestuous parricide,
Invokes Tisiphone to scourge the pride
Of's scornful sons: Who reign by joint consent,
In course; then change their Crowns for banishment.
The first lot fell to Etheocles: But Jove
Sends Hermes down, for Laius Ghost, to move
Quarrels between them. Polynices flies
To Argos, weather-beaten: Thither hyes
Young Tydeus too: There they contest, and fight:
Till King Adrastus, thus disturbd in the night,
Makes peace; invites them; asks their names: They follow
To'th' Altars; where he chaunts Hymns to Apollo.
A Sacred heat inflames me, to relate
The Etheocles and Polynices.
Brethrens quarrels, and inveterate hate
For an alternate Crown; and to rehearse
Thebes's guilt. Great Powers, whence shall I fetch my verse?

Banished by Jupiter
Europa's rape? Forbidding his son Cadmus to return without his sister Europa.
Agenor's fatal Law?
Or Cadmus scowring the Ocean? 'Twere too far,
Should I discourse, how the Cadmus in the place sowed serpen^s ^eeth, which
grew to G^^n^s, who ki^^^d one another.
Plowman, sowing war
In his seditious furrows, stood amazed

With Tyrian Stones, charmed by Amphions ditty:
Whence grew that By which Agave slew Pe^^beus.
rage, which seized on Semel^ half Mother to Bacchus was a Thebane.
Bacchus's City:
(Stern Jealous of Jove with Semele.
Juno, it was thy work:) against whose brow,
Unhappy Who slew his son Learchus, instead of a young Lion.
Athamas did bend his bow:
Why, slighting the Ionick sea, the L^ucothoe.
Mother
Leapt with Palaemo^ in, the second Brother.
But farewell these; farewell both grief and joy,
Which Cadmus found: The miseries which annoy
The house of O Edipus must be my song:
Who dare not sing the triumphs that belong
To Titus Domitianus whom the Poet flatters.
Caesar's banners; nor the double baies
He bore from He triumphed twice over the Catti and Batavi.
Rheine, or Danow: Or that praise
The conquered Dacians yield him, who were thrown
Down from the Amongst these Nations mountains were consecrated, on which they
cursed their enemies. Strab. Lib 7.
Hills they cursed us on. It Is known
How Is Domitian, yet a child, freed his father from Vitellius his siege in the
Capitol.
infant years brought succor to, the glory
Of Iov^, Romes Capitol -- Thou larger story
Of great Vespasians name, borne to complete
Thy Fathers Vict'ries, whom this The Roman Empire.
Royal seat
Wishes eternal: Though the stars be crowded
In narrower compass; Though the never-clouded
East, the cold North, and Southern climate, free
From blasts, invite Thee: Though Apollo be
Ambitious to set off his round with those
Rich The custom was to paint the Emperors with glories about their heads, in
the similitud^ of gods.
glories of thy Rays: And Jove dispose
Half of his mighty Throne to Thee, (Great Soul)
Humble thy thoughts to earth, stoop to control
The Sea and Land; a while Divinity smother,
And make the heavens thy free gift to another.
The time may come, when a diviner rage
May swell my verse to thy great Acts. This page,
Thebane Wars;
One Crown destructive to two Princes: jars
Which death could put no end to; funeral When the two Brethren were burnt at
one pile, that flame (as if it were angry) parted in the air.
flames
Divided, like the souls they carry; names
Of dead Kings without Tombstones; many a Town

When A fountain near Thebes.
Dirce blushed, being stained with Grecian blood:
And Ioves-beloved Thetis wondering stood
To see A River of Boeotia emptying it self into Euripus Euboicus.
Ismenos, which was dry before,
Flow with such violence and chide his shore.

Enraged Tydeus? or Apollo's Amphiaraus who with his chariot was swallowed into
the earth.
Priest,
Buried before he is dead? Or is it the proud
Fighting ^n the river Hismeneta he was drowned.
Hyppomedon, whose slaughters stop the flood
That overwhelmed him? Or wilt weep the tale
Parthenopaeus funeral?
When that is spun out, take Brained with stones as he was scaling the walls of
Thebes.
Capaneus, and tell
(But with a greater horror) how he fell.
The hand of O Edipus had eclipsed the light
Of's wicked eyes, and brought eternal night

That he might long be dying: But a stronger
Beam's darted from his soul, there Furies lie
In thousand shapes (invited thither by
His bosom sins) which watch him; whilst he hides

In his close, u^seen Chambers. Then he raises
The fresh wounds he had made, those empty places
Where Is eyes had been, to heaven: Beating the ground,
The senseless ground, with his bloody hands; a sound

Which reign over guiltiness, and Hell, whose ends
Are narrower then our faults; And thou dark Lake
Of Styx, whose prospect I, though blind, can take.
Thou too, Tisiphone, which know best
That voice, thou have heard so often, grant this request:
If I have served thee truly, whom I found
Nurse to my infancy, who heal'dst the wound
They Then he was named O Edipus. This was commanded by his Father Laius,
aff^ighted at the O^acle.
bored through my feet; If I did go
At thy command to A Phocian City near Pernassus.
Cyrrha's streams, which flow
Twixt the two-headed Hill, when I might rather
Have staid with King of Corinth, to whom O Edipus was presented by his
Shepherd Phorbas.
Polybus, my supposed Father.
Where in the Tower of Appearing with three Promontories.
three-top'd Phocis, I
Grappled with the hoary King, and did deny
Life to his trembling joints, seeking to find
What there I lost, a Father: If my mind
By thee enlightened could unty the knot
Of Sphinx her riddle: If the incestuous blot
By which I stained my Ioc^^ta whom he married.
Mothers bed brought joys
To my free spirit; where I got thee boys.
Straight on these hands I fell desiring death,
And to my Mother did mine eyes bequeath.
Then here I ask a noble boon, and that,
Which thou thy self would prompt: My sons of late
(Sons still, however By incestuous marriage.
begotten) do despise
Their mournful Father, robbed of's power, and's eyes.
They will not Only his d^ughter Antigone would perform that office.
guide me, will not cheer my heart
With words of comfort: But (O grievous smart!)
Grown proud, they raise their Scepters from my urne,
Triumph over blindness, laughing when I mourn.
Am I accursed in these too? does dull Jove
See this with silence? Thou at least may prove
Their scourge: Sweet Mistress of revenge, come hither,
Entaile a Curse upon their heirs for ever.

Which from my fathers head these fingers tore.
Go, winged with a Parents curse; Divide
Between the Brethren: Let the sword decide
That title too: Dear Queen of Hell, invent

Will show their courage: Could thou plot a rage
Worthy their souls, they would prove their Parentage.
This said: the Fury throws a cruel glance
Upon him. She was sitting then by chance
Cocytus banks, where she did scatter
Her serpent locks, to let them drink o'th water.
But swift as lightning, or some falling Star,
She flies from thence; The ghosts give place, and fear
Their Mistress presence: she her progress makes

The way to the Iron gate; at foot of the hill
Of A Laconian promontory whence was supposed a passage to Hell.
Taenarus, where is a free entrance still,
But no return: The day shrunk from her sight,
And hid her self in that dark cloud, which night
A high Thessalian Mountain, feigned to be Metamorphosed from a man at the
sight of the Gorgons head.
Atlas fled,
And let the heavens fall from his trembling head.
But from the plains of Part of the aforesaid P^omontory.
Malea she does hurry
In The beaten path to Thebes: Nor does the Fury
Fly any way with greater speed, or takes
This kind of Serpent was ^s^ribed to the F^ries locks for (...)
horned snakes
(The lifeguard of her head) shades all her face;
A dark black color fills the hollow place,
Where stood her worn-out eyes: just as the Moon
Blushes, when by Art The superstition of the heathen thought that the Moon
Eclipsed was conjured out of the heavens, at which time they sounded loud
Instruments of br^sse, left she should he^r their inc^ntations.
Magic she is charmed down*
From heaven. Thus puffing out her hollow cheeks
With rage, and swollen with venomed gore, there breaks
A black flame from her ugly mouth: Whence came in
An army of diseases; Empty famine,
Devouring plagues, grim death: Her tattered coat
Sits wrinckled on her back, tied with a knot
Or two about her: if she change that hue,
The Justice is a servant to the Fates.
Destinies spin her another clue.
Then shakes she both her hands: this flames does wear,
The Other with serpent fingers stings the air.
When she stood still, where long A mountain dedicated to Bac^hus.
Cithaeron meets
Heaven with his cragged top, her hissing greets
The earth so loud, that th'Ecchoed noise resounds
Through vast Containing Attica, Baeotia, Megaris, AEtolia, and Phocis, besides
the sea so called.
Achaia, and the Grecian towns.
Proved to be the middle of the e^rth by Jove's Eagles, which met there.
Parnassus, the worlds navell, heard it: so
Did sharp Laconia producing v^liant men.
Eurotas; doubtful Whether belonging to Thessalia or Thracia.
O Ete too,
Which tottered at the sound. A neck of land where Corinth stands, enduring the
violence of the waves on either side.
Isthmos did wonder,
And scarce had power to keep two seas asunder.
Leucothoe affrighted at the crack
Pulled her Palaemon from the Dolphins back,
And hid him in her lap. The Fury next
Flying to Thebes built by Cadmus.
Cadmus Towers (which she had vexed
With many storms before) begets strange passion
In The brethrens frighted minds; renews the fashion
Of their The earth-born Giants, which destroyed one another.
first founders rage; then Envy tears
Their tortured souls, and hate-begetting fears.
Now a desire of Government possest'um:
Their league is broke, whilst both strive to invest'um
First, with the pall, and Scepter: Oh! it is brave
To be Lord Paramount, and not to have

Will Crowns divided ever hold together.
So, when the toyling husbandman shall yoke
Two untamed steeres in's plow, they will scorn the stroke
They feel, and know not how, with down-press'd necks

Rent with their several forces; whilst they take
Two diverse paths, and crooked furrows make.
Such was the Brethrens discord, such stern Ire
Had set an edge, on their untamed desire.

By course, their Crowns for banishment: It Is strange,
How they would cool their Fortunes: whilst the heir
Gapes at the hopes of the succeeding year.
This was that league, their wars were stopped upon:
For the second year Etheocles denied it.
Succession.
And yet the world had not used then to guild
Their seiled roofes, nor had it learned to build
Piatzo's raised with Lac^demon^^n ^ Corinth being most famous for it.
Grecian marble, able
To shelter thronged He alludes to the Roman ^ust^me of entertaining their
clients with a sportula.
retainers to their table:

No Sentinels at door kept watch and ward:
No precious Goblets made their wine look neat,
No plates of gold were sullied with their meat:
It Is a bare power they seek, an empty prize,

Thus whilst both strive for a neglected soil,
The humble throne of Cadmus, they defile
Religion and themselves: The laws and rig^t
Are beaten down, In their funeral flames.
alive and dead they fight.
Misguided souls! whither does passion bear you?
What if both poles were the purchase, should it dare you
To such impieties? If all that is seen
By the eye of heaven, in the East, or West, or when
He wanders out of's circle, to behold
The Southern heat, or squints of the Northern cold?
What if Tyre's wealth, or Phrygian heaps invite you?
But it is a dismal Palace does excite you
To rage: you would buy from hell a wretched boon,
To sit in O Edipus his The Scepter being always fatal to those that swayed
it.
cursed throne,
But now the lots are cast, and fate has crossed
Stiff Polynices hopes. How wast thou lost
In thine own joys, proud Etheocles, to whom the lot fell.
Tyrant then? when all
About thee, were thy slaves? when thou migh'st call,
What 'ere thou fanciest, thine, and none deny thee?
Yet by and by the commons whisper nigh thee
Some relish of dislike; and (as they use)
The next successor in their heart they choose.
And one amongst the rest (whose mind was set
To blast the Scepter, and could never yet
With patience bear commands) cries out; Oh Fate!
Is It thus resolved to vex the Ogyges was King of Thebes when the first deluge
h^ppened, long before that of Deucalion.
Ogygian State?
Must we exchange our fears still? and endanger
Our subdued heads by course to serve a stranger?
They Have made division of our lives, they have weakened
The hand of Choosing banishment willingly, the worst of misery.
Fortune. Shall I still be reckoned
A bond-slave ruled by banished spirits? is it,
Great power of heaven and earth! fixed in thy breast
To plague my countrymen with such a doom?
Or does this long-continu'd mischief come
Since Cadmus searching the Carpathus is an Island twixt Egypt and Rhodes,
which names the sea about her.
Carpathian seas,
For her who backed the wanton Europa Cadmus's sister, stolen by Jupiter,
transformed to a bull.
Bull, did please
To choose those fields of Once King of this place, after whose name, the
Baeotians were once called.
Hyas, here t'erect
His newfound kingdom? Might we else expect
This plague, from the first The Giants springing from the Dragons teeth, who
destroyed one another.
Brethrens quarrels, when

Do You mark, since to others banishment, how sour
He looks upon it? How he has swelled his power?
How big his words? how proud his pace is grown?
Think you, that this man will be e're brought down

That none was once more gentle, just, and kind:
And reason good: he had a rival then,
But we 're contrould by all: Poor, abject men.
Like as two winds, from several quarters met,

The topmast in the churlish waves: such fate
Hangs over this doubtful, this distracted State.
One Prince commands obedience, whilst the other
Threatens as much if they obey his brother.
Jove's high command the gods resort
To heavens Star Chamber: 'Twas the inner Court
Where they assembled, In the middle of the heavens.
equally between
The East and Western houses: whence was seen
The confines of the earth and seas: Jupiter.
The God

Of his majestic countenance: A^on
He sets him down, in his bespangled throne.
The rest stand, and expect: not one presumed
To sit, till leave was beckned: Then they assumed

And the heaven-begotten Growing from the rain, distilling out of the clouds.
Rivers: Nay the wind
Comes whistling too; but's breath was stopped with fear.
Thus having filled the starry Quire, they wear
Such Majesty about them, that the face
Of heaven's amazed: Such beauty fills the place,
That more then day breaks thence: The roofe's all gold,
The beams of Chrysolite hidden flames do hold.
Having commanded silence, all the round
Gave care and trembled: (for within that sound
Was an unchanged decree; the Divinely enough, contrary to the fond opinion of
the Stoics.
Fates did make
His words a law:) thus then aloft he spoke.
The tainted earth; and man's polluted soul
I here impeach, whom vengeance cannot control.
How long shall guilty cries awake my rage?
This arm is tired with thundering. It Is an age*
Has wearied out the Vulcans men which made Jove his thunderbolts.
Cyclops. Every cinder
In Vulcans shop's burnt out. AEtna, the flaming Sicilian Mount.
I would not hinder
Thy horses ( Phoebus) ranging where they list
To fire the world, when their false Phaeton thrown headlong into the river
Padus.
guide was mis't,
Hoping they would refine't: But all in vain,
As was thy labor, Neptune, when the In the great deluge.
Maine,
Raised by thy trident, found a way to pass
Beyond its bounds, and washed Earths dirty face.
Now come we armed with vengeance against two Nations
Sprung from our The Argives challenge from Perseus the son of Jove and Danas,
the Thebanes from Cadmus, of the line of Epaphus.
loins: One's Greece, the habitations
Of Perseus: T'other's Thebes, built in that tract,
Which men once called Afterward Boeotia, from the Ox which the Oracle
commanded Cadmus to follow.
Aonia: One neglect
Has seized on all their souls. Who does not know
Cadmus his ruins? Whilst the powers below,
Charmed from their darker vaults, often quarreld here.
Do You see their As that of Agave triumphing in Pentheus's death, and that of
Iocasta's incest.
Matrons wicked joys? Do You hear
The outcries from their Where Athamas slew his son Learchus.
groves? I would conceal
Those daring sins that strike at As Niobe against Latona, Pentheus against
Bacchus, and S^mele against Juno.
heaven: to tell
All those lewd manners, which defile that place,

Yet O Edipus, more fruitful in his sin,
Covets his Fathers bed, and strives to win
Strange pleasures from his Mother. Who, before him,
E're forced a passage to that womb that bore him?
Having torn out his eyes.
reached him: He has banished
All day, and comfort: Heaven it self is vanished
Out of his sight: whilst his malignant brood
(Wicked beyond all president) have stood
Triumphing over his blindness. The have obtained,
Of blindness.
night has gained
Jove's ear, and's hand: I Will arm their rage, and mock
At the ruin of both kingdoms: All that stock
I Will root and branch destroy. The quarrel's spun
With ease: King of the Argives.
Adrastus pitying's exiled son,
His daughter Argia, was married afterward to Polynices, but it is spoken here
as if done and past, as all things are in the foreknowledge of the gods.
Line unhappily, shall give
Assistance. It Is decreed: Nor must they live.
Deceitful Once King there, who intending to try the divinity of the gods,
whom he had invited, served up his son Pelops to the table.
Tantalus sticks in our breast:
We have not digested yet his bloody feast.
So spoke the God: But Juno deeply wounded

Must I to Arms (great Justice?) must I fight?
It Is known full well, what strength of men, what might
I always brought to the towers of Called ^he Cyclops towers for the excellency
of the workmanship.
Greece: that Crown
Which my Who bounding the dominion between Neptune and Juno, gave sentence on
her part, and was therefore honored by her.
Phoroneus wore, with what renown
Have flourisht? I have winked at one dull slight,
When sleeping Made the keeper of Jove's beloved Io, and slain by Mercury.
Argus found eternal night
Within those borders: when in a Golden shower
Thou found'st a passage to the guarded Where Acrisius imprisoned Danac.
tower:
It Is pardoned: 'twas a borrowed shape offended.
But when thou wor'st As he appeard to S^mel^ in Thebes.
thy self, and wast attended
With flames, the tokens of our nuptial sports,
My hate may justly blast such rival Courts.
Let Thebes be punished: what had Greece deserved?
Yet take thy pleasure: If thy Queen's reserved
An object for thy scorn, level her Cities,
Grecian Cities dedicated to Juno, Samos had the honor to see her Nuptials.
Samos, Grecian Cities dedicated to Juno, Samos had the honor to see her
Nuptials.
Mycene, and Grecian Cities dedicated to Juno, Samos had the honor to see her
Nuptials.
Sparta: Sure it pities
Thee, she is so great: What needs perfuming wood
To warm her Altars, washed with sacred blood?
A City devoted to Isis, formerly Io, now deified.
Coptos in Egypt sends a better savor,
Where Isis tears This sacrifice began with sound of kettledrums, where Isis's
tears for her Os^^is, were thought to cause Niles inundations.
with Nile obtain more favor.
But if old scores to a new account we call,
And it is decreed to squeeze the dregs of all
The times are past: Where shall this task begin?
What age will serve to purge Earths raging sin?
Look back upon that Pisa in Arcadia, by whose wall Alph^us flows, near
which was Jove's grove.
kingdom, whence by cunning
Alpheus after a long c^urse under earth and sea, rises again with the
fountain Arethusa in Sicily.
Alpheus is joined with Arethusa; running
Through sea and earth, to find her; Is It not shame,
The Arcadians should build temples to thy name
In so unchaste a place? There were the forces
Who proposed his daughter Hippodamia a prize to him that conquered him in a
chariot combat, which cost the lives of thirteen wooers.
O Enomaus: whose horses
Might make Getulian Thracia, where Diomedes his horses were fed with man's
flesh.
AEmus a fit stable:
Behold the mangled limbs of a whole rabble
Of suitors lie unburied there. False Where Paris gave the rash judgment
against Juno.
I Would,
The place of my disgrace, thou make thy pride*
The place of Jove's nativity which does likewise bo^st of his tomb.
Crete, which has belied thy sepulcher.
May not poor Greece be left thy spouse? Forbear
Such furious threats. Take pity on that Nation,
That claims from thee, by a most nee^e relation.
The world has many kingdoms: None's so good,

Thus ended she her suit, made up of tears
Lined with reproaches: But Jove's patient ears
Heard her without disturbance: then replies;
'Twas not expected, any curse should seize
Graecians, were it never so right,
But thou would frown: Nay There worshipped.
Bacchus, if he might
Have liberty, would plead for's Thebes, I know:
And (durst she speak) so would Mother to Venus, and solicitous for her
grandchild Hermione.
Dione too.
But witness all the infernal lakes, and those
Stygian floods, my brother Pluto chose,
There Is an irrevocable sentence past:
Wherefore my swift-wing'd The Ambassador of heaven.
Mercury, make haste:
Outstrip the winds that bear thee: Through the air
Glide down to the darker region: There repair
Father to O Edipus.
Laius; call him back from hell:
(He Is not yet passed the Of Lethe whence no return.
Gulf: because he fell
Untimely by the sword of O Edipus:
This is that kingdoms That the souls of slaughtered bodies wander a hundred
years.
Fundamental:) Thus
Quickened by thee, send him to's Etheocles.
Grandchilds Court,
With these commands: His brother (whose resort
To Greece, in's banishment, will swell his pride,
And strengthen's sufferings) must be denied
Access to's presence, (He himself would choose it)
And when the throne is asked, let him refuse it.
Hence will I ground their anger, and dispose
The rest as order bids me. Called Atlantiades from his grandsire Atlas, King
of Arcadia.
Hermes goes
As Jove commanded, putting on a pair
Of winged buskins; whilst his golden hair,
And starry head was shadowed with his hat:
Then takes his charming rod, the scepter that
Commands sleep, or forbids it: He looks over
Death's Court with this: This can lost life recover.
Thus vaulting down, he flutters in the air;
Which parted gently; Neither stops he there;
But with his sudden flight, the welkin sounded,
And darting downward, all the sky was rounded.
Now Polynices, banished from his throne,
As 'twas contracted, wanders all alone,
By Not daring openly to appear there in his brothers year.
stealth in the Thebane deserts: Whilst his mind
Feeds on the hopes, of what must be resigned
E're long to's hands. Sometimes he thinks the Sun
Stands still; It Is tedious e're the year be done.
One thought, asleep and waking has possessed him,
What beams will guild that hour, that shall invest him
In The strength o'th Kingdom; When his humbled brother
Must go and seek new fortunes, whilst Himself by course.
another
Shall weild the scepter. This were such a day
He Would spend an age to see it. But the delay
Is irksome to his fancy: Yet that thought

With pomp to th'Diadem; and sit on high,
To laugh at's wandering brothers misery.
Thus various passions do his soul annoy,
And over-greedy wishes spend his joy.

To First King of the Argives, whence they are called Inachidae.
Innachus his City's, and the place
Where Who expelling King Sthenelus governed Argos.
Danaus reigned; To Where Atreus frighted Thyestes with a banquet of his own
children. At which sight the Sun fled backward.
Mycene, which would hide
Her black deeds from the startling Sun: His guide
Was rage, or chance, or destiny. He flies
In which Bacchus's Priestesses performed their howling sacrifices.
Ogygian caves, where frantic cries
Of the mad Priests are echoed: where the fields
Fatned with Of the Bacchae which lance themselves.
sacred blood more plenty yields.
Then passed he by A Boeotian mountain devoted to Bacchus, on whose smooth top
was a long continued plain.
Cithaerons gentle plain,
Where the high mount stoops down to kiss the Maine.
A famous thief, who threw the passengers he had robbed, from this place,
headlong into the sea.
Scyrons dangerous craggy rocks:
And sees, where The City Megara where Scylla cut off her fathers fatal hair.
Nisus with his purple locks
Once reigned. Then leaves he quiet Corinth, where
'Two neighbor The Isthmos where Corinth stands is between the Ionian and
AEgean Seas.
seas made music in his ear.
By this time had the Moon begun her station,
Sol, tired out with his last perambulation,
Was gone to bed. The silent world does view
Her Ayery chariot, pearld with drops of dew.
No beasts do roar, no birds do chatter, sleep
Over man's desires, and careful thoughts does creep:

A sweet forgetfulness of labor past.
But the gray sky promised no glorious beams
From the morning sun: The duskie Twilight seems
To put out day too soon, and keeps no light
Reflected from the absent sun: Grim night
Arising thicker from the earth, does cloud
Heavens glittering fires. Whilst the winds aloud
Knock at the AEolia is a part ef' Asia minor; where AEolus king of the winds
kept Court.
AEolian bars, and rudely force
A passage from their prisons. Straight the hoarse
And hollow throat of winter comes on, scolding:
The winds fall out among themselves; Each holding
Heaven by a proper title, for his own;
Till Poles are rent, and the Axle's overthrown.
But the prevailing Southern blast has given
Most clouds to the work, and chiefly mantles heaven:
Opening a thousand spouts; whose drops are stayed
By the dry cold Northern breath, and hail are made.
Nay heavens artillery comes in; the Thunder
And subtle lightning, tear the clouds asunder.
By this time A woody country, near the city Cleon^, where Hercules slew the
famous Lion.
Nemea, and the Five in number: viz. Cyllenus, Lycaeus, Lycormis, Argoleon, and
Maenalus.
hills that scatter
About the Arcadian groves, are drenched with water.
Old Named from the first Argive king.
Inachus with nimbler floods does roar,
Cold Arising in the North.
Erasine's more active then before.
In sandy channels, where men walked but now,
In spite of damms, huge streams do overflow.
You Would think that The poole where Hercules killed the serpent Hydra.
Lerna's poisonous, troubled lake,
Sweld with new venom. Every wood does crack:
The trees let fall their arms: And heaven beholds
What it never saw before, In which shades Pan kept his summer Court of
residence.
Lycaean folds.
Our frighted travailer's amazed to see
The stones drop from the craggy clifts: But he
The stones drop from the craggy clifts: But he
Startles at harsher music, whilst each mountain
In dreadful Cataracts powers down a fountain
Of cloud-begotten waters; which orethrow

Benighted thus, and mad at this disaster,
He gropes on: Fear and's brother, spur him faster.
So when a storm has caught the mariner
In raging seas, when neither Moon, nor star,

His soul to the angry heavens, and boistrous waves:
Now fears he treacherous sholes; now thinks he knocks
His reeling ship against the foming rocks.
Thus through the woods does Polynices fly;

In their wild mansions: His stout breast does tear
A way through thickets: now grown bold with fear.
Till from Larissa's top, he spies a light,
( For there was a Thessalian City of that name, which named Achilles
Larissaeus.
Lariss a tower of Argos) conquering night,

With all his power. O'th left hand, he descries
Juno's Where stood Juno's Temple.
Prosymna. On the right, he sees
The lake of Lerna drained by This lake was dried up by Hercules, burning the
spungy ground about it* The name of Hydra being fetched (...).
Hercules.
At length he enters the open gates, and straight
Where Adrastus kept Court.
Palace, in whose porch he might
Repose his stiffened limbs: Here rests his head,
And sleep's invited to so hard a bed.
Adrastus then was King; whose quiet fate
Had spun his years beyond a middle date:

In both his Son to Talaus the grandchild of Jupiter, and Eurynome daughter to
Apollo.
parents. Yet the gods had given
No male successor to him: All his hope
Rests in two Dcipbile, and Argia.
daughters, which must underprop
His throne. Apollo, once being asked about'um,
Replied: (you would think the god had meant to flout'um)
(But time discovers Truth) Their chosen love,
A bristled Hog, and Lion fierce, shall prove.
This riddle could not thou, grave Sire, untwist,
Not thou Amphiaraus Oicles's son.
Oiclides, great Apollo's Priest.
The god forbad it: Only care possessed,
And gnawed upon their Fathers doubtful breast.
As't happened: The son of O Eneus reigning over Calydon, Pleuros and Oleuos,
Cities of AEtolia.
Tydeus at that instant, leaving
His native Calydonia; (Horror cleaving
Fast to his guilty soul, for's Menalippus, whom unawares he had slain, as he
was hunting.
brothers blood)
In The dead of night, traced the same desert wood,
And felt that storm of Ice, and hail; till rain
Had washed his face; and thawed his back again.
Then chances on that shelter, where before
The Other had stretched his limbs upon the floor.
Here chance presents a bloody rage. The weather
Cannot make one roof shroud both their heads together.
Their tongues beat the preparative, till both
Swollen big with anger, rise: And first they 'uncloath
And strip their shoulders naked: next they dare
Each other (Champion-like) t'a single war.
The Thebane was the taller, and had told
Most suns of the two: yet Tydeus was as bold,
And equaled him in's courage; Give him's merit,
In a less room there reigned a greater spirit.
By this time they were fallen to cuffes: the blows
Like Rip^eus the most Northern mount of Scythia is famous for these storms.
Scythian hail, or darts an Army throws,
Fly thick about their ears: Nor do they stick
With buckled hammes their empty guts to kick.
So when the Olympic games return again
Jove, on A City of Elis, ^^eer which the Olympic games were celebrated every
fifth year to the honor of Jupiter.
Pisa's plain,
The dust is laid with falling drops of sweat,
And the spectators differing votes do whet
The striplings valor; whilst the No women were admit(...)
Matrons barred
From entrance, stand expecting their (...)
reward.

(For 'twas not praise they looked for) whilst their cruel
Hooked fingers, claw their faces: Each man cries
How he can best tear out his fellows eyes.
Perhaps their angry swords too had been drawn,

Unhappy Thebane, had been better wrought
By a strangers hand: But that Adrastus thought
He heard some deep-fetch'd groans, and outcryes pass,
In The dead o'th night, which called him to the place:

He could not freely harbor quiet slumber.
Thus, when by torch-light he was brought in state
Down, through the Courts, and had unbar'd the gate;
He spies strange faces there: scratcht mangled cheaks,

To these expressions: What inflames your angers
To these uncivil broils, young fiery strangers?
None of my subjects durst presume I Am sure,
To break the peace thus rudely. Why does your

Is the whole day too short? Or do you delight
To banish peace, and rest? Speak: whence do you come?
Or whither go ye? why so quarrelsome?
Your rage says you are not base: A noble house
^s wrote in bloody letters, on your brows.
Scarce had he done: when speaking both together,
They mix these words, and frown on one another.
Mild King, what need we talk this quarrel over?
These streams of blood you see, our wrongs discover.
They uttered this confusedly: But next,
Tideus goes on, alone: My soul being vexed
At her Killing his brother unawares.
misfortunes, left her native Land
Of The boar slain by Meleager and sent by Diana.
Monster-bearing Calydonia, and
The AEtolian Which were washed by Achelous, a ^iver springing in Thessalia.
plains; hoping to find some ease:
But close within your borders, night did seize
With all her powers upon me: Who is this
Denies my head a shelter here, cause his
Took' first possession in the place? We see
The double shapen Half men, half horses, indeed Thessalians, the first that
backed horses.
Centaures will agree
To lodge together: And the Cyclops rest
But in one The shop where they make Jove's thunderbolts.
AEtna: Nay the wildest beast
Knows natures Laws, and cannot one roof contain
Us two? -- But why do I spend my self in vain?
Be whosoever 'ere thou will, thou art not like
To triumph long. If guilty Of hi^ late slaughter*
blood don't strike
New horror to my soul, I Will make thee know
I Am O Eneus son, and Mel^^ger the father to O Eneus was son to (...)
Mars his grandchild too.
We have both stock and courage too, says the other:
But 'twas a startled (...)
conscience made him smother
His Fathers name. Stay, says the King: assuage
Such churlish thoughts begot by night, or rage,
Or valor. Use my Court: come enter hither,
And let your shak'd hands join your hearts together.
It Is not in vain, nor were the gods asleep,

Through these rough paths; and then you may with laughter
Remember these past discontents hereafter.
How truly did this reverend King foretell
Their fortunes I when this storm was over, they fell
The four pair of friends are famous: Theseus and Perithous, Pylades and
Orestes, Patroclus and Achilles, Tydeus and Polynices.
pair;
And might with Theseus and his Perithous, accomp^nied by his friend to hell in
search of Proserpina.
friend compare,
In their long progress: Or with Or^stes haunted by the Furies for
Clytemnestra's murder was freed by Pylades's advice.
Pylad's stand
Who freed Orestes from Megara's hand.
Their wounded minds were healed now, with the balm
Adrastus lips: Like as a calm
Quiets the troubled waves, when the storm is over,
And the last blast expiring now, does hover
About the sails. Straight into the Court they pass;
Where the good King beholds the comely grace

Of some great bearded Lion (sure, of kin
To that young Hercules whilst a child slew a Lion near Teumessus, whose ^kin
he always used as a mantle.
Hercules in Tempe slew
For there is another Tempe in Thessalia, this in Boeotia.
Teumessian Tempe, long before he knew
The Afterward one of his twelve labors.
Cleonaean monster) hang about
Thebanes shoulders: whilst a bristled, stout,
And tusked boar, of Famous formerly for the great boar Diana sent.
Calydonian kind,
Had parted with his coat, which spread behind
Tydeus his back: The aged Prince, possessed
With strange amazement at the sight, confessed
Apollo's sacred truth, remembering then
What Oracles he heard, in the Where the Tripos was
speaking Den.
This spectacle confounds him: Joy does thrill
Through all his foul; He reads expressed the will
Of The gods, that brought them hither: Now he sees,
What beasts they were, the riddling god did please
To point out for his sons-in-law: then raises
His hands to heaven, and chant^ these solemn praises.
Thou sacred power of Night, which do^^^ embrace
The cares of heaven, and earth: whilst every place
In The sky, is spangled by thy hand; Repairing
Our wearied natures, against the Suns appearing:
Thy darkness is my guide: through the thick mist
Of perplexed error: Thou do best untwist
Thy threads of foretold destiny. Go on;
Perfect, great Queen, the work thou have begun.
This Court shall pay a yearly sacrifice
To thy great Deity: On thy altar dies
Two fair, The color making them proper for the night. Macr.
black heifers; whose Having been shut up five years, whence they were called
Lustralia.
fat gu^s shall soake
In The newest With which they used to sprinkle the infer^all sacrifice^, and
those offered to the Dii minores.
milk, and make thy Temples smoke.
Hail faithful The place where the Pythia ^ate, when she prophesied.
Tripos, and ye close aboads
Of the dark Oracle. I Have found the gods.
This said, he grasps their hands, and guides them right
To the farther court: Where the Altars still looked white
With their late Having sacrificed the day before to Apollo.
fires; In The ashes yet there fumed
Some sparks alive, with fragments unconsumed.
He bids them bring new fuel, and prepare
A second offering. His servants hear
With reverence and obey him: All the Court
Rings with their diligence: One goes to sort
New broydred coverings for the beds, and calls
For richer tapestry to hang the walls.
Another scours the pots. One puts out night,
And fills the branched candlesticks with light.
Some play the Cooks, and spit the joints of meat;

Adrastus joys to see them; putting on
His richest robes, and mounts his Ivory throne.
Of the other side, the strangers took their places,
(Their wounds being washed) and viewed each others faces;

Sends for Acestes (she had nursed his daughters,
And had their virgin chastity in care
Till At whose Altars they use to be presented spotless on their marriage day
by a matron.
Hymen asked for it) whispering her in the ear.
Who soon perceived his mind: And forthwith came

Which armed Pallas and Diana wore,
But with less terror) from their chamber door.
Soon as their looks were on the strangers fixed,
A blushing red, and paler white were mixed
Within their comely cheeks; their eyes did rove

When the last course o'th feast, was served up,
Adras^us calls for's graven gilded cup,
Which Two former kings of the Argives.
Danaus and Two former kings of the Argives.
Phoroneus used of old

On the one side He was said to fly to the Gorgons execution, because he was
the first that used a ship with sails.
winged Perseus sets upon,
And kills the snake-hair'd Gorgon, which being done
He seems to mount in the air: But she lets fall
Her ghastly eyes; and, though in gold, looks pale.
Tros his son, beloved of Jupiter, and mounted to heaven on an Eagles back,
where he was made the gods cupbearer.
Ganym^de his glorious flight,
And leaves the hills behind; Troy's out of sight:
His fellow-huntsmen sadly look about,
And's dogs in vain do bark at every cloud.
This cup was crowned with wine: Whilst all the gods
By course were called on: But Phoeb' got the od^.
The servants crowned with Retaining still Daphnes temper.
chaste unspotted baies
Chant at Ph^^b's shrine their Chorall Hymns of praise.
This day's his festival: The fire never falters,
But fed with incense shines on's smoking Altars.
Then says the King: Perhaps my noble guests,
You Would ask what cause begat these solemn feasts;
Or why, amongst all the gods, w'adore Apollo.
It is no vain religion which does hallow
This time: The Argives l^ng since groaning under
A curse began it: Mark, and hear the wonder.
After the god had pierced the speckled skin
Of the earth-begotten Said to be born of the earth, and slain by Apollo,
because the sun dries up those vapors which are exhaled from the moist ground.
Python, folding in
Delphos with his numerous circles, wearing out
With His tail the well-grown oaks; whilst spread about
The springs of Helicon, his forked tongue
Lick's poison from the crystal streams; 'Twas long
E're many darts dispatched him; spreading over
The Phocian plains his yet-twin'd bulk did cover
A hundred acres. Then the god resorts
(To cleanse the Nothing staind with blood, before expiation made, might be
admitted to the court of heaven.
guilt of blood) to the humble courts
Of our Once king of the Argives.
Cr^topus, whose young Psamate beloved of, and ravished by Apoll^.
daughters eye
Ruled over his house: In her, sweet modesty,
And beauty strove for conquest: Happy maid,
Could she Apollo's close desires avoid.
For on the banks of Nemea, giving way
To the sportfull god, she there conceived a boy:
And after ten moons wanes, brought forth her son,
Latona's royal grandchild. But anon
Fearing her fathers vengeance (for he knew

To desert walks: Where she exposed (for fear)
Her infant amongst the folds t'a shepherds care.
Sweet babe! such entertainments don't become
The stock thou springst of: Earth prepares thy room

With oaken leaves close woven; whilst the grove
Lends bark to make thy garments; gentle sleep
Is whistled on; Thou battlest with the sheep.
Yet Fate thought this too good a place for him,

And feasted on his members, which were spread
Upon the grass, where he with air was fed.
This news no sooner struck his mothers ear,
But she forgot both father, shame, and fear:

Her naked breasts; Then the whole truth discovers
To the hard hearted King; who publishes
The sentence which she hoped for, present death.
Could Phoeb' forget his joys thus? But too late

A monster, hell would own; conceived between
The coupling Furies: In whose shape was seen
A virgins face and breast, but from her crown,
A snake, that hissed eternally, hangs down,

To their close-chambers secretly when sleep
Sits heavy on them; tearing infants from
The breast that suckle them; devouring some
With ravenous jaws, before their Parents eyes,

But C^oraeb's skillful valor could not brook
This plague without revenge: Who straight betook
Himself to's chosen band of friends, whose souls,
Prized credit more then life. The Monster rouls
More death before he still; and then she stood
Where two ways parted, smeard with infants blood:
On both sides of her hung a babe, whose hearts
^eak'd with her claw^, which search their vital parts:
Our Champion here sets on her, guarded round
With all his train; His sword si^ks intoth' wound
^t made in her black breast; and hunts her soul
Through all her limbs till hell receives her foul
^espotted carcesse: 'Twas a joy to come
and see her ghastly looks, and panch that womb
^n which sh'ad crammed our sucklings; To behold
^er venomed breast: Amazement struck us cold:
and these extremes of joy turn pale again.
^ome thrash'd her senseless limbs, seeking in vain
This solace for their griefs: Others brought trees
^o dash her teeth out: rage their power out-vies.
^e ravenous skrieking birds few from these grounds,
though hungerbitten, when as deep-mouthed hounds,
and chap-faln wolves, gaping at distance stood,
Greedy of prey, yet durst not take such food.
Enraged Apollo sets an edge on's spleen
^hus disappointed: Sitting then between
^arnassus double top, he arms his bow
^ith poisoned arrows; Whilst the fields below,
and all the Grecian houses seemed to flame,
through the thick clouds, which hung about the same.
^weet souls of all sides dropped: Death Not broke it off, as in common destinies.
cut the thread
^f Fate, and captive towns in triumph led.
But when the Oracle was sought to, why
^uch flames and dire As that of the dog^r, so generally hurtful.
Aspects possessed the sky:
^he same Power bids, their lives should pay to hell
^ sacrifice, by whom his monster fell.
Courageous soul! deserving when thou art dead
^ lasting name: Thou did not hide thy head
Through base degenerous fear; nor trembled'st when
Cor^b^ then
With an undaunted look, stands at the do^^
Of the gods Temple, and inrageth more
The divi^e breast, thus speaking: I Am not sent,
Called Thymbraeus, from a place near Troy, where he was worshipped.
Phoeb', to thy shrine; nor come I to relent,

And care to the public, brought me: 'Twas my merit
That tamed thy vengeance, god, it is me the have sought
With clouded foggy days, and pest'lence brought
From heaven unjustly. But if gods delight

The loss of the world, and death of men: if heaven
Be so unkind; How have the Graecians given
Just cause of anger? May not I suffice
(Great Power) to be the Fates just sacrifice?

When it depopulates a well-fill'd City?
When the fields shine with bonfires, which are made
Of plowmens bones? But why should I dissuade
Or stop thy striking hand? The matrons vow

I have deserved that Provoking it by these affronts.
stroke, that shall not spare me:
But draw thy well strung bow: Let the arrows tear me,
Send a triumphing soul to the grave: But then
Drive that black cloud away, that blasts our men:

To punish only those who break their trust.
Phoeb's rage gave back a^ this, and grants a boon
More then was asked; His life: The tempest soon
Blew from our heaven ^ whilst Choroebe is entreated

These solemn feasts, which yearly we renew
To Appease the god, whose Altars now ye view.
But what blood fills your veins, my Friends? Although
(If fame deserves belief) Son to O Eneus King of Calydonia.
Tydeus does owe,
His birth to Calydoniae, and may claim
AEtoliae where now reigned Praetus* Tydeus's uncle.
Parthaons ancient scepter. But what same
Brought you to Argos? Tell me, who is this other?
Since it is a time to talk in, nothing smother.
The noble Named her from Ismenos a Thebane river.
Thebane now with down-cast eyes
Swollen big with grief, now with side-glances spies
Tydeus his wounds; then breaks his silence thus:
Before these Altars here, it fits not us
To mingle such discourses: What I am,
How stocked, what blood, the country whence I came,
Will blast your sacrifice: yet if yee'r bent
To know my wretched fortunes; My descent
Came from my grand-sire Modestly for shame concealing his fathers name.
Cadmus; Thebes, the joy
Of Either from Queen Hermione Mars's daughter, or for the Giants springing
from the dragons teeth, both being the delight of Mars.
Mars, my Country; I Iocasta's boy.
And now Adrastus startled with his guest
Discovered thus, says, why do you hide the rest?
It Is known already: Fame does take her rise
Not so remote from Argos. He that lies
Under the North pole, chatt'ring: He that drinks
In The Indian Ganges; He in the West, that thinks
To trace the sun to bed, and those that sail
Amongst the Africa shoals have learned the tale
Of Thebes beset with Furies; and those eyes
Which shrunk from their own guilt: Let this suffice
To thy complaints; and score not up their sin
On thine own head; Such stains may be of kin
To us from our As from Tantalus.
forefathers: But that blot
Don't prejudice their offspring. Equal not
Their vices; but endeavor by thy merit
To purge their guilt: Them, not their faults inherit.
Two Northern signs, viz. Sep^entrio and Opiochus, which at the first
appearance of the morn, burn dim.
Charls-waine declines, and the chill Two Northern signs, viz. Sep^entrio and
Opiochus, which at the first appearance of the morn, burn dim.
sire
Does disappear: with fresh cups feed the fire:
Chant out Apollo's hymns; repeat his praise,
Our guardian still from our As when Apollo taught Thyestes after Atreus his
wickedness, to marry his own daughter Pelopeia, on whom he begat AEgisthus,
who revenged his father by Agamemnons death.
forefathers days.
Great Father Phoeb', whether the snowy tops
A Lycian City dedicated to Apollo.
Patara delight thee; Or the drops
Of pure Apollo enamourd of Castalia, who threw herself into a fountain, used
to dip his locks in the waters.
Castalian dew do bath thy hair,
Thy golden hair: Or whether Troy does wear
Thy That of Thymbraeus.
name and presence; where thou did submit
Thy self to labors for thy self unfit,
When he and Neptune ^ere hired to build the walls of Troy by Laomedon.
Mason willingly; or tired
With seeking floating When Delos could not be found by Latona, Cynthus the
highest mountain discovered it self, where she brought forth Apollo and Diana.
Delos, if desired
Cynthus, Latona's welcome mount, does please:
Cynthus, whose top shades the AEgaean seas:
The Quiver's thine, and bow stiffe-bent, to quell
The sun never grows old.
Eternal youth does dwell
Upon thy cheeks: Thou can foretell the doom
Of the unjust Fates, and know what is to come:
Know what decrees Jove means to pass; do show
What plagues or wars shall reign; what overthrow
By Comets.
heaven points at: 'Twas thy harp subdued
The Mar^ias who challenged Apollo.
Phrygian minstrell. Thou did drag the rude
Earths offspring Seeking to enforce
Titius down to hell, and take
Just vengeance for thy mother: Thou do shake
Envenomed Python with thy looks; and quail
The The^a^e Niobe, contending with Diana, was deprived by Apollo of all her
children.
dame, with thy triumphant spoil.
Wrinckled Megara is thy Minister
Tormenting hungry Who burning the temple of Apollo, was placed in hell under a
huge stone, whose downfall was daily threatened, and he fed there by Megara.
Phlegias, who does fear
The ever-falling stone; she proffers meat
To's empty stomach, but he loathes to eat.
Great God be present, think upon the place
That ^n Crotopus's time.
entertained thee; show a smiling face
To Juno's land; whether thou please to choose
Fair Titans name, which the These were part of Persia, named from their King
Achaemenes.
Achaemonians use;
Or if Worshipped under that ^ame by the AEg^ptians.
Osiris's title take the more,
Whom Egypt makes the Author of her store.
Or, as the Persians in their caves below,
The Persian worshipped the sun eclipsed in a Cave, by the name of Mitra, in
the shape of a Lion with a Tiara on his head, holding by the horns a struggling
Cow, representing the Moon, which labors to avoid him.
Mitra, which draws by the horns a stubborn Cow.
Finis Lib. I. Statii Thebaid.
Argument. Lib. 2. Statii Thebaidos.
Hermes returns with Laius's Ghost, which steals
Tiresias's shape, and in a dream reveals
To the Tyrant, Joves decree. Adrastus gives
Argia and Deiphile, for wives
To Polynice and Tydeus: They are married
With prod^gies, because Argia carried
Hermiones chain. The Thebane Prince desires
His Crown; which Tydeus in his name requires.
Denied by the King, he war denounces; then
Returns by Sphinx her rock; where fifty men
Way lay him; they are subdued: He sends this story
By Maeon back, and sings Minerva's glory.
Mean time winged Mercury, with Jove's embassage
Returns from hell: thick clouds oppose his passage,
And troubled air infolds him: Never a blast
To drive't away; but stinking fogges are cast

The spreading floods of Styx, and flames of fire,
Belched out of sulfurous streams, which choke the way.
Behind crawles Laius trembling, whose delay
His wound might yet excuse; for in his side

The onset of the Which possessed his son OEdipus.
Furies; yet he creeps,
And Mercuries Caduceus, which can charm souls from hell.
Hermes's powerful wand does guide his steps.
The barren groves were startled, and those coasts
Where the dark shades were filled with trembling Ghosts.
The Earth herselfe's amazed, to see her womb
Lie open back again; nay there were some
In their cold, senseless Urnes, whose withered brows
Spoke envy: One amongst the rest, whose vows
Were still unlucky, and (which wrought his bane)
Heavens grief his joy, heavens joy his grief began;
Says, Go and prosper whatsoever design
You Are called for, whether Jove did so injoyne;
Or uncontrol'd Erinnys by thee sent
Greeting toth' day; Or some These were wont to counterfeit a phrensy before
their incantations.
Enchantresse spent
Her charms upon thy Tomb. Thou shall have sight
Of the fresh air, and the forgotten light
Of The sun; thou wilt tread upon the springing grass,
And hear the warbling Rivers, as they pass
From their clear fountains. Yet at last with pain,
Look to return to these black shades again.
No sooner Cerb'rus spies them, from the dark
Cell, where he lay, but he begins to bark
With all his mouths at once: The cur does grin
At such strange ghosts as seek to enter in;
But now he swells his bristled neck, enraged,
And would have torn them piecemeal; But assuaged
By the gods powerful Scepter, down he lies,
And treble sleep tames his Answering to his three heads.
three pair of eyes.
There is a place, which the old Graecians said
Was A Laconian promontory, where Hercules had a Temple in a cave, which Poets
imagine the passage (...)
Taenarus, where foaming Malea's head,
Which seamen tremble at, towrs to the sky's,
Till it has quite lost the beholders eyes.
The lofty top's still fair, and does disdain
The inferior power of wind, or force of rain:
But the tired stars rest on it; and the wind
There ye may trace the lightning; and the ranks
And shapes of the clouds are molded on those banks.
The soaring Lark could never raise her flight

But when the day grows old, the shade does flee,
(Strange bounds are these)toth' midst of the neighbor Sea.
There Taenarus crooks his broken shoars, as though
His coward banks gave backward from the rough
Neptune lands his steads
Tired in the The description of the Seahorse.
AEgean Sea, whose Named so from AEgeus, son to Neptune.
fore-hoof treads
The sands, but spread to a fishes tail behind.
From hence, as men report, the pale Ghosts find
A by-way path, through which due Custome's reard
Pluto's Court: Here may be heard
Strange shreeks and groans, (if any truth be found
In the Arcadian Plow-men) all the ground
Rings with a hellish noise: Sometimes a stroke,
Sometimes a word which the last Fury spoak,

Out of the fields, to hear Three-headed Cerberus.
Deaths Porter roar.
Here Hermes, with a Stygian fog surrounded,
Springs into the air. The clouds, which late abounded,
Break with his Glory: His warm breathing makes

His circuit by The Northern Star, which Climate was chosen by Mercury, because
the most windy and most advantageous for his flight.
Arcturus, mounting then
Through Phoebes She being Nights Mistress.
silent Orb, ore lands and men.
Sleep meets him with Nights chariot, and does rise
With reverence, and straight departs the skies.
Laius beneath him hovers, and does view
The stars he is B^ dying unnaturally on his sons sword.
robbed of, whence his Either because of the Nobility of his Progenitors, or
from the Stoics opinion, who fetch the Souls of men from the Stars.
soul he drew.
And now to The Boeotian mountain which over-looked Phocis, where he was slain.
Cyrrha's craggy top was come,
Whence he spies Phocis, stained with his tomb.
At last he reaches Thebes; there sighs out tears
Near his sons threshold: Yet at first forbears
To pass those wel-known doors. But when he spies
Those stately roofs, whose beauteous tops did rise
On pillars he had laid, and saw those Of the Cha^iot in which he was slain.
wheels
Stained yet with blood; troubled, he backward reels:
The Thund'rers high command, the charming force
Of the Mercuries Caduceus, given him by Apollo in Arcadia, after the Oxen were
stolen.
Arcadian rod, scarce stopped his course.
As't chanced too, 'twas a solemn Called Bacchus his first Birthday.
Day, which heaven
Marked out with Semele desiring to see Jove in his Majesty, was
thunder-strook, yet the God pitying her Babe, not ripe for nativity, took him
from her womb, and nourished him in his thigh.
thunder; when young Bacchus, given
To's Fathers thigh, found a too early birth
From Semele: This caused the Tyrants mirth
To banish sleep that night; but spread abroad
Through house and ground, belched out the pursie Bacchus to whom that day was
dedicate.
God
Amongst their Crowns and empty Cups, till day
Did part them: There ye might have heard them play
On their loud Pipes, and Trumpets, which overcome
In their shrill noise the rattling of the Drum.
And glad A Boeotian mountain dedicated to Bacchus.
Cithaeron tie'd the women out,
Inflamed now, not As once, when Agave tore her son Pentheus piecemeal; hence
our Poet calls Bacchus now, Their more gentle God.
enraged, to dance about
His un-trod thickets. So the Named here from Biston a Thracian King; they used
to feast upon their mountains.
Thracians spread
Bankets to their rash troops, of the snowy head
Of Rhodope, or Dale of A mountain between Thrace and Thessaly, which in the
middle incloseth a famous Valley.
Ossa: where
The panting limbs of beasts, which they did tear
From Lions jaws, and blood with milk allaid
Proves a rich Feast: but if their sense be staid

To dash their cups, throw stones, or any way
To shed their partners blood; with which the rabble
Will make new feasts, and garnish a new table.
Such was the night, when swift Mercury named from Cyllene, an Arcadian
mountain, his birthplace.
Cyllenius crept
Thebanes privy-Chamber, Etheocles named here from Echion one of Cadmus his
companions in building Thebes.
who then slept
Stretched out at large upon his Ivory bed,
With cov'rings of Assyrian tap'stry spread.
How careless is man's heart! He feasts, he sleeps!
But Laius did, as he was taught, and creeps
^ blind Thebane P^ophet, punished by Juno, for passing verdict on Jove's part
against her.
Tiresias's borrowed hiew; left this
Might seem a dream, he wears his voice and fleece:
His own locks still remained, and the driven snow
Upon his chin, so did his palenesse too:
But a false Miter on his hair was placed,

Then seems to touch the breast of the sleeping King
With His bough, and thus the Fates decrees to sing.
This is no time for sleep, secure from fear
Of thy false brother, Dullard! Do not hear?

What preparations, Fool, he makes for Thee?
Thou dalliest, like a sleeping Pilot, when
The Sea works high with winds, his Compass then
Is quite forgot, his Stern let loose: And yet

New wings on's soul: He Is gathering strength to gain
Thy Kingdom from thee, and (...)
deny't again:
H'appoints thy Court, the nurs'ry for his age:
Adrastus his Wives Father, does engage
His resolution deeper, with what force
Her Dowry the Argives bring: Nay (which is worse)
Tydeus, who is stained in's brothers blood, has tied
A solemn knot of friendship: Hence his pride
Puffs up it self: this raises his intent
To promise thee a lasting banishment.
The King of heaven, in pity sent me down,
With this advice; Keep Thebes; It is thine own:
Banish the ambitious brother, who would deal
As ill with thee; let not his gaping zeal
For thy destruction, any longer trust
To his close plots, or think the Graecians must
Come, Lord it over Thebes. Then, leaving him,
When this was said, (for now the Stars burned dim
Before the day) he first uncloaths his face
Of's borrowed mask, confessing that he was
His Fathers Sire; and falling on the bed
Where Is cursed Grandchild tumbled, he does spread
His throat, still gaping with the wound, before
His eyes, and seems to bath him in his gore.
This breaks his sleep; then starting up, he stood
Scared with these prodigies; and shook the blood,
The seeming blood from's trembling joints; together
He fears his Grand-sire, and demands his Brother.
As when a Tiger th'Hunts-mans Echo hears,
She rouses up her sluggish limbs, and tears
The toyls she is trap'd in: It Is her sport to meet
With some bold foe; She yawns; She sucks her feet;
Straight intoth' midst of the company she hurries,
And in her jaws, some panting soul she carries,
To feast her bloody Whelps: So rage persuades
The King, he'has vanquished now his Brothers aides.
Named here from Migdon, a King of Phrygia, where Tithonus, Aurora's beloved,
lived.
Phrygian cell,
And wiping her dew'd locks, she did expel
The nights cold darkness, blushing on the Sun
That follows her: Bright The morning star, which drives his other flock before
him.
Lucifer was one
O'th'last that wooes her, with his parting glances,
Sol advances
His Chariot ore the heavens, whose glorious light
Deprives the world of his pale sisters sight.
When old Adrastus, leaves his chamber, where
The Named from Dirce, a Thebane fountain, and Achelous an AEtolian river
running into Calydonia.
Thebane and the Named from Dirce, a Thebane fountain, and Achelous an
AEtolian river running into Calydonia.
Calydonian Peer

Their wearied limbs, (since the last storm had fleshed
Each in his fellows blood) with all his store
Of blessings: But Adrastus breast found more
Unquiet thoughts; whilst he recalls the gods,

His sons-in-law, found thus unlooked for: Those
Meeting i'th'midst o'th'Hall, shook hands, and chose
A place fit to discourse their private cares:
And first Adrastus thus salutes their ears.

By the gods care; whose steps through stormy weather,
And thundering showers, Phoeb' guided to this Court:
You Have heard (I doubt not) what a troop resort
To woo my daughters; both whose equal years,

What modest beauty sits upon their brow
(Trust not a Fathers eyes) your selves may know
From last nights entertainment. Puissant Kings,
Whose thoughts soar on their Armies spreading wings,

To tell how the Either a Missenian, or rather an Achaean town, by which the
river Pierius flows.
Pharaean Princes throng,
And the Named from O Etialu^, a Laconian King.
Laconian Lords: With what strong hope
The As Atalanta the Mother of Parth^nopaus.
Achaean matrons strive to underprop
Their house with plants from hence. For his Daughter Deianira for whom
Hercules fought with the river Achelous.
O Eneus thy father
Has not refused more courteous proffers: Neither
Has the O Enomaus, whose Daughter Hippodamia had triumphed over the lives of
thirteen Wooers, who were vanquished by her Father in Chariot-combats.
Pi^^an Chariotteer* But I
Both Spartans brood, and El^an kind decry
To be my Sons-in-law: This blood is due
With all my care, by the Fates decrees to you.
The Gods are kind, which sent such valiant Knights
Within my Court: How the Oracle delights,
And feeds my soul* This honor you atchieve
Through the hights storms; this balm your wounds receive.
They heard him, when their eyes a while were fixed
On one another; who should answer next,
Their looks did complement: But Tydeus spirit
More daring still, began: How is thy merit
Eclipsed by thy modest soul, which tames
Thy growing Fortunes? Who can claim more names
And kingdoms then Adrastus? Is It not known
How thou wast wooed to leave thy The Sycionians inhabited part of
Pelopomi^sus, where AEgileus stood, whose king Polybus was Grandsire to
Adrastus by his Daughter Las^anassa, who was married to Talaus King of the
Argives: Their Son Adrastus flying the rage of the Citizens, to his
Grandfather, was made Heir to his Crown, but was recalled by the Argives
after his Fathers death. Pausan.
Grand-sires throne
Of Sycion, to curb th'unbridled lust
Of the Argives. Would the Gods be pleased to trust
Those nations to thy hands, which lie within
The Grecian This Isthmos divides the AEgean and Ionick Seas, being a passage
between Greece and Peloponnesus: these Countries therefore are meant, and the
other Il^nds in both Seas.
Is^mos, and whose banks are seen
Beneath it: Savage Mycene had not then
Scared back the Which fled from the wicked acts of Atreus and Thyesies there.
Sun; nor the Where OEnomaus reigned.
Elean vale had been
The Theater of blood: And other Kings
Had escaped the Furies lash, whose venomed stings
Polynices in his Father and his Brother.
Thebane, who has felt, may speak. But we
Have ready minds to serve thee. So said he;
And the other then subjoyns: Who would not toil
To find such fathers? Though love seldom smile
On banished wretches, yet all grief departs

Nor do our joyful breasts less comfort find,
Then when a Ship, late tossed with raging wind,
Beholds the welcome shore; It Is our desire,
Who have begun so luckily, t'expire,

Without more words: Whilst the old King out-vies
His last words with new promises: His might
Shall aid them back, t'instate them in their right.
The frolic Argives now, with joy did meet

Their ears: Their King had found a noble pair
Of sons, with whom Argia, and the fair
Deiphile should kindle Hymen's flame,
And lose their Virgin crop, now ripe. This Fame

Filled with it, as far as the Two woody mountains of Arcadia, one dedicated to
Pan, the other to Venus.
Lycaean bounds,
And the Two woody mountains of Arcadia, one dedicated to Pan, the other to
Venus.
Parthenian thickets: to the Coasts
Of There were diverse other Ephyrae, but Corinth her^ was named so, from the
Nymph Ephyra, Daughter to the Ocean, and Thetis.
Corinth: Nay the tel-tale Goddess boasts
The same in Thebes, where hovering over the walls,
Etheocles, named from Labdacus Grandfather to OEdipus.
King; whilst she recalls
His last nights Dream: (what dares the Monster? where
Does her spleen end?) She sings of the solemn cheer
That entertained his Brother: Of the hour
That crowned his Bride-bed: Of the league and power
Of The stock he is joined to: Nay her fatal ditty
Speaks war already. Now the pompous Argos where the marriages were solemnized.
City
On the set day, did all her train unfold;
Joy crowded in the Court: You might behold
Their Fathers On their Weddings and Funerals they used in triumph to produce
the Images of their Ancestors.
statues march; The brass did strive
With living faces, which was most alive:
The artist durst make such comparison.
Horned First King of the Argives, but feigned by the Poets, to be changed into
a River, and therefore said to be horned, either from his crooked banks, or
because the murmuring of waters sounds like the lowing of Oxen, AElian. lib. 1.
Inachus sat of the left hand, leaning on
His o'return'd This was the old portraicture of rivers, and thus Inachus is
described by Virgil, AE ^ead. lib. 1.
Pitcher; old These are all Argive kings.
Iasius
And good Who taught the people first to sacrifice to angry Juno.
Phoroneus, bold First shutting up his Daughter Danae from him, then exposing
her to the mercy of the Seas.
Acrisius
Whose anger struck at Jove, and Father to Acrisius an heroic Champion.
Abas too
The warrier, with valiant Who killed Apollo's Monster, whose head he bore in
triumph.
Choroebe, who
On's swords point bore a head, encompassed him;
As Commanding his fifty Daughters in one night, to murder all their Husbands
who were Sons to his Brother AEgyptus.
Danaus did, whose crabbed looks did seem
Still to be plotting mischief. Then there stood
A thousand chieftains more. When straight a flood
Of The common people roares within the gate,
Set open now. Where first the Nobles sat,
With those of the royal blood. The inner ground
Was warm with sacrifice, and did resound

(Yet interlac'd with Virgins every where)
Make a chaste ring, and teach the Brides to tie
This knot, and shake off fearful modesty.
These were led on, in Virgin robes, and state;

Dissolved to blushes; casting down their eyes;
When love of their Virginity did seize
Closely upon them; and the bashful thought
Of the first night a second blushing brought:

Their tender Parents smile. Just so appears
Pallas, and rougher Being always accustomed to the woods.
Dian, when they slide
From heaven together, both have The one a helmet and spear, in token of the
vanquished Gorgon; the other a bow and arrows, because she was a Huntresse.
Arms, beside
Stern brows alike, and yellow locks tied up

Of A Delian mountain dedicated to Diana.
Cynthus, this to An Atticke mountain dedicated to Mi^erva.
Aracinthus: Then
(If Which their divinity denies.
eyes might see) what eyes can judge between
Their grace and luster? Who did most partake
Of Jove and majesty? Or should they make
Minerva's quiver
And Delia's helm, would suit as well together.
The Graecians joys o'restow: The Gods were tired
With vows; As each man's house and state required,
He brought a sacrifice: Some from the ground,

If pure hands offered it. The Gods were pleased
With incense, and their doors with Used both in private and public houses on
solemn dai^s, Iuven. Sat. 6.
garlands dressed.
But lo! a Panick fear struck all their mind,
Upon a sudden, (thus the Fates designed)
The peoples joy's were clouded, and the day
Disturbed; They went with torches light to pay
Duty's to maiden Pallas, who accounts
The City where these Nupti Is were celebrated.
Lariss' as much as her The mountains on which Minerva's festivals, called
Munichia, were celebrated.
Munichian mounts:
Here th'Argives, as their Fathers used, resort,
When their chaste years were ripe for nuptial sport,
To dedicate their Virgin Virgins before they were espoused dedicated their
locks, and whatsoever was an emblem of their Virginity, to Pallas the guardian
of it.
locks, and plead
Excuse for Loves first sweets. But as they tread
Of The greeces of the stately Towr; the shield
Of brass, which brave An Arcadian born, but a most prosperous king of the
Argives, whose shield consecrated to the Goddess, was in their solemn triumphed
born before the Conqueror through the streets* ^s his greatest honor.
Euhippus won in the field,
Comes tumbling from the Temples stately spire,
And puts the ^ignificantly intimating that war should quench this love.
torches out, Loves sacred fire.
And from the distant Quire a trumpet sounds
Frighting them back, which now scarce kept their grounds.
All trembling, star'd at first upon the King;
But straight Flattering the King.
deny they would heard it. Yet this thing
Sounded unluckily within their ears,
And several whispers soon increased their fears.
No marvel: thou Argia did retain
Thy husbands fatal gift, Harmiones chain.
This mischief was far-fetched; but I Will discourse
Whence this new Present, gained such deadly force.
Thrown out of heaven ^or his deformity, into the I Will Lemnos, which here
denominates him.
Vulcan, long grieved at Mars his stolen With Venus, for whom V^^can made
artificial fetters, which could not yet hinder their embraces.
content,
(As stories say) and finding punishment
No bar to his delights, nor could his chains
Chastise the bold adulterer; he feigns

The Daughter born to these adulterers.
Harmione, upon her marriage day.
The skillful Vulcans forge-men, which make --.
Cyclops hammered it; (and yet
They Would -- Jove's thunderbolts*
greater work, to which the Envious orcerers, but cunning Artificers in working
poisons.
Telchines set
Their helping hand: But Vulcan himself.
he sweats most; and works

And the Adamant, ingrav'd with charms: The ball
Of Stones as splendent and as dangerous.
Gorgons eyes: With cinders, which did fall
From Jove's last thunderbolt at AEtna: This
Was thredded with young Serpents manes: There is
Which bore the golden apples watched by the waking Dragon whom Hercules slew.
Hesperian tree,
Wrought in with Who swimming ore the straights to Colchos, on a ram with a
golden fleece, sacrificed the ram to Mars, and hung up the fleece in his
Temple, from whence I^son fetched it.
Phryxus golden fleece: Then he
Studs in his several plagues, and the Captain snake
Plucked from the Furies head: such power could make
Venus her This girdle called Ceston, Venus puts on at lawful Nuptials,
whereas unlawful wedlock is called incast, which this venomed bracelet in
Io^asta did more then threaten.
girdle crack: All these, h'anoints
The Moon, mistress of Magicians, was thought to spit her jelly on the most
powerful charming herbs. Some please themselves in referring this to Spuma
Argenti (the Moon in Minerals being Argent) which is glittering, but venomous.
Moon-froth, and with varnished poison paints.
'Twas not Lytarge Daughter to Jove and Harmione, m^ther to the Graces, Aglaia,
Thalia, and Euphrosyne.
Pasiphaes work, the Graces Queen,
Nor Named here from Idalus a hill in Cyprus, where his mother and he were
worshipped.
C^pids, nor Aglaia's: But 'twas Spleen,
Grief, Discord, Sorrow shaped it: The first trial
Was wrought on poor Who accompanying Cadmus into Illyria (transformed there
into a Snake) by kissing him assumes the same shape.
Harmione, who loyal
To her now creeping husband, with her breast
Plough'd up the Illyrian sands, whilst she expressed
Her plaints by hisses. Semele next venters
No sooner on it, but beldame Persuading her to her destruction, to require of
Jove such embraces as he used to bestow on his own Queen.
Juno enters.
And thou too, cursed Iocasta, once did owe
This gilded mischief; which adorned thy brow,
To please strange, oh strange That of her own son.
Love: With mo beside,
Till now Argia shines in it: and does hide
Her sisters cheaper habit, with this gold,
Accursed gold. As't chanced, the Eryphile, who afterward obtained it.
wife of old
Amphiaraus spied it; and in sight
Of the Gods altars, and the tables dight,
Durst feed close Envy: Oh! might she inherit
This prize! Alas! her Lords prophetic spirit
Could not avail her. What a dismal honor,
What No less then her Husbands death, her Sons madness, and her own
dest^uction.
mischief the fool strives to bring upon her?
Let her: but can her husbands cheated Arms,
Or her sons guiltless rage, deserve such harms?
After twelve days were spent in royal cheer,
And public triumphs; the Polynices from Ismenos, a Thebane fountain.
Ismenian Peer
Looks back to Thebes and thinks of's Crown: For now
That day takes up his soul, when he stood low
In's brothers eyes; (such was his Fortune then)
He thinks the Gods deserted him, and men
Shrunk cowardly back; he naked; but the worst
Was Fortunes flight: Only one Antigone, who likewise guided her blind Father.
sister durst
Show him the way to exile, but forbeares
To pass the thr^shold, wh^re rage stopped his tears.
Then night and day he meditates, what joy
His absence brought to some; And who are they

At his departure. Grief and anger gnaw
Upon his soul, but expectation most,
The greatest plague that ever mortal crossed.
Thus plodding in his thoughts, still clouded, he
T^ebes to see.
So when a bull, leaves his beloved cow
In The pastures, whence his Conqueror but now
Has driven him; he stands off, and bellows; till
He thinks of's lovely mull, and blood does swell

He Is mad for the other push, and gains at length
His captive herd: With His horns, and hoofs he fights,
And's conquering mate, with his herds-man too he frights.
Such anger whets our lusty Named from Ta^messus, a Thebane mountain dedicated
to B^cch^^
Theban's mind.

And as her soft embraces did enclose
Her husband, when the pale-faced Morn arose:
Dissembler, says she, what is this change? what flight
Do thou intend? Naught blinds a Lovers sight.

Thy waking cares? How many a startling dream
Breaks off thy sleep? How often have I found
This face bedewed with tears? this breast abound
With sobs, when ere I felt it? it is no bond

Despair of widowed youth: (although Loves sweets
Be newly budded, and the bridal sheets
Be not yet fully ayr'd:) Thoughts for thy quiet
And safety trouble me* I Will never deny it.

Demand thy Crown? Can thou retreat again,
Should he deny it? Fame that is nimble eyed
To trace the lives of Kings, reports his pride
Raised with usurping; how, his love's diminished
To thee; nor is his year completely finished.
And, truth is, some late Prophesies, with all
Prodigious Misplaced or speckled, which threaten heaven was angry.
entrals, and th'unlucky fall
Of birds, with startling dreams increase my fear:
Hah! I remember, The patroness of the Argives, and therefore would not deceive
them.
Juno don't appear
In vain: What journey's this? Does Out of jealousy, lest he should have left
another wife be^^nd him.
love t'another
Draw thee? Can Thebes a nobler stock discover?
Here Polynices from Echion, one of Cadmus companions in building of Thebes.
th'Echionian smiled a while, and strove
With soft embraces t'undeceive his Love.
He dries her moistened eyes with welcome kisses,
And with these friendly words her tears represses.
Take courage, sweet; trust me, blessed peace attends
The Counsels of my best deserving friends.
Leave cares for riper years: Jove may hereafter
Behold our wrongs, if Justice be heaven's daughter,
And daignes to look beneath the clouds, to see
The right maintained on Earth: The time may be
Thy husbands palace shall with joy be seen,
And through two Cities thou saluted Queen.
This said, he slips out closely, and repairs
To Tydeus, now co-partner in's affairs;
Whose breast sob'd equal cares: (such love combined
Their once divided souls) to whom he joined
Adrastus's counsel, sadly: Here they pause:
But after long dispute, this sentence was
Received of all: Best, feel his Brothers mind
Fairly, and pray the Crown might be resigned.
Bold Tyd^us freely undertakes the message;
Yet (brave AEtolian) tears had stopped thy passage,
Deiphile, had not the name
Of a comma^ding Father overcame:
Besides her sisters prayers* and that power
Which gives safe conduct t'an Ambassador.
Now traced he rugged paths, through woods and rocks,
Lerna's poole, where the scorched See Polynices his journey, lib. 1.
Hydra smoaks
In the still boiling foord; By Nemea's bounds
Where the blithe As if he sti^l fe^red the Lion which Hercules killed there.
Shepherds pipe, scarce yet resounds
Sweet roundelaies: By Corinth's Eastern side:
And the Where Sisyphus formerly had practiced his robberies.
Sisyphian port, where Of the AEgaean Sea, which by the Isthmos is divided from
the Ionick.
th'waves that chide

Of Palaemonian A Po^t of Corinth, under the Lee of a promontery, from which
Palaemon with his Mother leaped into the Sea.
Lache: passing over
Eith^r Megara where Nisus reigned, or rather a Mountain of that nam^, where he
was buried.
Nisus from hence; of the left he spies the plain
Of mild Where Ceres first was entertained of King Eleusinus, and afterward
worshipped as a Goddess.
Eleusis, and does straight obtain
The Mount Where Hercules killed the Lion.
Teumessus; reaching near the towers
Built by Cadmus* Agenors son.
Thebes; where he beholds the royal powers
Of stem Etheocles, whose lo^ty state
Was guarded round with Arms: the Tyrant sat
To judge the folk, beyond all right, and The year being now expired.
time
Prescribed, for's brother: Mischief hardened him

They came so As if angry that he had no occasion to break his faith sooner.
late to prove him. Tydeus draws
To the midst of the Court: His Olive-boughs discover
He was a Legate: Who being questioned over
His name and message; rude of speech and prone

If any faith possessed thee, or just care
Of keeping Cov'nants, now the have reigned thy year,
Thou would have called thy Brother, and in course
Exchanged thy fortunes, and resigned thy force:
That he, long wandering, tossed with storms unfitting
Abroad, might find his due, a throne to sit in.
But since you are thus enamored of thy Crown
And courtst thy power; We ask it. It Is well known
The sun has traced the Called the girdle of the year.
Zodiac, and the hills
Have their lost shades restored, since all the ills
Of banishment through unknown Coasts did seize
On thy poor Brother: Now Is thy time to freeze
Under heavens spangled Canopy, and stand
Toth' mercy of the cold, and cap-in-hand
Beg entrance at another door: Forget
Thy happy state: Those purple robes, beset
With plates of gold, have glister'd long: And thou
Have sported with thy Brothers ebb: But now
Unteach thy self, I advise thee, how to reign,
And by thy patient Let thy voluntary exile merit of thy Brother at the years
end, that thou be re-instated in the Throne.
flight deserv't again.
This said, a secret flame was kindled in
The Tyrants breast: (so when a Serpents den
Is battered, she springs up, who thirsty dwells
In her close coverts; but now chafed, she fills
Her gums, and scaly neck with venomed gore)
Had not I fully known (says he) before,
My brothers anger; had not's private spleen
Appeared thus naked; Faith alone had been
Sufficient pawn for's kingdom: Faith, which swells
Thy looks so big, that whilst thy fancy dwells
On him, thou ragest, as if Pioners
Now min'd our walls, or trumpets called to wars.
Were this thy message to the Called Bistonians from Biston son to Mars and
Calirrhoe, who built the Metropolis of the Country after his name.
Thracians done,
Or the pale Scythians, which know no Which seldom declines so far North as to
behold them.
Sun,

With greater reverence: But it is no sin
Of thy rash soul, I blame: Thy errand's so,
Now since threats usher all, and faith's let go:
Nor peace is brought to mediate, but thy sword

To my brave Enviously not allowing his brother the name of Thebane, but
intimating he may seek a kingdom where he found a wife.
Grecian Monarch; not so sour
As thine, yet my full answer: All that power
Which Because the lots determined it, according to the right of age.
equal fortune, and my birthright gives,
I hold, and will maintain: Thy wife relieves
Greece her dowry; Thou may heap
The Either respecting Dana^, courted in a golden shower, or put for Grecian
from Danaus the Argive King.
Danaan wealth into thy lap: (I keep
No envious thoughts to blast thy Fortune) Rule
Argos succesfully, and Said to be made by the stroke of Neptune^ spear, in
the place where he deflowred Amimone Danaus's daughter.
Lerna's poole.
Dirces bare pastures give content to me,
The Euripus between Eu^^ia and Boe^tia.
Euboian sea,
Not shamed with EOdipus my wretched father.
But thou from the stock of The son of Jupiter and the Nymph Phocis.
Tantalus may gather
Far-fetched Nobility, and Tantal^^ his son, both Grecian Kings.
Pelops heir
Kindred with Jove may challenge. Can thy fair

For whom our sisters may esteem't a grace
To spin, forsooth: where Iocasta and OEdipus.
Mothers dreery eyes
And that imprisoned Iocasta and OEdipus.
fathers dismal cries,
If heard, may fright her. And the common folk
Are now accustomed to endure my yoke.
Hard were the peoples lot, should they submit
TO I know not whose command, and weeping sit
Under continual changes; They Will repent
Of duty, to a doubtful Tyrant lent.
Short reigns spare none. These loyal subjects view,
What horror strikes them since this quarrel grew.
Shall these be left to thy sure lash? Thou art
Too hot on it, brother: Say, I would depart
My right, these Senators would scarce approve
The act, if I have known their purchased love,
Or find due thanks. Tydeus could brook no more,
But interrupts him thus: Thou shall restore,
Tyrant, thou shall: If iron rampires guard
Thy person, or As formerly when his harp drew stones to the work.
Amphions ditty heard,
Raise treble walls about thee; It Is no arms;
No fire shall stop me: Thou shall feel thy harms
Revenged on thine own head: At thy deaths wound
Thy Captive Diadem shall beat the ground.
Thou justly: but I pity He seeket^ to undeceive the people whom Etheocles had
flattered.
these, whose lives
Thou make (good King) so cheap: snatched from their wives,
And children to these dismal wars. What blood
Will stain A Boeotian mountain, with
Cithaeron? What a barbarous flood
Will fill a river not far distant.
Ismenos banks? This is thy care*
This thy much talk'd-of faith. But I forbear
To wonder at thy Nations crimes: The frame
Of thy whole Sprung from O Edipus by incestuous copulation with Iocasta.
stock is such, raised from the shame
Of thy incestuous Parents; yet there is Polynices whose sweet temper makes
amends for his native pollution.
one
Has cleans'd the stain of's birth: It Is thou alone
Shall be O Edipodes; Thy manners here,
And sins, rash man, deserv't; We ask our year.

Turning himself about; then tumbles over
The crowd in's flight: So Who offended with O Eneus for neglecting her in his
sacrifice, sent a monstrous boar, which depopulated most part of AEtolia.
Dian's cursed avenger
Sets up his bristled neck, and does endanger
The huntsman, with the stroke of's foming tushes,
Pelopo^nesus sent out troops with Atalanta their Kings daughter, to parsue the
boar, by whom he was first wounded.
Grecian troops pursue: at all he pushes;
Rooting up stones and broken shrubs; and plows
The banks with his crooked snowt: He overthrows
Here Telamon, and there Ixio^s son, under whose name he is here clouded.
Perithous: Next
He sets o^ The chief of those allured out with the Kings promises.
Meleager, where he is fixed

In's struggling shoulder. Tydeus thus departs
From this affrighted council, with disdain,
As if himself were here denied to reign.
Thus hurries he, and throws away the Crown
The token of an Ambassador.
Olive. The scared matrons run
To the roofes to see him; thence their curses fling
On's rage, and Not daring openly to discover their ill affections.
closely wish as bad to the King.
Nor was the Tyrants quick industrous brain

Of hearts resolved to fight: These he prepares
With money and good words: Then lays his snares
For an exploit that night, hoping t'invade
The Ambassador, (whose The l^w of Nations giving them a civil respect for
(...) office sake.
sacred name was had

What will not ambition plot? should fortune please
To send thy brother, what new tricks would find,
What arts to circumvent him? Oh the blind
Advice of guilty souls! How fearfull's sin!
This troop goes out combined, as if it had been
To beat up the enemies Quarters, or to storm
A City walls: Full fifty champions form
Their ranks; then crowd they through the lofty gate.
Courage, brave soul! thought worthy of such In their own judgment conceiving
Tydeus able to cope with fifty of them.
hate.
These creep the nearest way, by paths unseen,
Through shrubs, and cross the woods: Then lay their scene
For villainy. Two remote hillocks stood,
Disjoined by a treacherous passage in the wood,
Shaded by the neighbor mountain, and the trees
Which grew of the top: Here nature seemed to please
Herself in wiles, making this place to hide
Her close deceits. A straight path does divide
The midst o'th cliffe: Under whose hanging head
The pleasant fields, and spacious valleys spread.
Against it, was that deadly cave, in which
The Thebane Sphinx, born of Typhon and Echidna, which destroyed all those that
could not expound her rid^le.
monster dwelt: Here used the witch
To raise up her pale visage: Black gore stood
About her eyes; her wings were stiff with blood:
She hugged men's offals; her bare breasts did cover
Their half devoured bones, whilst she looks over
The neighbor fields, to see if any The Oracle counseled the way to quit
themselves of her, was to ^xpound her riddle, which (...)
stranger
Durst ask her riddles, or approach in the danger
Of her stern brow, or entertain discourse:
But then she whets her claws, and screws the force
Of her staind hands; and grinds those teeth, she broke
On some late carcass; fluttering with the stroke
Of her unlucky wings, before the eyes
Of her new prey: A while these treacheries
Were undiscovered, till she met with one
As (...)
wicked as her self: Then tumbles down
With closed wings, upon the rock lay under
Her bloody cav^, and splits her panch in sunder.
The wood still shows the mischief; Cattle dread
The neighbor plains; no hungry flocks dare feed

Within these shades, no Fawnes are worshipped there.
The scrich-owles fly from this Because strewn over with humane bon^^ and
c^^neige.
prodigious grove:
Yet hither this Being ^re long to become a sacrifice to Tydeus his rage.
unhappy train does rove
With silent steps, expecting their proud foe:

Their other weapons scattered on the ground,
And with thick stations they the woods surround.
The night had now begun to cloak the Sun
With her wet mantle; the earth was overrun
Tyd^us hastening thither
Spies from the bank, men's shields, with crests and feathers
Glister, where the boughs grew thin; from the adverse hill
He sees the Moon-beames dance upon their steel.
This sight amazed him, yet goes forward, and

Then calls out first: Whence are you? What do you here
In this close ambush? Questions void of fear.
To which no answer's given; this did increase
The just suspicion of his doubted peace.

Their Captai^ The chief of the conspiratours.
Chromius lets fly a spear
With His brawny arm: But fortune did not aid
This daring blow; yet did it pierce the hide
Of the Ol^nos was a country and city in AEtolia, where the boar was slain,
whose skin Tyd^us wore.
Ol^^^an boar, whose bristled skin

To raze his flesh: And the but-end did light
Upon his neck. This set his hair upright,
And freez'd his blood: He tosses up and down
His thoughts and eyes, now pale with anger grown.
Nor could he think, they had such strength prepared
Against one. Come out, (says he) come out, you are dared
^'th open field. What fear has stopped your rage?
What cowardice is this? It Is I engage
My single self against you. Nor do these
Forbear; whose numbers when he saw increase
From their close Coverts; Some o'th top oth' hill
Some in the valleys; nor a few did fill
The plains, but's way seemed paved with arms: (As when
The huntsmans voice calls wild-beasts from their den
Beset with toils:) His troubled thoughts invent
No help but this; To climb the steep ascent
To Sphinx her cave; where, batt'ring's hooked nails
Against the craggy rock, he at last prevails
To reach the top; which thus obtained, secures
His back from fear of danger, and procures
A way for's just revenge: He tears a stone
From the maine rock, which well-grown steeres would groan
To draw to the City: Then uniting all
His strength, with violence he lets it fall.
Thus mighty One of the Centaures, who being drunk at P^rithou^'s wedding
quarreld with the Lapithae their Thessalian neighbors, and were vanquished.
Pholas heaves a goblet up
Against the Lapithans. The Falling soon after by the hand of Tydeus*
dying troop
Wondering at's height above them, were o'rethrowne
With th'unexpected rock, thus tumbled down.
Here lay men's mangled faces, hands, and breast,
With weapons which they wore, together pressed.
Four gron'd beneath this burden, the other fled
With terror from their project; for those dead
Were not a despicable train: There was
The Kingly spirit of fierce Dorylas*
Thereon sprung from Mars, descending from
The Those borne of the serpents teeth sown by Calmu^.
Earth-begotten brood, and Halys whom
No horseman ever conquered, but now falls,
Overwhelmed on foot; and Phaedimus, who calls
Pentheus his Grandsire, but with Bacchus enraged against P^ntheus* afflicted
all his posterity* Ovid.
Libers anger:

When Tydeus saw disordered; his whole stock
Of arms, two darts, stuck on the side o'th rock,
Were hurled at's flying foes; then skips toth' ground:
And lest his naked breast should catch a wound,

Pressed Thereon; guarding's back and head, with the That o^ the boar.
hide
Of proof, and fencing's breast with his enemies shield,
He makes a stand. The Named here from Ogyges, once King of Thebes.
Thebanes take the field,
Joined once more in a body, and march on
Tydeus soon
Draws out his Mars, grandfather to O Eneus was worshipped in Thrac^a, and
arms dedicated to him, one of whose swords Ty^eus wore.
Thracian sword, the Martial gift
Of O Eneus, turning him with many a shift
Of's body; here and there his blows they feel;
And's buckler wards their darts of glittering steel.

Fall foul of one another; their own harms
Are wrought by their own powers; now wanting strengt^
To Offend, the crowd o'rethrows it self at length.
He was so small a mark, their arrows mist '^m,
Thus his unconquered arm does still resist^um.
Thraecian There were two Cities, and valleys of that name, one between
Macedonia and Thrace, where this battle was pitched, the other in Campai^a,
where Hercules overcame the Giants.
Phlegra do not lie)
Stout A Giant faign'd to have a hundred h^nds.
Briareus outbrav'd the armed sky:
Despising Phoebus shafts, and Pallas's Snakes the Symbol of prudence were
ascribed to Minerva, and placed under her Image, and reckoned by Virgil, for
part of her Arms. AEn^id. 12.
snakes,
and the Thessalian pines, which Mavors shakes
^or spears; One of the Cyclops, which hammer out Jove's bolt^ in AEtna*
and Jove forged thunderbolts, which tired
^ Pyra^mon last: Yet whilst all heaven conspired
^n vain to batter'im, he complains his hands
Are idle still: Thus active Tydeus stands,
Weilding his buckler: now, he does retire,
And guards himself round; now, advances higher
Upon their fears; and getting ground, commands
The darts which stuck in's shield, to arm his hands.
Some deep wounds he received, none deadly yet:
Nor could he fear his death: He does over set
Raging Deilochus, and then does send
Phlegeus to hell, t'accompany his friend,
As he was threatening death, with his heav'd-up blade;
Then Lycophon, and Thebane Gyas had
Like fortune. Now the cowards 'gan to seek,
And count themselves: nor did they so well like
This killing sport: And grieved to see the throng
Thus melt away. When Chromis (who was sprung
From Son to Agenor King of Tire.
Tyrian Cadmus stock) (whose mother, hight
Phoeniceaen Driope forgot the weight
Of her great belly, when she was possessed
With fury, father One of the names of Liber, in whose Bacchanals she was
enraged.
Evan, of thy Priest:
And whilst a struggling bull she haled on
By'th' horns, her Not staying the course of nature, but abortive through his
mothers struggling.
pains deliver her of this son:)
Bold with his darts, and's conquered Lions skin*
He shakes his lusty club of knotty pine:
Exclaiming thus: Shall one man, Friends, shall one
Triumph in Greece, over your destruction?
Fame scarce will credit him. Mates, where is our power?
Where Is our prevailing Arms? We promised more
Cydon! to our King; Lampus! more bold adventers.
Thebane Which he had snatched from his adversaries.
javeling enters
His open mouth: His jaws in vain withstood:
But's voice thus stopped, his closed tongue swims in blood.
And yet he stands, till death had summond all
His limbs; then silent, biting th'spear does fall.

My noble Thespian pair? Young Periphas
(The richest mind, in the choysest body found)
Raised up his brothers dying limbs from ground:
His left hand under-props his drooping neck;

His straightened breast: Nor could his helm contain
Those floods of tears: But in this weeping vain,
A furious lance pierced his short ribs behind,
Which through him smote his brother too, and joined
He who was first wounded.
His trembling eyes
Look up on's brothers death, and then he dies.
The Other, not spent yet with his wounds, thus wishes:
Such be An imprecation on Tydeus.
thy sons embraces, such their kisses.
Thus both did fall alike: (a wretched prize

But he pursues his victories, and chases
M^naetes with his shield and darts; whose paces,
Trembling, give back, till the unequal sands
Trip'd up his heels: Then spreading both his hands,

Charged now against his throat* then makes his prayer.
By these still shades, where stars glide from the skies;
By heaven; by this thy night of victories;
Spare me to go, and blaze this dismal news
Thebes; and with contempt to our King, diffuse
Thy glory amongst the quaking vulgar: So
Our darts shall fall in vain, and tho^ shall go
Shot-free through all our Arms, and be in the end
Brought back with triumph to thy longing friend.
Thus spoke he: The Other cleares not up his brow:
Thou spend'st thy te^rs in vain (says he) 'twas thou
Made promise of my head toth' King, if I
Mistake not: yield up now thy arm^s, and die.
Why would spin out thy life, when As if present li^e wo^ld not advantage
them, which mus^ soon after be cut off. I choose to sense the place thus,
opposing compendium to dispendium.
war's at hand?
With that he draws his weapon back, now staind
With his heart blood: And crows ore's captives thus:
This is n't the The festival of B^cchus, thus named, because every third year
they were performed, with the greater solemnity.
Trieterick night, in use
Among your Countrymen; nor do you see
Cadmus his The name of these Sacrifices is fetched from the Priestesses fury,
in which ^^ge Agave slew P^ntheus.
Orgies, where your Matrons be
Enraged by Bacchus: Did you think to wear
Your buckskin The Sacrificers were loose garments made of the skins of beasts.
copes, and shake a garnished These Thirsi, dressed about with vineleaves* were
charged fantastically in the way of foiles, at the sound of their Music.
spear,
At your soft strains? Or (which true valor scorns)
Meant you, at sound of The place where the piper Mar^^a^ challenged Apollo;
all wind Instruments were invented there.
Celenean horns,
To close your wanton The combats of adulterers.
fights? The blows we deal
Are sharper, like our fury. Sink to hell
Ye few, ye over matched Cowards. Thus he roares:
But his tired spirits stopped him: All the force
Of's threatening hand was lost: His footsteps falter'd:
His arm lets fall his shield, whose hew was altered
With drops of blood: a could sweat trickles down*
His panting breast: A bloody dew stands on
His locks, and flaming eyes; over his grim brow,
Whole streams, which spouted from their wounds, did flow

Preyes on Massilian sheep: But when he is fed
And pampered with their blood, which clots his mane,
He stands in the midst of of the flock, which he has slain,
Tired, yawning, surfeited; his rage does pawse,

Licking, with his loll'd-out tongue, their gentle fleeces.
Now Tydeus full of blood, and glorious pieces
Of spoils, had gone to Thebes in pomp toth' view
O'th frighted Court: But thou did please to show
Called T^itonia from the Afric^ fountain Triton, where she first appeared.
virgin- Pallas, to his mind
Inflamed, and with his prosperous fortunes blind.
Great branch of O Eneus's stock, whom we afford
To overcome Thebes at I^ her fifty champions whom thou have slain.
distance; sheath thy sword:
Spare heaven that is too propitious: Thou have done

With fortunes choicest gifts. There did remain
Only the Thebane Nam^d either from Haemon a Boeotian river, o^ son to that
Haemon who was enamored of Antigone.
Maeon yet unslaine;
Unwilling to survive them: (he fore-knew
This fate, being A famous Auspex. i. c. fortune tellers, from the flight of
birds.
skilled in every bird that flew:)

Destined to death, neglect what he could say.
He (wr^tched creature) was condemned to live:
To whom grim Tydeus, this harsh charge did give.
Thebane, what e're thou art, whom the next Sun

Return this to thy King: Entrench thy gates,
Renew thy arms, view round thy walls defaults:
But chiefly raise more men, complete again
Thy shattered troops: See how this spacious plain

^o fight. This said, he chose an offering
^or thee, kind Pallas, from the field of slaughter:
And makes a heap of carcasses; with laughter
Recounting his own acts: An oak did grow
In The middle trench of the field, which did not know
The age when 'twas first planted: A thick rind
With crooked twigs, and suckers 'bout it twined.
Here helmets are hung up, and targets battered
With many strokes; here broken swords are scattered:
Here binds he shivered spears, he could recover
Out of their gaping wounds: Then standing over
His heap of arms and bodies, he begins:
Night and the Mountain ecchoe to his Hymns.
Goddess of power, thy Minerva was borne of the brain of Jupiter.
Fathers brain and pride:
Great Queen of war, whose cheeks a helm does hide
With comely terror; whose stern brow is painted
With Lending her shield to Perseus, in his expedition against Medusa, had the
reflection of it there imprinted, which ever afterward she wore.
Gorgons blood: Mars is not more acquainted
With battles; nor Bellona shriller blows
Her trumpets: be propitious to my vows.
Whether thou leave Athens dedicated to Pallas, where Pandion reigned.
Pandions hill to view
Our slaughters; or forsak'st thy joyful crew
Of Thebane Several Cities of this name, were in Epire, Italy, Boeotia, Lydia,
Thessalia; this of Boeotia was devoted to Minerva*
Ithones Nymphs, or kombst thy hairs
Bedewed in The Africa river where Trit^n used to bathe.
Trit^ns streams, where two white mares
Hurry thy warlike Charret: We present
These broken spoils now, and this pillage rent
From our foes shoulders: But if e're we come
To see AEtoliae where he was borne.
Parthaons fields, and find a home
In An AEtolian City, consecrated to Mars.
Pleur^n, then thy Temples richly gilt
In The loftiest streets of the City shall be built.
Whence 'twill delight, the Ionick waves to spy,
And boistrous Achelous passing by
The Three Islands of sand wrought up by the Sea, in the mouth of Achelous.
Echinades, where is azure waves do raise
The Ocean. Here will I paint the The stories of victories atcheiv'd by them.
baies

Of puissant Princes. Here will I bestow
Their Arms fixed to their Scutcheons: What these broiles
Afford me here, with all those other spoils
Which thou shall grant, when Thebes is made our prize.
Calydonian votaries,
Shall wait upon thy Pallas, Diana, and Vesta, the three virgin Goddesses.
virgin Altars, with
Athens, named here from King Actaeus, brought in the use of lights to the
Sacrifices of Pallas.
Athenean torches; binding many a wreath
From thy Either the Olive Minerva's gift, of which they wrought her garlands:
or that tree, which every fifth year was devoted, on which they hung the first
fruits of all their increases, like the Roman Verbena.
chaste tree, with white and purple tires.
Here thy aged Priest shall feed In this, performing the office of the Vest^ll
virgins, who might not suffer their fir^ to go out without a prodigy.
eternal fires;
Whether that of the Palladium let fall from heaven, which was death to pry
into. Or rather that of her Virginity, of which there was a strong suspicion
with Vul^an, when Erictho^ius was borne.
myst'ries: Thou shall bear
The first fruits of our works in peace, and war,
Without As once when she sent the boat into Calydonia.
Diana's anger. Thus he spoke,
And to sweet Argos, straight his journey took.
Finis Lib. II. Statii Thebaid.
Argument. Lib. III. Statii Thebaidos.
Maeon reports toth' King his Captains fall;
Then dies himself, denied his funeral:
The howling Matrons run toth' bloody field
To weep upon the dead. Mavors does yield
At Joves command, toth' Thebane wars; though hindered
By Venus prayers. Tydeus returning, tendered
His aid to Polynices, who is affected
With His Brothers wrongs: Nor are his wounds neglected.
On Aphesas, the Prophets Auguries
Are taken: Capaneus does them despise.
Argia does implore her Fathers aid
Toth' war; he grants the boon for which she praid.
BUt the persidious Thebane Prince, forbears
All rest, this It was not yet discovered which side was worsted.
doubtful night; though the moist stars
Had a long race to morning: His Of way-laying* (...)
base act
Keeps watch about his soul; and does exact
Just punishment: Whilst fear (which prophesies
The worst of doubts) all her conjectures tries.
Alas! says he, why stay they? (he did think
The task was easy: Tydeus needs must shrink
At sight of such a power; nor did he weigh
His courage with their Numbers) did they stray
Through some wrong path? Is there an army raised
From Greece to's succor? or's the Rumor blazed
Through neighbor Cities, of our base attempt?
Were some few Cowards chose fit for contempt,
Mars? Chromis and Dorilas,
The Thespians too, true champions to our cause,
Were there: whole Greece could not withstand their arms:
And sure he brought no guard of hidden charms
To Oppose our darts; He wore no coat of mayle,

Thus long over one! If battle yet be joined.
Thus various heates of rage distract his mind.
But above all he blames himself, who spared
The Legate when is Embassage was declared

Now he is ashamed, and in another mood
Repents. As the Calabrian Pilot plowes
The That boistrous part of the Mediterranean Sea, which lies about the
Adriatic straits.
Ionick waves, where every shoale he knows
And creek; Enticed out from the friendly shore,
Cause the A constellation, in honor to the Amalthean goat which nourished
Jupiter, whose first rising threatens boistrous weather, but cleares up before
the fall.
Olenean Goat rose clear before:

The ports fly open, The son which Jupiter gave OEnopion without a wife, who
slain by Diana's Scorpion, was transfigured to a Star, which rises in the wet
month of January.
Orion does let fall
Huge tempests: Then he longs for land, and rows
To shore amain: But a strong South Wind blows
Oth' stern to Sea: When leaving's skill, he grieves,

Thus troubled lies Eteocles, and blames
The slow-paced Light's not-yet-approaching beams.
But lo! when nights black steeds their course had run,
In whose lap she sleeps every night.
Tethys roused the Sun,
Bathing in the Eastern Sea: The womb of the Earth,
(As 'twere to give strange prodigies a birth)
Trembles, the The Globe of the Earth, hanging equally poised in the air,
seems to be struck by the Orb in compassing it, when it jars in an
Earthquake.
Globe being struck: Bacchus his mountain covered with snow.
Citharons top
Shakes off his snow, the hills seemed lifted up:
And Thebes seav'n gates threatened to clash together:
The cause appeared; Spared in the last book by Tydeus to publish his
victories.
Maeon returned thither
From his could quarters, vexed with Who had showed him a cruel favor.
Fate, and sad
Because he lived: Nor yet the Dawning had
Fully discovered him. But's lamentation
Was a sure token of their desolation.
And now his stock of tears were spent; As when
The heardsman comes from's pastures back again,
Spoiled by the Country wolves, whose Masters herd
Was fled out of his Grove that night, afear'd
Of storms raised by the Weather was prognosticated by the figure of the Moon
after her changes.
blunted horns o'th Moon:
Next day their slaughter's seen; Nor dares he run
To tell this news at home, but strewn with A custom practiced by Christians
and (...)
sand
He fills the Vale with his plaints, hating the land
His (...)
silent folds were pitched on, and does roar
For his lost bulls, which now he calls over.
Soon as the crowd of Matrons see him come
Toth' gates alone, without his troops, or some
O'th valiant Captains with him; They (alas!)
Dared not to ask, but made an outcry: As
A City stormed would do, or seamen shout
Launching a ship toth' Maine. When he found out,
To his desire, the hated King, says he,
Stern Tydeus recommends one soul to thee,
One wretched soul, of all thy train: If this
Were the gods will, or Fortunes, or (which is
A shame to speak) the foes unconquered might;
I, which relate it, scarce can think it right:
All, all are dead: Witness ye stars above,
My partners Ghost, and that Bringing him back only to perish.
ill fate which drove

This cruel pardon, life's As not worthy to die amongst his confeder^tes.
dishonored stain:
But the Which as a Prophet he was best acquainted with.
command of heaven and constant Fate
Unchanged from her decrees, or Pluto's gate
Late shut against me, did forbid my death:

How little fearing hell? Then blood-hound hear:
Thou'st raised a fatal, a forbidden war.
Whilst in contempt of Laws, and brothers right
Banished, a Scepter's only thy delight.

And fifty Those of his Captains.
Ghosts hovering before thine eyes.
With horror, night and day, shall fright thy mind,
And be thy guard; Nor will I stay behind.
With this the fierce Kings breast was swollen with ire:

Straight, Phlegias and Labdacus, prepared
For all injustice (Captains of his Guard)
Would force him from the presence. But he had
With daring courage, now unsheathed his blade:

Glancing on's steel; Thou have not right (quoth he)
To any blood of mine; Nor shall thou strike
That breast which Tydeus spared: I go to seek
Forbidden death with triumph; and am borne
Of his partners which fell before him.
expectation to my partners Urne.
Heaven and thy Brother plague thee. -- But this sound
Was stopped with his blade, sunk up to the hilts in's wound.
He strives against deaths pangs; and doubling all
His strength t'a second stroke, on's sword does fall.

Streams from his mouth and wounds in a double flood.
The Nobles minds were struck, and all the round
Mutt'red their troubled thoughts. Whilst he still frowned,
With looks unchanged by death; his wife and friends
(Not long joy'd with his company) attends
On's corpse to's house. The Tyrant sticks not here,
But interdicts his fun'ralls; and (as 'twere
To make his sins complete) in vain does turn
The Ghost that felt it not, from's quiet Urne.
But thou, whose Fate was great, as was thy soul,
Who, never to be forgotten, durst control
The Imperious King; and pave a way in which
Blessed liberty might ride! What verse, what speech
Can raise thy name, as high as thy deserts?
Thou God-delighting Prophet! Heavenly Arts
Were not taught thee in vain. Apollo's The tree whence Apollo's Priests had
garlands in honor of Daphne.
baies
Did well become thy brows. Dodona, where Jove gave answer by two Doves,
sitting on his Oaks.
Dodona's praise,
That Queen of Groves, dies: Where Apollo's Oracle in the bottom of P^ruassus,
was delivered by an ancient maid. But this Prophet being dead, all Oracles
would be silent.
Cyrrha's Nymph will dare,
Now Phoeb' is mute, to unresolve our fear.
And now far distant from the Stygian coasts,
Go, take Elysium; which no Because of their last cowardly attempt.
Thebane Ghost,
But thine, may enter: where the Tyrants name
Has no command. The Prophets body exposed now by the Kings command.
His shape remains the same,
His limbs untouched by ravenous beasts, and where
He lay exposed, the birds with awe forbear.
But wives, and Orphans, with sad Parents, spread
Through all the plains, and rocks, run who should feed
Their eyes first, with their miseries: (It was
A sad contest:) whilst many thousands pass
Along to comfort them: And some haste on
To see what one man, in one night had done.
The way reek'd with their sighs: Their cries were heard
Through all the fields: But when those rocks appeared
And that Infamous as well for the monster Sphinx, as for Tydeus his slaughter.
unhallowed wood; (as if their shreikes

One general out-cry's made: this sight of blood
Had kindled all their rage. Black sorrow stood
In mourning weeds, all torn, and mangled paps
Inviting on the Matrons. They unclaspe

The bodies, as they found them, which they knew:
Falling on friends and strangers. One besmeares
Her locks with goare: some close the eyes: Her tears
Are shed to bath his wounds: This plucks a dart

Part fit the trunk limbs as they grew before,
And join the shoulders to the head they bore.
But I Would, mother to the Thespian pair,
Wandering in the braky sands, whose scattered hair

In careless manner, having bathed her hands
In The blood of her pale cheeks: Not wretched now,
Now not unhappy: Fear and dread does flow
From both her eyes. Thus, through the field of war

With dust; she seeks her widowed joys, and moanes
Over every slaughtered carcass, for her sons.
As a Thessalian hag, joy'd with the news
Of some late Which might furnish her with store of carcasses.
battle; (from whose Countries use

With Either to keep light the better, or that there was a spell in the
inspication and cleaving of them.
seare-branch'd-Cedar-torch-light Which besides that they be oily, seem to
Virgill, and Ovid to be of a m^gicall power.
, in the night
Traces the fields; where every corpse is tossed
As't welters in its blood, to see what Ghost
To her commands, freest it self engages,
Whilst the black Round complains, and That their rest and his dominion is
thus disturbed.
Pluto rages.
Those lay together, underneath the rock;
Happy, to fall the same day, by the same stroke:
Their breasts were pegg'd together with the spear;
Which when her eyes saw, (having dropped a tear)
Sons, is it a Mother (says she) that beholds
These your close kisses? These your loving folds?
Has deaths too cruel wit, thus coupled you
In The close of life? Whose wounds first shall I view?
Whose lips salute? Are you your Mothers glory?
My wombs best fortune? Which should raise my story
To heaven, outvying other As Niob^s, etc.
Matrons names;
Ah! how much happier are those coupled Dames
Whose barren wombes n'ere called Lucina down
To ease their pains? my pains my ills may own.
Nor fell you nobly in the Being slain in a cowardly night skirmish.
day of war,
The talk of Nations, what things you did dare;
Leaving a badge of honor to your Mother:
You died a poor, base death, which night would smother.
Could so great blood steal without praise to the grave?
But I Will not strive to part you, or to have
Your hands untwined as they lie embraced:
And break your league of death. Go Brethren, last
Long, undistinguisht; when your bodies burn,
And may your kind Ghosts mingle in your Urne.
Thy wife laments no less Chromis for thee,
And Pentheus mother, sad Astioche,
Having prepared the Fun'rals: You might gather
From Phaedrims infants, they had lost their Father:
Phylleus her spouse, Marpissa weeps; alas!
Whilst sisters bath the bloody Achamas.
Now they lop'd down the To build funeral piles for their dead friends.
wood, and shaved the head
Of The neighbor hill, which witnessed this black deed,
And saw their tears. But sage Alethes stood
Before the piles, and whilst no mourner could

Seeks with these words their sorrows to assuage.
Our Nation seldom has been free from danger
By'th' sport of Fate, since the When Cadmus sowed the Dragons teeth, whence
the Giants sprung.
Sidonian stranger
Threw his cursed seed in our Aonian plains,

But Thebes never wept so loud, when lightning turned
Old Cadmus When Juno counsell^d Semele, to desire Jove's majestic appearance.
court to ashes, where it burned
By Juno's counsel: Nor when Athamas
Down from the mount with fun'rall Of his sons d^ad body.
spoils did pass,
Learchus fears.
Nay Thebes was bathed in no more fruifull tears,
When tired Who in that fury tore her son Pe^theus piece-meale.
Agave's madness found relief,
And stood amazed at her companions grief.
The fate and mischief of this single day
Niobe did pay
For her proud boasts, where overwhelmed with ills,
She gives so many Making a bold comparison with Latona, she lost in one day
fourteen children.
corpses to their piles.
So left the people then the naked City,
Whilst aged Sires, and ranks of Matrons pity,
Thebes the seven gated City, had two corpses carried through every gate.
gate
Was crowded with two Funerals: My Fate
Then taught me, like my Parents to lament;
Although my years knew not what sorrows meant,
Heaven wrought all this: Nor grieved I more because
Actaeon torn by his hounds, for espying naked Diana.
Masters face
Wandering by Delia's fountains, where he spi'de
Forbidden sights: or when thy blood did glide
Great Dirce dragged by Amphion and Zetus, had her blood changed into a
fountain of her name.
Queen, in new-sprung streams: 'Twas the decree
Of Fate, and Jove's high pleasure. Whereas we
Are robbed of the kingdoms pillars, all our power,
By one false Tyrants fault. Nor at this hour,
Greece, how the Embassage was rejected, hears:
And now, we think, we wail the worst of wars.
How shall the horses foame? what sweaty brows
Will roll in the dust? how red the Current flows?
Green years will see this: Whilst I may, will I
Kindle my pile: and in my Country lie.
Thus spoke the old Father: and much aggravates
Etheocles his sin, whilst he relates,
His cruel, wicked purpose, which ere long
Just vengeance would pursue. What taught his tongue
This freedom? He foresaw his end was nigh,
His days were spent, and he would bravely die.
The King of heaven from's stately palace, viewed
These Nations first, in their own blood imbrued.
And sends post-haste for Mars. Who laying waste
Some These Nations were so warlike, that Mars was said to be borne there.
Thracian and These Nations were so warlike, that Mars was said to be borne
there.
Getick towns, did haste
And drove his charret furiously, toth' sky:
Lightning did creast his helm; the gold did die
On's cruel arms; which quickened with the shapes
Of monstrous beasts, he shook: Whilst thunderclaps
Crack heaven: a bloody-red light sets upon
His shield, whose envy strikes the distant Sun.
When Jove beheld him, puffing with his late
Sarmatick pains, and swelling still with hate,
And warr's huge Tempest; Go, says he, appear
Through Greece, as thou art: Nor sword, nor anger clear,
Bid them Or after another edition, bid them disturb their idle league.
scowre up the rusty bits, and hate
All, but thy self: Thee, in their lives estate
And fortunes: Break delays; Cashiere that These Nations never quarreled
before.
peace

Thou may disturb my quiet. I have sown
The seed of discord thus: Tydeus does frown
At his return, reporting the base act
Attempted by the King, fit to contract

And by his steel revenged: It Is thou must add
Credit to's words. Ye gods, which draw your line
From me, dissent not: Hope not, to decline
My sentence by your prayers: The black clew

To Mars, from the Earths first fabric; and those are
A people destined, from their birth to war.
But should my justice find you her gaine-saiers,
Not to plague old offenses in the heirs;

Of mine own thoughts; And what, as heaven, I set
In mine esteem, Thou clear Elyzian water;
This hand shall Thebes, and her proud bulwarks batter:
Whose towers razed to the ground, on Greece I Will power:

Of blood rained down: Though Contending so earnestly for them. Lib. 1.
Juno in her arms
Embrace her hills and Temples, midst these harms.
This said, they trembling, do their speech forbear,
And quell their thoughts, as if they mortals were.

No waves forbid the shore to sleep at ease;
The shady leaves, and clouds, are scorched with heat,
Without a blast to cool them: Then the great
And roaring lakes contract themselves: The Sun
Drinks up the streams which now with silence run,
Mars triumphs at these summons; as he rides
On's f^ery wheels, toth' left the reins he guides.
And having re^ch'd his journey, Heavens ascent,
Venus does boldly before his steedes present
Herself: They startling back, let fall their manes
With reverence: She on their harness leanes;
And glancing her moist eyes, makes this complaint:
(Mean while his, steeds were fed with Adamant
Which sprung besides her feet:) Prepar'st thou war
For Thebes? Do thou, her lovely Being father to Harmione, the wife of
Cadmus*
Sire, prepare
So kind a war? And seek'st thou to destroy
Thy offspring? Cannot Harmony, nor the joy
Of heaven, those Where all the gods threw in their offerings.
weddings; Cannot my tears be heard
To stop thy rage? Is this a just reward
For my Of playing the adulteress.
offense? Left I my bashful spirit*
And wore I Which Vulca^ forged to ensnare them.
Lemnian chains, that I might merit
This boon? Proceed. But it is another duty
Wronged Vulcan pays; whose anger serves my beauty.
He would be glad, eternally to sweat
In's forge, at my command: And nightly sit
Watching at's anvile: He would hammer, Thee,
Even Thee, a suite of arms. Yet Thou -- But I
Think by my tears, to melt a rockie heart,
A heart of brass. This only this impart:
I beg it: Why did cause my child to take
A Tyrian spouse, and fatal wedlock make?
Thy boast was, that those champions of Tire,
Though sprung from When Cadmus sowed the serpents teeth.
Vipers, challenged Jove, their Sire;
Brave lively spirits. Oh that my girl had joined
To a Northern blade, of the The Northern part of Thr^ce, named from its King
Sitho^.
Sithonian kind,
Beyond thy Thrace. Is It not enough disgrace,
Queen Venus's daughter Harmione when with Cadmus she was transformed into a
snake.
creeps upon the grass,
And spits her poison in the Illyrian coast?
But now a Nation undeserving's lost.

Of tears, but handling's spear, leaps down in haste
From's lofty Chariot; where his buckler meets her
With rough embraces, and thus kindly greets her.
Thou sweet refreshment from my warlike toils.

My darts, amongst gods or men; who safely charm'st
My foming steeds, and this right hand disarm'st:
I ha'nt forgot th'alliance Cadmus claims,
Nor thy dear Love: (Let me not bear these blames

And driven disarmed to the pale Furies cell.
But now the Fates decree, and Jove's command
I must obey (Thy Vulcan has no hand
Fit for such service:) How dare I oppose
Jove's pleasure, or contemn what he will impose?
When late he spoke, heaven, earth, and the vast deep
(Strange power!) stood trembling: Nay the gods did creep,
And hid themselves, though of his rank: Yet, dear,
Be not possess't with a despairing fear:

Toth' Thebane arms, when both their hosts shall meet
Under the Tyrian walls: Then shall thou see
Me, hurry through the field of blood, and be
A terror to the Graecians, with more joy.

This said, he whips his horses through the sky:
Jove's thunderbolts do not more swiftly fly
To the distant Earth, when on the snowy head
Of Two mountains of that eminent height, that their tops are hid within the
(...)
Othrys, or cold Two mountains of that eminent height, that their tops are hid
within the (...)
Ossa he does tread;
And arms his hand in the clouds: Down fall his darts
Bearing his sad commands; Their sparkeling, starts
The Universe, should they a drought infer
Toth' Earth, or shipwreck to the Mariner.
Now Tydeus did his wary steps recall
Toth' Grecian plains, and sweet Prosymna's dale:
His looks affright; his hair with dust abounds;
A shower of sweat falls into's open wounds.
His eyes look red with watching; thirst contracts
His drawn-up mouth: his mind feeds on his acts,
And breathes his lasting fame. Just so, comes back
The pushing bull to's pastures; with his neck
And deawlap, and torn shoulders drenched in gore
Of's own, and's enemies blood: Though tired before,
His courage rises now: His pride does grow
From sight of's mangled breast: His conquered foe
Lies roaring, as he tumbles on the ground,
Which bids him slight the anguish of his wound.
Thus he returns; and as he passed, enflames
The Inland towns, betwixt A river in the utmost borders of Boeotia.
Asopus streams
And Argos: Every where discoursing, how
Himself Ambassador from Greece did go,
To ask for banished Polynices right:
Where he endured such force, so black a night,
That craft, those treacherous arms combined together,
By'th' Tyrants charge, who will not resign t^'s brother.
The people soon believe him; Mars prepares
Their credulous souls, and Fame does raise their fears.
He entering on a sudden at the gate,
What time Adrastus and his Nobles sat
^n Parliament:) cries out, at the Palace door:
^rme, Arm my sparks; and thou great Sovereign power
which rulest Greece; if any grandsires blood
^oe swell thy veins; to Arms: All that is good

More safely, I a Legate might have been
To the greedy Scythians, or that bloody Amycus, who challenged all travailers
to combat in the Bithynian woods, and there rifled and murdered them.
theife
Of the Bebrician wood. Nor do I grieve
Or check you for commanding: I am glad

In guilty Thebes. Trust me an Army backed
With night and craft, besieged me, in a tract
Of ground I knew not, naked; yet in vain:
As they had gone some fortress to obtain,

And armed with plots, they came t'encounter me.
There weltring in their blood, before the wall
O'th Which had lost fifty of her best commanders.
empty City. Now Is the time to fall
On our affrighted foes, when they have made

Though tired with sending fifty souls toth' grave,
My wounds not cleans'd, and bleeding, yet I crave,
Let Us march away. The amazed Graecians rise,
But first the Thebane meets, with downe-cast eyes:

Thy wounds, untouched my self: Was this my due
At my return, dear Brother? was this strife
Levelled at me! O base desire of life!
Wretch! that I should deny this crimson Of becoming a parricide in murdering
his brother.
stain

Long blessed with peace: A stranger shall not beget
Your trouble: Neither has my fortune yet
Swelled me so high, but that I know what smart
And grief it is, from wife and babes to part,

Nor pensive Matrons eye shall squint on me.
I Will go resolved for death, although my spouse
And Father-in-law again should stop my vows.
This life to Thebes, and to my brother's due,
And Thee, great Tydeus. Thus his speeches screw
Into their minds, whilst he winds in his Closely imploring assistance which
he seemed to pray against.
prayers.
But these complaints had moved their spleen; In tears
They boil their grief. One purpose does engage
The breasts of all; both young, and such whose age
Had cooled their spirits: All would rise as one,
And call in neighbors help; and straight be gone.
But brave Adrastus, who knew well to guide
A Scepter, cries, Let It being unlawful to wage war, without consulting the
Gods.
heaven and me decide
This matter. Neither shall th'Usurper live
Without revenge; nor you too hasty give
Promise for war. But now let us entertain
Tydeus, triumphing over so many slain:
Whose gallant soul from rest may find relief:
Reason shall moderate us in our grief.
The Peers were struck with this, his wife grew pale:
Glad Tydeus now surrounded by them all,
Wearied with his war, and travailes, was reposed
In The midst o'th hall; his back to a pillar closed:
Whilst Called so from a Grecian City of that name, which bred AEsculapius the
inventor of medicine.
Epidaurian Idmon baths him, who
Was skilled in the Surgeons lance, and simpling too.
He taken up with lofty thoughts, discourses
The cause of the jar, how they replied in courses;
In what place they way-lay'd him; at what hour;
What Captains came against him, of what power;
Who put him hardest to it: Then he relates,
How he spared Maeon, to report their fates.
The round of Nobles, with the King's amazed,
To hear't: The banished Thebanes ^pirit's raised.
The Sun descending toth' Hesperian shore,
Had loosed his fiery steeds, and washes ore

By Nereus train, and the Hours with nimble feet.
These take the reins off; and the imbroydred crest
Of's Crown, they unharnesse their chafed back and breast.
Some lead his steeds to pasture, when they are cool,

Night coming on composeth humane care,
And stops the wilde-beasts ranging; heaven does wear
A sable robe: All do partake this boon,
Except Adrastus, and his Thebane son.
Tydeus slept securely, whilst the Theme
Of's valor was presented in his dream.
And now the god of war, this gloomy night
Clatters his steel; and though he do affright,
Yet he allures their souls, through all the bounds
Arcadie, and the Nemaean towns:
Toth' top of Taenarus, and A Lycian City dedicated to Apollo.
Therapne blessed
With Phoeb's great presence. Rage and anger dressed
His horses manes: Terror his Squire, does use
The reins; and Fame, which watches every news,

Byth' horses breath, turns his Postilion:
And shakes her quivering wings with sounds of fear,
Forced on byth' bloody whip of the Charioteer,
To speak both truth and falsehood: The Angry god
Scythian rod.
As winds set by their Captain Neptune free
From their AEolian jail, before him flee
Intoth' From AEgeus, an Ath^nian, who drowned himself here, in despair for
his son Thes^us.
AEgean ^ea: whilst storms and clouds
Sad company, and gloomy winter crowds

From the torn Center of the scattered world.
The Fifty three little Islands in the AEgea^ sea.
Cyclads then feel their foundation shake;
Delos fears Two of the Cyclades, incompassing and securing D^los.
Mycone will her forsake,
And Two of the Cyclades, incompassing and securing Delos.
Gyarus; and does implore the aid,
And claims the promise, her great Apollo who in recompense to the Island which
brought him up, secu^ed it from winds and tempests.
Nurse-child made.
Now the seventh morning courted heaven and earth,
Giving the day from her fair lips a birth;
When the Adrastus named here from Perseus, who once ruled over Argos.
old King, from's privy chamber came,
Much doubtful, much distracted with the name
Of war, and's fiery sons: He cannot resolve,
Whether to be their General, and involve
The nations in their quarrel; Or refrain
His raging breast, and sheath his sword again.
This way sweet peace provoked; then he is ashamed
Of lazy ease, and's subjects all inflamed
With fresh desires of war: But yet, at last
His doubts are closed with this; He Will go, and taste
The Prophets minds, and try what the One great part of divination being made,
by looking on the sacrifices there slain.
Altars mean,
Which best discover truth. This was thy Scene
Eclus his son, who was both Prophet and Captain in the war, slain afterward.
Amphiaraus, with old Melampus joined
But son-in-law to King Praetus, upon compact of restoring his daughters the
Praetides to their former shapes.
Amithaons son, who flourished still in mind,
And Phoeb's great presence; 'Twas a doubt it seems
Who best beloved, drunk most of Where Apollo was worshipped, where they drunk
in the Art of divination.
Cyrrha's streams.
They try the Gods, with entrails first, and blood
Of cattle slain; whose speckled hearts withstood:
And shrivel'd veins spoke mischief to their fear:
Yet they will abroad and guess The two other kinds of soothsaying from the
flight and chirping of the birds.
in the open air.
There was a mount, whose daring top did pass
The clouds; the Grecians call it A Cilician mount, whence Perseus took his
flight, when he went for the Gorgo^s head.
Aphesas;

Swift Perseus took his flight, and did invade
The heavens: His frighted Danae.
mother saw his feet
Part from the rock, and would have followed it.
Here came the Prophets, having decked their brows

Of the white Olive; when the appearing Sun
Moistened the fields, and bid the frost be gone.
And first Amphiaraus.
Oeclides thus invoketh heaven:
Almighty Jove, from whom all power is given

Discovering heavens advice, and secret doom:
Not Near which Apollo had his speaking Tripos.
Cyrrha's Oracle speaks the God more plain,
Not the A country of Epirus where Doves on the boughs of oaks, delivered
Oracles from Jupiter.
Chaonian oaks, which men do feign,
Do answer thee. Though dusty In the des^rts of Africa, Jupiter appearing to
thirsty Liber in the similitude of a ram, and discovering water, had a temple
built, which he honored with his Oracle.
Hammon fret;
A Lycian City where Apollo had an oraculous Temple.
Patarean lots contend, or yet
Niles Apis a good King, since honored ^or a God under this shape, who gives
them his mute Oracles by the willing acceptance of his meat.
Ox, or Apollo's son, who had a Temple built to him in the City Possideum.
Bronchus equal to his Father,
Or watery Pisa's The Pisaean rusticks, being (as it were) Pa^s Organ-pipes,
which nightly he inspires.
swains, when they do gather
Pans nightly answer's in the dark; Those souls
Are most enriched, to whom thy lucky fowls
Named Dictaus from that name of ^rete, where he was brought up.
Jove, are sent: Strange ^ whence this honor came
To birds: it is ancient. Either when the frame
Of The world was molded out of the Chaos, then
The great Creator gave it; Or, once According to the Pythagorean fancy of the
transmigration of souls.
men
They changed their shapes, and chose to inhabit in
The air: Or their pure climate, where no sin
Does nestle, whilst they seldom touch the earth,
Has taught them truth; Chief power, which gav'st a birth
To all things, Thou know best. Vouchsafe from heaven
To let us know what pains, what fate is given
Toth' Grecian battles: If th'unchanged Powers
Decree, that we shall force the Thebane Towers
Discover't with All Omens fetched from the heavens and air, looked first to
the quarters from whence they came: if from the left it was prosperous, if from
the right, unlucky.
a left hand crack: Let birds
In The air consent to it, chirping hidden words.
If thou deny't; here stop us: Cloud the day
With right hand shoales: This spoken, he does lay
His limbs of the rock; where, to more gods he cries
Unknown, and looking steadfast So intentive to the divisions of the heavens,
that he dazzled his eyes from beholding any thing.
dimms his eyes.
Thus having parted 'twixt them all the sky,
Their eyes and mind in every Coast do pry:
At last Melampus calls: do thou not see,
Amphiaraus, under heavens Canopy
There Is no bird makes a prosperous flight? There Is none
Hovers with clear wings in this region?
There Is none flies clapping with a luckie sound?
Apollo's The Crow changed by Apollo for his Coronis sake, and ever since
attending on his Oracle.
black companion cannot be found,
Nor the Because Jove's messenger.
Eagle bearing lightning, nor the Owl
Minerva's howling Nyctimene changed to an Owl for incest with her father, was
admitted a nightly attendant on Diana. All these were prosperous birds.
bird is in the Shole.
The best diviner here is a Vultur* or
Some ravenous Kites, aloft triumphing soar.
A monstrous flight! hark, what a dismal skritch
They make in the clouds; what groans the night-birds fetch!
What ill presaging tunes, the Scritch-owles holloe!
Must we, these first portents of mischief follow?
Named here from Thymbra, where he was worshipped.
Phoeb'? see where
Their hooked claws do their bloody faces tear.
Their wings do beat the wind, whose clapping sound
Resembles sobs: Their feathered breasts they wound.
Then he proceeds, I Have oftentimes endured

In the Thessalian Which ^arried Jason and his Argonauts to Colchos.
bark, scarce past a child,
Among those royal As the Argonauts, all sons to Kings, were afterward
accounted.
demigods, who filled
Their souls with wonder, when I did declare
The fate of Sea and Land; Jason gave ear
Apollo's s^n most exquisite in Sooth-sayings, and intimate with Jason.
Mopsus's prophesies,
When doubts arose: But never yet the skies
Seemed so prodigious: never so great fear:
Yet more's a coming. Mark, in that bright Sphere
Of heaven a thousand swans have closed their ranks:
A Thraci^n river abounding with Swans, where they are thought to be colored
with snow.
Strimons banks,
Or fruitful Nile has sent them: Here their flight
Is stopped; think these present Thebes to thy sight.
For silent in a quiet round they are set,
As if they were entrenched with walls. But yet

Sev'n golden The king of birds, Eagles, who attend of Jupiter.
Birds of Jove, in triumph fly:
Imagine these are For that number went to the Thebane w^rs.
Grecian Captains: They
Have entered the Swans circle, where they prey
With their hooked talons on their slaughtered foes;
And claspe their claws, at more. But see, it blows,
And rains down drops of blood: the day is dressed
In plumes: How soon Jove's anger has distressed
The conquering party! Betokening Capaneus, who contesting with Jupiter, was
slain with lightning.
He, which soared so high,
Scorched with the Suns quick beams does fall and die.
Parthenopaeus desiring to accomplish things beyond his age.
To Others forsaken by his tender wings,
Whilst he mounts after stronger birds: Polynices, who died upon his brother.
This clings
About his foe, and falls together; Adrastus, who only returned.
He
Turns back, and flies from's partners destiny.
There Is Hippomedon, o'rewhelmed in a ^iver.
one, wrapped in a Tempest, falls: And Tydeus cat up Menalippus his brains, who
g^ve him his deaths wound*
he
Dies feeding on his living Enemy.
Their blood has stained the clouds. Why do thou Amphiaraus replies to
Melampus whose voice was stopped with tears, upon sight of the last Eagle
falling, which Amphiaraus interprets of himself.
steal
Soft tears, Melampus? I discover well,
Who falls now. Thus, fearful of the event,
And So sure, as if they already felt it.
feeling what their visions did present;
The Prophets stand affrighted. Now they grieve
They'ntruded amongst the birds, and without leave
Screwed into heavens designs: Anon they hate
The answ'ring Gods. What fury did create
This eager Love in mortals, to make known
Things yet to come? Was It heavens gift? or their own
Ambitious thoughts, content with no estate?
We search the birth, and end of time; what fate
The highest Called Coelopeus of Mathematicians.
Power, and hardened destinies
Determine for us. Hence we cast our eyes
On entrails, listening to the birds discourse;
We trace the stars, and reckon According to whose increase or decrease, their
spells were more or less powerful.
Phoebe's course;
And use Magic there, was most in practice by the raising of Ghos^s.
Thessalian arts. The Golden Age
Of our forefathers never durst presage
Thus boldly: When De^calion advised by the Oracle, threw his Mothers bones
behind him.
They were borne of stumps of rocks,

In woods or tillage. Mortals may not strive
To know to morrow's doom: And yet we dive,
(Poor Vulgars) in Heavens secrets: hence our Lies,
Fears, Anger, Craft, immodest hopes arise.

His garland now discharged, without his boughs
Of honor, leaves th'unlucky mountain: Where
The noise of war and trumpets greet his ear:
For distant Thebes boiled in their breast; He brooks

Nor the Peers meetings: Hid in's ^ecret Cell
The Gods acts he refuses to reveal.
Thy shame, Melampus, and thy cares retained
Thee in the Being both a Physician and a Prophet.
Country. Twelve days Amphiaraus.
he refrained

In doubts. But Jove's command now chafes their souls:
Whole towns and countries straight unpeopled lie;
Mars pressed a thousand troops: With joy they fly
From house, and lovely brides, and infants tears,

They pluck down weapons from their Grandsires halls,
And charriots fastened to the Temple walls.
Then burnish they their rusty darts, and set
Their cankered swords for slaughter, which they whet

And buckling brass-seam'd Corslets on their breasts,
They try their crackling Coats of maile; these bend
Their Cretian horns: Some, hooks and plow-shares send*
Toth' forge, with spades and harrows, where they glow:
Some do not stick, to cut down spears which grow
In consecrated groves; covering their shields
With Whence of old a shield was called corium bovis.
skins of Oxen, which have plough'd their fields.
They break int' Argos next, and roar out war
At the Kings door; their Clamours reach as far
As Tyrrhene waves: or when One of the Giants who attempting heaven, was
ore-whelmed by Jove under this mountain of AEtn^, and there broyled.
Enceladus.
Desires to change his side: the mountain thus
Thunders within its fiery caves: the top
Vomits huge Cinders, which begin to stop
The channel next A Sicili^n promontory, lying over against Scylla's gulf.
Pelorus; the Island Sicily once joined to the continent of Italy, and rent
from it by the violence of the waves.
then
Divided now, hopes to be joined again.
And now the hot desire of war did seize
The soul of Capaneus, long tired with peace;
Whose blood was streamed from noble veins; but he
Out^trips his grandsires acts: Long lived he free
In his contempt of heaven, neglect of right,
A daring soul, where Anger did excite.
Like one of shady A woody mountain of Thessaly where the Centaures inhabited.
Pholoes tenants, and
Amongst The Cyclops which work in their shop of AEtna.
the AEtnean brethren fit to stand.
Before thy door, Amphiaraus, where
The crowd of Captains, and mad vulgars were;
Argives, he cries, what sluggishnesse does tame
Your spirits? And you Grecians; is it not shame
So many armed, courageous nations wait
At one poor Citizens oraculous gate?
Should Phoeb' himself (what ever fears of men
And fame has made him) from's inspired den
Within the hollow top of The place where the Oracle was delivered by --
Cyrrha, mutter;
I Would scorn to stay, till his pale His Enthean Prophetess an aged maid, pale
and frantic, when she was possessed.
wench could utter
Her ridd'ling terrors; courage and this steel

Call out the Prophet with his juglings, now:
Or I Will make trial what his birds can do.
The Grecian bands do shout for joy, and crown
His rage with their applause: Amphiaraus the son of O Ecleus.
O Eclides soon

Was with another Foreseeing his own destruction occasioned by his wives pride.
sourse of cares oppressed.
I leave not my dark Cell, says he, for fear
Of this rash young man's clamours, though he bear
Mad threatenings in his tongue: another fate

From Being swallowed up by the earth.
mortal hands. It Is your Love, and the God
Too powerful in me, bids me spread abroad
These sec^ets: Sadly* I Will discover all,
You must expect to happen. Neither shall
Capaneus.
man: Apollo's den
To thee alone is silent. Wretched Men!
Why, why do you take up arms? the Fates, and heaven
Resisting. Whither have the Furies driven
Your blinded souls? Are lives so burdensome?
Argos so odious? Nothing sweet at home
Slight ye heavens signs? Why did ye make me pass,
With trembling steps toth' top of Called the Persean mountain, because Perseus
took his flight from thence.
Aphesas,
T'intrude int' heaven? I might have lived like you,
Not knowing the black days that shall pursue

Nor the Omens, seen: (Witness thou secret womb
Of The world, that counsel'dst me; ye chirping birds
And thou Apollo, as before.
Thymbraeus, listening to my words
More gently heretofore) Prodigious signs
Of ruin, I beheld: Men's base designs
Were seconded byth' Gods As Venus assisting the Thebanes, Juno the Grecians.
: Furies did mock,
And On whose Dist^ffe, the clue of life was seigned to be spun.
Lachesis tore lives off from her rock.
Lay down your arms: God has your rage withstood*
God has withstood. Is It sport, with captive blood
To water Cadmus The land where before he had sown his serpents teeth.
tilth, Aonian plains?
But why do I lose my song? why take I pains
To drive back fixed chance? There Is no release,
We It b^ing so determined by the destinies.
must go. Here he sighs and holds his peace.
But Capaneus replies: Prophet, on thee
Light all thy madness, and those plagues; to be
The Governor of When all the men are gone out to war.
naked Argos; where
May no Called here Tyrrhene, because they were the first inventors of Trumpets.
field-Musick rattle in thy ear.
Why stop'st thou nobler Spirits? Is It forsooth
For us, to suffer thee to hug thy sloth
At home? to enjoy thy foolish birds, and son*
And wife? But unrevenged forget, what is done
To gallant Tydeus, and the league they break?
But if the Grecians may not fight, go speak,
As a new Legate, to the Thebanes; sure
Thy holy Ironic^lly, because he was a Prophet.
Garlands will thy peace secure.
Shall the hidden cause, and ground of things, be given
Byth' stars at thy command? I pity heaven,
If prayers or charms can move it. Why do'^t fright
Dull sluggish souls? Fear first, gave Gods their height*
Yet now, rage on securely; but when first,
Th'alarme is given, and we shall quench our thirst
In helmes, full of Thebane streams.
Ismene, or Thebane streams.
Dirce's water,
Beware of meeting then, when we breath slaughter
Harnessed toth' battle: think not a cross bird,
Or wind, shall make that battle be deferred.

And terrible Apollo's madness. None
But I, and such as I am, daring men,
Shall divine there. A shout was raised again,
By such as did encourage him: which flies

Like a swift torrent, which does nimblier flow
With spring-tydes, or the hills dissolving snow,
When it ore-spreads the plains, maugre the shoares
Resistance; there tempestuously it roares

Against a hill, or with steep banks o'r^top'd.
These Captains quarrels here the night did part:
But poor Argia with a pensive heart
Bearing her husbands grief, and pitying their

Disheveled, as it was; and furrowed cheeks,
Into her Fathers lofty Palace breaks.
Carrying Polynices's young son.
Thessander at her breast; when night
Dis-mantled at the approaching of the light:
The North star, once Calisto, Jove's harlot, who is forbid to bath in the Ocean
by Thetis, at Juno's command* whose Nurse she was.
Arctos seeing the other stars decline
Toth' Sea, does envy. When sh'had entered in,
And kneeled before her reverend Sire, she says:
You know, dear Father, should I hold my peace,
Why thus with tears, without my spouse, in the night

Our births may challenge: by your self, I swear,
He did not bid me: 'twas that waking care,
And sleep disturbed with sighs, since Hymen plighted
Our faiths, and Juno's fatal torch was lighted.
If Tigers milk had nursed me, or rocks grew
Beneath my heart, I could not bear't: it is you
Have only means to help: All powers are
In your own hands: Dear Father, wage a war:
Pity your son's low fortunes: Pity this
Poor banish'd-fathers child: What shame it is?
He first, was entertained; and heaven, you will find
Witnessed the contract, when our hands were joined.
Sure this is he, foretold ^yth' Oracle:
I stole no close heats, no fires blameable:
I loved at your command: 'twas your advice.
Now with what cruelty can I despise
His sad complaints? Father, you know not yet,
What Love, a husbands misery can beget.
Now my sad soul puts up unpleasing wishes,
That I may Him fighting, him departing.
fear and Him fighting, him departing.
grieve: But when our kisses
Shall be divided; at the dismal day,
When the shrill trumpets call your Arms away,
When you shall shine in your enameled steel;
Alas, dear father, I perhaps shall kneel,
To ask it back again. Adrastus takes
Her kisses, watered from his eyes, and speaks:
I cannot blame thy plaints girl; Lay aside
Thy fears: Such boones are not to be denied:
Praiseworthy suits: But heaven, and mine own fear
The weight of the kingdom too, (yet don't forbear
To hope) suggest much to my soul. Thy cares
Shall find their due, nor shall thou lose thy tears.
Comfort thy husband, daughter: this delay
Will prove no loss: For great designs we stay.
This profits much in war. The light appears
As he spoke thus, and he is called up by's cares.
Finis Lib. III. Statii Thebaid.
Argument. Lib. IV. Statii Thebaidos.
Bellona calls to Arms: They part with tears:
Adrastus first leads on his troops to wars:
Then follows Polynice his wronged son:
Stout Tydeus next: and then Hippomedon:
Then Capaneus: Amphiaraus sixth,
Betrayed by's wife: Parthenopaeus next;
Though's fearful mother, would have stopped his heat.
The Thebanes preparations were as great;
Whom Bacchus's Priest affrights: Tiresias charms
The Ghosts up: Laius then foretells their harms.
The Grecians march. Bacchus sends ^routh to grieve 'um:
Hypsipyle shows Langia to relieve 'um.
THe winter thrice was thawed with gales, which blow
From the warm South; short days do longer grow
In their After the vernall AEquinox the days exceed the nights.
spring-quarters: When cursed fate controuls
Their broken Councels; tiil They, wretched souls,
Bellona's hand
Shakes on A tower of the Argives, where they yearly celebrated their feast of
Torches, in memory of Hypermnestra.
Larissa's top, a flaming brand
At first, and darts her massy spears, which glide
Whizzing in the air, and light on the other side
On A Thebane fountain which by this received an alarm to the war.
Dirces banks. From thence she takes the field,

A glittering show. Sh' inrages now the forces;
Arms the most forward, and claps on the horses;
Calls them toth' ports: their valor does prevent
Her call; even Cowards had some valor lent.
The appointed time was come; whole herds do fall
To Jove and Mavors; but the Priest grew pale
At the unlucky entrails; yet does frame
Some shows of hope toth' Camp. And now there came
A crowd of boys and girls, and aged Fathers
About their parting friends; this concourse gathers
And stops their doors up: tears no measure knew,
But sad fare-wells their shields and crests bedew.
The soldiers sigh to leave their home: they kiss
Through their close beavers: the rough helmet is
Bowed to embrace. He that in the Sword delights
Or Death but now, breaths out his rage in sighs.
So th'Mariner for some long voyage bound,
When Is sails do swel, and's anchor's weighed from ground,
Shakes hands with friends, who strive to cull his limbs,
Till kisses bathed in tears their eyesight dims;
So does the fog oth' Sea: Yet left behind
They climb a bank, and send their eyes to find
His sails, they grieve the wind blows fair from land,
And greeting the known keel on shore they stand.
Now forward Fame, thou worlds For the Thebane war was the most ancient.
first Register,
Since to remember Nobles is thy Care,
And spin their Lives; these valiant spirits discover:
And thou Calliope which raignes^-over
The sounding Pindus or Parnassus where the Muses warbled.
grove, take up thy harp, and tell
What bands, what Arms Mars raised; how people fell
From every City: None that tastes the river
Of Where they drunk in Poetry.
Helicon, can nobler strains deliver.
The King Adrastus, sad and pressed with cares,
Now drawing on to his declining years,
Marches amongst the troops unwillingly,
Content to girt his sword upon his thigh:
His Coat of Armour's brought byth' guard in the ree^:
His Steeds were harnessed by the Charioteer
In The gate: Adrastus his Horse, sprung from Scyphos, out of the Thessalian
earth.
Arion does his curb disdain.
Grec^an Cities accompanying Adrastus.
Larissa's train,
And tall Grec^an Cities accompanying Adrastus.
Prosymnes, Grec^an Cities accompanying Adrastus.
Media pasture-bearing,
And The Country of Arcadia famous for pasturage.
Phyllos stored with Sheep; with A Peloponnesian city, against which Ch^radros
beats.
Neris fearing
Charadrus foming through her vale: more powers
Came from A middle City between Corinth and Argos, near which Hercules killed
his Lion.
Cleone spir'd with lofty Towers.
A City contested for between the Argives and I acedemonians, whose Captain
Orthiades almost vanquished, dipped his finger in his own blood, and wrote an
inscription for a Trophe of his Victory, and then died.
Thyre sprinkled with Laconian blood.
More Kings descended from the same line, stood
Associated, which inhabit on
A rocky country near C^rinth.
Drepan, or olive-bearing A fruitful City, where Adrastus first reigned.
Sicyon,
Where slow An Achaian river, making a poole of that name.
Langia's silent waters glide,
An Atticke river, filled with the overflowing of Co^ytus, whence the Furies
are said to bath in it.
Helisse his winding banks does chide:
Sad is this Rivers honor, whose rough surges,
The Stygian Furies bathing in them, purges:
Their snakes are washed here, quitting The river of hell.
Phlegeton:
Whether the Thracian houses overthrown
Mycenes wicked At the bloody Feast which the sun fled from.
Court,
Or Cadmus family: When here they sport,
The river stained with poison, flies their touch.
Corinth joins company, abating much
From Building here a Temple to her, and honoring her son Melic^rta with the
Isthmian games.
Ino's plaints: The Corinthian haven.
Cenchre sends in her force,
Listed with those, where the Pegasus sprung from Neptune and the Gorgon
Medusa, whose hoof raised the fountain Hippocrene in Helicon.
Gorgonean horse
Beat up the Poets spring: And those that be,
Where Dividing 'twixt the AEgean and Io^ick sea.
Isthmos parts, and beats back the Sea.
Adrastus thus was followed with a band
Three thousand strong, with shouts: Some arm their hand
With darts* and some with smoke-dried clubs; (they come
From several stocks, with several customs:) some
Knew better how to use the nimble sling,
And wheeling round, would make an empty ring.
He marches, venerable for his years,
And government. As the stout bull appears
In his old pastures, though his strength's decayed,
Yet still he is Captain: all the herd's afraid
To try his push; they see his horns are broke,
And's breast is scarr'd with many a former stroke.
Next old Adrastus, marched the Polynic^s, Adrastus his son-in-law.
Thebanes Van
With banners; for whose sake the war began.
His troops whet on his courage: Hither came
His country-voluntiers; whether the shame
Of's banishment had moved them; or their Love
Grew with his wrongs; or they were such as strove
Still to depose the mighty: many a one
Joined, whom the justness of his cause had won.
Besides Adrastus gave him for a dowre,
Cities of Arcadia.
AEgion, Cities of Arcadia.
Arane, Thesean A Thessalian city, freed by Theseus from thieves which beset it.
Troezes power:
Lest his thin troops might prove his shame, or he
Of's own lost honors too resentive be.
That dress, those very arms he wore, wherein
First in the black night he came: The Lions skin
Covered his back; steel armed his glittering spear:
The hilt of's sword grim In memory of his father O Edipus who unriddled her.
Sphinxes stamp did bear.
His hopes and wishes now the Crown possessed,
With His mothers lap, and's sisters faithful breast:
Yet looking back he sees his heartlesse Argia disconsolate for his departure.
spouse
Stretch forward all her limbs, on top of the house.

Sweet Thebes within his breast no place can find.
See, thundering Tydeus in the midst does arm
His Country troops: Soon as the first alarm
Was sounded, Courage now; his wounds are cured:

Out of his bed, Reported by slipping of the skin to renew his age.
shakes off his duller age
In The flowery pastures hissing out his rage.
Alas, poor Swain! against whom at first he comes
Gaping, on whom he dries his venomed gums)

From the AEtolian towns: Rocky An AEtolian City.
Phylene
Heard it, and A Boeotia^ city, where the sisters of Meleager bewai^ing his
untimely death, were transformed to querulous birds.
Ple^ron, where the birds bemoan
Their Meleager; with steep Calydon;
And An Arcadian city, where Jove was suckled by the Goat, and therefore
challenged shares with Ida, where he was born and worshipped.
Olenos, which strives with I Would for Jove:
Chalcis, which the Mariner does prove
A secure harbor from the Ionick Seas:
The Achelous, which putting on diverse shapes, was foiled in all by Hercules,
his rival by Deianira.
river too, once foiled by Hercules,
Scarce daring yet to raise his battered Amongst other shapes he became a Bull,
when Hercules pulled off one of his horns: on which our Poet reflects.
brow
From underneath his waters; but below

And sands choke up his panting Achelous flowed in two channels of which
Hercules stopped one, whence grew the fiction, of his pulling off one of his
horns.
banks and waves.
Their brazen shield defends their breasts, their hands
Are armed with cruel javelins: Perhaps to take part with his grandson Tydeus.
Mavors stands
In's helmet. All the chosen guard surrounds
Valiant O Enides, graced with former wounds;
All courage; nothing less in rage and spite
Then Is brother: you would doubt, for whom they fight.
But greater Under the leading of Hippomedon.
Dorick troops in armor shine,
Which plow upon Two Grecian rivers, upon whose banks he mustered his men.
Lyncaeus banks, or thine
Old Two Grecian rivers, upon whose banks he mustered his men.
Inachus, the Prince of Grecian rivers;
Argos denominated from Perseus once king.
Perseus his land no quicker streams delivers,
If The sign entered April, 10. when the spring-tides begin.
Taurus, or the watery Always accompanied with showrs.
Pleiads run
Their course; or he swells, proud of When he accompanied his daughter Io.
Jove his son.
Those which Asterion incircles, join;
Inhabitants near Parnassus whose corn is washed away by the overflowing of
this river, before it break out in Argos.
Dryopian harvest-spoiling Erasine;
With the An Argive city where AEsculapius was worshipped.
Epidaurian tenants: Ceres the goddess of corn, here named from AEtna, because
of the fruitfulness of Sicily, whence her daughter Proserpine was stolen.
Dime too,
Fruitful for Vines, but stubborn to the Ceres the goddess of corn, here
named from AEtna, because of the fruitfulness of Sicily, whence her daughter
Proserpine was stolen.
Plow.
From N^leus Nestors Father.
Neleian Pylos all her forces lent,
Pylos scarce known, for Nestor had not spent
His second To the age of thr^escore, after which time he went to the Trojane
war.
age: Yet he refused to go
Toth' tents destined for a sad overthrow.
Hardy Hyppomedon leads these, and advances
Their love to valor: a brass helmet dances
Upon his head, with three white crests: besides
His arms, a coat of maile defends his side:
His breasts and shoulders a guilt shield protects,
Lively presenting Danaus his night-acts:
The guilty brides, inflamed byth' Furies, slay
Their fifty husbands: whilst their Sire does stay
At the bloody door, and with applauding words

He Is brought from Called the Palladian city from the founder Pallas.
Athens, on a Nemean Steed,
Who startling, does his clashing armor dread:
His prauncing raises clouds of dust; you would swear,
The field it self were flying into the air.
The greatest of the Centaurs, half man and half horse.
Hyleus hasting from his den,
With both his breasts bears woods down: The Thessalian mountain where they
inhabited.
Ossa then
Trembles: the salvage beasts sink down for fear,
His brother Centaures quake, till he appear
In A Thessalian river, where they bathed themselves.
Peneus streams; where he stops up the river.

The Artiliery, nations, strength? the valiant spirits
Of which The City where Jupiter begat Hercules upon Alemena.
Tyrinthe's fruitful, which inherits
The glory of her Hercules, are called
By him from thence. Though now their state's enthralled

The thin inhabitants in th'empty field
Show where the The founders of this City.
Cyclops built their lofty towers:
Yet they send out three-hundred striplings; powers
Toth' wars Their courage able to overcome the greatest number.
innumerable: without spear

Fenced with their Which triumphs in Hercules's conquest over the Lion.
nations glory, a To resemble their God Hercules.
Lions skin;
Clubs arm their hands, their darts are crowded in
Their unexhausted quivers; whilst they sing
Herculean Paeans, how their God and King

By him in distant The woody mountain where Hercules was burnt.
O Eta's shades interred.
The wood, where at Euristheus's command, Hercules slew the Nemeaean Lion.
Nemea pressed some toth' battle, with what aid
The sacred vine-yards of A poor man who gave Hercules homely, but wel-accepted
entertainment, when he went upon the former service.
Molorchus had:
The cottage is well known: his Hercules, soon after a God.
divine guest
Has, on the willow doors, his arms expressed:
The oak, where is The several editions vary much in rendering this place.
club and bow was laid, is clear
In gold, and where the print's of's bed appear.
But Capaneus a footman, yet byth' head
O're-peering all the rest, on's shield does spread
The hides of four wild bulls, besides the weight
Of brass. There, dying Hydra would affright
Your sense, branched in a Befitting her many heads.
triple Garland: Part
Bore living snakes engraved: A new found Hercules cauterised her fruitful
necks.
art
Stopped up the other: As she does expire,
You Would think, the sparkling gold wore flames of The only means Hercules found
to stop the increase of heads.
fire.
About her the dull streams of The Lake where the Hydra kept.
Lerna glide,
With which the Iron seems to Azure died.
But a most weighty breast plate, such as was
No They used of old to spin military garments for their sons, whereas this was
of brass.
Mothers work, covered with plates of brass,
Clasped on, defends his sides, and spreading chest:
A Whose Image was there placed.
Giant dances on his glit'ring crest:
And for his spear, a Cypresse-tree was spoiled
Of all her boughs, which only he could weild.
The Citizens of A Messenian City.
Amphigenia, and
Low Built in a valley, through which a river runs.
Messene, high Built upon the mountains.
Ithone's in his command:
With Near the river Alpheus.
Thrion, hill-built Nestors City on the top of the hills.
AEpy, Lacovick Cities*
Ptelion,
The Inhabitants of Lacovick Cities*
Helos; Lacovick Cities*
Dorion,
The Thamyris who was here sentenced by the Muses.
Getick Poets grief; here Thamyris,
Boasting t'out-sing the learned Aonides,

His voice and Harp were silenced. For who dares
Challenge the Gods? who knows not With Marsias, who being overcome, was --.
Phoeb's contest
And -- In this City excorinted,
Celoenes same, in the Satyrs doom expressed?
Amphiaraus.
Prophets mind was overcome,
And tired; although he saw his dismal doom,
Yet with a lingering hand the Fates had armed
Him, and the virtue of his Apollo who forbad him this expedition* The Stoiks
think, the Gods submit to Fate.
God was charmed.
Nor wants a treacherous Eriphile who sold ^^m into the Graecians hands for
Argia's bracelet, of which before she was so much enamored.
wife; forbidden gold
Now glisters in her house. The Gods foretold,

Of the Arg^ves, and himself had knowledge of it:
But his perfidious spouse had rather sell
His bed at such a rate, longing t'excell

Argia's spoils: who lets it go with joy.
She saw this war and the Commanders were
Turned on this hinge, if the divining Amphiaraus a Prophet, yet a Commander.
Peer
Would take up arms. Thus with a cheerful mind,
In her dear husbands bosom, she resigned

For gorgeous dresses: Beauty were a crime
In her, that is wretched without thee: I Will cheat
My fears, with A place variously read; with Calatho, then with Coetu.
distaffe comforts, and entreat
At the Gods Altars with disheveled hair:
May't be, y' Eternal Powers! when thou shall wear
Thy threatening steel, and clashing arms, that I
Put on Harmonie's chain? Some Deity
Perhaps more fitly, will indulge it, then,
And I outshine the Grecian spouses, when
(At thy return, a Queen) my votive Quires
Shall fill the Temples: Now let her desires
Take place, who makes her husbands wars her joy.
Thus th'execrable Gold did force a way
Toth' Prophets house, and sowed strange mischief in it;
Tysiphone laughed for joy, when she had seen it.
He mounted on Tenarian steeds, (begot
By The famous horse of Castor and Pollux
Cyllarus, when Castor knew it not,
Upon inferior mares) does shake the ground:
Prophet-like, with Parnassian garlands crowned:
His helmet is with branching olives dressed,
Where a white Miter does infold the crest.
Weapons, and reins he guides at once: his hands
Are sometimes stayed with darts: in's chariot stands
An Of spears and darts.
armed wood, brandished: He far off appears
Dreadful; his shield the conquered In honor to his God Apollo.
Python bears.
Phoeb's A Laconian city consecrated to Apollo, therefore follows his Prophet.
Amycleans wait on's chariot wheel:
With A city of Pcloponese, whence Nestor came.
Pylos, A promontory dangerous to seamen.
Malea, which the doubtful keele
Avoids with terror: so the A Laconian city, where Diana had her Temple.
Carians
Chaunting to pleased Diana; with the bands
Of A Laconian city.
Pharis, Cythereian A city dedicated to Venus, for the abundance of Doves
breeding there.
Mess, where
The turtles breed: A Laconian mountain dedicated to Bacchus.
Tayget's troops were there;
And olive-bearing A Laconian river, near whose banks they exercised their
bodies with scourgings, he being first crowned, that first have whipped
themselves to death.
Eurot's; Mercury the president of these solemn g^mes.
Arcas trains
These men in the moist'ned sands, inspires their vains
With rage, and naked valor: hence their spirits

To fall in the bed of honor: Parents joy
At their sons Fates, persuading them to die:
And when the round bewail the striplings fall,
Mothers triumph at their crowned funeral.

In a slip knot; they never use to hide
Their shoulders, in a rough coat armor dressed:
Swans feathers, into which shape Leda was changed.
Ledaean feathers dance upon their crest.
These were not all the Prophets troops, a few
A city of Pelopo^ese watered with the river Alpheus.
Elis; with the crew
Which dwell in The valle^, where the Olympic games were celebrated.
Pisa's vale, and do descry
(Fair Enamored of the Nymph or river Arethusa, he creeps through the Sea to
Sicily after her, and there springs again.
Alpheus) how thou steal'st to Sicily,
Not tainted with the Ocean: their fields
Are furrowed with a thousand chariot wheels:

Of The Nation, by long custom: Since the story
O'th O Evomaus, whose chariotteer Myrtilus being corrupted by Pelops, he lost
his daughter, kingdom, and life.
Tyrants melting axeltree. They chew
Their froathy curbs, foame does plowed sand bedew.
And thou, Parthe^opeus, yet unskilled

Lead'st on Arcadian troops, though 'twas unknown
To thy stern Atalanta,
Mother: She by chance was gone
To hunt in distant chases, and the bleak
Lycean deserts; nor might he partake
Of those rough sports; None vent'ring to the place
Of danger, had so sweet a beauteous face.
Nor is true courage wanting, if his age
Did lend him strength, and power to engage.
What silvan Deity, or Nymph that is named
From As the Potamides and Napaeae.
spring or As the Potamides and Napaeae.
shrubs, was not by him inflamed?
When in the Maenalian shades, his tender feet
Pressed down the willing grass, Dian' did see it
They say, and pardoned her Atalanta Diana's votary, married to Meleager, to
whom she bore Partbe^opaeus: the breach of whose vow Dian would have revenged,
if the child's beauty had not stopped her.
companion;
Fitting Cr^tensian where they were made, as the quivers for the same reason
are called Amyclaean.
Dictaean darts, and quivers on
His shoulders. He inflamed with the bold joys
Of war, leaps out, burning to hear the noise
Of arms, and trumpets; to besmeare his hair
With warlike dust; that captive steeds may bear
Him back; ashamed of the wood; ashamed to spy
His arrows, yet without the guilty die
Of humane blood. He shines before the rest
In gold and purple clothes: his loins are dressed
In loose robes, girt with Spanish belts. He wore
In's Having never yet seen the wars.
untried shield, the Calydonian boar
His Mother slew: On's left hand his bow twangs,
On's back plated with maile, a quiver hangs,
Filled with Cydonean arrows, beautified
With amber and with Eastern pearls beside:
He rides a lofty horse, whose swiftness wins
Of The fearful dear, trap'd with two Lynxes skins:
Now startling at the weight of's Masters arms,
Whose blushing cheeks to all men's eyes are charms.
You old Arcadians, borne before the They thought the Moon was daughter to
Pallas, as the Sun was son to Hyperion, borne (...)
Moon
Or stars, troop'd under him: Fame says, as soon
The Goddess of the earth, taken for the earth it self.
Tellus felt men's footsteps, ye
Fetched from rough stocks of Before the use of cottages they sheltered their
young childen in hollow trees, who by that means were conceived to be borne
from them.
trees, your progeny:
Nor bounds of fields, nor house, nor towns were yet,
Nor ties of wedlock: Oaks and Baytrees get
Young boys, and girls; the shady ashes breed:

These wondered as they say to see the Being born before the Sun or Moon.
light
Have changes, and to be eclipsed with night:
And gazing after Titans setting ray,
Wept, and despaired to see another day.
All Arcadian Cities, the first is seated very high.
Maenalus has naked streets, they come
From the All Arcadian Cities, the first is seated very high.
Parthenian grove, All Arcadian Cities, the first is seated very high.
Rhipe gives some,
And All Arcadian Cities, the first is seated very high.
Rhodope, and cold All Arcadian Cities, the first is seated very high.
Enispe too:
Not An Arcadian town, where Pan was worshipped.
Tegea, not The Mountain where Maia brought forth Mercury.
Cyllene's absent, who
Glories in the winged God: with these the wood
So named from Aleus the Arcadian King that built it.
Alea Minerva's Temple stood.
Swift Two Arcadian rivers: the daughter of the last, Daphne, was like to have
been ravished by Apollo.
Cliton likewise, and clear Two Arcadian rivers: the daughter of the last,
Daphne, was like to have been ravished by Apollo.
Ladon came,
Almost thy Father-in-law great Phoeb', the same
Did they, which on Lampia's white cliffes dwell:
And The poole that feeds Styx with water.
Pheneus, thought to send black Styx to hell.
An Arcadian Mountain, where Cibele had her howling Sacrifices.
Azan, that houles as loud as Where Jove had his.
Ida, joins
With the The Arcadian City, where Lycaon reigned.
Parrhasians; and ye A Mountain of Arcadia, where Jove in the shape of Diana
ravished Calisto.
Nona^rines,
Borders beloved of quiver-bearing Jove,
Whilst ye beheld, and smiled to see his Love.
Sheepstor'd An Arcadian City full of sheep.
Orchonienos, wild A promontory stored with wild beasts.
Cynosure
Came to the rendevouz; these heats allure
The The country named from the commander AEphitus.
AEphitian borders; An Arcadian city.
Psophis high; with these
The mountains join, made known by Where he performed two of his miraculous
labors.
Hercules,
Both monster-bearing Which bred the boar.
Erymanthus, and
Tinkling Whence the Birds were driven by beating on the brazen Cymball which
Pallas gave him.
Stymphalus. These, were of one land,
Arcadians all: But differ in their hue:
Some, their bowed stocks of Paphian Myrtle show,
And fight with shepherds crooks: One's armed with his bow,
The Other with his smoak-dri'd club: this guards his brow
With His helmet: The Other keeps his Countries right
In his Either because used by Mercury, or by Castor and Pollux.
Arcadian hat. This would affright
With the stern visage of a yawning Bear,
Thrown over his head; yet though these forces were
Sworn servants to the God of war, they had
From neighboring Mycene received no aid:
Their deadly When Atreus feasted Thy^stes with the limbs of his own sons,
at which the Sun was said to startle, the revenge of which caused much
bloodshed after.
fea^t* and mid-daies suns affright
Was then, those brethren too began to fight.
By this time Atalanta heard, that all
Arcadia made her son their General
Toth' wars: Her knees shake, down her arrows sink
Beside her: Over the rocks, and steepest brink
Of rivers, swifter then the winged wind
She flies; her clothes girt up, her hair behind
Disheveled, scatters with each blast. So when
A Tiger robbed of's whelps, starts from her den,
Pursuing the horseman. When with down-cast eyes,
And pale, he stood before her: Son (she cries)
What has begot this furious desire?
How comes thy tender breast thus set on fire?

The burden of the field, and walk secure
Through push of pike? Though, would thy strength were such!
Of late I saw thee, with thy javelin, touch
An angry boar? (with fear I saw thee) when

Had not I plied my darts, where had been now
My Champion for the wars? this polished bow,
And arrows cannot help thee there, nor yet
This dappled steed thou trust'st to: They are great

To a Nymphs bed, as yet. The Omen's true:
I wond'red why Diana's Temple shook
Of late, and she frowned with a down-cast look;
The offerings fell down from the Temples roof:

Of skill, from my dull fingers. Stop thy rage
Till thou art grown to a more settled age:
Till thy fair cheeks are shaded; and thou'st lost
Thy woman's face: what thou desire most,

A mothers tears shall not stop thee longer: Now
Uncase at home. Will you his march endure
Arcadians? Sprung from trees or quarries sure!
More would she: But her son, and the Captains spread

The trumpets sound: whilst her embraces are
Scarce stopped, she leaves him to Adrastus care.
On the other side Cadmus his The Thebanes.
Martial brood
Vexed with their General's Furies, frighted stood
With no small outcry: (for they were alarmed,
That Greece against them all her strengh had armed:)
And though ashamed of the King and's cause, prepare
Slowly their force: None had an edge toth' war;
Greedy to clasp on's back his fathers shield,
Or trim his warlike steed: (such joys of the field
The Soldiers use;) dejected they appear,
Filled with no rage, or valor, but with fear.
One mournes for's bedridden Parent, whom he leaves
As discontent as he: Another grieves,
To part with his tender wife, or wretched son
In's lap: The Mars.
quarrelling God inflamed none.
The Th^ba^^ walls raised by him being now decayed.
Amphions stately towers, burying their pride
In their own ruins, show a naked side
Worn out with age: And The wall raised by Music once, was now repaired by
inferior workmen, in which respect it is said to be de^f.
base, dull workmanship
Patches that wall, which once to heaven did skip
By sacred Music. Yet war breathes his rage
Over the Boeotian Cities, who engage
Not to protect the treacherous Kings estate,
So much, as to assist a neighbor state.
He Is like a ravenous wolf, that preying stood
Over well-fed sheep, glutted with clotter'd blood;
His bristled chops with bloody wool besmeared,
And yawning he returns from's fold, affear'd
Lest the heardsman, finding it, pursue; he stares
About, and flies from his own guilty fears.
Disturbing fame begets fresh cause of doubt:
One says, the Grecian horse quarter about
A hilly country in Achaia.
Asopis banks; A Boeotian mountain dedicated to Bacchus.
Cithaeron's plund'red, cries
Another, so's A neighbor mountain to Thebes.
Theumeson a third replies.
Guarded A Boeotian City, where a continual garrison is kept.
Platea too, last night 'twas told
Burnt with their watchlights. Every man was bold
To say, he saw the Several omens, which the affrighted people fancied to
themselves.
Tyrian statues sweat;
Dirce run blood, Sphinx in her craggy seat
Began to talk again; new monstrous broods:
Another fright too startled all their bloods.
Th'inspired His chief Priestesse.
Queen of Bacchus silvane train,
Cytherons top, down to the plain:
Scattering her The mystical vans, in which they put his oblations.
baskets; and with sparkling eyes
Shakes here and there her branched torch. Her cries
Fill the amazed streets: Powrfull Bacchus from Nisa where he was fostered.
Nisaean Father
Which hat'st thy native Country, and had rather
A Thracian mount, where the Orgies were celebrated.
Ismarus, in the frozen North,
With headed Wreathed about with Ivy, that they might wound the more closely.
leavy Javelins: Or call forth
Thy spreading vines t'oretop A Thracian King, who to prevent his subjects
drunkenness, cut down all the vines: but in a distraction cut off his own legs.
Lycurgus head:
Or rage through An Indian river, near which Bacchus ^rected hsi columns.
Ganges, or the latest bed
Of blushing With a puissant Army of women he conquered all the East.
Tethys; the triumphant King
An Asian river, having golden sands, where Bacchus had a Temple.
Hermus spring:
But we thy offspring, whose devotion's paid
To thee, (our The harmeles arms used in the Bacchanals.
Country weapons being laid
Aside;) now wars, and tears, and frights must own;
And Brethrens madness, for an unjust Crown.
Bacchus fix me, in eternal frost,
Or beyond A Northern hill parting Thrace from Scythia.
Caucasus where the armed host
Of These use to fight with a dolorous noise called Barritus.
Amazonians howl, before I Will trace
The monstrous Generals, and their wicked race.
Yet thou compel'st -- Another Such as the Bacchae were postest with.
rage to Thee
Bacchus I When she was initiated into his Orgies.
vowed. Two Parabolically of the two Brethren Etheocles and Polynices.
equal bulls I see
Push at each other, both of grace alike,
^oth of the same breed: with angry horns they strike
^t one another fronts; and cruelly
^n one another in their rage they die.
^ut Etheocles who began the quarrel with Tydeus, und refused his brothers
copartnership.
thou art worst; thou art most stained with blood,
Who would alone enjoy thy Grand-sires food,
^he grass of the common field: Ill nurtured cattle!
^ow fiercely you maintain a bloody battle!
^hil'st a new Creon who reigned after the death of the brethren.
Captain gains your pastures by it:
^his said, she is pale, and Bacchus left her quiet.
But the haunted King, now sinking under's fears,
And ill at ease, to ask advise of the years
And knowing blindness of A Prophet blinded by Juno, but enlightened by Jove.
Tiresias, went:
Men doubtful do it:) he seeks the Gods intent
Not by large The several ways of divination.
sacrifices, or the flight
Of birds, or entrails breathing out the right;
^ark Of the ridling Tripos.
answers, Casting of Figures used by Mathematicians.
Figures guided by the skies,
Nor by the By the dividing of which the (...) prophesied.
smoke which over the Altar flies;
^ut tells them, how the Ghosts called out, appear
from the deep gates of death: and does prepare
^'th' royal presence, hellish sacrifice
And hidden rites; beneath that bank that lies
Where A Boeotian river emptying his channel unto the Ocean.
Ismene meets the sea; torn entrails, grass,
Sulphur, and many charms do cleanse the place.
An ancient wood, decayed by age there grew,
Whose uncrop'd bough's, the Sunbeams never knew.
No winters flaws could blast it, it did fear
No Southern winds, nor storms from the Artick The Northern pole, where the
Bear-star is placed.
bear.
Beneath were quiet shades, which did affright
With horrid silence, and pale glimpse of the light.
Nor wants this grove a Deity, for there
Latona's worshipped; every tree does bear
Her image; pitch-trees, cedars, oaks beside

Her unseen arrows twang here; dogs resort
To nightly howlings, when she leaves the Court
Of her Pluto, in whose kingdom she is called Hecate, as here Diana.
infernal Uncle, and in place
Of what she was, puts on Diana's face.

Of The Summer Sun, does pleasant sleep invite;
Here, round about her, she her darts does stick,
And on her quiver rests her stretch'd-out neck.
Without, extends the pregnant Where Cadmus sowed the Serpents teeth which
converted to Giants.
Martial field
Cadmus; he was daring bold that tilled
That ground, and furrowed first the putrid filth,
After the The Giants which slew one another.
Brothers fought, in the bloody tilth.
At noonday still, and in the close shades of night
The unhappy Earth strange tumults does excite;
Their Ghosts would quarrel still.
Giants to vain combats rise,
The trembling plowman from his tillage flies;
And frighted Cattle to their stalls do get.
Here ('cause the place, for Stygian rites was fit,
And soyles made fat with streams of blood, do please)
The old Prophet calls for dark-fleec'd sheep; with these

The fairest head: Whilst The fountain where they used to drink.
Dirce did lament,
The mountain where the used to feed.
Cithaeron's sad, and Either with the Bacchanalian shouts, or the former lowing
of cattle.
the ecchoing valleys under
At their new Hearing no bleating of sheep, nor lowing of oxe^ as formerly.
silence did begin to wonder.
Then Being blind of his eyes.
groping with his hand, their horns he crowns
With flowery garlands, and in the noted bounds
Of The wood, The manner of infernal sacrifices.
large Cups of wine at first he powers
^'th' trenched Earth, nine times; with milk, and showers
Of honey, mixed with Ghost-alluring gore:
And fills, till the dry Earth could drink no more.
Then the sad Priest rols trunks of trees, and bids
Three fires be made to Hecate, besides
As many more toth' The three Furies.
Sisters borne of Hell.
Thy heap of pine-trees, Pluto, did excel
In The air from under As all internal sacrifices were placed.
ground: near which there stood
Proserpines less pile; boughs of Used at funerals, and Stygian sacrifices,
for the weeping boy of that name.
Cypress wood
Wreathed in on every side. And now they The method in sacrificing.
share
Their lofty Crowns, and place their From hence called immolation.
salt-cakes there:
Straight fall the Cattle on their Which is the victimation.
knives; whose blood
Received in chargers, virgin Daughter to the Prophet Tiresias.
Mantho stood
To offer: then thrice rounding every fire,
(As she had learned from her religious Sire)
She brings their quivering Guts, and entrails reaking,
Kindling the boughs: when flames he felt, were breaking
Out of the crackling leaves, and the sad pile
Did blaze (for's cheeks grew hot, and vapors fill
His hollow eyeholes:) he cries out: (His voice*
Made the fire wave, and tremble at the noise.)
Ye infernal seats, the Court of hungry death,
Which men do fear, and thou whom Ghosts beneath
Attend, with plagues for every guilty soul,
And do the lower Region control,
More Pluto brother to Jupiter and Neptune.
stern then thy two brothers; At my call*
Open the gates toth' silent groves, and all
The same with Proserpi^a, the Queen of Hell.
Persephone's wast: Call out the crew, that is hid
In The hollow night: Send Charon back to guide
His full boat over Styx. Come Both good and bad.
all together:
Trace back more paths then one. Let Brother to Mercury, and copartner in that
office.
Perseus sever
The just Elizian souls, and th'hated Mercury.
God

On to'other side, toth' guilty, (which exceed
In hell, and which are most of Cadmus breed,)
Tisiphone, shaking thrice thy snake-haires, show
The day light, guiding them with flaming Of which venomous tree, the Furies
framed their torches.
yew:
Cerb'rus with his heads affright
The Ghosts away, so long deprived of light.
This said, the Sire, and the Phoebeian maid
Prepare attentive souls; no whit afraid,
Because inspired; only Etheocles

Sometimes, and sometimes of his hands, or eyes,
And doubtful would break of the Sacrifice.
So the huntsman strengthning's valor, does expect
A Lion roused with noise, within the tract
Getulian wood, and grasped his dart
In's sweaty palm; yet fear congeales his heart;
His trembling steps look, where, how great he is;
His roaring's marked; blind Care each noise does prize.
Tiresias now, seeing no Ghost appeared,

And we with our The proper instrument for infernal sacrifices.
left hands, full blows did pay
To the trench'd Earth. I cannot brook delay.
Am I your Priest chasheer'd? and will you go,
If a Thessalian hag command you so,
B'Inchantments? Or shall trembling hell look pale,
If A Scythian City famous for Medea.
Colchian witches, armed with poison, shall
Provoke it? we are slighted: if you have
No mind to raise a body from the grave,
Or empty Urnes of their enclosed bones,
Polluting By Necromancy.
Gods of heaven, and hell at once:
Or mangle bloudlesse faces, taking out
The putrid nerves of dead men: Do not flout
My weaker years, I wish you; don't despise
The cloud that hangs upon my darkened eyes.
We can be angry too; we know, what e're
You dread to hear, or know: Did not I fear
Apollo, the sun being their chief deity; the other but like stars, receiving
their influence from him.
Thymbraeus, and the Worlds first Nature taught them there must be one supreme.
Some think, they esteemed none other for a God, but expressed his several
attributes under the feigned name of their other Deities.
Mover, who
Must not be His name was ineffable.
known, I could vex Hecate too.
But I forbear: my quiet age denies.
For you -- Phoebeian Mantho straight replies,
Father, you're heard: The saplesse ghosts do come,
Elysian deeps are opened; Earth's large womb
Is rent; dark shades, black hell gapes; Rivers of hell.
Acheron
Casts sulfurous sands up: smoaky Rivers of hell.
Phlegeton
Vomits black flames, about his foord: And The infernal river dividing hell
from the Elys^^n fields.
Styx
Flowing between, forbids the Ghosts to mix.
I see the pale Pluto.
King sitting on his throne;
About, his servant Furies wait upon
His dire commands. The dismal bed is seen,
And severe chambers of the infernal Proserpine.
Queen:
Black death sits in the watch-towre, numbering over
The subjects of his silent Master. More
Appear, whose lots the Minos, named from Gortyna, a Cretian city which he
governed.
Cretian Judge does cast
In's An earthen pot, in which the Judges put their effragies.
urne: exacting truth of all that is past,
Throughout their lives, too strictly; to proclaim
What plagues they ever gained. Why should I name
Hells monsters? Scylla's? Centaures, which in vain
Do rage? or the Gyans fett'red in a chain
Of solid adamant? or say, where stands
AEgaeons lean His vast body is contracted into a thin Ghost.
ghost with his hundred hands?
No, says her Sire, my ages strength and guide,
Don't speak of that: Who does not know beside
Oth' rolling Sisyphus.
stone? or the deceitful Of Tantalus.
flood?
Or For indevouring to ravish Latona.
Tytius whence the Vultures peck their food?
For seeking to embrace Juno.
Ixion on his restless wheel?
I led by Hecate, when good blood did swell
My veins, saw those close seats; ere I was blind,
Or had my eyes by Who gave him a double proportion of judgment in requital of
his eyes, which were struck blind by Juno.
Jove fixed in my mind.
Rather the Greek and Thebane souls, call hither;
With which the ghosts were thought to be delighted, because it coold their
torments.
milk four times, command the other
To leave this dismal shade: then tell the attire
And shapes the appear in, with their hot desire
Of shedding blood; which nation vaunts it best;
And teach my blindness daughter, all the rest.

The Ghosts are scatt'red and convened: the Witch
Medea, 'bate her For they esteemed conjuration of a higher nature, the Virtue
proceeding from the Gods.
faults, did so before;
And Making Ulysses his companions think she had transformed them into swine.
Circe juggling in the AEaean shore.
Then to her priestly Father thus she speaks,
Cadmus with his ghastly visage breaks
Through the red lake; near him Harmione keeps,
From both whose crowns, a double serpent creeps:
The Giants, Born of the Dragons teeth which was consecrated to Mars.
Mars his brood, about him stand,
Whose age was but For instantly they destroyed one another.
one day: Each has his hand
Upon his sword, each does regard his arms,
^pposing, rushing, plotting others harms,
^ith The ghosts quarreled as if they were still alive.
Live-mens rage; Nor is their drink so good
^'th' The blood flowing there would not satisfy them.
furrows, they thirst one another blood.
^ext come their Autonoc, Ino, Semele, Agave.
daughters, for their Actaeon, Melicerta, P^^theus.
Children crying:
^ereft Whose son Actaeon was transformed to a heart by Diana.
Autonoe; breathless With which her husband Athamas slew his son Learchus.
Ino, spying
^he With which her husband Athamas slew his son Learchus.
bow still, offering her sweet babe the teat:
and Semele, with Fearing Jove's lightning she defended her womb although she
perished her self.
arms crossed over her great
and pregnant womb. Then Agave with tears
^ursues her Pentheus, breaking the Which she used at the Orgies.
Ivy spears,
Now dispossessed by the God; she open lays
Her bloody breast: He flies through desert ways
Of Styx and Lethe; where his milder Echion who would recompose his son, torn
in pieces by his Mother Agave in her fury.
Father
Weeps for him, and his s^atter'd limbs does gather.
^ know sad Slain by his ^on Amphion and Zethus in revenge of their mother
Au^iopa.
Lycus: Son to AEolus, who supposing his wife and children were a Lioness and
her whelps, slew Learchus, whose corpse afterward he bore upon his shoulders.
Athamas I know
With His hands behind; on's shoulders he does throw
His dead sons corpse. Nor has Actaeon transformed for seeing Diana naked.
Aristeus's son
Changed yet his habit, or ill shape p^t-on:
Antlets still arm his brows, and darts his hand;
He kick's of's dogs, at's wounds which gaping stand.
See, envious Ta^talus his daughter who compared her off spring with Latona's.
Niobe following with her train,
Recounts her Her sons and daughters, slain by Apollo's revenge.
losses in a swelling strain:
And not dejected, joys she has outgone:
The Who could inflict no more upon her in the grave, where she will curse them
freely.
power of the Gods; now thinks her tongue's her own.

His hoary hairs raise up his garland higher
Standing on end: and some thin blood does flow
In's withered cheeks: on's staff he leanes not now,
Or's daughters hand, but standing bolt upright;

My clouds begin to scatter, the dark mist
Breaks from mine eyes. Supreme Apollo, is it
Thy spirit fills me? What I heard, I see.
But mark ^ the Grecian shadows pensive be,
Acrifius his tyrannical father.
Abas, and
Mischievous Who would have slain innocent Bellerophon.
Proetus, mild Juno's first sacrificer
Phoroneus stand:
With mangled Whose limbs were presented in a fe^st to the Gods.
Pelops, and In whose chariot race, thirteen were slain.
O Enomaus too,
Besmeared with bloody sand: Their large tears do
Bedew their cheeks: Hence I conceive, success
Thebanes. But, what means this prease
Of fighting The Ghosts of the fifty Captains, which Tydeus before had slain.
souls (as arms and wounds discover)
Showing their heads and breasts all blouded over,
And hands lift up, with seeming cries? If I
Mistake not they are those fifty: D'ont you spy
Chronius, and Chromis, Phegeus, Apollo's priest, as before.
Maeon too
Graced with our baies? Be not enraged so
Brave Captains. Think not mortal counsels durst
Conspire your deaths: The hard-hearted The Destinies which spi^ the thread of
life.
sisters first
Had spun your years: You have o're-past your pain;
Tydeus once again.
This said, he drives away the Ghosts that stood
With Which shows they were Captains, with which they are appeased.
Chaplets crowned, and shows them offered blood.
Laius stands on Cocytus banks alone;
Brought back to hell by Mercury who by Jove's command had fetched him thence.
Lib. 2.
Hermes: he squints on
His wicked grandson (For he knew his look;)
No draughts of blood, or other showers he Refusing to be appeased by blood,
milk or honey.
took,
As the other Ghosts; but breathes immortal hate.
Tiresias straight leaps out. Thou, whom the State
Of Thebes called their deserving General,
Since whose death, no good day did e're befall
The founder of Thebes.
Amphions towers; Thou, whose bloody slaughter
Is full revenged in The punishment of O Edipus and his sons.
those which followed after,
And Ghost appeased; Oh, whither do thou fly?
O Edipus w^ose eyes were out.
He whom thou hat'st, a lingering death does dye:
And knocks now at hels thresholds; dawbing over
His empty eye-holes, with black filth, and gore:
Deprived of day: beleev't, no death's so vile.
Why then do shun thy harmless Nephew? Smile
On us: let this blood-offering suffice:
And set this war's event before our eyes,
That so thou may affright us.
Angry, or That so thou m^ist prepare us.
pitying. Then I Will make good
Thy Because he was murdered.
denied passage over Lethes flood,
In the desired Charons ferry-boat.
boat; and holy dust
Shall cover thy pleased ashes; which I Will trust
Toth' care of Stygian Gods. These dignities
Appease the Ghost, who moistning's Either with the sacrificed blood or with
tears.
cheeks, replies:
Why, coaetanean Tiresias living in L^ius's his time.
Priest, am I, by thee
Raising the Ghosts, called to this Augury?
And chosen first, to speak of chance to come?
When thoughts of what is past, are too burdensome.
Brave Nephews! (Fie for shame) must our advice
Be asked? Bring to your hellish sacrifice
O Edipus after he had killed his Father, married his Mother, on whom he begat
these sons.
Him, him, whose falchion made his Father bleed,
And to the womb that bare him, raised up seed.
Who now the Gods, and the black Furies crew
With curses on his sons.
tire, and for the^e wars to us does sue.
But if I needs must sing such times as these,
So far as The Destinies and Furies, interrupted them in the middle of their
Oracles.
Lachesis and The Destinies and Furies, interrupted them in the middle of their
Oracles.
Megaera please,
I Will speak. War, war, vast troops on all sides finds:
And fatal Mars spurs on the Grecian minds.
As Amphi^raus found, who was swallowed up alive.
monsters, darts from As Capaneus did, who was struck dead by lightning.
heaven*
Brave deaths, to which, no Fun'rals may be given*
Byth' Prohibiting any slain corpse to be buried, before the ghost was appeased.
Law: the victory, Thebes, will be thine own;
Fear not; thy brother shall not enjoy thy Crown.
But yet the Furies and that Of murder and incest.
double sin,
Which appeared in both their destructions.
Fathers curse, (woes me!) shall win,
Midst the sharp swords; This said, he disappears,
And's doubtful riddles left them full of fears.
Mean, time cold Where Hercules slew the vast Lion.
Nemea, and the thickets where
Hercules's fame resounds, the quarters were
Grecian regiments; who are greedy now
To get Thebane, named from Cadmus the founder, who was a Sidonian.
Sidonian pillage; thinking how
To rifle battered houses. Phoebus tell,
Who turned their rage, how stopped, what cross befell
Them in their journey. The reports of Fame
Gives little light at first. Tired Bacchus came
Having conquered all the E^st.
AEmus, where he taught
Armed These with the Thracia^s were taught by him, the art of dressing a
vineyard.
Getes his Orgies, and two Put for the
winters brought
The top of snowy Mountains formerly covered with snow now planted with Vines.
Othrys to look green:
On Mountains formerly covered with snow now planted with Vines.
Rhodope Vines. Icarus was Bacchus's companion, slain by shepherds, who were
drunk, with the wine which he had given them.
Icarian shades were seen.
And now he drives his vine-spread Chariot, to
His Thebes where Semele lived.
mothers walls: unbridled Lynxes go
On either hand, and Beasts which use to be harnessed in Mars his chariot.
Tygres lick the foam
from reins long steeped in wine. Behind do come
Triumphing Priests, with spoils of cattle slain,
Half slaughtered wolves, torn bears: Nor was this train
More dull; for The companions of Bacchus.
Anger, The companions of Bacchus.
Fury, The companions of Bacchus.
Courage, The companions of Bacchus.
Fear,
And fiery The companions of Bacchus.
Heat still in extremes, was there;
With stumbling The companions of Bacchus.
steps, Tents like their Vnfixed and tottering*
King beside.
But when he saw, a cloud of dust did hide
Traced Nemea; and the sunbeams glistred bright
Upon their steel, Thebes unprepared to fight:
Moved at the sight (though pined in face and breast)
The drums and trumpets, and still pipes he ceast,
Whose diverse tunes filled his astonished ears;
Then thus he spoke: This Army here prepares:
My ruin, and my Nations: Cruel Greece,
(Thus raged he) and my Juno who angry with Semele counseled her to her own
destruction.
stepdame plotted this.
Could not my Mothers unjust With which at Jupiters appearance she was burnt.
flames suffice?
Could not the fires, which at my Being untimely then borne, with the death of
his mother.
birth did rise?
And lightnings, which I felt my self? But must
Cursed she, strike at the relics too, and dust
Of Jove's lost Concubine? shall she destroy
What Is left of Thebes? I Will cheat them, to delay:
Holla, Companions, haste to yonder plains.
At's word, the harnessed Named in our Poet from (...)
Tygres raise their manes,

When the faint day perceived the Sun to climb
Toth' height of heaven; whilst little moisture filled
Earth's chinkes, and every grove the sky beheld.
He calls the water-Nymphs, and thus begins

The Rivers Deities, chief parts of my train,
Perform the task we set: A while restrain
The Grecian streams, and founts, and pooles; and stop
With looser sands, their winding channels, up:
Nemea's, whence they 'dvance against our towers:
Let water fly toth' bottom: all the powers
Of The Sun help on, (if you be willing) now
In's height: the stars besides assist my vow:
Erigones The dogstar, once son to Erigone, who challenges a share in Bacchus
from her father Icarus.
dog foames still: Go on with mirth,

Hereafter to full streams I will invite you,
And with choice offered presents will requite you:
Bold hornefoot Satyrs night-thefts I Will forbid,
And Who being well liquor'd, used in the night to ravish the Nymphs.
Faunes hot rapes: This said, a thin foame did

And his green garlands moistures parched with drouth.
Straight, a dry thirst draines the Grecian, named from King Inach^^
Inachian land,
Streams ebb, on founts and lakes a scum does stand:
Deep rivers now were paved with hardened mud,
Earth pined; the corne-eares hanging downward, stood

On banks of rivers, where they swum before.
So when The great Egyptian river, whose overflowing makes the whol^ Land
fruitful.
Nile flows back to his mighty den,
And's His streams fed by the winters showers.
winters food within his springs does pen,
^ry valleys reake, and AEgypts gaping ground
^xpects to hear the watery Fathers The rivers Cataracts which fill all the land
with noise.
sound;
^ill at their prayer, he feeds the Pharian plain,
and crowns that year with a rich crop again.
Rivers in ^emea.
Lyrcaeus dries, and poysnous Rivers in ^emea.
Lerna, so
^reat Rivers in ^emea.
Inachus, so does Rivers in ^emea.
Charadrus too,
which casts up floating stones: and Erasine,
that rests not in his channel; hither join
^moother Asterion: the others used to creep
through deserts, and disturb the shepherds sheep.
^nely The fountain which Hysipyle showed to the Graecians*
Langia feeds her silent waves
(...) the Gods appointment, in her secret caves.
Archimore's loss, had not yet made her own
^is For Langia was afterward called Archemorus.
name, nor was the fame of the Goddess known:
^et gliding through the wood in by-waies, she
^eserves her streams: Great shall her glory be,
^hen Grecian Peers in Solemn (...) performed b^ the Graecians every three
years in honor to Ar^morus.
Trieterick games,
^rowne sad First fled from her Country, and now required as a sa^fice by angry
Lycurgus to his sons ghost.
Hysipyle's, and Called afterward Arche^rus because he was the first slain in
these wars.
Opheltes Names.
Now, (tortured thus with heat) they could not bear
their burning shields, nor their strait brest-plates wear.
^or were their mouths, or throats alone inflamed,
^ut inward heat their panting hearts had tamed.
(...) shrivel'd veins, no troubled blood did run,
^ut clots to their dry ribs: Earth parched by the Sun
^reaths out hot clouds of dust; no showers of some
^rop from the horses mouths, which champ upon
^ry bits, and thrust their curbed tongues out, obeying
^or law, nor riders; but inflamed, run neying
about the field. The King sends scouts to spy
Abroad, if all the Grecian pooles were dry;
If m Ainimone had moisture: But, in vain;

Like sunburned Africks sandy deserts, and
Unclouded A City dividing AEthiopia and Egypt where it never raines.
Siene, so appears the land.
Wandering at last (as Bacchus had designed)
Among the Woods, Hypsipyle they find

Shined Majesty, though none of her own race,
But young Lycurgus, the Grecian Kings son to whom the was nurse.
Opheltes hung upon her breast,
Lycurg's unhappy son; she poorly dressed,
With hair neglected, showed a grace beyond
Adrastus then, aston'd,
Spoke thus: Great Sylvan Goddess, (for thy brow
Denies thy mortal stock, who pleasant now
Under heavens fire, seek'st for no waters) aid
A neighboring people: Whether once a maid
Dian's train, she bad thee turn a bride;
Or from the sky, some heavenly Love did slide
To make thee fruitful: (for to Grecian beds
The King of heaven's no As to Io, Danac, etc.
stranger:) See the heads
Of fainting troops. We thought by the sword to raze
Thebes toth' ground; but our weak fate gives place
To tedious thirst now, which infeebles all
Our spirits, and tired bodies do inthrall.
Help our weak state; if troubled stream thou know,
Or muddy poole: There Is nothing is too low
Honored now, in the place of Jove, or AEolus.
for
The winds and rain: Our scattered strength restore;
Raise our disheartened breasts with valor; so
May thy sweet babe, with prosperous fortune grow.
Jove grant a safe return; how great a prey
Shall be thy offering then? I will repay
Whole Thebane herds; as many Their hopes promising every particular Soldier a
spoil.
gifts as men:
This Honoring it, for the benefit, which they found in it.
grove shall shine with thy great Altar then.
This said, heat does his speech in the midst control,
And his dry tongue cannot express his soul:
So gaped they all for breath, and looked aghast.
The Hypsipile daughter to Thoas King of Lemnos.
Lemnian answers with eyes doweward cast;
Although from Being grandchild to Bacchus by the fathers side.
heaven my pedegree's derived,
How seem I so to you? Would I had grieved
No more then mortals. Here, robbed of mine Her two sons, which after in this
story find her.
own,
You see me tend a Nurse-child: It Is unknown
Who dandles mine, or suckles them. Yet I
Had once a Crown, and royal Sire. But why
Discourse I this to you? And stop you thus
Tired, from your wisht-for waters? Follow us;
Come on: perhaps Langia still can show
Continued streams in the foord: She Is used to flow,
When the hot- The summer Tropic.
Crab does entertain the sun,
And the dog star shines. With that, she lays down
Her clinging babe on the next turfe of grass,
(So the Fates pleased) lest he might stop her pace,
As she led on the Greeks: And heaping flowers
Under's unwilling head, she stops his showers
Of tears, with her sweet Lullabies. Even so
Did The mother of the Gods.
Cybele, when she bad her Curates go,
And dance about young Jove: they The Priests either feared Saturns anger, or
foresented the majesty of Jove.
trembling strike
Their Cymbals; I Would does Echo with the shrike.
But the young child laid in the lofty grass,
On earths green lap, grovelling upon his face,
Sometimes beats down the willing spires, and then

Or prattling words which quarrel with his lips,
Admires the whistling noise of the woods; or clips
What Is next his reach, or gapes for air: Thus free
From unknown harms, securely wandreth he.
Mars in the Thracian, from whence Mars had his original.
Odrysian snow,
The Mercury.
winged God on Maenalus did so:
So young untir'd Apollo did before
Tread on The Island where he was borne, since called Delos.
Ortygia, creeping by the shore.
They break through shrubs and shady by-ways: some

And crowd her on: She treads the middle ground,
With no small speed. And now the Vale does sound
With the near stream, which with a warbling noise
Does fill their ears: There, in the Van, with joys

The Army Eccho's, Waters: So, byth' shore
Of The Named from Ambracia, a City of Epire, a Country of Greece.
Grecian Sea, the boate-swaine shouting stand
Byth' oars, when the Master has discovered land:
And The Earth against them echoes to their cry,
Phoeb', shows A promontory o^ the Epirotick Sea.
Leucas to their eye.
All rush into the foord at once: the first
And last could make no difference; equal thirst
Could not distingiush any. Steeds do enter
Harnest in the Chariots; laden horses venture

Stones trip up others: No respect; or room
Is made for Kings o'rethrowne: No help to save
A crying friend: The foaming waters have
No rest far from the fount. Even now the flood
^as pure, and clear toth' bottom; now the mud
^tirr'd up defiles it: Then they break the bank;
^read down the grass: Their thirst though quenched, they drank
^his puddle water still. You Would think they are
^ighting a battle; think, that open war
^aged now in the channel, or some City were
taken and sacked by the proud Conqueror.
And one of the Captains in the midst of the flood
Begins thus: Nemea, thou most springing wood,
^ mansion fit for Where he was worshiped, and Lycurgus father to Archemorus
was his Priest.
Jove; as dangerous now
As Herc'les found thee, when he brake in two
The The Lion which he slew there.
monsters crested neck, and pressed his tough
^roud soul in his swollen limbs: Be it enough,
That hitherto malicious winds did blow
Upon thy peoples enterprise. And oh
Thou See the reason, Lib. 2.
horned spring, of this eternal river,
^ntam'd by the Sun, flow joyful, swelling ever;
from whatsoever house thy cold head flows:
^or neither hoary winter lends thee For those rivers which were fed by rain
or snow were dried up.
snows;
Nor the The rainbow.
Bow powers streams, stolen from another spring;
Nor watery Plyads, clouds to feed thee, bring:
Thou run'st, thine own, unconquered by the stars.
Not either One in Lycia, the other in Troas.
Xanthus, nor Phoeb's t Ladon dares
Compare with thee, nor threatening A Thessalian City, near which the Centaures
inhabited.
Sperchius, nor
Monstrous Where Hercules killed Nessus.
Lycorme: In peace, and clouds of war,
^le celebrate thy praise at sacred Feasts.
Next Jove's thy honor. Welcome but thy guests
From war with joy; open kind streams again
To Our weary limbs: Own thy defended train.
Argument. Lib. V. Statii Thebaidos.
After their thirst was quenched, Hypsip'les story
Is asked by King Adrastus; She, though sorry,
Replies: I Am borne a Lemnian, Thoas's daughter;
Where Venus, by Polixo's mouth, breathed slaughter
To all our males; and all, but Thoas, feel
Our swords: Him, Bacchus guides: The Argo keel
Touch here, in a storm; Their landing's stopped, before
We knew them; then received: Two sons I bore
To Jason: They depart: I Am banished. Here
A serpent killed Opheltes: Cap'neus's spear
Dispatched him: She laments: Lycurgus tried
Her death; they guard her: Th'infant's deified.
THeir thirst now quenc'd in the river, roil'd with mud,
The banks were broke, whilst they drank down the flood:
The mettall'd horse prance fiercer, in the plain;
The foot do shout; men's souls revived again:

Mixed with the stream, had kindled their desire
To bloody war. In rank and file they are placed,
And ordered strictly; as they were listed last
Under their leaders, they are bid advance.

Through the thick woods, upon their Arms. So when
Hoarse shoales of cranes come from A color made of the spume of the sea baked
on the sands.
white On whose warm banks they had wintered.
Nile again,
When winters over, where warm Egypt had
Defended them; they crossed the maine, and Being so great a shoale.
shade
Both Sea and Land: The untract air does hear
Their gagling flight: Now Northern Which in Thrace are usual.
storms they bear;
Swim in thawed streams, on bleake A Thracian mountain.
Haeme summering.
Adrastus here, incircled with a ring
Of Nobles, under an old ash did stand*
Resting on Polynices Spear, his hand,
And spoke thus: Thou, who have the glory, that
So many troops to thee do owe their fate,
(An honor worthy of heavens Sovereign King)
Tell us (since we stand quickened by thy spring)
Thy stock, or land: derived from what star?
Thy Father: yet some Godhead cannot be far.
Though fortune's fled, thy blood does Nobler flow,
And Majesty shines in thy afflicted brow.
The Lemnian sighs, and shedding modest tears,
She answers: General, you renew my cares,
And rub my wounds, to speak of the Furies, and
Where the women enraged by Venus, who was neglected in their Sacrifices, slew
all the Males.
Lemnos, and Geniall beds, with weapons stained;
And all our Males slain with accursed steel:
The horrid fact strikes terror: now I feel*
Cold Furies at my heart. Oh Caitiffs, thus
Enraged! oh night! oh Sire! 'Twas I, (never As if she were stained with her
Nations crimes.
blush
For your kind guide:) 'Twas She saved her Father Thoas, who alone escaped the
destruction.
I alone that freed
My rescued Father. But these evils need
No such long Preface: And your arms control,
With the great resolutions of your soul:
This may suffice: I Thoas's daughter, called
Hypsip'le, The Lemnian women offended at her mercy showed to her Father would
have slain her; but she avoiding them fell into the hands of Pirates who sold
her to Lycurgus, as appears afterward.
serve Lycurgus now inthral'd.
This does possess their souls: and now she shines
More glorious, and seems fit for such Of preserving a whole Army from ruin.
designs:
Adrastus first
Exhorts her thus: Come on, report the worst
Of their base enterprise; thy praise; their grief;
How there deposed, thou sought'st here for relief;
(Our Van does march before: for in the wood

To pass in a full body:) It Is some rest
In misery, to have our griefs expressed.
The Named from AEgeus the father of Theseus.
AEgaean waves (says she) beat on the shore
Of sea-girt Lemnos; Vulcan tired before
AEtna, The Island being dedicated to him.
here, takes breath; the Land
Is clothed with A mountain of a vast height, between Macedonie and Thrace,
overshadowing the Isle Lemnos.
Atho's shade, which nigh does stand:
Darkning the sea with his woods. The Thracians trace
The other side: That Either occasioning our misery, or by their wicked
examples of Progne etc. teaching us.
fatal shore of Thrace,
Our plague! The Isle was rich in valiant spirits;
Samos, not Famous for Apollo's birth.
resounding Dele inherits
More buds of Fame; Not all the coasts, are washed
By foaming AEgeus. But the Gods have dashed
Our peace: Nor want we guilt: No fires did shine
On They were so true servants to Vulcan, that they neglected Venus who abused
him.
Venus Altars, nor had she a shrine.

And slow-paced punishment creeps on our souls.
The Cyprian city where she was worshipped.
Paphos, and the hundred Altars, she forsook.
Careless of face or hair; they say she broke
Her coupling Of this Ceston, read Lib. 2. with this she honored lawful
m^rr^^ges.
girdle, banishing her pair
Of young Idalian Which drew her Chariot: she neglects all pomp and beauty.
doves: Nay some declare,
They saw the Goddess, in the dark shades of night
Wear other flames, and with new darts affright.
Amongst Furies, she into their chambers breaks,
Filling their closest rooms with twining snakes:
And terrifies all houses; without pity
To her poor Who con^inued constant to her, notwithstanding Mars's adulteries.
faithful husbands wretched City.
Forthwith all tender Love from Lemnos fled;
Hymen's displaced, his Torches Alluding to the customs of Renegados in an
Army, who in this posture, submit to the adverse General.
trail'd, the bed,
The Geniall bed grew cold: No joys at night;
No soft embraces cherished sleep: But spite,
Rage, hatred, discord fills the sheets. Our men
Are plotting, how to rout proud Thracians, in
Th'opposite Coast, and how to triumph over
That warlike people: and when they discover
Their house or babes, stand on the adverse shoares,
They chose Named from ^ AEgon a Thracian mountain on which they warred.
AEdonian cold, where The constellation next the Northern pole.
Arctos roares:
Or after battle, in the silent night,
Loud torrents breaking from the hills, delight.
The woman sad, drenched night and day in tears,
(My virgin years were not then ripe for cares:)
Mixed comfortable words, or gazed upon
Cursed Thrace on the other side. The midday Sun
Poised then his horses in the height of heaven,
As though they would stopped: The even number making them the more ominous.
Four thundercracks were given
Vulcans de^
Opened its flaming top: The AEgaean, when
The winds were quiet, did work high, and roar,
And with proud swelling waves did beat the shore.
When suddenly The frowardest paricide amongst the Lemnians.
Polixo, ripe of age,

Unusually, flies from her cell abroad;
Like Thebane Thyas, tossed by the Named from the effect, because in his
Bacchanals he made his Priests so.
frantic God;
When Is Orgies call, the The hill where these feasts were celebrated.
Idaean pipes invite,
And One of the names of Bacchus there called upon.
Evan sounds down from the mountains heig^

She frights the Forsaken by the men.
naked City, with mad cries;
And gathers an assembly; knocking at
Barred portals; with her sons, the Whom soon after she slew.
wretches, that
Attended her: They all, enraged no less,
Minerva's Temples press.
Thither we crowd with speed, without respect
To order. Straight, this guide to our bloody fact,
With a drawn sword, bids silence; then breaks out
In The midst, to this discourse: I am about

Strengthen your souls, ye widowed Lemnians,
Forget your sex. If you are grieved to keep
Your naked walls eternally, and weep
For withered youth, and barren years spun out

The Gods proposed it) to renew your Lost by the absence of your husbands.
pleasure;
Let but your sorrows your brave courage measure.
For tell me; since three winters hoard the ground,
Who, wedlock bands, or sweets of Love has found?
those breast has warmed his wife? whose travail has
^ucina eased? whose hopes were swelled to pass
^he reckoned months? Such peace, as beasts and birds
Coupling enjoy? Dull souls I shall vengefull swords
^e put byth' Danaus persuading his fifty daughters in one night to murder
their husbands.
King in his Greek daughters hands;
^hilst he, joy'd with their husbands mischief stands,
those secure sleep is bathed in their own blood?
^ut we are tame fools ^yet, if you think it good
^o act by nearer presidents; behold,
^et Thracian Who slew her husband Tereus and her son Itis because her bed was
abused by Philom^la.
Proc^e teach you to be bold;
those hands revenged her bed, and feasted on
Her husband. Neither are you called upon
^y one that is spotless. See, my family
^s full, I Have travaild often: These four which lie
Within my lap, their Fathers pride and joy,
^le slay at once, though tears and kisses stay
My rage: I Will mix the brothers gore and slaughter;
And whilst they are gasping, send their father after.
Dares any kill so many? -- More she said;
When on the Maine before them, sails were spread.
^t was the Returning home after three years wars with the Thracians.
Lemnian fleet. Polyxo then
^oy'd, takes the advantage: -- Are we wanting, when
The Gods call on us? see their navy; heaven,
Revenging heaven these to our wrath has given;
And favors our design. Nor are my dreams
^aine: with a naked weapon Venus seems
Presented in my sleep; and cries; why loose ye
Time thus? cast off these husbands that abuse ye.
^le light new fires: you shall be better wed:
With that, she lays this sword upon my bed;
This very sword, beleev't. Take counsel then

Belabour yonder Sea, until it foame;
Perhaps they bring their Spoken, to inflame their jelousies.
Thracian spouses home.
This raised their jealous envy, with a shout
Which struck the stars. An The women fighters; under their General
Pen^hiselea.
Amazonian rout
Scythia, or a troop
With Which the Amazonians used as Virgil describes them.
half-moone, Targets roared; when Mars does open
The gates of Alluding to the Rom^ne Temple of Ian^^.
war, and calls to fight. Nor yet
Did several cries, or differing humors whet
Their minds, as th'rabble use. All rage alike,

At old and young: babes from full teats are pulled,
And through all ages, shall their swords be dulled.
A grove then green shaded the ground before
Minerva's The Temple of Minerva, and its situation.
spires: dark of it self: but more,

The Sun: within this place their faith was plighted.
Martial Bellona sister to Mars.
Enyo thou wast witness: So
Was The daughter to Ceres.
Proserpine: The Stygian Furies too
(Hell opening) came Being always officious in mischief.
unasked. But every where
Venus ch^ats, mixed Love being but one degree removed from Fury.
amongst them: She does bear
A brandished sword: She does inflame their strife.
Nor used they common blood: Carops'es wife
Offers her son: the others, straight addressed,
With swords and hands tear his amazed breast:
With which they seal their ^ovenant of mischief.
blood they swear their sweet sins over:
Whilst the young Ghost about her eyes does hover.
At sight of this what horror seized my breast*
How pale I looked! So when a Does distressed
By bloody wolves, her tender soul commands
No strength, but in her speed her comfort stands:
Doubtful she flies, and every step they strain
She thinks she is caught, and hears their snaps in vain.
The fleet arrived, and struck upon the sand
In The hav'ns mouth; they headlong leap to land.
Poor wretches! whom the rage of Thracian war,
And The Oceans boistrous waves thus To perish now more dishonourably by their
wives treacheries.
long did spare.
And now the temples smoke: vowed Sacrifices
Are thither drawn: but a The color being ominous.
dark flame arises
From every Altar: Luctatius tells us of a sign in the intrailes, called Deus,
which if it be entire, discovers a propitious heaven; but if absent or
mutilated, the contrary: but gratis dicit. The absence or dislocation, or
speckling of any part of the entrails is sufficient.
Nor do th'entrailes reake
Entirely, but an angry God they speak.
Jove brought down night more slow, and I conceive
Out of his mercy, whilst the Fates gave leave,
He stopped the moving heavens: Nor ever yet
Darkness forbore so long, when Sun was set.
At last the stars arose and shed their light
On Two of the Islands Cyclades, the last overgrown with woods.
Paros, Two of the Islands Cyclades, the last overgrown with woods.
Thasos, the thick Fifty three Islands, so called from their form, in the
AEgaean sea.
Cyclads: Night
Only hung heavily over Lemnos: here
Dark clouds which mantled the black sky, appear.
Lemnos alone, toth' wandering sea-mans eye
Is undiscerned. Now leaving house, they lie
Spread through their sacred groves: and warm their souls
With costly banquets; where their deepest bouls
Are cleans'd, with draughts as large. Where they relate
Their battles fought on A Thracian river, where they had joined battle.
Strimons banks: their fate
On Thracian mountains where they fought.
Rhodope: how in cold Thracian mountains where they fought.
AEme they swet.
Nay their lewd wives, in gorgeous dress were set
Among their revels too, and garlands: When
Venus, in the last night, mollifies the Who loathed their wives formerly, for
their rank savours.
men,

For a short Being all slain before morning.
time, in vain: kindling their breast
With dying flames. Now, silent grew the round,
And made an end of revelling: the sound
Of nights first whispers ceased: When sleep beset

With Stygian dew, embraced the dying town,
And poured from's Out of which he used to power his blessings.
angry horn, dull slumber down,
Seizing of the males: Wives, Mothers, Sisters watch
Whetting their steel with joy, and lie at catch

A proper Fury reigns in every soul.
A part of India bordering on Scythia.
Hir^anian tigers so the herds enclose,
In Scythian plains, whom morning hunger does
Rouse up, and th'ravenous whelps roar for their paps.

Shall I report? Rash Gorge sets upon
Which ^e^emonious habit they used in their sacred festivals.
Crowned Helim, snorting out his liquor, on
His tapestry coverings: She, his garments tears,
To feel for's wounds; whose wretched sleep forbears

Of's heavy eyes embraced her: She with haste
Stabbed him in the back, who grasped her still, and pressed,
Until the point of the poniard razed her breast.
This stops her rage: He, gentle still and kind,

His Gorge, I read the pl^ce -- non solvit br^bi^ --, and not -- sol^^ sua
brac^i^ -- an agreeing best with the context.
culling her unworthy neck.
Of none of the common peoples death, I Will speak,
though cruel too; but weep my kinsmens Fate.
^aire Cidon why should I thy death relate?
^r thine, unshav'd Crenaeus, with thy locks
^catter'd? my foster-brothers, both whose stocks
^prung from my Father, in a Being the bastard sons of King Thoas.
crooked line.
Or, whom espoused I As young Virgins use.
feared, brave Gyas, thine?
(...) saw him fall byth' bloody Mermidon.
^r, how the barbarous mother slew her son
^popeus, as amongst their Crowns he skips?
^'re Cydimus, unarmed Lycaste weeps,
Her brother-twin: viewing her image in
His falling limbs: She marks his rosy chin,
And gold-imbraided hair: But her fierce Mother,
With threats enforced her then upon her brother,
Having first slain her spouse,) and arms her hand.
As Lions brought toth' Keepers soft command,
Forget their fierceness: no affront or stroke
Can their tame souls to wonted rage provoke:
So she fell down upon him; fallen, she keeps
His blood, which streamed into her lap: and dips
Her torn hair in his wounds. But when I saw
Alcimides, her fathers head display,
Which The lips moving after death.
muttered still, and brandish her The old man not having blood enough to paint
it red.
pale steel;
My hair straight stood on end: My soul did feel
Strange horror. 'Twas, me thought, my Thoas dead;
That hand seemed mine. Straight to my Fathers bed
Distraught I went. He (for what sleep can seize
On so great thoughts?) long since in's bosom weighes
What rustling 'twas? (Though's palace stood not nigh
The City:) in the dead of night what cry
Had frighted rest? I with a trembling tongue
Relate their guilt; how At their husbands absence.
grieved; whence ^^raged by Venus.
courage sprung;
How none could stop their rage; Then cried; away,

You for your sex, I for revealing their design.
We both perhaps shall rue it: Moved with this
He rises from his bed. Our passage is
Through the back-lanes of the City where we spy
Muffled in clouds, heaps of night slaughters lie,

Here grovelling faces with their pillows strove;
The rapiers hilt out of the closed wound appears,
And broken truncheons of their weighty spears:
Swords pinck'd their clothes and breasts alike; we viewed

Their wine, like torrents, from their mangled throats,
Mingled with blood streamed back into their pots.
Young men lay mixed with old; whose hoary head
The sword would reverence: Gasping infants spread

Sob out their trembling souls: With equal strife
The feasting Whose Kin^ Perithous, slew the Centaures, who would have ravished
his bride a^ his marriage feast.
Lapithans do riot, in
Cold Ossa's top, when with large cups of wine
The The Centaures begot by Ixion on a cloud, which was presented in Juno's
place to his embraces.
cloud-borne sons are warmed. Scarce angry grown

Then Named here from Thyone, or Semele so called, the mother of Bac^hus.
Bacchus first affrights our sense, in the night,
Aiding's distressed son Thoas: glorious light
Breaks from him suddenly. I knew him well:
And yet no With which Bacchus is usually adorned.
garlands made his temples swell,
No yellow grapes did part his hair: He seemed
Tears being beneath a God.
unworthy showers streamed:
And spoke: Whilst Fate made powerful Lemnos thine,
And feared of other Nations, I did join
My care with thy just labor, Son; but now
^he Destinies have cut their thread in two;
No prayers or tears* which I have powered in vain
before Jove's throne, could a reprieve obtain:
^his dismal honor to his Venus, who had obtained their destruction.
daughter's paid,
^asten your flight; and thou deserving maid,
^y grandchild, guide thy Father where the shore
^uns out, byth' double peer. There, where they roar
^th' gate, unlucky Venus Forbidding their stage that way.
porter stands,
Girt with a sword, and whets their rage: (What hands
^he Goddess wears! whence grew her martial Usually tender, now bloody.
spirit!)
^ommit to the That ^ort only ^ing open.
Deep thy Father: I Will inherit
^hy cares. This said, he springs in the air again;
and though dark shades obstruct our sight, a train
Of light cleeres up his path. Those marks I follow,
and recommend my Sire closed in a hollow
^eele, to the Sea-gods, winds, The Deity of that Sea, in which Lemnos and the
other ^tads were seated.
AEgeon too
^mbracing round the Cyclads. Tears did flow
^t parting, without measure: Till the day-
Discovering star, had chased the rest away
from th'Easterne heaven. Then I strange doubts did roll,
^earfulll, in the shore; whilst my divided soul
^urst scarce conside in Whose counsel she had followed.
Bacchus: Walking thence,
^ left my heart there: Nor could I dispense
^ith rest, till I had viewed from every hill,
that winds arose, or if the seas were still.
The blushing morn breaks, Titan sheds a ray
^ismantling heav'^, yet cross to Lemnos: Day
^oes guide her Terrified (...) so bloody a spectacle.
frighted steeds into a cloud.
^hen were their works of darkness seen; their blood
^^nted their cheeks, fearing the light should peep,
though all were guilty: Straight they buried deep
Their slaughtered corpse, or with nimble fires
Consumed them. Glutted Venus now retire^
With all her Furies, from the Town sh'ad sacked:

Their deeds: to tear their hair; and dew their face.
Our fruitful Isle was known by the site, a place
Once stored with wealth, Arms, Men; enriched of late
By the People of Thracia over whom the Lemnians had triumphed.
Getick triumph: Now Is an empty state,

The enemies force, or an unluckie sky,
There Is none alive to plough the ground, there is none
To cut the Seas: Houses are silent grown:
Blood covers all: black gore the fields does stain:
The female Sex.
we, in the spacious streets remain;
And the angry Ghosts hover about the spires.
I too, did build Counterfeiting her fathers funeral.
a pile for lofty fires
In The inner Court of the Palace, throwing on it
My Fathers Arms, and robes our Kings were wont

Nigh the amazed flames: my sword was staind with blood:
Where I wept ore the cheat of the empty pile,
Fearing their If they knew her mercy in the close conve^ance of King Thoas.
rage; and prayed, that by this wile
My Fathers Fate, and doubtful fears of death
They supposing ^he had killed her father.
merits, they bequeath
This punishment, his Kingdom; I must sit
In The royal Throne: Such faith, my craft did get.
Could I refuse then, thus beset? I went:
But call the Gods to witness my intent,
My faith, and my unspotted hands. I gained

Poor, sad, Having lost all the Males.
beheaded Lemnos. Sorrow tore
Their waking souls, by this time, more and more:
They sigh aloud: Polyxo's cursed anon:
And now they hate the thought of what they would done:
Altars toth' Ghosts they straight decree to rear,
And by their buried ashes often Swearing by their name, being a chief part of
divine worship.
swear.
So when the trembling heifers see with fear,
A Mauritanian Lions which abound there.
foe their Captain tear,
Which The town bull.
served them all, and did command the Chase,
The pride of the herd: They having lost their grace,
Dismembered droop; because their King is slain,
The fields, and springs, and the mute drove complain.
But see, the Called Argo, but named here from the mountain Peliu^ in
Thessaly, where it was built.
Pesian ship, with stem of brass
Cutting the waves, through the Which before this time never bore so great a
vessel.
untrack'd Seas does pass
With spreading sails: which the Jason and his companions, named from Minyus a
Thessalian King, now sailing to fetch the golden fleeces.
Argonauts do guide:
The clashing waves do foame on every side:
You Would think. The Isle Delos, which since Apollo's birth, was fixed and
apparent.
Ortygia's bottom cracked, and the hill
Tumbled in the Sea: But, when the Ocean's still*
And the oars laid by, a sweeter voice salutes
Our ears fro'th' keele, then dying Swans, or lutes
Touched by Phoeb's hand: waves danced to the ship: (At last
It Was known:) there The son of O Eager, so brave an artist, that he drew the
s^as attention after him.
Orpheus leaning to the mast
Sings, in the midst of the mariners, to clear
Their souls from sense of Forgotten, by his melody.
pains: Their course they steer
Toth' Where Colchis lay.
Northern coast, and borders straightned by
Little scattered Islands called the Symplegades.
Cyanean flats. We judging them by the eye.
A Thracian power from house to house do roll
In troops, like droves, or shoales of winged foul.

And walls of the harbor, whence our prospect's clear
To the Maine; and scale our lofty turrets; whither
They trembling carry stones, and clubs, together
With their late husbands Arms, and weapons died

Their wanton cheeks in helmets, and put on
Rough breast-plates. Pallas blushed to think upon
Their boldness, and Mars laughed in distant The Thracian mountain where he
kept his Rendevouz.
AEme.
Now their rash madness first forsakes them,

By sea sent slow-paced vengeance, armed with rods.
And now they ride a flight-shot from the shore:
When Jove brings clouds, swolne-big with tempests, over
The tackling of the Grecian ship: anon

Mantled with darkness: The water's black as the Air:
Whilst labo'ring winds the hollow clouds do tear;
And roll the Seas up: Moist'ned gravel heaves
Out of the black whirle-pooles: all the Oceans waves

To wash the stars, the billows break in two.
The tottering Keele, less nimble's, leakie grown;
And The statue in the beak which named the ship.
Triton placed in the stem, dives sometimes down
To the bottom of the gulf, then strikes the skies.
Jason and his partners with his ship Argo, were afterward translated to the
heavens.
Demy-gods suffice.
The reeling mast does lash the stream; and tear
The curling waves, whose unfixt weight they bear.
The oars are tug'd in vain: yet whilst they find
Such labor to encounter Seas and wind;

With feeble arms let fly our darts, which gall
Some of the Argonauts.
Peleus and Some of the Argonauts.
Tel^mon, (how bold we grow!)
And Named from Tiryns his native Country.
Hericules is aimed at with a bow.
Endangered thus by Seas, and darts, together,
Some guard the ship, some ply the pumpe: and other
Prepare to fight; whose joints unwe^ldy fail
With The rouling of the ship did hinder their settled courage.
motion, nor can tottering strength prevail.
We ply our weapons still; our shoures of darts
Equal the clouds: huge stakes, and broken parts
Of mil-stones, spears, grenades, streaming bright,
Sometimes in the Sea, sometimes in the ship do light.
The covered vessel gapes, and the close deck
Opening the seames does give a mighty crack.
So Jove does batter fields with Northern hail:
All sorts of cattle droop; drenched wings do fail
The birds; Cone's lodged byth' bitter storm; there fell
Streams roaring from the hills, and rivers swell.
But when his darted fires the clouds did tear,
And the brave Mariners byth' light appear;
Our courage shrunk; our husbands Arms fell down
From trembling hands, and now our Remembering that we were women.
Sex we own.
We see the sons of Telamon and Peleus.
AEacus, withal
Neptunes son, after King of Samos.
Ansaeus, threatening ruin to our wall:
And The Champion that afterward restored the Olympicks.
Iphitus with a long spear does stop
The ship from rocks: then The supposed son of Amphitryo begot on his wife
Al^mena ^y Jupiter.
Herc'les does oretop
The astonished troop byth' head; and Lest, if with all his weight he should
stand on one side, ^e might over set it.
stradling keep
The full bark poised; yet would step down in the deep.
But Well deserving the name because he forsook ^er for Medea, and afterward
Medea for Creusa.
fickle Jason, whom I knew not yet,
Throughout the gall'ries, oars, and crowde, does whet
Me^eager son to O En^us.
O Enides forward, Ida now,
Now Taelaus, now Either Castor or Pollux the sons of Tyndar^s.
Tyndarides whose brow
Lardourd with froth: With hand and voice aloud
He calls on Calais, hid in's Bore^s who begat Calais and Zethe on Orythia,
raises cold storms and clouds.
Fathers cloud,
Striving to fasten sails toth' mast. The Seas,

Yet can they not beat back the foaming Maine,
And from our Towers their spears recoyle in vain.
The chief Pilot of the Argona^uts.
Tiphys tries all the billows, tyring out
The Not easily guided.
unruly stern, then is pale and tackes about:

The rocks, to the right, and left. Till Jason.
AEsons son
In The foredeck, holds up a Palladian bough
Of Olive, which before crowned The Prophet which with Amphiaraus accompanied
the Argonauts. Lib. 3.
Mopsus's brow,
And asks a truce, against his partners mind:

This stopped our Arms: and now some rest was given
Toth' breath-lesse winds, and day looked down from heaven.
Fifty leapt down of the sudden, on our shore;
(The ships being fastened, as they used before:)

Serene; of an attractive feature; now
Their fear and rage had left them. So they say
The Deities brake out, a secret way,
When entering house, or coast, they think it good
A Nation with whom the Gods were often conversant, because of their justice.
AEthiopians food.
Rivers and hills make room; their footsteps grace
The earth, whilst The empty heavens lying now lighter upon his shoulders.
Atlas finds a breathing space.
Here we spy Theseus, proud of A City infe^ted with a monstrous bull, flaine
by Theseus.
Marathons
Gained liberty: with Boreas his Calais and Zete, begot upon Ismarus a Thracian
mountain.
sons
The Ismarian brethren, whose bright Feigned so from their long dangling hair.
wings do beat
Their temples: and Admetus, once more great
Then unrepining Who willingly was his heardsman.
Phoeb': Smooth A most excellent Musician borne in a most barbarous Country.
Orpheus, son
To rugged Thrace: Thy Meleager son to Calydonian O Eneus.
offspring, Calydon:
With Nereus's Peleus who married Tethys the daughter of Nereus.
son-in-law: The Castor and Pollux borne in O Ebalia a Spartane city.
O Ebalian pair,
Which tired our doubtful eyes; for both did wear
Flame-colour'd cloaks, both shook their spears, and both
Had naked cheeks, their shoulders both uncloath;
With the glory of the marching Heroes, whose loss made the Arganauts leave
his searching master behind in Mysia.
Stars paint their locks alike. The way does c shine.
Young d Hylas, following after, does decline
Great Herc'les's steps; for though his weight did make him
March softly, yet his page could scarce overtake him;
But carrying his With which he killed the Hydra.
Lernaean arms, the boy
Under his mighty quiver sweats with joy.
Now Venus once again with Loves cool flames
Kindles the churlish hearts of the Lemnian dames.
Queen Juno then insinuates in their mind
The Arms, and garb of the men; their gallant kind:
All doors straight opened to them. Then they heat
Their Having not sacrificed since the last massacre.
Altars first and heinous cares forget:
They banquet, sleep secure, had quiet nights;
Nay (heaven designed it sure,) their guilt delights.
Perhaps you long too Gentlemen, to hear
My In entertaining Jason.
crime-excusing Fate: The Ghosts do bear
Me record, and my country- Furies, how

T'a strangers bed: (Gods answer for me:) yet
Jason by's flat'ries could with toils beset
Young As he did Medea, and Creusa afterward.
maids: The river where Medea having slain her brother Absyrtus, cast him
piecemeale before her Father.
stained Phasis knows his loose desires;
You Medea's Country.
Colchians furnished him with other fires.
Which seem to be frozen in his winter absence.
stars were warmed byth' heightened sun,
When the swift year, through half the girdle run,
Gave us new Sons; whose birth did crown our vows,
And Lemnos with All the males being slain.
unlook'd-for offspring flows.
I likewise, made a mother, brought forth two,

Their Grandsires name, from this hard-hearted stranger:
Nor since I left them, have I known their danger.
If fortune please, a nurse Lycaste bred
Them safe, full twenty years have passed their head.

Wait with more calmness now upon the sails.
The ship in the quiet harbor hates to ride,
And draws the cable tite, with which it is tied.
At this the Arganauts will put to Sea;
Jason calls his comrades: oh, had he
In smoother streams passed by my coast before,
Who thus neglects his babes, and quits the score
Of's faith engaged: Fame says at distance, Greece
Injoyes him now, returned with Who with his sister Hell, avoiding the rage of
their Father Athamas, crossed the seas on the back of a ram with a golden
fleece, she was drowned, he escaped to Colchos, where he sacrificed the ram to
Mars, and offered the fleece in his Temple, which Jason afterward by Medea's
help recovered back to Greece.
Phryxus's fleece.
When they had resolved to hoyse sails.
time, when The ship-master who judged of the weather.
Tiphys had discovered
The approaching sky, and fiery Beto^^ening a fair morning.
redness hovered
About the set suns bed; new sighs, alas!
Were spent, another farewell Recalling the memory of that when they stew
their husbands.
night it was.
The day scarce dawned, when lofty Jason urges
To shipboard, giving the first stroke toth' surges.
With longing looks we follow after these,
Plowing the foaming back of the spacious seas,
From rocks and tops of mountain: Till the light
Had tired our wandering eyes; and to our sight
The distant waves appear to touch the The sea and sky appearing conterminous
to them that at distance beheld them.
clouds,
And th'edge of heaven the wa^ry surface crowds.
A fame was spread, that Thoas cross the Maine
Conveyed in's brothers Another AEgea^ I^le, whither Thoas fled.
Chios now did reign:
Whilst I unspotted, kindled Which they conceived were her fathers funerals.
empty fires.
The bloody rabble grudge; guil^ whets their ires:
They call my deed t'account: Close whispers grow
Between them straight: Was'^ she alone, could show
Pity t'her friends? We triumphed over the slain:
No God nor Fate, which over the town does reign,
Commanded Either upbraiding her disobedience, or rather condemning their own
credulity, who were deluded by Polyxo, pretending the gods command.
this. Affrighted at their words
(For sad revenge drew near: My realm affords
As little succor:) the crook'd shore I trace
Alone by stealth, leaving the polluted place:
And mark which way my Father fled: but now
I met no As formerly, when Bacchus appeared at her Fathers escape.
God: For Pirates which did row
To shore, seized on me in the silent strand,
And brought me thus a Captive to your land.
Thus whilst the Lemnian toth' Greek Captains speaks,
And with her plaints, her force of sorrow breaks;
Opheltes, Lycurgus's son to whom she was nurse.
nurse-child is forgot, (so heaven disposed:)
Whose heavy eyes, and fainting mouth is closed
Toth' flowery ground; whilst childish action tires
Him to a sleep; clasping the grassy With which he sported before.
spires.
Mean while, an earth-borne Serpent in the fields

A This creature being always esteemed consecrated to some God.
sacred horror toth' Achaean groves:
His monstrous bulk They that fancy not this interpretation of -- tractus
solutus, -- let them call it -- wanton folds, -- if they like it better. I wish
our English tongue could express Traction, (...), more properly.
in the furrowed sands, he moves
And drags his tail behind; Fire sparkles from
His eyes, and on his mouth stands a green foame

Through his three rows of teeth: His forehead's parted
With the sad glory of his glistring scales.
The countryman, this Serpent sacred calls
To the Inachian Jupiter, whose Priest, Lycurgus the childs Fathers was.
Thund'rer, who protects

An humble honor. Now the Serpent crawles
In winding folds about his Temple-wals:
Anon, the oaks of the wretched wood are torn,
And with his embraces the tall beeches worn.

Stretched out, he presses: Whilst his scaly hide
Dams up the roaring stream. But when the ground
Reaks now (as Who in favor of his Countrymen the Th^banes, caused this
drought before.
Bacchus charged) and th'Nymphs are found
Panting in the dust, upon the earth he glides,

Raging with greater danger, sin^e the fire
Kindled his poisonous thirst: He rols in the mire
Of pooles, dry lakes, and springs choked up with drouth,
And rivers empty channels. With his mouth
Turned up, now drinks he liquid Air; and then
Uncertain what to do, grovels again
Upon the earth, and shaves the Weary either of the heat, or of his burden.
groaning plain,
If any moisture in the grass remain;
Which withers, blasted with his infectious breath;
And where he creepes, his hisses usher death.
Such was the Ophi^^hus a constellation of that length, that beginning at
Charles's waine, it crosses* he Tropicks.
snake, which from the Northern ear
Divides the sky, and thence extends far
Within the Southern Zone. Such was the Python, which by Juno's command,
persecuted Latona from Farnassus to the sea.
snake,
Whose circles made th'infolded The two tops of Parnassus about which he twined.
heads to shake
Of The sacred mount: till pierced by Apollo borne in Delos, who to revenge his
Mother, slew him.
Del^us's Arts,
With many wounds, he bore a wood of darts.
Poor babe, what God allotted thee a Fate
So great? Do thou scarce having past the gate
Of life, beneath a foe so powerful fall?
Was It, that the Graecians might hereafter call
Thee sacred? worthy of that tomb? The child
Byth' tail of the Serpent unawares is killed.
Sleep soon forsakes his tender limbs, and's eyes
Look up to welcome Fate, and then he dies.
But when his dying shrikes the air has struck,
And plaints half uttered his pale lips forsook,
(Like those imperfect words, in dreams we speak:)
Hypsip'le frighted heard him: But her weak
Knees falter'd in her course; her mind foretold
The mischief: whilst her roving eyes behold
The ground she searches on: Doubling, in vain
Those words her infant knew. He Is gone; The plain
Has lost the marks it had; where the dull snake
In a green knot lies gathered, and does take

His winding panch. A trembling seizes on
The unhappy soul at sight on it; her shrill cries
Ring through the wood: Yet still the Serpent lies
Unterrified. At last the Graecians hear
Parthenop^eus, whom our Poet expresses on ho^seback.
Artas straight the Cavalliere
Commanded, flies, and brings the reason: Then
Moved with their glittering Arms, and noise of the men,
He raised his scaly neck, with visage sour:
But stout Hippomedon with all his power

Through the air, with such a force, as warlike slings
With milstones poised, strong barricadoes shake:
Yet his strength's disappointed: For the snake
Having shrunk up his tender neck, to's back,
With the violence of the blow which the Serpent escaped.
crack:
Whilst he in numerous curles hops through the shrubs.
But, met by Capa^eus with his ashen club,
My wounds, he cries out, though shall never flee;
Whether a fierce inhabitant thou be
He prosecute* his old sacril^gious humor.
oh!
That Gods took any pleasure in thee.) No:
Not if a Between whom there is some relation, for the Giant w^^res s^rpents
fe^t.
Giant should thy back bestride.
Then flies his quivering spear, and does divide
The monstrous gaping jaws, and cuts in two

His standing mane, and glistering forehead; Having so long a race from (...)
he^^
next,
Dau^'^ with his brains black goare, in the earth it is fixed.
Pain had scarce posted through every part,
When he with many folds twines round the dart:
And bearing it plu^k'd out, he flies away
Toth' Gods dark Temples, meas'ring, as he say,
The ground with his bulk: his mourning soul does twine,
As 'twas hissed out, about his masters shrine.
The angry pooles of Lerna, near Either because the Hydra was like him, or
perhaps his progenitor.
of kin,
And Nymphs, that used with flowers to strew his skin,
Where he was bred and lived.
Nemea over which he'ad crawled, the Gods of all
The groves, and Faunes, (their reeds A token of their sad laments; reeds
betokening either their garlands or pipes, for both were made of them.
brook) wept his fall.
Nay To revenge the serpent which implored his aid before.
Jove from AEtna's forge had armed his hand,
And winter storms were gathered over the land;
But that, (the God not As afterward, when for his Atheism he was
thunderstruck.
ceased yet,) Capaneus is
Reserved to merit greater plagues then this.
Yet blasts of lightning glanced up and down,
And By which he w^^ ^^^ked out for a Sacrifice.
singed the top of's helmet on his crown.
And now the unhappy Lemni^n wandering over
The field, freed from the serpent, does discover
Upon a distant hillocke, how the grass
With sprinkled drops of blood discolored was.
Hither with bitter moanes she bends her pace,
Raging, and sees the mischief; on the place
Of guilt, she falls like lightning: neither words
Nor tea res at first, that fatal sight affords.
But only doubling wretched kisses, she
Falls on him, seeking where his soul did flee
From his warm limbs: Nor's Being bruised together by the ser(...)
face, nor's breast appear
In The place; his skin's torn; all his bones lie bare:
With springing shoures of blood his joints are drowned;
And all his body's one continued wound.
So when a crows nest, and her young ones, laid
In a broad oak, by a serpent are destroyed.
The hen returns, and wondering she don't hear
Their cawking noise, sits tittering over for fear,
And lets the meat she brought fall from her bill,
Since only blood, and scattered down does fill
Her plundered bower. When the poor wretch, dismayed,
Within her lap his mangled limbs had laid,
And wrapped them in her locks: Her voice at last

Of sighs dissolved to words: Oh thou that do
Break the fair image of the sons I lost
A^c^emorus! thou comfort of my state,
And Country left! Grace, to my captived Fate!

Whom I left sporting when I went away,
And tumbling on the grass? Ah! where are found
T^y star-like eyes, now, and the tongue-tied sound
Of thy half words? Thy smiles, and murmurs soft,

Lemnos, and Argos heard'st thou me recite?
And with sad lullabies thy sleep invite?
Thus I cheered up my grief, suckling this child
As 'twere mine own: But now his mouth is filled

Upon his Either flowing back out of his mouth, or his face it self, being
likewise wounded.
wounds. Now, now, the gods are Fore-warning her: or rather commanding a
general guilt upon the Lemnians, as Polixo informed them.
known*
Oh my presaging dreams, and nightly fears!
Venus at no time unrevenged appears
In The dark, to my affrighted sense. But why

Fear I to tell the truth? 'Twas I alone
Exposed thy life. What madness seized upon
My soul? Could such a care be so forgot?
Whilst I proud fool, report my Countries lot,
And mine own fame; Lemnos, thy In mur(...)
sin I act:

Me to the fatal snake: If thanks be due
For my unlucky I^ discovering water to them, whilst she lost the (...)
merit; or if you
Honor my words. Or else dispatch me here:
Lest my offensive person should appear
To my sad Lycurgus and Euridice whose servant now she was.
Princes, and Euridice
Bereft. Although in sorrows combat, she
Can hardly overcome me. Shall I go
To her, and this unwelcome burden throw
Into her lap? Earth sink me first below
The Center. With these words, she dawbs her brow
With dust and blood: And roules at feet of the As all the Generals were called.
Kings,
Imputing close, to their grieved souls, the Langia, the guidance to which
begot this mischief.
springs.
And now the King of the Country and Priest to Jupiter.
royal Priest, Lycurgus hears
The news, which fills him, and the house with tears.
From the Persean mountains Where Jove's Temple stood.
sacred top
He came; slasht inwards there, he'ad offered up
To threatening Jove, and shaking's head returned
From the Altar, where the speckled intrals burned.
Here he secured himself from Grecian wars:
The Temple stopped him, though not free from cares.
Nor were the gods oraculous replies.
And old advice forgot: a voice did rise
From the sacred Where the Oracle was delivered.
vault: Which he interpreting of himself, found it accomplished in his son.
Thy blood, Lycurgus shall
Toth' Grecian wars bring the first funeral.
This frights him; since Wars Chariot ^ak'd the ground,
He Is sad, and startles at the trumpets sound:
Yet Being desi^ous to accompany them if the (...)
envies the Arms marked out for ruin, See
The faith of (...)
heaven! Guarded Hipsipyle
Brings the torn carcass forth; and meets the Mother
Who brought a train of howling Matrons with her.
But stout Lycurg's dull piety forbears;
He Is better sp'rited; rage drunk up his tears:
And meas'ring with long steps the plains, he cries:
Where Is she, that does loss of my blood despise,

And drag her quickly hither: I will make her
Forget her Lemnian tale, and sire belied,
And sacred stock, which bolsters up her pride.
Then he rushed on; and snatched a sword in's rage
Tydeus does engage
With His shield against his breast; and gnashing cries,
Stop, Madman, stop thy furious enterprise,
Who e're thou art: Nor Capaneus is slack,
Nor fierce Hipomedon, with his sword To make a violent thrust as fencers use.
drawn back,
Arcas with a forward thrust. Parthenopaeus name^ from Arymanthus the Arcadian
mount where he was bred.
His eyes
Dazzled with her bright arms. Then Is servants rise
To aid their King. Adrastus, in the rout,
More calmely, and Amphiaraus, out
Of reverence to his partners Which one wore as Priest to Jupiter, the other as
Prophet to Apollo.
garland, cries;

One Perseu^ whence all the petty Kings of Gr^^ce, united then, were sprung.
Grandsires blood, which makes us all of kin:
Don't cherish fury thus: Do thou T^ Tydeus, whom Adrastus had most power to
command.
begin.
But Tydeus, discomposed still, thus replies:
Dare thou, upon thy sons tomb sacrifice
Graecians guide and their preserver; while
Being latel (...)
Ungrateful they look on? (what (...)
fun'rall pile
Avenging by it!) A Kingdom is her due;
Her father Tho^s: from A^ (...)
bright Evan too
Her stocks derived. Will It not content thy pride,

Thou only, amongst the raging troops, have peace?
But hug it still: Oh may victorious Greece
Find thee, lamenting still thy fate, o're's urne.
This said; He breaking's anger does return

Marching to race the Thebane bulwarks, drew
^n enemies force on us: Go on, destroy
^our brethren; (if you think it such a joy:)
^eason your arms at home: Let impious fires
For, what Which might demerit at Jove's hand: This Parenthesis is to be
re^^rred to what follows. S^ vil^m tanti premerent etc. --.
offense has past?) consume the spires
Of Jove, in Who either saved his son nor protected him.
vain long worshipped. I conceived,
A Prince and Master, when so justly grieved,
^ad power o're's servant: But heavens Sovereign
^ees this; he sees, and's anger does remain
^ure though it be late: This spoke; he looks about
^oth' Town, where war had raised another rout.
^resh fame outstrips the horse-mens speed, and brings
A One in the City, the o^^er in the fields where Lycurgus was.
double tumult upon both her wings.
AEport flies up and down, Hypsipiles led
^o execution, and by this time dead.
It Is soon By the Grecian army quar^^ing in the town, who mutinied upon the
news.
believed: nor will they stop their anger,
^ut fire and sword, their houses straight endanger.
^hey'^e overthrow the Kingdom, and subdue
Captived Lycurg's, with Jove, and's Altars too:
^he women shrikes the Ecchoing houses here,
and Conceived (...) for the death of Arche^^^^^* fli^s now (...) the fear of
war (...)
grief inverted turns its back to fear.
^ut high Adrastus, in's swift Chariot, flies
^'th' midst of the troops, and shows before their eyes
^ Thoantis, carried with him: crying thus:
^old, hold, here is nothing done that is barbarous.
Lycurgus no such ruin has deserved;
^ehold, the foundresse of our streame's preserved.
So when on this side the East, and Northern wind,
On that, the gloomy Southern are combined
^o vex the Seas, with diverse storms; the day
^s banished, and dark winter bears the sway:
Mounted on's steed comes Neptune over the Maine,
A double Either harnessed double in his watery Chariot, or double shape half
horse, half fish.
Triton swims with his froathy rain:
But when the faling waves his signal hear,
The Sea-Nymph, daughter to Nereus, p^^ ^or the Sea.
Thetis looks smooth, the hills, and shoares appear.
What God, in pity to their funeral grief,
Prosper'd their vows so much? and did relieve
Hypsipiles tears, with joys past expectation?
Thou father Bacchus from whom Thoas sprung.
Evan, founder of the Nation,
Nemea, from the Lemnian strand,
The Hypsipyles two sons for whose safety she was so solicitous before.
two young Brethren, and strange fate command.
They sought their mother then, and did resort
Unto Lycurgus's hospitable Court:
When the sad messenger came in, to tell

They therefore troop along: (Oh chance! how dim
Men's souls are to foresee!) and favor him.
But when the sound of Lemnos struck their ears,
And Thoas's name, they rush through swords and spears;

Their mother, where they 'xchange each others soul.
She like a rock stands with fixed eyes unmoved,
And dares not Doub^ing the truth o^ what she saw.
trust the Gods, which she had proved.
But when their face, and the Impressed upon their Arms.
Argo's stamp she notes

Left them for a m^moriall of their father.
Iason^ imbroider'd picture: sighs depart*
So great a present does or'echarge her heart,
And down she sinkes: then were her eyes bedewed
With other tears. Signs from the Which seconded the joy of the (...)
sky were showed:

(...)
Bacchus his drums and trumpets rend the air.
Oiclides then, when first their rage did break
To silence, and he might be heard to speak,
Begins: Thou Neman ruler, and the rest
(...) Peere^ of Graece, hear what is plain expressed
^y Who forbad this war, by this Prophet: Lib. 3.
constant Phoeb': this grief of late pursues
^he Grecian Arms; the Destinies do use
^o Being constant (...) occasions of sorrow.
winding paths now. (...): For his death foretold his de^truction.
Thirst does first destroy
^he river, then the deadly snake, and boy
Archemorus, named from our fate: All this
^y heavens supreme decrees appointed is.
^ake off your edge: Quick arms must be delaid:
^his infant must have lasting honors paid,
^o's merit: Let By the solemn games offered to his memory, in the next ^ooke.
courageous hands appease
^is Ghost with fair oblations. Might it please
Apollo to beget more stops, and fright
Our troops with new mischances from the sight*
^till may the thought of fatal Which he knew would be destructive to all the
Army.
Thebes abate!
^ut happy His ^arents which lived to see their off spring de^fied, which no^e
of their ^redecessours did before them.
you, that have out-stript the fate
Of your great Parents: hence, shall ages tell
^our everlasting name, whilst waters dwell
(...) Lernas poole, and Inachus shall flow,
and Nemeas shades dance on the fields below:
^et ^ot profaning tears be shed upon
^is sacred tomb, do not the Gods bemone:
^e is enrolled a God: Nor would he rather
^njoy the fate of Whose thre^ ages are famous.
Nestors age, or gather
The long experience of Either Pri^mus's, who lived to see Troy sacked, or
rather Tit^onus's Auro^^s beloved, who live^ to be so waste^ wi^h age, that
they seigned him (...) last to be converted into a gr^sse-hopper.
Ph^ygian years.
^e ends, and night heavens sable mantle wears.
Finis Lib. V. Statii Thebaid.

