DOMVS NATVRAE

Ripley Reviud

Nil decit nisi Clavis

Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in little Britain 1678*



THE Author's Preface TO HIS EXPOSITIONS UPON Sir GEORGE RIPLEY's Compound of
Alchymy, etc.
THis Canon of Bridlington flourished in the days of Edward the Fourth, King of
England, to whom he wrote an Epistle, as in the beginning of this Book
appears: a true Artist he was, as every one who has attained the knowledge
in this Mastery can testify. He wrote, among other Writings, these Twelve
Gates of Alchymy, which with the Preface, Recapitulation, Erroneous Experiments
by him warned of, his Epistle to the King, Vision, and Wheel, I shall unfold.

For his Experience herein he was eminent, yea his Writings indeed are, in my
opinion, for the fullness of them, and eminent descriptions of things, to be
preferred before any that I have read or seen, yet I have seen many.

I would detract from no candid well-deserving Author, but would ingenuously
give them their due; yet Ripley to me seems to carry the Garland.

For mine own part, I have cause to honor Bernard Trevisan, who is very
ingenious, as in all his Writings, so especially in that Epistle of his to
Thomas of Bononia, in which let me seriously profess, I received the main Light
in this hidden Secret. I shall not name the place, but read the Epistle, and
read it again and again, for in it is most excellent truth, and Naked truth.

Next to him, or rather before him in some respects, is an Author whom I will
not name; yet truly all Chemical Writers are therein to be preferred by any
man, by how far he gets good by them: one commends Raymond Lully before all,
yet I remember not that ever I got good by reading of him: some in good sooth,
who are not Professors of this Secret, write more edifyingly to the informing
of a Tyro, then those whom skill has made crafty, especially in such places
where they intend nothing less then to discover such Secrets* I learned the
Secret of the Philosophers Magnes, from one; of their Magical Chalybs, from
another; the use of Diana's Doves, from a third; the Air, or rather the
Camelion of the Philosophers, from another; the gross Preparation of their
Menstruum, in another; the number of Eagles, in another: but for operation on
the true Matter, and signs of the true Mercury, I know none like Ripley, though
Flammel be eminent. I know what I say, as knowing experimentally the truth, and
what is error.

For mine own part, I have had experience of misleading Sophistical Writers,
and have made many toylsom laborious Experiments, though but young; and
therefore having at length, through the undeserved mercy of God, arrived at my
Haven of Rest, I shall stretch out my hand to such as are behind.

I have wrote several Treatises, some in English, but especially in Latin; one
English Treatise touching the Stone, very plainly written, but not perfected,
unfortunately slipped out of my hand, and perhaps may come abroad into the World;
if it do, I should be sorry. Two Latin Tractates, one entitled, Brevis
manuductio ad Rubinum Coelestem, another, Fons Chymicae Philosophiae, I wrote,
which for especial Reasons to me known I resolve to suppress. Two other Latin
Treatises, the one entitled, Ars Metallorum Metamorphose^s, the other,
Introitus apertus ad occlusum Regis Palatium, I lately wrote, which perhaps
thou may enjoy. Two English Poems I wrote, declaring the whole Secret, which
are lost. Also an Enchiridion of Experiments, together with a Diurnal of
Meditations, in which were many Philosophical Receipts declaring the whole
Secret, with an Aenigma annexed; which also fell into such hands, who I
conceive will never restore it. This last was written in English, with many
other which I wrote for mine own recreation, and afterward burned.

But now at length studying how to profit the Sons of Art to my utmost, I have
rather resolved to unfold Ripley's Knots, and so thou may have two Witnesses
in one; for by the unfolding of him thou shall both see the depth of the Man,
and discern that both he and I were truly, and not Sophistically, entrusted
with this Divine Science and Art; in which it is not notional, as many men
conceive the Art to be, but real Experiments of Nature, taught me by the only
God and Master of Nature, that was my Guide; having seen and made the Secret
Water of the Philosophers, and known the use of it by ocular experience, to the
effecting of the admirable Elixir. These Writings peruse, for they are not
Fancies, and so with the help of the most High, thou shall attain thy wish.

AN Advertisement.
THe Compound of Alchymy which seems to be most made use of in this Book for
Quotations, agrees for the most part with the Edition published by Ralph
Rabbards, and Printed at London 1591. in 4o. in which Edition the English is
not so old as is that Copy which was published by Elias Ashmole Esquire; In his
most excellent and laborious Collection of our Ancient English Hermetick
Authors, called Theat^^^ Chymic^m Britannicum* Printed at London 165^. in 40.
with his learned and ingenious Observations upon the same. And I heartily wish
that the learned Philosophere of our Age, could prevail with him to publish his
second Volume of that Collection, which he had almost finished near twenty
years since, (as I had it from his own mouth) and has lain asleep ever since,
and likely so to lie; for to the perfecting thereof he is now unwilling to be
brought, unless some worthy Friend of his can be wrought upon to prevail with
him, before the sleep of death seizes him, and leav^^ those rare pieces of
Antiquity to be inevitably lost, to the prejudice of all Philosophers, and
great dishonor of the English Nation.
: Yet I humbly conceive that this Expositor has thought fit to clear the sense
of the old English Verse, by the change of some few words, more significant to
the present speech, and yet doubtless not differing from the mind of the
Author; which change of words, I durst not presume to alter, but that I ought
rather in justice to the Author to let them pass; and for this reason likewise,
that whomsoever shall desire to see the difference, may easily compare all
three together, because they are all published in Print: and in performing this
service, I hope I have done my duty faithfully, and wronged no body. I likewise
make bold to acquaint the Reader, that in the Exposition upon Sir G. Ripley's
Preface, in the Learned Sophies Feast, page 52. line 5. I find this word
[greatest,] which from what follows line 11. (I humbly conceive, with
submission) should be [meanest,] as may more manifestly appear from the same
Author, in his Secrets Revealed, page 62, 63. and in Sir G. Ripley's 5th. Gate,
Stave 40. line 6. But because I found it [greatest price] in two Copies, I
therefore left it so, and by this Advertisement submit it to the Readers
Judgment. I have likewise found, that in the Exposition upon Sir G. Ripley's
Epistle to King Edward the 4th. page 9. line 2. for Mercury, some Copies read
Antimony, which is likewise left to the Readers scrutiny, by

W. C. B.

The Contents. Directions for the Book-binder. 1. The Author's Preface. 1
sheet, Signat. 2. An Exposition upon the Epistle to K. Edw. 3 sheets and a half
Signat. A. B. D. E* 3. -- upon the Preface. 6 sheets. 4. -- upon the 6 Gates 5.
and the Experiments of the Sophick Mercury 19 sheets and a half, from F. to C
c. 6. Breviary of Alchymy. 2 sheets, A. B. 7. An Exposition upon Sir G.
Ripley's Vision. 2 sheets, A. B.

AN EXPOSITION Upon Sir George Ripley's EPISTLE To King Edward IV.

Written by Eirenaeus Philalethes Anglus, COSMOPOLITA.

LONDON,Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain, 1677.

Sir GEORGE RIPLEY'S EPISTLE TO King Edward the Fourth, UNFOLDED.
THis Epistle as it was immediately written to a King, who was in his
Generation, both wise and valiant; so it does comprize the whole secret, both
learnedly described, and yet artificially veiled. Yet as the Author testifies,
that in this Epistle he does plainly untie the main knot; So I can, and do
testify with him, that there is nothing desirable for the true attaining of
this Mystery, both in the Theory and Practick of it, which is not in this short
Epistle fully taught. This then I intend as a Key to all my former writings,
and assure you on my faithful word, that I shall not speak one word doubtfully
or Mystically, as I have in all my other writings, seeming to aver some things,
which taken without a Figure, are utterly false, which we did only to conceal
this Art. This Key therefore we intend not to make common; and shall entreat
you to keep it secret to your self, and not to communicate it, except it be to
a sure friend, who you are confident will not make it public: And this request
we make upon very good grounds, knowing that all our writings together, are
nothing to this, by reason of the contradictions, which we have woven into
them, which here is not done in the least measure. I shall therefore in this
Epistle take up a new Method, and that different from the former, and shall
first draw up the substance of the Philosophy couched in this Epistle, into
several conclusions, and after elucidate the same.

The first Conclusion is drawn from the Ninth Stave of this Epistle, the eight
first Staves being only complementall; and that is, That as all things are
multiplied in their kind, so may be Metalls, which have in themselves a
capacity of being transmuted, the imperfect into perfect.

The second Conclusion in the Tenth Stave is, That the main ground for the
possibility of transmutation, is the possibility of reduction of all Metalls,
and such Minerals as are of metallic principles, into their first Mercurial
matter.

The third Conclusion is in the Eleventh Stave, that among so many Metaline and
Mineral Sulphurs, and so many Mercuries there are but two Sulphurs that are
related to our work, which Sulphurs have their Mercuries essentially united to
them.

The fourth Conclusion from the same Stave is, That he who understands these
two Sulphurs and Mercuries aright, shall find that the one is the most pure red
Sulphur of Gold, which is Sulphur in manifesto, and Mercurius in occulto, and
that other is most pure white Mercury, which is indeed true Quicksilver in
manifesto, and Sulphur in occulto, these are our two Principles.

The fifth Conclusion from the Twelfth Stave is, That if a man's Principles be
true, and his Operations regular, his Event will be certain, which Event is no
other then the true Mystery.

These Conclusions are but few in number, but of great weight or concernment;
the Amplification, Illustration and Elucidation therefore of them, will make a
son of Art truly glad.

STAVE IX. In the Edition 1591: but in Esquire Ashmole's Theatrum it is Stave 8.
But notwithstanding for peril that may befall,
If I dare not here plainly the knot unbind,
Yet in my writing I will not be so mystical,
But that by study the true Knowledge you may find
How that each thing is multiplied in its kind,
And how the likeness of Bodies Metalline be tran^mutable,
I will declare, that if you feel me in your mind,
My writing you shall find true, and no fained Fable.

FOr the First; Forasmuch as it is not for our purpose here to invite any to
the Art, only intending to lead and guide the sons of Art; We shall not prove
the possibility of Alchymy, by many Arguments, having done it abundantly in
another Treatise. He then that will be incredulous, let him be incredulous; he
that will cavil, let him cavil; But he whose mind is persuaded of the truth of
this Art, and of its Dignity, let him attend to what is in the Illustration of
these Five Conclusions discovered, and his heart shall certainly rejoice. We
shall therefore briefly Illustrate this 1st. Conclusion, and insist there more
largely, where the secrets of the Art are most couched.

For this first, which concludes in effect the truth of the Art, and its
validity; he that would therein be more satisfied in it, let him read the
Testimony of the Philosophers: And he that will not believe the Testimony of so
many men, being most of them men of renown in their own times, he will cavil
also against all other Arguments.

We shall only hold to Ripley's Testimony in this our Key, who in the Fourth
Stave, assures the King that at Lovain he first saw the greatest and most
perfect secrets, namely, the two Elixirs; and in his following Verses, craved
his confident credit, that he himself has truly found the way of secret
Alchymy, and promises the discovery of it to the King, only upon condition of
secrecy.

And in the Eighth Stave, though he protests never to write it by Pen, yet
proffers the King at his pleasure, to show him occularly the Red and White
Elixir, and the working of them, which he promises will be done for easy
costs in time So then, he that will doubt the truth of this Art, must account
this Famous Author for a most simple mad Sophister, to write and offer such
things to his Prince, unless he were able in effect to do what he promised;
from which imputation, his Writings, and also the History of him, of his Fame,
Gravity, and Worth, will sufficiently clear him.

STAVE X.
As the Philosopher in the Book of Meteors does write,
The likeness of Bodies Metalline be not transmutable,
But after he added these words of more delight,
Without they be reduced to their beginning materiable,
Wherefore such Bodies which in Nature be liquiable,
Mineral and Metalline may be Mercurizate,
Conceive you may this Science is not opinionable,
But very true, by Raymond and others determinate.

WE come to the second Conclusion; the substance of which is, that all Metalls,
and Bodies of Metalline Principles, may be reduced to their first Mercurial
Matter; And this is the main and chief ground for the possibility of
Transmutation. On this we must insist largly and fully, for (trust me) this is
the very hinge on which our secrets hang.

First, Then know that all Metalls, and several Minerals have Mercury for their
next matter, to which (for the most part, nay indeed always) there adheres, and
is Con-coagulated an external Sulphur, which is not Metalline, but
distinguishable from the internal Kernel of the Mercury.

This Sulphur is not wanting even in common Argent Vive, by the Mediation of
which, it may be precipitated into the form of a dry Powder: Yea, and by a
Liquor well known to us, (though nothing helping the Art of Transmutation) it
may be so fixed, that it may endure all Fires, the Test and Coppel, and this
without the addition of any thing to it, but the Liquor (by virtue whereof it
is fixed) coming away entire, both in its Pondus and Virtue. This Sulphur in
Gold and Silver is pure, in the other Metalls less pure; Therefore in Gold and
Silver it is fixed, in others it is fugitive; in all the Metalls it is
coagulated, in Mercury or Argent Vive, it is coagulable, in Gold, Silver and
Mercury; this Sulphur is so strongly united, that the Ancients did ever judge
Sulphur and Mercury, to be all one; but we by the help of a Liquor, the
Invention of which in these parts of the world we owe to Paracelsus, (though
among the Moors and Arabians, it has been, and is (at this day) commonly known
to the acuter sort of Chemists.) By this I say, we know that the Sulphur which
is in Mercury coagulable, and in the Metals coagulated, is external to the
Internal nature of Mercury, and may may be separated in the form of a tincted
Metallic Oil, the remaining Mercury being then void of all Sulphur, save that
which may be called its Inward or Central Sulphur, and is now incoagulable of
it self, (though by our Elixir it is to be coagulated) but of it self, it can
neither be fixed nor precipitated, nor sublimed, but remains un-altered in all
corrosive waters, and in all digestions of heat. One way then of Mercury
Azating all Metals and Minerals, is by the Liquor Alchahest, which out of all
such Bodies as have Mercury in their Constitution, can separate a running
Argent Vive, from which Argent vive all its Sulphur is then separated, save
that only which is Internal and Central to the Mercury, which Internal Sulphur
of Mercury no corrosive can touch: Next to this way of universal Reduction,
there are also some other particular ways by which Saturn, Jupiter, Antimony,
yea even Venus and Mars may be reduced into a running Quicksilver, by the help
of Salts, which because (being corporeal) they pierce not so radically as the
forenamed Liquor does; they therefore do not spoil the Mercury of its Sulphur,
but that as much Sulphur as there in is Common Mercury; so much also there in
is this Mercury of the Bodies, only this Mercury has specificated qualities
according to the nature of the Metal or Mineral, from which it was extracted;
and for that reason, (as to our work which is to dissolve perfect Species of
Metals,) it has no more virtue then common Argent Vive. There is than but one
only humidity, which is applicable unto our Work, which certainly is neither of
Saturn nor Venus, nor is drawn from any thing, which nature has formed, but
from a substance compounded by the Art of the Philosopher. So then, if a
Mercury drawn from the Bodies, have not only the same deficiency of heat and
superfluity of faeces as Common Mercury has, but also a distinct specificated
form, it must (by reason of this its form) be so much the farther remote from
our Mercury, then common Argent Vive is.

Our Art therefore is to compound two Principles, (one in which the Salt, and
another in which the Sulphur of Nature does abound,) which are not yet perfect,
nor yet totally imperfect, and (by consequence) may therefore (by our Art) be
changed or exalted, which that (which is totally perfect) cannot be; and then
by Common Mercury to extract not the Pondus, but the Celestial virtue out of
the compound; which virtue (being Fermental) begets in the common Mercury an
Offspring more noble then it self, which is our true Hermaphrodite, which will
congeal it self, and dissolve the Bodies: Observe but a grain of Corn, in
which, scarce a discernable part is Sprout, and this Sprout, if it were out of
the Grain, would die in a moment; the whole grain is sown, yet the Sprout only
produces the Herb: So is it in our Body, the Fermental Spirit that is in it,
is scarce a third part of the whole, the rest is of no value, yet all is
joined, (in the composition,) and the faeculent corporeous parts of the Body
comes away with the dregs of the Mercury. But beyond the example or similitude
given of a grain of Corn, it may be observed that the hidden and spiritual
virtue of this our Body, does purge and purify its Matrix of water, in which
it is sown; that is, it makes it cast forth a great quantity of filthy earth,
and a great deal of Hydropical Saline moisture. For instance, make thy washings
(for a trial) with pure and clean Fountain water; weigh first a Pint of the
same water, and take the exact weight of it, then wash thy compound 8 or 10
Eagles (or times,) save all the faeces, weigh thy Body and Mercury exactly,
weigh thy faeces being very dry, then Distill or Sublime all that will Sublime,
a very little quick Mercury will ascend, then put the residue of the faeces in
a Crucible, set them on the Coals, and all the faeculency of the Mercury will
burn like a Coal, yet without fume; when that is all consumed, weigh the
remaining faeces, and thou shall find them to be two thirds of thy Body, the
other third being in the Mercury; weigh the Mercury which thou Sublimest, and
the Mercury prepared by it self, and the weight of both will not recompense thy
Mercuries weight by far: So then, boil up thy water to a skin, in which thou
made thy Lotions, for that is a thick water; and in a cool place thou shall
have Crystals, which is the Salt of Mercury Crude, and no way fit for
Medicines; Yet it is a content for the Artists to see how the Heterogeneities
of Mercury are discovered, which no Art save the Liquor of Alchahest can do,
and that in a destructive, not a generative way as this is; for this operation
of ours is made between Male and Female, within their own kind, between which
there is a Ferment which effects that which no other thing in the world could
do. In all truth I tell you, that if you should take our imperfect compound
Body, per se, and Mercury per se, and Ferment them alone, though you might
bring out of the one a most pure Sulphur, and out of the other Mercury of
Mercury, which is the Nut of Mercury, yet with these thou could effect
nothing, for Fermental virtue is the wonder of the world, and it is by it, that
water becomes Herbs, Trees, and Plants, Fruits, Flesh, Blood, Stones, Minerals,
and every thing; seek then for it only, and rejoice in it, as in a deservedly
invaluable treasure: Now know, that Fermentation works or ferments not out of
kind, neither do Salts Ferment Metals. Will thou then know whence it is that
some fixed Alcalies do extract a Mercury out of Minerals, and out of the more
imperfect Metals? Consider then, that in all these Bodies the Sulphur is not so
radically mixed and united, as it is in Silver and Gold. Now Sulphur is of kin
to diverse Alcalies, that are extraordinarily dissolved or melted with it, and
by this means the Mercurial parts are disjoined, and the Argent vive is by fire
separated. The Mercury thus separated, is spoiled of its Sulphur, when as
indeed there needs, or is required only a depuration of the Sulphur by
separating the impure from the pure; but these Salts having separated the
Sulphur, do leave the Mercury worse; that is, more estranged from a Metallic
nature than it was before; for in its Composition that Sulphur of Saturn will
not burn, for though it be Sublimed, Calcined, made Sugar or Vitrified, yet by
Fire and Fluxes it still returns to the same it was in before; but its Sulphur
being (as is aforesaid,) separated, will take fire if joined with Saltpeter,
even as common Sulphur does, so that the Salts act on the Sulphur of which they
rob the Mercury, but on the Mercury they act not for want of Ferment, which is
not to be found, but only amongst Homogeneal things. Therefore the Ferment of
Bread Leavens not a Stone, nor does the Ferment of any Animal or Vegetable,
Ferment a Metal or Mineral. So then, though out of Gold thou might obtain a
Mercury by the help of the Liquor of the first Ens of Salt, yet that Mercury
would never accomplish our work: whereas on the other side Mercury made out of
Gold by our Mercury, though there be three parts of our Mercury to one of Gold:
This Mercury I say, will (by continual digestion) accomplish the whole work;
marvel not then, that our Mercury is more powerful, which is prepared by
Mercury: For certainly the Ferment, which comes between the compound Body and
the water, causes a death and a regeneration; it does that, which nothing in
the world can do: Besides it severs from Mercury a terrestreity which burns
like a coal, and an Hydropical humor melting in common water, but the residue
is acuated by a Spirit of Life, which is our true embryonated Sulphur of our
water, not visible, yet working visibly. We conclude then, that all operations
for our Mercury, but by common Mercury, and our Body according to our Art, are
erroneous, and will never produce our Mystery, although they be otherwise,
Mercuries never so wonderfully made. For as the Author of the New light, says,
No Water in any Island of the Philosophers was wholesome, but that which was
drawn out of the reigns of Sol and Luna. Will thou know what that means,
Mercury in its pondus and incombustibility is Gold fugitive, our Body in its
purity is called the Philosophers Luna, being far more pure than the imperfect
Metals, and its Sulphur also as pure as the Sulphur of Sol, not that it is
indeed Luna, for it abides not in the fire. Now in the composition of these
three; First, our common Mercury, and the two Principles of our compound there
intercedes the Ferment of Luna, out of which though it be a Body, proceeds yet
a speci^icated odor: yea, and often the Pondus of it is diminished: If the
Compound be much washed, after it is sufficiently clean. So then, the Ferment of
Sol and Luna intercedes in our composition, which Ferment begets an offspring
more noble then it self a thousand fold; whereas should thou work on our
compound body by a violent way of Salts, thou should have the Mercury, by far
less noble then the Body, the Sulphur of the Body being separated, and not
exalted by such a progress.

STAVE XI.
In the said Book the Philosopher speaks also,
Therein if it please Your Highness for to read,
Of diverse Sulphurs, and especially of two,
And of two Mercuries joined to them indeed,
Whereby he does true understanders lead,
To the knowledge of the Principles which be only true,
Both Red, Moist, Pure, and White, as I have espied,
Which be nevertheless found but of very few.

WE now come to the Third Conclusion, which is, that among all Metalline and
Mineral Sulphurs there are only Two that belong to our Work; which Two have
their Mercuries essentially united with them: This is the truth of our secrets,
though we (to seduce the unwary) do seem to aver the contrary; for do not think
that (because we do insinuate two ways, therefore) we really mean as we say,
for verily (as witnesses Ripley,) There is no true Principle but one, nor have
we but one matter, nor but one way of working upon that matter, nor but one
regimen of heat, and one linear way of proceeding.

These two Sulphurs as they are Principles of our Work, they ought to be
Homogeneal, for it is only Gold Spiritual that we seek; First White, then Red,
which Gold is no other then that which the vulgar see, but they know not the
hidden Spirit that is in it. This Principle wants nothing but composition, and
this composition must be made with our other crude white Sulphur, which is
nothing but Mercury vulgar, by frequent cohobation of it upon our
Hermaphroditical body, so long till it become a fiery water.

Know therefore, that Mercury has in it self a Sulphur, which being un-active,
our Art is to multiply in it a living active Sulphur, which comes out of the
loins of our Hermaphroditieal body, whose Father is a Metal, and his Mother a
Mineral; Take then the most beloved Daughter of Saturn, whose Arms are a Circle
Argent, and on it a Sable Cross on a Black Field, which is the signal note of
the great world, espouse her to the most warlike God, who dwells in the house
of Aries, and thou shall find the Salt of Nature, with this Salt acuate thy
water, as thou best know, and thou shall have the Lunary bath in which the
Sun will be amended.

And in all truth I assure thee, that although thou had our Body
Mercurialized (without the addition of Mercury, or of the Mercury of any of the
Metals) made per se, that is, without the addition of Mercury, it would not be
in the least profitable unto thee, for it is our Mercury only, which has a
Celestial form and power, which it receives, not only, nor so much from the
Compound Body or Principles, as from the Fermental virtue which proceeds from
the composition of both the Body and the Mercury, by which is produced a
wonderful Creature: So then let all thy care be to marry Sulphur with Sulphur,
that is our Mercury which is impregnated, which Sulphur must be espoused with
our Sol, then have thou two Sulphurs married, and two Mercuries of one
offspring, whose Father is the Sun, and Moon the Mother.

The Fourth Conclusion makes all perfectly plain which has been said before;
namely, that these two Sulphurs are, the one most pure Red Sulphur of Gold, and
the other of most pure clean White Mercury.

These are our two Sulphurs; the one appears a coagulated Body, and yet carries
its Mercury in its belly: the other is in all its proportions true Mercury, yet
very clean, and carries its Sulphur within its self, though hidden under the
form and fluxibility of Mercury.

Sophisters are (here) in a Labyrinth, for because they are not acquainted with
Metalline love, they work in things altogether heterogeneal,; or if they work
upon Metalline Bodies, they yet either join Males with Males, or else Females
with Females, or else they work on each alone; or else they take Males which
are charged with natural inabilities, and Females whose Matrix is vitiated.
Thus by their own inconsideration they frustrate their own hopes, and then cast
the blame upon the Art, when as indeed it is only to be imputed to their own
folly, in not understanding the Philosophers.

I know many pitiful Sophisters do dote on many Stones, Vegetable, Animal, and
Mineral; and some to those add the fiery Angelical, Paradaical Stone, which
they call a Wonder-working Essence; and because the mark they aim at is so
great, the ways also by which they would attain their scope, they make also
agreeable, that is a double way; One way they call Via Humida, the other they
call Via Sicca, (to use their languages:) The latter way is the Labyrinthian
path, which is fit only for the great ones of the earth to tread in; the other
the Daedalean Path, an easy way of small cost for the poor of the world to
enterprise.

But this I know, and can testify, that there is but one way, and but only one
Regimen, no more colors than ours; and what we say or write otherwise, is but
to deceive the unwary: For if every thing in the world ought to have its proper
causes, there cannot be any one end which is produced from two ways of working
on distinct Principles.

Therefore we protest, and must again admonish the Reader, that (in our former
writings) we have concealed much, by reason of the two ways we have insinuated,
which we will briefly touch; There is one Work of ours, which is the Play of
Children, and the Work of Women, and that is Decoction by the Fire; and we
protest that the lowest degree of this our work, is, that the matter be stirred
up, and may hourly circulate without fear of breaking of the Vessel, which for
this reason ought to be very strong; but our lineal Decoction is an Internal
Work, which advances every day and hour, and is distinct from that of outward
heat, and therefore is both invisible and insensible. In this our work, our
Diana is our body when it is mixed with the water, for then all is called the
Moon; for Laton is whitened, and the Woman bears rule: our Diana has a wood,
for in the first days of the Stone, our Body after it is whitened grows
vegetably. In this wood are at the last found two Doves; for about the end of
three weeks the Soul of the Mercury ascends with the Soul of the dissolved
Gold; these are infolded in the everlasting Arms of Venus, for in this season
the confections are all tincted with a pure green color; These Doves are
circulated seven times, for in seven is perfection, and they are left dead,
for they then rise and move no more; our Body is then black like to a Crows
Bill, for in this operation all is turned to Powder, blacker than the blackest.
Such passages as these we do oftentimes use when we speak of the Preparation of
our Mercury; and this we do to deceive the simple, and it is also for no other
end that we confound our operations, speaking of one, when we ought to speak of
another; For if this Art were but plainly set down, our operations would be
contemptible even to the foolish. Therefore believe me in this, that because
our works are truly natural, we therefore do take the liberty to confound the
Philosophers work with that which is purely Natures work, that so we might keep
the simple in ignorance concerning our true Vinegre, which being unknown, their
labor is wholly lost.

Let me then (for a close) say only thus much; Take our Body which is Gold, and
our Mercury which is seven times acuated by the marriage of it with our
Hermaphroditical body which is a Chaos, and it is the splendour of the Soul of
the God Mars, in the Earth and water of Saturn; mix these two in such a Pondus
as Nature does require: in this mixture you have our invisible Fires, for in
the Water, or in the Mercury is an active Sulphur or Mineral Fire, and in the
Gold a dead, passive, but yet actual Sulphur; Now when that Sulphur of the Gold
is stirred up and quickened, there is made between the Fire of Nature which is
in the Gold and the Fire against Nature, which is in the Mercury, a Fire partly
of the one, and partly of the other, for it partakes of both; and by these two
Fires thus united into one, is caused both Corruption (which is Humiliation)
and Generation, (which is Glorification and Perfection.) Now know that God only
governs this way of the Internal Fire, Man being ignorant of the progress
thereof, only by his Reason beholding its operations, he is able to discern
that it is hot; that is, that it does perform the actions of heat, which is
Decoction. In this Fire there is no Sublimation, for Sublimation is an
Exaltation; But this Fire is such an Exaltation, that it is Perfection it self,
and that beyond it is no progress.

All our Work then is only to multiply this Fire, that is, to circulate the
Body, so long until the Virtue of the Sulphur be augmented. Again, this Fire is
an invisible Spirit, and therefore not having Dimensions as neither above nor
below, but every where in the Sphere of the activity of our Matter in the
Vessel; So that though the material visible substance do sublime and ascend by
the action of the Elemental heat, yet this Spiritual Virtue is always as well
in that which subsides in the bottom, as in that which is in the upper part of
the Vessel. For it is as the Soul in the Body of Man, which is every where at
the same time, and yet bounded or terminated in none.

This is the Ground of one Sophism of ours, (viz.) when we say, that in this
true Philosophical Fire there is no Sublimation; for the Fire is the Life, and
the Life is a Soul, which is not at all subject to the dimensions of Bodies:
Hence also it is, that the opening of the Glass, or cooling of the same during
the time of Working, kills the Life or Fire that is in this secret Sulphur, and
yet not one Grain of the matter is lost. The Elemental Fire then is that which
any Child knows how to kindle and govern, but it is the Philosopher only that
is able to discern the true inward Fire, for it is a wonderful thing which acts
in the Body, yet is no part of the Body. Therefore the Fire is a Celestial
Virtue, it is uniformed; that is, it is always the same until the period of its
Operation is come; and then being come to perfection, it acts no more, for
every Agent, when the end of its action is come, then rests.

Remember then, that when we speak of our Fire which sublimes not, that thou do
not mistake, and think that the moisture of the Compound which is within the
Glass, ought not to Sublime, for that it must do uncessantly; but the Fire that
sublimes not is the Metalline love, which is above, and below, and in all
places alike. Now then for a close to all that has been said, learn, and be
well advised what matter you take in hand, for an evil Crow lays an evil Egg,
as the Proverb has it; Let thy Seed be pure, and thy Matrix also pure, then
shall thou see a Noble Offspring: Let the Fire without be such, as in which
our Confections may play to and fro uncessantly, and this (in a few days) will
produce that which thou most longest for, the Crows Bill. Continue then thy
Decoction, and in an hundred and thirty days thou shall see the White Dove, and
in ninety days more the Sparkling Cherubim.

STAVE XII.
And these Two things be best, he adds anon,
For him that works the Alchymy to take:
Our Gold and our Silver therewith to make all one,
Wherefore I say, who will our Pearl and Ruby make,
The said Principles look that he not forsake:
For at the beginning, if the Principles be true;
And if so be by craft he can them also take,
In the end truly his work he shall not rue.

THus come we to the last Conclusion, which is, that if a Man's Operations be
Regular, and his Principles true, his end will be certain, (viz.) the Mastery.

O Fools and Blind that do not consider how each thing in the world has his
proper Cause and Progress in Operation; Think you, if a Seaman should with a
gallant Coach, intend to Sail to any place beyond Sea, he would not find his
attempt to be foolish; Or if with a Ship gallantly furnished, he should Row at
Random, he may not sooner stumble on an unfortunate Rock, then arrive at the
golden Coast: Such fools are they who seek our secret in trivial matters, and
yet hope to find the Gold of Ophir.

For the more exact Guiding of your Practice, take notice of these Twenty Rules
following.
Rule I.
Whatever any Sophister may suggest unto you, or you may read in any
Sophistical Author; yet let none take you from this ground, (viz.) That as the
end you look for is Gold: so let Gold be the subject on which you work, and
none other.

Rule II.
Let none deceive you with telling you, that our Gold is not common, but
Philosophical; for common Gold is dead, which is true: But as we order it,
there is made a quickening of it, as a grain of Corn in the Earth is quickened.

So then in our work, after six Weeks, Gold that was dead, becomes quick,
living, and spermatical; and in our composition, it may be called Our Gold,
because it is joined with an Agent that will certainly quicken it: So a
Condemned Man, is called a Dead Man, though at present living.

Rule III.
Besides Gold, which is the Body or Male, you must have another Sperm, which is
the Spirit and Soul; or Female, and this is Mercury, in Flux and Form like to
common Argent Vive, yet more clean and pure.

There are many, who instead of Mercury, will have strange Waters or Liquors,
which they style by the name of Philosophical Mercury; Be not deceived by them,
for what a Man sows, that he must look to reap: If thou shall sow thy Body in
any Earth, but that which is Metalline and Homogeneal to it; thou shall instead
of a Metalline Elixir, reap an unprofitable Calx, which will be of no value.

Rule IV.
Our Mercury is in substance one with common Argent Vive, but far different in
Form; For it has a Form Celestial, Fiery, and of excellent Virtue: and this
is the Nature which it receives by our Artificial Preparation.

Rule V.
The whole Secret of our Preparation, is, that thou take that Mineral which is
next of kin to Gold, and to Mercury; Impregnate this with Volatile Gold, which
is found in the reins of Mars, with this purify your Mercury until seven
times are past, then it is fitted for the Kings Bath.

Rule VI.
Yet know, that from seven times to ten, the Mercury is made better and
better, and is more active, being by each Preparation acuated by our true
Sulphur; which if it exceed in number of Preparations, becomes too fiery; which
instead of dissolving the Body, will Coagulate it self.

Rule VII.
This Mercury thus acuated, is after to be distilled in a Glass retort twice or
thrice; and that for this reason, because some Atoms of the Body may be in it,
which were insensibly left in the Preparation of the Mercury, afterward it is
to be cleansed well with Vinegar and Sal-armoniack, then is it fit for the work.

Rule VIII.
Choose your Gold for this work pure and clean from any mixture: if it be not so
when you buy it, make it so by Purgation; then let it be made fine, either by
Filing, Malleating, Calcining with Corrosives, or any other way, by which it
may be made most subtle.

Rule IX.
Now come to your mixture, in which take of the aforesaid Body so chosen and
prepared, one Ounce of Mercury, as is above taught animated, two Ounces or
three at the most, mix them in a Marble which may be warmed so hot as water
will heat it; grind both together till they be well incorporated, then wash the
mixture with Vinegar and Salt till it be very pure; And lastly, Dulcifie it
with warm water, and dry it carefully.

Rule X.
Know now, that whatever we say out of Envy, our way is none other, and we
protest, and will protest, that neither We, nor any of the Ancients knew any
other way; for it is impossible that our secret can be wrought by any other
Principles, or any other disposition then this. Our Sophism lies only in the
two kinds of Fire in our work: the Internal secret Fire, which is Gods
Instrument, has no qualities perceptible to man, of that Fire we speak often,
and seem yet to speak of the External heat; and hence arise among the unwary
many Errors. This is our Fire which is graduated, for the External heat, is
almost linear all the work, to the white work, it is one without alteration,
save that in the seven first days we keep the heat a little slack for
certainty and security sake, which an experienced Philosopher need not do.

But the Internal governing heat is insensibly graduated hourly, and by how
much that is daily vigorated by the continuance of Decoction, the Colors are
altered, and the Compound maturated: I have unfolded a main knot unto you, take
heed of being ensnared here again.

Rule XI.
Then you must provide a Glass Tun, in which you may perfect your work, without
which you could never do any thing; Let it be either Oval or Spherical, so big
in reference to your Compound, that it may hold about twelve times the quantity
of it within its Sphere, let your Glass be thick and strong, clear, and free of
flaws, with a neck about a Span or Foot long; In this Egg put your matter,
sealing the neck carefully, without flaw, or crack, or hole, for the least vent
will let out the subtle Spirit, and destroy the work.

You may know the exact Sealing of your Glass thus, when it is cold, put the
neck where it is sealed, into your mouth, and suck strongly; if there be the
least vent, you will draw out the Air, that is in the Vial, into your mouth,
which when you take the Glass from your mouth, is again sucked into the Glass
with a hissing, so that your ear may perceive the noise; this is an undoubted
trial.

Rule XII.
You must then provide your self with a Furnace, by wise men called an Athanor,
in which you may accomplish your work; nor will any one serve in your first
work; But such a one in which you may give a heat obscurely red at your
pleasure, or lesser, and that in its highest degree of heat, it may endure
twelve hours at the least.

This if you would obtain; Observe, First, that your nest be no bigger then to
contain your dish with about an Inch vacancy at the side where the Vent-hole of
your Athanor, is for the Fire to play.

Secondly, Let your Dish be no bigger then to hold one Glass with about an inch
thickness of Ashes between the Glass and side, remembering the word of the
Philosopher, One Glass, One Thing, One Furnace; for such a Dish standing with
the bottom level to the vent-hole, which in such a Furnace ought to be but one,
about three Inches Diameter, sloping upwards, will with the stream of Flame,
which is always playing to the top of the Vessel, and round about the bottom,
be kept always in a glowing heat.

Thirdly, If your Dish be bigger, your Furnace vent must be within a third
part, or a fourth as big as your Platter is Diameter, else it cannot be
exactly, nor continually heated.

Fourthly, If your Tower be above six Inches square at the Fireplace, you are
out of proportion, and can never do rightly as to the point of heat; For if you
cause it (if above that proportion) to stream with flame, the heat will be too
big: And if it stream not, it will not be big enough, or very hardly.

Fifthly, Let the top of your Furnace be closed to an hole which may but just
serve for casting in of Coals about three Inches Diameter or Square, which will
keep down the heat powerfully.

Rule XIII.
These things thus ordered, set in your Glass with your matter, and give Fire
as Nature requires, easy, not too violent; beginning there where Nature left.
Now know, that Nature has left your Materials in the Mineral Kingdom;
therefore though we take comparison from Vegetables and Animals; Yet you must
understand a Parallel in the Kingdom, in which the Subject you would handle is
placed: As for Instance, if I should Analogize, between the Generation of a
Man, and the Vegetation of a Vegetable, you must not understand, as though the
heat for one, were to be measured by the other; for we know, that in the ground
Vegetables will grow, which is not without heat, which they in the Earth feel,
even in the beginning of the Spring; yet would not an Egg be hatched in that
heat, nor could a man feel any warmth, but rather to him a numbing cold.

Since then you know that your work appertains all to the Mineral Kingdom; you
must know what heat is fit for Mineral Bodies; and may be called a gentle heat,
and what violent; First, now consider, where Nature leaves you, not only in the
Mineral Kingdom, but in it to work on Gold and Mercury, which are both
incombustible: Yet Mercury being tender, will break all Vessels, if the Fire be
over extreme; Therefore though it be incombustible, and so no Fire can hurt it,
yet also it must be kept with the Male Sperm in one Glass, which if the Fire be
too big, cannot be, and by consequence the work cannot be accomplished. So then
from the degree of heat that will keep Lead or Tin constantly molten, and
higher, so high as the Glass will endure without danger of breaking, is a
temperate heat; and so you begin your degrees of heat according to the Kingdom
in which Nature has left you.

As then the highest degree of heat which the root of a Tree feels in the
bowels of the Earth; is not by far comparable to the lowest degree of heat an
Animal has; So the highest degree of heat a Vegetable will endure without
burning, is too low for the first degree of Mineral heat as to our Work.

Rule XIV.
Know, that all your progress in this Work is to ascend in Bus and Nubi, from
the Moon up to the Sun; that is in Nubibus, or in Clouds: Therefore I charge
thee to sublime in a continual vapor, that the Stone may take Air, and live.

Rule XV.
Nor is this enough, but for to attain our permanent Tincture, the water of our
Lake must be boiled with the Ashes of Hermes Tree; I charge thee then to boil
night and day without ceasing, that in the troubles of the stormy Sea, the
Heavenly Nature may ascend, and the Earthly descend.

For verily, if we did not Boil, we would never name our work Decoction, but
Digestion; For where the Spirits only Circulate silently, and the Compound
below moves not by an Ebullition, that is only properly to be named Digestion.

Rule XVI.
Be not over hasty, expecting Harvest too soon, or the end soon after the
beginning: For if thou be patiently supported, in the space of fifty days at
the farthest, thou shall see the Crows Bill.

Many (says the Philosophers) do imagine our Solution to be an easy work; But
how hard it is, they can only tell, who have tried and made Experience: See
thou not a Grain of Corn, sow it, and after three days thou shall only see it
swelled; which being dried, is the Corn it was before: Yet thou can not say
it was not cast into its due Matri^x; for the Earth is its true place, but only
it wanted its due time to Vegetate.

But things of an harder Kernel lie in the ground a far longer time, as Nuts
and ^lumb stones, for each thing has its season; And this is a true sign of a
natural Operation, that it stays its season, and is not Precipitate: Do think
then, that Gold the most solid Body in the world? will change its Form in a
short time; Nay, thou must wait and wait until about the 40th. day utter
blackness be^^ns to appear; when thou see that, ^^en conclude thy Body is
destroyed, that (...), made a living Soul, and thy Spirit is ^ead, that is
Coagulated with the Body; ^ut till this sign of Blackness, both the ^old and
the Mercury retain their Forms and Natures.

Rule XVII.
Beware that thy Fire go not out, no ^ot for a moment, so as to let thy Mat^er
be cold, for so Ruin of the Work ^ill certainly follow..

By what has been said, thou may ga^^er, that all our work is nothing else
^ut an uncessant boiling of thy Com^^ound in the first degree of liquifying
^eat, which is found in the Metalline ^ingdom, in which the Internal Vapors
^^all go round about thy matter, in which fume it shall both die, and be
re^^ived.

Rule XVIII.
Know, that when the White appears, which will be about the end of Five Months,
that then the accomplishment of the White Stone approaches; Rejoice then, for
now the King has overcome Death, and is rising in the East with great Glory.

Rule XIX.
Then continue your Fire until the Colors appear again, then at last you shall
see the fair Vermillion, the Red Poppy^ Glorify God then, and be thankful.

Rule XX.
Lastly, you must boil this Stone in the same water, in the same proportion,
with the same Regimen, (only your Fire shall then be a little slacker) and so
you shall increase Quantity and Goodness at your pleasure.

Now the only God the Father of light, bring you to see this Regeneration of
the light, and make (...) to rejoice with him for ever hereafter in light^ Amen.
AN ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Author having wrote many Excellent Pieces on this Subject, not so much to
manifest himself an Adept (a^ many have done) as to benefit the World^ by his
Writings, himself professing, that ^^though the rest of his Adept Brethren ^ad
(as we may say enviously) sworn se^^ecie (contrary to their received Maxim ^f
doing all the good they may with this ^rge Talent so long as they live, and
^^nger if it might be,) yet had not he so ^worn, though they supposed it; for
he ^ad as himself confesses, an extraor^inary impulse of mind, to be helpful
to all ^^ncere searchers of this secret Art, (to use ^is own words) and to
stretch out his hand (...) such as are behind. Seeing therefore, that it was
the Authors own desire to ^enefit the World by his Labors, and that he gave
his consent to Mr. Starkey for Printing his Pieces, as appears in his Preface
to the Marrow of Alchimy; I know no reason wherefore his Writings should lie
concealed any longer: And great pity it was that Mr. Starkey did separate this
Author's Commentary upon Sir George Ripley's 12 Gates, which he did as I was
informed by one unto whom he gave the very Book from which he confessed he had
cut the last Six Gates; the Person demanding the reason wherefore he cut them
in sunder: he answered, that the World was unworthy of them; which nevertheless
he promised to give that Person a Transcript of, but did not, which is the
reason that they cannot yet be found; the loss of which is very much lamented*
Wherefore if any Gentleman has them by him, or any other piece of this Author,
It is humbly desired that they will send them to the Pelican in Little
Britain, London, that they may be Printed with the first Six Gates, which are
now in the Press: And that I may not be wanting to contribute what I can for
the discovery of this Author's Works, I here make bold to present the Reader
with a Catalogue of such Pieces as are noted to be writ by this Author under
the disguised name of Aeyraeneus Philalethes, part whereof are set down by Mr.
Starkey in his Preface aforenamed, and part are mentioned by the Author
himself, with several others, which he wrote (as he says) for his own
recreation, and afterward burned; which Author is acknowledged by all hands to
be an Englishman, and an Adept and supposed to be yet living, and traveling,
and about the age of 55 years, but his Name is not certainly known.

These Books in this Catalogue were written by Eirenaeus Philalethes, whereof
these 15. following are Printed.
(...) INtroitus apertus ad oc^lusum Regis Palatium, Amst. 1667. This is Re.
printed in Germany, with the Collection of Books called Musaeum Hermeticum of
the Edition 1677. in 4o (...) -- Idem in English, called Secrets Revealed,
Printed at London 1669. in 8o. being much more perfect than the Latin
Editions. (...) The Marrow of Alchymy, in two Poems or Parts, in English Verse,
Land. 1654. and 1655. (...) Ars Metallorum Metamorphosews, Amst. 1668. in 8o.
These are likewise in the aforesaid Edition of the Musaeum Hermeticum. Brevis
manuductio ad Rubinum Coelestem, Amst. 1668. in 8o. These are likewise in the
aforesaid Edition of the Musaeum Hermeticum. Fons Chymicae Philosophiae, Amst.
1668. in 8o. These are likewise in the aforesaid Edition of the Musaeum
Hermeticum. (...) Methodica Enarratio trium Gebri Medicinarum, Land. 1678. in
8o. (...) Vade-Mecum Philosophicum, sive breve manuductorium ad Campum Sophiae,
Land. 1678. in 8o. (...) Experimenta de praeparatione Mercurii Sophici. Land.
1678. in 8o. (...) A Commentary or Exposition upon Sir. G. Ripley's Epistle to
Edw. IV. King of England, Land. 1678. in 8o. (...) -- Idem upon Sir G. Ripley's
Preface to his Compound of Alchymy, Land. 1678. in 8o. 12. -- Idem upon the
first six Gates of his Compound of Alchymy, London 1678. in 8o. 13. -- Idem
upon the Recapitulation of his Compound of Alchymy, London 1678. in 8o. 14. --
Idem upon his Vision, London 1678. in 8o. 15. Experiments for the Preparation
of the Sophick Mercury, London 1678. in 8o.
These 13. following he wrote, but we cannot as yet find where the Copies are.
1. A Comment. or Exposition upon the last six Gates of Sir G. Ripley's
Compound of Alchymy. 2. -- Idem upon Sir G. Ripley's Erroneous Experiments. 3.
-- Idem upon Sir G. Ripley's Wheel. 4. -- Idem upon Arnold's Vltimum
Testamentu^ 5. Opus Elixeris Aurifici and Argentifici. 6. Brevis via ad vitam
longam, or Alchymy Tr^umphing. 7. Cabala Sapientum, or an Exposition upon the
Hieroglyphics of the Magi. 8. Elenchus Errorum in Art Chymica deviantium^ 9.
Elenchus Authorum potissimorum in Art Chymic^^ 10. An En^hiridion of
Experiments, togethe^ with a Diurnal of Meditations, in which we^^ many
Philosophical Receipts, declaring th^^ whole Secret; with an Aenigma at the
end. 11. Analysis Operis. 12. A Clavis to his Works. 13. Comments or
Expositions upon Flamm^^ Artephius, and Sendivogius. But these thre^ are rather
Quaeried, then affirmed to be wrot^^ by this Author.
AN EXPOSITION UPON Sir GEORGE RIPLEY's PREFACE.

Written by Aeyrenaeus Philalethes, ANGLUS, COSMOPOLITA.



LONDON, Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain.
MDCLXXVII.

An Exposition UPON THE PREFACE OF Sr GEORGE RIPLEY, Canon of Bridlington.
TO pass over his Prologue which is Adhortatory to the desirously studious of
this Art, and the beginning of the Preface, which is his Address to God, who is
the only Giver of Wisdom, to bestow upon him true Understanding, that he might
lead his sinful Life to the glory of him, being over-swayed from what he was
naturally, by him who is the Fountain of all Goodness; I shall take up his
Pattern for a Precedent rather of Imitation, than a Subject of Exposition.

And first, as touching those who shall bend themselves to this Science; Let
them resolve that they undertake a most admirable piece of Work, in which
(though far be it that I should think that God bestows upon any of us what we
enjoy for our own Merits, but of his free Grace, yet withal) let me exhort any
one who shall set his Studies this way, to address himself to the Author and
Fountain of Goodness for his help, that he may have grace to honor God in the
use of so great a Talent: For I persuade my self, that whomever God shall
appoint to be Heir of such a Talent, that he will give him a heart to improve
it aright; or else he will add to his Judgment for the abuse of so great a
Blessing.

For whoever shall be wanton and dissolute, and live without the fear of God,
what may he not do with such an Art? unless God restrain him, as certainly he
will, hiding this Secret from him, or making it to him a snare and trap to
betray his Life into the hands of covetous men of the World, as many have found
it by sad experience. Therefore the Lord give both me and thee that grace, that
he may be continually before our Eyes, The Alpha and Omega of our Thoughts,
Words and Actions: Even so Am^n.

In the Beginning, when thou made all of naught, a globous matter, and dark,
under confusion, by him the beginning, etc.
FIrst then cast thine Eyes upon the Works of God, and behold that work of his
hands: Consider how the glorious work of Creation was begun by him, even by
Christ, for whose sake this very Science is communicated unto the Sons of Men,
as Bernardus Trevisan witnesses, who in his Epistle to Thomas of Bononia,
says of this work, That it is done (Christi Gratia) for Christ's sake.

Consider how out of one Mass the Lord God by his powerful Command made all
things to appear that are in Heaven or in Earth; the heavenly Bodies with their
Influences above, and the earthly Matter below; which by the Rotation of the
Heavens produce all sublunary products, through the word of his Mouth.

Above all which and in all which God is, he is the Maker and the Lord of all,
above all, blessed for ever, who has purchased to himself a People, and
redeemed them, and they shall reign with him for ever and ever.

For as of one Mass was made all things, right so in our practice must it be.
APply all this to the work of this Mastery Analogically and Allegorically: for
as the Lord made all the works which we see, so he did lay them all under his
powerful word of Command, by which they continue to be what they are, and are
carried with an uniform motion to that first Pattern or Draught of things.

All our Secrets of one Image must spring.
AS then out of one mixed confused Mass all things had an actual existence
according to their several kinds, so out of one Image all these Secrets must
flow: Truth does not consist in Heterogeneity, but in Unity; for God is one,
and his works uniform; and the more Noble any thing is, the nearer to
Simplicity.

As in Philosophers Books, whosoever list to see.
TO this the Sentences of the Philosophers concur, as many as have truly
understood the Secret, as Morien often and plentifully witnesses, Geber,
Trevisan, and many others: The thing is but one in kind, though two in number;
and though more things are used, yet till they be all brought to an oneness of
Nature, they are not fit to enter into this work.

Our Stone is called the Lesser World.
ANd therefore our Stone is resembled to Man, who although he have a Wife
different from him in Sex, yet one with him in kind; in which sense it is
called the Microcosm, or Less World: for indeed, next to Man, who is the Image
of God, it is the true little System of the Great World: I shall not
particularize here how, for in its place it will fall in seasonably.

One and Three.
THis Stone is also called Trine or Trinity in Unity, from the Homogeneity of
the Matter, as Trevisan says: Our Stone is made of one Root, that is, of two
Mercurial Substances, etc. This Trinity is discerned in the Components; for
first there is the Body, which is Sol* and the Water of Mercury, in which
besides its Mercuriality, there is a spiritual seed of Sulphur, which is the
secret Fire. This is the Trinity, these are called the Body, the Soul, and the
Spirit; the Body is the dead Earth, which increases not without the celestial
Virtue; the Spirit is the Soul of our Air or Chameleon, which is also of a
twofold composure, yet made one inseparably; the Soul is the Bond of Mercury,
without which our Fire never appears, nor can appear, for it is naked, it
inhabits the Fiery-Dragon, and it yields his Soul to the true Saturnia, and is
embraced by it, and both become one together, bearing the stamp of the most
High, even the Oriental Lucifer, the Son of the Morning: This Soul is Chalyb's
Magical Volatile, and very tender, the true Minera of Sol, out of which Sol
naturally proceeds, which I my self know to be true, and have spoken of it in
my little Latin Treatise, called Introitus apertus ad occlusum Regis palatium:
This is true Sulphur, which is imbibed by the Mercuriality of Saturnia, and
notes it with the Regal Signet, and being united and revived into a Mineral
Water by the Mediation of Diana's Doves, it is the sharp Spirit which in the
Water moves the Body to putrefie. Thus is the Trinity proportionable, to wit,
three Natures in the first Mixture, the Work is carried an end to perfect
Complement distinctly, according to the Virtue of a Body, Soul, and Spirit: for
the Body would be never penetrative, were it not for the Spirit, nor would the
Spirit be permanent in its super-perfect Tincture, were it not for the Body;
nor could these two act one upon another without the Soul, for the Spirit is an
invisible thing, nor does it ever appear without another Garment, which Garment
is the Soul. In this it exercises its virtue: this Soul, as it is drawn from
the Saturnia, solid and dry, is named our Air, or rather the Chameleon, which
is an airy Body, changing its hue according to every Object it beholds, so our
Air is of an astonishing Nature, out of which I know all Metals may be drawn,
yea even Sol and Luna, without the Transmuting Elixir, of which in my little
Latin Treatise (which was the Congest of mine own experience) I spoke fully.

This Air being dissolved into Water Mineral, has in it two of our Trinity
united so really that in a short digestion the spiritual inhabiting invisible
Sulphur will without addition congeal the Mercury in which it is, and make a
visible congelated substance of Luna and then Sol.

Thus this Trinity is indeed Unity, one being Gold mature, fixed, and digested
in act, the other Gold volatile, white, and crude, yet (in posse) to be made
most fixed and solid by naked digestion. It is not then a delusion that
Philosophers speak and write, for trust me (Viderunt nudam sine vest Dianam;
sciens loquor) I know I speak true, which the Sons of Art do know, and can
testify with me.

Magnesia also.
THis Stone is by the Philosophers called their Magnesia, their Adrop, etc.
with many more names, and is indeed their Stone in the first true mixture of
the true matter; for it is the true seed, and will produce, with the
cooperation of external Fire, in a patient expectation of the time of Nature,
which is not long to him that understands it.

Of Sulphur and Mercury.
FOr that which is done by Nature in many years and ages, in the bowels of the
Earth, decocting Mercury alone, without addition; Art, to make the work short,
first impregnates Mercury with a spiritual seed of Sulphur, by which it becomes
powerful in the dissolution of Metals, and then adds to it mature Sulphur, by
which the work is shortened; and out of these two Parents of one Root is
brought forth a Noble Son of a Regal Offspring, that is not simply Gold, but
our Elixir, ten thousand times more precious.

Proportionate by Nature most perfectly.
YEt all this Work of the Artist is only to help Nature; we can do no more, yea
we have professed and will profess, that we do only administer unto Nature
herein: for all the Works of God are entire, we can but behold them and admire
them; and therefore we seek our Principals where Nature is, and amend Nature in
its own Nature. Nor do we make the simple believe, which is the Trade of
Sophisters, that we by our Extractions and Manual Operations upon Vegetables,
Minerals, Urines, Hair, or the like, intend to make our so highly prized
Elixir; but out of such things in which Nature has put it, we by Art do make
it appear by revealing what was hidden, and hiding what was manifest.

But many one marvelleth, and marvel may, and museth on such a mavelous thing.
WHereas those who work upon other matters than the true, do betray their
ignorance herein most foully, that they do not consider the possibility of
Nature, but work after their Fancy; as though out of combustible substances
filthy in their nature, and made up of Heterogeneities, might be produced a
pure perfect Metallic Substance, by reason of its unseverable Unity
invincible, and by virtue of its transcendent Excellency cleansing and fixing
all leporous and fugitive bodies in the Mineral Kingdom, and reducing them to
the Anatical proportion of perfectly digested Sol or Luna, according to the
quality of the Medicine. When therefore their Principles are not sound, their
Conclusion is always deceitful, and then they not knowing Nature in her
Operation, but interpreting the words of the crafty and envious Philosophers,
according to the Letter, do stand admiring at the Unconformity of their Work to
the Promises of the Philosophers, at least as they understand their Books; they
admire what this Stone is, if it be a Truth, or a Conceit; and why they (as
well as any) do not attain it if possible: Such meditations usually fill the
minds of unsuccessful Alchymists, who though they be (as they esteem
themselves) very Judicious, yet cannot stumble upon this unhappy Stone.

What is our Stone, etc.
THey marvel at the uncouth difficulty of the thing, nor can they almost tell
what to judge of what they read; forasmuch as all Philosophers say it is a very
easy thing.

For Fowls and Fishes to us do it bring, every Man it has: And it is in every
place, in thee, in me, etc.
ANd in very deed the Ancient Wise Men have so written, and do still write the
same; as to wit, That it is found in a Dunghill, according to Morien* and for
the easiness of the charge, they all write plentifully; so that in respect of
time and cost, Artephius and Flammel say it is but the play of Children and
work of Women; and therefore one Excellent Philosopher, writing of this
Mastery, titles his Treatise, Ludus Puerorum; that is, Childrens Play.

To this I answer, That Mercury it is I wis.
YEt trust me, though the wise men thus write, and it be true, there is
notwithstanding something to be added to their Sentence, according as the
Author of Novum Lumen well observed, as namely, That this Art is easy to him
that understands it, as Artephius plainly expresses; but to him that is
ignorant of it, there is nothing can appear so hard; The Wise Man, says
Sendivogius, finds it in a Dunghill, but the Fool cannot believe that it is in
Gold. I for my part (through the great mercy of God to me an unworthy and
unthankful Creature) I know the Art to be true, and not that only, but also
very easy; and I wonder that men of so great parts have studied for it so long
in vain; only this I am confident of, it is the gift of God; nor is it in him
that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that gives mercy: In which
respect I am bold, to the glory of God, to confess that I have the Art, and
have Natures Operations in these so hidden Secrets, before mine eyes at this
present writing, which I see hourly with admiration of the infinite Glory, in
the beholding of such a great Glory in the Creatures, which, trust me, will
ravish the Beholder, to see such a despised Infant as our Mercury is, to grow
into so strong a Hero, which the World cannot purchase.

But not the Common, called Quicksilver by name.
YEt the difficulty is not over when once it is known that the whole Secret
consists in Mercury; for what more frequent among the Sophisters than to cry,
Our Mercury, etc. and yet in the Work of Nature they are as blind as Moles? The
cause is, for that Nature has produced a Mineral Juice in the bowels of the
Earth, which does answer to most of the Philosophical Descriptions of their
Water; as namely, that it is mineral, quick, current, without humectation,
ponderous, and the like; which when the vulgar Alchymists read, they apply it
to this naughty Mercury, which for inward Qualities has nothing in it like
ours.

Some there are, who trusting to the Sentence of most of the Wise Men who have
written concerning this Art, do reject Mercury vulgar in word, when as indeed
they dote as much upon it as others, whenas by their mock-purgations they
handle Mercuries diverse ways by Sublimation, Precipitation, Calcination Manual,
even to a black substance, like to Soot or Lamp-black, by distillation from
sundry Faeces, after grinding with Vinegar, by Calcination with Waters-fort, by
Lotions innumerable, changing Mercury into sundry forms, and after quickening
him: By all which Operations they imagine themselves secure of the Secret of
our Mercury, whenas all such ways indeed are but Sophisms; and yet Mercury so
abused is one and the same vulgar Mercury.

So that upon this Rock more have stumbled than upon any other, and yet will
stumble, till they know how to distinguish our Mercury from Common, and our
preparations from that of the vulgar Sophisters, which have no likeness one to
another.

But Mercury, without which nothing being is.
FOr our Mercury is Essential and Radical to our Body, and partakes of the
nature of it entirely, and therefore it is said to be that Mercury without
which nothing is; for all things are distinguished by Philosophers by three
Principles, (although some Simples have not three, but only by Analogy) among
which the most essential is Mercury, for the humidity of all things concrete is
called their Mercury, which is most entire to all things, forasmuch as all
things owe their beginning unto Water.

So then as the proper specific Mercury of all things is so Essential unto
them that nothing is without it, so our Mercury is so consubstantial with our
Body, that it is one in kind with that Mercury of which it was by coagulation
concrete, which vulgar Mercury is not; and therefore the Body is incrudate by
this Mercury, and sends forth its Seed by mixture with it, through the
cooperation of requisite temperate external heat.

All Philosophers record and truly sain the same.
TRuly this I could confirm by infinite Testimonies of Philosophers, since
there never wrote any who was indeed a true Artist, but he has affirmed the
same: Geber, Artephius, Haly, Ro^^nus, Flammel, Sendivogius, the Author of the
Rosary, Trevisan, with many others, which would be very tedious to name.

So that indeed this Work of mine I wrote not because enough has not been
written before, for I do but echo to the Voice of all Philosophers, who have
left upon record such clear Testimonies of the cooperation of Art and Nature
herein, that if Wit were capable of this attainment, the Art would have been
common ere now; and I do verily admiringly adore the Wisdom of God herein, that
an Art so true, so natural, so easy, so much desired and sought after, should
yet ^e so rarely found, that the generality of Men, Learned and Unlearned, do
laugh at it as a Fable: it is therefore most certainly the Gift of God, who is
and ever will be the Dispenser of it, according to his good pleasure.

But simple Searchers puts them in blame, saying they hid it.
MOst injurious are they therefore to the well-deserving Philosophers, who
because they cannot understand their Writings, and through the
misunderstanding of the possibility of Nature, do commit foul mistakes in
their operations, and therefore reap a ridiculous Harvest, they then blame the
falsity of Authors, or at least accuse their difficult writing, not considering
that Philosophers owe them nothing, and whatever they write for the information
of the studious, it is not of debt, nor yet of Covetousness, for they possess
the greatest Treasure in the World; nor lastly of Ambition, for many suppress
their names: it is of Love therefore, and of desire to be helpful to the
Studious; which Love to requite with reproaches, is a ^^ken of great
ingratitude.

Moreover, it is to be understood that the most wise GOD has a ruling hand
herein, and all Sons of Art have their Commission as it were given them; they
write and teach according to that permission which the Creator of all things
has given them. I may speak it experimentally, that when my self have had one
intent, I have been so over-swayed with unpremeditated thoughts in the very
writing, that I have taken notice of the immediate hand of God therein, by
which I have been carried beyond what I intended.

And truly it is not our intent to make the Art common to all kind of men, we
write to the deserving only; intending our Books to be but as Way-marks to such
as shall travel in these paths of Nature, and we do what we may to shut out the
unworthy: Yet so plainly we write, that as many as God has appointed to this
Mastery shall certainly understand us, and have cause to be thankful unto us
for our faithfulness herein. This we shall receive from the Sons of this
Science, whatever we have from others: therefore our Books are intended for the
former, we do not write a word to the latter.

But they be blameworthy which be no Clerks, and meddle with Philosophy.
MOreover, we write not our Books for the information of the illiterate, as
though any vulgar mechanic Distiller, Alchymist, or Sophister, should readily
carry away the Golden Fleece; or as though any covetous man, who makes Gain his
utmost end, should readily gather the Apples of the Hesperides; nor yet that
any, though Learned, should by once or twice overly and slight reading (as the
Dogs lap the Water of Nilus) straightway be made a Philosopher: Nay verily,
the majesty of this Science forbids so great impiety; it is the gift of God,
and not of Men: Our Books are for those who have been or intend to be
conversant about the search of Nature; we hint the way; prayer to God and
patient persisting in the use of means, must open these Doors. Let therefore
profound Meditation, accompanied with the Blessing of God, Furnaces, Coals,
Glasses, and indefatigable pains, be thy Interpreters, and let them serve for
Commentaries upon our Writings. So I did, so I advise thee; and the Blessing of
God attend all studious virtuous Searchers in this way.

But though it Mercury be.
YEt is not the knot untied, nor difficulties overcome, when once a man has
learned to sing this thredbare Song in Philosophy, Est in Mercurio quicquid
quaerunt sapientes: for what Sophister who cannot make so great a clatter in
these general terms as a son of Art? the greatest difficulty is to know what
this Mercury is, that is so desirable and effectual.

Yet wisely understand wherein it is, and where thou shall it seek.
THerefore let me advise every studious Searcher of this hid Science, to
consider warily with himself what he seeks and would find; nor that only, but
in what he would find it: for trust me it is not in this Science as some do
imagine, that our Arcanum may be made out of any thing, nor yet out of any base
thing: But in the knowing of the true Principle, consists the first true step
to Perfection, according to the Poet, Dimidium facti qui been coepit habet.

Else I counsel thee take not this work in hand.
BUt he who knows not this our Ocean in which our Water has its flux and
reflux, and our Fountain out of which he may draw this Water for his use, let
him forbear this, as a most dangerous Science, for he may only expect loss in
it, but no profit.

For Philosophers flatter Fools with fair speech.
NOr let any expect comfortable Direction in our Books, who know not the true
Matter, nor the true Keys by which our Matter is brought forth from darkness
into the light; for verily though we write for the inlightning of a son of Art,
yet also for the fatal blinding of all such Owls and Bats who cannot behold the
light of the Sun, nor can endure the splendour of our Moon. To such we propound
rare tricks, suiting to their sordid fancy: to the covetous, an easy way
without expense, in an inconsiderable time; to the lazy Book-men, a play,
without tedious toil; to the unstable, rash, hasty multiplicity of
Distillations.

But listen to me, for truly I will thee teach.
BUt to thee, supposing thy qualifications to be Honesty, Secrecy,
Studiousness and Indefatigableness, we will show the Truth; yet so, that it may
be hid from the Vulgar, yet plain enough to an industrious attentive Reader.

Which is this Mercury most profitable.
PHilosophers have hidden much under the Homonymium of Mercury, so that it is
no hard matter for those that peruse their Books to mistake them; yea as many
as God will have excluded from this Art, shall certainly mistake.

For many things are by them named by the name of Mercury, which are altogether
useless in this Mastery; and many Processes have they deciphered which
themselves never did. I for my part shall not tread in their metaphorical
steps, but shall herein heartily follow the path of profound Ripley, whose Text
I annex to my Discourse as I go, because it is an elaborate Piece, in excellent
Method; on whom I do not so much comment, for I write mine own experimental
Knowledge, but rather intend this Treatise for a Light to that excellent Light
in Alchymy; these Labors of mine being entire of themselves: Only to help thee
to my utmost, I have confined my Discourse to his Method, which I might (as
other Philosophers have done) have scattered here and there confusedly.

Being to thee nothing deceiveable.
AS then I have chosen Ripley's Method to follow, so will I imitate his
Ingenuity, and do solemnly profess not to be deceiveable to thee in any thing,
though I shall not so unfold the Mysteries, that bare reading shall suffice to
show the unveiled Diana.

Know therefore assuredly, that when the Philosophers say, That their Matter is
every where, etc. This they speak only for the blinding of all such who taking
the Philosophers meaning according to the bare sound of their words, do reap
Trifles instead of Treasures. I shall therefore let you understand that this
subject of the Philosophers is considered either in reference to its Matter, or
formal Virtue; in reference to the former, it is a concrete of Water, as all
other Compounds are; in respect of the latter, it participates of a Celestial
Virtue, and that in a high degree in both respects. It is said to be in every
place: for the original matter, which is Water, passes equally through the
whole Family of Concretes: and for the celestial Influence, it is so universal
that nothing is hidden from the heat of it: so that indeed in this sense it is
said to be every where. Moreover, the Stone being the System of the great
World, does in some way or other represent every thing which is or can be
perceived by man; I mean in reference to some or other operation, color or
quality, and therefore the Wise have described it almost by all things
imaginable, for to every thing in some or other circumstance it has
resemblance.

It is more near in some things than in some.
YEt to speak properly for information, and not to conceal the Secret, we
profess that there is but one kind in which our Stone is found, and in number
two: understand me not as the Philosopher finds things in his first laborious
Preparation, for so one of the two subjects which being of one kind enter the
supernatural work of Generation of our fiery Stone, I say our crude Sperm flows
from a Trinity of Substances in one Essence, of which two are extracted out of
the Earth of their Nativity by the third, and then become a pure milky Virgin*
like Nature, drawn from the Menstru^^^ of our sordid Whore.

Take heed therefore what I to thee write.
ANd now I call God to witness that I will show you a great Mystery: our Stone
is in one part of a perfect nature, which we would exalt into a more then most
perfect, and for this end we stand in need of our true Fountain, which I have
elsewhere described, and shall not now repeat: This Fountain has three
Springs, and these are three Witnesses which ^estifie to the Artist of the
truth of his proceedings; these are the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, and
these three agree in one; the Water is a Mercurial Bond, which the Sophisters
can behold so far as the outward shell reaches, but the wise man can behold
his hidden secret Center: the Blood is of our Green Lion, which is indeed the
greenest or rawest of the three: for it has no manner of Metalline Sulphur, no
not a grain, and therefore is Totally Volatile, and it is more raw than the
common Water, and yet it is called the Blood, for a most secret reason, because
it is the feat of the Life, which is the Spirit, as Blood in man is the seat of
his Life; yea the Spirit by this Soul of our Green Lion, is made manifest, and
is united to it, so that though it be very green or unripe, yet that inhabits
it, which is both pure and ripe, and can and will digest it with the Water, and
make both become life with life: Now the Spirit is nothing else but a Chaos,
the Wonder of the Wonders of God, which every man almost has, and knows it
not, because as it appears to the World it is compact in a vile despised form;
yet is it so useful, that in humane Affairs none can want it: to the
Philosopher it appears united to the Blood, that is, of our Green Lion, which
truly is not a Lion till the spirit be joined with it, and then it is made able
to devour all Creatures of its kind.

And these three agree in one, they are not absolutely one, mark that; our Fire
is not of the matter, and yet it is united with the matter, as if it were of
one form with it; and there is an agreement in one, though not a radical union;
for the spirit (which is the Fire) is separable from the Water and the Blood;
and then is our Lion actually Green, but cease then to be our Lion, but is
the true matter to multiply Emeraulds more glorious than natural.

For if to thee Knowledge never come,
Therefore yet shall thou me not twite.

ANd now indeed if any be ignorant, let him be ignorant; I know not what more
to say, and not transgress the silence of Pythagoras. I have told you that our
matter is twofold, crude and fixed; the fixed is by Nature perfected to our
hands, and we need only to have it made more then most perfect, which Nature
alone could never perform; nor is there any thing that can thus exalt
Tinctures, but our dissolving Water, which I told you flows from three
Springs; the one is a common Well at which all draw, and of which Water many
use; this Well has in it a Saturnine drossiness, which make the Waters
unuseful; these frigid superfluities are purged by two other Springs, through
which the Water of this Well is artificially caused to run: these Springs make
but one Well, whose Waters appear dry, the humidity being sealed; the Well it
self is surrounded with an Arsenical Wall, the slimy bottom abounds with the
First Ens of Mineral Salt and Sulphur, which acuate the Water of the first
Well, whose primary quality is Coldness; being thus acuated, it becomes so
powerful a Menstruum, and so pleasant to the Metals, that for its peculiar
Virtue it is chosen for to be the Bath of the Sun and Moon.

For I will truly now thee excite to understand well Mercuries three.
BUt because one Book never is sufficient in this Mastery, to discover all that
is to be known, and other Authors write variously of Mercury: Attend further
what I have to say to thee concerning this point.

We have in our work properly three Mercuries, of which one is to be by the
Philosopher prepared, of which I have spoken; and this being joynd with the
perfect Body, and set to digest, the Glass is shut, and then in this first
Composition is the Matter called Rebis, that is, (two things) to wit in Number,
for you may yet separate each from other in its entire nature.

These two being joined, do operate so within the Vessel till the Compound
become a black Powder, which is then called the Ashes of the Platter.

This Powder relenteth into a black Broth, which is called Elixir, or Water
extracted by Elixation, which is reiterate Liquefaction.

This Elixir is divided into a more subtle part, which is called Azoth, and
the grosser part is called Leton, which is by Azoth washed and whitened.

In Rebis the Matters are confused, in Elixir they are divided, and in Azoth
they are conjoined with an inseparable union.

The Keys which of this Science be.
THese Menstruums or Mercuries are the very Keys of this Science: The first is
the Philosophers Key, the other two are Natures Keys.

Reymund his Menstrues does them call.
THey are called by the wise men Menstrues, in three respects: first for the
secrecy of them; as those Lunary Tributes of Women are hid from common view,
so these Mercuries from vulgar Searchers. Secondly for the Prognostics of
them; as those in Women betoken maturity to conceive, so these are called
Menstrues because they are fit for procreation. Thirdly in regard of the office
of them; as those in Women are accounted nutritive for the Embrion, so our
Child is nourished by these to perfect age and strength.

Let me add a fourth reason, and that is, in respect of the time; the
Philosophical Preparation will hardly give thee thy first Menstruum fit for thy
use in less than a month. And after conjunction thy first Menstruum will begin
to hold of the nature of the Body in another month, and then thou shall see a
show of the second Menstruum; but wait till another month, and thou shall see
thy second Menstruum complete; then yet wait a third month, and thou shall see
a show of the third Menstruum, which in the fourth month will perfectly
exuberate, and then with it thou shall soon see perfected Sulphur of Nature,
for it is Fire of Nature; and in this first Exaltation is the white Stone
perfected.

Without them truly no Truth is done.
HE then that knows not the Secret of our Menstruals, let him forbear the
practice of the Work, for verily he may expect nothing but a sophistical
Delusion instead of the true Work of Nature: He is like a man that would enter
an inaccessable Castle without a Key, or shoot in a Bow without a string.

But two of them be superficial.
NOw that you may know our Secrets exactly, we shall faithfully discover unto
you our Experience, as cordially as a Brother may declare to a Brother; and
shall reveal what I never found yet revealed in any Author.

There are in our Mercury three Mercurial Substances, which may well be called
Menstrues, the one the more gross part, (which though it be a Water, yet it
being the most palpable part, and visible, may be termed the Body of the Water:
the last is a Fiery Form, which is the Blood of Cadmus; this is a real
invisible form, which is essentially and formally Sol Volatile: the second is
the mean Soul, which Philosophers without Equivocation call Saturn's Child; the
middle substance of these three, are made into one wonderful Mercury, which
has not its like in the world.

Now for the superficiality of the two first Menstrues or Mercuries, and the
essentiality of the third, know and understand, for our speech will be very
mysterious: Know I say, what it is to be superficial, and what essential:
Essence you know is invisible, and more formal then material, which does
actuate the matter, and ripens it; but that which is superficial is visible,
and may be seen, and is more material and passive: Now those two first which
are superficial, are the Water and the Blood, the essential Menstrue is the
Spirit, which all are in one; yet distinguished in number, though not in kind.

The third Essential to Sun and Moon.
SO then two are material passive substances, which are united in our sophical
Mercury; the third is an active essence which is hid in our Mercury, which is
essential to Sun and Moon, because it is a Fire, which is Sol volatile; and as
the Artist may govern this Mercury, it will digest the passive Principles
either into Sol or Luna, at the Philosophers pleasure.

Their Properties I will declare right soon.
I Shall by and by in its place describe to you all the Properties of these
three Menstrues, when I come to it; in the mean time take notice that by this
Mercury in which are three Mercuries, or Menstrues, the perfect Bodies will be
calcined, and then dissolved into Mercury, which is not then so properly called
a Menstrue, for it is the Fruit it self, called Azoth, or Virgins Milk; which
is a digestion beyond the Menstrues.

And Mercury of Metals essential,
Is the Principle of our Stone material.

THe Bodies when they are dissolved do transmute the foresaid Mercuries by
their own ferment, into their own nature, for the Fire of Nature assimilates
all that nourishes it to its own likeness; and then our Mercury or Menstrue
vanishes, that is, it is swallowed up in the Solary Nature, and all together
make but one universal Mercury, by intimate union, and this Mercury is the
material Principle of the Stone; for before our Mercury (as it was compounded
of three Mercuries) had in it two which were superficial, and the third
essential to Sol and Luna only, not to the Stone: for Nature would produce
these two out of it, by artificial decoction: but when the perfect Bodies are
dissolved, they transmute the Mercury (that dissolved it) and then there is no
more repugnancy in it, then is there no longer a distinction between
superficial and essential, but all is become essential* And this is that one
matter of the Stone, that one thing which is the subject of all Wonders.

In Sol and Luna our Menstrues are not seen.
WHen thou art come to this, then shall thou no more discern a distinction
between the Dissolver and the Dissolved; for the Water shall neither ascend nor
descend, go out nor in alone, but the Fire of Nature shall accompany it, and
the color of the mature Sulphur, which is unseparably joined, shall tincture
thy Water.

It appears not but by effect to sight.
SO that thou shall never see them severed one from the other, but shall
discern them by the effect, and by the eye of thy mind more then of thy body
Therefore says the Philosopher, Azoth and Fire are sufficient for thee in the
middle and end, but not in the beginning, for then they are not our Mercury,
that is our universally united Mercury. But in the first days of the Stone,
there appear four Elements, of which three are in the Mercury sublimed, and one
in Sol, which is counted all for Earth till it be dissolved, and then it
fermenteth the Mercury, and makes the three qualities of it, which it has,
drawn from three substances to unite into one Mercury which has all in it one
essential property, and that is Solary, which first will show the Moon in the
full, and is the true one matter of all our Secrets, our one Image out of which
springs white and red, not bare Sol and Luna, as will spring out of our
Mercury, which we prepare with our hands, but the white and red Elixirs, which
show that this Mercury which Nature has made in the Glass, without our help,
is far beyond that Mercury which we prepared with a laborious toil.

This is the Stone of which we mean,
Who so our Writings conceives aright.

ANd verily he that has well studied our Books shall understand that this
general one Mercury which we call Azoth, is indeed our Stone, which wants
only digestion, for it is inseparably united, not in a Dyprative Conjunction,
which is barely a mixture of the Sun with our Mercury; or Triptative, which is
a mixture and union of the Body, Soul, and Spirit, which is before
Putrefaction* but Tetraptive, which is the Anatization of qualities, which is
the first degree of the white Stone, which will then grow higher and higher,
till the Moon come up to the full.

It is a Soul and Substance bright.
THis Stone or Virtue multiplicative is not in relation to the matter, but the
form, which does make the matter to receive and after impress Tinctures: for
who could believe that Sol, in which the virtue is but unary, I mean only
sufficient for it self, should by the addition of our Mercury, which in
reference to its material parts, is below the degree of Sol, and needs
digestion, and that only to maturate it to the height of Sol, I say that by the
mixture of those two Venerial Tinctures, should be multiplied in a manner
infinitely.

Of Sol and Luna a subtle Influence.
WEre it not that this Tincture which in the Mercury is Sol and Luna, were as a
Soul, that is, a spiritual thing, it were impossible; it is therefore the very
Dos faecunditatis which is in Minerals (which does appear in their Lunary and
Solary Tinctures) which was put and planted on and in them, in the first
Benediction of (Crescite and Multiplicamini) which increasing is in some things
juxta quantitatem: This is in quality.

Whereby the Earth receives resplendence.
SO then the matter of Minerals is a dead passive thing, in which there is
included a Light which is clothed (vitali Aura aetheria) as I may speak; this
form of Light is it which does actuate and specificate or determine the matter;
and this splendour or Light is in all Metals, Sol or Luna, which are conspicuous
more eminently in those two perfect Bodies Gold and Silver, but are in other
Mineral Bodies more Clouded and Eclipsed with an earthly faeculent
interposition between the fulgor and the superfluities, which is the
Imperfection of such Bodies; and is accompanied with a rawness and inconstancy
in the Fire, the Impure carrying away the Pure.

For what is Sol and Luna, says Avicen*
But Earth which is pure White and Red?

SO then Sol and Luna is more formal then material; for the matter is a gross
Terrene Substance, but the form of Light purifying the Substance, is a most
subtle spiritual thing which does ennoble the grossness of the matter by a
Fire-abiding Tincture.

Take from it the said Clearness, and then That Earth will stand but in little
stead.
BUt if this Tincture could be separated from the pondus of the matter, the
remainder would be an unprofitable Terrestriety: Our work therefore is for to
advance this Light by exaltation in the matter; which as it in its simplicity
is but in unity, so it may be brought to a Virtue millenary, and gradually so
exalted, that the matter would seem to be quite swallowed up of the form; and
yet in this exaltation it is not the moles or pondus that is the Solary or
Lunary Virtue, but a Light whose multiplication is not in the increase of
pondus, but in the circulation of Natures, till the Heavenly illuminate the
Earthly with an immediate Beam, all interposition being removed out of the way.

The whole Compound is called our Lead*
FOr to attain this admirable multiplication Philosophers have found out a most
subtle yet very natural Composition, which has been not a little sought for
by many: this the wise Ancients, both to describe the Fountain of these
Mysteries, as also to hide the Secret from the unworthy, have mystically called
their Lead.

The quality of Clearness from Sol and Luna does come.
THis Lead, so called from the appearing baseness of its original, is
notwithstanding of an admirable power, for it contains the Bath for Sol and
Luna; that is, the Sun and Moon enter into it, and send out their Tinctures
into it, which it receives, and like to a fertile Soil ennobleth it an hundred
and an hundred fold.

These are our Menstrues, both all and some.
THus have I in general given you a description of our Menstrues, which are
three, Acetum, Elixir, and Azoth; which I shall now particularly describe.

Bodies with the first we Calcine naturally* perfect.
THe first Menstrue we call our sharp Vinegar, with infinite other names, which
it will be tedious for to recite; and with this is made our Magical Solution of
Sol; this, says Sendivogius, is (Menstruum mundi in sphaera Lunae toties
rectificatum ut possit calcinare Solemn.) In this, says the noble Author of the
Hermetical Arcanum, is made Eclipsis Solis and Lunae in Cauda Draconis: this
is, as Artephi^^ says, the only Instrument in the World for our Art: for it
causes the Sun to putrefie; that is, it loses its hard compaction, and makes
it to be an impalpable Powder, as says the truth-telling Flammel. In this
Calcination, as all Authors testify, and our own Experience has taught us,
Natures are united, Colors are mingled, and one holds of the other, and this
is the period of the first Menstruum, which ends in this Circulation.

But none which been unclean.
THis Blackness many erroneously conceive to be uncleanness, but it is not so,
for it is only the Sepulcher of our King; in which, though he seem to have lost
what he was, yet from hence he shall arise what he never was before.

Except one.
ANd verily there is nothing of an unclean nature that enters our Composition
except one thing, which is the Instrument moving the Gold to putrify; and in
regard that it does naturally incline the Body to putrify, and is as it were
the very grave of it, it is called by some Philosophers Aqua foetida, and by
some Mortis Immundities; yet indeed it is not in its own nature unclean, but
made pure, as pure as the Art of the Artist can make it with the help of
Nature* joining Consanguinty with Consanguinity.

Which is usually Named by Philosophers their Lion Green.
THis hidden Body, or rather Chaos, the Philosophers have highly extolled and
deeply concealed, but they usually call it their Green Lion, which many
mistaking apply to Venus, and some to Vitriol, which is all one in a manner,
Vitriol being only Copper corroded by an embryonated Salt; but Fools, says
Ripley (in his Errors) call it the Green Lion. I shall discover this Subject to
you, so far as I dare, in this following Song.

The Learned SOPHIES FEAST.
Whosoever would lasting and eternal Fame
Deserve, Learn thou the Lion Green to tame.
But this before you can by Art attain,
To study him to know thou must be fain;
Nor is it, trust me, for a stupid Fool,
Nor yet for one brought up in vulgar School.
I shall him therefore lively out pourtray,
Lest from this Banquet you go lean away.
This Song I style the Learned Sophies Feast,
Prepare your self to come a worthy Guest:
With Mind attentive to my words give heed,
Lest you, instead of Meat, on Fancies feed.
This horrid Beast, which we our Lion call,
Has many other Names, that no man shall
The truth perceive, unless that God direct,
And on his darkened Mind a Light reflect.
It Is not because this Subject does consist
Of Animal Components (he that list
May well conceive) that we do therefore use
The name of Beasts; nor is it to abuse
The Readers; he whoever so does think,
With stupid Sots himself does hereby link.
But it is because of the transcendent force
It has, and for the rawness of its source,
Of which the like is no where to be seen,
That it of them is named the Lion Green.
Now listen, and I shall to you disclose
The Secret, which times past has like a Rose
Been hedged so on every side with Briars,
That few could pluck it at their hearts desires
There is a substance of Metalline Race,
If you the matter view, whose louring face
A Sophister would at first sight so scare,
That he it to approach would never dare;
The form that^s visible is very vile,
And does Metalline Bodies so defile,
That none to see it could be brought to think
That thence should spring bright Phoebu^ Pearly Drink:
And yet, O strange! a wonder to relate,
At this same Spring naked Diana sat.
Who horned Acteon for his ventrous peeping,
This Spring two dreadful Beasts have in their keeping;
Which drive away rash Searchers to their woe,
Them to inchant, the Art who do not know.
Yet further for to answer your desire,
I say this subject never felt the fire
Of Sulphur Metalline, but is more crude
Then any Mineral, which does delude
The unwary, and in Fire fugitive
It Is found the impure away the pure does drive;
And its Components are, A Mercury
Most pure, though tender, with a Sulphur dry
Incarcerate, which does the flux restrain,
And as in shackles does the same detain.
This Sulphur with malignant qualities
Does so the Mercury infect which with it lies
That though they have no fundamental union,
Yet hereby is debarred the sweet communion
Which otherwise would surely intercede
Between this Virgin-Nymph, which we call Lead
And her dear Sister which in Silver streams
Runs down abundantly, then should the beams
Of bright Apollo cause the Dews which fall
From these commixed Waters, from the tall
Aspiring Mountains, gliding through the Vales,
Fire to conceive of Nature, which avails
To warm the Bath for Sol, in which he may
Descend and wash, and with fair Phebe play,
Till flesh and youth renewing, they be able
To shine with glory, aye multiplicable.
Know then this Subject, which the sure Base
Of all our Secrets is, and it uncase;
And choose what thou shall find of greatest price,
Leave Sophisters, and follow my advice:
Be not deluded, for the Truth is one,
It Is not in many things, this is our Stone.
At first appearing in a Garb defiled,
And to deal plainly, it is Saturn's Child:
His price is mean, his venom very great,
His constitution cold, devoid of heat.
Although it is mixed with a Sulphur, yet
This Sulphur is combustible, to get
Another Sulphur Metalline and pure,
And mix with the Mercurial part be sure.
This Sulphur in the House of Aries seek,
There shall you find it, and this is the Greek
Alcides, which with Jason Journey took
To Colchos, this is it which never Book
As yet revealed, and yet I will proceed,
And greater Mysteries unfold with speed.
Our Subject it is no ways malleable,
It is Metalline, and its color sable,
With intermixed Argent, which in veins
The sable Field with glittering Branches stains.
The pure parts from the impure, thou shall never
With Fire or Water for this work dissever
Nor with the hardest Iron dig it thence,
For Steel against this affords no defense.
So easily as any little Boy
A Giant can suppress, this can destroy
Alcides Breast Plate, with his Target stout,
And put opposing Armies to the rout
Of Swords and Spears, O wondrous force, and yet
The Sages this have seen, when they did sit
In Council, how this Fury they might tame,
Which (as unparalled) they then did name
Their Lion Green, they suffered him to prey
On Cadmus Sociates, and when the fray
Was over, they with Dian's Charms him tied
And made him under Waters to abide,
And washed him clean, and after gave him Wings
To fly, much like a Dragon, whose sharp Springs
Of fiery Water the only way was found
To cause Apollo his Harp-strings to sound.
This is the true Nymphs Bath, which we did try,
And proved to be the Wise Men's Mercury.
IN this Song you have the Lion Green so described, that more I dare not, more
I cannot, unless I should pen you down the Receipt verbatim, which God and
Reason forbids.

He is the mean the Sun and Moon between,
Of joining Tinctures with perfectness.

LEarn then to know this Green Lion and its preparation, which is all in all in
the Art, it is the only knot, untie it, and you are as good as a Master; for
whatever then remains is but to know the outward Regimen of Fire, for to help
on Natures internal Work.

As Geber thereunto bears witness.
MOreover be not various, seeking that in many things which is verily but in
one thing; for in all the world there is not any one subject but this: Ripley,
after the Rehearsal of all his Errors, tells you, That he never saw true Work
but one: And Geber, Exact (inquit) singula sumus experti, idque probatis
rationibus and nihil invenimus praeter solum unctuosam humiditatem penetrantem
and tingentem, etc. And Artephius says, There is no other subject in the World
for this Art, naming it, although in a Philosophic manner, wondrous subtly.
I counsel thee, with Ripley, to learn to know this one thing which I have
faithfully declared, and I know what I have declared experimentally to be true:
He that understands me will have cause to thank God and me for what Light I
have given to Ripley: He that with me understands Ripley will easily discern.

With the second which is an humidity
Vegetable reviving what erst was dead.

OUr second Water, or Menstruum, or Fire, is our Elixir, which is an Elixation
of our Matters, or drawing forth the Tincture out of our dissolved Bodies;
which does cause our dead Body to rise, and to spring forth in Sprigs and
Branches, like to the tender Grass in the Spring out of the Field; and this so
long until an entire Triptative Union be made of Body, Soul and Spirit. In this
operation our Body of the Sun has its dead moles turned into a living quick
active Spirit, and our Compound after death begins to sprout, and to show its
true Vegetative nature, it is endowed with a green Color, which is the sign of
the growth of all things.

Both Principles Materials must loosed be.
HEre your Natures are changed, and hold one of another, and become one
inseparably; that is, the Solary Nature is not to be divided from the Mercury,
nor the Fire from the Water, but with one the other is always moved; and so
though there yet be a superius and an ^nferius, an ascendens and subsidens, yet
now quod est superius est sicut id quod est inferius.

And Formals, else they stand in little stead.
NOw between the two Extremes of Mercury and Sulphur, you have a mavelous
medium ingendered: now the form of Gold is taken quite away, and it has at
present an accidental imperfect form, which is the mean through which it
passes to its transcendent perfection.

These Menstrues therefore know, I thee reed.
Labor with all thy might to attain the skill of these two first Menstruums
Theoretically and Practically; the first is to be by thee prepared and
proportioned in the beginning, before thou attempt any thing. When thou have
the true Nymphs Bath, then join this Spouse with her beloved Husband, and see
if she will make his Body fall to sunder in impalpable Atoms: Then let Saturn
be thy Chamberlain, and let him gather together these dissevered members, and
of them make one broth, in which is blackness complete, after which follows
greenness; and then shall thou know that thy Compound is by the living God
endowed with a vegetable Soul.

Without the which neither true Calcination Done may be, nor true Dissolution.
HE who knows not the Mystery of these two Menstrues, can never attain either
to Calcination or Dissolution of the Philosophers: The Mystery of the first
consists in the acuating of thy Vinegar with the Blood of our Green Lion, and
the Soul of the Fiery Dragon, which is by seven Eagles, which are seven
Cohobations and Depurations of thy feminine Sperm, till it conceive a spiritual
seed, or true natural heat, to animate thy young King.

The Mystery of the second Menstrue consists in the true proportion of thy
first Water, with its own Body, and the administration of true heat external,
by which the combat between the Eagles and the Lion may be stirred up; thus
shall the Duel be ended, the Lion rent in pieces, and the Carrion of its
Carcass shall kill the Eagles; and out of these Atoms shall the second Water be
made apparent by Dissolution.

With the third Humidity most permanent.
THe third Menstrue is by Artephius called the second Water, for our second he
does join together with the first; although where he does particularize the
three Fires, he does then distinguish three Menstruums.

The like course many Philosophers have used in the description of their
Operations, some omitting the first, or at least confounding it with the
second, for the greater obscuring of the Art.

But we have (beyond what any have hitherto performed) particularly insisted
upon the three in order, and have taken more pains in the discovery of the
first, because the wise Ancients have taken such pains to conceal that most;
and after that we have made an orderly proceeding to the second, which we have
in like sort handled, and this being performed, we do now address our selves to
the third.

This is called by Ripley a most permanent Humidity: and note by the way, that
the first Water is called by Authors a permanent Water likewise; but take
notice that there is a different reason for each denomination; for first of
all, all Mercury is Water permanent, that is, the parts have no Heterogeneity,
they will not leave one another in the examen of the Fire, but either all flies
and is unconstant, or else all abides and is constant in the trial of Vulcan:
and so is our first Menstruum. And in this our Mercury and Common Mercury
agree, besides the identity of matter, for it is the form only that
distinguishes them. But in the next place, our Water is permanent with the
Body, which Common Mercury is not; that is, it by digestion does unite, not
only adhere to it, so that both together do make one Individuum, which is done
by our secret Conjunction. But lastly, when the Body is thus by our Water
reduced, at last it comes that the four Elements are united in this Water.
After Putrefaction and Purification, which is the last most laudable Tetraptive
Conjunction, and now the Tincture is the Spirit, and the Spirit is the Soul,
and the Soul is the Body, and all these are one.

Incombustible and unctuous in his Nature.
THis is our true Incombustible Mercury, for it is totally purged from all its
burning faeculency; Gold though it be a pure Metal, in respect of others which
are imperfect, yet compared with our Stone it has also its faeces; but this
when it is taken away by Putrefaction and Ablution, then becomes a total
separation of what is precious from what is vile, and as the Philosopher well
says, In the troubles of this our stormy Sea, all that is pure will ascend,
and all that is impure descend, and will abide in the bottom of the Vessel in
the form of a combust Earth; then is made the new Heaven and the new Earth,
pray to God then that thou may see when there shall be no more Sea. Yet I say
before thou have this final Inceration, thou have this most incombustible
Menstruum, and most permanent, in which Nature and Art have conspired and made
a Purification, beyond what Nature alone could ever have brought to pass.

Therefore this Mercury, though it be liquid and in the form of Mercury, it is
notwithstanding Unctuous, that is, great with Child, which Child is Sulphur,
which Sulphur it will in the end bring forth, and shall then be sealed up in
the belly of this Infant, which is when all is fixed, and Mercury is then
hidden under the fixity of Sulphur.

Hermes Tree unto Ashes is burnt.
IT does therefore naturally incline it self unto Inceration, for Earth is the
Nurse of our Stone, and in it is its virtue attained, and its perfection
entire, according to noble Hermes in his Smaragdine Table; Vis (says he) ejus
est integra si versa fuerit in terram. By virtue of this third permanent pure
incombustible Water, thou shall at last attain a total Inceration; for this
Water though it be wholly Mercurial to sight, yet has it in its own Bowels its
own Sulphur, nay it is all Sulphur, and that all incombustible. This work is
called the burning of Hermes Tree to Ashes, which is done thrice; first, into a
black unctuous Calx, as impalpable as Atoms, which are only to be discerned in
the Sunbeams: secondly, into a fine white Calx, in which is the Moon in the
full: the third, a red Calx, in which the Sun is Orient. Now know that the
first Calcination is from the virtue of the Sun, in which the Sun seeks to
rise, but by reason of the equal opposition it finds from the water, it is
beclouded, and after through the interposition of the Earth, totally Eclipsed.

This Fire therefore, because of the mixture of it with the natural Fire of
Sol, which is in it dissolved, is called unnatural; the first Fire of our Water
is called Fire against nature, and the Fire of the Sulphur of the perfect Body
is called Fire of nature. In this operation, through the power and will of the
Almighty, the Body which has been so long dead, is by this Water quickened, and
actually sprouts like to a Vegetable; for when the pores of it are opened by
the moistning of our Water, it straight begins to follow the Spirit upon the
Fire, the Spirit then does mount aloft; which the Body thus made tender cannot
follow, but as the Poet says, non passibus aequis, as a Son that is little
follows his Father. It therefore in a token of its friendship with the Water,
does bud forth like to the tender Frost upon the surface of the Earth, and
retains a quantity of the Water with it self, occupying a middle room between
the bottom and the top; in which respects the Philosophers have called it their
Soul, which to show its union to the Body, rises no higher then it can have a
root or Basis below; and to manifest its love to the Spirit, it does as it were
climb after it highe^ and higher for its season, until at length it return from
whence it came: And verily this Soul is the Magnetical Medium between the
Spirit and the Body, which does desire the Spirit as its true drink; and
therefore as it grows dry, it does attract the greater drops of sweat, which
falling to the Earth, arise in a pleasant fume, and do moisten the growing
virtue with a pleasant dew, by reason of which it grows every day more and more.

This Tree of ours some have compared to one thing, and some to another; some
to a Cypress or Fir Tree, which indeed may seem to resemble it; others to
Haw-Thorn Trees, as Ripley in his Gate of Cibation; others to Shrubs and
Bushes, others to thick Woods, and in these Woods, says Lambsprint, there is a
Beast all over black. I confess there is a similitude between our Germination,
and all these; others, because of the Humidity of the Compound, which is ever
and anon returning by drops, have likened it to a moorish low Bog, in which
Rushes grow, and Toads keep; others have called it their Coral, which is indeed
the fittest comparison, for in our Tree there are Shoots and Sprigs, without
any thing that may be properly likened to Leaves: as then Coral is an union of
a Vegetable and a Stony nature, so is it in our Tree, (for Stones and Minerals
are of one Imposition) our Tree is Metalline, and yet through the power of God
it seems to Vegetate. 2ly. Coral grows under the water, where one would think
no Vegetable could grow; ours also grows in a heat in which no Vegetable but it
self can grow. 3ly. Coral has many Sprigs and Branches without Leaves; so is
our Tree. 4ly* Coral as it is under water has a most exquisite biting taste,
which in the Air it quickly loses; so our Stone, or Tree Metalline, in its
place is of a pontique fiery nature, but taken out, it in a short space loses
the same irrecoverably. 5ly. There are five sorts of Coral, the common Gray,
the Milk White, the Green, the Blood Red, and the Black; so our Tree is at his
periods of all these colors, and in this form, which Tree by the heat of the
Fire is dried to a Calx, which is called the Ashes of Hermes Tree. Lastly,
Coral is more heavy then any other Vegetable; and so is our Tree beyond all
Vegetables, yea and Coral it self, in ponderosity. It was not therefore a
fortuitous comparison that Philosophers named their Mastery the Tree of the
Hesperides, nor is it in vain that they bring in Jason pouring Broth at the
Root of it to attain the Mastery; for verily ^he wise Philosopher (noted by
Jason) ^o governing his Fire, that the Lunaria or Water of the Moon may return
to the Earth in which these Trees grow, the Earth will at length be so dried by
the ^eat of the Sun, that it shall afford the Tree no more moisture; then shall
the Tree it self be calcined by the prevailing ^eat, into a Powder impalpable,
first black, then white, then red. Therefore ^s our little Glass by Flammel in
his Summary named the Philosophers Garden, in which the Sun rises and sets,
and the Philosophers Tree is moistened with the dew of Heaven day and night
without ^ntermission.

It is our natural Fire most sure.
THis Mercury drawn out of the Sun is the true natural heat, in the acua^ing
and stirring up of which is the whole secret of the Mastery; this is the
honored Salt, when this is made to appear thy operations will be so admirable,
that they will take up thy whole worldly content, and with their variety the
time will seem so short, that thou will not take notice of any tediousness in
the passing of it.

Our Mercury, our Sulphur, our Tincture pure.
THis is our Mercury which cannot be attained with money, which is nothing but
Sulphur, and Sulphur which is nothing but Tincture, in which all Elements are
proportioned perfectly.

Our Soul, our Stone born up with wind,
In the Earth engendered. Bear this in mind.

THis is our Body, which is now become all Soul and all Spirit, all the pure
parts are separated now totally from the uncleanness of the dead; it is our
Stone, though it be as yet volatile, yet it has all in it essential to our
Stone, and therefore though it fly and sublime for the space of seven times,
yet his Nurse is the Earth, and therefore to it as to its Nest it returns, and
in seven sublimations what was before all Heaven, will now become all Earth.
And this is the period of all the Rotations, and Natures consummation.

This Stone also tell thee I dare,
Is the vapor of Metals potential.

ANd now if any should demand of us what our Stone is, we shall answer him,
that it is Gold digested to its height of purity and perfection, through the
cooperation of Art and Nature; but the means to get this, is to learn to turn
thy Body into a vapor, that is, into Mercury, which then ascends in form of a
vapor.

How thou shall get it thou must beware,
For Invisible truly is this Menstrual.
Howbeit with the second Water Philosophical,
By separation of Elements it may appear
To sight in form of Water clear.

BUt the means to attain this is not a light work, it requires a profound
meditation, for this is the Seed of Gold, (which as the Poet sang, reclusa
resedit longius) it is involved in many links, and held Prisoner as it were in
a deep Dungeon; so that as the noble Sandivow has it, it is the work of a very
wise Philosopher to let loose Sulphur; he that knows not our two first
Menstruals, is altogether shut out from attaining to the sight of this third
and last Menstrue; yet he who knows how to prepare the first Water, and to join
it to the Body in a just pondus, to shut it up in its Vessel Philosophically,
until the Infant be formed, and what is the greatest of all, to govern his Fire
dexterously, so as to cherish Internal heat with External, and can wait with
patience till he see his signs, he shall see the first Water will work on the
Body till it has opened the pores, and extracted partly the Tincture of Sol,
which as it comes out gradually, so it contests with the first Fire against
Nature, so long till they be reconciled in an imperfect medium; in which they,
like to weary wounded Combatants, lie gasping and panting for breath, and at
length dye; and then appears the second Water of the wise, which does ascend
and descend so long til lit revive the dead Carcass, and then a Soul comes into
it, and it vegetates and circulates, and changes colors so long, till
Blackness vanishing there be made a perfect union and universal temperament of
Elemental qualities, never more to contend together: then the whole Compound
for a time appears like to a new glorious Water, glittering like Oriental
Pearls, and Fish-eyes.

Of this Menstrue by labor exuberate,
With it may be made Sulphur of Nature.

THis is it which Raymund calls his Mercury exuberate, as much as to say,
Mercury with Child; Artephius calls it, the Salt pregnant, for it has
Sulphur actually hidden under the Mercurial quickness; therefore it by
digestion is easily turned into our Stone, which is Sulphur, or Fire of Nature.

If it be well and kindly acuate,
And circulate into a Spirit pure,
Then to dissolve thou must be sure
Thy base with it in diverse wise,
As thou shall know by thy practice,
That point, etc.

THis Mercury thus renovate or new born, may by the Philosopher be diversely
handled; for he may take his work from the Fire, and circulate and cohobate
this Mercury by a peculiar operation, which is partly Mechanical, till he have
a most admirable pure subtle Spirit, in which he may dissolve Pearls and all
Gems, and multiply them or his Red Stone, before it be united with a Metal in
projection for the making of Aurum Potabile. And in this Mercury thus
circulated, is doubtless the Mystery of the never-fading Light, which I have
actually seen, but yet not practically made. In a word, every one who has this
exuberate Mercury, has indeed at command the subject of wonders, which he may
employ himself many ways in both admirably and pleasantly. And certainly he
that has this, needs no information from another; himself now standing in the
Center, he may easily view the Circumference, and then operation will be, next
to the Spirit of God, his best Guide. Know then, that if thou be a Son of Art,
when thou art once arrived hither, thou art so far from being at the end of thy
search, (unless thou make Gold to be thy final object, and so thou shall never
come hither) that thou art but now come into the Mystical School of the hidden
wonders of God, in which thou may every day see new Miracles, if thou be
studious and desirous of knowledge, which all Adepti are; they prize skill
before any earthly thing, and therefore refuse Honor and Pomp, and retire only
to the beholding of God and his Works, in this admirable Looking-glass of the
most hidden Mysteries of Nature.

For so together they may be circulate,
That is, the base oil and vegetable Menstrual,
So that it be by labor exuberate,
And made by craft a Stone celestial.

YEt does not wisdom come naked, but with her she brings riches and length of
days; for this exuberate Mercury is an Hermaphrodite, and may without taking
out of the Glass be circulated into a fifth Essence.

Now the union between the two Principles, is the very true cause of this
circulation; for though in this last Menstruum there is an inseparable oneness,
yet the Components do give each their most noble quality to exalt the
transcendency of our Medicine. The extreme Components of this third Menstruum,
are the Sulphur and Mercuriality of the second; as the first Menstrue, and Sol
our Body, were the extremes of the second. The base oil, our Sulphur is called,
for he is the unctuous Dragon, or Earth which lies at bottom without wings, and
is the Basis as it were of the Work. The Mercury is called Vegetable, for that
it flies and returns, and makes the Earth to sprout and bud with tender
branches. These two (the base oil or Sulphur, and the vegetable Menstrue) at
last make one entire indivisible substance, which is of an Hermaphroditical
quality, the Man is the Woman, and the Woman the Man; the Sulphur the Mercury,
and the Mercury is the Sulphur; in this respect the Earth flies as if it were
Heaven, and at length the Heaven will precipitate in the form of Earth, and
then is our work at an end, there is the Harvest in the South, when the
glorified Soul is become a spiritual Body, which is called our Stone of
Paradise.

Of nature so Fiery that we it call,
Our Basilisk, or our Cockatrice,
Our great Elixir most of price.
For as the sight of the Basilisk his object
Kills, so slays it crude Mercury,
When thereupon he is project,
In twinkling of an eye most suddenly.
That Mercury then teyneth permanently
All Metals to Gold and Silver perfect.
Thus guide thy base both red and white.

THis Heavenly Earth is true Mineral Fire, which is then resembled to the Sun
in its Summer Solstice; it is called Venom, because it penetrates Metals so
wonderfully; it is called our Basilisk, our Cockatrice, our Tyrian Poison,
though indeed it be an excellent Medicine, in which respect it is called our
incomparable inestimable Elixir. But the denomination of Basilisk it retains
from its sudden operation upon Mercury; for it penetrates it in projection, as
warm Oil runs into sinking Paper, even to the profundity of it. Let thy Mercury
therefore be taken as it is crude bought at the Apothecaries, and thou shall
set it in a Crucible to the Fire, in such a heat as the Mercury may not fume;
and when it is so hot that it is ready to fly, which you shall discern by a
spurtling noise, throw upon it of your Medicine as much as will teyne it, and
you shall see that in a moment it will enter it, and straightway the Mercury
loses its flux, and stands congealed. Then it is to be melted by a Fire of
fusion, and you shall find pure Gold or Silver, according to the quality of
your Medicine. But if you cast your high Elixir in too great a quantity on
Mercury, you shall find in the Crucible after projection, a brittle mass of the
quality and color of the first Medicine, only of a lower virtue, which then
you may project upon any inferior Metal, and it will transmute it into most
perfect. This operation is not apparent or to sight, as is the work of
Sophisters, but it is both inward and outward, for it transmuteth into a
perfect species, and not only to show. This is the way of projection both of
thy white and thy red Quintessences, first to cast them upon Sol or Luna,
according as thy Medicine is, and after that to make projection on Mercury
again and again, till you find the true extent of the virtue of your Stone.

Aurum Potabile thus is made,
Of Gold not commonly calcinate.

ANd now I come to the second reward that Wisdom does bring with her, and that
is length of days; and here I have transposed some few Verses of Ripleys
concerning Aurum Potabile, that what he says in this point may be represented
in view together, Method inviting me to it. Some propound the Medicine of Aurum
Potabile to be Extracted out of Sol pure, by corroding with Aqua Regia, and
afterward levigating it by reiterate Calcinations in the Fire, and manual
Contritions. This Calx so subtilized, some attempt to resolve by Menstrues, (as
they call them) but in vain, there being only one Menstruum that has the power
to resolve both Gold, and all sublunary Bodies, to their first matter.
Paracelsus the first Author of this, did name this dissolving Water his
Alkahest, his Jgnis Gehennae, his ^orrosivum specificum, with many other names.
This Medicine thus made of Gold by the Alkahest, as it is Philosophical and
real, so it is very excellent, and known only to the Adepti.

Yet this is not our great Medicine, for this being but a resolution of Gold in
its unary simplicity, does afford to us only the most exquisite Medicine that
is in Gold, as it is made and left by Nature, which partly for its simple
virtue, and partly for its Metallic determination, does not enter our
Constitutive Principles, and consequently cannot touch or reach long life.

But of our Tincture which will not fade,
Out of our base drawn by our Menstrue circulate.

BUt when as we have by our Art exalted Gold from an unary to a millenary
perfection, and advanced it from its gross corpulency to a Spiritual Tincture,
which is unfading, and of all Sublunary things the most durable, then out of
this so glorious and triumphant in an universal virtue, we do make an Oil so
called by us, (though it be permiscible by mixture in any Liquor) which Oil is
the very Tree of Life, which prevails and triumphs over all the Miseries in the
world. For it is not Metallum, but transcending all Metalline things: This
Tincture is extracted out of Gold, not as Tinctures are drawn by the Sal
Circulatum of Paracelsus, but by an universal changing of the Sickness of the
Metalline offspring, into a true posture of Health; by which means it is able
to heal all Metalline Bodies from their Leprosy, and being resolved by its own
Vegetable Humidity, which is our first Menstrue, circulated till the Water have
a ferment from the Bodies, and the Bodies from the Water, it will give a
Spiritual Tincture, sparkling like the flame, to taste most sweet, to smell most
pleasant, the most incomparable Treasure of the whole World.

And for thy first ground principal,
Understand thy Waters Menstrual.

NOw I return to that which went before concerning this Medicine, which I
passed over in that place, that I might here bring it in together; and indeed
he who will know this Mystery, he must in the first place learn to know his
Menstrual Waters, for without this knowledge he can never come to this Mastery;
for with the third Menstruum, (counting three according to Ripley) or the
second Water, (making the first and second into one, with Arteph^us) is this
fragrant Balsam made: And verily the whole is but Cohobation, the first Water
being cohobated so long upon the Bodies, till it receive from them a quality of
natural heat; yet so as that the quality of its own Fire, which is corruptive,
and so against Nature, be mingled in way of action and passion with the natural
Fire. This makes a Fire innatural, and is the second Water, in which colors
rise and set frequently, and then by cohobating it till Fire of Nature have
wholly subdued his Adversary, and made a perfect peace and union with it. Then
all is Fire of Nature, then the Clouds are scattered and the Light appears; and
this is our third Water, the subject of wonders, which being one alone, does
from that time all operations within it self, congealing, relenting, calcining,
exalting, subliming and fixing all Elements, being linked here inviolably to
the making up of that great Mysterium magnum, which Paracelsus described, but
knew it not; we both know it, and have seen it, and what we do know and have
seen, we do faithfully relate.

And when thou have made Calcination,
Increasing not wasting moisture radical,
Until thy base by often subtilation,
Will lightly flow as Wax on a Metal.
Then loose it with thy Vegetable Menstrual,
Till thou have Oil thereof in color bright.

THerefore labor thou to bring thy Gold to a Calcination, not by Corrosives,
but by Mercury, not into a Powder red and dry, but into a Calx black and
unctuous, and multiply moisture by our true Virgins Milk; then circulate these
Natures together, till they will flow like unto Wax upon a Plate of Metal,
which is the sign of the true Tincture of Luna. Continue thy Fire till the fixed
again relent of its own accord, till the dry become moist again, and till a
Soul return; then shall thy Tincture proceed forward to a new Germination, and
shall be endowed with a Vegetative Soul. Govern thy Bath sweetly, until thou
have a Tincture of Citrine, which is a sign that thy Water is now impregnated
with the Oil immarcessible.

Then is that Menstruum visible to sight.
THen shall thou discover what before was hidden, and see what before was
invisible, and shall say with the Philosopher, O Nature, how thou make Gold
volatile that was most fixed! Therefore have they passed one into another.

An Oil is drawn out in the color of Gold.
THis is our Virgins Milk of the Sun, which is yellow; with this and our
perfect Tincture, we make our Blessed Oil, which has not its Peer among all
the works of God, next to the Immortal Soul of man, the Glass of Tri-unity, the
Sabbath of perfection. O happy they that attain to it!

Or like thereto out of fine red Lead.
YEt a succedaneum of this noble Medicine is found in the loins of Saturn, in
the bowels of our despised Infant, which some true and loyal Sons of Nature,
through the great mercy of God, have attained without knowing our great
Arcanum, which a man would think mavelous.

This is our red Lead, our Mercury essencificate and coagulated into a chaos of
Spiritual Gold, and after dissolved into a quintessence as red as Blood; which
because it is made out of the very Essential Mercury of our Stone, which is our
first Water, I shall leave it undiscovered, which otherwise (if it might be
explained without danger of prostituting the other Secret to unworthy people) I
would for the good of Mankind proclaim it with Trumpets.

Which Raymund said when he was old,
Much more then Gold would stand in stead.

THis Oil or Quintessence, this Balsam of Health, we do therefore prize for its
wonderful virtue, not so much for that by means of it Poverty, that great
snare, may be avoided, but for its wonderful prevailing excellency against all
Diseases both of body and mind, as witnesses Lully, Trevisan, Artephius, with
that excellent Book entitled Aurea Hora, or Consurgens Aurora.

For when he was for Age near dead,
He made thereof Aurum Potabile,
Which him revived as men might see.

BY virtue of this Quintessence Artephius testifies, that he lived above a
thousand years: Flammel also records of it, that it triumphs over all the
Miseries of the World. Johannes de Laznioro is more bold, and says, that if in
the Agony of death a man should taste but a Grain of it, all the mortal
Pestilence would depart from him.

Since then this Knowledge is so wonderfully profitable, being the very
Looking-glass of Nature, the Antidote against Poverty and Sickness, and
consequently the Cutthroat of Covetousness, Pride, Ambition, and such like
sordid Affections, who would not bestow a little time in the Inquiry of it? In
which let me assure thee in the very words of Trevisan, the Art is so plain,
that if it were nakedly described it would be contemptible. And yet in vulgar
Mechanics, how frequent is it for men to serve seven, eight, yea ten years
Apprentiship to attain them? And in some that are a little more ingenious, how
frequently are considerable sums of Money bestowed to boot? Yet in this noble
Art, so far excelling all Humane Sciences as the Sun does a Candle, who will
employ himself with diligence? unless it be some Money-minded Sots, who seek
only for Riches; and yet how soon are even they weary? So that few or none
persist in their Inquiry, save a few Roguish Sophisters who live by Cozening;
by reason of such the Art is scandalized, and ill spoken of: Yet trust me, for
I speak knowingly, the Art is both true and easy; yea so easy, that if you
did see the Experiment, you could not believe it. I made not five wrong
Experiments in it, before I found the truth, although in some particular
turnings of the Encheiresis, I erred often; yet so, as I in my error knew my self
a Master, and in less then full two years and a half, of a vulgar Jgnoramus, I
became a true Adept, and have the Secret through the goodness of God. And that
this is true, there are those alive that can bear witness to this my writing,
which I penned for the sake of the Ingenious, that they may have Ariadne's
thread stretched out to guide them; so with the blessing of God they shall by
their own Experience see and know, that I wrote nothing but what the Light of
Experience (far beyond all imaginary conjectures) has taught me to be true.

ANd now my Muse, let it not irksome seem
To thee of Natures Mysteries to sing,
Those hidden Mysteries which many deem
Naught but delusions with them for to bring.
This is the opinion of the Vulgar rude,
To whom there is hardly any selcouth thing,
But seems a Juggling trick, that would delude
Their fancies with an empty wondering;
Therefore against it they with thundering words do ring.
There is a fiery Stone of Paradise,
So called because of its Celestial hew,
Named of Ancient years by Sages wise
Elixir, made of Earth and Heaven new,
Anatically mixed; strange to relate,
Sought for by many, but found out by few;
Above vicissitudes of Nature, and by fate
Immortal, like a Body fixed to show,
Whose penetrative virtue proves a Spirit true.
His property is as the Sages told,
Metals imperfect (which before would burn)
Six to transmute into most perfect Gold,
And five into the finest Silver turn,
Not equalled by Metals of the Mine;
Which while some seek, they madly seem to spurn
The pricks, which proves in the end a bad design,
And gives them cause sadly at length to mourn,
And to bewail their destiny like men forlorn.
For why, they do not well premeditate
The nature of the thing they would attain;
The only thirst of Gain does animate
These Gold-adoring wretches, who maintain
Their mad expense with many a cursed lie,
Nor from false perjury will they refrain:
Thus they allure fools by flattery,
To trust their dotage for the hope of gain,
This last so long, till in the suds they both remain.
Then Covetousness wrangles with Deceit,
And curses him for all his lewd expense:
The other being conscious of his cheat,
With subtle words does make a sly defense.
But what is past can never be recalled,
This grieves the Churl, who vows for that offense
He Will have the Jugglers future pranks forestalled,
Lays him in Gaol, O monstrous change! from thence
The great Stone-maker through a Grate does beg for pence.
But he who will a studious Searcher be
Of Truth, let him such Sophisters eschew,
And if he will but be advised by me,
Of false ways I Will him warn, and show him true.
Beg humbly of thy God to be thy guide,
For thou must pass through hidden ways, by few
Traced; and that thy suit be not denied,
Entreat of him thy heart for to renew,
Thus qualified thou may thy Journey never rue.
Next learn to know the different Kingdoms three,
In which all sublunary things are wrought,
Vnveil the hidden Bodies, whose degree
Is noble, though their place full low be sought;
In which respect they bear the Planets names,
And they to such a Virtue may be brought,
Which answer may the painful Chymist's aims,
And it perform, which will surpass the thought
Of the rude Vulgar, who by only sense are taught.
The Wise men's Books with diligence peruse,
From which, if diligent, thou may discern
What substance it is they for their Matter choose,
Also their hidden Agent thou may learn.
They tell thee eke what things thou should refuse,
And of erroneous Works they will thee warn;
Their counsel take, so shall thou never lose
Thy cost ne labor; also thou may earn
Riches and Health, the one to other subaltern.
Yet pains and labor see thou do not grudge,
Nor cost, although a little will suffice;
Yet Truth at first to find thou may not judge;
It Is well if faults at length will make thee wise:
Nor be thou over-heady to believe
The Shell of words, which them who are not nice
To sever Truth from Falsehood, do deceive,
That they to win a shadow lose a prize:
To sever Corn from Straw I therefore you advise.
And if you please to take me for your Guide,
I Will you unto a godly Castle lead,
A Castle which to hold all proof is tried,
So that there is none within its Walls may tread
But he who favored is with special Grace,
No other title any one may plead:
And she who is Queen-Regent of the place,
Is Nature called, she in Jehovah 's stead
Does sit and rule, for she next under God is Head.
This Castle round by force Inexpugnable,
Whose Composition's Homogeneal,
Immortal ever stands, that none is able
To conquer it by force, though fraud withal
Concur; its standing is so firmly stable,
No way to storm it, though we could recall
Great Hercules, it is so inviolable:
And yet withal its Beauty is so amiable.
Twelve Gates it has, and yet they are but one,
And these twelve Gates have but one only Lock,
So that you either open all or none;
Nor can you force it open with a knock,
For violence cannot it break in sunder,
Those who attempt it the event does mock;
Nay though you could call down the dreadful Thunder,
It would nothing avail; who so his stock
Shall thus employ, may walk at length in threadbare Cloak.
There is one only Key, this learn to know
And make, then I will you a Master name.
This Key the entrance of the Lock will show,
And being entered will unlock the same:
Which being done, to you shall open fly
The twelve Gates of this Castle, great in fame,
Little in bulk, which once I did espy;
Also within it a most noble Game
Fought 'twixt an Eagle volant, and a Lion tame.
FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION UPON THE First Six Gates OF Sir GEORGE RIPLEY's Compound of
Alchymie. VIZ.

1. Calcination. 2. Dissolution. 3. Separation. 4. Conjunction. 5.
Putrefaction. 6. Congelation.
Written by Aeyrenaeus Philalethes, Natu Anglus, Habitatione Cosmopolita.



LONDON, Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain.
MDCLXXVII.

Sir GEORGE RIPLEY's Compound of Alchymie Expounded by a Son of ART.
The first Gate opened, Which is CALCINATION.
Calcination is the Purgation of our Stone.
WE have led thee as it were by the hand through many a waste Field, and many a
Desert and Thicket, and now lift up your eyes and behold where you are, and now
welcome my Friend into the Garden of the Philosophers; here you may behold (like
a Landscape) a very glorious Castle, walled about with a very high wall, and
twelve Gates one following another hindering your entrance and Possession of it
at will, one being opened the rest open of themselves, and yield to thee a far
more renowned Conquest, then ever Caesar or Alexander won. The first Gate lo
is as it were dug hollow into the Earth, and little to be seen above the
Superficies: view well the Inscription which is written over it, which is the
words of that Curse which God inflicted on Adam, in the day that he fell, Dust
thou art, and unto Dust thou shall return. Mark the Escutcheon that is set
forth upon the Gate, this signifies unto thee, that some Great Person is dead
within, therefore behold the Attendants all stand in Mourning; amongst whom one
with this verse of Solomon, I am black, but comely, etc.

This Lady the Sages have called Juno, or the Metallic Nature, which is indeed
very comely, yet black, for why the Sun has shined upon her. Another who seems
to supply the room of the Porter, speaks unto you in these words, Nothing
enters hither that defiles, or that is unclean. But enough of this, we must
not here stand gazing, lest we be taken for Spies; but we will knock for a
Guide, who may go along with us; for know that this Castle is a Garrison, and
must not be viewed without a Guide, who may conduct us in and out, and show us
what the places are through which we pass. And now he is come, I shall acquaint
you somewhat of his conditions, that you may know how to please him, that he
may be the more willing to go along with you in the right way, and not leave
you, as he has done some, nor mislead you, as he has done others, who when
they have attempted this work with good success in the knowledge of matters
requisite, they notwithstanding have fatally erred, not knowing how to please
their Guide, who has a humor of his own not to be equalled in the World; and
if you make him either sullen, or choleric, you had as good give over the
enterprise.

First of all then know, that for his parts he is a very stupid Fool, there is
none more simple among all his Brethren; yet is he most faithful to his Lord,
and does all things for him most prudently, ordering all things in the Family
very discreetly; which I may rather ascribe to a natural instinct, then to any
quickness of parts. He is very faithful, for that cause he will never either
ask or answer any question, but goes on silently: Nor will he ever go before
you, but follow; you must be very wary how you lead him, if he can find an
opportunity he will give you the slip, and leave you to a world of misfortune.
By his countenance you shall know whether he be pleased or displeased;
therefore lay bonds on him, that is, shut him close where he may not get forth,
then go wisely before with heat, and ever observe his countenance as he
follows; his anger you shall know, by redness in his countenance, and his
sullenness by his lumpish behavior; in his good temper he is indifferent
active and merry; and so you shall pass on forward, or turn, or go back, as you
see his countenance and temper inclined. In the next place you are to
understand, that he was born to be a drudge, and is the very Servant unto all
his Brethren; and hereupon he does as it were monopolize the whole toil and
task of labor to himself, and if you go about to do any thing, he will
presently take snuff, and will leave you all the work to do, and will not do
one stroke more.

Thirdly, he through long custom has gotten a habit of perpetual working, and
therefore if you allow him one hours respite, he will never work more; for in
his Fathers house he committed the offense of Cham, and is therefore judged to
be a Servant of Servants: his body is very tender and naked, yet will he have
no Clothes, nor will he endure any Consolidation of parts without exception;
for in his youth he offended with Ruben, and went up to his Fathers Couch, and
was for that doomed to a perpetual inconstancy, and is as unstable as Water.
These in general are the qualifications of your Guide, and you must address
your self to him accordingly, or else your labor will be in vain.

Restoring also of his natural heat.
Of Radical humidity it loses none,
Inducing solution into our Stone most meet.

THe first place which you come to, worthy your observation, is a large Room
floored with black, the Hangings part black, bluish, and yellowish, in which
you may see a Carcass intombed, and very rotten; a Serpent almost dead with
cold, laid to the fire, and a Fountain still flowing forth to water a Pot which
is nigh to it, in which is planted an Herb much like to Ros solis, only it has
the Root black, the Leaves yellow, with bluish veins and black spots in them
continually standing in a dew, and over it the Sun as in the Solstice, shining
in its full vigor, and under in a Fire, as it were of Aetna burning
continually. The Fountain still sends a few small streams of Pearly water to
the Root of this Herb, which by insensible pores ascend and stand like drops
discolored on the Leaves of the Herb, which seems as though blasted and
withering, and yet always full of drops, which dropping down again, and rising
continually, do resolve the Tree into a viscous Juice, which is afterward
dried up into a dry dust, yet unctuous to sight, and very black.

After Philosophy I you behight.
THen I lift up mine eyes, and behold I saw Nature as a Queen gloriously
adorned, sitting upon her Throne, and in her hand a fair Book, which was
called, Philosophy Restored to its Primitive Purity;whom with low submission I
did obeisance to, and she graciously took notice of me, and gave me this Book
to eat it up, which I did, and straightway she had another of the same in her
hand: Then was my Understanding so enlightened, that I did fully apprehend all
things which I saw and heard; and when I approached to any Gate or Door,
straightway (as though they were acted by a sensitive Spirit) they opened of
their own accord: And all in the House did fealty to me, and said that I was to
be honored as Lord of the place: For, say they, the Queen and He are in love
united, and she moreover has plighted her troth to him.Then I considered with
my self, and behold the Book that I had devoured (like a Charm) had so
commanded my Spirits, that I could think of nothing more than the enjoyment of
this rare Beauty which I had beheld: And while I was full of these thoughts,
behold I heard a Voice behind me, saying, What would thou in this World? I
was a little astonished at the Voice, but yet boldly answered, Nothing but that
I might once more see that admirable Perfection which once I beheld in a Nymph,
which not long since I saw, who with seeming affection did salute me, and gave
me a Book to eat; which when I had eaten, my Intellectuals seemed as though the
Candle of the Lord had been kindled in them: But since I could never see her
whom my Heart longs for: Oh that I might only be so happy again! Then said the
Voice, Thou art happy in that thou have seen her, more happy in that she gave
thee that Book, which few in an Age attain to; most happy in that thou could
and did eat it, which every one that has it cannot do: She therefore whom
thou seek for, is gone into her retired Solitudes, and as a Legacy has left
thee two great Treasures, the Treasure of Riches, and the Treasure of Long
Lif^*Then said I, Ah Sir, this you tell me of, is nothing but an aggravation of
my misery; for all the wealth in this world I count but as a straw in
comparison of the enjoyment of that most admirable Lady's presence, whose
Service I should take for a greater happiness, than if I were Master of all the
World besides. If then I may not see her again, my Life will be to me a burden,
and to what then will Long Life avail? Thus I sat bemoaning my self, and I
heard a shrill Voice as it were close by me, and I looked suddenly, and behold
an unspeakable Light, in comparison whereof the Sun it self seemed dark; and
close by me I saw a most secret place, and in it a secret Room of Diaphanous
matter, and round, and within it this Lady whom I formerly had seen, upon her
Throne; and another in the person of a King, in most gay Raiment, as if it were
a Robe of beaten Gold, which reached from his shoulders to the ground, and a
Crown of pure Gold on his head; and a third person, who like a Water-bearer had
a Pitcher on his shoulder, and in the midst of it there burned as it were a
Lamp: The sight was excellent, yet I could not be pleased, for that I saw this
Lady stark naked with this King, so in private; and while I viewed the Room, I
found it was exquisitely closed on every side, so that it seemed as if it were
made of one entire piece of Crystal. I marvelled at what I saw: for the House
was but small, the Chamber less, and the Closet of Crystal to sight no bigger
than a small Egg; and the three Parties, with all the Accoutrements of them,
might well have been enclosed in a Hazel Nut: Yet was their Delineaments so
lively, that I might easily discern her entire shape, whom I could not but with
distracted thoughtfulness and a sad countenance behold; which she perceiving,
said unto me, Friend, Why art thou sad? I am not sad, quoth I, most Noble Lady,
but am pensively meditating on what I behold, which does not a little amaze me,
the sight not being to be paralleled in John Tradescants Chamber of Rarities,
which is the System of the Novel Rarities of the known World: For whom I lately
beheld glorious upon a Throne in the Majesty of a Queen, I now see cloistered
up in a small Diaphanous Pix, in a stature so small as is scarce credible:
Moreover, whom I deemed so piously virtuous a Lady, to be so retiredly naked
with a man, only attended with a Water-bearer, makes me very thoughtful what
this thing should be. Moreover, it was my hopes so to have ingratiated my self
into your favor, as to have been a Servant unto you, who I see are otherwise
provided of a Lover. Then said she, My Friend, what you admire in this strange
Metamorphosis of me, know that it is by a Magical Virtue, which is alone given
to me from GOD, my immediate Lord and Ruler; and for any Diabolical Art, which
your Scruple seems to manifest your suspicion of, it is because of your
unexperience in these things; and this your Ignorance is no way provoking unto
me, for in these Affairs (though a man) yet you are but a Child; and this
liberty I allow all my Sons while they are Children, so to speak, so to think,
and so to act; and I love to hear and answer their childish prattle. Know then
that the Devil is but one of my Servants, and in my Kingdom he does serve GOD,
his and my Lord: And though of all my Servants he is the worst, yet he can do
nothing of himself, either without me, or against me, or above me: He for the
most part is a deceitful Jugler, and does make things appear, that are not; but
whatever is actually effected by him, is nothing but what is in my Power: He
only applies Agents to Patients, and adds a little of his own villainous
qualities, as a circumstantial aggravation of the horror of what he thus (by my
virtue) brings to pass, and then his villainous mind attributes that to himself,
which is my Act, that so he might arrogate the honor due to my Lord and his
Master. Now I will tell you a strange thing, which yet is very true: I am
obedient to all my Subjects, which are many, and they obey me; I rule them, and
they do as it were enforce me, for so my Lord has pleased to ordain it: If
they call me, I am straight at hand; yea, in my Body which thou see (which is
no Body (but only representative) for I am all Spirit) I feel the Sympathies
and Antipathies, the Actions and Passions of every thing in the World; and I
must be always present, for nothing is or can be well done without I be
present: I always work according to the subject and its disposition, which does
alter the effect wonderfully. In a word, whatever thou see that I am, and
more then thou can see by far, though thou had the Eyes of Argus. My Rule
is not as is the Rule of Princes among Men, but I am serviceable to all, yea to
the least Worm in the World; and because I am so serviceable, therefore my
Master has appointed that nothing can or may disobey me, or offer violence to
me; the Devil here has no power, though malice enough: Therefore my Lord has
given me his own Diploma to make me the more Honorable; first, An Omnisciency
of all things which are done in the World, as touching the Being, Conservation,
or Mutation of them; and next, An Omnipresency, by which I am every where
present at once, and I am seated in the Will of God, which is my Center, All my
Subjects are put under Man, therefore he has a free power to act any thing
within his reach in the World; and the Soul of Man is as it were a Magnet unto
me, and all my Subjects, in its Exaltation and Union, by Faith to my Lord and
Master; though since Man lost his Dignity, he lost also his Knowledge, and his
Will is liable to the Temptations of the Devil; and so as many as by renouncing
their Creator do devote themselves to Satan, he has by his confederacy power
to exalt their Will, and to apply their Power to the effecting of things
possible in Nature, and impossible for the Devil to perform alone, (whose pride
would scorn to crave help, if he could) and beyond the knowledge of the
inthralled Caytiff, who mistaking the effect, and not seeing how it was done by
himself and not Satan (though his power for want of knowledge to employ it,
without his help were made use of by him, and applied according to his own
Devilish Design) the Wretch is ensnared to bind over both his Soul and Body to
the Devil, as a requital of this Service, so crafty a Deceiver is he. But this
being from my present scope, I shall forbear to speak further of it at present,
lest I should distract, not edify you. Now as concerning your jealousy for
that you see me naked with this King, know that this place and my Kingdom are
in the State of Innocence, though we are by the Fall of Adam laid subject to
Vanity; and till the final Restitution of that Fall, I am forbidden to work any
thing of my own accord beyond the state of fading corruptibility, though all
things have an incorruptible Spirit, which when Heaven and Earth shall be
renewed, shall cause an Immutable Glory in all these things. Know then that
this King is my Servant, and he has many Brethren who in their passage to him
are taken Prisoners, and kept in bondage, and there is no way to Redeem them,
unless he give his Flesh and Blood for their Ransom, which cannot be effectual,
unless he die and arise from the Dead: This I cannot perform alone my self, nor
can any help me herein but Man alone; for God has here limited my power, I
cannot bring Agents and Patients together, though he has given me power to
work on them being composed, and to effect what may serve for the Ransom of
those poor Captives, and he has given man a free power to act in subordination
to him in the World, though through the Fall the Wings of this power are not
clipped at all, but clogged with Ignorance, that it is very uneffectual in
comparison of its virtue. If thou could but understand and believe, thy very
Soul would command all Nature in the whole Fabric of it: for if thou did but
know things as they are, thou would withal clearly see the Dignity of thy
Soul, being the Image of God; and this would command Faith, and kindle Desire:
Now Faith and a kindled Desire in the Soul is that extatical Passion which
attracts the whole Phenomenon of Nature. This is the Dignity of a Mental Man.
Now then, my Friend, hearken to me, and what I advise, that do; help me in what
I cannot, and I will help thee in what thou can not; so shall thou be (to GOD
subordinate) Lord both of me and mine; and the Blood of this King, which
redeems his Brethren, will give thee a Medicine to command all the
Imperfections of thy mortal Body; and though it be no Antidote against Death,
the irrevocable Decree being past, yet it triumphs over all the Miseries of
Life, both of Poverty and Sickness, and it possesses a Man of the most
incomparable Treasures of this World. Then full of Admiration, with Tears for
very Joy trickling down abundantly, I bespake her, and said, Lady, I thank you
for your so great favor to me, as so familiarly to discourse with me; Now
then, without any Complement, I am yours (ad usque aras) and whatever you
please, that will I do. Then said she, Under this Chamber and Closet there is a
Stove, put Fire into it, for this King must sweat to death. Ah sweet Lady, said
I, and what will become of you? Care not you for that,said she, do you as I bid
you: But yet farther to satisfy your curious mind, let me tell you, That I
endure without hurt the most violent Fires which are or can be made, for I am
in them all, and no less in the most frozen places. Then I considered, and
methought my Understanding it was enlarged, and I perceived the extent of
Nature, and of a sudden she appeared not to my sight; but where she was I saw a
most exquisite Light, which took up an incredible small room, and methoughts my
Head seemed as it were diaphanous: And while I considered these things, it came
into my mind to wonder what was become of my Guide, for I missed him. While
these thoughts perplexed me, an Answer was given, as if from an intelligent
Spirit within the Glass, saying, Let not thoughts fill your mind, he whom you
seek is with us, for so it must be, this King is his Lord. This straight made
me view the complexion of the Water-bearer, and his countenance told me that he
was my very Guide: Then I viewed his Pitcher well, and I found that his Pitcher
was clear as pure Silver; and what was strange, the Bearer, and the Pitcher,
and the Water in it were one; and in the midst of the Water, as it were in the
very center, there was a most radiant twinkling Spark, which sent forth its
Beams even to the very surface of the Water, and appeared as it were a Lamp
burning, and yet no way distinguishable from the Water. The Voice then spoke to
me a second time, Delay not to put Fire under us, and govern it as you shall
hear the Voice direct you. Then I put Fire in at the open door at the top of
the high Turret, and Coals upon it, and caused my doors to be stopped both above
and below, and on every side; only by a secret passage I conveyed my Immortal
Fire under the Chamber in which was the Closet, and forthwith when all things
were heated, the Water-bearer took his Pitcher, and through a small Pipe he
poured out his Water, and the Fire came out with the Water, without any
particular shape, only it added a luster thereto; and no sooner was the Water
poured forth, but the Water-bearer with his Pitcher popt as it were under the
streams, and I saw them no more: And though the clearness of the Water did make
it to appear as it were Diaphanous, yet I found by a diligent view that it was
not so really, but only as to apparency, and that it was indeed very compact:
And as I wistfully beheld it, I saw as it were a goodly Lady in the midst of
it, which was no way resembling the former Beauty which I had discoursed
withal, whose Name was Nature; yet indeed very bcautiful, even to the parallel
of Helena. This Lady was naked, and of an admirable fair complexioned Skin, as
bright as the finest Silver; at first she appeared very small, and waxed bigger
and bigger, until the Water appeared no more, but she her self had transmuted
its whole substance into her shape. This sight I beheld with pity, for she (far
unlike unto the first Lady) was wholly impatient of the heat which I had made,
and yet was so enclosed in the Closet that she could not get out; she sweat
therefore even as though she would melt, and seemed as though continually
fainting: Then the King (who seemed as it were glad of the heat) seeing her
knew her to be his Sister, his Mother, and his Wife, and compassionating her
estate, ran unto her and took her in his Arms, and she feeling him, did so
strongly embrace him, that he could not shake her off, and with her sweat
partly, and partly with her tears, she did so bestream his Kingly Robes, which
shone like unto Tagus or Pactolus, that they were all suddenly changed into a
color Argent: the King loving her exceedingly, asked her what she desired? She
answered, That her desire was to have of him Conjugal Fealty; for, said she, I
cannot endure this heat, but I must die in it, and without me your Highness can
have no Offspring: The King condescended, and granted her Request, and so soon
as she conceived the Kings Seed, she said that she was better able to endure
the Fire which did prevail upon her.

Therefore not contented, she had a second, a third and fourth Benevolence,
even to the eleventh time: Then said the King, I am very faint and weak: and
trying to go, as formerly, his Legs and Feet failed him, his Flesh and Body
wasted as it were to nothing, and so continued worse and worse, until at length
his Body being thus wasted by Venery, began to sweat exceedingly, so long he
sweated, till he was as it were wholly consumed; and his Wife seeing what fell
out, wept bitterly, and her tears mingling with her Husbands sweat, grew into a
large stream, in which both she and the King were drowned; so far I beheld: And
then when they were both wholly out of sight, I mused at the strangeness of the
object, and while I wondered, methought I saw them ascend again; but
considering it well, I found that there swam upon the Water a Carcass, which
being wholly void of Life, did with the heat of the place draw to putrefaction
more and more, so that it grew livid, black, bluish, and yellowish, and sent
up most venomous Exhalations, and with its odor did so infect the Waters,
which were before of an Argent Clearness, that they did grow very thick and
dark, and at last black, resembling the form of muddy slime which is found in
Boggs; and at length with the heat of the Sun the moisture was wholly dried up
(as Moorish low Grounds in the summer time use to be) and I sought what was
become of my Bodies, and I found a horrible venomous tumefied Toad, which
seemed as it were dying; and a Raven almost famished walking there for to look
for meat, lighted upon the Toad, and preyed upon him, and with its poison died,
and made a most filthy squallid Liquor blacker than Ink, and thick like to
Pitch melted, which made me to wonder at the sight: And going to depart, I
heard a Voice which said to me, You must not leave us; if you do, our Persons
and Kingdom is lost without recovery. Then my Eyes were opened, and I saw
Nature walking up and down among the Carcases, and in her hand her
unparalleled Lamp; and taking a more serious view, I saw in those rotten Atoms
the Idea's of all things natural and supernatural; and I found the dead King
with his Wife were intombed in a Field Sable, and the Tomb as it were of
polished Jet or Ebony; and as in that place all things were strange, so most
strange was it that the Tomb and the intombed Carcass were one, and that
inseparably. Also upon the Tomb I found written a Prophecy, viz. That they (if
the Fire were kept equal and continual) should rise again, and be more glorious
and powerful than ever they were before. Then said I to the voice which is in
the Glass, I must be directed both what, and how, and when to do. The voice
answered me, Take no care, only do as I shall direct, and all shall be well; in
the mean time you may view the places that are about, only be sure that you
neglect not your time of attending here: And for to take away the tediousness
which the length of time would otherwise work, ask of me, and I shall inform
you in whatever you desire, nor shall I think my discourse to me a burden, so
you will not think your labor a trouble. Then said I, Not so; though I should
be bound to serve you during my whole Life, yet should I count it a privilege,
not a burden. Then she gave unto me as it were a Ball of fine Silk, wound up as
on a bottom, and said, Make this fast to a Pin of this Tower, and then go round
and behold the place, it may shorten the time to you: Carry this bottom with
you, and unwind it as you go, and by it you may return till you know the place.

But do not after the common guise.
THen I passed along, and was no sooner out of that place, but a very thick
misty darkness apprehended me, so thick that I might fell it; and though my
head were as it were transparent and very light, and I took also a Candle with
me, which was burning there continually at the entrance of the Tower, yet the
darkness was such, that it would not receive the light, for they were not
homogenial, but were a little dis-joyned by the Rays of the Light, and as it
were here and there condensed into strange figures, as of Birds, Beasts, and
creeping things of monstrous shapes: And by reason of this opposition the Rays
of the Light extended but a little way, and the Light most clear did shoot as
it were in Beams, and the darkness stood as it were in clusters by it self.

There were as it were a multitude of men, who seeing my Light in my hand,
which they could not discern well, they being in that dark which would not be
enlightened, but as through a thick cloud they beheld my Candle, and judged it
ominous, and left their stations: for their eyes with dark and smoke were so
tender, that my Candle over-poured them, and they could not bear its luster;
therefore they crying out, ran away. I mused much at this, how they could be in
such Cimmerian Darkness; and as I wondered, I espied that they had with them
Light as it were of Fox-fire, or rotten Wood, and Glowworms Tails, and with
this they sat in consultation, reading Geber, Rhasis, and such whom I heard
them name, and commenting on them, not without much pleasantness: Then I
considered that the Light which I had brought with me, did not enlighten the
place, but stood separated as it were from the darkness; and withal I remembered
that once there was Light in the World, and the darkness comprehended it not,
and that darkness had a false fire Light of its own, with which it seemed to
its inhabitants wondrous well enlightened: I set down my Candle, and went with
my Thread in my hand, by which I intended to return. When I was gone out of
sight of my Candle, my head began to seem as it were opacous, and a wind had
almost blown me down: Then I took my bottom of Thread, and made it fast to my
Girdle, lest it might drop out of my hand; and well it was that I did so, for
soon a Vertigo came upon me, and I fell and slumbered; and when I awaked,
methoughts it was no more darkness, but daylight about me: I wondered at the
very strange change, and still felt for my Thread, which by that Light I could
not see, but only feel it. I began to look about me, to see where I was, and
behold I was in a ruinous place of many millions of turnings, each leading
several ways; and every room was so enlightened with Fox-fire and
Glowworm-Tails, that for want of a better Light it seemed as if it were day: I
took out of my Pocket a small Book to see if I could read in it, it was called
Enchiridion Physicae Restitutae, with an Arcanum at the end of it, and I could
not read one word in it. There met me a man aged and decrepit, his Face rugged,
his Eyes bleared, his Hands and Fingers corraded, and saluted me, and said
merrily, What Book have you there? It is, said I, Arcanum Hermeticum. It is a
good Book, says he. He and Sendivow are the two best that ever wrote. I but,
said I, I went to peruse my Book, and I can read not one word in it. That Is
strange, quoth he; let me see it: Then I showed it him, and he read out of it
such strange things that I never had heard of before; and Sandivogius, says
he, is of the same mind. Then he begun to read in him, and read such Processes
that I had never heard of. I do remember well the Authors, and what they wrote,
but never to my remembrance did I find what you read in them, said I. Look on
them your self, said he, and you shall find it plain: I went to look on the
Book, but could not distinguish any word in it; which made me wonder. Then I
thought with my self, that as that Light had a peculiar difference from that
Light which I saw about the Tower where I was before, so it might have its
peculiar Objects: This Opinion I had confirmed by this, for that having Geber
and Rhasis with me, I tried how I could read there, and all the Processes I
could read very well, only some places seemed as it were left out, and a
distance of white left: I knew that my Books were perfect, and some of the
places (which were (as they seemed to me) left out) I remembered very well to be
those places in which the Truth was couched in few words: Then I returned by my
Thread to my Candle, and straight my head returned to its former diaphanity: I
took my Candle in my way, and of a sudden all my places that seemed light
before, returned to be Cimmerian darkness; only with the time that I had been
there, I found my Eyes were beginning to grow tender, and smarted and itched at
the first glimpse of this true Light, which then in comparison of the Light I
had before seen, did not seem barely Light, but the Super-Coelestial Light of
Paradise. Then I demanded of her with whom in the Glass I had former converse,
concerning what I had seen. She told me, That they were such who wrote in
Alchymy according to the Light of Fancy, and not of Nature; though to them
their Light seem clear enough, yet can they see nothing by it but what is
fantastical, and mystically or sophistically written by the Envious, for the
seducing of such fanciful Doters: therefore when once the Light of Nature is
brought to their station, it discovers Cimmerian darkness there, where their
imaginary Light only shines, such as is Fox-fire and Glowworms Tails, that
shine only in the dark; This Light makes their Eyes so tender, that the Lamp of
Nature makes them fly. Moreover, whatever is written according to this Light,
they cannot see, nay they cannot endure the Light of the true Luna of the wise
men: for any true Light discovers their Darkness, and yet their Darkness is
incapable of apprehending the Light. Now in that you went in among them without
your Candle, it was a bold adventure, for had you lost your Thread, you could
never have returned. Then I looked into my Tower, and did as I was directed;
and again I went to view those parts of Cimmerian Darkness once more, yet with
my Candle in mine hand, and my Thread at my Girdle; when I came the second
time, at the sight of this Light all fled, so that I could not meet with any,
but I entered into several turnings which I saw, and found in them several
works curiously erected, in which I might guess they aimed at nothing less than
the Philosophers Stone.

With Sulphurs.
I Found one Furnace most curiously built, in which all degrees of heat
imaginable, by the Art of man, might be kept with one fire; in which was set a
multitude of curious Glasses, in which were several Matters, some digesting,
others subliming, others distilling, others calcining, and about the Glasses
and the Furnace was written this of Geber, Per Deum Sulphur est omne illud
illuminans quod est supra terram. By this I knew, that Sulphur was the subject
on which was wrought; and indeed with so great cunning, that I could not but
admire the ingenuity of the men: and knowing that what a man prizeth, (though
it be a trifle) yet to spoil or destroy that would be an injury, I meddled not
with any Glass, (for indeed there were Laborers that fled not, because they
knew nothing, but only wrought as they were directed:) and when I came, they
could not perceive that I had any Candle in my hand, and wondered their Masters
should fly so from a fancy. Moreover I found that they could not see any
light from the Fox-fire and Glowworms tails, which were there; but the place
being dark, as being under ground, they wrought by Candles and Lamps, which yet
could give their Masters no light, but they sought all the world over for those
shining subjects: Yet I could notwithstanding both discern utter darkness,
which the Rays of my Candle would not enlighten. Then said I to the Workmen,
What is this that is brought in here? Oh, said they, they are Sol and Luna
terrestrial, whereby our Masters can see clearly the Natures of all things in
the world, and to make by their light the great Elixir; and though we can see
no light in them, or very little, it is because of our Ignorance in these
things, therefore we use our Lamps to work by. Where are your Masters? said I.
They ran away, said they, because when you came they said you were a Devil, and
brought an ominous light with you, and if they did but once see that with a
full view, their Works would all vanish; they did therefore lay a few Charms,
and ran away. Then I looked, and the ground under me was full of Crosses and
Circles, at which I laughed, and departed into another Room.

Or Salts preparate in diverse wise,
Neither with Corrosives, nor with Fire alone,
Neither with Vinegar, nor with Waters ardent,
Nor with the vapor of Lead, our Stone
Calcined is according to our intent.
All those to Calcining which are so bent,
From this hard Science withdraw their hand,
Till they our Calcining better understand.

ANd there I found in the like sort rare Furnaces, with this Inscription, Sal
Metallorum est Lapis Philosophorum: many processes I beheld, which would be
tedious to relate. On I passed from thence, and in another Room I found large
Furnaces, in which they were laboring about Waters fort; others were with
strong reverberations calcining Lead, Tin, Copper, Iron, and all Metals and
Minerals; others were drawing Spirit of Vinegar with a great care, till it
became exquisitely sharp, and in this they labored to calcine several
Metalline bodies; others were rectifying Spirit of Wine, so long till no Body
almost or Receiver could hold it, it was so subtle, and this they said was the
true Water of Life that must do the work; others were subliming of Lead, hoping
after it was exquisitely sublimed, to have out of it that Menstruum which
should effect the Stone, without any further laying on of hands. This when I
had seen, I returned to my Furnace, and recruited my Fire as I was directed,
and made a particular relation of what I had seen, and desired the verdict of
Nature upon them all. She told me, That they could never by this way expect any
thing but loss. I asked her if they might not with trying many things, at
length hit the right. She told me, No, they had not any ground of truth, nor
could they expect either the great secret, or any other particular profitable
truth, in that way. Then said I, Noble Lady, pray let me know the reason of
their error, that I may know how to avoid the like.

For by such Calcination their bodies be shent,
Which minisheth the moisture of our Stone;
Therefore when bodies to powder are brent,
Dry as ashes of Tree or Bone,
Of such Calxes then will we none:
For moisture we multiply radical,
In Calcining minishing none at all.

THen said she, Besides that they work not on the true Matter, they work not in
a right way, which are two most desperate errors; for our work is to make a
substance fluid, penetrating and entering, that may have ingress into imperfect
Metals: for which cause we do preserve humidity, without which our Stone cannot
be penetrative. So then instead of purifying the crude, and ripening what is
raw by these Calcinations, the tender Soul is put to flight, and the crudities
are the more strongly vitrified, so that all hope of fruit is wholly by this
means taken away: for take this for a rule, whatever either by violence of
Fire, or Corrosives, is turned into a dry Powder or Calx, it is wholly
reprobate in our work: for though we Calcine, yet it is in such a Fire in which
our moisture is not burnt, and in such a Vessel so closed that the Spirits are
retained, and in a word so sweet is our Regimen in reference to our Matter,
that moisture is advanced, and is made more unctuous, and by consequent more
ingressive.

And for a sure ground of our true Calcination,
Work wittily only kind with kind,
For kind unto kind has appetitive inclination.

BUt all this is not enough to declare our Calcination, for Operation follows
Preparation, and he that does not before he begin to work, prepare his Matters,
and set true Agent and Patient together, it is not his Regimen that can or will
produce any thing. Therefore first you must know, that we join kind with kind
in our work, for Nature is mended and retained with its own Nature: for this
cause is our King wedded to the Water-bearers Daughter, of which Water-bearer I
told you that his Body, his Pitcher, and the Water in it, are all one; and his
Daughter was the Queen which arose out of the water, in which was seen a Lamp
burning: Wonder not at it* that a Queen should spring out of a W^^ter-bearers
loins, for the King is the (...) Son, and he is greater then both. For know,
that in this place there is nothing so hard to get as Water, which cannot be
brought but by him that has the Keys of the whole Kingdom. Take this then for
a great secret, our Water-bearer is Father to the King and Queen: the King
being at perfect years, is at his own dispose, and enjoys more Riches then his
Father; but his Father has the Key of a Closet, in which is Riches enough for
all in the Kingdom, to make every Subject as rich as the King; but the dispose
of this wealth the King only is to have, yet can he not have it in his
possession till he marry his Sister, which is in the water of the Pitcher
invisible. This his Sister, is also his Mother and his Father, for it is one
with the Water-bearer, the Water and the Pitcher, as is said. By reason of his
Consanguinity the King embraces his Sister very desirously, and she by his
embraces appears as a Queen, and then the Water-bearer, and his Water and
Pitcher vanish, and the King and (...) remain alone: at length both King (...)
Queen are drowned, after the immoderate use of Venery, and violent sweating,
weeping and pissing, which sweat, tears and urine, do make one Sea, in which
swim two Fishes without flesh and bones, which after resolve and make one
Broth, which is called Water permanent.

Who knows not this in knowledge is blind,
He may forth wander as mist in the wind,
Wotting never with profit where to light,
Because he understands not our words aright.

THus though I have somewhat Metaphorically deciphered our true principles, yet
so plainly as that you may with diligence understand the meaning; and unless
you know this, you will proceed blindfold in your work, not knowing the causes
of things, so that every puff of Sophisters will toss you, like as a Feather is
tossed in the Air with a blast of wind: for our Books are full of obscurity,
and Philosophers write horrid Metaphors and Riddles to them who are not upon a
sure bottom, which like to a running Stream will carry them down headlong into
despair and errors, which they can never escape till they so far understand our
writings, as to discern the subject Matter of our secrets, which being known
the rest is not so hard.

Join kind therefore with kind, as good reason is,
For every Burgeon answers his own seed,
Man gets Man, a Beast a Beast I wis,
Further to treat of this it is no need.
But understand this point if you will speed,
Each thing is first Calcined in his own kind,
This well conceived, fruit therein shall thou find.

STep therefore not one step further till you have learned this Lesson, namely,
to wed Consanguinity with Consanguinity, and consider well what it is you
desire to produce, and according to that let be your intention. Take the last
thing in your Intention, for the first thing in your Principles: this is
according to Nature, and it is the true ground of all Generation, for out of
kind nothing does engender; a Man begets a Man, and not a Lion, nor does a
Lion beget a Sheep, a Rose does not produce a Thorn, nor a Nettle a
Gilliflower; and so, if need were, I could particularly demonstrate it
throughout all Vegetable, Animal, and Mineral Bodies, but it is so plain a
thing that I need say no more, but leave it with you as the Foundation-stone on
which you shall build whatever you intend. Attempt nothing out of its own
nature and kind, lest you reap a fancy instead of truth. Whatever you intend to
increase by way of Multiplication, attempt it only in its own kind; and so in
this work especially, in which Calcination is the mingling of Seminal
influence, which must be done in the same way of homogeneity. If you apprehend
this in its cause aright, and know how to apply this doctrine in your operation
as you ought, in this you will find great benefit, and a door hereby opened to
the discovery of greater Mysteries.

And we make Calx unctuous, black, white, and red.
ANd now the opportunity of this discourse, leads me to handle our Magical
Calxes, know that we do Calcine three times in our work, of which the general
principle is, that our Calxes are not combust powders, but unctuous, for in
them we innoble the Sulphurs, which are the Basis of Radical Humidity, which
Raymund calls Oils and Unguents: So then our Calxes are one in kind, and do
only differ in color and maturity. Our first is black of the blackest, and is
called Saturn; our second white of the whitest, and is called Luna; our third
is red of the reddest, and is called Sol.

Of three degrees or our Base be perfect.
THese Calxes are the periods of so many Circulations, and have so many degrees
allowed to each of them; our first Circulation confounds the Elements, our
second renews the Air, and the third exalts the Fire, and then is our Stone
perfect.

Flexible as Wax, else stand they in no stead.
OUr Calxes thus graduated, are distinguishable from all the Calxes in the
world; first, in that they are done without any laying on of hands: secondly,
from their exquisite subtilty of parts, (for they are finer then Atoms of the
Sun) joined with an eminent Humidity, by reason of which, to the astonishment
of the beholders, they flow like unto melted Wax; the first in the Glass by
continuance of heat, and so the second as not being come to their period of
perfection, and the second and third upon a plate of hot Metal, or on a melted
Metal, or on Mercury heated so long till it is ready to fly.

By right long process, as Philosophers do write,
A year we take or more for our respite:
For in less space our Calxes will not be made,
Able to tyne with Tincture that will not fade.

WHich last Calxes, as they are the period of Arts skill, and Natures power in
this thing, so they are a considerable time in perfecting; the former in five
months, viz. the white, and the red in nine months and a half, which is the
true time, and a month we allow for the preparing of our Materials, and three
months for Fermentations and Imbibitions, so that our whole Operation is above
a year. For indeed it is not an ordinary thing that we expect, but a
Fire-abiding Tincture, which is unfading and incorruptible, which cannot be
expected in a short time; yet verily the Industry of the Workman may forward,
or set back his Work, a month, two, or three, according to his more exquisitely
preparing of his Matters, and governing of his Fire, whose exact Regimen is for
speed, or retarding of the Work, almost all in all.

And for thy proportion thou must beware,
For therein may thou be beguiled,
Therefore thy Work that thou not mar.

AFter the knowledge of the true material Subject, and its Preparation, the
next main thing to be understood is the mystery of Proportion, which is a
secret of no light concernment, for many err therein. Thou shall therefore
understand, that our Proportion is twofold, Internal and External; the
Internal pondus is a Labyrinth in which all err who know our Subject as many
do, but not its Proportion. He who would effect any thing, must principally
learn this which is set down in Golden words, in Bernard Trevisan his Treatise
of the Chemical Miracle: The Sulphur, says he, which is in the Mercury, and
predominates not, is the Fire alone which governs the whole Work; and he
therefore that in these things would be a skilful Artist, let him know how much
Fire is beyond other Elements in subtilty, and what a proportion of it will
overcome all the rest. These Golden words, worthy to be engraven in Marble, are
the true foundation of our pondus.

With Mercury as much then so subtil'd,
One of the Sun, two of the Moon,
Till all together like pap be done.

BUt there is an External proportion, which is as necessary as the other, or
else the Work will either for lack, or excess of moisture, be destroyed; and
that is thus: Take thy Body which without any equivocation is most pure Gold,
let it be exquisitely purged, then filed or laminated, or calcined with
Mercury, as is vulgarly known; of this take one part, and of our Water (which
is without equivocation Argent-vive animated, which then we call our Luna) two
parts, mix them together in an Amalgama, and grind them in a Mortar of Glass,
or on a Marble, till they become very soft, and all the grettiness of the Body
be subtilized with the Mercury, that they may seem to be one pap or paste,
which we call Inceration.

Then make the Mercury four to the Sun,
Two to the Moon as it should be.

NOw pluck up your attention, for my speech will be difficult. When your Body
to your Mercury in outward proportion is one to two, then must your Mercury in
its inward proportion be just opposite, that is, four to two, else you shall
never make Harmony that is good Music; for do not think it is all one, with
one and the same proportioned Mercury, to put either one of the Body to two of
the Water, or one to three, or two to three, or three to four; no verily, till
you come to this, to measure your Lamp clibanically to your Furnace, you are
yet in the dark for Practice, though you may be true in Theory. I almost
tremble to speak of this point, for it is the very wild of all those who study
this Art, and cannot come to the end of their desires for want of true
information in this particular. Know then, that when thy Mercury is to Sol in
external pondus two to one, it must be as I said in respect of its own internal
qualities, four to the Sun to two of the Moon; therefore, says Artephius, that
our Water is of kin to the Sun and to the Moon, but more to the Sun then to the
Moon: Note this well, that is four to two, as Ripley has it. This is indeed a
great secret, which has befooled many.

Now know that our Eagles duly prepared are accommodated to the Sun from three
to ten, so that four to the Sun will be just seven; and thy Mercury thus
proportioned, let it be two of the Moon to one of its Body. Know also, that our
Water is not called the Moon, but in, or in reference to conjunction, and so
let the Moon be two. In reference to its one Constitution, it is called
Mercury, (for so it ought to be in that form and flux) and so it ought to be
four to the Sun, that is seven Eagles, which are to the Sun not before three,
to which adding four, you make seven.

And thus thy Work must be begun,
In figure of the Trinity,
Three of the Body, and of the Spirit three;
And for the unity of the substance spiritual,
One more then of the substance corporal.

ANd thus thy Work is brought to the true Touchstone, and that is Trinity in
Unity; for in this pondus of your Mercury you have a potential Body, which is
one part of three of the Mercury, which may by Art be made appear. This
potential Body is to be reckoned to your actual Body, and that makes with it
two, and so in potentia you have two of the Body to one of the Spirit, which is
three to three, and one to one. And this potential Body is at first spiritual
and volatile, (in manifesto) for unity sake, without which could be no unity.
Thus then a potential Body, but an actual Spirit, is joined with an actual
Body, by which means the actual Body, when it is actually dissolved and made no
Body, but a Spirit or Spiritual Body, then this potential Spiritual Body (which
was in the Water before) receives this potentialized Body, and both unite and
congeal together, and is endowed with a double nature and virtue, that is,
Spiritual and Corporal, Heavenly and Earthly. And thus is made an union, of
which the proportion of the Water in its first preparation, and its due mixing
with its Body, was the moving cause, really though hiddenly enforcing the
Compound by the necessity of its end, which it could not have done had it not
been so proportioned.

By Raymunds Repertory this is true
Proportion, there who list to look;
The same my Doctor to me did show.

THis is the true meaning of our proportions, both according to the mystery of
Internal and External pondus; this is that which Authors have so much
concealed, both Raymund, Arnold, Albert, and all who ever have wrote of it: I
have broke the Ice first in plain discovering the mystery.

Yet for all this, you stand in need either of a Master, or of more then
ordinary pains, accompanied with the blessing of God, e^se never look to find
out this mystery, which though by me revealed more plainly then any, yet it
will and must remain secret even till the fullness of time.

But three of the Spirit Bacon took
To one of the Body: For which I awoke
Many a night ere I it wist.
And both be true, take which you list.

THere is another External proportion, which is three of the Spirit to one of
the Body, according to the working of Noble Bacon, and many others; which
though it seem little to differ from the former, yet there is a wide
difference: I know them both, but shall not set down the grounds of the other;
if you understand the former, the rule of it may guide you in the latter; for
there is an infallible rule of proportion, how the External and Internal ought
to concur, to make a sweet Harmony: only let me this assure you out of Norton,
That if thy Body have plenty of drink, Then must thou wake when thou desir'st
to wink; it will cost thee more assiduity of boiling for to dry up three parts,
then two parts of Water; and there must be necessarily a diversity of Internal
pondus, for the Water being of one and the same Internal heat, and the External
fire being the same, the difference of decoction between two parts and three
will be half in half almost until blackness, though after blackness there is
one and the same time to both. Yet either of these proportions are true, only
you must be sure to qualify your Mercury in heat, and your Regimen of your
Furnace accordingly as you work with one or other of these proportions, or else
your first token of the Crows head will come wonderful slowly.

If the Water also be equal in proportion
To the Earth with heat in due measure,
Of them will spring a new Burgeon,
Both white and red in a Tincture pure,
Which in the Fire shall ever endure.
Kill thou the quick, the dead revive;
Make Trinity Unity without any strive.
This is the surest and best proportion,
For there is least of the part spiritual;
The better therefore shall be solution,
Then if thou did it with Water small,
Thine Earth over-glutting which loses all.
Take heed therefore to Potters Loam,
And make thou never too nesh thy Womb.
That Loam behold how it tempered is,
The mean also by which it is Calcinate,
And ever in mind look thou bear this,
That never thine Earth with Water be suffocate.

ALso if your Water have its proportion qualified accordingly, you may temper
it with your Earth almost in an equal quality, that is, two to three, or three
to four; but be sure then of your due government of external Fire, and a just
size of your Vessel, and so you may expect from this mixture Conception and
Generation: for in this pondus you shall find the death of the Spirit, and the
quickening of the Body, and the exalting of your Tincture first into white, and
after that into red, which will have ingress into Bodies, and tyne them
permanently and radically. Though the Tincture is largest where the Water is
most, but the work is speediest where the Water is least, the Fire is also less
hazardable; but your true proportion of your Mercury for such a pondus is hard
to be found, and thou will not easily find it unless thou be very skilful; the
middle proportion is less difficult, that of three to one is worse, for a Tyro,
because he may very easily have his time made tedious by it. The last would be
better for such a one, if it were not so hard to apprehend, for the Body would
soon be made no Body, and the Spirit mortified, and so Union would follow in a
short time, in comparison to other proportions. So then if thou know how to
prepare thy Mercury aright for its Internal proportion, the lesser thou put
of the Spirit, the better and quicker shall be thy Calcination and Dissolution;
and the more thou give of the Water, the longer thou shall be in attaining
the mastery: but if thou glut thy Earth with Water, thou will so suffocate the
active virtue, that thy moisture will not be dried up; at least it would
require so tedious a decoction, that thou would never see the effect. But
the mediocrity is for thee the best, at least at first; be not too covetous,
nor too prodigal, for over-driness and over-moisture are both enemies to
Generation, and make a barren Womb. If thou be'st witty to apprehend therefore,
I shall show you the certain way of External proportion; for know, that as the
Water is qualified internally, so does it act externally, and if thou can
apprehend the sympathy that is between the inward quality, and the outward
effect, thou may easily discern by what is apparent to sight, that which is
hiddenly contained. Then for your true information take this rule: Let your
Body be very well subtilized, and very pure, (which is a great matter, at the
least 24 Carrats) mix this at first with twice as much of its Water, and grind
it either on a clean Glass, or Marble Mortar; grind it thoroughly, as Painters
use to grind their Colors, and make not a light matter of this, for lack of
one half hour or hours pains in thy Amalgamation, thou may set thy work
backward 20 or 30 days; for the more subtlely the Amalgama is mixed, the more
easily* and speedily it resolves into Mercury, and is wrought upon, and the
signs appear. When thou have soundly and well ground it, and washed it very
clean, and dried it very thoroughly, so that there be not the least moisture in
it, observe the temper; if it be pliable like to Paste, yet so as when you
incline it this way or that, you see no Water run to the inclining side, which
you may easily discern, it is a good and sure temper; but if it be so hard and
dry, that it will not spread easily, it lacks moisture; or if that Hydropical
water run as it were within a skin, to the declining side of your Amalgama, add
more of your Body to it, till you see that sign no more; and grind it thoroughly,
as is said, and rather choose to lean to the other hand, then to this, for there
is nothing more irksome to an Artist in his Scholarship, then to wait for his
signs beyond the time.

Dry up thy moisture with heat most temperate.
Help Dissolution with moisture of the Moon,
And Congelation with the Sun, then have thou done.

WHen thou have done this, then be sure to decoct it in a very gentle Fire till
it be dry, not by exhaling the Water, but by coagulating it with the Body, in
which thy main care must be, that thy Vessel be close, and thy Fire gentle: Now
the way to distinguish a gentle from a violent Fire, is a thing deeply
concealed by the envious, I shall prescribe some few rules.

1. Know that it is the internal Fire of the Sulphur of thy Water, which does
perform the whole work.

2. That the external Fire is but an outward circumstance, which yet is so
absolutely necessary, that nothing can be effected without it.

3. The Regimen of the Fire is one Linear decoction, from the beginning to the
end of the Work, boiling the thick, and subliming the thin, and so dissevering
both (suaviter and cum ingenio) according to old Hermes.

4. All our Mastery consists in Vapor, which cannot be done without
Sublimation and Distillation; for if our Spirit ascended not in a living form,
it would all ascend and hang; but ascending quick, it returns again and
moistens the Body.

5. Our Distillation or Circulation, is not without a constant motion of
Separation; for as the subtle is separated from the gross by Sublimation, so
the thick of that which is below is severed from the thin, which is by
continual boiling and decocting, without a moments intermission: Therefore,
says Hermes, thou shall sever the subtle from the gross, and the thick from
the thin.

6. Our tender Spirit learns every day more and more to suffer Fire; and
therefore, says Arnold, boil it with a Fire daily increasing: yet is it but
one degree of Fire, and that is boiling, till the Woman's Empire is vanquished;
and then there is another degree, and that is roasting, which has two periods,
Fixation and Calcination: therefore say Philosophers in the beginning, Coque,
that is, Boil, for as much as the Stone is moist; and at the end they say,
Assa, that is, Roast, for then the Stone is dry.

7. The periods of the strength of the Fire are in this time many: every day if
thou can, augment a little, that it may increase insensibly, and you will
find the effect the more sweetly and speedily.

8. The Philosophers in their description of the Fire, and its degrees, did
more observe their matter and its capacity, then the Fire it self.

9. They chiefly liken their Work to Man's Generation, and so they call their
Compound, Man: therefore says Ripley, remember Man is the most Noble Creature.

10. This is the true meaning of Arnold's four degrees of Fire, Primus formetur
ut sensus ei dominetur; that is, the Stone being compared to Man, and its first
moist Regimen to a Bath; the first degree makes it sweat gently, as a Bath to a
Man, which is less hot then he can suffer, does cause a gentle sweat. Sensibus
aequato gaudet natura secundo, is the second degree, in which sweat is
exceedingly caused, as a Bath which is as hot as a man can possibly suffer,
causes a most violent sweat. Tertius excedit and cum tolerantia laedit, is the
third degree, which causes bubbling and swelling, and answers to that heat
which will blister a man's hand; for our Compound in this heat rises in
blisters, which fall and rise continually. Destructor sensus gaudet procedere
quartus, is the fourth heat of Congelation, which takes away sense, that is,
quickness, and brings in siccity, just as the cauterizing heat sears the flesh,
and drys the moisture. Thus hiddenly did that subtle Sophister veil his Fires.

11. Know that after 40 or 46 days continually boiling, the moisture will begin
to waste, and the Compound will begin to dry; which thou shall know, in that
the boiling will begin to turn to a swelling, like to Puff-paste or
Leaveneddough.

12. Know that in 36 days thou may have thy moisture begin to congeal, if
thou be exact in thy Fire, and Proportions both inward and outward.

13. Know that thy Glass must be thick, and very strong, and no less strongly
closed, lest it break with those winds which the first decoction will raise in
thy Vessel.

14. Let its neck be somewhat long, and fastened, that the motion which is in
the Glass may not cause it (by reason of the length and thickness of the neck,
and the Sublimation that is still in it, in drops which make it heavy) to sway
the little Body one way or other; for if it incline, the Matter will be apt to
grow to the inclining side, which should be avoided.

15. Let the neck be considerably cooler then the other part, that thy Vapors
may condense in it, which else will burst the Glass violently; so may thou
give thy Fire more strong then otherwise, and let thy nest be guarded from
unnecessary heats and colds, which therefore would have holes at the top of the
Cover, which may shut over every Glass, and let out a part of the neck, which
would be very advantageous both for the fastening of the Glass, and condensing
of Vapors.

16. This boiling will begin in the first three days, and if you be a good
Workman, in the first 24 hours; and from its first ebullition your time is to
be reckoned.

17. When you see the Water thicken in its boiling, there is less danger of the
Fire.

18. If your Fire go out, your Stone dies.

19. Every intermission of your Fire, is a wasting both of its strength and
virtue; and besides the most tedious protraction of time, it makes the Stone
subject to many Sicknesses, which would require a most subtle Philosopher to
amend, and it lays your Stone in danger of having a return of the Crows Pullets
to their nest, after they are fled, which is an ominous sign.

20. Your Gold is not totally lost before blackness perfect; yet it may be so
metamorphosed, as to puzzle the best Mechanic to reduce it, and then it is
never so full of Spirit as it was before.

21. Yet some of it will be lost in a short decoction, and most of it in thirty
days. In a Fire then governed according to these Rules, dry up thy moisture:
and that thou may dry up the moisture of thy Water, thou must dissolve the
Compages of thy Body, so then thy Water dissolves thy Body, and thy dissolved
Body re-congeals it self by a further decoction, and with it self congeals the
Water, which in dissolution was so united as to make one with it.

Four Natures into a fifth so shall thou turn,
Which is a Nature most perfect and temperate.

THus shall thou turn thy four qualities in which were repugnancy, into a fifth
which is temperate; that is, thou shall in this dryness of Calcination,
reconcile the Mercury with its qualities of cold and moisture, to Sulphur with
its qualities of heat and dryness, so shall thy Elements remain at the bottom,
and thy Exhalations shall cease, and the moisture being daily terminated into
dryness, by the ferment of the Body, as Milk by Runnit is terminated into
Cheese, thou shall have a middle product, partaking of the complexion of either
Parent.

But hard it is with thy bare foot to spurn
Against a bar of Iron, or Steel new acuate;
For many so do which be infatuate,
When they such high things take in hand,
Which they in no wise understand.

THus we have plainly and faithfully done our duty, and by a Line as it were
have dissevered the Truth from Falsehood; yet we know, that in the World our
Writings shall prove as a curious edged Knife; to some they shall carve out
Dainties, and to others it shall serve only to cut their Fingers: yet we are
not to be blamed; for we do seriously profess to any that shall attempt this
Work, that he attempts the highest piece of Philosophy that is in Nature; and
though we write in English, yet our Matter will be as hard as Greek to some,
who will think they understand us well, when they misconstrue our meaning most
perversely: For is it imaginable that they who are fools in Nature, should be
wise in our Books, which are testimonies unto Nature?

In Eggs, in Vitriol, or in Blood,
What Riches ween they there to find?
If they Philosophy understood,
They would not be in working so blind,
Gold and Silver to seek out of its kind:
For like as Fire of burning principle is,
So the principle of gilding is Gold I wis.
If thou therefore intend for to make
Gold or Silver by craft of our Philosophy,
Thereto neither Eggs nor Blood thou take,
But Gold and Silver, which naturally
Calcined wisely, and not manually,
A new Generation will forth bring,
Increasing its kind as does every other thing.

SOme I know will serve my Book as they have served others, out of it they will
read their own fantastic processes, which I never dreamt of, nor yet are they
in Nature; and whatever I write most plainly, they will Allegorize, and say it
is true, for matter of Operation he wrought well, but withal very enviously
and mysteriously: he calls the matter Gold, and Mercury, but that is but
allusively; but he meant Egg-shels calcined, or Vitriol, or Man's Blood, or Dew,
or Rainwater, or Saltpeter, or Nitre, or Tartar, or this or that thing,
according to their sordid fancy, and so they will proceed, nothing unsettled in
their fancies by what I have heartily written. Gross Sots, thus to think that I
in what I without any equivocation call Gold and Mercury, they should make to
allude to such trifles: it is the sign of an Owl to be blinder, by how much the
Sun shines clearer; let me therefore to satisfy the Ingenious, profess and
protest, that without any Allusion or Figure in speaking, our Matter is Gold,
even the purest that is sold, or can be bought; this is our Masculine Sperm.
And our other principle is Mercury, like to that which is commonly sold, in
form, in flux and color, only it is brighter, and some what more ponderous;
and without any Metaphor we call it Argent vive. In the making of this Mercury
is all our secret, and in the Regimen of the Fire according to its capacity,
consists the whole Mastery. O fools and blind! think you to gather Grapes of
Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? wherefore do you thus waste your Goods, proceeding
in your Work, as an Ass to his Crib, never considering the nature of the thing
you go about? If Gold and Silver be your intention to produce, in what would
you find them? in Eggs, or Blood, in Salts, or such things? what a madness is
this? to what end think you these operations will tend? what conformity is
there between what you seek, and that which you take in hand? do you not
consider the difference of imposition between those Subjects, and Metals? how
do you think that they should give weight to imperfect Bodies, when as they
themselves are far more light themselves? how can you expect from them a
specific perfect Metalline Tincture, which have not any thing Metalline in
them? You see not your own madness. It is no light matter to cause a Body,
which perhaps is 10 or 12 parts at the least in 16 defective of the dimensions
of Gold, to penetrate its own dimensions so many times, to answer your fond
desires. This which you attempt is to force Nature, and to create Sperms, both
which are vain to undertake, and truly impossible. Leave then this Sophistry,
and embrace true Light. To create Sperms is Gods alone property, and every
thing has its own Sperm, as it has its own Form: there is nothing that has a
seminal virtue applicable to two things, every thing has its own Seed, and
according to its own Form. Gold therefore and Silver being thine intention, let
the same be thy subject to work upon; Gold is thy first Basis, for thy white
must first come out of thy red, and when thy white Stone is perfect, then may
thou use Luna vulgar. Now Gold must have its hidden Seed extracted, and that is
done by Mercury in Calcination, for that operation is the Mineral Copulation,
in which the Seeds are sent forth and mingled together, then shall the old Body
die, and a new Body shall rise again, endowed with a multiplicative virtue,
according to the nature of all things; for it savours rankly of absurdity and
ignorance, to allow all things almost a multiplicative power, and to deny it to
Gold, the most perfect of all sublunary things.

And if it true were that profit might be,
In things which are not Metalline.

I But some will say, How will you answer the Philosophers, who affirm that
their Stone is in all things, though in some things nearer, and in some things
at greater distance, yet in all things according to the rule of (propinquius
and remotius?) To such I answer, I grant and know that all things originally
owe all their principle material unto Water, and their formal unto Light; and
according to the congress of these two principles, through the command of the
Architect, this Light does illuminate the material Water in a singular way,
according to the Ideal species which were before in the Archetype: So then the
Matter resides in Water, the Informing in Light, and the determination of the
Form, which is as I may say the Form's formality, is in the will of the
Creator, first impressed or sealed in the word (fiat,) and ratified in his
command (producat unumquodque juxta speciem suam.) Now to apply this to our
present purpose, in Water and Light all things agree, in the determination of
Illumination they differ. This determinative sentence of the Almighty, sealed a
great variety in the products of the Matter and Form, which are in themselves
general, and being thus sealed, not any thing can pass from its kind to mix
with another kind, but it will cause a product partaking of either Parent, nor
can mixture be made but in the same genus or species; as an Apple may be
graffed on a Crab-tree, a Man may (though abominably) mix with a Beast,
(licentia naturali) but out of genus or species nothing can mix. There are also
many particular exceptions of things in one genus, for many Trees I know which
the Art of man cannot ingraff one in another, so as to grow, will yet grow well
ingraffed elsewhere; so a Dog and a Mouse cannot mix, being one so
disproportionable to another. But this by the by.

To return to our intention, we say, that as all things are by the will and
power of God specificated, so with the destruction of that species, the Form
(as to that individual) perishing, (for no entire species can perish) things
may both by Nature and Art return to their first stable principle material,
which is Water, of which Nature, if it found it in a convenient place, might
(impregnating it with a Metalline Seed) produce a Metalline Sperm, or
viscosity, which then might be a Metal by decoction, and yield unto our work a
profitable subject.

As in Blood, Eggs, Hair, Urine, or Wine,
Or in mean Minerals dug out of the Mine;
Yet must that Element be first purified and separate,
And with Elements of perfect Bodies be desponsate.

SO then if thou can (as by the Liquor Alcahest thou may) reduce a Body (be
it what it will, whether Eggs, or Hair, or Urine, or a Spirit ardent, or any
mean Mineral which is not of a Metalline imposition) to Water, and after
know how to impregnate that Water with a specificated, seminal, influential
Light, so that that Water may penetrate its dimensions at the least 16 times,
and become a Mineral, Mercurial Juice; thou may then expect as much profit
from that Mercury, as from the best Mercury that is sold in the Apothecaries
shops, and no more; for thou may so purify it, and separate its faeces and
crudities, as that it may become fit to join with thy perfect Bodies: but I
doubt this way will be so hard, (try it when thou will, I fear the first will
puzzle thee all thy life long, to turn all Bodies into Water, and the next
would puzzle all the Devils in Hell, to bring this Water to a Metallic seminal
viscosity) that thou had better leave musing on these Impossibilities, and
take my counsel, that is, seek it there where Nature has put it.

But first of thine Elements make thou Rotation,
And into Water thine Earth turn first of all,
Then of thy Water make Air by levigation,
And Air make Fire; then Master I will thee call
Of all our Secrets great and small:
The wheel of Elements then have thou turned about,
Truly conceiving our Writings without doubt.

TAke of thy clean Mercury, which is animated according to what I have
faithfully taught in my little Latin ^troitus ^rtus.
Treatise, and mix it with thy Body, as there I told you, without ambiguity;
put it in a Glass, as I there advised, and govern it with a Fire, as I in that
Treatise ordered, and thou shall see thy Elements circulate; first thou shall
have thy Gold dissolved, which thou shall know by thy first sign, which is a
whiteness which will arise like a skin in boiling upon the Water. This Water
will be made aerial, by subliming in a continual Vapor; for by constant and
continual Sublimation, our Stone is inspired, and takes life in the Air, and
lives, and shows the actions of life, and a living Water or Dew shall from the
top of the Glass descend upon the lower grounds, and make them fructify; then
shall the Central Fire, which was hidden in the Earth, and is now in the Water,
come forth and ascend with the Water, and in the form of Air and Vapor, shall
beautify thy Vessel with changable colors, Citrine, pale, bluish and
blackish: This is the Fire of Radical Sulphur, which when it is once stirred
up, is like unto the Fiery Dragon, and Ignis Infernalis; by this thou may
know that the Heaven and the Earth, the Form and the Matter, the Male and the
Female are now beginning Conjunction: when thou see this sign, rejoice, for
know that now thy Bodies are made in greatest part no Bodies; and this if thou
do work well, will be in 30 or 36 days.

This done, go backwards turning thy wheel again,
And into Water turn thy Fire anon,
Air into Earth, else labourest thou in vain.

NOw know, that all our three Circulations are so called not without great
reason, for so indeed they go on as a Wheel; put a Nail in a Wheel, and turn
it, and you shall see the Nail will with one half of your turning ascend, and
the other half descend: And then that Circulation is complete, and you then
must go on to another Circulation.

These our Circulations are Solution and Congelation, Volatization and
Fixation, opening and shutting; when once thou have brought thy Body to the
height of Subtiliation, that the Spirit by decoction can bring it to, then the
Spirit has done its work, and cease then to be active; then begins the
dissolved Body to work after its kind, and then the Spirit is passive, and the
Body active; thus passive Natures are made active, and active passive, which is
the Key of our Mastery. First then, advance the Spirit above the Body, till the
Fire be discovered, which is in a yellow color; then advance the Body over the
Spirit, till the Earth again appear, which is in a color blacker than Pitch;
which first will begin with blewness, and this will decline daily more and more
unto blackness. This yellow color remember that it comes with a moisture of
the Compound, otherwise what you do is all in vain: turn it then into Water,
that is, let this yellowness appear in humido, till by opposition from the
terrene qualities there be engendered a blewness, then continue this decoction
till all be entirely black, for in gross moisture heat working, engenders
blackness, with such like gross colors.

For so to temperament is brought our Stone,
And Natures contractions four, are made one;
After they have three times been circulate,
Also thy Base perfectly consummate.

THy Air then must be thickened with the Body, which is terrene and gross, being
not yet putrified, and by this means the Fire and the Air, and the Earth and
Water will accord; for Air will agree with Water, and Earth with Fire: The Air
being then tempered with Earth, does by this reconcile the Water and the Fire.
Thus our first decoction confounds the Elements, and thus our Stone which was
of severed qualities, is brought to a temperateness. Thus by a natural
Circulation, the Quadrangle is made a Circle, and four qualities make a fifth,
which is a Neuter from the four, and yet partakes of all. This first
Conjunction natural, which is made in the Glass without laying on of hands,
which we call Triptative, is the ground of the last Tetraptive Conjunction,
which is made in the truning round of the three Wheels, which does perfect the
Stone.

Thus under the moisture of the Moon.
GOvern then thy Bath first with a moist Fire, until the Body be made no Body,
but a flying Spirit; this is the time of the Woman's reign, and it is attributed
to the Moon: for our Gold till it be dissolved, all the work depends only upon
the active virtue of the Water, which causes the slow appearance of our signs.

And under the temperate heat of the Sun,
Thy Elements shall be incinerate soon,
And then have thou the Mastery won.
Thank God thy Work was so begun:
For then have thou one token true,
Which first in blackness to thee will show.

WHen thou have by thy first Waters Pontick virtue and firiness, so far
dissolved thy Body as to set at liberty its internal Sulphur, then thy
Operations will be speedy; for the Sulphur of the Water, together with the
natural Sulphur of thy Gold, by mixture will make an unnatural Fire, which will
then burn like to the Fire of Hell, first making a total end of that
dissolution which was but in part made by the Water, and after that drying up
and congealing its own moisture, and the moisture of the Water, uniting the
Sulphur of the Sun and the Sulphur of the Water, and the Mercury of the Sun and
the Mercury of the Water, and the united Sulphur prevailing over the united
Humidity, rotting it into powder as small as Atoms, black of the blackest
black, thou shall then see a total mixture of Seeds, and death of thy Compound.
This rotting will begin about the 42, 46 or 50th day; and the signs of it are,
the Fumes will not ascend, but the Matter will boil at the bottom of the Glass*
like to melted Pitch, boiling and bubbling, swelling and puffing in a black
color, every day blacker and blacker, showing changable rotting colors in its
boiling. This will continue till it be so thick, that it boil not, but grow
hard and swell; yet it will vary often, and appear sometimes as though dry, and
sometimes a little moisture will appear, with fresh bubbling, but no Fumes. And
this will last about 46 days, no Fumes rising at all, so that about the 84th or
90th day, after thy Matters begin to be boiled in a continual decoction,
Putrefaction will be complete, and then Sublimation or Circulation will begin
again, which in 46 or 50 days will end in a white Dove.

This first token of blackness proclaims thee a Master, after which thou can
not well miss, unless thou will. This is the astonishment of Art, to make Gold
volatile, which was so fixed: be patient then, and boil continually till your
Gold begin to dissolve, and come upon the Water like a Cream. Then continue
your decoction till the color begin to change into an imperfect Citrine, with
moisture, and send up yellowish vapors. This Citrine will soon be mixed with a
bluish black, and yet continue the decoction till the Clouds begin to rise,
and a dark mist: then continue your boiling, till breath fail, that is, the
Clouds and Fumes arise no more; then the Compound boil at the bottom without
Fumes, and will show dark, obscure, reddish, yellowish, bluish, gray and
blackish colors; then continue your decoction till the Body and whole Compound
begin to rot into Atoms, which the 50th day will give you a Harbinger or
forerunner of, with Pitchy blackness; then know that all is thoroughly mingled
together, and will never cease till the damned Earth come, the Earth of Leaves,
which is a dust impalpable.

The Head of the Crow that token call we,
And some do call it the Crows Bill,
Some call it the Ashes of Hermes Tree;
And thus they name it after their will,
Our Toad of the Earth which eats his fill.
Some call it by what it is mortificate,
Our Spirit with Venom intoxicate.
But it has names I say to thee infinite;
For after each thing that blackness is to sight
Named it is, till time it waxes white;
Then has it names of more delight,
After all things that been full white.
And the red likewise after the same,
After all read things does take the name,
At the first Gate, etc.

THis token then is called the Crow, the Crow's Head, and the Crow's Bill, for
it is a shining blackness, like unto Printers Ink, or a solid Coal new broken,
or the most black and compacted broken Pitch.

Others name it the Ashes of Hermes Tree, for it is Ashes out of which grows a
Tree afterward, beautiful and glorious with Sprigs and Branches, and changable
colors.

And indeed this liberty the Philosophers have taken, to call it what they
list: they call it their Toad which crawleth on the ground, and feeds upon
the slime of the Earth; because before it is quite black, it may ^^semble the
colors of a Toad, and its likeness, pusfing and swelling, and rugged with
bunches and blisters, and knobs.

Others call it a Spirit killed with its own deadly poison, that is, Mercury
dissolving Gold, in which dissolved Body (which then seems a Spirit) there is a
hidden ferment, which may recongeal the same: this fermental virtue it is that
does coagulate or thicken the Water, that to the wonder of the Beholders what
before was thinner and thinner, does after 40 days thicken, till it come to a
dust or powder like to impalpable Atoms.

But I shall not insist upon these denominations, there being so many given to
it by the Envious, that there is nothing almost in the World that is black, or
may be made black by the Fire, but they have named it by it. Also whatever is
filthy or faeculent, or unsavory either to taste or smell, they have
Allusively called their Stone by, in reference to its first putridness or
corruption. So likewise when by continuance of decoction the color changes to
white, they then call it their Swan, their Dove, their white Stone of Paradise,
their white Gold, their Alablaster, their white Smoke, and in a word whatever
is white they do call it by. And so the Red they name their Vermilion, their
red Lead, their Poppy of the Rock, their Tire, their Basilisk, their red Lion,
and in sum it borrows the names of all red things.

Now thou art entered the first five Gates of the Philosophers Castle; for do
not believe but that Calcination is verily Putrefaction, and is done by
Dissolution, Separation and Conjunction, as if thou have attended this
discourse thou may easily conceive: only here is the Sophism, after this
total Calcination, there is a relenting again; for as I said before, our
Operation is but turning as it were of a Wheel, which runs one half of its
circulation directly backwards to its first progress. Thou sublimest so long,
till the Body is made as volatile as it may be, this is the activity of the
Spirit; then thou congealest so long, till all appear like Atoms, and then is
thy bodily virtue active, and thy Spirit passive; then thy Spirit begins to be
active again, and thy Compound which was apparently fixed, relents again and
distills as before, till it come to its height again of volatility, which is
again a Separation; then is celebrated again a Conjunction Tetraptive, and from
that time all ascends and descends together, and there is such an union, that
there does not then (as at first) exhale a quick Fume, and descend upon the
bodily Moles, but all ascends like to a glorious Tree with branches, and is not
sublimed to the top, but sprouts up like the tender Forced in a fair morning,
which falls and rises till all become a Powder impalpable. So then after
Calcination is again a Solution, and that divides between Azoth and Laton, and
a distilling Separation in which Azoth washes Laton; and after that a
Conjunction, not of the four Elemental qualities only, which was in the first
Conjunction, but of the Elements themselves, the Body, Soul and Spirit; and
then is made another Calcination into a white Calx, which by continual
decoction relents again, and is made volatile again: for our Wheel goes round,
and when it is come thither whence it set forth, it begins again. Thus is made
a third Solution, Sublimation and Calcination into a red Elixir, which is the
Sabbath of Nature and Art; at which being arrived, there is no farther progress
without a new Marriage, either by Ferment or otherwise, according to the rule
of Nature and Art: so that indeed all our work is three Rotations, and every
Rotation has three Members, Solution, Sublimation, and Calcination. The first
Solution, is called Inceration, and Reduction or Liquefaction, the second
properly Solution, the third Inceration. The first Sublimation is called
Distillation, Ascension and Descension, the second Separation and Ablution, the
third Exaltation and Sublimation. The First Calcination is called Calcination
and Conjunction Triptative, Putrefaction, etc. The second Congelation,
Albification and Fixation, the Third Illumination, etc. only remember, thou in
thy first Calcination attainest complete Putrefaction, in the second the
complete white Elixir, and in the third the complete Red. This I premise to
undeceive thee, that thou may not think to have a Calcination first, a
Dissolution next, a Separation thirdly, a Conjunction fourthly, a Putrefaction
fifthly, etc. No verily, when thou first put thy Matters into the Vessel,
in the first day of thy Operation, thou give a Fire in which thy Compound
boileth, swells, and puffs visibly, and drops run down in veins off from
the Unequal of thy Glass; for in this Mercury thy Gold will, beyond the nature
of any other Mercury, flow in the Fire as if the whole was Mercury, and boil
visibly, which must never cease, not a moment, for it brings imminent damage.
In the first days of your boiling, which is accompanied with a constant
ascending and return of Fumes, your Compound grows more and more liquid, now
and then a skin appearing in the form of a distinguishable, though not very
observable, whiteness. At length a yellowish color will appear, less at first,
and more afterward distinguishable, both in the boiling Compound below, and in
the Fumes above; and when thou see thy Glass as if it were all over gilded,
where the Fumes ascend with a blewness, then know that thy Man and Wife do mix
their Seeds, then shall an obscure greenness pass and continue a season, then
shall thy Fumes diminish, and at length be none at all, and the Compound shall
boil and swell in the bottom of the Glass.

After that, the more you boil, your Compound will be the more black, coming at
last to the temper of melted Pitch for color and bubbling, which shall rot
with obscure colors until it come to the period of Putrefaction, which is a
most exquisitely subtle, black, unctuous Powder, which about the 84th or 90th
day in a good decoction will be complete.

Take heed now, for I shall not make such another particular Systeme of the
Work in all my Writings. When the fullness of complete Calcination is perfect,
then will the parts begin to liquefie together again, and you then shall see
Vapors begin to arise again, first like to a Smoke, which will after return in
drops condensing on the Vessel sides, which believe me is a gallant sight; for
in this Operation as blackness by little wears away, such colors will appear
which thou can not imagine, that thou will steal from Natures due to satisfy
thine eyes in the beholding of it, when thou should sleep.

This Circulation with infinite variety of colors will last between 20 and 30
days, and then thou shall see thy Matter appear pretty white, which then will
grow whiter and whiter, till it become like a glittering Sword in the
Sunbeams: trust me, for I have seen this shining sparkling white, which yet
will be quick like a most glorious Heaven-born Mercury, the subject of wonders.

Then shall these Fumes begin to cease, and thou shall see a Congelation, like
to the sparkling twinkling eyes of Fishes, which moving uncessantly on the
Fire, will glitter incomparably and wonderfully, and thickning more and more,
it will sprout like the tender Frost in a most amiable luster, and in 25 days
shall thou have it a most impalpable undiscernable Powder. Now thou need no
farther instruction, only this let me tell you, that the continuing your Glass
in the Fire, and increasing it discreetly, this white will relent again, and
change into a perfect green, and will again circulate and become perfect Azure,
and at the length thicken, and in the end become (after a long Citrinity) in a
moment a sparkling red pure impalpable Powder. Understand this well, and you
will not be amazed any longer with the distinction of our Operations, which is
but Solution (which contains Separation or Sublimation, and Volatization) and
Coagulation, which contains Conjunction, Calcination and Fixation; and all is
but a successive action and passion of Gold the Body and his qualities, and
Mercury the Soul and its qualities, between which intercedes a Spirit of Life,
which carries them up and down like a Wheel, which turns till it returns
thither whence it proceeded, and then begins again and turns so long till it
finds its rest, which is in the Fiery Cathedra, the red of the reddest, the
great Elixir commanding all Metals, and reducing them to the highest period of
Nature, which is Gold it self, having attained a plusquam perfection, through
the mavelous cooperation of Art and Nature.

Thus Gold is thy Base or Foundation, the Center to which all thy Operations
return, and in which they rest; for they are but Circulations in their own
kind, and these Circulations are uncessantly carried along through the
never-ceasing action of the Fire, which a little intermission would retard
notably, an extinction of the heat would extinguish irrecoverably. If any then
should ask us, what our natural Operation of the Stone is; we would answer, a
making of active Natures passive, and passive active, by continual decoction.
We boil continually, and when the Spirit is active there is a constant
ascension and descension, and the Body is dissolved and made to fly like a
Spirit; and when the Body is active, the Fumes by little and little cease, and
the Compound remains below, boiling without fuming, thickning and then at
length calcining: and this is without hands repeated three times, the Fire only
being kept continually, and then a Sabbath of rest and perfection is attained:
in the mean time diverse colors come and go, which the dying Body and
vegetative Soul do work and cause. Trust me, Friend and Brother, thou never
had such a manuduct as this in thy life, the Reasons of my plainness my
little Latin Treatise does clearly show.

The Battle's fought, the Conquest won,
The Lion dead revived;
The Eagle's dead which did him slay,
And both of sense deprived.
The Showrs cease, the Dews which fell
For six weeks, do not rise;
The ugly Toad that did so swell,
With swelling bursts and dies.
The Argent Field with Or is stained,
With Violet intermixed,
The sable Black is not disdained,
Which shows the Spirits fixed.
The Compound into Atoms turned,
The Seeds together blended;
The flying Soul to the Earth returned,
The soaring Bird descended.
The King and Queen contumulate,
And joined as one together;
That which before was two, by Fate
Is tied, which none can sever.
The King begets the Queen with Child,
Conjunction does allay
Their fury who before were wild,
Conception both does slay.
The King is Brother to his Wife,
And she to him is Mother;
One Father is to both, whose life
Depends upon each other.
The one when dead, the other dies,
And both are laid in Grave;
The Coffin's one in which both lies,
Each does the other save.
Yet each the other does destroy,
And yet both are amended;
One without to other has no joy,
Both are of one descended.
Twice forty days do come and go,
To which twice five are added,
These do produce a perfect Crow,
Whose blackness chears hearts sadded.
Twice fifteen more produce a Dove,
Whose wings are bright and tender;
Twice ten more make the Soul above
To need no Fire defender.
For Soul and Body so combine,
The Spirit interceding,
Tincture to give of Silver fine,
The Soul the Body in leading.
Also such fixity to add,
Against the Flames prevailing,
Which may the Chemist make full glad,
The Sophister still failing.
Who seeks in fancies for to find
Our Art so much concealed,
Not duly weighing in his mind
That it is a Fountain sealed,
Which one thing only can unlock;
This one thing learn to know,
Lest you the same event should mock,
That thing these Lines do show.
AN EXPOSITION UPON THE Second Gate, Which is DISSOLUTION.
The Second Gate Opened, Which is DISSOLUTION.
Of Dissolution now will I speak a word or two,
Which shows out what erst was hid from fight,
And makes intenuate things that were thick also,
By virtue of our first Menstrue clear and bright,
In which our Bodies eclipsed been of light,
And of their hard and dry compaction subtilate,
Into their own first Matter kindly retrogradate.

HAving run through the Chapter of Calcination, I now come to handle
Dissolution, which as I said before, is the first beginning of the Spirits
activity, and it is the first half of the Wheel which turns up the Spirit, and
down the Body; the second has a contrary operation, for it makes the Body
active, and Spirit passive: so then Calcination hides the profundity of the
Body, which Solution discovers. It is then nothing else but a boiling of hard
and dry Bodies in our Mercury, in a convenient Fire, so long till they be
dissolved and made thin; then the same Fire makes them fly, and flying they
condense and return in drops on the Body, and moisten it: This is Solution and
Sublimation together, for the Water circulating upon the Body, does soften it,
and by often returning does at length bring it to its own nature of moisture.
In this Resolution, according to Artephius, the Sun loses its color and is
darkened, and the Moon does not give her light, for all things are turned into
their confused Chaos, or first Matter, in which the Elements with their
qualities are hurried together.

One in Gender they be, and in Number two,
Whose Father is the Sun, and the Moon the Mother;
The mover is Mercury: These and no more be
Our Magnesia, our Adrop, and none other
Things here be, but only Sister and Brother:
That is to mean, Agent and Patient,
Sulphur and Mercury co-essential to our intent.

THe cause of this is the Homogeneity of the Matter, wherein they agree in
essence, together with the difference which is between them in Sex, they being
in the Glass as Male and Female; and in ripeness of years one being more
mature, and by consequent more active, (to wit, the Sun, who therefore is the
Father) the other more crude (in comparison of the Sun) and so more passive,
viz. the Moon, which therefore is the Mother of our Stone. This Mother is our
Mercury (which for its eminent difference from any other Mercury, is called the
Moon) with its internal true Sulphur, which is hidden under its Mercurial form,
does first move; for at first our Body, which is Gold, is dead, and lives not
till it be quickened by our Mercury, then it lives: it behooves thee then to put
in thy Body and thy Water, and let them stand together, and add nothing to
them. This Composition duly made we call our Magnesia, and our Adrop, and
nothing enters, neither Powder nor Liquor, save only these two species, which
species are the perfect Body and Argent vive.

These two sprung out of one Root, for as I told you, the Soul of thy animated
Mercury is perfect true Gold, yet volatile, which by Art may be made to appear
in a fixed form: so then we join Consanguinity with Consanguinity, Brother with
Sister, and make them become together Man and Wife. These two by continual Fire
do act and re-act, the Woman first, and then the Man, several, which then are
joined and make one Hermaphrodite, acting one half of each Circulation as a
Woman or Spirit, and the other half as a Man or Body.

For each of the two principles have a Sulphur and a Mercuriality; the Gold or
Body has its Sulphur external and apparent, the Mercury the Spirit has it
internally hidden, yet both these are co-essential each to other, and in that
respect they are the only subjects in the World for our Art.

Between these two in quality contrarious,
Engendered is a mean most mavelous,
Which is our Mercury and Menstrue unctuous;
Our secret Sulphur working invisibly,
More fierce then Fire burning the Body,
Dissolving Metals into Water Mineral,
Which Night for darkness in the North we do call.

FOr with their Homogeneity, they have withal such a Contrariety in opposite
qualities, that they do no sooner feel the Fire, but they are stirred up to
Work, and boiling and circulating in a continual Ebullition or Vapor, they do
mingle their homogeneal qualities together: by reason of which there is a
strange medium, of an unnatural Fire and a putrefying Bath engendered, then the
Sulphur or Fire of the Gold, which is the Fire of Nature, and the Sulphur of
the Water, do embrace one another, and these two make an unnatural Fire, in
which the Humidity appears, and the Sulphur being hidden to the eye, appears in
its effects only to sight, and that is, it burns, destroys and conquers the
Bodies, which common Fire never could do, making them to be no Bodies, but a
Fume of Mineral Vapor; and in this Operation the Elements are confused, and
make our Chaos which is void and dark, for here the Lights of the World are
eclipsed, the Sun is darkened, and the Moon shows not its light: which
watrishness of the Compositions, for its abundance of moisture, and privation
of light, we call Winter, and Night, and the North Latitude of our Stone.

But yet I trow thou understandst not utterly,
The very secret of Philosophers Dissolution,
Therefore understand me, I counsel thee wittily,
For the truth I will tell thee without delusion,
Our Solution is caused of our Congelation;
For Dissolution on the one side corporal,
Causes Congelation on the other side spiritual.

WHen once thou have the true mastery of our Dissolution, thou need take no
care for Congelation, for governing it on with thy Fire, thou shall attain
Coagulation without any laying on of hands. Therefore says Ricardus, above all
things it is wonderful, that in our work, Calcination, Dissolution,
Sublimation, Putrefaction, Separation, Conjunction, Death and Purification,
should be performed in one Vessel, and one linear decoction, without laying on
of hands: for verily the Dissolution of the Body thickens the Spirit, as it is
in Water in which Gum or such a thing is dissolved; for by how much the one is
dissolved, the other is congealed: this proves the naturality of our Work, for
as a grain of Corn is in the bowels of the Earth softened with the moist Vapor,
and swells thereby, this Vapor is also terminated by the fermental odor of
the Grain, and so both grow up together into Stalks and Ears.

And we dissolve into Water which wetteth no hand;
For when the Earth is integratly incinerate,
Then is the Water congealed: This understand,
For our Elements are so together concatenate,
That when thy Body from its first form is alterate,
A new form is endued immediately,
Since nothing being without all form is utterly.

SO we in our Work dissolve our Body, which is Gold, in its own Water, in which
it is softened as a Seed in its proper ground, and being softened it relents into
Water, not diaphanous, such as is the Waters of the Clouds, or of Fountains,
but Mineral, even Mercury which wetteth no hand, nor cleaves to any thing but
that which is of its own substance and essence.

So that then in our Work, our two Principals work not according to their
single dispositions, but as conjunct; the one, says the Philosopher, dies not
without its Brother: therefore when thou calcinest the Earth, thou do in it
and with it calcine the Water, and in this the Souls of both are tied together,
to the end that they may serve the wise Philosophers. Therefore let all thy
study be to unite Natures, which thou can never do, unless thou separate
first their Souls by Sublimation, and afterward unite them in blackness, which
a continual Circulation of thy Water upon the Earth will produce.

Now know, that when thou see thy Water and thy Body boil together, so as to
thicken one another, and to congeal one another, that then thy science is true,
and then thy Body which thus thickens, is not the same which thou put in,
but a middle coagulate, a terra Adamica, a Limus and Chaos, for one form being
taken away, a second necessarily follows immediately; for as no Body can at any
time have more than one form, so can it never be void of all form.

And here a secret I will to thee disclose,
Which is the ground of our secrets all,
And it not known thou shall but lose
Thy labor and costs both great and small:
Take heed therefore in error that thou not fall.
The more thine Earth, and the less thy moisture be,
The rather and better Solution shall thou see.

ANd here take notice by the way, that that is no total Dissolution which is
before Calcination, but only partial, the Water resolves as much as it can of
the Body, so much that it does sever between its Spirit and Body; but by reason
of its perfection and strong compaction, it finds a great deal of difficulty
before a total Resolution, and therefore it putrefies what is most gross, and
thus brings it to Atoms, which when it is once subtilized beyond the exigency
of its own nature, it then is dissolved, and relents, and then Dissolution is
made totally, viz. after Putrefaction. Then at length it becomes all like a
glorious Argent vive, and this immediately before the Lunary Coagulation: Know
then that our first loosing is into a viscous Powder, which is brought on by
Incrudation, or rather Liquefaction; for know that till after Putrefaction, our
Stone and Compound is moist in the Fire, but hardens more and more by how much
the colder it is, and softens more and more by how much hotter it is, and the
heat slacking, the boiling will change into a seeming Vegetation, and the Fire
going out, it is hard rather than soft, yet the mingling of the Natures is
known by the colors, and drawing to Calcination. Therefore thy first Operation
is to dry up thy superfluous watrish moisture, not evaporating it, but
congealing it on the Body. Think not then, as some of the envious Sophistically
write, that the more you put of your Water, the sooner you dissolve, and
congeal the slower: No verily, your Calcination is but the medium of true
Solution, which is (trust me) not total nor proper till after Putrefaction. I
should never have told thee this Mystery, had not the love of my Neighbor
compelled me. That opening of the Body which is before, is but an opening of
its pores, which lets our Water in, and then after death and resurrection the
Mercury of Sol is visible to the eye, which before was but distinguishable by
its effect.

Behold how Ice to Water does relent,
And so it must, for Water it was before;
Right so again our Water to Earth is went,
And Water thereby congealed for evermore:
For after all Philosophers that ere were bore,
Each Metal once was Water Mineral,
Therefore with Water they turn to Water all.

SO then our Body has moisture in it self, but this moisture is sealed, as
Water when frozen by the Cold. But when the pores of the Body are by our Water
opened, and its central Fire set at liberty, this internal Fire of Nature makes
the Body to become no Body, but a very Spirit.

In this same Operation the Spirit is congealed, for the Body has in it more
virtue then its two Sociats, that is, than the Soul and Spirit. This is the
action and re-action of our Body and its Water, for our Body is in its occulto
Mercury, and our Mercury is in its occulto Sol; therefore they embrace each
other, because of the nearness of their Natures, and so the Body has its
profundity discovered, and the Water its altitude, and both together are
glorified in one Spiritual Body together, according to Noble Hermes, Vis ejus
est integra si versa fuerit in terram. But thou can never have this excellent
fixity, till the fixed have attained its volatility.

In which Water of kind occasionate,
Of qualities been repugnance and diversity,
Things into things must therefore be Rotate,
Until that Trinity be brought to perfect Unity.

THis Water into which our Bodies are first liquefied, is not properly Water,
but (modo quodam) as we may say in the Fire. During the predomination of the
Woman, all appears in a moist posture, and so will do most part of the first 50
days; yet this is a gross moisture, and by consequence the more fit for
Putrefaction: in which gross Humidity all the Elements are in a confusion, not
the Elements of the great World, but our Mineral Elements; thou must therefore
work by a continual boiling, in which thy Compound will appear like unto the
stormy Sea in a Tempest, raging and swelling, waves and bubbles rising one in
the neck of another incessantly. The Vapor of this Bath being imprisoned,
condenseth and returns every moment, until there be an union made of all the
Elements, in a terra Adamica, or Limus. Then will the Body, Soul and Spirit
remain below in the bottom of the Vessel, which is as a Tomb, in which they dye
and rot, and are putrified.

For the Scripture records when the Earth shall be
Troubled, and into the deep Sea shall be cast
Mountains and Bodies likewise at the last.

THen will our Earth be moved, and the powers of our Heaven will be shaken, and
the windows thereof opened, and an universal Deluge will come upon the face of
the whole Earth, which will destroy all things, and cover the highest
Mountains, so that all Flesh shall dye: these Waters will be a long time upon
the face of the ground.

Our Bodies be likned conveniently
To Mountains, which after high Planets we name;
Into the deeps therefore of Mercury
Turn them, and keep thee out of blame,
For then shall thou see a noble game,
How all will become Powder as soft as Silk;
So does our Runnit kindly curd up our Milk.

THus have many of the envious allegorized of the Scripture, and veiled their
Work under several passages and overtures which are mentioned therein, to which
they have some resemblance: they have called their Metals Sol and Luna,
Mountains, either for the situation sake, they being generally found in
Mountains; or by opposition sake, for as Mountains are highest above ground, so
they lie deepest under ground; or for that as the Mountains are nearer the Sun,
so those do approximate nearer to celestial Influences than any other Bodies
whatsoever: so also they have styled them by the names of Planets, by reason of
some similitude.

But it makes not so much for the name, the thing is, take the Body which is
Gold, and throw it into Mercury, such a Mercury which is bottomless, that is,
whose center it can never find but by discovering its own; govern them wisely
with Fire, as thy Matter requires, then shall thy Gold visibly liquefie in the
Fire, that is, appear thin as if it were Mercury, and it will swell, bubble and
boil, so long till the moisture be terminated by the Body into an impalpable
Powder, as naturally as Runnit does curdle Milk into Cheese. This total
reduction into Atoms, is the perfection of Putrefaction, in blackness most
black, and it begins before the 50th day, and ends before or about the 90th
day, in variable colors.

Then have thy Bodies their first form lost,
And others been endued immediately,
Then have thou well bestowed thy cost,
When others uncunning must go by,
Not knowing the secrets of our Philosophy.

THen thou have a Body, not such a one as thou put in, but
Hermaphroditical, which yet has but one form. Nor is it the same form it had,
though an accidental imperfect one in the same kind; which imperfect form is
not to be despised, for these Ashes are the Tomb of our King. Honor then the
Sepulcher of him and of his Queen, if ever thou expect to see them returning
from the East in power and great glory. Never grutch it then that thou have
destroyed thy Gold, for he that thus destroys it, loses it not, but sows
good Seed in good Earth, from whence he shall receive it with an hundredfold
increase: when as he that saves his Gold in this Work, loses his labor, and
is deceived for lack of true understanding, when as he undertakes this Work
without the true knowledge of its causes.

Yet one point more I must tell thee,
How that each Body has dimensions three,
Altitude, Latitude, and also Profundity;
By which all Gates turn we must our Wheel.

HAving then this Mystery, which is the Stumbling Block at which thousands
stumble, who cannot for all their talk destroy their Bodies, which is not to be
done but by the Alkahest, which is an unprofitable way for our Work, and by our
Mercury, viz. in 40 days, or thereabouts: Then know which must be your next
progress, for Calcination is but a term put on our Work by Authors, and it
reaches to the end of Putrefaction, our first Calcination. I told you before,
that all our Work was complete in three Circulations, and every Circulation had
three periods; so now I tell you, that these three periods are Altitude,
Latitude and Profundity: Altitude and Profundity being united, make Latitude,
and so our Wheel is turned round: the Profundity is the Water below, the
Altitude is Vapor or Waters above, and the union of these two is in a Calx,
which is Latitude; which is done by Liquefaction, Sublimation and Calcination:
Liquefaction dissolves and confounds, Sublimation volatizeth, separates and
washes, and Calcination unites and fixes.

Knowing that thine entrance in the West shall be,
Thy passage forth to the North if thou do well,
And there thy Lights will lose their lights each deal,
For there must thou abide for 90 nights,
In darkness of Purgatory without lights.

THou must begin in the West, and in the Autumn, which is Barren, for then
Crops are gathered; take then thou Gold, which is the Harvest of Natures works,
and it is barren of it self: to make it fruitful thou must bring on the Winter
showrs, which is the North Latitude, and by these the Earth will be made
mellow, and the Seeds will rot; which Seeds are Sol terrestrial, in whose belly
is a hidden Luna. These Lights will in this Operation be darkened, and by little
and little a horrible Night will over-shadow the Earth and Heaven, a blackness
like unto Pitch: this blackness and Eclipsation will continue until the end of
thy first three months, perhaps 100 days, perhaps 120, yea sometimes 130 days,
as it may fall out; think not this time long, for it must be that thy Matters
must be purified, before they can or shall be glorified.

Then take thy course up to the East anon,
By colors rising variable in manifold wise,
To the East therefore thine ascending devise,
For there the Sun with daylight does uprise
In Summer, and there disport thee with delight.

THen shall thou see thy Exhalations to return again, and by the continuance of
them on thy Body, light shall begin to appear, which is our Spring and East
season, in which as the rising Sun scatters the darkness with multitude of
previous colors, especially in a misty morning; so is it with our Work, such
admirable colors will appear, as never were seen by the eye of man in so
little a room before. Then rejoice, for now our King has triumphed over the
miseries of death, and behold him returning in the East with the Clouds in
power and great glory. Now the Night is overgone, and the Morning breaks; the
Winter is past, and the Spring comes on pleasantly, with sweet showrs of April,
hastening the most beautiful Flowers of May. Now as the Winter is a sad time,
being cold and wet, frosty and slabbery, the Countries of Pleasure being dirty
to the Horses belly, but the Spring returns the year, and pleasure with its
sweet season: so in our Work, thy first Operations before blackness seem
tedious, but after blackness far more tedious, for thou will think there will
never be an end of it; so variety of colors brings delight in its daily and
hourly variety, even to perfect whiteness.

Forth from the East into the South ascend,
And set thee down there in a Chair of Fire,
For there is Harvest, that is to say, an end
Of all this Work after thine own desire,
There shines the Sun up in his Hemisphere.
After the Eclipses in redness with glory,
As King to reign over all Metals and Mercury.

HEre thou may light and bait, and enjoy the glory of thy white Elixir, but
do not, for thou had better wait the end. Proceed then with a Fire a little
more increased unto the Summer or South quarter, where after some colors, as
green, yellow, azure, and the like, thou shall have a sparkling red, like unto
the flaming Fire. Then thou art come indeed to thy Harvest, and to the end of
all thy Operations; for now thou beginnest by apparent colors the uprising of
the Sun, after it has been so long beclouded and eclipsed; now have thou
mourned long enough, now the time is come that thou shall need no more to
mourn, for the Bridegroom is now come forth out of his Chamber, and the Sun
comes forth as a valiant Champion to win a prize: now is the time come in which
that of the Poet is fulfilled;

Ne te poeniteat faciem fuligine pingi,
Adferet haec Phoebi nigra favilla jubar.

Now has our King of Peace attained his Kingdom, whose Government is, parcere
subjectis and debellare superbos; for whatever is infected our King will cure,
what is lame he will heal, and what is rebellious he will suppress and subdue.
Sic Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.

And in one Glass must be done all this thing,
Like to an Egg in shape, and closed well.

NOw all these our Operations, as the Philosopher says, are done in our secret
Fire, hidden Furnace, and in one Vessel; for if thou think to make any of
these Operations with thy hand, thou art in a certain way of error. Our Vessel
then, which for similitudes sake we call an Egg, must be so closed when our
Materials are set in it, that the Spirits cannot possibly get out, nor the Air
get in, else our Work were spoiled.

Then must thou know the measure of Firing,
The which unknown thy Work is lost each deal.
Let never thy Glass be hotter then thou may feel,
And suffer still in thy bare hand to hold,
For fear of losing, as Philosophers have told.

THis done, we then set our Vessel and Matter to the Fire, and let it stand
untouched till the Work be done: so that the Philosopher has nothing then to
do but behold his Glass, and the Operation in it, and to govern his Fire
artificially.

So then when once the Stone is set to work, the whole Mastery is to govern the
external Fire, which as the Philosopher does either perfect or destroy all: if
thy Fire be too slow for want of motion, thou will hardly ever see an end; and
if too big, thou may happen to seek thy fortune in the Ashes.

Be not therefore immoderate in governing; and for better security, let not
your Glass neck be under a span in length, but as much longer as you shall see
good; the longer for a Tyro, the better he shall work, and with the more
security. But the usual length which we use, is about 12 or 14 inches high;
this height being so allowed, order so your Furnace as to let out about 3 or 4
inches of the top of your Glass, which may come forth through the cover of your
Athanor, and if you can without hurt feel or suffer any part of that neck, fear
not your Fire, but stew him without fear, your Glass being strong, and the
quicker Fire the better.

Yet know, that your Furnace must be answerable, for do not believe that
Philosophers did formerly use our Art of Furnaces, but made them of Brick, or
Earth, with Earthen Covers, which had holes for letting out part of the necks
of their Glasses, over which if they put a Cover, which they could remove and
set on again at their pleasure; this Earthen Cover was not so reflective of
heat, as our Iron Covers are, but that end of the Glass which came out at the
hole of the Cover, they could feel without any damage, and by their being able
to suffer that in their hand, they judged the temperament of their heat.
Therefore in thy Furnace let thy Cover or Top be luted with good Loam
everywhere, at the least half an inch thick, so shall thou be sure not to have
too scalding a heat in the concavity of thy Nest, which otherwise thou would
have, so may thou govern thy Fire at thy pleasure; the necks of thy Glasses
which come forth, thou need not cover* so shall thou see this of Ripley
verified, thy Work will go on very successfully, and thou will ever be able to
endure thy Glass in thy hand; and this is the true meaning of all Philosophers,
to give a certain rule by which thou shall never exceed, and that is so long as
you can endure to feel any part of thy Glass, provided thy Nest be covered, and
the ends of thy Glass necks come forth.

Yet to my Doctrine furthermore attend,
Beware thy Glass thou never open ne meeve,
From the beginning till thou have made an end;
If thou do otherwise thy Work may never cheeve.
Thus in this Chapter which is but brief, etc.

ANd that this is according to the ^ence of all Wise men, is evident by their
testimony in general, and the following words of Ripley; See (says he) that
thou open not thy Glass, nor move it, from the beginning to the end of the
Work. So then this feeling of the Glass, it must be such as may be without
opening or moving of the same; for if the Seed be disturbed in its beginning to
vegetate, the Work is undoubtedly spoiled, or at least it will be so notably
weakened, that it will hardly afford thee thy true Signs in thy due time.

Therefore when thou set in thy Egg in thy Nest, take heed of meddling with
it until the Mastery be attained, but with a Wyre or some such thing, or with a
hole in thy Cover, stay the neck of thy Glass from jogging this way or that,
which otherwise it will be very subject to.

Thus have I briefly run through this second Gate of Dissolution, which is
indeed one with Calcination and Separation; for by a constant Sublimation, is
made a Solution of the Body, and at length a Congelation of Spirits, for they
by often ascending, come to that pass that they will ascend no more, but remain
at the bottom of the Vessel together, which is Conjunction: in which
Conjunction they swell, bubble and boil, till they calcine and putrefie. The
black Earth, impalpable like Atoms of the Sun, being the highest degree of
Putrefaction: and this is a secret not so clearly discovered by any before.

THe Sun is set, no wonder darkest Night
Does veil the Crystal Sky:
The Moon's eclipsed, no marvel that her light
Does from us hidden lie.
The Sun's declined to the Northern Pole,
And O the change that is made!
The pearly drops are turned to a Coal,
All brightness quite does fade.
Is this Apollo bright, whose glory did
A luster great display?
Is this fair Phoebe, who ere light was hid,
Did shine as bright as day?
Is this the King whose glory and renown
Through all the World did ring?
Is this the Queen who far and near was known?
Oh it is a wondrous thing,
Such glory and such beauty thus should fade!
That what before did shine
More bright then Tagus, should so soon be made
More foul then ere 'twas fine!
The Earth does melt, the Heavens drop down rain,
The Rocks which do relent,
They seem like Water, then condense again
Till all their moisture's spent.
To Ashes they return, for Dust they were,
This Dust from Water springs;
Therefore at length they melt to Water clear,
Which all to Spirits brings.
The Nest is Earth, therefore they will congeal
To sparkling pearly dew,
Shining like tender Pearl, on which does steal
A Body dry and new.
And then the parts like Atoms of the Sun
For fineness do appear:
Rejoice, for now thou half thy course have run,
Nor have thou cause to fear.
Proceed until thou see the sparkling red,
Oh happy sight to see!
By which unto the Royal Palace led,
Thou shall aye happy be.
Happy are they who shall not miss to find
The new uprising Sun:
More happy they who with renewed mind,
In God find rest alone.
AN EXPOSITION UPON THE Third Gate, Which is SEPARATION.
The Third Gate Opened, Which is SEPARATION.
Separation does each part from other divide,
The subtle from the gross, the thick from the thin;
But manual Separation see thou set aside,
For that pertains to Fools, which little fruit does win.
But in our Separation Nature does not blin,
Making division of qualities Elemental,
Into a fifth degree till they be turned all.

HAving now run through two of the twelve Gates, I am come to the third, which
is Separation, which begins so soon as the Matters have been so long
circulated, as to begin to hold one of another. This Operation the Ancient
Sages have denominated Division of Elements, which afterward they say must be
joined with a perpetual union. This Separation is by others called Extraction
of Natures, and the parts separated are compared to two Dragons, the one
winged, and the other without wings.

Artephius, who for Age and Candor was next to Hermes the most eminent, calls
this Separation the Key of the Work, which according to him is a Sublimation in
a continual Vapor, that what is Heavenly and subtle, may ascend aloft, that
is, to the upper part of the Vessel, and there take the nature of a Body
Heavenly, or Spirit; and what is gross may remain below, in the nature of a
Body Earthly, which is the end of our Mastery, to bring the Bodies which are
compact and dry, to become a Spiritual fume, which is only to be done by
Sublimation, and Division or Separation.

So then our Separation is not to be understood, as many foolish Alchymists do
interpret it, who have their Elements of which they boast much, which are
indeed manual, done by handiwork, the Glass being removed, altered or renewed
every time. Nor are our Separations made by filter, or per tritorium, as many
imagine, who know not the nature of our Work, and therefore run into such
foolish fancies.

Nature then in our Work does all in all, who as a curious Artificer makes no
confused mixtures, but first of all causes the moisture to ascend, which
because it cannot get out, it does therefore condense in drops, and descends so
long till at length it begin to be acuated from the Body, which is below; for
naturally all homogeneal moisture, cohobated on a bodily substance, with which
it has affinity, is acuated by it. Gold then is a Body in which the active
qualities of heat and dryness, are more than in the Mercury, and the Mercury
being cohobated on it, begins to be a little more Fiery or hot, and then the
Exhalations are more Aerial, which before were more Watery, and by continued
Cohobation the Water partakes yet more and more of the Solary nature, until at
length this heat or Sulphur impregnating the Mercury, cause it to congeal into
a new Body or quintessence, which is after the corruption of the old Body,
which is called the Earth, or Ashes of Hermes's Tree.

Earth is turned into Water under black and bloe,
And Water after into Air under very white,
Then Air into Fire, Elements there be no more,
Of these is made our Stone of great delight.
But of this Separation much more I must write;
And Separation is called by Philosophers definition,
Of several qualities a Tetraptive dispersion.

SO then this is the method of our Operation, Earth, that is Sol, is boiled in
our Mercury, in such a heat in which the Mercury may ascend constantly in a
smoke, and descend in drops, and the Body below stand liquid and boil: then
shall the Water dry up, under which is blackness hidden, which when the Water
is dried up shall appear like the Crows Bill.

Then shall this Powder again relent, and after 40 days rotting without fumes,
shall send up a smoke again, which shall ascend and descend so long, till the
whole be made volatile and Aerial; then shall the black color vanish, and the
white appear.

This white Argent vive, or Mercury animated, which appears after blackness,
shall then totally congeal, and shall be then Fire, whose Nurse is the Earth;
then have thou the four Elements, that is, cohobated thy Natures to the highest
degree of perfection of the white Stone, then can thou go no further, but go
back and turn the same Wheel till thou have attained the red Stone. Thus have
thou the true Principles and Operation of our great Elixirs both red and white,
which if thou once have, thou have Riches enough, and need no more in this
life.

This, if no more were said of this point, might be enough to show thee the
truth of our true Separation: yet because Philosophers have spoken much of it,
and indeed it is all the work to cause ascension and descension of our true
Water on our true Body, so long till by the Water the Body be volatized, and
after that by the Body the Water fixed; and till that be brought to pass, there
will come and go the four Qualities in their season, and will cause change of
colors suitable to their station, pleasant to the Philosopher to behold.

Of this Separation I find a like figure thus spoken:
So out of our Stone precious if thou be witty,
Oil incombustible and Water thou shall draw,
And thereabout thou need not at the Coals to blow.

THese Philosophical Operations some have had the fancy to compare with some
passages of Scripture, but I had rather bound Philosophy within its own Pale,
and not allegorize the Holy Scripture thereto, where Philosophy is not
understood there.

To the thing in hand; by continual decoction our Work will show, as in
Circulation, a real change of the ascending Humidity; the first will be white,
and so continue a long time, which is called Water or Phlegm, and after it the
Water will be colored, and ascend so on the sides of the Vessel, which is
called Oil; and this Oil is not combustible, for it is the true Sulphur of
Gold, and therefore as permanent as the Mercury.

Yet be not mistaken, nor do not imagine that because we speak of incombustible
Oil, that our Work is to be performed with the Fire of a Wind, Oven, or of
Bellows, (as some foolishly imagine) to burn up what is combustible, until the
very incombustible Oil be left, for all our volatile subject is turned into
incombustible fixity, with a moderate decoction in our secret Athanor, whose
heat in its highest vigoration is but very obscurely red, hardly perceptible,
and in its lowest degree is not full half so strong, or half at the most.

Do this with heat easy and nourishing,
First with moist Fire, and after that with dry,
The Phlegm with patience out-drawing,
And after that the other Natures wittily:
Dry up thine Earth until it be thirsty,
By Calcination, else labourest thou in vain,
And then make it drink up the moisture again.

THis is a heat which is friendly to the Bodies, for it causes the Spirit to
ascend, and yet suffers it to return, and by reason of its ascending and
returning, the Matter below stands continually moist, and boileth with a
perpetual motion and exhalation, which ascends and returns day and night every
hour and minute without intermission.

This moist Air, or liquid form at bottom, with Ebullition and sending forth a
spiritual smoke or Vapor, (in which, says Artephius, the whole Mastery
consists) continues about six weeks, or thereabouts, and then the boiling will
turn to a Pitchy swelling, and puffing up like Leavened Dough; and from that
time the Compound shall grow dryer and dryer, coming at length to Pitch-black
Atoms, or Powder impalpable, and the fumes shall cease for six weeks.

Be patient therefore in decoction, and wait with a great deal of confidence,
until thou see thy Water, which at first ascends white and phlegmatic, to
begin to change color, and the Exhalations to arise discolored within the
Glass. Then continue your decoction till the Cloud which is conceived be
brought forth: for in this Operation be sure that the Seeds begin to mingle,
and will give you a sign of the beginning of the Conjunction of Natures, and
that is the gilding of the Glass about the sides within the Concave, as if it
were overspread with leaves of pure Gold.

Continue still your decoction till the Earth at the bottom begin to appear,
and the moisture of the Compound begin to be terminated in Di^ess, in color
Black, which is a sure sign of your right progress, and without which you can
never attain the Mastery.

Remember that in this Calcination thou have a portion of Water in the upper
part of thy Vessel, which did not descend; and in the time of the ceasing of
the fumes, the Body grows very dry, even to Calcination, which when it is
entirely perfected, the Water is as it were by a Magnetical virtue drawn down,
and then follows a second Liquefaction.

Separation thus must thou oftentimes make,
Thy Waters dividing into parts two,
So that the subtle from the gross thou take,
Till the Earth remain below in colors bloe;
That Earth is fixed to abide all woe.
The other part is spiritual and flying,
But thou must turn them all into one thing.

BUt to return to our Work of Sublimation, which is as was touched before, the
Key of the whole Work, by which Separation is made uncessantly each day and
hour.

Thus are the Waters divided from the Waters, that is, the Waters above from
them which are below; for part of the Water ascends up like a fume, and
congeals and runs down the sides of the Glass in drops like veins, and part
remains still below with the Body, and with it boils visibly, and that
uncessantly.

By this Work thou have the subtle or thin parts of the Body, and the thin
parts of the Water, ascend and mingle; and the gross part of the Body, and the
gross part of the Water, mixed below, the one by subliming together, and the
other by boiling together: thus is thy Body below compounded of two even the
most fixed parts of Sol, with the grosser parts of Lunaria; and thy Water of
two parts, the Soul of Sol, and the Spirit of Lunaria, which is the true
mystical ground of Fixation.

Thus by subliming in a continual Vapor whatever is Spiritual and Heavenly,
both in the Water and in the Body lightly ascending, and in the upper part of
the Glass taking the nature of a Spirit, what is more gross, earthy and
corporeal, will in the bottom take the nature of a Body, whose color, the Soul
being separated, will be as Black as Pitch.

This Body is a middle substance between the Body and the Water, a Limus, a new
Body, or Adamica terra, a medium between fixed and not fixed; it is not so
fixed as to be equal to Sol, nor yet so volatile as the Mercury, but it is
sufficiently fixed to endure a Fire requisite for this Work, and to suffer all
the pain and woe of this our Purgatory, in which it abides six weeks without
fumes or vapor.

But as for the Spirit, that is a tender thing, nor is it able to endure the
Fire, but flys from it, and abides in the uppermost part of the Glass; only so
long as the fumes arise, the ascending do still meet with them which are above,
till at last making over great drops, they fall down; and when the fumes cease,
as much of the Spirit as the Concave of the Glass will hold without running
down, stays above until entire Calcination be perfected, and then they are
drawn down by a Magnetical virtue: So that here is all the mystery of the
proportion of the Glass to the Matter, namely, that it be so big, and no
bigger, as in its Concave will hold up a competent quantity of Water, (after
Calcination to water the dry pores) while the Body below rots into Atoms.

Then shall you bring back the Water upon the Earth, and circulate again so
long till there be a total joining, till the Spirit become the Body, and the
Body become the Spirit, and all be made true Fire or Tincture; of which
Conjunction this true Separation is the cause, and without it it cannot be made.

Then Oil and Water with Water shall distill,
And through her help receive moving:
Keep well these two, that thou not spill
Thy Work for want of due closing,
And make thy Stopple of Glass melting,
The top of thy Vessel together with it,
Then Philosopher lick it is up shit:

IN this second Circulation, which is after Conjunction, there shall be no more
the Body below and the Spirit above, but all shall be one, and the Body which
is the Sulphur, shall always follow the Spirit on the Fire wherever it flys.
The occasional cause of all this, is our first Water, which though vile, is
therefore to be much valued, for it is very precious; through the virtue of
which it comes to pass, that our Earth yields a Water, and causes it to fly
with the Spirit aloft, and is the Soul of our Sol, which at length does allure
the said Spirit and Body to union, which else would never be: and then the Body
beyond its own nature is lifted up, moving uncessantly with the Spirit and Soul
upon the Fire, for all now are made one inseparably; and this is called the
sealing the Mother in the belly of the Infant which she bore, that is, the
Earth below is so united to the Water that arose from it, that in this
Operation after this true Conjunction, they are never more divided, but are
together sublimed, and descend continually, moving and altering continually
until perfect Complement.

Now for as much as all the Mastery consists in Vapor, which are called the
great Winds, which are in the Vessel at the forming of this our Embrio,
therefore great care must be had lest the Spirits exhale. Which they will do,
without the Glass have a strong guard; for first, they are subtle; nor that
only, but ascend with a great impetus, by reason of our Fire, which must cause
the inferiora ebullire and moveri continuo, and inferiora circulari, quolibet
momento; and thirdly, in Putrefaction the Body and Spirits have a most subtle
odor, which also must be retained.

For preventing of all, thou shall have thy Stopple as firm as any part of thy
Glass, which let it be strong, as is said, and the neck long and strong, and
let the neck be melted up with a Lamp, or with Coals, and closed well without
much wringing, which makes the Glass brittle; but being nipt up, and after that
staying in the same heat, turning it to and fro in the clear heat, the Glass
will come to as exactly close and smooth a superficies, as in any other place.

This is the true and sure way which Philosophers have secured their Glasses
by. Let it cool by degrees, and be very wary that it get no crack in cooling,
which if it do, though never so little, you must not connive at it, lest the
winds within cause it there to burst, as being a weak defective place.

The Water wherewith thou may revive thy Stone,
Look thou distill before thou work with it.
Oftentimes by it self alone,
And by this sight thou shall wit,
From feculent faeces when it is quit:
For some men can with Saturn it multiply,
And such like substance, which we defy.

THus thou see how our Work must be ordered in reference to its Regimen, but
the main matter is our Water* Which Water, as says Artephius, is the Vinegar
of Mountains, and it is the only Instrument for our Work: its Preparation
consists in Cohobation, which we will discover. In my little Treatise called
Introitus Apertus, and in my other Tractate called Ars Metallorum
Metamorphose^s, I speak as much of it as a man can speak, without giving a
Receipt; but to the Ingenious, what there is written is far better than any
Receipt.

This I say, that it must first be cohobated in a very wonderful way, (for it
is such a Cohobation that has not its like in the World) and for several
times, to a determinate number, and after it may and ought to be distilled per
se, without addition, again and again, that thou may have the Water clean
from any Exotical mixture.

When it ascends like to the Pearled dew, thou may then know that it is
sufficiently pure, which is not till all the filthiness be cast from the
center, and washed from the superficies: Thy Water then has so excellent a
Pontick faculty, that it will dissolve Jupiter, Saturn, or Venus, into Mercury
and Sulphur; for it commands Metals as their true Water Mineral, which no
Mercury in the World is, but our Mercury, nor can be, for Reasons known to the
Adepti, which if I should give, there would be none almost so stupid but would
easily apprehend them, for they are most demonstrable. This only I at present
say of this Mercury, that it is the Mother of Metals, and therefore has power
to reduce them, by dividing their principles of Sulphur and Mercury; but we
count it a loss to employ our Mercury to such such sordid uses, for we spoil
the goodness of it hereby. Gold only is drowned in it, that is, it is reduced
without division of parts; but though the Sulphur and Mercury be for a time
distinct, yet they will join with the Water, and together, and so remain
perpetually; which other Metals in their dissolution will not, for their
Sulphurs being not perfect, are rejected to the superficies, and never are
received to union again, for they are Heterogeneous.

Distill it therefore till it be clean,
And thin like Water as it should be,
Like Heaven in color bright and sheene,
Keeping both figure and ponderosity:
There with did Hermes moisten his Tree,
In his Glass that he made it to grow upright,
With Flowers discolored beautiful to sight.

SO then to return to what we digressed a little from, thy Water must be so
long distilled, until it be very clean; for this, says the Philosopher, is thy
first work, to make clean thy Mercury, and then into clean Mercury to put clean
Bodies, for who can expect a pure Generation from that which is unclean?

The next property of thy Water is, that it must be thin, even as thin as any
other Mercury; for if the external proportion be corrupted, it is an evident
sign that the inward nature is confused.

It must also be of a very bright color, even like to fine burnished Silver,
as says Artephius. Hence says a certain Philosopher, that our Water to sight
is like to a Celestial Body.

Our Water must not be reduced into any limpid Diaphanous liquor, as some
fondly imagine, and as I my self in my time of errors did conceit, but it must
keep its Mercurial form pure and incorrupted. It is also very ponderous, so
ponderous that it is somewhat more weighty then any other Mercury in the World.

This is the only one Mercury, and there is none in the whole World besides it
which can do our Work: with this Hermes did moisten his Body, and made it to
rot and putrefie.

By means of this Water the Body shall be brought to have a vegetative Soul,
for it will shoot forth as with Sprigs, and Leaves, and Branches, and after it
will resolve into Powder like Atoms.

In the time of this process many colors shall come and go, rise and set,
which will be a pleasant spectacle to the beholder, and shorten the time
wonderfully, which else would seem very tedious.

This Water is like to the venomous Tire,
And with it the mighty Triacle is wrought;
It is a poison most strong of ire,
A stronger poison cannot be thought,
Often times therefore at the Pothecaries it is sought.
But no man shall thereby be intoxicate,
From time it is to Medicine Elixerate.

THis Water is by Philosophers called their Venom, and indeed it is a very
strong poison, to wit, to the Body of Sol, to which it is mixed: but what it is
to the Body of Man, I never tried my self, nor gave it to another, nor do I
believe did any of they. But as concerning the Medicine that is made by it, and
out of it, it is certain, that of all Medicines in the World it is the highest,
for it is the true Arbor vitae, which does answer the universal desires of them
who have it in this kind; for besides its virtue Curative, which it has in a
wonderful miraculous way, it can penetrate even to our Constitutive principles,
which no other Mineral Medicine can do. Though Paracelsus glory much of his
Renovantia and Restaurantia, (which we have known, as being Masters of his
secret Alcahest, of which if I live I will write a particular Treatise) yet it
is not his Haematina, nor yet his Arcana, nor his Elixiria, nor his Essentiae,
nor any of his secrets, which are surely noble Medicines, that can reach the
root of Life, which this can and will; for it performs all, only it cannot
prevail against the appointment of God, otherwise were it not for that decree
it could really keep a man immortal, for it renews Youth, retards Age, and
restores to most exquisite and complete health, increases strength
wonderfully; yea it will not only renew Hair to those from whom it is fallen,
but it will change the hoary head into a youthful color, which will not grow
hoary again for many years, nor ever, if the use of it were fully known, and it
were used as it ought to be.

Hereupon in respect of its wonderful virtue, after it is made into Medicine,
Philosophers have by Analogy concluded, that it was before the greatest poison,
for they have a Maxim (ex summo veneno, summa Medicina) which as I do not
always hold true, so I shall not here dispute. But he who thinks, because
Philosophers say it is such a deadly poison, that it is to be bought at the
Apothecaries, or Druggists, he is mistaken; for as it is first bought, I
confess it is very venomous, but this malignity I conceive and know is fully
taken away, before it become the Philosophers Mercury.

But whatever it be in its Crudity, I am sure it is not so in its Perfection,
for he who shall take of it then, shall be so far from receiving any damage by
it, that he shall find it to be a sovereign Medicine, which has not its like
in the whole Universe.

For then as is the Triacle true,
And in its working does marvels show,
Restoring many from death to life;
But see thou mingle it with no Corrosive,
But choose it pure and quick running,
If thou thereby wilt have winning.

IT is not the Triacle of Galen, nor yet of Hippocrates, (which yet if right
made are of great efficacy) that can compare to it; for first, it kills all the
venom of any disease or malady, so that those diseases which do astonish the
beholders, are by this overcome even ad miraculum: for suppose a man dying with
the Tokens of the Plague, so that he is upon the very point of departure, (and
the decree be not past, for then there is no recovery) if he have but a drop of
this Elixir poured down, so that he swallow it, he shall immediately recover,
and in short time he will be restored to his former health. Now that it does
immediately reach the root of Life, I shall demonstrate: Suppose one with a
very languishing disease be consumed to nothing in comparison, and for want of
Spirits be just going out of the World, so the decree be not past, if he have
but strength even in the Agony of death, but to take a drop of this Elixir, he
will recover and revive, and in a few days in comparison will be doubly
stronger then ever he was before. Suppose one of a very weak Constitution, and
sickly, and every day ill, feeble all over, if he take of this Elixir, it will
in a short time alter his Constitution fundamentally, so that he shall be far
stronger then any other man ordinarily is.

A noble Philosopher (though I scarce believe him to be an Adeptus of the
Stone) has wrote of late a small Treatise of Fevers, the Lithiasis, and the
Pestilence, and there he says in one of his Tractates, That the loss of
strength which is made by Venery and Bloodletting, is wholly irrecoverable. It
is true, and I verily believe that he had Medicines very noble, and it is pity
but he had this secret to preserve his old age, for I seriously profess, that
of all the Tractates that ever I read, they are the most Philosophical; but by
this expression it is evident, that he was ignorant of this secret.

For although by Venery, or a Tabes, or Bleeding, or by any other way a man be
debilitated, he may be restored by this Elixir, not only to perfect health, but
also to such a measure of strength which he never had before. Yea and a man or
woman who is born to hereditary weakness, may be changed into a more then
ordinary strength by the use of our Medicine: or a man who by labor, sickness
and years, is come to the Graves mouth, even to drop in it, may by use hereof
be restored his hair, his teeth, and his strength, so that he shall be of
greater agility then in his youth, and of greater strength, and may live many
years, provided the period of the Almighties decree be not come.

For Minerals are of all Sublunary Bodies the most perfect, and the best part
of them are Metals, which when they are perfect, defend themselves from all
fear of corruption perpetually. Now the Spirit of the Metal when it is exalted
to a millenary perfection, it tingeth all Metals imperfect to an incorruptible
purity; but then this Spirit must be made a Body, according to the saying of
Hermes, Vis ejus est integra si versa fuerit in terram.

But this transcendent Tincture may be dissolved into an Oil, or rather a pure
Liquor, which then is not proper for Metals, but is only Medicinal; for it is
of the nature of Light, and therefore it does as readily concur with our formal
vital principle, as one flame will enter another.

Yea and beyond this, it may be exalted beyond the nature of man, yea and of
any tangible Body, to become a most radiant perpetual Light, which I have seen,
though not my self actually made. All this is done by the Divine virtue of our
Water, which is to be prepared, as is said, by Cohobation and Distillation, for
our Water is a living Water, and not corrosive, as many do mis-interpret our
Books.

These then are the circumstantial qualities of our Water, it is pure, clean,
and very bright, it is quick, and very fluent, without Humectation; it is the
only profitable subject that we can choose for this Art, and whatever can be
taken in hand in the World besides this, is but fallacious.

It is a mavelous thing in kind,
And without it can nothing be done,
Therefore did Hermes call it his Wind,
For it is up-flying from Sun and Moon,
And makes our Stone to fly with it soon,
Reviving the dead, and giving life
To Sun and Moon, Husband and Wife.

IT is of a wonderful Composition, yea so wonderful that if thou should know
it by relation only, thou could not believe it. Study therefore only to know
it, for it is the very hinge on which turns all perfection, it is that which
the Wise men never revealed but only in Figures and Metaphors.

Some have called it their sharp Vinegar, because of its dissolvent quality;
others have called it a Bird, a Goose, a Phesant, and many such names they have
given it.

But because it arises in the form of a Wind or Vapor, the Philosophers have
called it their Vapor, their Smoke, and their Wind; and for this cause
command, that the Porter keep diligent watch, that it fly not away or exhale,
for it would spoil the Work.

This Water then flies the more Spiritual part of it, and the Corporal part
remains below in the form of an Humidity, which does bubble and boil
continually, and the smoke in the Head condenseth and returns in drops upon
the Body; and by this means the Body of Sol, which is most fixed, to the
astonishment of Nature is made volatile, and sends out in the Exhalation of the
Water its subtle fiery Soul.

Thus the dead Body has infused into it a Spirit of life, and begins to be
endowed with a living Soul, which moves aloft with the Spirit, and returns with
the same, till the Body be wholly renewed.

And by this means the Body of the Sun retaining the more Corporeal part of the
Water at the bottom, they boil together, and enter one another, and so both by
decoction become more and more Corporal, and make together one Hermaphroditical
Body, of which the more fixed parts of the Sun, and the grosser parts of the
Water, are the Component principals: So that being thus mixed, the more
Corporal parts below, and the more Spiritual parts in Sublimation, the Bodily
part is Husband and Wife to it self, for all Conception is made at the bottom
of the Vessel.

Which if they were not by craft made quick,
And their fatness with Water drawn out,
And so the thin dissevered from the thick,
Thou should never bring this Work about.
If thou will therefore speed without doubt,
Raise up the Birds out of their Nest,
And after bring them again to rest.

THese Bodies do send forth a thin subtle fume, which may be compared to their
breath; and the returning of it, and fuming continually, may be likened to the
breathing in and out of Air, for says Artephius, all things live by Air: and
so our Stone it is inspired by the Air, which Air is the fume which ascends
continually, which partakes of both Natures as well as the Body below does.
Also this makes that below to boil and swell continually, which it would not
do, did not the Earth retain the moisture; and the Sublimation carries with it
the subtilest part, or Soul of the Body, which easily appears by its changing
of colors, for whatever colors is of Sulphur, which is unctuous, and
therefore the Sublimation appears pinguous: the medium of this Extraction is
Water, because our Water and the Sulphur are Homogeneal.

Wherefore in this Circulation there are two things to be considered, the
bottom, and the top; the bottom is not only the Body of Sol, for so it would
not stand liquid, and flow, and boil, and bubble as it does: therefore it is
certain, that the Body retains part of the Water, which is more thick, which
thickness digestion and mixture has caused; which grosser part of the Water is
joined with the Body, but not perfectly united. The uppermost part is not only
from the Water, nor yet the most whole of the Water, but a certain subtle
portion of your first Vinegar, which has in it the most pure part of your
Gold, which is sublimed with it, which both together make a medium of much
Firiness: So then by reason of the mixture both the uppermost and the subsident
part are reduced to a mean, which hold one of another; therefore our Body at
this time, and in this Operation, is called the Body both of the Sun and Moon,
and the Vapor contains both the Soul of the Sun, and the Spirit of the
Mercury. Take this for your prey, for I have revealed what Philosophers upon
penalty of an Anathema would never disclose.

If you have well attended to what I have said, I have said enough, and if this
do not suffice you, I know not what will. Remember well what I have said, if
you ever expect success.

To sum up all therefore in one word, for I have been so long that I fear I
have been too prolix: Remember what you go about, and what you work on. You
take in hand an Earthly Body, which you would bring to a Heavenly Tincture.
This you would effect by Mercury, which is the only way or medium in the World.
First then, sublime till by Mercury thou have brought thy Body to the height of
volatility, and thou shall find that in this dissolved Body there will be such
a ferment, which will recongeal the Spirit.

Water with Water accord will and ascend,
And Spirit with Spirit, for they be both of one kind,
Which when they be exalted make to descend.
So shall thou unloose that which Nature erst did bind,
Mercury essential turning into Wind;
Without which natural and subtle Separation,
May never be complete profitable Generation.

FOr the Body though in its manifesto it be Sulphur congealed, and dry, yet in
its occulto it is Mercury liquid, and moist: Now the Water which thou mixest
with it has this virtue, to open its pores, and then the Water of the Body
will as naturally agree and ascend with thy Water of Life, which thou did put
to it, as one Water will join with another.

Now as Sol has a hidden Spirit, so has our Mercury, which is in it
invisible; for to sight it appears as other Mercury, only a little brighter,
but in effect they differ wonderfully: which Spirit will as naturally unite
with the Soul, or Fiery part of the Body, as Light will mix with Light, and
then the gross part of the Body, and of the Water, in the bottom of the Vessel,
will be brought in absence of the Soul and Spirit to putrefie. So then these
two Fiery Natures being Homogeneous, will readily mix, and will sublime
together in form of a white Smoke or Vapor, as says noble Artephius, and
there condensing in the top of the Vessel, that is, about the fides, and in the
Concave of the Glass, will return again and circulate up and down, till it have
destroyed the solidity of the Body, making it no Body, but subliming what is
subtle, and what is earthly and resisting turning into Ashes, or an impalpable
Powder, by Calcination.

And after Putrefaction is complete by Circulation, the most fixed part which
is called the Body of Fixion, the essential and most permanent part of both
Body and Water, will ponderously be lifted up and carried aloft into the Air.

And without this Separation and Division; all is nothing, for this is the very
Key of the Mastery, it is the cause of Generation: therefore in vain is
whatever is attempted without this, boiling the gross, and subliming what is
subtle, that in the troubles of the stormy Sea, which works up and down as the
Sea in the mighty Winds, what is pure may ascend, and whatever is impure may
remain at the bottom; and when all that is pure is ascended, that which is left
is called the Earth that remains. So Artephius.

Now to help thee in at this Gate,
This last secret I will disclose to thee,
Thy Water must be seven times sublimate,
Else shall no kindly Dissolution be,
Nor Putrefaction shall thou none see;
Like liquid Pitch nor colors appearing,
For lack of heat within thy Glass working.

NOte then that Sublimation, which otherwise is called Separation, Division,
Ascension and Descension, is the Key of the Work; it is placed for the third
Gate, and yet it is the last and the first; the last it is called by Ripley,
and I to Echo to his voice assure thee it is the first and last.

And as the Key of all our Operations is Separation, so the Key to it is our
true Mercury, truly prepared and proportioned as it ought to be. Now the
proportion of thy Water, is in reference to its internal additional Sulphur,
which is added by the Philosopher; which is done by successive Eagles, which
are made by our Philosophical Arsnick, the number of which ought to be seven.
The darkness vanishing, and the light appearing, after many showrs, before the
flight of each Eagle, our Water being thus acuated, is by Acuation purged, and
then it becomes powerful in dissolving the Body, which will be done with a
fewer number of Eagles, or a greater, but with 7 or 9 most desiredly.

This acuated Water is also the Instrument which does move the Gold to
putrefie, which no other Agent in the World can do; for by this the Body is
ground, softened and mollified, the pores of it are opened, and the Sulphur
invisible is set at liberty, which causes the Body to rot, change colors, and
at length become black like unto melted Pitch.

But if thou omit any of the number of Eagles, or fail in the goodness of thy
Arsnick, or err in the preparation of the Water with thy Arsnick, either in
Conjunction, or Purification, or Digestion, or any other error, of which
experience will warn thee, do not then expect that the most exact Regimen of
heat of thy external Furnace will do the Work.

Four Fires there be, which thou must understand,
Natural, against Nature, unnatural also,
And the Elemental, which does burn the brand;
These four Fires use we and no more,
Fire against Nature must do thy Body woe.
This is our Dragon as I thee tell,
Fiercely burning as the Fire in Hell.

NOw to give thee a touch concerning our Fire, which he that knows may well be
accounted a Master of our Secrets: We have indeed four Fires, which is one more
than Artephius numbered, which yet he intended to include. The most noble Fire
is Natural, which is that which we seek to have multiplied, and that is the
Sulphur of Gold, or rather its Fiery Tincture; it is that which we seek for,
and we use Mercury for Sol his sake.

Our next Fire is our Fire against Nature, and that is the Fire of our Water
which is to be corrupted, and by this corruption Multiplication is made.

The third Fire is Unnatural, which is the mixture of these two Fires, while
they are in their action and passion, and neither does actually predominate.

Now for to give you a reason of these Fires denomination, know that Mineral
Fire is Sulphur, which is hot and dry, and it is the death of the Mineral Tree,
that is, it is the cause of coagulating, that is, taking away the flux of the
Mercury which is cold and moist; this in Gold is apparent, for it is a
coagulated perfect Body, fixed and permanent in all trials: this it has from,
its Fire or Sulphur, and this is Natural.

But now our Water has an actual and active Sulphur in it, and yet quick and
fluid, a Fire in Water which yet is not burned; this Sulphur is true Gold, and
yet it is volatile; this is a Riddle, the Philosophers Mystery, and yet true;
this is contrary to Natures ordinary operation in Mineral Bodies.

Now Nature will always care and provide for her own Child, before a Stranger;
Gold is her own Son, and is according to her own Rules: but this Mercury is the
Son of the Philosopher, to whose nativity though Nature contribute her help,
yet he is out of her ordinary road, and through the cooperation of Art and
Nature, he is for his qualifications an astonishment to Nature, hot and dry
internally, and that actually; for it is impregnated with real Sulphur, and yet
not coagulated, but in one word Ignis aqua, Gold truly so called, and that most
pure, yet volatile and crude, and no abortive; not perfect, yet left in the way
to perfection, and yet its virtue active, not extinguished. This subject Nature
finding mixed with her Son, the King, even Gold, by it she endeavors to mend
his Constitution, and to multiply his virtue; for though living Gold be a thing
of admirable force, yet being out of the ordinary channel of Natures
operations, Nature does not mind its preservation, much less its propagation.

These three forenamed Fires are internal, secret and invisible, but there is
one more which we use, which is not ours properly; for every Sophister has it
and uses it as well as we, and that is Culinary Fire, which yet is so
necessary that without it we can do nothing, nor yet without the true knowledge
of its due proportion. So then we use no Fires of Dung, nor of the Sun, or of
Baths, at some Sophisters persuade themselves and others, for these are all the
Fires which we use.

With the secret Sulphur that is in our Water, which we proportion exactly in
the beginning, we open our Body, for this Fire can do and does that which no
other Fire can do, for it destroys and conquers the Body, and makes it no Body
but a Spirit.

So that whatever any Sophisters may suggest, our Fire is Mineral, it is
Sulphur, and that pure; it is united to the Water in one form, and yet hinders
not its flux, nor corrupts its form.

This is the true Ignis Gehennae, for it Eclipseth the light of the Bodies, and
makes them become black as Pitch; which is a symbol of Hell, and for its
Cimmerian darkness is by many of the Wise men called Hell.

Fire of Nature is the third Menstrual,
That Fire is natural in each thing,
But Fire occasionate we call unnatural,
As heat of Ashes and Balnes for putrefying.
Without these Fires thou may naught bring
To Putrefaction, for to be separate,
Thy Matters together proportionate.

OUr natural Fire is, as I said, the true Sulphur of Gold, which in the hard
and dry Body is imprisoned, but by the mediation of our Water it is let loose,
by rotting the moles of the Body under which it was detained, and after
separation of Elements, it appears visibly in our third Menstrual.

For though Gold be a compact and dry Earthy Body, none may think that it
became what it is without the virtue of a Seed, which by perfection is not
extinct, but sealed up only; which Seed is a Fiery form of Light, which nothing
in the World wants, and therefore it would be a great Anomalum if it should
be only defective in Metals, the choice of all sublunary Bodies.

Betwixt these two Fires, in the time of their action and passion one upon
another, and from another, there is made a medium which is part of both, which
because it is not altogether natural, nor wholly against nature, is called
unnatural.

The duration of this unnatural Fire is from the time that the Body begins to
open, and colors to change, that is in a word, all the time of the rule of
Saturn, and part of the rule of Jupiter, the whole Regimen of Putrefaction, and
so much of Ablution until the Dove begin to prevail over the Crow; which
Putrefaction as it is the turning of an entire Wheel, so part of it is done in
sicco, when the Body is all a discontinuous Calx or Ashes, and part in humido,
which is called a Bath, when the subsident part is liquid and boils, and the
superior part vapors aloft and descends.

Thus you see how many Fires we have, and how they are distinguished: wherein I
have written what I know, and as many as understand me will esteem my Writings
highly; for without boasting let me assure thee, thou have not such another
Directory in the whole World: I may speak it without offense, being unknown to
thee, and thou to me. This I say not to detract from any Philosopher, for many
were deeply seen in this Mastery, but almost all were envious, and the most
candid would have judged my plainness deserving an Anathema maranatha. I have
here laid you so plain demonstrations as I go, that you cannot miss, if God
direct you; and without the knowledge of the Fires you are far wide, whatever
whimsies you have in your head; for you shall never see the dissolution of the
Body, nor shall you ever make black, and by consequence you cannot divide
Elements as you ought to do, because you proportioned not your Matters wisely
in the beginning of the Work; for, Dimidium facti qui been cepit, habet, he who
makes a good beginning, has as good as half done.

Therefore make Fire thy Glass within,
Which burns the Body much more than Fire
Elemental, if thou will win
Our secrets according to thy desire:
Then shall thy Seed both rot and spire,
By help of Fire occasionate,
That kindly after they may be separate.

TAke then my counsel, be not so careful of the Fire of the Athanor, as of your
Internal Fire; seek it in the house of Aries, and draw it from the depths of
Saturn; let Mercury be the Internuncio, and your signal the Doves of Diana. By
the River you shall find a Tree, in which is the Nest of 10 Eagles; take of
them 7, 9, or all* but take them very white, which often plunging in the River
will cause: with these you may overcome the Lion.

The heat of their stomachs is far more powerful than any Fire in the World;
for in it Gold will be destroyed, that thou shall not know what is become of
it; which yet loses nothing from it self, though exposed to the greatest
violence of any flame.

Thus with patience thou shall see thy desire fulfilled, and thy heart shall
rejoice; for a wide door shall be opened by which thou may behold the
Mysteries of Nature in all her Kingdoms.

In 40 or 50 days thou shall behold the highest sign of most perfect corruption
of thy perfect Body, which of a dead lump is thus become Seed, in which though
many cannot believe that there is any active virtue, yet it is now to the
astonishment of Nature made living, and by its life it kills that by which it
was made alive, and both being mingled make one Bath, which by continual
decoction, moving the Earth and Water below, and circulating the Air and Fire
above, make at last one inseparable quintessence, the Father of Wonders.

Now to God only wise, the reveal^^ of these hidden Mysteries, be praise from
all his Creatures for ever.

Of Separation the Gate must thus be won.
THus I have run through this Gate of Separation, which might be enough, for it
is all; but because the Wise men have made many Operations for to hide the
secret, and have scattered their notions here and there in every Gate o^
Operation, sometimes being at the beginning, sometimes at the end, thereby to
puzzle the unwary; I must to make this Treatise entire, run through the rest
with what brevity and plainness I can.

I Shall now sing a pleasant Elegy,
What did betwixt two Lovers
Fall out, seek the reason why,
This Song discovers;
A Wife
Did lose her life,
Because she did her Husband revive,
Whose death did enforce
The man to remorse,
To see her dead who gave him life.
He was a King, yet dead as dead could be,
His Sister a Queen,
Who when her Brother she did breathless see,
The like was never seen;
She cries
Until her eyes
With over-weeping were waxed dim,
So long till her tears
Reached up to her ears,
The Queen sunk, but the King did swim.
These Waters with the Fire which prevailed,
Did him so perplex,
That starting up, not knowing what him ailed,
He sorely did vex;
He thought
That there was wrought
Some Treason, but full little did know
That it was a Queen
Him saved, though unseen,
And died her self sad white I trow.
At length her Carcass, when her Gall was broke,
Rose up to the top,
From which fumed up so venomous a smoke,
His breath which did stop;
He found,
Which made him sound,
The cause of his life his Sister did slay;
This made him full sad,
And grief made him mad,
Thus soon his strength fell to decay.
His House and Chamber were so charged with heat,
It made him to faint,
And fainting fell into a grievous sweat;
His sweat did so taint
The Room
With foul persume,
Which did even almost suffocate:
So feeble he grew,
He could not eschew,
But dung'd and pissed there where he sat.
At length with sorrows many he expires,
Full glad of the change,
That death at last should answer his desires;
But what is most strange,
When dead,
That it might be said
How dearly he his Sister did love,
Their Corpse did unite,
That they in despite
Of Fire, would not asunder move.
And thus together they contumulate
A rotting did lie,
Passing through dismal Purgatories Gate;
Wherein they did fry
So long,
Until among
The Saints for purity they might pass:
Their sins were no more
To be found on score,
They then were clear as Crystal Glass.
A Spirit then of life from Heaven came,
In their Bodies dead,
Which now united, of renowned fame
To Heaven were led;
Where they
Abode for aye,
Enjoying pleasures for evermore,
To death not subject,
Were now the object
Of wonder, for the had Riches store.
AN EXPOSITION UPON THE Fourth Gate, Which is CONJUNCTION.
The Fourth Gate Opened, Which is CONJUNCTION.
After the Chapter of Natural Separation,
By which the Elements of our Stone dissevered be,
The Chapter here follows of secret Conjunction,
Which Natures repugnant joyneth to perfect unity,
And so them knitteth that none from others may flee,
When they by the Fire shall be examinate,
They be together so surely conjungate.

HAving run through the Chapter of Separation with a plain style, we shall now
come to the life of all, which is Conjunction; for we seek not a thing which
may be capable of Separation, but which may abide in all trials, the parts
being impossible to be separated one from another, for so our Tincture ought to
be, or else it will be wholly unprofitable for our purpose. For Separation is
but the middle motion, by which we pass from the unary simplicity of Gold, to
the millenary plusquam perfection of our Stone; before which can be attained,
there must be a loosing of the Compages of the Body, that so the Spiritual
Fire, or Tincture may be set loose; which being loosed, will certainly multiply
it self with that by which it was dissolved, with which it is necessary that it
should Radically be mixed and united, so as that both the dissolvent and the
dissolved may make one together.

This then is the benefit of our Water, that it does not only reduce, open and
mollify our Body, and cause it to send out its Seed, but it is actually
recongealed with the fermental virtue of this seminal influence of Gold, that
it becomes together with the Body, one new Body perpetually united.

So that although our Water be volatile when it is first taken, yet
notwithstanding after it has first made the Body no Body, but a Spirit, in
which spiritualizing the Virtue or Tincture is augmented; after that the Body
by Congelation, makes this no Spirit but a Body, by which the fixity is
advanced mightily, so that both will endure all Fire.

For it is not only an apparent union that is made, but real, so real that the
Spirit and the Body pass one into another, penetrating each others dimensions,
the Spirit being one with the Body, and the Body being the Spirit, the Form
swallowing up the Matter in unity, so that all becomes really Tincture.

And therefore Philosophers give this definition,
Saying this Conjunction is nothing else
But of dissevered qualities a Copulation,
Or of principles a Coequation as others tells.
But some men with Mercury that Apothecaries sells,
Meddleth Bodies that cannot divide
Their Matter, and therefore they slip aside.

OF this Operation Philosophers make a great Mystery, and speak of it very
hiddenly, in respect to the terminus of it, which they call the hour of the
Stones Nativity, in which they say many marvels will appear, for all the
colors that can be invented in the World will be then apparent.

Some say their Conjunction is our reconciliation of Contraries, a making
friendship between Enemies, because in that time the volatile is still
ascending and descending upon the fixed: this is by them ascribed to Contrariety.

Others measuring all sublunary things by the rules of Symmetry and Ametry, do
ascribe this Operation (which they for similitude sake compare to a Duel) to
the over-prevailing of one principles qualities above the qualities of the
other, and therefore they define Auriety to be the Anaticalness of the four
Elements in mixture, each in his quality acting proportionable to the
resistance of its contrary, and vice versa. But this is but an Entanglement, in
which the Chemists stumble upon School Academical Principles: I had rather
embrace their Secret, as for Operation; but for Philosophy, jump with that
noble Bruxellian, whose promised Treatises when the World shall enjoy, I
suppose they will be the profoundest piece of Philosophy that ever was revealed
to the World: which I admire not so much for his Experiments, of none of which
I am ignorant, nor Paracelsus to boot, many, yea most of which are far harder
(though sooner wrought) than the Elixir, and the Alchahest is a hundred times
more difficult; but what I most honor in that noble Naturalist is, that he did
search out the Occulta Naturae, more accurately then ever any did in the World.
So that (setting aside the skill of this Mastery, of which I cannot find any
footsteps in what of his is extant) I am confident he was without flattery
Natures Privy-Counsellor, and for Philosophical verity might have commanded
this Secret; but God does not reveal all to all men, yet who knows what he may
live to be Master of in this point too.

This I speak not to flatter him, who (besides what is evident to the whole
World in his Writings) have no other character of him, and to him I am like to
remain a perpetual Stranger; yet could as heartily desire his acquaintance, as
any man's I know in the World, and if the Fates prevent not mine intentions, by
mine or his death, I shall endeavor familiarity with him. But this by the way.

To return whence I digressed; our final secret is first to unite the Spirit
and Soul of our dissolving Water, that by the mediation of the Soul, the Spirit
and Body may be conjoined, and then after several Sublimations and
Precipitations made for that end, that the Body may be spiritualized, and the
Spirit corporalized, so fix together the Soul, Body and Spirit, the flying and
the fixed, that all the Elements (to use Philosophers terms) may acquiesce and
rest in this Nest of Earth, in which all the virtue of the superiors and
inferiors is contained, both in power and act.

From what has been said may appear, the strong passive delusion that has
taken many men of our Age, and formerly, who with the Chemist in Sendivogius,
cannot dream of any other Mercury, then that Mercury which is to be bought at
Druggists, which they take and sublime variously to make it clean, and then
with Hogheland mix it with Gold, applying all the words and sayings of
Philosophers to this their mixture: But when the time comes that they should
see the signs specified of the Philosophers, there they fail, it may be by
reason of something external to the Gold, (which it gets in foliating, or the
Mercury, which it gets in washing and purging, which though it be but little,
yet it is enough in heat to give a light Tincture to the Superficies) they may
with Hogheland, see a discolored outside, which is nothing; for our Operation
is not so trivial, that a man had need of Spectacles, and a most clear light to
discern it: but it is so apparent, that a half blind man would be amazed at it,
for our Body, even the perfect Body is divided, which common Mercury can never
do, though a man bless himself never so much in his mock-purgations.

But when as such Workmen have waited their time out, and it may be out again,
and see not blackness, then they run into another extreme, and share the fault
of their error (which was only in their Mercury, or withal in their
proportion for pondus and heat of external Fire) between both principles, and
then say with Hogheland, our Mercury and our Gold are not vulgar, but they are
something (no man knows what) which the Philosophers have called Gold and
Mercury; which yet are some strange thing which man never heard of, or some
common thing, or some vile thing. Thus they vanish into smoke, and all for want
of knowledge of our true Mercury.

For until the Soul be separate,
And cleansed from its original sin
With the Water, and thoroughly spiritualizate,
The true Conjunction may thou never begin.
Therefore the Soul first from the Body twine,
Then of the corporal part and of the spiritual,
The Soul shall cause Conjunction perpetual.

REmember then that thou get such a Mercury, which may destroy and conquer thy
Body; mollify it, soften it, and draw out its Seed, and sever the Soul from
it, by virtue of that Spirit which is in thy dissolving Water; Spirits
naturally uniting with Spirits, as one flame will mix with another.

The Soul being thus severed from the Body, it will dry and rot as naturally as
any other thing will, that has its Soul separated. And as by the Water (which
extracts the Soul) it dies and grows putrid and black, so by the same Water it
is washed from its filthy blackness; then the clean Soul having cleansed the
Body, is united to it, that from that time the Body follows the Soul, and is
moved always with it upon the Fire, flying and descending in the form of a
Spirit, which is a wonder to behold.

This is our Secret so much esteemed, Conjunction, which is celebrated after
the loosing, putrefying and purifying of our Body. This is the true process of
our Work, according to the true exigency of Nature; first the Soul is to be
divided from the Body, that is, grosness may be purged by corruption and
rotting, and the Spirit which is a form of light, and seminal, may, being let
loose, multiply it self by the Spirit of the Water, and so being allied to the
Body from whence it was drawn, and to the Water from whose Spirit it receives
an increase in virtue and Tincture, it may unite both the Spirit and the Body
with a perpetual bond. He who works thus, shall undoubtedly attain unto
perfection.

Of two Conjunctions Philosophers mention make,
Gross when the Body is with Mercury reincrudate;
But let this pass; and to the second heed take,
Which is, as I said, after Separation celebrate,
In which the parties be left with least to colligate,
And so promoted unto most perfect temperance,
That never after may be repugnance.

BUt when as the Philosophers speak of Conjunction, it is warily to be
considered of what Conjunction they do mean, for as it is a term very often
used, so is it very doubtfully to be taken. One Conjunction which they speak of
is gross, which is properly Amalgamation, it is the first Operation after the
preparation of the Mercury.

But this is not the Conjunction here to be understood, but a more secret by
far, in which man works nothing at all, but stands by only and beholds
Natures Operation. And this work is done without any laying on of hands, and
very quickly, when the Matters are prepared and made fit. This work is
therefore called a Divine Work.

This Conjunction is far more intimate than the gross, for this is an union per
minima, or intima, so that the essence of the one, enters the essence of the
other, so as to make it but one substance.

This makes a temper which man by no Art could make, for even as Water mixed
with Water is inseparable, so is it now with these principles. Now is concord,
amity and friendship made, for now the hot and the dry, will embrace the cold
and moist, and now patience is made between the Water and the Fire.

Thus causes true Separation true Conjunction to be had,
Of Water and Air, with Earth and Fire;
But that each Element into other may be led,
And so abide for ever at thy desire,
Do as do Dawbers with Clay or Mire,
Temper them thick, and make them not too thin,
This do up-drying the rather thou shall win.

THus the Proverb is verified, Amantium irae amoris redintegratio est, for Love
brought them together, Love parted them with a seeming discontent, and at last
Love unites them with a perpetual tie, that they can no more part for ever,
without a new Resolution in this dissolving Water, after they are first become
perfect.

Now the same thing is both moist and dry, hot and cold, according to the
qualities of the Elements, (that I may speak according to the usual voice of
Philosophers) for now is of two made three, and of three made four, and of four
one; the Quadrangle is turned into a Circle, to the amazement of Nature.

For the essence of one Element now penetrateth the essence of another, that
is, the essential properties are so thoroughly mixed, that all four now make but
one partaking of all.

These are those principles which God now has conjoined, and therefore nothing
can separate: Rejoice now, O Son of Art, for thou have the Sun for thy Diadem,
and the Moon Crescent for thy Garland.

That thou may the more certainly, easily and speedily attain to this, and
that thy signs may the better and orderly appear, next to thy care of preparing
true and purged Mercury, and pure Gold, first be sure of thy mixture, mix them
like as a Potter mixeth his Loam.

Be sure you do not over-glut your Earth with Water, nor cloy your Water with
Earth, but impast them, and then grind them together as diligently as a Painter
would grind his Colors; for the more exactly thou mixest them, the better and
sooner will they work one upon another in heat.

Then set thy Glass in a Furnace made for thy Work, and give a convenient Fire,
in which it may boil night and day perpetually, without a minutes ceasing;
order the Fire so that it may in 12 or 24 hours begin to boil, and from that
hour not to cease boiling, subliming, ascending and descending, until such time
as the moisture be dried up, and all remain below (at least greatest part) in
form of a discontinuous Calx.

But manners there be of our Conjunction three,
The first is called by Philosophers diptative,
The which between Agent and Patient must be,
Male and Female, Mercury and Sulphur vive,
Matter and Form, thin and thick to thrive.
This Lesson will help thee without doubt,
And our Conjunction truly bring about.

NOw to help thee thoroughly in this mystery of Philosophical Conjunction, I
shall particularize all our Conjunctions. We have particularly three
Conjunctions, all which must be known by him who intends to complete this
Mastery.

The first is gross, which I touched before; it is the Amalgamation of Sol with
our Mercury, which because the mixture is made of two things, it is called
Conjunction diptative; and the Compound is now called Rebis, that is, two
things, according to the verse, Res Rebis est Vina confecta.

In this mixture there are two Natures, the one more active, which is the
Mercury, the other more passive, which is Gold: where note, that the activity
of the Mercury above the Gold, is because the moving virtue of Sol is sealed,
that is, his Sulphur is imprisoned. Otherwise when Dissolution is made, Sol
then is most active, and Mercury more passive; Mercury then is as it were the
Feminine Sperm, which being more crude and tender, it is sooner wrought upon by
the Fire, which Sol the Masculine Sperm feels not till it be penetrated by the
Mercury, and then it is forced to send forth its Seed; for the formal principle
resides mostly in the Gold, and the material chiefly in the Water; in the one,
being thick of constitution, the formal part is sealed; in the other, that
little which is, (in respect of the Body) is more at liberty, and so by
consequence sooner active. These two then must be mixed (ad justam exigentiam
naturae) as is elsewhere hinted and prosecuted largely. To this if thou have
attended, thou shall know the extent and full Latitude of this Conjunction;
this is a manual work, and the last manual work, next to the putting and
sealing of it in the Egg, that thou have, before thou have attained the first
degree of the Mastery.

The second manner is called Triptative,
Which is a Conjunction of things three,
Of Body, Soul and Spirit, that they not strive,
Which Trinity thou must bring to Unity.

THe next Conjunction that follows this in order, is when thou have so
administered and regulated thy Fire, that thy Spirits shall so ascend and
circulate, until they have extracted out of the fixed Body its most digested
virtue, or subtle Soul, which is Sulphurous, or of great Firiness. Then shall
the Spirit and Soul descend, and shall unite it self with the Body; then shall
the Air be converted into Dust, according to the process of noble Sandivogius,
where they shall lie contumulate for six weeks without breath; and after when
the Spirit of life shall enter into them, the Spirit and Soul shall by their
mighty force carry aloft the Body with them, so that it shall go out and return
with them, for now these three are made one.

For as the Soul to the Spirit the bond must be,
Right so the Body the Soul to him must knit.
Out of thy mind let not this Lesson flit.

SO then by the mediation of the Soul, the Spirit is made one, and incorporate
with the Body; for the Soul being by the Spirit drawn from the Body, does
naturally desire to be united with it again, and so long as it is from it, is
from home as it were in a Pilgrimage. The Body also naturally does desire its
Soul, and will as forcibly attract it as a Loadstone does attract Iron: for
know, that the Soul does not ascend, but it carries with it a fermental Odor
of the Body, by which it does so effectually affect the Spirit, that it begins
to think of taking a new impression, and becomes daily by little and little
more and more able to suffer Fire, and by consequence draws to the nature of a
Body: observe this.

The third manner, and also the last of all,
Four Elements together which joins to abide,
Tetraptative certainly Philosophers do it call,
And specially Guido de Montanor, whos^ fame goes wide,
And therefore in most laudable manner this tide.

BUt yet this Conjunction does not retain the volatility of the Compound,
though it is so united that the parts ascend and descend together; the reason
is, that though by the Soul the Spirit and Body be united, yet the Spirit
sometimes does carry the Body with it aloft, and the Body at times precipitates
the Spirit, the Soul holding fast together, till at length not only these
parts, but the Elemental qualities of them, are so strongly permixt, that the
one does not more in acting, then the other does in resisting, by which means
they are not only united to follow one another, but fixed to abide Fire together.

This is the last and noblest Conjunction, in which all the mysteries of this
Microcosm have their Consummation. This is by the Wise called their Tetraptive
Conjunction, wherein the Quadrangle is reduced to a Circle, in the which there
is neither beginning nor end. He who has arrived here, may sit down at Banquet
with the Sun and Moon.

This is the so highly commended Stone of the Wise, which is without all fear
of corruption; for here are by Nature all Elements Anatically mixed and united,
so that it cannot suffer from any, for it agrees with all.

In our Conjunction four Elements must aggregate
In due proportion, which first asunder were separate.

THese our Elements are not such vain trifles, which are idly imagined by
Sophisters; by the primary qualities, to speak after the common phrase, though
I do not think that any thing attains perfection upon an account of qualities,
but so it pleased the Ancients to express themselves; only this is most
certain, that what was before inconstant in the Fire, now is impatible therein,
and what at first in the beginning of the Work discovered two distinct Natures,
is now one entirely and inseparably.

Therefore like as the Woman has veins fifteen,
And the Man but five to the act of their fecundity,
Required in our Conjunction first I mean,
So must the Man his Son have of his Water three,
And nine his Wife, which three to him must be:
Then like with like shall joy have for to dwell.
More of Conjunction me needs not to tell.

OUr Stone is as it is called Microcosmos, which name unless to our Stone, has
been only appropriated unto Man; so is there in the Generation of our Stone,
much that may answer to the Generation of Man: for as Anatomists do allow the
Woman fifteen veins conducing to the act of Venery and Procreation, and the Man
from whom comes the Male Sperm but five; so our Stone in his first Composition
requires three parts of the Water or Feminine Sperm, to one of Sulphur or the
Male: so the Artist decocting, and Nature perfecting, the Mastery will be
accomplished with the blessing of God.

Remember now that the more thy Water is, the more ought to be thy Internal
Fire to dry it up; so then when thou shall make the proportion of Water to the
Sun three to one, remember that thy number of Eagles, which is the proportion
of thy Mercury, ought to be nine, or at most ten.

This is the highest Acuation of the Water, which is best for such a
proportion; as for seven Eagles, two to one is a very good proportion, so have
thou proportionably three Eagles to every one of the Water which is added to
the Body. Some are so acute as to say, that with four Eagles well cleansed, the
Work may be performed, and then the proportion must be as three of the Water to
two of the Body, but the decoction must needs be longer. I never yet tried it,
knowing the forenamed proportions will do far better, and nine months time is a
sufficient waiting for a Philosopher. Any shorter way is and would be
acceptable, but more tedious are very unacceptable, since they show nothing
more than quicker ways, but protract the time of Putrefaction; for from that
time the Fire of Nature is at work, and then every pondus has the same period,
provided the Fire be accordingly, and the Matter in the Glass not much over the
other, for one ounce or two will be far sooner accomplished, than five or six
ounces; therefore we advise all rather to content themselves with one ounce, or
two at most: if an ounce succeed, you can wish no more.

This Chapter I will conclude right soon therefore,
Gross Conjunction charging thee to make but one,
For seldom have Strumpets Children ybore,
And so shall thou never come by our Stone,
Without thou let the Woman lig alone;
That after she have once conceived by the Man,
Her Matrix be shut up from all other than.

I Shall soon draw to an end concerning this subject, for I trow that thou
understandest it fully; take heed then to my Doctrine, mix thy Water with thy
Body in a due quantity, and grind them together diligently, and when thou have
mixed them, shut them up in thy Glass carefully, and there let them stand till
complete perfection.

And after thou have mixed them, and set them to heat, be sure thou stir them
not, much less open them, or add any thing to them, or take ought from them,
whatever any Author do seem to advise: For if thou do contrary to this my
Doctrine, thou do run an extreme hazard of losing all; for as it is with
Harlots, who lying with many men, conceive rarely of any: so if thou join crude
Mercury after thy first Conjunction, I will not say that it is impossible, but
very unlikely that ever thou shall attain our Mastery: And what I say of
putting in fresh Mercury, is to be understood of the Body also, for if thou
shall add fresh of that, thou will destroy all; for after thou set them to
the Fire, thou must expect Conception, that is, that the Mercury by ascending
and descending will extract part of the seminal virtue out of the reins of the
Sun, which when she has done, there then stands a relation between the Sun and
that Mercury, as between Husband and Wife. Now other Mercury, or other Sol are
not as yet so related, and therefore they are as a third person, which Love
abhors. Therefore mix thy Matters so judiciously at first, that thou need not
afterward to wish for any new addition, and close your Vessel well, and decoct
it carefully.

For such as evermore add crude to crude,
Opening their Vessel, letting their Matters keel,
The Sperm conceived they nourish not, but delude
Themselves, and spill their Work each deal;
If therefore thou have list to do weel,
Close up thy Matrix, and nourish thy Seed
With heat continual and temperate, if thou will speed.

THey who shall do otherwise, as they discover themselves to be too impatient,
so they certainly will destroy their Operations. For were it no other damage
then this, that they cool their Seed, it is an irreparable error; but over and
besides, the crude Air, will they, nill they, will get in, and being as it is a
great enemy to Generation, it destroys the germinative and living virtue.

Then instead of getting profit, they reap certain loss; and instead of
attaining truth, they get a delusion: for no man that understands himself would
do it, but he that would open a woman's Womb that is conceived, to make her
bring forth sooner, or crack an Egg he would set under a Hen, to make it hatch
more speedily.

Therefore as I advised before, so I do now, and shall make it the ^piphonema
of this discourse; mix thy Seeds, and elaborate them with what pains thou
can, then shut them in a house of Glass, that is to say, an ounce in a Glass
that would ^old about 16 ounces, or 20, or two ounces in a Glass that would
hold two ounces or thereabouts of Water distilled; set thy Glass in thy Nest,
about a 4th part of it in Sand, which must be sisted from Stones. Let the Neck
be fastened either with a Wyre, or set into a hole which may be in the Cover of
thy Nest, the Neck about 6 inches long, or longer a little. Let thy Athanor be
so that thou may give in it what heat thou please, and keep it about a day,
or 16 or 12 hours at least, without renewing, and yet no sensible alteration in
heat.

In this Furnace thou shall give thy Matter such a Fire, as may within the
first day or two cause it to boil, like to a Pot over the Fire, or as the
stormy Sea swells in a mighty Wind; from the surface of which there will
exhale a Vapor which we call the Winds, which are in the belly or womb in the
forming of our Embrio, which will condense at the top, (the Glass being strong)
and run down in drops, and this continually night and day without ceasing. Thus
is verified the saying of the Philosopher, that our Stone retains life, and
is perfected, that is, divided and united, and at last fixed and congealed, by
continual boiling and subliming. Thus are thy Waters divided, the uppermost
part carry aloft the Soul with them, and the lowermost boil and tear and soften
the Body, and make it more fit for the returning Spirit and Soul to work on, in
their continual descending.

And when thy Vessel has stood by months five,
And Clouds and Eclipses passed each one,
The light appearing increase thy heat, then believe,
Until bright and shining in whiteness be thy Stone.
Then may thou open thy Glass anon,
And feed thy Child which is ybore,
With Milk and Meat aye more and more.

THus shall thou keep them for the space of 150 days, in which time thou shall
see a gallant Game played, the Earth shall be overflown with Waters, the two
great Lights eclipsed, the Heavens be clouded, the Air darkened, and all things
in disorder and confusion; then shall the Earth be turned into a Limus, and the
Water by decoction continual shall be dried up, and by moderate showrs and dews
shall be moistened, and by continual washing shall be cleansed; then through the
good pleasure of God the daylight shall spring forth, and what was before
dark, shall now become clear, and what was black of the blackest, shall now be
made very white.

This when thou shall see, rejoice, for our King is now coming from the East
triumphing, he has conquered death, and now is made immortal; strengthen then
your Fire a little, prudently and with discretion continue it till such time as
your Stone become white, and very clear and bright, sparkling like to a Sword
new slipped, and by dryness be reduced into a Powder impalpable.

Now art thou come to the end of the white, and thou have a Stone perfect;
though this be but of small virtue, yet thou may now take it out, and use it
either by Fermentation, or Cibation, or Imbibition, or Multiplication, and make
it fit for projection: so that if thou have but an ounce, thou may soon have
a thousand.

For now both moist and dry is so contemperate,
That of the Water Earth has received impression,
Which never after that asunder may be separate,
And right so Water to the Earth has given ingression,
That both together to dwell have made profession;
And Water of the Earth has purchased a retentive,
They four made one never more to strive.

NOw thou have an intimate union between the moist and the dry, that one is
passed into another, and of two there is a third made, which is a Neuter from
both, and yet partakes of both; and these two Natures that did seem so
opposite, are now conspired together to make one substance incorruptible.

For the Water which is a Spirit, has given such an impression to the Earth,
that it which was corporal and dry, and incapable of communicating Tincture, is
by it become penetrative, so that it can in the very twinkling of an eye pass
to the very Center, upon an imperfect Metal on which it is project, as I have
often with an unspeakable content observed.

For it is not in our union of this Sulphur to its Mercury, as it is with the
union of Water to Earth, though we make such comparisons; for though we call
our Sulphur Earth, and our Mercury Water, yet our Mercury will not in the
Examen of the Fire flow away as Water will exhale from Loam, how exquisitely
soever it be contempered with it.

So then our Body which by our Art is renewed, is advanced into the order of
Spirits, or Bodies glorified, which though they have Bodies, yet they are not
subject to those Laws of gross corporeity, which is in Bodies not regenerate:
therefore our Stone is a System of Wonders, ponderous, fixed, and exquisitely
compact, and yet as penetrative as hot Oil is into soaking Paper.

So that it is not now as it was at first beginning of Operation, when the one
was above, the other below, compared to two Dragons or Birds, the one winged,
the other without wings; but now both are capable to resist the Fire in its
utmost fury.

Now has the Water received a fermental impression from the Earth or Sulphur,
so that it is now made Sulphur with Sulphur, as the other is made by the Water
life with life.

This is the highest perfection which any sublunary Body can be brought to, by
which we know that God is one, for God is perfection; to which when ever any
creature arrives, in its kind it rejoices in unity, in which is no division or
alterity, but peace and rest without contention.

Thus in two things all our intents do hing,
In moist and dry, which be contraries two;
In dry, that it the moist to fixing bring;
In moist, that it give Liquefaction to the Earth also.

WHatever then we seem to say or write to the contrary, all our intentional
Secret consists only in two things; whatever we seem to advise more, is but
only to entangle the unwary.

Our first Secret is to know, our true Sulphur, which many do allego^ize to all
the absurdities in the World: This is Gold, which is to be bought pure almost
in any place.

The next is to know our Mercury, which is not common, but artificial, drawn
from three heads by the mediation of one thing, which makes the two which are
dry and Sulphurous, to unite with one which is moist and Mercurial. These are
different in their qualities, which difference our decoction so reconciles, as
to make of them sweet Harmony. For the Sulphur in whose increase of virtue
consists our final intent, it does give consistence to the Water, yet so as
that it does not part with it from it self, but with its Fermentative virtue it
does so infuse it, that of a moist Spirit tender and volatile, it becomes a
fixed dry Fire-abiding substance.

But first of all the Water does mollify the Body, and soak into it, and
search out its profundity; for the Sun teyneth not, till it teyned be, for hard
and dry Bodies cannot enter so as to transmute, till such time as themselves be
first Radically entered, and changed from color to color, till they come to
perfection; then it is fluid and penetrative, for it will enter to the root of
the imperfect, and cause it to lose its imperfection, and become perfect,
flowing upon it like Wax when it is heated by the Fire.

Then of them thus a temperament may forth go,
A temperament not so thick as the Body is,
Neither so thin as Water withouten miss.

BEtween the dry Body and the fluid Water, we make a temperament which is
called Impastation, for it is made like unto Paste; and Inceration, for it
brings it to the temper of Wax; but most properly Amalgamation, or gross
Conjunction, which is a middle consistence between Mercury, and a Metal not so
hard as the one, for it may with a Knife or ones Finger be spread to and fro
easily; nor yet is it so current as Mercury, for no Mercury will run out of it,
though it be inclined one way or other. I need say no more, for there is hardly
any vulgar Chemist who is not acquainted with the notion of an Amalgama, and
knows what temper that is, when it will spread like Butter, and yet laid
declining, will let nothing run from it which is thinner then the whole
Compound; for in a thin Amalgama, the Mercury if it be declined will run to the
declining side, like Hydropical intercutis Water. But ours is not so thin, and
yet so soft that it is easily pliable, yet so that it may be rouled up in
Balls, and no quick Mercury run down or sink to the bottom. He that can miss in
this direction, would hardly find the shining Sun at Noonday.

Loosing and knitting be principles two
Of this hard Science, and Poles most principal,
Howbeit that other principles be many more, etc.

WE have done this Chapter, and to conclude assure thee, that all our twelve
Gates are nothing else but locking and unlocking, shutting and opening,
dissolving and congealing, volatizing and fixing, making the dry soft, and
afterward the soft dry, loosing and binding. Learn but this, and thou shall be
sure of the Keys of this Terrestrial Paradise.

Yet because I would be more clearly understood, I shall pass through the other
Gates of the Philosophers, that running through their multiplicity, I may as I
go reduce them all to unity.

UPon a day as I abroad was walking,
The pleasant Fields to view,
A voice I heard in silence softly talking
Of Wonders passing new.
Whereat I starting stood like one amazed,
Not knowing what to guess;
But when I round about a while had gazed,
This terror it grew less.
The voice I heard came from a Grove, which there
At my right hand did grow,
Which I considering, silently drew near
The cause of it to know.
Where I did see a Lady finely dressed,
Sit sighing by a Spring,
She uttered words as if with grief oppressed,
And often her hands would wring.
Ah me, quoth she, how is my joy departed!
Oh dismal cruel death!
Could any think the Fiend so flinty hearted,
So to bereave him breath?
I then drew near, and thought to have assuaged
With pleasant words her grief:
The more I spoke, the more she was enraged,
Nay she disdained relief.
Her face was Lilly white, with Purple spots
Upon her cheeks and chin;
Her Rosy lips, her feature free from blots,
TO amaze me did begin.
Beauty most rare, quoth I, what do thou weeping?
What Wight most vile shall dare
To wrong thee, whom the Gods have in their keeping,
Whose face is mortals snare?
Good Sir, quoth she, forbear your words of sorrow,
I live, yet living dye:
I wish my life might end before the morrow,
Ah death I fear's not nigh.
I had a Husband dear, of comely feature,
A King of great renown;
So lovely and so loving, that in Nature
There Is none may put him down.
His Constitution was so strong, he scorned
To fly from any Foe:
His Person was with grace so well adorned,
That none but him did know.
Great Phoebus he was named, whose princely merit
It Is death for to recite;
So Rich he was, the wealth he did inherit
Great honor did invite.
We walking here the pleasant Woods among,
Found this unhappy Spring,
Of which to drink for thirst my Lord did long,
Which draught his end did bring.
For stooping down, the Water with its stream
His head did make so light,
He could not rise, but dropped into the stream
To everlasting Night.
He strove to swim, but to the bottom sank,
O dismal sight to see!
Then swelling with the Water which he drank,
Himself he could not free.
But burst, and then the Spring began to boil,
And bubbling, color changed;
It Is wonder for to see (alas the spoil!)
King dead, and Spring estranged
So from its former state, that what then shone
Like unto glittering Sky,
Now like a stinking Puddle reaks, that none
Can it endure: yea I
Who in it lost a Husband dear, do loath
The vapors that ascend;
I hope one Spring will be the end of both,
'Twould be a happy end.
So long she spoke, until the Water seemed
Like Ink, so black it grew;
And eke the savor erst so bad esteemed,
Did far surpass the hew.
The Air with Clouds most dark was filled, that never
Such Fogs and Mists were seen,
The which a Soul from the dead Corpse did sever,
Whose color first was green,
Then yellow, mixed with blue; the fumes ascended,
Which bore the Soul on high,
Which when the Lady saw, her tears were ended,
She fainted by and by.
Into the same Stream she did swouning drop,
And never more appeared;
She loved her Husband so, she would not stop,
Like one of death afear'd,
And straightway she of vital breath deprived,
Was of a Lady fair
A Carcass made, thus both in love who lived,
Alike in death did share.
Their Souls disjoined from their Bodies hovering
Upon the Fountain played,
Expecting if their Carcasses recovering,
Might have their lives repaid.
The Sun in Solstice stood, whose heat did dry
The Waters more and more;
And eke beneath a Central heat did fry,
And sent up vapors store.
Which still returned, so long till they were changed
The greater part to dust;
The wandering Souls which long had been estranged,
Were now allured with lust
Of their own Bodies, in whose Atoms lay
A strange Magnetic force;
They also though long banished, day by day
Awaited the dead Coarse.
For Souls united were Bodies combined,
And both to each allied
So nearly, that no sooner they can find
A way, but they are tied
With knot inviolable, that no power,
How strong it may appear,
Can part them any more, even from the hour
They thus united were.
Thus two one Body have, of double Sex,
Which does no sooner live,
But is impregnated; this does perplex
Their foes, who fain would drive
This tender offspring to despair: but God
Him safely ever keeps
From all Invasion, nor permits the rod
Of them to make him weep.
And though his Garments and his Skin be foul
With blackness and with stink,
He shall be purged, for both Spirit and Soul
Are clean, whatever men think.
A River springs amidst a Garden fair,
With Flowers many deck^,
Whose drops are Crystal like, these into Air
By Central heat are checked.
This Air condenses like Pearl Orient,
Which on this Body falls,
Whose luster on its blackness being spent,
To brightness it recalls.
And both together make a Crystal Spring,
Whose Streams most strangely shine;
These after are condensed, and with them bring
Treasures of Silver fine.
These Treasures if to rest untoucht a while
Upon the Fire are left,
The stealing Azure will the white beguile,
And both will be bereft
Of Being by the Vert, which long will dure;
The Citrine will succeed,
Which will abide full long, but then be sure
To see the sparkling red.
Then is the King who formerly was drowned,
Become the whole Earths wonder;
His Wife and he are one, and both abound
With wealth; nor they asunder
Will ever more depart: now all their Foes
Must their dominion know;
Who will not stoop, shall surely feel their blows,
For all are him below.
His Brethren all who formerly were held
As Slaves in prison fast,
Are now set free; their Enemies which swelled
With pride, full low were cast.
Thus by his death, the King has now obtained
That Glory which before
He never had; his former state's disdained,
His Wife now weeps no more.
She Is one with him, his former Kingdom he
Unto his Brethren gives;
The worst of them does now those Fortunes see,
That each in plenty lives.
And what their Brother was before his death,
That they are now become,
For he their sickness cures with his breath,
And makes them live at home.
No more in bondage, bonds no place can find,
All liberty enjoy;
There Is nothing here can hurt, for all one mind
Have: all that would destroy
Is banished from the Kingly Palace, where
The Streets with Gold are paved;
The Walls are Silver fine, the Gates most clear
Entire Gems, engraved
With wondrous Art; the Windows glass most pure,
Which falls nor knocks can break;
The Drink from fear of venom still is sure,
Whosoever virtue none can speak.
Whose comes there, is at a place arrived
Where neither want, nor death,
Nor any grief is known; a place contrived
For Saints therein to breath.
Whom God shall choose, and to his Palace bring,
What need he more desire
Then God himself, that he may praises sing,
Kindled with holy fire?
But he whose hands unclean, and heart defiled,
These Mysteries forbear,
For you the are not; cease timely, for y' are wild
TO have neither wit nor fear.
AN EXPOSITION UPON THE Fifth Gate, Which is PUTREFACTION.
The Fifth Gate Opened, Which is PUTREFACTION.
Now we begin the Chapter of Putrefaction,
Without which Pole no Seed can multiply,
Which must be done only by continual action
Of heat in the Body, moist not manually;
For Bodies else may not be altered naturally.

WE have already run through four Gates, the first being opened, the rest stand
open at will; so that thou have need only to enter. The course and method of
Philosophers now does lead us to the Gate of Putrefaction, a horrible Gate,
whose entrance is dark with Cimmerian night, dreadful with many windings and
turnings.

And yet it is a Gate so necessary, that unless you pass through it, you may
never expect to reap fruit from your labor; for without it can be no Life nor
Generation, much less desired Multiplication: therefore says the Poet,

Felices atrum quotquot habere queant. The cause of this death, or corruption
or rottenness, proceeds from the action of continual heat, not so much of the
external Fire of the Athanor, as of the Compound within it self; in which the
Fire of the Water which is against Nature, does open the perfect Body by
continual contrition and decoction, and so lets loose its Sulphur that was
incarcerate, which is Fire of Nature, that so between these two in continual
action and passion, together with the external heat continually acting, the
whole Compound is brought to corruption, being sometimes roasted with external
heat, which does sublime the moisture, which again of its own accord returns
continually, and does moisten the Earth so long, until by reason of the heat it
have drunk up the moisture wholly, and then it dies.

And unless thou see this sign, of rotting of thy Compound, which is done in a
black color, a stinking odor, and with a discontinuity of parts, thy labor
will still be in vain; for thou may never expect what thou desire, to have
a new form brought in, till the old form be corrupted and put off.

Since Christ does witness, without the Grain of Wheat
Dye in the Ground, increase thou may none get.
And in likewise without the Matter putrefie,
It may in no wise truly be alterate,
Neither thy Elements may be divided kindly,
Nor the Conjunction of them perfectly celebrate:
That therefore thy labor be not frustrate,
The privity of our putrefying well understand,
Or ever thou take this Work in hand.

THis is so constant to Natures constant proceedings, that the painful
Husbandman, that he may have an increased Harvest, commits his precious Seed to
the Ground, in it to rot, and to be corrupted, that so a new Life may spring
from the old dead Body; nor does he ever expect increase, so long as it remains
in his Garner.

Right so we, so long as our Material principles continue in their own nature
and form, they are but of a single value, for Gold and Mercury are two such
principles, that they will for ever delude as many as proceed to work on them
in a Sophistical way; for whatever the Artist may think, they will remain the
same unto the end of the World, unless pure Sol being mixed with its own pure
and appropriated Mercury, and set in a due heat of digestion, there arise a
mutual action and passion between them, which without the laying on of the
Artists hands, will tend to a new Generation. For in a convenient Fire, in
which the Compound may perpetually and uncessantly boil, and the subtle parts
may ascend and circulate upon the gross without intermission, the most digested
Virtue or Soul of the fixed Body, (which is his basis of Tincture) will be
extracted by the Water, and this will mix it self with the pure Spirit of the
Water, and with this it will ascend and return, until a total separation be
made of the pure from the impure, and the subtle from the gross.

Then shall the Body draw down its Soul again, and by the power of the most
High it shall be united, and with it the Spirit of life shall be joined also,
so that all three shall become one with an union indissolvable; but all this
pre-supposeth a Putrefaction, or Corruption of one form, else cannot there be
an Introduction of another.

Therefore since this mystery of Putrefaction is not more secret then
necessary, so necessary that without it there is nothing can be done to
purpose, that is to say, with profit; I shall be a little plain and full in the
prosecution of this mystery: For in the knowledge of this consists all that is
required to make a Philosopher. All the intentions of the Artist, must be only
so to prepare and order things, that he may be sure of this terminus; and when
he is there come, he is as sure a Master as if he had the Stone in his Cabinet.
By the failing of this sign, the Operator is always to turn either backward to
seek out some other principles, or forward, or to the right hand, or to the
left; but when he is Master of this, he then can fail in nothing but in the
Regimen of the outward heat.

And Putrefaction may thus defined be,
After Philosophers definition to be of Bodies the slaying,
And in our Compound a division of things three,
The killed Bodies into Corruption forth leading,
And after unto Regeneration them ableing;
For things being in the Earth, without doubt
Be engendered of Rotation of the Heavens about.

THe definition that the Philosophers give of this Operation, is perpetually
Allegorical, for this Gate they have named by all Metaphors almost in the
World, especially from death, and dead men: therefore they allegorize the
Vessel in this station, to Grave, or Tomb, and emblematically discover this
Operation by the types of Skuls, dead Bones, and rotten Carcasses; according to
which Metaphors they call Putrefaction, the death of the Compound.

For when they saw the Body with the Water to melt in the Fire, to flow and to
boil, they called this Magnesia; when they saw the Water partly to ascend, and
partly to descend, and partly to remain below, so that at once there was both a
Sublimation in vapor, and a Motion of what was below, they said that it was
the Spirit of the Water that ascended, or more Airy part; and the more Fiery
part, which rejoices most to be united to, and hidden in Earth, remained
below, for that was more capable of the Fire, and did better agree with it, as
with its like: which because it did so uncessantly swell and boil, and rage at
the bottom, and make the Body begin to change its color, they said it was Fire
against Nature. Again, when they saw the ascending Vapor to change color,
they said it was the Soul of the Bodies was mixed with the Spirit, which
because it was green, they said it was a vegetative Soul, and Fire of Nature.

Now when the Body below began to thicken, they said this was an
Hermaphroditical Body, because part of the Water always remained below, and
made the Body to boil, and bubble, and flow; and therefore this they called a
new Body compounded of two Bodies, the Sun and the Moon, the Man and the Wife,
which because it grew to a slimy consistence, they named it Limus, or Limbus,
Hyle, and a Chaos, or Terra Adamica.

When this Body began to grow very black, and to send up foul Exhalations,
yellowish, bluish, and black, they said this was Death and Corruption, which
followed the separation of the Soul from the Body.

Now when they see the Souls to be again united, and to remain below together,
they knew that the Soul and Spirit were Immortal, that is, the Tincture or
Vital Balsam was Incorruptible; and because they see them again unite, they
knew the Soul and Spirit would renew the Bodies, and this seeming Corruption,
was but the natural step to a glorious Regeneration; for if the Souls be again
united to the Bodies, they will surely regenerate them, and renew them, and
make them incorruptible; for if the Spirits had not returned to this union,
they might only have expected the Exhalation of them: for Spiritual Tinctures
or Essences, cannot be destroyed by corruption in many Vegetals, much less in
the most perfect of Minerals and Metals. The union then of the Souls with the
Bodies, argues evidently a hidden purity, under the apparent rottenness, which
will after Purification be exalted to transcendent Glory.

Hereupon they said, that the Spirit and Soul which were above, were the
Heavenly Quintessence, and the Body below was the Earth; and this Circulation
of Spirits, were but as the Circulation of the Heavens round about the Earth;
and the falling drops, were but as the influential dew, which did cause the
Earth to fructify; and the blackness and darkness, were but the Winter
Latitude, which with its Clouds and droppings do mellow and fertilize the
Earth, to shoot forth with the more beautiful varieties in the Spring^^*

And therefore like as I have said before,
Thine Elements commixt and wisely coequate,
Thou keep in temperate heat, eschewing evermore
That they by violent heat be not incinerate,
To powder dry unprofitably Rubificate:
But into powder black as the Crows Bill,
With heat of our Bath, or else of our Dunghill.

FOr this cause they looked upon this as a secret, mysterious, yet very natural
Operation, whereby the most solid and perfect Minerals, are by Nature so
applied one to another, and cultivated, that the very Earth or Ground should be
found, in which this noble Tree of the Hesperides may be planted and grow; the
Matrix or Womb should be prepared, in which this noble Offspring may again
enter, and be born again.

Therefore what by long Experience, and profound Meditation, Philosophers have
found out and seen, that also they committed and communicated unto us; so that
we also are made fellow Heirs of this great Treasure, and we shall as
faithfully communicate our knowledge for thy Instruction. First then, take thy
Body which is Gold, and thy Water which is Mercury, the one ready made by
Nature to thy hand, the other thou must Prepare, for it is not to be found in
the Land of the Living, but must be made; Nature here is at a nonplus, and so
is Art, taken asunder, but both together effect it.

Mix these together in due proportion, so as I have often told thee; then set
them to the Fire to decoct, and give them a convenient heat, in which they may
boil, ascend and descend perpetually, without any intermission night or day.

But especially and before all things be careful in your Internal heat, to wit,
the proportion of your Water for your Sulphur; that you must add and supply to
it in the beginning of your Work, in its Preparation, is that which does
perform all the work within, without which your External heat is of no value,
for it is of it self uneffectual.

If then thou accend this heat so much as that it predominate, it will not then
dissolve the Bodies, as thou expectest, but contrariwise burn the Flowers
before they are extracted from the depth of their Marrow: this thou may
easily do, either if thy Arsnick be not made as it ought, or else the number of
Eagles exceeded, or the proportion of thy Water to thy Body not agreeing to the
number of Eagles, or thy Glass not well proportioned to thy Matter; it will
easily burn, if thy Glass be too big, for so the moisture will so much be
dispersed about the Concave, that it will not return before the Earth below be
left too dry. I have given Rules easily to avoid all these inconveniences.

And on the other hand, be sure that thou do not err in too little heat; let
thy Water have Fire enough within it, to make a true division and corruption,
which if either thy Arsnick have not sufficient Fiery virtue, or if the union
of this and thy Water be not well attended, but slightly performed, or the
Purgation of thy Water be not thoroughly made each Eagle, for so two or three
Eagles may not add the virtue of one, or if thy number of Eagles be not just,
or thy proportion of quantity be not duly observed.

Therefore follow my advice, and be careful in both these particulars, and then
let your External heat be so that your Compound may boil and sublime, which for
its similitude is called a Balneum, so long till the Vapors cease, and are
retained within; then will the Compound rot, which for its great likeness is
called our Dunghill.

Until the time that Nights be passed ninety,
In moist heat keep them for any thing,
Soon after by blackness thou shall espy,
That they draw fast to putrefying.

FIrst then, our Operations begin in humido, for in the beginning moisture it
prevails, and is called the Phlegmatic Constitution of our Embrio; and this is
called the Reign of the Woman, which (according to Flammel) seeks to get the
Domination for many months, that is to say, for three months or thereabouts,
which according to our Author is ninety days and nights, to whom many other
Authors agree. This time may be longer or shorter, according to the better or
worse preparation of the Matter, and the Regimen of the Fire.

But when thou have set thy Glass once, in the first place be sure that thou
give a due, yet temperate heat; govern it so as that between the Waters above,
and the Floods beneath, the Earth may liquefie; then continue your decoction,
and the Vessel shall be beclouded, and thy Compound shall with constant
Circulation become black.

This color shall be a sign unto you that you have not run your course in
vain; this is the first Gate, into which and through which you must enter; now
know for certain that thy Seeds begin to rot and engender. In this Putrefaction
there is life, for this Operation is nothing else but an extracting of Natures
from their profundity or root; this is that which will make thy fixed Body to
become a volatile Spirit, for Putrefaction does loose the bands of all the
Elements.

Which after many colors thou may bring
To perfect whiteness, by patience easily,
And so the Seed in his nature shall multiply.

SO soon then as thou shall have blackness complete, know for certain that in
this blackness whiteness is really hidden, so really as a living Plant in its
Seed. But before thou attain to this whiteness, thou may have patience, and
pass through many middle changable colors, which will be no small chearing to
the Workman, who must wait with a great deal of Longanimity until the Earth
and Heaven be united.

Then shall thy Elements perfectly accord, and one color shall cover thy
new-married Soul and Body, and that will be like to the most pure Lilly, or
sublimed Salt, sparkling like to a new-slipped Sword in the Sun beams.

In this whiteness is the Multiplicative virtue exalted, and made apparent in
its first degree; by this white Soul thou may turn either Mercury, or Saturn,
or Jupiter, or Venus, or Mars, into most pure refined Silver, in a short time,
and that not Sophistically, to apparency, but in reality, inwardly and
outwardly to abide all Essays.

Make each the other to hal^e and kiss,
And like as Children play them up and down,
And when their Shirts are filled with Piss,
Then let the Woman to wash be bown,
Which often for faintness will fall in a swo^^,
And die at last with her Children all,
And go to Purgatory to wash their filth Original.

BUt in thy first Operation, as is said before, first look for blackness, which
will appear in the first Regimen by continual decoction, which blackness shall
be an Indicium to you that your two Natures do begin now to embrace and kiss
one another.

For so soon as they feel the Fire, they flow together within the Vessel, and
boil by continuance of decoction visibly, and the tender Nature not enduring
the heat, flies aloft, and being enclosed so that it cannot get out, it
congeals in drops in the head of the Vessel, and about the sides, and again
returns to its Body, which may well be called Childrens play, running round as
it were in a Circular motion: This play continues so long, till the Water
begins to leave its thicker parts, with the thicker parts of the Body, which in
the bottom of the Vessel is called Vrina puerorum; and the thinner parts of the
Water, mixed with the thinner parts of the Body, which is dissolved in it,
flies still and circulates until it have made a more full dissolution of the
Body, which here by the odor of its Sulphur does penetrate the Spirit and
Soul, and makes them faint at last, and remain as it were breathless in the
bottom of the Glass.

Then shall the Body be destroyed, and both the Water and it rot into small
Atoms, which will lie without motion, growing every day more and more black,
until at length Cimmerian darkness cover the whole Sky.

This is called the North Latitude of our Stone, and it is Winter, cold and
dirty; here are the Elements brought to rest for a time, until a Generation be
made in the bottom of the Glass, when through the will and power of God, a
clean thing shall be brought out of this uncleanness and black venenosity.

When they be there, by little and little increase
Their pains with heat aye more and more,
The Fire from them let never cease,
And see that thy Furnace be surely apt therefore,
Which wise men call an Athanor:
Concerning heat required most temperately,
By which thy Matter does kindly putrefie.

NOw thy Bath will begin to be a little more heated and stirred up, to wash
this young King, which though noble, is yet conceived in a Stable; for at this
time thou have the Sulphur of thy dissolved Body let loose, which mixing with
the Sulphur of the Water, does acuate it exceedingly; the one being a natural,
the other a Fire against Nature, both together make an unnatural Fire, burning
like to the Fire of Hell, comparable to nothing but the Alcahest.

Nor must thou think that this increase of Fire consists in the blowing of the
Coal, no verily, it is a more subtle internal Fire that we have, and yet that
also must be kept constant, and in due order.

For this cause see that thy Furnace be trusty, else thou may and wilt fail;
for though the Fire of Coals do not effect any thing, yet it excites, and the
Water though it be of a wonderful nature, yet it acts no farther then it is
stirred up, and intermission in this Work when it is once begun, will in the
end prove fatal extinction.

Therefore the Wise men have named the Furnace in which they work their
Secrets, an Athanor, that is, Immortal, showing that from the beginning to the
end the Fire must not go out, for the extinction of it destroys the Work; and
as death includes all sicknesses, which are steps to it, so an Immortal Furnace
or Athanor, must not only preserve the Fire from going out, but also from
exorbitancy either on one hand or other; for whatever swerves from the
temperate mean, hinders the kind operation of the Matter, which is
Putrefaction, by which means the Work is notably retarded and weakened, and by
continuance of any extremity it will be destroyed, but with its due heat it
does putrefie kindly.

Of this principle speaks sapient Guido,
And says by rotting dies the Compound corporal,
And then after Morien and others more,
Up rises again regenerate, simple and spiritual.
And were not heat and moisture continual,
Sperm in the Womb might have none abiding,
And so there should no fruit thereof up spring.

THis according to the intention of all Philosophers, Guido, Turba, Arnaldus,
and others, but especially noble Trevisan, whom I chiefly honor; so Flammel,
Artephius, Morien, and all Philosophers testify thus much, namely, that the
heat must be so adequated to the Compound, as that in it the Body, through the
Pontick virtue of the Water, may have its Sulphur let loose, and so these two
Sulphurs mixing together, may bring the whole to rotting or Putrefaction.

By which putridness a Ferment is engendered, which as it does volatize all
things naturally, so it does quicken this gross dead Body, in so much that it
mounts aloft upon the Fire with the Water, and rises a new glorious Body mixed
with the Water, so that both being become one together, the Spirit borrows from
the Body permanency, and the Body from the Spirit obtains penetrativeness, so
that both make one celestial and terrestrial Compound, named the Regenerate
Body and Stone of Paradise incombustible. All which is occasioned by the
continuance and not failing of heat, both inwardly and outwardly, by which the
moisture is circulated and depurated, without which the seminal virtue would be
extinct, which only vegetates by heat and moisture.

And if once the seminal virtue were killed, the remaining Compound would be no
better then a dead unprofitable thing, which could never be recovered; so that
if either moisture or heat within, or convenient heat without should fail,
there is nothing to be expected, but according to the Poet,

Cuncta ruent, quae non ulla reparaveris Art: Therefore at the beginning our
Stone thou take,
And bury each in other with their Grave,
Then equal between them a marriage make,
To lig together six weeks let them have.
Their Seed conceived, kindly nourish and save,
from the ground of their Grave not rising the while,
Which secret point does many one beguile.

THis then is the process of our Work; take at the first our Stone, that is,
the true Material principles thereof, which are one in kind, and two in number:
mix these together in a due proportion, then shall thou see as follows. First,
thy Feminine nature will so embrace thy Masculine, as to extract from him his
Seed, that is, the most digested virtue, so shall the Body dye, and the Water
shall intomb it.

The Water by Cohabitation shall contract amity and friendship with the Body,
for it is nothing else but a Feminine Body of the same Stock, which when they
are united and joined, this is called the Marriage of Gabritius with Beya.

Then shall the Vapors cease, and all Exhalations shall be withheld from
ascending or descending during the space of 40 days, or 42 at most, in which
time though thou see not the former Circulation, rejoice, for now the Body
begins to retain his Soul in a black color.

Now the Queen has conceived the Kingly Seed, which must be nourished with
gentle convenient Fire, till it wax strong, and become a puissant triumphant
Champion, whom no Earthly force is able to withstand.

Thou must of necessity then let them have this prefixed time for their
solitude and retirement, in which time the fixed and the volatile, the cold and
the moist, the hot and the dry, do learn to agree each with other, being
reconciled in this Head of the Crow, which is the conversion of Natures into a
discontinuous Calx, finer then Atoms of the Sun.

This Operation as it is the Wyld and Labyrinth of all who seek this Art in
vain, so it is the Capo di Bona Esperanza to as many as attain to the perfect
fight hereof; for now most of the difficulties are passed, which they are like
to meet withal in this their Voyage to the Oriental Indies.

This time of Conception with easy heat abide,
The blackness appearing shall tell thee when they die,
For they together like liquid Pitch that tide
Shall swell and bubble, settle and putrefie;
Shining colors therein thou shall espy,
Like to the Rainbow, mavelous to sight,
The Water then begins to dry upright.

THou must then be very careful that thy over-heat do not now hinder their
Conjunction, for now is the main fear of burning thy Flowers, which thou may
easily do, and make these Natures become a half Red, or Orange color, instead
of the true Crows Bill.

Whereas if thy external heat be so gentle, as not to extinguish motion, thou
shall find that in this period thy Natures shall both of them die together, for
one is not killed, nor dies without the other; which death in its approach
thou shall discover by the appearing blackness.

And when once the Crow shall begin to show it self, know that thou shall see a
terrible day, for thou must expect to be in the heat of the shore, and in the
storm of the enraged Sea, which now the Winds are abated, after a long and
strong blowing of them, does arise in waves, raging and taking on, and raising
the filth from the very bottom, so that all becomes like to a troubled Glass of
Ink, or melting boiling Pitch.

After this blackness, which shall endure for a long and tedious time, thou
shall see various and glorious colors to succeed, such as thou never have
seen; for all the colors that the mind of Man possibly can imagine, shall then
present themselves to view, which shall be an evident token to thee, that the
moist and dark Dominion of the Woman does now begin to vanish, and instead
thereof the Man begins to rule, who first dries up the moisture of the
Woman, with which there will vanish blackness, and the changable colors, and
after all shall be fixed in a sparkling dry white Powder, which is the Stone of
Paradise.

For in moist Bodies heat working temperate,
Engenders blackness first of all, which is
Of kindly Conjunction the token assignate,
And of true putrefying; remember this,
For then perfectly to alter thou can not miss.
And thus by the Gate of blackness thou must come in
To the light of Paradise in whiteness, if thou will win.

IN the beginning therefore of our Work, through the Cooperation of heat both
internal and external, and the moisture of the Matter concurring, our Body
gives a blackness like unto Pitch, which for the most part happens in 40, or at
the most in 50 days.

This color discovers plainly that the two Natures are united, and if they are
united, they will certainly operate one upon another, and alter and change each
other from thing to thing, and from state to state, until all come to one
Nature and substance Regenerate, which is a new Heavenly Body.

But before there can be this Renovation, the Old man necessarily must be
destroyed, that is, thy first Body must rot and be corrupted, and lose its
form, that it may have it repaid with a new form, which is a thousand times
more noble. So then our Work is not a forced and apparent, but a natural and
radical Operation, in which our Natures are altered perfectly, in so much that
the one and the other having fully lost what they were before, yet without
change of kind, they become a third thing, Homogeneal to both the former.

Thus they who sow in tears, shall reap in joy; and he who goes forth
mourning, and carrying precious Seed, shall return with an abundance of
increase, with their hands filled with sheaves, and their mouths with the
praises of the Lord: thus the chosen or redeemed of the Lord shall return with
Songs, and everlasting Joy shall be upon their heads, and sighing and sorrows
shall fly away.

For first the Sun in his uprising obscurate
Shall be, and pass the Waters of Noah's Flood,
On Earth which were a hundred days continuate
And fifty, away ere all these Waters goed;
Right so our Waters, as Wise men understood,
Shall pass, that thou with David may say,
Abierunt in sicco flumina; bear this away.

REmember then this Chemical Maxim, namely, that a sad cloudy morning, begins a
fair day, and a cheerful noontide; for our Work is properly to be compared to
a day, in which the morning is dark and cloudy, so that the Sun appears not.

After that, the Sky is over-clouded, and the Air cold with Northerly winds,
and much Rain falls, which endures for its season; but after that, the Sun
breaks out, and shines hotter and hotter, till all become dry, and then at
Noonday not a Cloud appearing, but all clear from one end of the Heaven to the
other.

But our Waters may more fitly be compared to Noah's Flood, or Deluge* then to
a day-showr, by reason of their continuance; for before our Waters shall all be
overcome, and dried up by prevailing siccity, it will be about 5 months, in
which time the Artist shall be held in constant horror, according as the
Allegory of Arisleus has it; Sed ne poeniteat faciem fuligine pingi,
Adferet haec Phoebi nigra favilla ju^ar.
Wait patiently, for thou shall see the Day Star arising with deliverance, and
these Waters shall through the command of the Almighty abate; Jupiter then
shall rule, in whose reign all things shall be restored: for by constant
decoction, thy Body shall have virtue to receive Tincture, and to retain it,
and to increase it, by which it shall be renewed, and shall by little and
little digest all the moisture, which then shall be unto it as nourishment,
Milk of Life, which we call Virgins Milk.

Then shall thou have leisure to contemplate these wonders of the most High*
which if they do not ravish and astonish thee in the beholding of them, it is
because God has not intended this Science to thee in Mercy, but in Judgment,
to wit, that it should be unto thee a snare and trap, and a stumbling block at
which thou shall stumble and fall, and never rise again. Remember then when
once thou shall see the renewing of these Natures, that with humble heart and
bended knees thou praise and extol, and magnify that gracious God, who has
been nigh unto thee, and heard thee, and directed thine Operations, enlightened
thy Judgment; for certainly flesh and blood never taught thee this, but it was
the free gift of that God who gives to whom he pleases.

Soon after that Noah planted this Vineyard,
Which Royally flourished, and brought forth Grapes anon,
After which space thou shall not be afeard.

NOw as the Earth when the Waters of the Flood were abated, was as it were
renewed; even so thy Earth is made new, and the Rainbow is to thee a sign that
there shall never again happen such another Deluge, as thou have now passed.
Thy Earth then being renewed, behold how it is decked with an admirable green
color, which is then named the Philosophers Vineyard.

This greenness, after the perfect whiteness, is to thee a token that thy
Matter has re-attained, through the will and power of the Almighty, a new
vegetative life: observe then how this Philosophical Vine does seem to flower,
and to bring forth tender green Clusters; know then that thou art now preparing
for a rich Vintage.

Thy Stone has already passed through many hazards, and yet the danger is not
quite over, although it be not great, for thy former experience may now guide
thee, if rash joy do not make thee mad.

For in like wise shall follow the flourishing of our Stone.
COnsider now that thou art in process to a new Work, and though in perfect
whiteness thy Stone was incombustible, yet in continuing it on the Fire without
moving, it is now become tender again; therefore though it be not in so great
danger of Fire now as heretofore, yet immoderacy now may and will certainly
spoil all, and undo thy hopes: Govern with prudence therefore during the while
that these colors shall come and go, and be not either overhasty, nor
despondent, but wait the end with patience.

And soon that after thirty days are gone,
Thou shall have Grapes right as Ruby red,
Which is our Adrop, our Usifur, and our red Lead.

FOr in a short time thou shall find, that this green will be overcome by the
Azure, and that by the pale wan color, which will at length come to a Citrine,
which Citrine shall endure for the space of 46 days.

Then shall the heavenly Fire descend, and illuminate the Earth with
inconceivable Glory; the Crown of thy Labors shall be brought unto thee, when
our Sol shall sit in the South, shining with redness incomparable.

This is our Tire, our Ba^ilisk, our red Poppy of the Rock, our Adrop, our
Vsifur, our red Lead, our Lion devouring all things: This is our true Light,
our Earth glorified; rejoice now, for our King has passed from death to life,
and now possesses the Keys of both Death and Hell, and over him nothing now
has power.

For like as Souls after pains tran^itory,
Be brought to Paradise where ever is joyful life;
So shall our Stone after his darkness in Purgatory,
Be purged and joined in Elements withouten strife.

AS then it is with those who are Redeemed, their Old man is crucified, in
which is sorrow, anguish, grief, heartbreaking, and many tears; after that the
New man is restored, and then is joy, shouting, clapping of hands, singing, and
the like, for the ransomed of the Lord shall return with Songs, and everlasting
Joy shall be on their heads: even so it is after a sort in our Operations, for
first of all our old Body dies, rots, and is as it were corrupted, yielding a
most loathsome stink, and engendring squallid and filthy colors, and most
venomous exhalations, which is as it were the Purgatory of this old Body, in
which its corruption is overcome by a long and gentle decoction.

And when it once is purged, and made clean and pure, then are the Elements
joined, and are of four contraries made one perfect, perpetual, indissolvable
unity; so that from henceforth there is nothing but concord and amity to be
found in all our habitations.

Rejoice the whiteness and beauty of his Wife.
OUr Man then to show his singular love to his Wife, and to give an evident
token that they will never fall out any more, is content to attain the first
degree of its perfection in her color; so that the first stable color of thy
renovate Body, after its Eclipsation in blackness, is the sparkling white,
which is a luster hardly imaginable.

And pass from darkness of Purgatory to light
Of Paradise, in whiteness Elixir of great might.

THis is a noble step, from Hell to Heaven; from the bottom of the Grave, to
the top of Power and Glory; from obscurity in blackness, to resplendent
whiteness; from the height of venenosity, to the height of Medicine. Oh Nature!
how do thou alter things into things, casting down the high and mighty, and
again exalting them being base and lowly! Oh Death! how art thou vanquished
when thy Prisoners are taken from thee, and carried to a state and place of
Immortality! This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

And that thou may the rather to Putrefaction,
Win this example, thou take, etc.
The heart of an Oak which has of Water continual infusion;
For though it in Water lay an hundred years and more,
Yet should thou find it sound as ever it was before.

O Happy Gate of blackness, which art the passage to this so glorious a change!
study therefore, whoever applyest thy self to this Art, only to know this
Secret; for know this, and know all, and contrariwise be ignorant of this, and
be ignorant of all.

Therefore if that possible thou may attain the depth of this Mystery, I
shall endeavor to unfold it to thy capacity by similitudes and examples.

Thou know that if a solid piece of Wood lie in water perpetually, it will
tire the patience of the most patient expecter to see it rot, for it will abide
many Generations, and in the end be as sound as when it was first laid in. Yea
some contend, that in our days Pine-Trees are dug up in their entire
proportion, which have been buried ever since the Flood, being found in such
places in which no Histories ever mentioned that such Trees grew, and so deep
under ground as it is almost incredible; which certainly have layn at least
many hundred years, and yet the Wood as sound as any other Tree of that sort,
which has not been cut down above a year or two: such is the force of constant
Hume-faction, to prevent the ordinary corruption of Timber.

But and thou keep it sometimes wet and sometimes dry,
As thou may see in Timber,
And so even likewise, etc.
Sometimes our Tree must with the Sun be brent.

BUt contrariwise, Timber which is kept wet sometimes, and dry sometimes, as
usually the foundations of Timber Houses are, if not secured by the Masons Art,
it would tire the Householders patience to see how soon such Timber will rot,
and molder away, and become fit for nothing; which is a thing so well known,
that the experience of every Rustic almost can teach it him.

So resolve our Stone must be used, if thou intend to have it putrefie kindly;
our Wheel for Putrefaction must go round, in a constant Elevation or Extraction
of the Water or Humidity from the Body, by which Operation our Man the Sun is
helped in his acting; and this Water must as constantly return to the Earth, to
moisten it, by which the Woman the Moon is helped in her acting.

And then with Water we must it keel,
That so to rotting we may bring it weel.

BEtween these two various Operations which one and the same Fire produces,
our Body is both heated and cooled, his sweat is drawn forth and returned upon
him again, by the which means it is triturated, ground, softened, and made weak
even unto death; and dying, it rots and putrefies, changing colors from one
into another, until at the length it becomes black as Ink or Pitch, which is
our Toad, our Crow, our Tomb filled with rottenness, our Golgotha or place of
dead bones, our Terra foliata or Earth of Leaves.

For now in wet, etc.
To be shall cause it soon to putrefie,
And so shall thou bring to rotting thy Gold,
Entreat thy Bodies, etc.
And in thy putrefying with heat be not too swift,
Lest in the Ashes thou seek after thy thrift.

OUr Operation then, says Morien, is nothing else but extracting Water from
the Earth, and returning it again upon the Earth, so long and so often till the
Earth putrefie; for by elevation of the moisture the Body is heated and dried,
and by returning it again it is cooled and moistened, by the continuation of
which successive Operations, it is brought to corrupt and rot, to lose its
form, and for a season to remain as dead.

This is the true intention and manner of our working, and there is no other
manner of working that can be invented, that can give thee the effect of this
our Operation; for this is the true way and means by which thy Body of Gold
will be destroyed, and no other way profitable for our Art: Proceed therefore
as I have directed thee, and swerve not either to the right hand or to the
left. Take this Body which I have showed thee, and join it with the Spirit
which is proper to it, which the Wise men have called their Venus, or Goddess
of Love, and circulate these two Natures one upon the other, until the one have
conceived by the other.

But beware you urge not the Spirit too much, but remember that he is a
volatile substance, and if he be over-provoked, he will certainly break the
Vessel, and fly, and leave thee the ruins of thy Glass for a recompense of thy
over-speedy rashness; which trust me will make thee fetch a deep Philosophical
sigh, and say when it is too late, I would I had been content to wait Natures
time. Let the Fire then be such in which thy Spirit may be so stirred up, as to
return to its Body in the Glass, and not so irritated as to break the Vessel,
and return to the Ashes or Sand of the Nest, or stick about the sides of the
Cover of your Nest, or else fly about in the Room wherein the Artist is, and
lodge in his Head, and so make it far more unconstant then it was before, by
adding to his rash giddiness a Paralytical shaking.

Therefore the Water out of the Earth thou draw,
And make the Soul therewith for to ascend,
Then down again into the Earth it throw,
That they oft-times so ascend and descend.

PRoceed therefore not as a Fool, but as a Wise man; make the Water of thy
Compound to arise and circulate, so long and often until the Soul, that is to
say, the most subtle virtue of the Body, arise with it, circulating with the
Spirit in manner of a fiery form, by which both the Spirit and Body are
enforced to change their color and complexion: for it is this Soul of the
dissolved Bodies, which is the subject of Wonders; it is the life, and
therefore quickens the dead; it is the Vegetative Soul, and therefore it makes
the dead and sealed Bodies, which in their own Nature are barren, to fructify
exceedingly.

Therefore if this return unto the Earth from which it first took its flight,
it will make it for to fructify, and to increase in Tincture, and in the Earth
it self will multiply as a grain of Wheat does in the ground.

Be sure then that so fast as thou make thy ascension, so fast also thy
descension be; this is agreeable both to Nature, and the intent of all
Philosophers, especially Trevisan in his Chemical Miracle; Authors, says he,
differ especially in the documents of the Fire, but in this all agree, that the
volatile ascend not higher then it may return. This is the true temperament of
the Fire.

From violent heat and sudden cold defend
Thy Glass, and make thy Fire so temperate,
That by the sides the Matter be not vitrificate.

TAke diligent heed then that thou exceed not this measure, especially have a
care that your Furnace be not apt to exceed, but that you may govern it at your
pleasure, without uncertain increasing or slacking of heat, but that your Fire
be equal and continually vaporous and boiling, for such a degree is altogether
agreeable to the intention of Nature.

Whereas if thou be too hasty, with Vulcan thou art always subject to error;
for even then when a discreet Workman is past fear, I mean in the fourth
Operation, in which the Elements are fixed and incerated, a hasty rash
Vulcanist shall make his Medicines to grow hard at the first, and with a
stronger and continuate degree of heat, to melt into a vitrificate substance,
without any hope of future profit.

Now then that Vitrification is an error which is incident in the last
Operation, as burning of the Flowers is in the first Operation; for if in
Calcination the Fire be too violent, instead of black thou shall have a
Citrine, or half red unprofitable Calx: so in the fourth Operation, by too
violent Fire thy Elixir will melt being vitrified, instead of a natural flowing
or Inceration.

And be thou wise in choosing of the Matter,
Meddle with no Salts, etc.
But whatsoever any Worker to thee chatter,
Our Sulphur and our Mercury been only in Metals,
Which Oils and Waters some men them calls,
Fowls and Birds, etc.
Because that Fools should never know our Stone.

IF thou have attended well to what has been told thee in these five Gates,
thou art secure; make sure of thy true Matter, which is no small thing to know,
and though we have named it, yet we have done it so cunningly, that if thou will be heedless, thou may sooner stumble at our Books, then at any thou ever
did read in thy life.

Meddle with nothing out of kind, whether Salts, or Sulphur, or whatever is of
the like Imposition; and whatever is Alien from the perfect Metals, is
reprobate in our Mastery. Be not deceived either with Receipt or Discourse, for
we verily do not intend to deceive you, but if you will be deceived, be
deceived.

Our principal know that it is but one, and that is in Metals, even those
Metals which you may buy commonly, to wit, the perfectest of them: but before
you can command it out of them, you must be a Master, and not a Scholar, namely
as it is wisely said in Norton;

To know to destroy their whole Composition,
That some of their Components may help in conclusion.

But trust me this is not for a Tyro, nor for every one of us, unless he have
the Secret from his own studies, and not by Tradition from a Master or Guide.
Know then that this fore-recited way is true, but involved with a thousand
broileries.

But our way which is an easy way, and in which no man may err, our broad
way, our Linear way, we have vowed never to reveal it but in Metaphors; I being
moved with pity, will hint it to you. Take that which is not yet perfect, nor
yet wholly imperfect, but in a way to perfection, and out of it make what is
most noble and most perfect: This you may conceive to be an easier Receipt,
then to take that which is already perfect, and extract out of it what is
imperfect, and then make it perfect, and after out of that perfection to draw a
plusquam perfection: and yet this is true, and we have wrought it. And because
it is an immense Labor for any to undertake, we describe that way; but this
last discovery which I hinted in few words, is it which no man ever did so
plainly lay open, nor may any make it more plain, upon pain of an Anathema.

For of this World our Stone is called the Cement,
Which moved by craft as Nature does require,
In his increase shall be full opulent,
And multiply his kind after thy own desire:
Therefore if God vouchsafe thee to inspire,
Like unto thee in Riches shall be but few.

OUr Stone it is the Representative of the great World, and has the Virtues of
that great Fabric, comprised or collected in this little System; in it is the
virtue Magnetical, attractive of its like in the whole World: it is the
Celestial Virtue, expounded universally in the whole Creation, but Epitomized
in this small Map or Abridgment.

This Virtue or Power is in it self barren, sluggish, dead and unactive, and
for this cause it remains without fruit; but being loosed by Art, it does
through the cooperation of Nature, produce that Arcanum which has not its
like in the whole World; for it does heal the imperfections of all Creatures
and Metals, taking away their sickness, and restoring them to perfect health.

The reward which this Mastery will bring to the Artist, is indeed inestimable;
for having it, he needs want no worldly blessing, for wealth he need take no
care, and from all frailties of Body he has a most sure Antidote.

Pray then to God, that he would be propitious unto your studies and labors,
in giving thee the true knowledge of this secret Mystery; it is the gift of
God, I have helped thee what I can, but venture not to practice barely upon my
words, for know that what I have only hinted, is far more then what I have
discovered; and what I have declared to thy first apprehension most openly,
has yet its lurking Serpent under the green Grass, I mean some hidden thing
which thou ought to understand, which thou being Cock-sure at first blush
wilt neglect; but yet it will bi^e thee by the heel when thou approachest to
practice, and make thee begin again, and it may be at last throw away all as a
man desperate: for know that this is an Art very Cabalistical, and we do study
expressions such as we know will suit almost with any man's fancy, in one place
or other; but be sure to take this Maxim from one who knows best the sense of
what he has written: Where we speak most plainly, there be most circumspect,
for we do not go about to betray the Secrets of Nature; especially then in
those places which seem to give Receipts so plain as you would desire, suspect
either a Metaphor, or else be sure that something or other is suppressed, which
thou will hardly without Inspiration ever find of thy self, which in trial will
make all thy confident knowledge vanish; yet to a Son of Art, we have written
that which never heretofore was by any revealed.

NOw for a close of this most secret Gate,
Whereat few enter, none but they who are
By Gods grace favored; its not luck ne sat
That in disclosing this can claim a share:
It is a portion which is very rare,
Bestowed on those whom the most High shall choose,
To such the Truth I freely shall declare,
Nor ought through Envy to them shall refuse,
Nor with unwonted Riddles shall their hopes abuse.
Of uncouth subjects now shall be my Song,
My mind intends high Wonders to reveal,
Which have lain hidden heretofore full long,
Each Artist striving them how to conceal,
Lest wretched Caitiffs should these Treasures steal:
Nor Villains should their Villainies maintain
By this rare Art; which danger they to heal,
In horrid Metaphors veiled an Art most plain,
Lest each Fool knowing it, should it when known disdain.
Remember Man how he produced was,
How formed from a lump of abject Clay,
From whence Created; he each thing does pass,
Which next to Angels ever saw the day:
For God in him infused so bright a Ray
Of his own Image, which the Body joined
To it, ennobled so that both pourtray
Their Maker, as though Heaven with Earth combined
A little System of the Universe to find.
But yet though he of Soul and Body both
Was made and of the two the nobler part
The Soul by far, which for the most part does
The subject nominate; yet that same Art
That made so rare a piece, does from the part
Less noble name the whole, Adam, or Dust,
Wherein a Mystery was couched, whose heart
Of life the Center, to Earth's bowels must
Return, the Earth it self for Man's sake being cursed.
Right so our Stone contains Natures two,
One hidden, subtle Soul, Heavens Progeny,
The other gross, compact, terrene also,
Earth's product must to Earth by destiny;
Which when resolved is made a feculency
To sight, but the Celestial part is still
(Though over-clouded) most pure inwardly,
And shall at last most Pearlie drops distill,
Which shall the barren Earth with fruit in plenty fill.
Thus all our Secrets from the Earth do flow,
It Is Earth which for our Base at first we take,
Our Water also unto Earth must go,
And both together must a Limus make,
Which we with respite by our Art must bake,
Till all become a Spirit glorified,
Whose firmness wasting, time shall never shake;
By perfect union the are so surely tied,
Each Element the other three within it self does hide.
Take then that thing which Gold we please to call,
But it is not Gold, yet Gold it is in truth;
Metalline it is, yet from a Mineral
It flows, which Art by Nature holp renew'th,
And to a Fool an ugly face it shows;
Yet to a Son of Art it lovely seems,
It Is Stellar white, and tender in his youth,
And vile appears in many men's esteems,
Yea the most part of men it for a trifle deems.
From it is made a subject of great price,
Show it the Goldsmith and he will swear it is Gold;
But look you sell it not, if you be wise,
The Basis it is of Secrets manifold,
This for their secret main the Sages hold:
The like is in Gold dug from the Mine,
But to procure it is scarce to be told,
That you may understand, though every line
Were plainly wrote, yet might your practice often decline.
For it is a Labor hardly to be borne,
So many tricks and turnings in it be,
And he that tries it is surely forlorn,
Unless a crafty Master, credit me;
For I have tried both, yet could not see
How any in this way can be secure:
I therefore who have vowed secrecy
Have writ this way, which we can scarce endure
For knowledge-sake to try, its ease will none allure.
Our Kingly road I also hinted have,
Our way in which a Fool can hardly err,
Our secret way, which much sad toil will save,
Which is so easy, that I may averr,
If thou should see it, thou would it prefer
To any Earthly pleasure; yet beware
That you mistake not, for I do averr,
A mingled Doctrine these lines do declare,
For both ways in this Book of mine do claim a share.
Learn to distinguish every sentence well,
And know to what Work it does appertain;
This is great skill, which few as I can tell
By all their reading yet could ere attain,
And yet of Theory this is the main:
Also to know accordingly to give
Due heat, which in one way thou must be fain
TO increase ten-fold, thou may me well believe,
For what does one decoct, the other away will drive.
Also their Operations different
Appear, the one thou must sublime and boil,
O tedious way! in which much time is spent,
And many errors, which the Work will spoil:
The other silently does make no toil,
Like the still voice which to Eliah came,
About which Work thou need not to broyl,
Nor wantst thou ^iery Vulcan's parching flame,
A far more gentle heat begins and ends this Game.
But if thou can each Work perform apart,
And know them afterward to reconcile,
Then art thou Master of a Princely Art,
The very success will thy hopes beguile;
Thou have all Natures Works rankt on a File,
And all her Treasures at command do keep,
On thee the Fates shall never dare but smile,
No Mystery is now for thee too deep,
The art Natures Darling, whether thou do wake or sleep.
Pardon my plainness, if the Art thou know,
'Twas the fruit of my untame desire
To profit many; and without a boast,
No man above my ^andour shall aspire:
My zeal was kindled with Minerva's Fire,
And thou who to this Art wilt now apply,
My ^ook in Natures way shall lead thee higher,
Then ever thou alone may hope to fly,
If only thou shall favored be by Destiny.
Peruse these lines, and being read, review
And read again, and on them meditate,
Each reading shall fresh Mysteries and new
Discover, which are scattered in each Gate;
For they so linked are, that all relate
To each, and we our words have woven so,
That thou may soon err by misleading ^ate,
Unless for to distinguish thou do know;
Remember that amongst Briars thick, sweet Roses grow.
AN EXPOSITION UPON THE Sixth Gate, Which is CONGELATION.
The Sixth Gate Opened, Which is CONGELATION.
Congelation, etc.
It is of soft things in duration of color white, etc.
How to congeal he needs not much to care for Elements:
But Congelations be made in diverse wise of Spirits, etc.
Of Salts dissolved, etc. and then congealed,
And some dissolveth congealing manually, etc.
But such congealing is not, etc.

HAving largely run through the first five Gates, in which is all the
difficulty, pre-supposing now that you have passed the shades of the Night, and
are now come to the approaching of the Day, whose dawning is to be seen soon
after the darkness of the Night, and is discovered by variety of gay Clouds,
which run before the Sun in its up-rising.

The first remarkable way mark that you are to meet with, is the whiteness of
the Compound, for the Peacocks tail though with its gayness it refreshes and
delights the beholder, yet those colors are but transient; but the white is a
stable color, and it is thy first Harvest, in which the moisture is
vanquished* and volatile Natures are fixed.

The Work as it is the long-wished Haven, so it is performed without any help
of the Artist, any more then to continue a due degree of outward heat; for know
that thou have not so great a desire after this sight, but Nature has as great
an appetite to obtain it, for it is the end of all her former Operations, from
the attaining whereof thou can not hinder her, if the external heat be
continued as it ought.

Yet about this the whole company of Alchymists do mightily busy themselves,
who have nothing more in their hopes then to make our great Elixir; do mainly
labor after Congelation, though in their Solution, in which the Key of our
Coagulation rests, they are as stupid as Blocks.

Some dissolve Metals with Corrosives, others Salts, and afterward filter
them, which they think graduates them, with which trumpery they intend no less
a Coagulate, then the true permanent Tincture: but alas they are deceived* for
they work not upon the right Matter.

Others although they happen to stumble in part upon the right Matter, yet
herein they err, that they understand our Operations preposterously, and
interpret our meaning contrary to our true intent; for all that they dream of,
is such Operations which are to be performed by hand: thus they dissolve and
congeal, but stumble in operandi modo.

For our Congelation is no such thing as this, but in every point it is
contrary to it; for in our Operation Nature only works, who therefore does
bring forth a true, and not a Sophistical Operation.

Our Congelation dreadeth not the Fir^,
For it must ever in it stand unctuous;
And it is also a Tincture so bounteous,
Which in the Air, etc.
Moreover congeal not, etc.
But that like Wax it will melt anon withouten blast,
For such congealing accords not, etc.
Which Congelation avails us not.

FOr as in our Solution we do not make our Gold volatile as to show, as Fools
may do, but actually it is made fugitive, so as that by no Art of man it can
ever be fixed again, but only by that Nature which made it volatile; so also our
Fixation does make our flying Spirits so Fire-abiding, that they by no Art of
man can ever be burnt away, yet it will flow like Wax.

Nor is it fixed in manner of flying Spirits in Vegetables, which are fixed by
burning into an Al^ali, for it will never relent neither in the Air nor Water,
like to a congealed Salt.

Nor yet is our Congelation a formal Transmutation of a thing by another
seminal virtue, for then it would become of a Stony, Flinty, or Adamantine
nature; but by its own internal virtue, the Mercury is changed into Sulphur
incombustible, yet so as that the Mercuriality retains some of its qualities in
a very noble remarkable way, furnishing the Compound with a fusible unctuosity,
when at the same time the Sulphur retains that fluxibility with a most noble
incombustibility.

So then take this for the Touchstone of all thy Alchymical endeavors, if
ever thou intend any thing commendable in our Art; see that thy Medicine be of
an easy fusion, so that when it is cast on a plate of Metal heated, it may
enter it, and flow on it like Wax or melted Pitch; yea let the flux be so
easy, that it may flow upon Mercury, and enter it before its flight, otherwise
brag not of thy skill, for thou art yet in a way of Sophistry, out of which
thou shall never escape, without a more then ordinary providence of God.

If thou therefore list to do weel,
Since the Medicine shall never else flow kindly,
Neither congeal without thou first it putrefie,
First purge, then fix the Elements of our Stone,
Till they together congeal and flow anon.

THat thou therefore may be sure of thy Work, and not repent thy cost and
pains, as many do when it is too late, take my counsel, and know that thy
Medicine never can nor shall flow as it ought, except thy Solution be
Philosophical.

Know then that our Solution is not an ordinary vulgar dissolving of Bodies,
either by Corrosives, or any other way; but our true dissolving is nothing else
then putrefying, that is, a destroying of the Compaction wholly with a
preservation of the Species. This Operation be sure to make before thou dream
of Congelation, for then thy Spirits will naturally fix and flow together,
congealing and relenting so long until they come to a perfect Powder
impalpable, which then has ingress into all Metals, penetrating their very
profundity, and altering them radically.

For when the Matter is made perfectly white,
Then, etc.
But of such time thou may have long respite,
Ere it congeal, etc.
And after into grains red as blood,
Richer, etc.

SO then our Congelation is nothing else but the whitening of the Bodies, of
which the Philosopher speaks, when he says, Whiten thy Body, and burn thy
Books, lest our hearts be broken.

This is the Haven at which after many a nights watching, and days labor, thou
may with Gods blessing hope at length to arrive; but in the mean season be
patient, and expect the Harvest in its season.

First thou shall have thy Body whitened, and all become a white living Water,
which being moved on the Fire continually, will turn first into greater, and
after that into smaller grains, till all at length become a Calx of an
exquisite fineness, and transcendent brightness, which is our Lilly Candent,
which in the end of thy Operations by continual decoction will be turned into a
purple redness, which is our wonderful Secret.

The Earthly grossness therefore first mortified in moisture, etc.
This principle may not be denied, etc.
Which had, of whiteness thou may not miss, etc.
And if, etc.

THe cause of all these strange alterations in one Glass, on one subject, with
one decoction, without laying on of hands, is from the internal disposition of
the Compound, which at the first is gross and Earthy, therefore in decoction it
becomes very black, it being the nature of all moist gross things, by the Fire
to acquire such a color. And this is according to the intention of all
Philosophers, that although thou seek white and red, yet thou must at first
make black, before thou can make white profitably.

But when once thy Matter is become truly black, rejoice, for this death of the
Body will be the quickening of the Spirit, and then both Soul and Body will
unite into a perfect whiteness, which is our Kingly Diadem.

The end of the sixth Gate.
THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
Reader,
IT is an Argument of a noble and generous Soul, to be freely communicative for
the benefit of Mankind, and most like to God himself, to be universally kind to
all; nay the very Heathen not only accounted those men as Gods, who
communicated their Inventions for the benefit of their Generation, and the good
of Mankind in general, but were worshipped as such by the succeeding
Generations, until Shilo came: Of this Spirit was our Author, who wrote many
Books of this Subject See the Catalogue of them in this Book, at the end of the
Exposition upon the Epistle to K. Edward, page 47.
, that by the variety of expressions, and insinuating hints, the diligent
Searchers might find out this Art as well as himself: And of this Spirit (I
hope) thou art, Gentle Reader, that if Providence have cast into thy hands the
Exposition upon the last Six Gates, which our Author wrote, as himself
confesses In his Preface to these Books.
, or any other of his Writings, I hope thou will not degenerate so far from a
Good man, and from the mind of the Author himself, as to conceal those
Treasures in private, which he so freely wrote, and by Transcripts dispersed,
with leave to communicate them for the good of all. Which if you shall please
to perform, you will thereby very much oblige this Generation of Philosophers,
(who esteem this Author's Pieces for the learned, freest, and smoothest
style, without affectation, and the plainest, that was ever yet wrote; who
thirsted as it were for a larger manifestation of this Secret, yet durst not
give a plain Receipt, for fear of doing more evil than good thereby;) and not
only this Generation, but Posterity will be infinitely beholden to you, that by
your means these worthy Writings may be handed down to them. And if you shall
likewise be pleased to send any of this Author's Pieces, either mentioned or
not mentioned in the Catalogue, to the Pelican in Little-Britain, London, you
shall receive the grateful acknowledgment of,

Your humble Servant, W. C. B.

EXPERIMENTS FOR THE PREPARATION OF THE Sophick Mercury; By Luna, and the
Antimonial-Stellate-Regulus of Mars, FOR THE Philosophers Stone.

Written by Eirenaeus Philalethes, an Englishman, and a Cosmopolite.

EXPERIMENTS for the Preparation of the Sophick Mercury, by Luna and the
Antimonial-Stellate-Regulus of Mars, for the Philosophers Stone.
1. The secret of the Philosophic Arsnick.
I Took one part of the Fiery Dragon, and of the Magnetical Body two parts, I
prepared them together by a strong Fire, and in the first fusion there was made
about eight ounces of the true Arsnick.

2. The secret of preparing the Mercury with his Arsnick, for the separating
its Faeces.
I Did take one part of the best Arsnick, and I made a Marriage with two parts
of the Virgin Diana into one Body; I ground it very fine, and with this I have
prepared my Mercury, working them all together in heat, until that they were
most exquifitely incorporated: then I purged it with the Salt of Urine, that
the Faeces did separate, which I put away.

3. The Purification of the Sophick Mercury.
THe Mercury thus prepared, is yet infected with an external uncleanness,
wherefore distill it three or four times in its proper Alembick, with its Steel
Cucurbit, then wash it with the Salt of Urine, until that it be clear and
bright, and in its motion leaves no tail behind it.

4. Another most excellent Purgation.
TAke of decrepit Salt, and of the Scoria of Mars, of each ten ounces, of
prepared Mercury one ounce and an half, grind the Salt and the Scorias very
fine together, in a Marble Mortar; then put in the Mercury, and grind it with
Vinegar, so long until no more of the Mercury appears: put it into a Glass
Body, and distill it by Sand in a Glass Alembick, until all the Mercury be
ascended, pure, clear, and splendidly bright; reiterate this three times, and
you will have the Mercury excellently well prepared for the Magistery.

5. The secret of the just Preparation of the Sophick Mercury.
EVery single preparation of the Mercury with its Arsnick is one Eagle, the
Feathers of the Eagle being purged from their Crow-like blackness, make it to
fly the seventh flight, and it is prepared even until the tenth flight.

6. The secret of the Sophick Mercury.
I Have taken the proper quantity of the Mercury, and I mixed it with its true
Arsnick, to wit, about four ounces of Mercury, and I made a thin commixed
consistence; I purged it after a due manner, and I distilled it, and I had a
pure Body of Lune, whence I knew that I had rightly prepared it: afterward I
added to its weight of Arsnick, and I increased its former weight of Mercury,
in so much that the Mercury might prevail to a thin flux, and so I purged it,
to the wasting of the blackness almost to a Lunary whiteness: then I took half
an ounce of the Arsnick of which I made a due Marriage, I added it to this
betrothed Mercury, and there was made a temperature like Potters Loam, but a
little thinner; I purged it again, after a due manner, the Purgation was
laborious, and a long time: I made it with the Salt of Urine, which I have
found to be the best in this Work.

7. Another Purgation, but yet better.
I Have found out a better way of purging it, with Vinegar and pure Sea Salt,
so that in the space of half a day I can prepare one Eagle: I made the first
Eagle to fly, and Diana is left, with a little Tincture of Brass; I began the
second Eagle by removing the superfluities, and then I made it fly, and again
the Doves of Diana are left, with the Tincture of Brass; I conjoined the third
Eagle, and I purged the superfluities, by removing them, even to a whiteness,
then I made it fly, and there was left a great part of Brass, with the Doves of
Diana; then I made it fly twice by it self, to the whole extraction of all the
Body; then I joined the fourth Eagle, by adding more and more of its own humor
by degrees, and there was made a very temperate consistence, in which there was
no Hydrops, (or superfluous moisture) as there was in the three former Eagles.

8. I have found the best way of preparing the Sophick Mercury, viz. such as
follows.
THe Amalgamated Mass, espoused or joined very intimately by a due Marriage, I
put into a Crucible, and into a Furnace of Sand for half an hour, but so that
it might not sublime; then I take it out, and strongly grind it; then I put it
again in a Crucible, and in the Furnace, and after a quarter of an hour or
thereabouts, I grind it again, and I make the Mortar hot, by this means the
Amalgama begins to be clean, and to cast forth a great deal of Powder: then I
put it in the Crucible again, and to the Fire as before, for a convenient time,
so that it be not sublimed, otherwise the greater the Fire is, the better it
is; so continually putting it in the Fire, and continually grinding it, till
almost all the Powder does wholly disappear, then I wash it, and the Faeces are
easily cast out, and the Amalgama becomes entire without any Heterogeneity;
then I wash it with Salt, and again do heat it and grind it: this I repeat to
the full cleansing it from all manner of Faeces.

9. A threefold trial of the goodness of the Prepared Mercury.
TAke thy Mercury prepared with its Arsnick of seven, eight, nine or ten
Eagles, put it into a Phial, and thou shall lute it with the Lutum sapientiae:
place it in a Furnace of Sand, and let it stand in an heat of Sublimation, so
that it may ascend and descend in the Glass, until it be coagulated a little
thicker than Butter: continue it unto a perfect Coagulation, until it be as
white as Silver.

10. Another trial.
IF by shaking it in a Glass with the Salt of Urine, it be turned into an
impalpable white Powder of its own accord, so that it does not appear as
Mercury, and of its own accord in an hot and dry place it coagulates again into
a thin Mercury, it is enough; but yet better if being agitated in
Fountain Water, it runs into small heads or particles, for if the grain be in
the Body, it will not be thus converted and separated into small minute parts.

11. The third trial.
DIstill it in a Glass Alembick, from a Glass Cucurbit; if it passes over and
leaves nothing behind it, it is a good Mineral Water.

12. The extraction of the Sulphur from the living Mercury by Separation.
TAke thy mixed corporal and spiritual Compound, the Body of which is
coagulated of the volatile by digestion, and separate the Mercury from its
Sulphur by a Glass Still, and thou shall have a white Luna fixed and resisting
Aqua fortis, and more ponderous than common Silver.

13. The Magical Sol out of this Luna.
OUt of this white Sulphur by Fire thou shall have a yellow Sulphur, by a
manual Operation, which Sol is the red Lead of the Philosophers.

14. Out of this Sulphur, Aurum potabile.
THou may turn this yellow Sulphur into an Oil as red as Blood, by
circulating it with the Volatile-Mercurial-Philosophical Menstruum, so thou
shall have an admirable Panacea, or Universal Medicine.

15. The gross conjunction of the Menstruum with its Sulphur, for the formation
of the Offspring of the Fire.
TAke of thy purged, best prepared and choicest Mercury, of seven, eight, nine,
or at most ten Eagles, mix it with the prepared Laton, or its red Sulphur, that
is to say, two parts of the Water, or at the most three, with one of the pure
Sulphur, ground and purged; N. B. but it is better that thou take two parts
to one.

16. The working of the mixture by a manual Operation.
THis thy mixture thou shall grind very well upon a Marble, then thou shall
wash it with Vinegar and Sal Ammoniac, until it has put off all its black
Faeces; then thou shall wash off all its saltness and acrimony with clear
Fountain Water, then shall thou dry it upon clean white Paper, by turning of it
from place to place with the point of a Knife, even unto an exquisite dryness.

17. The putting in of the Foetus into the Philosophical Egg.
NOw thy mixture being dried, put it into an Oval Glass, of the best and most
transparent Glass, of the bigness of an Hens Egg; in such a Glass let not thy
Matter exceed two ounces, seal it Hermetically.

18. The Government of the Fire.
THen you must have a Furnace built, in which you may keep an immortal Fire; in
it you shall make an heat of Sand of the first degree, in which the dew of our
Compound may be elevated and circulated continually day and night, without any
intermission, etc. And in such a Fire the Body will die, and the Spirit will be
renewed, and at length the Soul will be glorified and united with a new
immortal and incorruptible Body: Thus is made a new Heaven.

FINIS.
A Breviary of ALCHEMY; OR A COMMENTARY UPON Sir GEORGE RIPLEY'S
RECAPITULATION: BEING A Paraphrastical Epitome of his Twelve GATES.

Written by Aeyrenaeus Philalethes ANGLUS, COSMOPOLITA.



LONDON, Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain.
MDCLXXVIII.

Sir George Ripley's RECAPITULATION.
I.
FOr to bring this Treatise to a final end;
And briefly here to conclude these secrets all:
Diligently look thou, and to thy Figure attend,
Which does in it contain these secrets great and small:
And if thou it conceive, both Theorical and Practical,
By Figures and Colors, and by Scripture plain,
Which wittily conceived, thou may not work in vain.
II.
Consider first the Latitude of this precious Stone,
Beginning in the first side noted in the West,
Where the red Man, and white Woman be made one,
Spoused with the Spirit of life to live in love and rest:
Earth and water equally proportioned, that is best;
And one of the Earth is good, and of the Spirit Three,
Which Twelve to Four also of the Earth may be.
III.
Three of the Wife, and one of the Man thou must take;
And the less of the Spirit there is in this Disponsation,
The rather thy Calcination for certain shall thou make:
Then forth into the North proceed by obscuration*
Of the red man and his white Wife called Eclypsation;
Loosing them, and altering them betwixt Winter and Vere,
Into Water turning Earth, dark, and nothing clear.
IV.
From thence by Colors many one into the East ascend,
Then shall the Moon be full, appearing by daylight:
Then is she passed Purgatory, and her course at an end:
There is the up^rising of the Sun appearing white and bright*
There is Summer after Vere, and Day after Night:
Then Earth and Water which were black, be turned into Air,
And Clouds of darkness ^ver-blown, and all appears f^^r.
V.
And as in the West was the beginning of thy practice,
And the North the perfect mean of profound alteration:
So in the East after them is the beginning of speculation.
But of this course up in the South the Sun makes consummation.
There be the Elements turned into Fire by Circulation.
Then to win to thy desire, thou needst not be in doubt,
For the Wheel of our Philosophy thou have turned about.
VI.
But yet about again 2 times turn thy wheel,
In which be comprehended all the secrets of our Philosophy
In Chapters Twelve, made plain to thee, if thou conceive them well;
And all the secrets by and by of our lower Astronomy,
How thou shall Calcine Bodies, perfect, dissolve, divide, and putrify,
With perfect knowledge of all the Poles which in our Heaven been
Shining with Colors inexplicable, never were gayer seen.
VII.
And this one secret conclusion know withouten fail,
Our Red Man teyneth not, nor his Wife, until they teyned be;
Therefore if thou list thy self by this craft to avail,
The Altitude of the Bodies hide, and show out their profundity,
In every of thy Materials destroying the first Quality,
And secondary Qualities more glorious in them repair anon;
And in one Glass, with one Reg'ment Four Natures turn to One.
VIII.
Pale and black with false Citrine, unperfect White and Red,
The Peacock's Feathers in Colors gay, the Rainbow, which shall over-go
The spotted Panther, the Lion green, the Crow's Bill blew as Lead;
These shall appear before the perfect White, and many other more
Colors; And after the perfect white, gray and false Citrine also:
And after these, then shall appear the bloody red invariable;
Then have thou a Medicine of the third order of his own kind multiplicable.
IX.
Thou must divide thy white Elixir into parts Two,
Before thou Rubifie, and into Glasses Two let them be done,
If thou will have the Elixirs for Sun and Moon, so do,
With Mercury then them multiply unto great quantity soon:
And if thou had not at the beginning enough to fill a Spoon,
Yet thou may them so multiply, both the White, and the Red,
That if thou liv'st a Thousand Years, they will stand thee in stead.
X.
Have thou recourse unto thy Wheel therefore, I counsel thee,
And study him well to know in each Chapter truly;
Meddle with no Fantastical Multiplyers; but let them be,
Which will thee flatter, and falsely say they are cunning in Philosophy:
Do as I bid thee, then dissolve those foresaid Bases wittily,
And turn them into perfect Oils with our true Water ardent
By Circulation, that must be done according to our intent.
XI.
These Oils will six crude Mercury, and convert Bodies all
Into perfect Sol and Lune when thou shall make Projection:
That Oily Substance pure and fixed, Reymond Lully did call
His Basilisk, of which he never made so plain detection:
Pray for me to God, that I may be one of his Election;
And that he will for one of his at Doomsday me ken,
And grant me in his Bliss to Reign with him for ever, Amen.
A Breviary of Alchemy; OR A COMMENTARY UPON Sir GEORGE RIPLEY'S
RECAPITULATION: BEING A Paraphrastical Epitome of his XII Gates.
Stanza I. Position I.
That the Art is most certainly true.
WHich wittily conceived, thou may not Work in vain. Whence observe the
Truth and Certainty of the Art; so Father Hermes, It is true (says he,)
without falsehood, certain, and most true; That which is above, is like that
which is beneath; and that which is beneath, is like that which is above, to
bring about the Miracles of one thing. So Trevisan, Flammel, Dionys. Zachary,
and others, affirm upon their own Experience: And so this our Author in his
Epistle to King Edward; his Conclusion of the Admonition concerning erroneous
Experiments, and other places of these his Twelve Gates, that I need not
enlarge on this Subject.

Stanza II. Position II.
Our Work is made of Three Principles.
WHere the Red Man and the White Woman are made one, etc. Thence it is evident,
that our Operations are made of Three Principles, yet of one Essence; the Red
Man, the White Wife, and the Spirit of Life: By the latter, the two former are
Espoused or made One. This is that which Trevisan calls his One Root, and Two
Mercurial Substances, crude at their taking, and extracted out of their
Minera's: This our Author elsewhere calls his Trinity and Unity; the Trinity
respecting the Substances as they are several; the Unity respecting their
Essence, which is entirely Homogenial; Therefore it is added, that they live in
love and rest without repugnancy, which could not be were they not Essentially
and Radically the same; For likeness of Nature is the Cause of Love, and
Oneness of Essence the true ground of Union; among different Substances can
only be expected Confusion, if not Destruction.

Position III.
Three Substances make only Two Natures, Earth and Water.
EArth and Water equally proportioned, that is best. Here it is evident, that
these Three Substances make up but Two Natures of Earth and Water: The Man and
Wife are both Bodies or Earths; the one fixed and ripe; the other Volatile and
unripe, and by Mixture make a brittle black Hermaphroditical Body or Earth
called the Philosophers Lead, as Ripley in his Preface expresses it. The White
Woman, or Famale, is otherwise called the Moon by all Philosophers; and by this
Author in his Doctrine of Proportions; One of the Sun, and Two of the Moon,
till altogether like Pap be done.

Position IV.
From equal Pondus of Earth and Water, Three of Water to One of the Earth is
good, but equal is best.
THen make the Mercury Four to the Sun, Two to the Moon, etc. as it should be
in Figure of the Trinity. And so we come to take notice of the Doctrine of
Proportion between the Earth and Water, equal that is best; the same says our
Author in his Chapter of Calcination. This is the surest and best proportion,
speaking of equal Pondus of Earth and Water; and gives the Reason, because
Solution will be sooner made, viz.

The more thy Earth, the less thy Water be,
The sooner and better Solution shall thou see.
And here he affirms the same of Calcination, which goes before Solution. Yet
Three of the Water to One of the Earth, will do well, lest the Tincture should
not have room to be sufficiently dilated in the Water, and the Body opened by
it; and this is the Pondus of Roger Bacon, which requires a longer time before
the quick be killed; and by consequence, the reviving of the dead must be longer
in doing; For Calcination is nothing else, but a killing the moist with the
dry; till which be done, there is no reviving of the dry by the moist, but they
have one and the same Operation and Period of time; for one dies not, but the
other revives: nor does the Dragon die, but with its Sister.

Position V.
The White Wife in the first Conjunction is to be Three to One of the Red Man.
THree of the Wife, and one of the Man thou take, etc. From the Pondus between
the Earth and Water, come we to view the Proportion between the Man and his
Wife; Here the Pondus is laid down Three to One, and so there are Four parts of
Earth to Four of Water, or more, until Twelve; that is, Three of Water to One
of the Earth. This also is clear from the Chapter of Conjunction, where the
Woman is allowed 15 Veins to 5 of the Man, as to the Act of their Foecundity,
which is interpreted of the first Conjunction by himself, that the Man must
have but 3 of Water, and his Wife 9, which is 12 of Water to 4 of the Earth; by
which it is evident, that the Woman is to exceed her Husband in a threefold
Proportion.

Or Two to One after Reymund: Or Four to One according to Alanus; but Three to
One is best.

However, in Reymund's Doctrine of Proportions cited by our Author in his Gate
of Calcination, One of the Sun is joined with Two of the Moon, which make Three
of the Body; and to these are added Four of Mercury, which is One more of the
Spiritual than of the Corporal part; and this the Author compares to Trinity
and Unity, both are good; Yea, and Alanus prescribes Four parts to One, which
may be done, but Three to One is best and equal Pondus of Spirit and Life, for
completing of the Marriage between this Royal Pair, the Sun the Husband, and
the Moon the Wife: Of this speaks this Author in his Gate of Solution; One in
Gender they be, but in Number not so; The Father is the Sun, and the Moon the
Mother, the Mover is Mercury.

This Compound according to its various Considerations, has many Relations,
and as many Denominations; Sun and Moon, Man and Wife, Body, Soul and Spirit,
Earth and Water, Sister and Brother, Mother and Son, with many others; but its
Proper Name is Magnesia.

Quest. What is the Red Man? what his White Wife? What the Spirit of Life?

It may be here questioned, what this Red Man is? what his White Wife? and what
the Spirit of Life? for that is the only knot in understanding the Writings of
Philosophers, whose various Expressions, and seeming Contradictions herein, do
obscure the Art wonderfully: Yet however they seem to differ in their Writings,
they mean all one thing, if well or rightly understood.

Answer 1 st. What the Red Man is?

The Red Man betokens the perfect Body of the Sun, or his Shadow the Moon; For
Lune the Body, which is one of the Seven, is a Male, and a perfect Body, and
fixed, only wants a little Digestion; and therefore the Red is hid under its
visible White, as White is hid under the visible Red of Sol: Therefore our
Author in his Work of Albification, says, that the Sun appears White and
Bright: And Trevisan says, our King, who is clothed in Garments of pure Gold,
after he is once in the Bath, appears no more till after one hundred and thirty
days; and then he appears White, and wonderfully bright and shining. And an old
Philosopher says, Honor our King at his return from the East in Glory and
admirable bright whiteness. Therefore says Artefius, Our Water is of kin to
the perfect Bodies, to the Sun, and to the Moon; but more to the Sun then to
the Moon; (Note this well.) And in all his Books he joins the Sun and Moon the
perfect Bodies Gold and Silver for the work. So does Ripley, and so all
Philosophers; by which it is evident, that either of the perfect Metals or
Luminaries with o^r Aqua Vitae, will complete the work; as Arnold expressly
says in his Questions and Answers to Boniface; and Jodocus Greverus in his
Treatise, confirms the same in these words; If so be (says he) thou be so poor
that thou can not take Gold, then take so much Silver; yet Gold is the
better, as being nearer of kin to our Water and Mercury.

Answer 2. What is the White Wife?

Secondly, The White Wife, otherwise called the Moon, is a Female; it is a
Coagulated Mercury, but not fixed: A spiritual Body, fluxible in nature of a
Body, yet Volatile, in nature of a Spirit; It is called therefore Mercury of
the Philosophers; Our Green Lion; Our immature or unripe Gold: It is Pontanus's
Fire, Artephius's middle substance, clear like pure Silver, which ought to
receive the Tinctures of the Sun and Moon, his sharp Vinegar, his
Antimonial-Saturnine-Mercurial Argent Vive, without which ^aton cannot be
whitened; of which an old Philosopher says, whiten the red Laton, by a white,
tepid, and suffocated Water; of which testimony Tr^visanus affirms, that
nothing could be said better or clearer. This is that which is intimated in the
Vision of Arislaus, who found a People that were Married, yet had no Children,
because they married two Males together: Such are they who mix Sol and Lune,
both Corporal and fixed together, whom the Spirit will never revive, because
there is not conjugal Love. Join therefore Gabritius to his beloved Sister
Beya, which is a tender Damsel, and straightway Gabritius will die; that is,
will lose what he was; and from that place where he appeared to have lost what
he was, he shall appear what he was not before.

Answ. 3. What is the Spirit of Life?

Thirdly, The Spirit of Life is Mercury; The Mover says this Author is
Mercury, with which the Stone is to be multiplied when it is made: And it must
be true Mineral Mercury, without any foreign mixture, as Arnold resolves
expressly in his Answer to Boniface: And so Ripley says, some can multiply
Mercury with Saturn, and other substances, which we defy; Distill it therefore
till it be clean, etc. It moreover must have all the proportions of Mercury its
ponderosity, otherwise it could not be Metalline; its Humidity, otherwise the
Feminine Sperm would be deficient, and its siccity, not to wet the hand; which
it can no sooner lose by Corrosives or otherwise; but it straightway loses
its first Mineral Proportion, and so is no longer an Ingredient of our true
Tincture.

Position VI.
As the West Latitude is the entrance, so in the North is the first alteration.
PRoceed then forth to the North by obscuration, etc. Loosing them, and
altering them, etc. The Materials being found, and mixed according to the
Proportions taught before, is called the West Latitude; because in it the Sun
sets, and afterward appears no more in his Red Robes, till he first be
clothed with a White glittering Robe, and be Crowned with a very bright
Oriental Diadem. Now the progress into the North, is a discovery of the
Profundity of the Stone, and is compared to the Winter, which is in the North,
(chiefly) long, tedious, cold and slabbery; so will it be in this Work; the
Signs are Capricorn, Pisces, and Aquarius; In this there is a retrogradation of
Sol into its first matter, in which alteration the old Form dies, the Matter
rots and putrifies; and is after renewed in the East.

This Operation (says Flammel) is not perfected in less then Five Months; and
the Colors of the Compound are dark, obscure, waterish, and at length black
like Pitch; in which blackness the Body is rotted into Atoms; which entire
blackness, and height of corruption lasts but 2 or 3 days; and therefore says
Ripley in his Epistle, the third day he shall arise; the same says Dastin in
his Rosary, where he allows four days for Putrefaction: The same says
Efferarius the Monk in his entire Treatise published with Dastin; However, the
whole time of blackness, in coming, continuing, and going away, is 150 days,
although the Sun begins to appear in 130 days, if you work aright. This I have
added for the sake of many who expect black of the blackest in 40 or 50 days,
mistaking Flammel herein; who says, the color must be black of the blackest,
and like to the color of the Dragons in 40 days, which Dragons were blackish,
bluish, and yellowish, which colors show that the Matter begins to rot into
Atoms; which rottenness is not perfected in less than 150 days. (so as to let
the Sun appear with its Rays;) First in a small Circle of Heir of a whitish
Citrine; which increases, and changes hue day by day, till whiteness be fully
completed.

Position VII.
The East denoting Whiteness, is the beginning of the Stones Altitude.
THence by Colors many into the East ascend, etc. In the Work are three
Dimensions; Altitude, Latitude, and Profundity: The Altitude is the Perfection
of the Bodies which is Inchoate in Whiteness, and complete in Redness. The
Profundity is the first Matter into which they are resolved; For Multiplication
and the Latitude is the means through which it passes from its Perfection to
be abased; and from its abasement to its Glorification.

In this passage are infinite gay colors like unto those as appeared before
Blackness, but more glorious; For note, the Stone has but three colors,
Black, White and Red: In the first when completed, it stays three, or four
days at most; in the second as long; in the last it reposeth it self for ever,
between these Periods as the Matter is moister or dryer, purer or impurer, many
intermediate colors appear, more then can be numbered; But Two, (viz.) Green
and Yellow, are of long continuance, before the White and the Red: But many
colors appear between the beginning of that Work, and the first color of
Blackness: And although several colors appear, yet are they dark, foggy, and
foul colored; by which it appears, that Blackness is the predominant, which
for a space will appear like the Egyptian darkness, and is much about the same
continuance: so between Blackness and the White, although infinite colors
appear; yet the Basis of them being Whiteness, they are bright, and very
glorious, which being only transient, pass, and go, and others come in their
place, until the White be perfected.

Position VIII.
The South or Redness is the complement of this Mastery.
OF this course in the South the Sun makes Consummation. After the White, the
Fire being continued, the Compound will become Azure, Gray, and then Citrine,
which will last a long time; and at last end in a bloody Redness.

Position IX.
He that supposes his Work ended when the Stone is brought to its redness, is
mistaken.
But yet again Two times turn about thy Wheel, etc. The Stone being by constant
and long Decoction brought to this pass; he who thinks the race quite run,
reckons without his Host, and must reckon again: It is Medicine of the first
Order, and must be brought to the third Order by Imbibitions and Cibation,
which is a second turning round the Wheel; and by Fermentation, which is a
third turning round the Wheel, and brings the Medicine to the third Order, and
makes it then fit for Projection, which at first it is not; For till the
Medicine will flow like Wax, it cannot enter Mercury before its flight; but the
Powder as it is made at first, is like Grains or Atoms, and is congealed in a
far greater heat, then will make to fume, yet it abides in its from of Dust or
Powder, which must be otherwise before it be fitted for Projection; therefore
the Stone tingeth Mercury into a Metalline Mass in the twinkling of an eye, as
our Author says in his Preface, even as the Basilisk kills by sight: But the
Red Sulphur converteth Mercury by a digestion of time into its own Nature,
(viz.) Powder, if it be joined in a due proportion, and digested in a due heat:
Therefore says our Author, if you give it too much, it must have a Vomit, or
it will be sick too long, but the Stone will never part with any Mercury that
is joined to it in heat; our Sulphur then is a Royal Infant, which does both
hunger and thirst; and if you can but be a Nurse to it as you ought, it will
repay both your Pains and cost: Leave not then where you should begin; but go
on till you bring it to the third Order, which Reymond calls his Oils and
Unguents; and so our Author likewise.

Three Properties there are in which the White and Red Sulphurs of the first
Order, differ from those of the third Order.

One flows as easily as any Wax in heat, or on a hot Metal: the other in a
strong heat abides a Powder.

The one is like to Glass, brittle, ponderous and shining; the other a powder
like to Atoms.

The one enters Mercury like an Oil, and Coagulates it in an instant: the other
drinks up Mercury only, as the Calx of a Metal would do, but will not retain
it, if the Fire be increased strong, nor turn it into Metal; but if the heat
and proportion be both as they ought, by a digestion of Time, it turns it into
its own Nature: And so, (as Ripley says truly,) you may Multiply both White
and Red with Mercury; That if at first you had not enough to fill a spoon, yet
in short time you may be stored for your whole life, were it ten times as long
as it is like to be.

Position X.
Our Stone must have a Specification to Metals before it will Project.
Our Red Man teyneth not until he teyned be, etc. Our Red Man or King must be
teyned by Ferment, before it will tinge imperfect Metals: the Ferments are only
Sol and Luna, the Proportion a fourth part to the Compound let the Sulphurs be,
and three parts of Sol or Luna according as the Sulphur is: or four parts Sol
and Luna, and the Sulphur a fifth part; then with Mercury digest and putrify
your Ferment, and congeal it, and again Ferment it, till it flow like Wax or
Oil; then will that Oil fix Mercury, and turn any Metal into Perfection; which
you may then Multiply at your pleasure, or you may multiply it before
Fermentation: Then take the perfect Stone for your Body, and mix him with the
White Wife in proportion as at first, and add the Spirit of Life, as at first,
and digest it till it pass the three colors, Black, White, and Red.

Thus does our Author conclude his Erroneous Experiments also: I never saw true
work but one, says he. One he did, but it was after infinite Errors, and
other work no Philosopher ever yet saw, which he briefly describes.

Remember Man the most Noble Creature, etc. that is Gold; It is an error to
write it, (Remember that Man is the most Noble Creature of Earthly
Composition;) For Man is not of Earthly Composition, but Stones, Metals, and
Clays, etc. are. Now because we seek the Noblest of Creatures of Earthly
Composition, we must be so wise as to take it for our Principle: For as he
says elsewhere; as Fire of burning the Principle is, so the Principle of
Gilding is Gold ^wis. In this noblest Creature he says, are the four Elements
proportioned by nature, which makes it incombustible, for were any predominant,
it would not abide; but as Trevisan says, the Anatical proportioning the
Elements in a metalline matter, is the very form of Gold: or that rather which
gives it its form. He adds a natural Mercuriality, which costeth right naught;
that is a pure, sincere Mineral Water: without adulteration, not Artificial out
of Saturn, Jupiter, etc. But natural not a dear Mercury: but that which is
common and cheap. He adds one of his Minera's by Art is brought, that is our
green Lion, for with our first Menstrue, we Calcine only perfect bodies; but
none which are unclean, except one, which is usually called by Philosophers the
Lyon-Green, into this the clearness of the Sun, or of the Moon, secretly*
descends: that is, by this the Mercuriality, or profundity of the Sun and Moon
are manifested by exuberation, but is hidden from sight a long time; till after
putrefaction, it exuberates and appears openly, bleeding and changing colors,
and at first being clothed in a glorious Green: of which says the Rosary, O
happy Greenness, without which nothing can spring? This exuberate- Mercury is
our hidden Stone, that is, Potentially, for when that appears; repugnant
natures are tied to Unity, that is our Green-Lyon, or Minera, or vegetable
humidity, or Mercuriality natural, which costeth right naught, or our first
Menstrue, and the noblest Creature of Earthly composition, which is either the
Sun, or Moon, but especially the Sun: In each of which the Mercuriality is
invisible, and appears not to sight; but by effect, that is, in the quality of
clearness, with Whiteness in one, and with redness in the other, these three
being United, the Mercury of the Sun exuberates and appears at first green,
then is the Eclipse near, and the Northern progress, the process after all this
is short; this one thing putrifies, then wash him in his own broth, till he
become White, then Ferment him wisely; there is the beginning, middle and end.
Glory be to God.

FINIS.
These Books are Printed lately for William Cooper at the Pelican in
Little-Britain, London.
THe Philosophical Epitaph in Hieroglyphical Figures. 8o A Brief of the Golden
Calf the Miracle of Nature. 8o Glauber's Golden Ass, to get Gold from Stones,
Sand, etc. 8o Jehior, the Three Principles or Original of all things. 8o A
Catalogue of Chemical Books in 3 parts. 8o Simpson's Philosophical Discourse of
Fermentation. 8o Aeyrenaeus Philalethes's Secrets Revealed; Or the Shut
Pallance opened. 8o His Exposition upon Sir G. Ripley's Epistle to K. Ed. IV.
8o Upon Sir G. Ripley's Recapitulation. 8o
These are Printing.
Aeyr. Philalethes his Exposition upon Sir G. Ripley's Vision. 8o Upon Sir G.
Ripley' s Preface. 8o Upon Sir G. Ripley's first 6 Gates. 8o
FINIS.
AN EXPOSITION UPON Sir GEORGE RIPLEY's VISION.

Written by Aeyrenaeus Philalethes, ANGLUS, COSMOPOLITA.



LONDON, Printed for William Cooper at the Pelican in Little Britain*
MDCLXXVII.

THE VISION OF Sr GEORGE RIPLEY, Canon of Bridlington, Unfolded.
WHen busy at my Book I was upon a certain Night,
This Vision here expressed appeared unto my dimmed sight:
A Toad full Ruddy I saw, did drink the juice of Grapes so fast,
Till overcharged with the broth, his Bowels all to brast:
And after that, from poisoned Bulk he cast his Venom fell,
For Grief and Pain whereof his Members all began to swell;
With drops of Poisoned sweat approaching thus his secret Den,
His Cave with blasts of fumous Air he all bewhited then:
And from the which in space a Golden Humor did ensue,
Whose falling drops from high did stain the soil with ruddy hue.
And when his Corpse the force of vital breath began to lack,
This dying Toad became forthwith like Coal for color Black:
Thus drowned in his proper veins of poisoned flood;
For term of Eighty days and Four he rotting stood
By Trial then this Venom to expel I did desire;
For which I did commit his Carcass to a gentle Fire:
Which done, a Wonder to the sight, but more to be rehearst;
The Toad with Colors rare through every side was pierced;
And White appeared when all the sundry hews were past:
Which after being tincted Ruddy, for evermore did last.
Then of the Venom handled thus a Medicine I did make;
Which Venom kills, and saves such as Venom chance to take:
Glory be to him the granter of such secret ways,
Dominion, and Honor both, with Wor^ship, and with Praise. Amen.
THE VISION OF Sr GEORGE RIPLEY, Canon of Bridlington, Unfolded.
THis Vision is a Parable rather or Enigm, which the Ancient Wise Philosophers
have been wont to use often in setting out their secrets; this Liberty is
granted to all men for to make use of Enigmatical expressions, to decipher that
which is indeed mysterious. The Ancient Egyptians taught much by
Hieroglyphics, which way many Fathers of this Science have followed; but most
especially they have made use of Mystical or Cabalistical descriptions; such is
this. But to the thing in hand.

A Toad full ruddy I saw. --
HEre we have a Toad described, and in it the whole secret of Philosophers: The
Toad is Gold; so called, because it is an Earthly Body, but most especially for
the black stinking venenosity which this operation comes to in the first days
of its preparation, before the whiteness appear; during the Rule of Saturn,
therefore it is called the ruddy Toad.

To this Authors assent with one accord; when they say our stone is nothing
else but Gold digested unto the highest degree, to which Nature and Art, can
bring it; and again the first work, says another Philosopher, is to sublime
Mercury, and then into clean Mercury to put clean bodies: many witnesses I
could bring, yea the whole current of writers run this way: And what if some
subtle Philosophers seem to deny this, on purpose to deceive the unwary? We
shall not make it our work to reconcile them; (though we might) for many of
them wrote very enviously, on purpose to ensnare; all of them wrote
mysteriously, as much as they could to darken the truth: and at the best none
of them were but men, and described things according to their apprehensions in
Philosophy, none of them wrote in every thing the naked truth; for then the Art
would become so easy, that it would be contemned. But what needs words? we
know the Truth, and we know by a secret Character, true Writers from
Sophisters; and we need no Arguments being eyewitnesses our selves, and know
that there is but one truth; nor but one path, even the beaten path in which
all who ever have attained this Art have trodden, nor can we be deceived our
selves; nor would we deceive others.

Did drink the juice of Grapes.
THis Toad is said to drink the juice of Grapes according to the Philosopher,
the body, says he, is not nobler than Gold, nor yet the water more precious
than wine. This water they call sometimes Aqua Ardens, sometimes Acetum
Acerrimum, but most commonly they call it their Mercury; this denomination I
shall not insist upon; but shall assure yon that it only deciphers Mercury,
even that Mercury, of which I writ in my little Latin Treatise, called (...),
or Introitus apertus ad occlusum Regis palatium; in that I discovered the whole
Truth fully and nakedly, and if not too plainly, I am sure plain enough. I
shall not here repeat; to that I remit the Reader.

This juice of Grapes this Toad is said to drink; that is not only in the gross
Conjunction, which is an Impastation of the body, with the Water to the temper
of Dough or Leaven, which the Water readily does: such affinity there is
between the Water and the Body; as the Philosopher says, this Water is
friendly and pleasant to the metals. But over, and besides the Water soaks
Radically into our Body; being circulated upon it, according as the Philosopher
says, When its own sweat is returned to the Body, it perforates it
marvellously. Thus the Body drinks in the Water, or Juice of Grapes, not so
much then when they are first mingled: but most especially, when by decoction
it pierces radically to the very profundity of it; and makes it to alter its
Form; This is the Water which teareth the Bodies, and makes them no Bodies, but
flying Spirits like a Smoke, Wind or Fume, as Artephius speaks plentifully.

This operation is performed in a short while, in comparison of Subterraneal
operations of Nature, which are done in a very long time; therefore it is that
so many Philosophers say, that it is done in a very short time, and yet it is
not without cause, that so many of the Philosophers have complained of the
length of this decoction.

Therefore the same Artephius who had said, that this fire of the Water of our
Mercury, does that in a short time above ground, that Nature was in performing
a 1000 years, does in another place say, that the tincture does not come out at
once, but by little and little each day, and hour, till after along time the
decoction be complete, according to the saying of the Philosopher: Boil, boil,
and again boil, and account not tedious our long decoction.

So fast.
SO then this expression here, that the Toad does drink in the Juice of Grapes
so fast, does not imply but that this work must have the true time of Nature;
which is indeed a long time, and so is every decoction at least: so they will
seem to the Artist who attends the fire day by day, and yet must wait for the
fruit with Patience, till the Heaven have showred down upon the Earth the
former and latter Rain: yet be not out of heart, but attend until the
compleatment, for then a large Harvest will abundantly recompense all thy toil.

Till overcharged with the Broth, his Bowels all to brast.
IT follows in the Vision, that at length the Toad (overcharged with the
broth) did burst asunder; This broth is the same which the fair Medea did
prepare, and pour upon the two Serpents which did keep the Golden Aples, which
grew in the hidden Garden of the Virgins Hesperides.

For the Vinegre of the Philosophers being circulated upon the Body, does
engender a substance like unto bloody Broth, and makes Colors of the Rainbow,
to appear in the ascension and descension upon your Lion, until the Eagles have
at length devoured the Lion, and all together being killed with the Carrion of
the Carcasses become a venomous Toad, creeping on the Earth, and a Crow
swimming in the midst of the dead Sea.

The Juice of Grapes then, which is our Mercury, drawn from the Chameleon or
Air of our Physical Magnesia, and Chalybs Magical, being circulated upon our
true Terra Lemnia; after it is grossly mixed with it by Incorporation, and set
to our fire to digest, does still enter in and upon our Body, and searches the
profoundity of it; and makes the occult to become manifest by continual
ascension and descension: till all together become a Broth; which is a mean
substance of dissevered qualities, between the Water and the Body, till at
length the Body burst asunder and be reduced into a Powder, like to the Atoms
of the Sun, black of the blackest and of a viscous matter.

And after that, from poisoned bulk he cast his venom fell.
THis Reduction of the Body, thus in this water ingenders so venomous a Nature,
that truly in the whole World there is not a ranker Poison, or stink, according
as Philosophers witness: And therefore he is said to cast his fell venom from
his poisoned bulk; in as much as the exhalations are compared to the Invenomed
Fume of Dragons, as Flamell in his Summary has such an Allusion. But the
Philosopher (as he adds in his Hieroglyphics of the two Dragons,) never feels
his stink, unless he break his Vessels, but only he judges it by the colors
proceeding from the rottenness of the Confections.

And indeed it is a wonder to consider, (which some Sons of Art are
eyewitnesses of) that the fixed and most digested Body of Gold; should so rot
and putrify, as if it were a Carcass, which is done by the admirable Divine
virtue of our dissolving Water, which no Money can purchase. All these
operations, which are so enlarged by variety of expressions, center in one,
which is killing the quick, and reviving the dead.

For grief and pain whereof his members all began to swell.
THis venomous fume of exhalations returning upon the Body, cause it to swell
all over according to the saying of the Philosopher; The Body in this Water
puffs up, swells and putrifieth as a Grain of Corn, taking the nature
living and vegetable, therefore for this cause this Water is in this sense
called by the Philosophers their Leaven, for as Leaven causes Past to swell,
so this fermenteth the body, and causes it to tumefie and puff up; it is also
called venom, for as venom causes swelling, so this Water by its reiteration
uncessantly upon our body.

This operation is uncessant from the first incitation of the matter, even
until complete putrefaction; for the Toad does always send forth his
exhalations (being rather called the Lion,) till he be overcome in part: and
then when the Body begins a little to put on the Nature of the Water, and the
Water of the Body, then it is compared to two Dragons, one winged, and the
other without wings: and lastly when that stinking Earth appears, which Hermes
calls his Terra Foliata, or Earth of Leaves, then it is most properly called
the Toad of the Earth; from the first excitation, even to the last of this
putrefaction: which exhalations are at the beginning for a time White, and
afterward become Yellowish, Bluish, and Blackish, (from the virulency of the
matter) which exhalations hourly condensing, and ever and anon running down
like little veins in drops, do enter the Body marvelously, and the more it is
entered; the more it swells and puffs up, till at length it be completely
putrefied.

With drops of poisoned sweat, approaching thus his secret Den.
THe following two Verses then are but a more Ample description of this work;
of volatization which is an ascension, and descension, or circulation of the
confections within the Glass. Which Glass here called the secret Den, is
elsewhere called by the same Author, a little Glassen-tun, and is an ovall
Vessel; of the purest White Glass, about the bigness of an ordinary Hen-Egg, in
the which about the quantity of an ounce of 8 drachms of the confection, in all
mixed is a convenient proportion to be set, which being Sealed up with Hermes
Seal, the Glass having a neck about 6 fingers high, or thereabouts, which being
thin and narrow; is melted together Artificially, that no Spirits can get out,
nor no Air can come in, in which respect it is named a secret Den.

Also it is called a secret Den, because of the secretness of Ashes or Sand, in
which in a Philosophical Athanor it is set, the doors being firmly shut up,
and a prospect left to look in by a Window, either to open a little, as much as
is convenient sometimes, as occasion requires, or else with Glass put into it,
to admit the view of the Artist; together with a light at hand to show the
colors.

His Cave with blasts of fumous Air, he all bewhited then.
WHich Glass, Nest, and Furnace being thus secretly ordered, the Artist must in
the first place expect to be in Prison a long time, as Bernard Trevisan says,
for the Concave of this secret place, will be so bewhited with the fumes which
ascend, that an Artist rules his work more by skill and reason, or the eye of
the mind, then of the Body, for the Spirits arising like a smoke or Wind,
sticks to the Concave of the Glass, which is above the Sand or Ashes, and
there by degrees, there grow drops which run down and moisten the Body below,
and reduce as much as they can of the fixed, and so the Body by the Water, and
the Water by the Body alter their colors.

And from the which in space a Golden Humor did ensue.
IN so much that at length, the whole Vessel will seem as though it were all
over gilded with Gold, for the exhalations will be Yellow, which is a sign of
true Copulation of our Man and Woman together, but before this Yellow, and with
it there will be an obscuring of the White brightness of the Fume, with mixture
of Colors, Dark, obscure and Bluish.

The space is not long, for all the several passages are conspicuous before 40
days; for in that space from these Colors, are demonstrating Signs of
Corruption and Generation, which is given us by the biting, and fiery Nature of
our pontick Waters, and the resistance of our Bodies; in which Fight the Body
is overcome, and killed, and dying yields these Colors: which is a Sign that
the Eagles now are getting the Mastery, and that our Lion has also a little
infected them with his Carcass, which they begin to prey upon. This Operation
is by Ingenious Artists called Extraction of Natures, and Separation, for the
Tincture begins now to be separated from the Body. Also Reduction to the first
matter; which is Sperm or Seed, which by reason of its double Nature, is
compared to two Dragons. I shall not enlarge in this Vision, but briefly unfold
what is briefly laid down.

Whose falling drops from high did stain the soil with ruddy hue.
THese colors of the Mercury, do affect the subsident fixed Body, with suitable
colors and the Bodies from these exhalations, be Tincted with a ruddy color,
which Flamel expresses to this purpose, that these two Natures, or Dragons do
bite one another very cruelly; and never leave from the time they have seized
one upon another; till by their slavering Venom, and mortal hurts, they be all
of a gore blood, and then being stewed in their own Venom, are changed into a
fifth Essence.

And when his Corpse the force of vital breath began to lack.
BUt before the renovation of these Natures, they must in the first place pass
through the Eclipse, both of the Sun and Moon and the darkness of Purgatory,
which is the Gate of Blackness, and after that they shall be renovated with the
light of Paradise.

This Allegorically is called Death, ^or as a man will resist violence, which
intrencheth upon his life as long as he can, but if his Enemies are many and
mighty, at length they grow too mighty for him, and he begins to fail both in
strength and courage, and so Paleness, the Harbinger of Death, does stand as it
were on his lips, so our Body or Man the Sun, like a strong Champion, does
resist long, till he be wounded, and bleed as it were all over, and then dies,
at whose death blackness does begin to appear, as of old the Ravens were
foretellers of Man's death approaching: for this Reiteration of Rotation of the
Influences of the Heaven of it, together with Heat still drying up and soaking
in the Moisture as fast as it falls, brings it at last naturally to die and
corrupt, as any other thing does.

And then the Corpse begin to lack breath; that is, the Fumes begin to cease:
for with often ascending and descending the Spirits are somewhat fixed, and
turned into Powder or Dust, and are now in the bottom of the Vessel, drawing
fast to Putrefaction: Nor do they for a time ascend, but remain below.

Wherefore govern your Fire, that your Spirits be not so exalted, and climb so
high that the Earth want them, and they return no more: For this Operation is,
as Morien says, a drawing out of Water from the Earth, and again a returning
of the same to the Earth, so often and so long till the Earth putrefie.

This dying* Toad became forthwith like Coal* for color black.
THis is the final end of the Combat, for herein in this Earth of Leaves all
are reconciled, and final Peace is made; and now one Nature embraces another,
in no other form but in the form of a Powder impalpable, and in no other color
but black of the blackest.

From henceforth Natures are united, and boil and bubble together like melted
Pitch, and change their forms one into another. Take heed therefore lest
instead of Powder Black of the Blackest, which is the Crows Bill, you have an
unprofitable dry half red Precipitate, Orange-coloured, which is a certain sign
of the Combustion of Flowers, or Virtue of the Vegetative Seed. On this very
Rock I have stumbled, and do therefore warn you.

Thus drowned in his proper Veins of poisoned Flood.
IT appears by all that has been said, and by the undoubted Testimony of all
Philosophers who have been Eyewitnesses to this Truth, that the work is not so
tedious, nor so chargeable, but that in the simple way of Nature the Mastery is
to be attained: for when once the true body is Impasted with its true Leven, it
does calcine it self, and dissolve it self for the dissolution of the Body into
a black and changeable colored Water, which is the sign of egression of the
Tincture, is the Congelation of the Spirits into this lowest Period of
Obscurity, which is this black Powder like unto Lamp-Black, this is the
Complement of Eclipsation, which Contrition begins soon after the Colors,
Yellowish, Bluish, etc.

For term of Eighty Days and Four he rotting stood.
THis Calcination begins with these Variations in Color about the two and
fortieth day, or fiftieth at the farthest, in a good Regimen: After which comes
putrefying Corruption, like to the Scum of boiling bloody Broth or melted
Pitch; but Blackness in part, to wit, Superficial, begins about the fortieth
day after the stirring up of the matter, in case of right Progress and Regimen
of the Fire, or about the fiftieth at farthest. But this drowning of him in his
own Poison, and stewing him in his own Broth, is the entire Blackness and
Cimmerian utter Darkness of complete Rottenness, which according to the Author,
is for the space of eighty four days. This time is not certainly agreed upon by
Authors: But in this they all agree, they prescribe so long time until the
Complement. One writes, That this Blackest Black indures a long time, and is
not destroyed in less than five months. Another writes, That the King when he
enters into his Bath pulls off his Robe, and gives it to Saturn, from whom he
receives a Black Shirt, which he keeps forty two days: And indeed it is two and
forty days before he put on this Black Shirt instead of his Golden Robe, that
is, be destroyed as touching his Solary Qualities, and become instead of Fixed,
Citrine, Terrene, and Solid, a Fugitive, Black, Spiritual, Watery, and
Phlegmatic Substance: But Putridness begins not till the first Forms be put
off; for so long as the Body may be reduced into its former Nature, it is not
yet well ground and imbibed I grind therefore and imbibe, till thou see the
Bodies to become no Bodies* but a Fume and Wind, and then circulating for a
season, thou shall see them settle and putrify.

Saturn then will hold the Earth, which is Occidental, Retentive and Autum^al,
in the West; then proceed to the North, where Mercury holds the Water, where
the Matter is Watery and Phlegmatic, and it is Winter, and the North expulsive.
But they who divide the Operation into Saturn's Rule, and after him succeeding
Jupiter, ascribe to Saturn the whole of Putridness, and to Jupiter the time of
variety of Colors. After Jupiter, who holds but twenty or two and twenty days,
comes Luna, the third Person, bright and fair, and she holds twenty good days,
sometimes two over and above: In this Computation it is good to count from the
fortieth or fiftieth day of the first beginning of the Stone, to the fourteenth
or sixteenth day of Jupiter's Reign, wherein in the washing of Laton there is
still Blackness, though mixed with variety of gay Colors, which amounts to
the sum of days allowed by the Author in Putrefaction, to wit, Eighty four
days. Accounting entire Blackness, with A^gurellus, after four times eleven
days and nights, which make four and forty: Or, according to another
Philosopher, which says, In the first Fifty Days there appears the True Crow,
and after it in Threescore and Ten Days the White Dove; and after in Fourscore
and Ten Days the Tyrian Color.

By Trial then this Venom to expel I did desire;
For which I did commit his Carcass to a gentle Fire.
Which done, a Wonder to the sight, but more to be rehearst;
The Toad with Colors rare through every side was pierced.
And white appeared when all the sundry hews were past;
Which after being tincted, ruddy for evermore did last.

I Shall add my own Sentence: Mix thy two Natures well, and if thy matter be
pure, both the Body, and the Water, and the internal Heat of thy Bath as it
ought to be, and the external Fire gentle, and not violent; yet so that the
Matter may circulate, the Spiritual Nature on the Corporal, in six and forty or
fifty days expect the beginning of entire Blackness; and after six and fifty
days more, or sixty, expect the Peacocks Tail, and Colors of the Rainbow; and
after two and twenty days more, or four and twenty, expect Luna perfect, the
Whitest White, which will grow more and more glorious for the space of twenty
days, or two and twenty at the most: After which, in a little more increased
Fire, expect the Rule of Venus for the space of forty days, or two and forty;
and after it the Rule of Mars two and forty days more; and after him the Rule
of Sol flavus forty days, or two and forty: And then in a moment comes the
Tyrian Color, the sparkling Red, the fiery Vermilion, and Red Poppy of the
Rock.

Then of the Venom handled thus a Medicine I did make,
Which Venom kills, and saves such a^ Venom chance to take.

THus only by Decoction these Natures are changed and altered so wonderfully
to this blessed Tincture, which expels all Poison, though it self were a
deadly Poison before the Preparation, yet after it is the Balsam of Nature,
expelling all Diseases, and cutting them off as it were with one Hook, all that
are accidental to Humane frail Body, which is wonderful.

Glory be to Him the Grantor of such secret Ways;
Dominion and Honor both, with Worship and with Praise. Amen.

NOw GOD only is the Dispenser of these glorious Mysteries: I have been a true
Witness of Nature unto thee, and I know that I write true, and all Sons of Art
shall by my Writings know that I am a Fellow-Heir with them of this Divine
Skill. To the Ignorant I have wrote so plain as may be, and more I had written
if the Creator of all things had given me larger Commission. Now to Him alone,
as is due, be all Honor, and Power, and Glory, who made all things, and gives
knowledge to whom he lists of his Servants, and conceals where he pleases:
To Him be ascribed, as due is, all Service and Honor. And now, Brother,
whoever enjoys this rare Blessing of God, improve all thy strength to do him
service with it, for he is worthy of it, who has created all things, and for
whose sake they were and are created.

The End of Sir George Ripley's Vision, Canon of Bridlington.
MArt. Birrius has published three Treatises of this Authors in Latin, (but
without the Name Philalethes) in the last of which, entitled Fons Chymicae
Philosophiae, was left out one whole Chapter, called Porta Prima de
Cal^inatione Philosophica, with some other defects mentioned by Morhofius in
his Epistle de Metallorum Transmutatione, page 145. which Chapter I having by
me, and finding a void Page or two like to pass in this Sheet, I thought it
would neither be amiss, nor improper, nor unwelcome to the World, with this
Piece of the same Author to publish it, for satisfaction to the Hermetical
Students, and to prevent the loss thereof.

W. C. Bibliop.

Porta Prima. De Calcinatione Philosophica.
CAlcinatio lapidem nostrum purgat, calorem naturalem restituit, humoris nihil
radicalis destruit, debitam Lapidi solutionem inducit; cautio est ut
Philosophice, non vulgariter fiat, Salibus aut Sulphur vary praeparatis, etc.
Quicunque itaque Calcinare cupiunt, tantisper ab hoc opere desistant usque quo
nostram melius Calcinationem intelligant. Destruit siquidem Corpora Calcinatio
omnis, lapidis humorem minuens, nos quoque calces omnes aridas reprobamus;
humiditatem siquidem radicalem calcinando augemus, nullam minuimus. Nos vero in
calcinando naturam naturae (suae) conjungimus; utpot^ simile simili gaudet, hoc
siquis negant Philosophi nomine dignus non erit, nec ullam unquam ex scriptis
nostris (nam ea non intelligit) fructum percipiet. Natura itaque Naturam
applices uti ratio postulat: omnia siquidem hoc a Natura habent, ut simile sibi
generet simile. Ex Homine Homo, ex Leone Leo generatur, ita quidvis propriae
sua Natura primo Calcinatur. Hoc discas, and fructum inde percipere ne dubites.

Calces itaque unct^ofas facimus, c^m alb^s, tum rubras, quae non nis^^ribus
gradibus perficiuntur; cerae (...) instar fluidae sunt, aliter reprobandae; nec
nisi anno perficiuntur, ut sine fuco tingunt. De pondere vero imprimis
cavendum, utpote in quo hallucinari sit contingens: ni ergo operam perdas, and
oleum, Calcinetur Corpus Mercurio it a subtili facto, in quo sit pars una
qualitatis Solaris, bina Lunaris usque dum totum cerae liquidae inst^r simul
fluat.

Augeas de in Solarem in Mercurio qualitatem ut sint quatuor ejus parts duae
Lunaris; sic ad Trinitatis figuram opus incipias. Tres parts corporis. tres
spiritus, and ad unitatem complendam, pars un^ sit substantiae spiritualis plus
substantia corporal^. Raymundi Testimonio hoc compi^batur siquis ibi
proportionem quaerat idem mihi demonstravit Doctor. Baconu^ autem tres Spiritus
parts ad unam Corporis accepit, multas noct^^ insomnes agebam: sed verum
utrumque ^lige quom velis, modum.

A Catalogue of certain Books, Printed and to be sold by William Cooper at the
Pelican in Little-Britain, London.
SPencers View of the state of Ireland, fol. Seberi Index in omnia Opera
Homeri, Graece 4o. Waraeus de Scriptoribus Hiberniae duobus lib. 4o. Vsserii
Hist. Gotteschalchi de Praedestinatione, 4o. -- Ejusd. Sylloge Vet. Epistolarum
Hibernicar. 4o. Seldeni de Synedriis, liber primus and tertius, 4o. Ferrarii
Euclides Physicus contra Papist. 4o. Democritus Reviviscens and de Manna, 12o.
Sancta-Clara de Deo, Natura and Gratia, 8o. Frommenii Synopsis Metaphysica,
12o. Jonstoni Lexici Chymici, liber secundus, 8o. French Grammar for
Reformation of the French Tongue, 8o. A Caveat for the Protestant Clergy, 8o.
The English Rogue, a Romance in 4 Parts, 8o. Jacob Behmen's Aurora, the Root or
Mother of Philosophy, 4o Smithaei Disticha Regum Angliae, in uno folio.
Strada's Musical Duel, or Natural and Artificial Music, 4o. Rich. Brathwait
Regicidium Tragicomoedia, 8o. A Vindication of the Doctrine of the state of
Souls departed, 8o. Lusts Dominion, or the Lascivious Queen, a Tragedy, 12o.
Cowell's Interpreter of the Laws of England, 4o. Paracelsus his Archidoxes with
the 10th, Book, 8o. -- his Aurora and Treasure of Philosophers, 8o. The
Philosophical Epitaph, with its Explanation, Helvetius his Miracle of Nature,
in a Transmutation of Lead to Gold, 8o. Glauber's way to get Gold out of
Stones, Sand, etc. 8o. Jehior the three Principles or Originals of all things,
8o. A Catalogue of Chemical Books, in 3 Parts. 8o. Simpson's Philosophical
Discourse of Fermentation, with his Discourse of the Sulphur Bath at
Knarsbrough, 8o. -- his Essay toward the Cure of the New Fevers, with his
Analogy between Vegetable and Animal Juices, 8o. The Principles of the Chemists
of London, in two Parts, 8o. Eirenaeus Philalethes his Secrets Revealed, 8o. --
his Exposition upon Sir G. Ripley's Epistle to K. Edw. IV. 8o. -- his
Exposition upon Sir G. R.'s Preface 8o. -- his Exposit. upon Sir G. R.'s first
6 Gates 8o. -- his Experiments for preparing the Sophick Mercury, 8o. -- his
Exposition upon the Recapitulation, 8o. -- his Exposition upon Sir G. R.'s
Vision, 8o. -- his Marrow of Alchymy, in two Poems, 8o. -- his Introitus
apertus ad occlusum Regis P^ latium, 8o. -- his Ars Metall^rum Metamorphos^^s,
8o -- his Brevis manu^^ctio ad Rubinum Coelest. 8o -- his Fons Chymicae
Philosophiae, 8o -- his Methodica Enarratio trium Gebri Medicinarum, 8o. -- his
Experimenta de Praeparatione Mercurii Sophici, 8o. -- his Vade-Mecum
Philosophicum sive Breve Manuductorium ad Campum Sophiae, 8o. Jo. Ern.
Burgravius his Vital or Astral Philos. 8o. Thomson's Method of Chemical
Physic, 8o. -- his Epilogismi Chymici, Latin, 8o. Willis his search of the
causes of Transmutat. 8o. Dr. Dee's Fasciculus Chymicus, in English, 8o. The
Water-Stone of the Wisemen, 8o. Crollius's Admonitory Pref. to his Basil.
Chym. 8o. Gaffarel's Telesmanical Curiosities, etc. 8o. Naudaeus History of
Magic, and reputed Magicians, 8o. The Laws of Mines, and Mineral Works, fol.
Alphonsus King of Portugal, of the Philosophers Stone, 4o. Vigineres discourse
of Fire and Salt, 4o. Geber the famous Arabian Prince and Philosopher his
Works, 8o. The Tomb of Semiramis Hermetically sealed, 8o. Boulton's Magical but
Natural Physic, 8o. Despagnets Enchiridion and Arcanum, Engl. Five Treatises
of the Philosophers Stone, 4o. Nuysement of the Salt and Secret of Philos. 8o.
Place this at the latter end, after the Latin page.

