AN APOLOGY FOR The Ancient Right and Power OF THE BISHOPS To SIT and VOTE IN
PARLIAMENTS: As the first and principal of the three Estates of the KINGDOM,
As Lord Coke shows, 3. Institut. C. 1. and other both learned LAWYERS and
ANTIQUARIES, as Camden, Spelman, Seldom, and many others. WITH An Answer to the
Reasons maintained by Dr. Burgess and many others against the Votes of BISHOPS.

A Determination at Cambridge of the Learned and Reverend Dr. DAVENANT B. of
Salisbury, Englished.

The Speech in Parliament made by Dr. WILLIAMS L. Archbishop of York, in
defense of the BISHOPS.

Two SPEECHES spoken in the House of Lords by the Lord Viscount NEWARKE, 1641.

London, Printed by W. Godbid, for Richard Thrale, at the Crosse-Keyes at St.
Paul's gate entering into Cheape-side. 1660.

To the READER,
DOctor Williams, Lord Archbishop of York made an accurate Speech in
Parliament, to defend the rights of the Bishops: and the learned Bishop Hall,
made an abstract of his reasons, against which Doctor Burgess published an
Examination, wherein there is little material, if once the principal doubt be
cleared, whether Bishops had anciently Votes in Parliament, and were Barons, or
that which is equal, or superior unto Barons, being accounted Thanes, in the
times of the Saxons, before the Conquest: which I hope is so fully cleared in
this following discourse, as there will be little question remaining. Though
Parliaments began, as our Histories show, long after the Conquest, in this
manner as now they are held, yet they had Assemblies (Gemots) of the Estates
and principal nobility, whereof the Bishops and Clergy were always an eminent
party, according to the Laws and Custom of those times, and equivalent in
authority to our Parliament. They had several Gemots, as the first was.

Wittena-gemott. idem apud Anglo-saxones fuit, quod apud nos hodie
Parliamentum: parumque a Folkmotto differebat, nisi quod hoc annuum esset and e
certis plerumque causis, illud ex arduis contingentibus, and legum condendarum
gratia, ad arbitrium principis indictum.

In Folckmotto semel quotannis sub initio Calendarum Maii, (tanquamin a^nuo
Parliamento) convenere Regni principes, tam Episcopi, quam Magistratus,
liberique homines. Iurantur laici omnes coram Episcopis in mutuum faedus, in
fidelitatem and in jura Regni conservanda. Consulitur de communi salute, de
pace, de bello, and de utilitate publica, promovenda -- etc. --

Sciregemott. (si pluries opus non esset) bis solummodo in anno indicebatur,
Aderat provinciae Comes, aderat Episcopus, aderant Magnates, omnes
Comitatenses. Episcopus jura divina enuntiabat and vindicabat; Comes secularia;
alter alteri auxilio: De causis hic cognitum est tam criminalibus, quam
civilibus: sed jurisdictiones postea separabat Gulielmus primus: videtur hoc
idem fuisse, quod olim Turnum dicemus Vicecomitis, (non minus quam hodie nunc
dicitur) bis in anno tenebatur, aderant que omnes una comitatus magnates, and
Te^iti^ liberi.

Many other Gemots and Meetings they had, but in all these public Gemots, the
Clergy were principal members as appears by the laws of King Edgar. Cap. 5.
Gemottis adsunto locii Episcopus, and Aldermannus (ho^ est Comes) doceatque
alter jus divinum, alter jus saeculare. Thus the learned Glossary shows, out
of whom it was necessary to show the several assemblies then in use, that we
need not contend about the French word Parliament, which came in use about the
time of Hen. 3. But whatsoever their Assemblies were, Page 314. ^
the Bishops were always principal members thereof: and though once in 25.
Edward* 1. there is mention of a Parliament at St. Edmunebury, whereby the
Clergy were excluded for denying of money (which they refused to grant by
reason of a prohibition from Pope Boniface, in regard of many Levies latel
yraised upon the state Ecclesiastical.) As of later times, there was a
Parliament once held without Lawyers, in 6. Hen. 4. at Coventry, as both our
Histories do testify, and also the Kings Writ directed to the Sheriff, 2.
part. Cause. in dors. n. 4*
whereof the words are: -- Nolu^us autem quod in seu aliquis alius vicecomes
Regni nostri praedicti, aut Apprenticius, aut alius homo ad legem aliqualiter
sit electus. Vnde Parliamentum illud laicorum dicebatur, and indoctorum, quo
and jugulum Ecclesiae atroci^s petebatur, as alearned Author says.

Yet I hope (notwithstanding the inconsiderate zeal of this Examiner;) our
Histories shall never be blemished, with such a reproach, as to report the loss
or defect in Parliament, of either learned Clergy or Lawyers, to direct and
assist in whatsoever matters are proper to their faculties, and the public
welfare of the Kingdom.

The most Accurate History of the ancient City, and famous Cathedral of
Canterbury; being an exact Description of all the Rarities in that City,
Suburbs, and Cathedral: together with the Lives of all the Arch bishops of that
See, Illustrated with diverse Maps and Rig^res, Published by Will. Somner Author
of the late Saxon Dictionary. 4to. And is to be sold by Richard Thrale, at the
Crosse-Keyes at Paul's gate, entering into Cheape-side.

The Contents of the several Chapters.
CHAPTER. I. COncerning Government Ecclesiastical and Civil, in the state of
nature, from Adam till Moses, which was about 2500 years: the same person was
both chief Magistrate, and also Priest unto God. CHAP. II. The government of
the Church and State of Israel, by Moses and Aaron, and their Successors, until
Christ, about 1500 years. That there was not then two several Jurisdictions,
the one Ecclesiastical, the other Civil. CHAP. III. Concerning the Union of the
Courts of Justice in the time of the Saxon Kings, after they were converted to
the faith: The division of the Courts being brought in by William the
Conqueror, as appears by his Statute. CHAP. IV. Concerning the Honor and
Dignity of Bishops in the time of Saxons, and so continued to these times.
CHAP. V. Concerning Barons, and the title thereof, and how the Bishops became
Barons, being no addition of honor to them, but enforced upon them by the
Conqueror, and since continued to this day. CHAP. VI. Concerning the
Legislative power and Votes of the Bishops in making laws. Concerning the
Statute 11. H. 7. whereby Empson and Dudley proceeded, and what great treasures
they brought to the King. Calvin and Beza at Geneva, were members of their
chief Council of State, consisting of 60, and so may Bishops in England be
members of Parliament: King David appointed Priests and Levites in all Courts
of Justice. The Clergy had many privileges, as Lord Coke shows upon Magna
Charta. 2 Instit. page 2, 3. Ambition and Coveteousness of the Presbyterians,
the principal cause of all our troubles. CHAP. VII. In the first frame of our
English Common wealth, the Bishops in every Diocese were the principal Judges.
The Charter of William the Conqueror for dividing the Courts. The Statute of
Circumspecte agatis, 13. Ed. 1. and Articuli Cleri, 9. Ed. 2. appointing what
Causes shall belong to the Ecclesiastical Courts. CHAP. VIII. Some Observations
out of the Civil Law, in the Empire, concerning the separation of Courts, and
some also out of the ancient Statutes, as Seldom has recited them. Lord Cokes
defense of the Bishops being in Parliament, and of the Convocation, and High
Commission; and other Ecclesiastical Courts. CHAP. IX. The example of the late
wars in Bohemia, and Germany, and France, with the ill successes thereof to the
Protestants, might well have forewarned us in England. The goodly Covenant of
Bohemia, might well have given us Caution, to take heed of a Covenant without
the Kings consent. The Church Lands taken anay formerly, are restored by the
Emperor, in many parts of Germany. The Censure of Grotius upon the
Presbyterians, for their raising of arms. CHAP. X. The Division of the Courts
in the Empire and the manner of proceeding in them by the Bishops, and the
Ecclesiastical Lawyers under them.
AN APOLOGY FOR The BISHOPS To Sit and Vote in PARLIAMENTS.
CHAP. I.
Concerning Government Ecclesiastical and Civil in the State of Nature, from
Adam till Moses, which was about 2500 years. The same person was both chief
Magistrate and also Priest unto God.
GOD had a Priesthood always from the Beginning of the World, to perform the
duties of his Worship, and the ^^ites thereof. Adam was a Priest unto God, to
offer Sacrifice, and to execute such duties as God required in his Service: But
Adam was also a King or Chief Ruler, over all his Children and Posterity. So
after Adam, Seth, and the tighteous Patriarchs, Enoch and others, were Priests
unto God, as well as Princes, and Magistrates, and they taught Noah how to call
upon God, and how to serve him.

So Noah was also a Prince, and also a Preacher of righteousness, as the
Apostle says of him, so that it was not incompatible, or inconsistent for the
same man to be a Magistrate, Prince, or Governor, and also a Priest.
Melchisedech, after the Flood, was the first that was called a King and a
Priest: and so Christ is a King and a Priest after his order. So that under the
Law of Nature, Kings were invested with a power Ecclesiastical; both of Order
and Jurisdiction: Therefore these things are not incompatible by Nature; and
thus it continued for the space of 2500. years from Adam till Moses.

Princes and Priests were formerly the same, both Functions residing in the
same person: Majorum haec erat consuetudo (says Servius) ut Rex esset etiam
Sacerdos, vel Pontifex: unde hodie quoque Imperatores^Pontifices-dicimus.] They
that had the managing of affairs of State, had also the executing of Divine
offices, and so received divine and holy duties, and oblations: which use
obtained in the Families of the old Patriarchs.] Thus the Learned Montague
against Seldom. cap. 3. p. 537.

Ante Legem datam ad primogenitos pertinebat-offerre sacrificia, -- Levitae
successerant loco eorum. And again to the same purpose: Cultus divinus ante
legem datam pertinebat ad Primogenitos Israel. And again: Sacerdotium fuit
annexum primogenitur ^ usque ad legem datam per Mosem. As Lyra says, reporting
the received judgments of the best Interpreters. Lyra in Numb. 3. 12. and 8.
16. in Genesis 14. Veteribus ordinarium and perpetuum fuit, ut qui Reges essent,
iidem etiam sacerdotio fungerentur, as Bertram says, cap. ^. De politia Iudaica.

The Privileges which in the Law of Nature followed the Birthright, were
these three. First, the Government or Principality. Secondly, the Priesthood.
Thirdly, a Portion answerable to maintain these dignities.

The same light may appear, though much darkened in the ancient Government of
the Heathen; for Heathen Kings are witnessed in old times, to have been Priests
of such Gods as they served, which ancient combining of these two offices, in
one person, came from the ancien^ practice in the time of the Law of Nature,
and from the light of Nature was received among the Heathens.

Abraham was a Priest in his own Family, and in several places of his
Peregrination, he built Altars, and places, where he did call upon God, and
perform all duties of Gods Worship then requisite. Abraham did offer Sacrifice,
as appears Genesis 15, 9. and 22, 7. 2, 7, 8. Abraham was a Prophet, Genesis 20. 7.
and received many promises from God* especially concerning Christ to descend of
him; and God gave him the Sacrament of Circumcision, and established his
Covenant with him. God says of him, Gen 18. 19. I know him, that he will
command his Children, and his Household after him, and they shall keep the way
of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, etc. --

And as Abraham did, so likewise did Isaac, and Jacob, after him, who built
Altars unto God, which was as much then as to build a Church in these days,
and to provide a Minister to preach, and pray, and administer the Sacraments,
and perform all other duties of a Pastor.

Hence it appears fully, that in the time of Nature, there was not two several
jurisdictions, one Ecclesiastical, the other Civil, as is now among us. But the
same persons, discharged both Offices, and all Duties belonging to them.

And further it appears, that the priests being the firstborn, and chief men,
had such honorable respect and maintenance, that they were not reckoned among
the lowest of the people, and made the off-scowring of all things as now they
are.

If the Clergy may not enjoy any temporal office, or dignity, they will be
crushed down, and oppressed in all public occasions, as they find it
manifestly in these troublesome times, when the neighbors of every parish do
impose all Taxes, Burdens, and Charges upon Ministers, more then they formerly
used to do, or in reason can be allowed. But the Clergy have no means to help
themselves, having none of their own tribe in authority, power, or place of
judicature as formerly they had, whereby they could help themselves, and
restrain the Laymen from imposing Burdens, and charges upon them in excessive
manner. It is easy to show particular instances, and one of many shall be
mentioned.

When all the Judges of the Land, about 20. years ago, had given their
opinions and directions in writing, upon particular doubts to Justices of
peace, incident to their offices; one doubt was, how much, and in what
proportion a Minister should be charged for Levies to the poor. The Justices in
the Country, and the Neighbors of the parish, would tax the Glebes severally
from the Tithes, and so augment the Levy to a great proportion, both for Glebe
and Tithes: But the Judges appointed in their answer, that Glebe and Tithes
should be both taxed together, at a tenth part of the Levy, in regard Tithes
are abated much by small rares, and much Land is discharged of Tithes in kind.
But now in these troubles, the Committee Men, and such like, impose Taxes, upon
the Glebes severally, and Tithes also, imposing a sixth, or seventh part of the
Tax upon the Tithes, which is contrary to the resolution of the Judges. But
Ministers have no remedy to help themselves, there being none of the Clergy
upon the Bench in any authority.

CHAP. II.
Of the Government of the Church and State of Israel, by Moses and Aaron, and
their Successors until Christ, about 1500 years. That there were not two
several Jurisdictions, one Ecclesiastical, the other Civil.
WHen God delivered his chosen people out of Egypt, and conducted them through
the Wilderness, toward the promised Land of Canaan, He began first to publish
his Law: And by Moses, delivered them many Laws, in Five Books.

Whatsoever Laws he gave, either moral, ceremonial or Judicial, they are all
contained in the Five books of Moses, and no man could better understand them
then the Priests and Levites. For God made his Covenant with Levy, of Life and
Peace: The Law of Truth was in his mouth: The Priests Lips should preserve
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his Mouth. Mal. 2. 5, 6, 7. and so
Ezekiel 44. 23. They shall teach my people the difference between the Holy and
profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean, and the clean: and in
Controversy they shall stand in judgment; and they shall judge according to
my Judgments, and they shall keep my Laws, and my Statutes, in all mine
Assemblies. They being the principal Judges and Lawyers in that Commonwealth,
of Gods own Constitution. And whereas it is now granted on all hands, that
there were three Courts of Justice in that Kingdom. 1. The great Council of
the 70. Elders. 2. The Court of Judgment, which was in in every good Town
where there were many families. 3. The Court of three, or some few more. The
Priests and Levites, were principal men, both Judges and Officers in all
Courts, Scophtim and Scoterim, as 1. Chron. 23. 4. both to give sentence and
judgment, and also to execute the same: So the Divines do affirm in their late
Annotations upon 1. Chron. 26. 29* 30. and 2. Chron. 19. 8. 11. They did study
the Judicial and politic Laws, and had power to see the Law of God, and
Injunctions of the King to be observed, and to order divine and humane affairs.
And they held also other honorable offices, for we read that Zechariah a
Levite, was a wise Counselor, 1. Chr. 16. 14.
and Benjah a Priest, Son of Iehojadah, was one of David's twelve Captains,
being the third Captain of the Host for the third month, 1. Chr. 27. 5.
and in his course consisting of 24000. was his Son Amizabad: Benjah also was
one of David's principal worthies, 1. Chr. 11. 22.
having the name of the three mighties: He was also Captain of the guard to
David, and after the Death of Ioab, he was made Lord General of the Army, by
King Solomon, in Ioabs room. 1. K. 2. 35.

It is recored 1 Chronicles. 26. 30. That of the Family of the Hebronists (Levites)
there were a thousand and seven hundred Officers, on this side Jordan westward,
in all businesses of the Lord, and in the service of the King; and two thousand
and seven hundred chief Fathers, and men of valor, whom King David made
Rulers, over the Re^bonists, the Gadite^s, and the half Tribe of Manasses, for
every matter pertaining to God and affairs of the King. v. 31. 32. Whereby it
manifestly appears, that the same Judges, and Officers, being Priests and
Levites, most of them did hear and determine all sorts of causes, pertaining to
God and affairs of the King, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal; so that there
was not several Courts, the one Ecclesiastical, and the other Civil, as in
these times, some do affirm too peremptorily, according to the Common practice,
and usage of these days, as Godwin in his Moses and Aaron lib. 5. Beza, Iunius,
and diverse others, with the Kirkmen of Scotland lately, Rutherford, Gillespie,
Baily, and others. So also the Papists generally, who that they may establish
the Popes Supremacy, above Kings and their Common-laws, do affirm, that Regimen
Ecclesiasticum est distinctum a politico. as Bellarmine de Romano pontifice
lib. 1. cap. 5. so our zealous party for the like ends and reasons, would
maintain a Government in the Clergy, separate from, and independent upon the
Civil Magistrate, and such as ought to be directed and ruled only by the word
of God, and his Spirit, ruling (as they suppose) in their classical Assemblies;
where they think the Throne of Christ is only to be advanced, and all his holy
Ordinances put in execution.

Whereas the King is Custos utriusqne tabulae, and the Supremacy in causes
Ecclesiastical, as well as Temporal, is acknowledged by our Statutes, and
annexed to the Crown. For Execution thereof, an Act was made 1. Eliz. cap. 1.

But if the Statute had not been made to annexe the Supremacy to the Crown, yet
as the Lord Cook says, 4. Instit. p. 331. King James has, and Queen Elizabeth
had before him, as great and ample Supremacy and Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical,
ase ver King of England had before them, and that had justly and rightly
pertained to them by diverse other Acts, and by the ancient Law of England, if
the said clause of annexation in the said Statute 1. Eliz. had never been
inserted.

But John Pym in his Speech in Parliament 4. Caroli, as Rushworth has it in
his late Collections, says, that the high Commission was derived from the
Parliament.] Page 659.
As if the Parliament gave the King the Supremacy as a gift of their own, and
that it was not vested in the Crown; but as they gave it, so they may take it
away when they please, and suppress the Court of high Commission, as they have
done; The duty of the Court was, to reform and correct all Heresies, Schisms,
Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities. But now upon Suppression of the
Court, all Heresies and Schisms in the world are broke out, and such
abominable abuses, offenses, and enormities, as never were known in this
Kingdom, with allowance and toleration.

This fallows upon the new light and doctrine of John Pym, and all the rest of
the Presbyterians who have stirred up all these troubles, and of late they
called the House of Commons, the Supreme power of the Nation in all Addresses
and Petitions made unto them.

It was a great Error of Calvin and Beza, and many others that follow them, to
affirm that there was one Court Ecclesiastical, and another Civil in Israel.
Calvin upon Jeremiah 19. 1. page 152. says, Scimus duos fuisse ordines
publicos, vel duplex regimen ut loquuntur; sacerdotes erant praefecti
Ecclesiae, nempe quoad legem, ita ut spiritualis esset eorum gubernatio; erant
seniores populi, qui prae erant rebus politicis, utriusque vero quaedam inter
se communio. Calvin understood only the plain Hebrew, not the Rabbis, and
Talmud, nor the Jewish Antiquities: Therefore in several places he is mistaken,
as upon Numb. 11. 17. Where God appointed first the 70. Elders to be joined as
Assistants to Moses, He does interpret the Text, I will take off the Spirit
that is upon thee, and put it on him, as if the gifts of the Spirit which Moses
had were diminished in him, and imparted to the 70. which is untruly said by
Calvin; for as Solomon Iarchis says, Moses in that hour wa^ like the Lamp,
that was burning on the candlestick in the Sanctuary from which all the other
lamps were lighted, yet the light thereof was not lessened any whit.] Deus ex
Mosis Spiritu tollens, quod aliis distribuit, ignominiae notam qua dignus er
at, ^ fligit, minime dubium est, quin diminutio notetur: This is spoken very
harshly and untruly by Calvin, as learned Authors have showed his Error herein.

So upon Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 9. 10. Where the Priests and Levites were appointed
Judges in great matters, between blood and blood, between Plea and Plea, and
between stroke and stroke, being matters of Controversy within thy gates:]
Calvin does so interpret, as if the Priests and Levites were only to expound
the Law to the Temporal Judges, but not to sit as Judges upon the bench
themselves with especial authority, as the other Elders and Judges did. Wherein
he was much mistaken. For the Priests and Levites were principal Judges in all
matters, and causes whatsoever, not only Ecclesiastical but Temporal; not only
for explaining of the Law, but executing the same.

The Learned Casaubon in his Exercitations upon Baronius 13. Sect. 5. showed
that the Priests and Levites were the principal judges in the genreal Council.
Hujus Conciliiea fuit institutio, ut si fieri posset. e solis Sacerdotibus and
Levitis constaret, qui non erant e Tribu Judah sed Levi: itaque and in Bibliis
aliquando, and apud Iosephum appellatione sacerdotum intelligitur ipsum
Synedrium: Si^ e numero sacerdotum aut Levitarum non reperirentur qui definitum
Iudicum illorum numerum imple^ent, tum demum aliis Iudaeis aditus in Synedrium*
patuit, nulla Tribus habit a ratione. Hoc Maimonides declarat, etc.

Bancroft in his Survey cap. 25. does fully show the error of Calvin and Beza,
in dividing the Courts, and does accurately con^ute them, to whom I refer.

And further of late, the excellently learned Grotius has also accurately
cleared the point. Quod quidam arbitrantur duos fuisse senatus summos Iudeorum,
alterum qui civilibus, alterum qui Ecclesiasticis negotiis praeesset, de eo
quid ^obis videatur, alibi erit dicendi Locus. in Mal. 2. which he does perform
upon Mal. 5. very exactly. Cum pingue haberent otium, non tantum omnialegis,
sed and medicinae aliarumque artium diligenter ediscebant, ut and Egyptii
sacerdotes; ideoque primis saeculis ex illis ut eruditioribus senatus 70. virum
legi maxim solebat. Grotius in Deuteronomy. 17. and so in Mal. 5. Cum sacerdotes
opimo fruentes otio omnibus sapienentiae partibus prae er caeteros, operam
darent, aequum erat ex horum numero, aliquam-multos allegi in ordinem illum,
cui jam suprema etiam judicia credita fuisse diximus, quanquam neminem fuisse
qui originis dignitate eum locum sibi posset vindicare, scripsit Ma^monides,
etc. -- Florentibus Hebraeorum rebus, fieri aliter non poterat, quin in
sacerdotum class plurimi r^perirentur digni eo loco; His addebantur alii qui
in alii^ tribubus doctrina and sanctimonia eminebant. Quamobrem Moses Deuteronomy. 19.
17. De falsi testimonii cognitione agens, and senatum hunc describens,
sacerdotes and judices nominat; alibi etiam de exploranda diligentia judicum
inferiorum in cognoscendo homicida, ipsi sacerdotes, tanquam ejus senatus, pars
praecipua, nominantur. etc.

Hoc ipso in loco (Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9,) non distinguuntur ca^sarum genera, neque
vero causae ullae nominantur, quae proprie videri possent sacerdotales, sed si
quid controversi incidisset, de homicidio, de lite, de vulnere, juben^^^ adire
sacerdotes -- etc. -- neque vero alia fuerant judicia sacerdotis, alia senatus,
id enim omnes Hebraeorum Magistri constanter negant. And much more he adds
out of Josephus -- and does also accurately expound the Texts, 2. Chron. 17.
Concerning Iehosophats reformation and placing of Judges in Jerusalem, as also
the Text in the prophet Ier. 26. where some priests do accuse the prophet, and
the Princes do absolve and free him. -- So in his Book De imperio summarum
potestatum. cap. 11. Sect. 15. He does accurately handle this Question. Ubi
explicantur Iudeorum tum minora judicia tum magnum, and ostenditur apud Iudaeos
eosdem fuisse qui de sacris and profanis jus dicebant, quae sint negotia Dei
quae Regis.

So Bertram a learned Lawyer, De politia Iudaica. cap. 9.

So Sigonius de Repub. Hebr aeorum. lib. 6. c. 7.

So Scuetetus in his Exercitations. lib. 1. cap. 54.

So Schickardus de jure regio Hebraeorum. c. 1. page 9. 10.

So Seldom in his Uxor Hebraica. cap. 15. Quod vero a nonnullis, iisque
alioquin doctissimis obtenditur, Presbyterium fuisse singular quoddam forum,
apud Iudaeos, quod de Religione and rebus saeris solum cog nosceret quale apud
nos dicitur Ecclesiasticum, ^ doctrina Talmudica, atque ab ipsa veritate est
long alienissimum, pro diversitate jurisdictionum amplitudinis idem ipsnm
ubique in ea Republica seu Ecclesia forum, de rebus sacris ac Religione
judicabat, quod de profanis, seu quae, non sacrae. And since this, Seldom has
more fully proved it in his books De Synedriis Iudaeorum, to which I refer; and
further the learned Dr. Hamond has most accurately proved and illustrated it,
in his Annotations on the New Testament, as on Luke 3. and Acts 4. and other
places, that there needs no further proof; Seldom in his Preface to the first
Book De Synedriis page 9. terms it, Duplex seu Bifurcatum in Christianismo
regnum seu imperium, Politicum seu Magistraticum, ut appellitari amat, and
Ecclesiasticum, ab illo prorsus sic distinctum, quasi Binos quis fingeret
soles. -- etc.

CHAP. III.
Concerning the Union of the Courts of Justice in the time of the Saxon Kings,
after they were converted to the Faith; The Division of the Courts being
brought in by William the Conqueror, as appears by his Statute.
THe union of Courts continued from the beginning of the World for four
thousand years, as Seldom affi^meth, lib. 2. De Synedriis, in the preface, p.
2. How that course came to be changed, will appear by what follows here. The
distinction of Courts seems to have proceeded first from Pope Nicholas the
first, as is mentioned in Gratian. Can. Cum ad verum. 96. Did. About 200.
years before the Conquest. Which was imitated among us, by William the
Conqueror, Whose Statute to that purpose is recited and illustrated by Spelman
in his Glossary and Councils, and by Seldom in his History cap. 14. and in his
notes upon Eadnez. page 167. and also published by Lord Cook 4. Instit. cap. 52.

But the Union of Courts in England continued till the time of William the
Conqueror, as the learned Antiqu^ry Spelman shows in his Glossary, in Cotes
page 3. Mun^s comitis judiciarium fuit, vim and injuriam prohibere, latrocinia
compescere, pacem regiam non solum legum tramite, sed armis etiam promovere,
jura regia, and vectigalia curare colligere, fisco infer. Praesidebat autem
foro comitatus, non solus sed adjunctus Episcopo; hic ut jus divinum, ille ut
humanum dic^ret; alter que alteri auxili^ esset, and consilio; presertim
Episcopus comiti; (...) in hunc illi animadvertere saepe licuit, and errante^^
cohibere. Idem igitur ^trique territorium, and jurisdictionis terminus.

Hereby it appears that the Bishop and Earl of the Coun^y were joint
governors, -- but the Bishop was principal, for he had power to restrain the
Earl if he did do amiss; the Bishop being learned, but the Laity in those days
altogether destitute of Learning and Knowledge. So that it is certain that the
Bishop and the Earl (or Aldermen) sat both together in the same Court*
together with their Assistants and Surrogates, and so (...) assist each other
with Counsel and authority: and in the forenoon they heard Church causes, and
in the Afternoon temporal business. This manner did preserve amity between the
Clergy and the Laity, that they did not clash for jurisdiction by sending
prohibitions, Injunctions and cross orders, as in our times, which do occasion
great vexation to the people, and prolonging of Suits, and does multiply
charges extremely. It is therefore certain, that the Bishops and principal
Clergy were always of great authority in our Kingdom, especially for making of
Laws and Constitutions of all kinds, and executing of them, which is manifest
by all the Laws themselves of the Svxon Kings; for about 500. years before the
Conquest. Wherein they first testify that the Laws were made by the consent,
(...)
suffrage, and approbation of the Bishops.

First Ethelbert the first Christian King of the Saxons made Laws which are
entitled thus, Haec sunt Decreta seu Iudicia qu^ Ethelbe^^us Ren conslitu^,
Tempore Augustini. As Sir Henry Spelman has recorded them in his Comments page
127. All the Laws then made, are not recited by Spelman: but they are extant in
the old Book called Textus Roffensis. Written by Ernulph a Bishop of Rochester.

Beda de his scribit. lib. 2. cap. 5. Mortem and sepulturam Ethelberti
referens: Inter ^aetera (iniquit) bona quae genti suae cansulendo conferebat,
etiam decreta illi Iudiciorum juxta exempla Romanorum, cum Consilio sapientum
constituit: Quae conscripta Anglorum sermon hactenus habentur, and observantur
ab ea: In quibus primitus posuit, qualiter id emendare deberet, qui aliquid
rerum and Episcopi vel reliquorum ordinem auferret: volens scilicet
tuitionem^^is quorum doctrinam successerat, praestare.] Sequuntur multa ad
vitae probitatem, and morum Correctionem pertinentia; says Spelman in his
Notes. Which Laws were casually omitted by my absence from the Press at that
instant, but shall be added if ever a second edition be made.

But certainly Augustine was the principal Bishop that did make these Laws,
though other names are not put down, but his only, being the principal. Yet in
other Councils following, diverse Bishops are mentioned, as in the Laws made by
King Ina. Anno 693.

Ego Ina Dei gratia West-Saxonum Rex exhortatione and doctrina Cennedes patris
mei, Lambard page 1.
and Heddes Episcopi mei, Council. p. 186.
and Erkenwaldes Episcopi mei, and omnium Aldermanorum meorum, and seniorum,
and sapientum Regni mei -- Constitui, etc. --

So in the beginning of King Aethelstan. Lambard page 57.
Ego Adelstanus Rex Consilio Wulfelmi Archiepiscopi mei, and aliorum
Episcoporum meorum, Council p. 402.
mando praepositis meis omnibus.

Likewise in the laws of King Edmund.

Edmundus Rex congregavit magnam Synodum Dei ordinis and seculi, Council. p.
423.
apud London Civitatem, in Sancto Paschae solennis, ^ui interfuit Odo, and
Wulstanus Archiepiscopi and alii plures Episcopi, -- etc.

The same appears by the Subscriptions to the laws, made by the Bishops and
principal Clergy, and Abbots of their several times, which are so frequent to
be observed in all ancient Charters and laws, in the first Tome of our English
Councils, that I will forbear many particulars, only one for example sake,
being the Custom then to testify their approbations not by voting, but by
subscribing their names, to approve and grant the laws made in Parliament* and
not to refer all to a Register or Clerk, to take notice of what is granted, and
by what persons present.

The Subscriptions to a Charter of King Edgar, to The Monastery of Glasten.
Ego Edgar Rex totius Britanniae praefatam libertatem cum sigillo sanctae
Crucis confirmavi. Council. p. 486.
Ego Elfgina ejusdem Regis Matter cum gaudio consensi. Ego Edward clito Patris
mei donum cum Triumpho sanctae crucis impressi. Ego Kinedrius Rex Albaniae
adquievi. Ego Mascusius Archipirata confortavi.
Ego Dunstanus Dorobernensis Ecclesiae Archiepiscopus cum Trophaeo sanctae
Crucis, and cum suffr^ganeis praesulibus Regis donum corroboravi. Ego Oswald
Eboracensis Ecclesiae primas, consentioni subscripsi. Ego Ethelnoldo
Wintoniensis Ecclesiae Minister and Glasten Monachus signum sanctae crucis
impressi. Ego Britchtelm Fontarensis Episcopns consentiens corroboravi. Ego
Ellslam Episcopus confirmavi. Ego Oswald Episcopus adquievi. Ego Elfnolde
Episcopus concessi. Ego Winsige Episcopus, cum signo sanctae Crucis conclusi.
Ego Segegar abbas vexillum sanctae crucis impressi. Ego Escui abbas
confirmavi. Ego Ordgar abbas corroboravi. Ego Ethelgar abbas concessi. Ego
Kinword abas Concessi. Ego Fideman abbas consolidavi. Ego Elphets Abbas
subscripsi. Ego Adulf Herefordensis Ecclesiae Catascopus corroboravi.
Ego Elphene Dux Dominae meae sanctae Mariae Glasteniensis Ecclesiae libertatem
omni devotione cum sigillo sanctae crucis confirmavi. Ego Osl^ck dux consensi.
Ego Ethelwine dux hoc donum triumphale hagiae crucis propriae manus depictione
impressi. Ego Osnald minister confirmavi. Ego Elfwurde minister corroboravi.
Ego Elthesie minister consensi. Ego El^kie minister consensi.

Thus first the King, Queen* and Prince do subscribe; then the Bishops;
afterward the Abbots; and lastly, the Noblemen; howsoever they were then
called.

The Bishops in all other Christian Kingdoms, as in the Empire of Germany,
France, Spain, Portugal, Poland, Hungary, and all others, as Denmark and
Sweden* since the Change of Religion there, have place and power in all their
Parliaments and public Assembies. The Bishops Electors of Germany, Ments,
Triers, and Colen, have place and precedence of the Temporal Electors, the Duke
of Bavaria, Saxony, and Brandenburgh, as our Bishops had place, sitting on the
right hand of the King in the House of Lords, and the Temporal Lords on the
left hand. And also out of the House the Bishops had precedence of all Barons.
And the two Archbishops of Canterbury and York, had place of any great
Temporal Lords, Dukes, Earls and Marquesses, or great Officers, as appears by
the Statute of 31. Hen. 8. c^p. 10. and Lord Cook, 4. Instit. page 361. and to
what end should they hold such privileges and places of Honor in Parliament,
unless they had the right and power of* voting in all Cases (unless in cases
of blood:) and all our ancient Parliaments and Statutes, do fully reckon the
Lords Spiritual in the first place, and then the Lords Temporal, and lastly the
House of Commons. These being the three estates in Parliament: but the Kings
person does not make one of the three estates (as some of late have affirmed)
but Lord Cook the great Oracle of our Common Law, does otherwise account 4.
Instit. cap. 1. Showing of what persons the Parliament consists.

This Court consists of the Kings Majesty, sitting there, as in his Royal
politic capacity, and of the three estates of the Realm, viz.

First, Are the Lords Spiritual, Archbishops and Bishops, being in number 26.
who sit there by Succession, in respect of their Counties or Baronies, parcel
of their Bishoprics, which they hold also in their politic Capacity. And
every one of these, when any Parliament is to be holden, ought ex debito
justitiae to have a Writ of Summons.

2. The Lords Temporal, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Uiscounts, and Barons, who
sit there by reason of their dignities, which they hold by Descent, or
Creation, in number at this time 106. and likewise every one of these, being of
full age, ought to have a Writ of Summons, ex debito justitiae.

3. The third estate is the Commons of the Realm, whereof there be Knights of
Shires or Counties, Citizens of Cities, and Burgesses of Buroughs; All which
are respectively elected by the Shires, or Counties, Cities and Buroughs, by
force of the Kings Writ, ex debito justitiae. And none of them ought to be
omitted, and these represent all the Commons of the whole Realm, and trusted
for them, and are in number at this day, 493.

In the beginning, Romulus ordained a hundred Senators for the good Government
of the Commonwealth, afterward they grew to 300. and so many were of the
House of Commons in Fortescues time. cap 18 fol. 40. as Lord Coke alleges him.

How the number of the Commons is increased to 500. or more, let them inquire
that please, perhaps the number of Burgesses of Corporation, and some Towns
which the Kings have lately allowed to come unto the Parliaments, may be a
reason of their great increase.

Lord Coke says, 4. Instit.
that anciently when the Parliaments were holden at Westminster, the Commons
^ate in the Chapter House of the Abbot of Westminster, and the Common
Chronicles do mention, that heretofore in the time of H. 8. The Commons sat in
the Black Friars where there were many large Chambers and Rooms: But since the
distinction of Cottages and free-Chappells. 1. Ed, 6. c. 14. The Commons sit in
the ancient and beautiful Chapel of St. Stephens Abbey, founded by King
Stephen, so that they now sit in the Temple of God.

The learned Montague against Seldom cap. 1. page 290 says, that Sedet in
Templo Dei, may be understood either Materiraliter as the great Turk does,
whose palace is that which sometimes was the chief patriarchal Church, built by
Justinian the Emperor, the Church of sancta Sophia; or spiritualiter, taking it
for contra Ecclesiam Dei, by persecuting Christians in quantum Christians, (for
that they profess the name of Christ Jesus) who are the living Temples of the
Holy Ghost, -- etc. --

The Bishops presence and voting in the Parliaments, may well seem necessary in
these times, when the Parliament does undertake to determine Controversies of
Religion of the greatest difficulty, as of predestination, absolute
Reprobation, universal Grace, Free Will, and final perseverance.

Sir John Eliott, and John Pym, zealous men in Religion, would not yield to the
King (40 Caroli) Tunnage and Poundage till they had first settled Religion,
touching the points of Ariminianisme; they accounting that Arminius was an
upstart Heretic, very dangerous to the truth; as Rushworth relates in his
Collections. p. 659.

Now if Parliaments will undertake to dispute and determine such great and
difficult points of Religion, as of Predestination, absolute Reprobation,
universal Grace, Free Will, and final perseverance; It is fit that the learned
Bishops should have power to vote in such difficult matters, of so great
Concernment, as well as any Members of the House of Lords or Commons: for it is
well known that many of the Bishops are men of excellent Learning, judgment
and abilities, as being long trained up in the Universities, and some of them
public professors, reading Lectures in Divinity and Heads of Colleges, that
they might be well informed concerning these points, or any other better then
Sir John Eliott, or John Pym, or any other Member of the House of Commons,
whosoever he be, or of the House of Lords, whereof very few are learned or
expert in the difficult points of Gods Decrees. And whosoever is wise and
sober, will be willing to refer these matters to the Convocation, who are a
part of the Parliament, and have the same privileges as other Parliament men
have, as Lord Cook shows, 4. Instit. cap. 74. pap. 322. etc. -- And their
proper office and duty is to debate of matters of Religion, of Heresies,
Schisms, and other like matters as Lord Cook shows very fully. The Bishops
being the principal men, that Reformed our Religion, made the 39 Articles, both
the lesser and greater Catechism, Common Prayer Book, and the Book of
Ordination, the Homilies, and whatsoever else has been settled in Religion, so
that they are most necessary and fit to be present in all Parliaments.

Dr. Burgess having written an examination of the reasons, asserted by Bishop
Hall, and Archbishop Williams of York. And this Author having written against
his examination of the reasons, the Doctor made a further Reply. Wherein he
says page 5. that if it can be made good, that in the * Wetten-Gem* of the
Saxons, the Bishops exercised a legislative power in voting of laws, as our
Bi^hops have done in Parliaments; the Examiner must provide him another
Advocate; for my part I must yield the cause.

I hope it appears clearly, by that is here alleged out of good Authority, --
that the Bishop had a legislative power in voting, and therefore by his own
confession he must yield the cause, and contend no farther about it.

There is one reason further to be considered, why the Bishops might well be of
great Authority in all Parliaments and public Assemblies, and that is by
reason of their Learning and Knowledge in languages, and matters of Law and
policy, which they got by travail into foreign parts; for most of them in
their youth, were bred in the English College at Rome, which was built and
endowed by the Kings of England. Ina, and many others after him, for the
education of Learned Scholars, sent thither out of England, there being then no
Universities, neither Paris, nor Padua, nor Oxon, nor Cambridge. Only Rome was
the principal place for Learning in these Western parts: and therefore our
Saxon Kings built the College there for English Scholars, and purchased Lands
in Italy for the maintenance thereof; and also gave the Peter Pence for their
better allowance and encouragement, which as Mr. Fuller accounts in his late
History, Lib. 5. p. 197.
was the sum of seven thousand and Five hundred pounds.

The Peter Pence was given, not as a Tribute to the Pope, as our
Common-Chronicles do grant it, and Polydor Virgilius, and Baronius, but as a
stipend to maintain the English College. As Spelman shows clearly, upon the
word Denarius St. Petri, Council. Britannica.
which Doctor Burgess might have observed better, and not have yielded it to
the Tribute paid to the Pope, as he does grant it. page 18. of his Reply. King
Henry the eighth, and those about him had forgotten the true use of them, and
therefore in the Tempest of his Indignation, swept them away among other
superstitious things in a Statute, but it might have been justly continued for
the first intention and purpose, to educate learned men beyond Seas, to learn
the Civil and Common Law and foreign languages, also matters of State, who
upon their return home after some seven or eight years, would deserve best to
be preferred to public places in Church or State: The Kings of England well
knowing the necessity of such learned men, did anciently, and of late, send
some choice Scholars, out of either Universities to foreign Countries, (as
Cambden observes, speaking of Sir Thomas Smith, Anno 1577.) Annis maturior
selectus ut in Italiam Regiis impensis mitteretur, ad nostra enim tempora
nonnulli adolescentes optimae spei, ex utraque Academia, ad uberiorem ingenii
cultum Regum sumptibus, in exteris Regionibus alebantur.

So was Cardinal Pool in his younger years, sent abroad by Henry the eighth,
Sir William Paget, Sir Thomas Smith, Sir William Peter's, and Sir John Mason,
these two having been fellows of All Souls College in Oxon, but being further
bred abroad in foreign Countries, they gained great experience and wisdom,
and were made either principal Officers or Secretaries of State at their return
home, and were principal men about the King for Counsel and disputes of
business, and guided the Kings Counsels in affairs of most importance.
Education in our own Universities at home, is not sufficient to enable men for
all public places and offices under a King. It is well known, that learned
young men of the best sort in the Universities, being sent abroad to travail,
when they come home are commonly men of far better abilities then such as have
only stayed at home, as of late years Sir Edwin Sandys, Sir Isaac Wake, Sir
John Digby, Sir Clement Edmond; and Dr. Bryan Duppa, now Bishop of Salisbury,
both these having been fellows of All Souls College, and Docter Duppa
specially chosen to be the Princes Tutor, having been bred a Civilian in his
College, and eminent besides for all polite Literature, and proctor of the
University, and afterward travailing into France and Spain, upon his return
home, it was not long before King Charles took special notice, and made choice
of him for the instruction of his three Sons, who are now the most accomplished
Princes in Christendom, notwithstanding the late disturbance and Rebellion of
these present times, and are likely to prove the most renowned, when the
present troubles shall be composed. Education goes beyond nature, as Aristotle
shows, 1. Ethic. Good instruction, and learned Education, does add those
perfections which cannot be obtained with ordinary helps, and by such men as
know only their own native Country and Climat.

The opposition that some men make against the Votes and presence of the
Bishops in Parliaments, and other places of Office and employment under the
King, does arise from that false principle; that jurisdiction Ecclesiastical
and civil, ought to be distinct and separate both for persons and their
employments. Which is already here confuted, it being one grand error of Calvin
and Beza, with diverse others that follow them too closely in all opinions, as
if they had been men free from error.

Our Bishops in ancient times were most part Lawyers; learned in the Civil and
Canon Laws, and thereby also knowing much in the Canon Law, and therefore they
were the chiefest Judges of the Land in all Courts of Justice, as Spelman
shows in his learned Glossary for 200 years after the Conquest, reckoning the
Catalogue of the great Lord chief Justices, being most part men of the Church,
page 409. 410, etc. -- and so page 131. Fungebantur antique cancellariatus
dignitate viri tantum Ecclesiastici and Episcopi, qui praeterea Curam gerebant
Regiae cap^llae, repositaque illic Monumenta, (Rotulos and Recorda vocant)
sacra custodia tuebantur, -- etc. --

And so also Lord Cook shows, 1. Instit. lib. 3. page 304. B. In ancient time
the Lord Chancellor and Treasurer, were most part men of the Church, yet were
they expert and learned in the Laws of the Realm, as for example in the time of
the Conqueror. Egelricus Episcopus Cicestrousis, viz. Antiquissimus and in
legibus sapientissimus. Nigellus Episcopus Eliensis Hen. 1. The saurarius in
temporibus suis incomparabilem habuit Scacarii scientiam, and de eadem scripsit
optime. Henricus Cant. Episcopus* H. Dunelm. Episcopus. Willielmus Episcopus
Eliensis. G. Roffensis Episcopus. Martinus de Pateshall Clericus Decanus divi
Pauli London, constitutus fuit capitalis Iusticiarius de Banco, -- etc. --
Willielmus de Raleash Clericus Iusticiarius Domini Regi^. Johannes Episcopus
Caliolensis, temp. H. 3. Robertus Passelew Episcopus Cicestrensis, temp. H. 3.
Robertus de Lexinton, Clericus constitutus sapitalis Iusticiarius de Banco.
Johannes Briton Episcopus Hereford. Henricus de Stanton, Clericus constitutus
fuit capitalis Justice, ad placita, With many others.

So also Seldom affirms, in his Notes upon Fleta. --

Sir John Eliott in his Speech in Parliament, confesses that there are among
our Bishops (whose profession I honor (says he) such as are fit to be made
example for all ages, who shine in virtue, and are firm for our Religion, etc.
-- as Rushworth relates in his Collections page 661. If Bishops be so eminent
that they shine in virtue, certainly they are fit men to be present in
Parliaments: for Parliaments ought to consist of such men, as shine in virtue,
as are firm for Religion.

A Learned Knight and Courtier, writing an answer to Sir Anth. Welden his
Pamphlet, entitled the Court and Character of King James page 178. where he
speaks of the preferment of Doctor Williams to be Lord Keeper of the great
Seal, shows, That former ages held it more consonant to reason, to trust the
Conscience of the Clergy with the case of the Laymen, they best knowing a case
of Conscience. And anciently the civil Law was always judged by the Ministers
of the Church, and the Chancery, and Courts of Equity, in charge of a Divine
Minister. So ran that Channel, till Sir Francis Bacons Father had it from a
Bishop; and now a Bishop had it again from Bacon. And had King James lived to
have effected his desires, the Clergy had fixed firm footing in Courts of
Judicature out of the road of Common Law, and this was the true cause of
Williams Invitation thither.

To prevent many Complaints and Mischiefs, there can be no better way then to
follow the Example of Gods own chosen people of Israel, where the chief fathers
of the priests and Levites were Judges in all Courts, both high and low,
sitting together with some chief men of the other Tribes of the Laity, as they
are now called. And though our Law be otherwise of late years, and the
jurisdiction of Courts divided, yet it was not so anciently, and the King may
put some of the Clergy in some places and Courts (at least of Equity) as King
James did design, if he had lived longer, and that without any prejudice to the
Law or Courts of Justice.

CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Honor and Dignity of the Bishops, in the time of the Saxons,
and so continued to these times.
FOr the Dignity, Order, and Estimation of the Clergy, they were from the
beginning reckoned and accounted equal with the best, as appears by the Laws of
diverse Kings* as first, of the first Christian King Ethelbert; who in his Laws,
does provide in the first place for their rights and privileges, and what
Satisfaction shall be made, for any wrong done to the Church, or Bishops, or
Clergy.

Quicunque res Dei vel Ecclesiae abstulerit, duodecima componat solutione.
Council. p. 127.

Episcopi res, Bid ^. 2. c. 5.
undecima solutione.
Sacerdotis res, nona solutione.
Diaconi res, sexta solutione.
Clerici res, trina solutione.
Pax Ecclesiae Violata, duplici emendetur solutione.
Volens scilicet tuitionem eis, quos and quorum doctrinam susceperat praestare,
says Bid.
These being the first Laws of our first Christian King of the Saxons, they
ought to be reverenced for their Antiquity, piety, and Christian Justice, in
rendering to every man his own due, though some men talk not only of taking
away superfluities, but of cutting up both root and branches. O Tempora! O
Mores!

And afterward about the time of King VVithred, there were laws made.

Quomodo damna and injuriae, Council. p. 206.
sacris ordinibus illata sunt compensanda.

And often elsewhere in the Councils many Laws do ordain, what satisfaction
shall be given to the Church and Bishops for several offenses committed: H.
Edw. Confessor. c. 3. Decanus Episcopi reliquas december parts habeat.
for then the Bishops had a great part in all fines, and shared in forfeitures
and penalties with the King.

Furthermore for point of Honor and Dignity, it appears by the Laws of King
Athelstan, that every Archbishop was equal to a Duke of a Province. Every
Bishop to an Earl and so esteemed in their valuations. Vide K. Athelstani Regis
apud Lambardum p. 71. and Council Britannica page 405. cap. 13. de Weregeldis.
1. capitum aestimationibus.

The Title of Baron was not then known or used among the Saxons, but they
called the Nobility Thanes. Vid. K. Inae page 187. Sect. 9. and the Bishops
were equal or rather superior to the Thanus Major, and the priest to the
Thanus minor. The Bishop and Earl are valued at eight thousand Theynses.

Messe-Theynes, K. Athelstani. page 406.
and Worald-Theynes; id est, Presbyteri and secularis Thani jusjur andum in
Anglorum lege reputatur aeque sacrum, cum Sacerdos Thani rectitudine dignus est.

The Priest was then accounted equal to a Knight, or Lord of the Town, and was
commonly styled by the name of Sir, as a Knight was, though now it be derided
and out of use.

Out of these Laws, and some others, does the learned Antiquary, who is so well
versed in the Antiquities and Monuments of our Laws and Kingdom, fully set
down the ancient dignity and order of the Clergy.

-- Magno sane in honor fuit Universus clerus, cum apud Populum, Epist. ad
Regem. Tum in vita tum in favore Council. Thansam. page 525.
and Proceres; tum apud ipsos Reges Angliae Saxonicos; nec precaria hoc quidem
concessione, sed ipsis confirmatum legibus. Sacerdos ad altar Celebrans minori
Thano (i. e. Villae Domino atque militi) aequiparabatur, in censu capitis
pariter aestimatus pariterque alias honorandus, quia Thani rectitudine dignus
est. Inquit Lex, Abbas sine C^nobiarcha inter Thanos majores (quos Barons
Regis appellarunt posteri) primicerius fuit: Episcopus similiter inter Comites
ipsos majores, qui integro fruebantur comitatu, juribusque Comitivis:
Archiepiscopus Duci and satratrapae amplissimae Provinciae pluribus gaudenti
comitatibus praeficiebatur: Vt and caeteri omnes Ecclesiastici comparibus suis
omnibus secularibus: Amplectebantur Reges universum clerum laeta front, and ex
eo semper sibi legebant primos a consisiis, primos ad officia Reipublicae
obeunda. Quippe sub his seculis apud ipsos solum erat literarum clavis and
scientiae, (dum militiae prorsus indulgerent laici) factumque est interea, ut
os sacerdotis oraculum esset plebis, and Episcopi oraculum Regis, and Reipu^.
Primi igi^ur sedebant in omnibus Regni comitiis and tribunalibus Episcopi in
Regali quidem palatio, cum Regni magnatibus, in comitatu una cum comite, and
Iusticiaerio comitatus, in Turno Vicecomitis cum Vice^omite; and in Hundredo
cum Domino Hundredi: sic ut in promovenda justitia, usquequaque gladius gladium
adjuvaret; and nihil inconsulto sacerdote, (qui velut saburra in navi fuit)
ageretur. Mutavit priscam hanc consuetudinem Gulielmus primus, K. Edw. Confess.
c. 3.
-- etc. --

After the Conquest William the first divided the Ecclesiastical Courts from
the secular, not with a purpose to diminish the Ecclesiastical authority. K.
Gulielm. in proaem.
-- Imo jurej^rando confirmavit leges sanctae matris Ecclesiae, quoniam per
came, Rex and Regnum solidum habent subsistendi firmamentum.

Yet the Bishops and Clergy do not now expect, or desire to enjoy their ancient
splendour, amplitude, and dignities, seeing the greatness of their Revenue
which should uphold the dignity is long since taken away.

So that well might Bishop Latimer in his Sermon before King Edward say, We of
the Clergy have had too much, but that is taken away, and now we have too
little. For there was no less in the whole taken away from them, then many
hundred thousands sterling, too incredible to be here briefly expressed. I will
only mention one, for example the Archbishopric of York, from which was taken
72. manors and Lordships at one instant, by one of the last statutes of Hen.
8. 37. H. 8. cap. 16.
and the like happened to Canterbury, London, Lincoln, and all the rest, which
me thinks should be enough to satisfy, that men should not go about to strip
them of these poor pittances that are left unto them, being but small
fragments, in comparison of their ancient patrimony, which the liberality and
piety of the primitive times ha^ conferred on them, when Charity and Piety was
fervent, and abounded with good works of all kinds; insomuch that they thought
no honor or respect too much to be given to the Clergy, especially to the
reverend Fathers and Bishops of the prime order.

From what has been said, it is manifest that the Bishops were equal to the
greatest persons and estates of the Kingdom, and had their votes and
suffrages, for making laws and Constitutions for the first 500. years before
the Conquest. Whereby it appears, that it is a very rash and ignorant assertion
of the Examiner Dr. Burgess.

That Bishops at first were but casually mounted to that height of extent and
power, page 42.
by William the Conqueror, the more to endear and oblige them.

And that it is only of Grace that Bishops were first allowed place in
Parliament. page 43.
And that they crept in by favor to serve a Conquerours turn, page 44.
and can derive no higher for sitting (as now they do) in the House of Peers,
then an Act of Parliament if so high.

Whereby it is manifest by all the Laws of the Saxon Kings, both in the edition
of Lambard and of the English Councels by Sir Henry Spelman, that the Bishops
were the principal men in all ages for ordaining of Laws and Consul^ations, in
all the great Assemblies of the Kingdom then in use.

And when matters in question, were only Ecclesiastical concerning the Church
and Religion, the Clergy sat by themselves, but when there was any thing to be
given and confirmed to the Church, then the Kings and Nobles did afford their
presence and assistance, as appears by diverse Councils.

Vide Council. Glocestriensiae, page 230.

CHAP. V.
Concerning Barons and the Title thereof, and how the Bishops became Barons,
being no addition of Honor to them, but enforced upon them by the Conqueror,
and since continued to this day.
AS for the Title and Original of Barons, and the old signification of the
Word; Seldom in his Titles of Honor. 2. part. cap. 7. Especially Sir Henry
Spelman in his learned Glossary -- upon the word Baro has so accurately showed
diverse particulars, that I need not here repeat them. But touching the Title
and Name, as it is now commonly used, I will say something as it is now
understood, it came among us since the Conquest, as the Glossary shows page
81. Ad Anglos pervenisse videtur vocabulum Baro, vel cum ipsis Normanis, vel
cum Edwardus Confessor, auras moresque imbibisset Normannicos --
Huntingtoniensis aevi sui vocabulum usurpans, Histor. lib. 5. Adolwaldum, (qui
occisus est, An. Dom. 903) Baronem Regis Edwardi senioris vocat; sed Author
antiquior Florentius Wigorniensis, eundem Ministrum Regis appellat, quo etiam
vocabulo scriptores ipsi Saxonici passim usi sunt. So in the Saxon Councils,
and Charters, diverse great men who were no less then Thanes, do style and
subscribe themselves Ministros Regis, as in the Charter of Edgar p. 486.

Ego Oswald minister confirmavi.
Ego Elfwurde minister corroboravi.
And the like frequently occure: These being the same in degree and substance
as Barons are now, whereof the Learned Glossary makes three sorts. Hodiernos
itaque nostros Barons e triplici font triplices faciamus.

1. Feodales, seu praescriptitios qui a priscis feodalibus Baronibus oriundi,
suam hodie praescriptione tuentur dignitatem. 2. Evocatos, seu rescriptitios,
qui brevi Regio ad Parliamentum evocantur. 3. Diplomaticos, qui Regio Diplomate
hoc fastigium ascendunt. Feodalium originem inter eos collocavero, quibus
Willielmus senior Angliam totam dispertitus est de se tenendam, quorumque
nomina in Domesdei paginis recognovit.
Rescriptitios ab aevo Regum Iohannis and Henrici tertii caput extulisse censeo.

Diplomaticos initium sumpsisse perhibent sub Richardo secundo, qui anno Regni
sui 8. (1. Christi 1387*) Iohannem Beauchamp de Hall in Baronem de
Kinderminster suo evexit diplomate.

Now the Bishops may be reckoned both as Feudal Barons in regard of their
estates and Baronies annexed to their Bishoprics: and also they are Evocati
summoned by Writ as Barons, and principal persons by the Kings to come unto
Parliaments, and also they are created by Patent, which is presented to the
Archbishop at their consecration.

But all the Feudal Barons were not summoned to Parliaments: Quorum ingens erat
multitudo, quae plus minus 30000. nullo tecto convocari poterat.

William the Conqueror brought in Tenures, enforcing all men of estates to
hold by one Tenure or other; and having made 30 thousand to hold by Barony, yet
he never called so many to a Parliament; seeing no Houses could hold so many:
and as not all the Feudal Barons were called, so not all the Abbots or Priors,
though they had great estates, but a convenient number, sometimes more and
sometimes less, as in 49. Hen. 3. Which is the first Parliament upon Record,
there were called to Parliament of the Clergy, 102. besides five Deans, says
Spelman, Glossary page 4. Anno. 1. Edw. 2. there were 36. Abbots. Anno. 4. Edw.
3. about 33. and all other times more or less. Yet not so few, as the Examiner
relates out of Sir Edward Cook (page 33.) who though he were a great Master of
law, yet in matters of Antiquity must yield to the Author of the Glossary, whom
in private he would call his Tutor, as well he might.

Cambden, writing of the Degrees of States in England, page 170. speaking of
the Bishops -- by right and custom it appertained to them, as to Peers of the
Kingdom, to be with the rest of the Peers personally present at all
Parliaments whatsoever, there to consult, to handle, to ordain, decree, and
determine in regard of the Baronies, which they hold of the King.

For William the first (a thing which the Churchmen of that time complained
of, but these in the age ensuing counted their greatest honor) ordained
Bishoprics and Abbeys, which held Baronies in pure and perpetual alms, and
until that time were free from all secular service, to be under Military or
Knights Service, enrolling every Bishopric and Abbey at his will and pleasure,
and appointed how many Soldiers he would have every of them to find for him and
his Successors, in the time of Hostility and War. Thus William the Conqueror
being very rigorous, imposed upon the Bishops and Abbots that held their
estates by Barony, great impositions to maintain arms, horses, and furniture
for War, enrolling them as he thought them able: but it seems the lesser
Abbeys, that did not hold by that Tenure of Barony, and Parish priests, were
not taxed as now they are.

But under the Saxons, when the grievous imposition of Dangelt was imposed and
raised from ten thousand pounds yearly to thirty thousand pounds, and in the
year 1012. to forty eight thousand pounds, which was a great sum for that age,
when money did not abound as it does now, yet the Church was then free.

De hoc Dangeldo libera and quieta erat omnis Ecclesia, qui^ magis in Ecclesiae
confidebant orationibus, quam armorum defen^ionibus.

The Prince and People did rely more upon the prayers of the Church, for their
deliverance and help, then upon any arms that they could raise, though the
necessity of those times was very urgent burdensome and desperate. But there is
no such Piety, Mercy, or favor now showed to the Church or any part of the
Clergy: But their Estates, Lands, and Revenues are the first that are seized
on, sequestered, sold, and disposed, to raise money for the maintenance of War
and payment of Soldiers, Goths and Vandals, Scots and Red^hanks, as errand
Philistines as ever came out of Gath and Askelon. And all particular ministers
of every Parish though they loose not all their Tithes, yet they are taxed in a
greater proportion then any Lay men, and many Shires petitioned the Parliament
to take away Tithes, and it was debated also in the Rump-Parliament, to take
away Tithes, and the Lands of both Universities, to maintain Soldiers and their
Charges which are so excessive and outrageous.

Hanc libertatem te^uit Anglorum Ecclesia usque ad tempus VVillielmi junioris
-- etc. --

William Rufus was the first that enforced this payment on the Barons and the
Clergy. Concessum est ei, non lege statutum, neque firmatum, sed habuit
necessitatis causa ex unaqu^que hyda; quatuor solidos Ecclesia non excepta,
quorum dum fiere^ collectio, proclamabat Ecclesia libertatem suam reposcens,
sed nihil pr^fecit. --

Thus the Religious and Learned Spelman, being the greatest Patron and Defender
of the Church, and the rights and privileges thereof that this age has
afforded. Glossar. page 200. on the word Dangeldum.

Dr. Burgess the Examiner might have observed what Cambden and Spelman have
written of the distinction and difference of Barons, both Authors having
written long before he had taken the boldness to talk so poorly of the
Baronies of Bishops, to whom William the Conqueror, did not add much to endear
them, but imposed many burdens upon them. He restrained them in many things,
using the power of a Conqueror, and clipped the Wings of their Temporal power
and confined them within the Limits of their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; He
procured Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, Agelrieus Bishop of East Angles, and
certain other Bishops and Abbots to be dep^ived by authority from Rome, and
detained them in prison, that strangers might enjoy their places. As Sir John
Hayward shows in his History of the three Norman Kings page 87. before time
they had part in fines and Mulcts, and power of coining money, as appears by
the Laws of King Athelstan, De Monolariis, page 399. and many other places. But
these were soon after reserved to the Crown as principal prerogatives. And till
the Council Council.
of Clarendon, under Hen. 2. the Clergy and Bishops enjoyed many more freedoms
and privileges, which were abated oftentimes and much diminished, about which
there was great contention, when Thomas Becket opposed the King; which the
learned Gl^ssary shows, page 82.

Episcopi autem Barons dici videantur propter nominis dignitatem, non quod
vassallagium pendebant aut seculare servitium: Hoc enim nostratibus jugum
injecit omnium primus Willielmus senior Anno 1070 ut in eodem tradit Matthew*
Paris. Auxit magnopere Willielmus junior ut in Historiola Ducum Normaniae and
in lib. Edwardi Confess. C. 11. Sed post varias colluctationes, aeterno robore
domum confirmavit Hen. 2. Anno Dom. 1164. in magno Concilio Clarendoniae
habito. Praesidente eidem ex ipsius mandato sacellano suo Iohanne de Oxonia,
praesentibusque Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, and
Baronibus* Regni in hunc tenorem.

Archiepiscopi, Episcopi and Vniversae personae Regni, qui de Rege tenent in
capite, habeant possessiones suas de Rege sicut Baroniam, and inde respondeant
Iusticiariis and ministris Regis and sicut Caeteri Barons debeant interesse
judiciis curiae Regis cum Baronibus quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem
Membrorum, vel ad mortem.

So that the Bishops, besides that they are called by the Kings Writ to
Parliament, and thereby have the same right that other Lords have; yet since
the Conquest they may be accounted also among the Feudal Barons. -- Qui nomen
dignitatemque suam ratione fundi obtinuerint, transferri autem olim aliquando
videatur dignitas cum ipso fundo, ut Episcopi suas sort^untur Baronias sola
fundorum investi^ra. Nam ut inquit Stamfordus, lib, 3. cap 62.

Ne ont lieu en Parliament -- ejus in respect de leur possessions. S. L'
ancient Barons annexees a leur dignites.

Whereas therefore Dr. Burgess says page 45. [albeit the Bishops are usually
said to hold of the King per B^roniam, yet this happily may be meant rather of
the honor affixed to their places, which works it up into a dignity, then of
the Land pertaining to them.] This is but fustian nonsense, and gross
ignorance; for like Feudal Barons, suas sortiuntur Baronias sola fundorum
investitura.] In like manner I take it, as the Earls of Arundel, both formerly
and of late, being possessed of the Castle of Arundel, Honor and Signory,
without other consideration or creation to be an Earl, became Earls of Arundel,
and the name, State, and Honor of the Earl of Arundel peaceably enjoyed, as
appears by a definitive judgment given in Parliament, as Cambden relates
out of the Parliament Rolls of Hen. 6. in Sussex p. 309.
out of which Cambden copied out what he says.

Further Dr. Burgess says, That the Bishops ought not to have the same
legislative power as the Temporal Barons, because these are for their Sons and
Heirs, and the others for their Successors only.

This Objection is frivolous, because the Bishops being men of great Integrity
and Learning, are as careful for the preservation of the public, wherein
stands the Safety of themselves and their Successors, as any Temporal Lords
^an be; and perhaps the more, because Temporal Lords do often fall into great
want and poverty, selling sometimes the very head of their Baronies, and so
oftentimes become very obnoxious; and some of them growing poor have been
degraded of their Titles and Honor; Whereof Lord Cook gives an instance 4.
Instit. page 355. How Nevil (both Father and Son) Dukes of Bedford, were
degraded by the King and Parliament, 17. Edw. 4. And for so much as it is
openly known, that George Nevil Duke of Bedford, has not, nor by Inheritance
may have, any livelihood to support the said Name, Estate and Dignity, or any
name of estate, as oftentimes it is seen, that when any Lord is called to high
estate, and have not Livelihood convenient to support the same dignity, it
induces great poverty and indigence, and causes oftentimes great Extortion,
Imbrolery, and maintenance to be had, to the great trouble of all such
Countries where such estate shall happen to be inhabited; wherefore the King by
the advice of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, ordains,
establishes, and enacteth, that from henceforth the same evection, and making
of the same Duke, and all the Names of dignity to the said George or to John
Nevil, before henceforth void and of none effect, -- etc. --

And much more the Lord Cook adds to the same purpose, as also York the
Herald, page 223.

The late Lord Brook, who was slain at Lichfield when he was ready to batter
the Cathedral Church, in his book against Bishops, speaking much against them,
and magnifying the Temporal Barons, says, that though their Honors are
derived from the King, yet being once made Lord their Honor is vested in their
blood and cannot be taken away; but his Lordship was not learned in Law or
Herauldry: He might have taken notice what Lord Bacon says in his Apopthegmes;
That blood is no better then the blood of a black Pudding that wants Fat and
Suet: Honor is vested in the lands, Manors, and Revenues, which when they are
lost and gone, farewell Honor and Title.

Edward Lord Cromwell (Grandchild to him that spoiled the Church) sold the head
of his Barony, Oukham in Rutland, and wasting his whole estate left himself as
little land in England, as his Grandfather left to the Monasteries; by the
Feudal Law his Barony is lost.

The last Edward Lord Zouch who dyed 1. Caroli, who was a very great Baron
anciently, sold the Head of his Barony Haringworth in Northamptonshire, page
40.
and all the Lands which he had, insomuch that Henry Howard Earl of Northampton
said, He was a Baron sans terre. Whereupon he bought again some other lands,
but having no Sons his Barony his extinct.

Henry Daubeny Earl of Bridgewater, created 20. July 30. H. 8. dyed without
Issue, Anno... Edw. 6. and so his Name, Family and Dignity extinct. This Earl
was reduced to that extreme poverty, that he had not a servant to wait on him
in his last sickness, nor means to buy Fire or Candles, or to bury him; but
all was done for him in Charity of his Sister Cicely married to John Bourchier,
the first of that name Earl of Bath.

Many more might be alleged, but these are enough to show, that when Lords
have lost their Lands and Revenues, then they are not fit men to fit and vote
in Parliament, and many there are who though no^ wholly impoverished, yet so
decayed, that they are not so fit as the Bishops to be present in Parliaments,
who if they might have enjoyed their ancient Lands and Manors, were indeed the
most able and worthy to be Members in Parliament, both in regard of their great
estates, and their Knowledge and Learning in all kinds, far beyond the Temporal
Lords.

Lastly, page 45.
Whereas Dr. Burgess says, the Bishops are Barons Ele^mosynarii, and would
thence infer that they are but as Arbitrary Almsmen, like the poor Knights of
Windsor, who may be abated or taken away at pleasure.

This is but a spightful inference upon the bare word Eleemosyna, without the
true sense of it; For as the Learned Glossary shows, -- Barons Eleemosynarii
apud Stanfordum, and in jure nostro dicuntur, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates
and Priores, qui praedia suae Ecclesia a Rege tenent per Baroniam: Baronias
etiam suas, ex Eleemosyna Regum perhibentur accepisse, licet ipsa praedia
aliorum saepe munificentia consequuti fuerint;

And sometimes, not only by the gift of other noble persons, but also
themselves did buy and purchase many Manors and Lands, conferring them on
their Successors, and being so bought, they cannot in justice be taken away,
as if all had been given by the King and others, as mere Alms.

Lanfranck Archbishop of Canterbury, bought and recovered 25. Manors, and
left them to his Successors. Harvey the first Bishop of Ely in the time of Hen.
7. bought and left many Manors to his Successors, and so likewise did many
other Bishops, (...)
enriching much their Bishoprics, and leaving besides many testimonies of
their piety, by building Colleges and Hospitals* And other good works to the
benefit of all men: They founded also, almost all the Colleges in both
Universities, to their eternal honor, so long as Learning shall flourish in
this Kingdom.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the Legislative power and Votes of the Bishops in making Laws.
Concerning the Statute 11. H. 7. Whereby Empson and Dudley proceeded, and what
great Treasures they brought to the King. Calvin and Beza at Geneva were
Members of their Chief Council of State, consisting of 60. and so many Bishops
in England be Members in Parliament.
King David appointed Priests and Levites in all Courts of Justice. The Clergy
had many privileges; as Lord Cook shows upon Magna Charta. 2. Instit. page
2, 3. Ambition and Covetousness of the Presbyterians, the principal cause of
all our Troubles.
BUt concerning the Legislative power, and Votes of Bishops, in making Laws to
regulate the Kingdom, and to preserve peace and justice among all sorts of
men, there is not to be forgotten an ancient Law of King Athelstan, Council.
page 402. c. 11. That worthy King in his Laws has one.

De Officio Episcopi, and quid pertinet ad Officium ejus. Episcopo jure
pertinet omnem rectitudinem promovere, Cap. 11.
Dei scilicet ac seculi, imprimis debet omnem ordinatum Dei instruere, quid ei
jure sit agendum, and quid secularibus judicare debeat. Debet enim sedulo pacem
and concordiam operari cum seculi judic^bus, qui rectum velle diligunt, and in
compellationum adlegationem docere, ne quis alii perperam agat in jurejurando,
vel in ^rdalio.

Nec pati debet aliquam circumventionem injustae mensurae, vel injusti
ponderis* sed convenit ut per Consilium and Testimonium ejus omne legis scitum,
and Burgi mensura, and omne pondus, ponderis sit secundum ejus institutum valde
rectum.

Ne quis proximum suum seducat pro quo decidat in peccatum. Et semper debet
Christianus providere contra ^mnia quae praedicta sunt, and ideo debet se magis
de pluribus intromittere, ut sciat quomodo grex agat* quem ad Dei manum
custodire suscept, ne diabolus eum laniet, nee malum aliquid super seminet,
etc. --

Christianis omnibus necessarium est, ut rectum diligant, and iniqua
condemnent, and saltem sacris ordinibus evecti, justum semper erigant, and
prava deponant; Hinc debent Episcopi cum secularibus judicibus interesse
judiciis, ne permittant si pessint, ut illius culpa, aliqua pravitatum germina
pullulaverint.

Et sacerdotibus pertinet in sua diocaesi, ut ad rectum sedulo quemcumque
juvent, nee patiantur si possint, ut Christianus aliquis alii noceat, non
potens impotenti, non summus infimo, non praelatus subditis, non dominus
hominibus suis vel servis aut liberis molestus existat, and secundum Episcopi
dictionem, and per suam mensuram convenit, ut servi testamentales, operentur
super omnem servnm cui praest.

Et Rectum est, ut non sit aliqua mensurabilis virga longior quam alia, sed per
Episcopi mensuram omnes institutae sint, and ex aequatae per suam diocaesim. Et
omne pondus constet secundum dictionem ejus; and si aliquid controversiarum
intersit, discernat Episcopus. And much more is there added --

It is manifest hereby, that by the ancient Laws of this Kingdom, what trust,
care, and charge is reposed in the Bishops; not only to direct matters
Ecclesiastical; but also to assist, rule, and guide Temporal Affairs; to
preserve peace, Justice, and upright dealing, just and true administration of
several offices and duties, whereby Religion is much advanced and adorned; when
men are honest and upright in their Actions, Contracts, Bargains and civil
dealings among themselves. So that they may not clash or oppose Religion: For
all public Statutes, Acts, and Constitutions, for the most part do in some
degree, more or less, trench upon Religion, and the furtherance or hinderance
thereof: So that they can hardly be duly and rightly enacted and framed,
without the advice, counsel, and assistance of Bishops and the Clergy.

Whereas Dr. Burgess replieth that the Bishops were present but did not Vote;
It is a very simple and frivolous answer. For the manner was not then in the
time of the Saxons, to vote to and fro as they do now: but at the conclusion
and end of every Council, Publick-meeting or Assembly, when their Acts or
Constitutions were written; all the Lords present did subscribe their names,
and testified thereby their Votes and Consents, and approbation of all that was
done. Whereas the Custom is now, in most businesses, to vote and declare
themselves by word of mouth, which is more uncertain; and many may be absent,
especially some days, or out of the way at the time of voting: but by staying
till the end of a Session or Parliament, and then subscribing their names, it
was a more certain way to testify who were present, and consented to all laws,
that are made: and posterity may know whom to thank, if the Statutes be good,
or whom to blame, if they be unjust or unreasonable.

As that Act 11. H. 7. c. 3. which gave power to Empson and Dudley, those two
infamous Committee Men, to proceed upon information without Indictment by their
discretion, and not secundum Legem and Consuetudinem Angliae, as all
proceedings ought to be. By virtue of this Statute (which Cook has printed, 4.
Instit. page 40. 41.) Empson and Dudley did commit upon the Subject
unsufferable pressures and oppressions. A good Caveat to Parliaments, to leave
all causes to be measured by the golden and straight metwand of the law, and
not to the uncertain and crooked cord of Discretion. And much more, to admonish
Parliaments, Cook does there add in very earnest manner: but our late long
Parliament has highly offended against all his severe admonitions, and have
far exceeded any ill doings of Empson and Dudley. Hist. H. 7.
For as Lord Chancellor Bacon says of them, They kept the half face of Justice
in putting up indictments against many men, but they would not suffer any man
to traverse them; and they had Jurors ready that would find any thing for fact
or valuation: But now in the proceedings against the Clergy especially, there
is not the half face of Justice observed, nor the outside: But only voting upon
any information: and upon the Votes of Committees, or Sub-committees, and such
like (not of either House) men are cast out, by Sequestration, of their Livings
and Freeholds, especially the Clergy are oppressed beyond example of any former
age.

All which unjust and horrible proceedings would not have been suffered, if the
Bishops had been permitted to enjoy their ancients rights, places, and power in
Parliament; they would have protested against it, and declared their dissent,
and found means to have hindered such detestable doings, far beyond the
wickedness of Empson and Dudley.

Empson and Dudley did not cast men out of their Houses, Lands, and Estates as
is now done by voting: Only they did tamper and trouble men till they could get
some money or fines upon the breach of some obsolete Statutes, which they called
mitigations, says Bacon: But now men's freeholds and Estates are taken away
upon pretenses only, and bare informations, without Jurors for Trial or
witnesses upon Oath, or any legal proceeding.

Empson and Dudley though they offended highly against Law, for which they were
severely punished; yet there came some good to the public by their doing, for
they filled the Kings Exchequer with great sums of money, some millions of
pounds, as Lord Cook shows, 4. Instit. page 198. And Lord Herbert in his
History page 9. Greater sums doubtless then any King of this Realm before had
in his Coffers, and such as may be thought effectively quadruple to so much in
our age.

But our Long Parliament and Committee Men have spent many more millions of
money, then can be imagined, more then ever David left for the building of the
Temple, viz, twenty and three Millions of our money, and a thousand pound: A
matter, but for the testimony of Scripture, exceeding all belief, says Sir
Walter Rawleigh, 2. Book Cap. 17. Sect. 9. But our long Parliaments have spent
more to pull down Temples; and have raised such a rabble of Sectaries, as are
ready to pull down and destroy all the Churches in the Land, and to make spoil
of all the materials and Revenues of them.

Empson and Dudley brought so much money to the Kings Coffers, that King Hen.
8. was exceedingly enriched, insomuch as Bacon says of him, upon the death of
Hen. 7^. That there was the fairest morning of a Kingdom, that ever was seen
in this land or any other: but by his prodigal exp^nces, and Sacrilegious
doings, there followed the foulest evening of a Kingdom that ere was known.

Bancroft in his Survey, cap. 6. says, that at Geneva they had a chief Council
of threescore, (which is as a Parliament in their Government) and that Calvin
and Beza were Members of that Council, and had vote and voice among them: and
why may not a Bishop among us be present in our great Council as well as Calvin
and Beza at Geneva, who carried all matters there under their Gow^s, as Dr.
Williams Archbishop of York says in his Speech in Parliament, which gave
occasion to Dr. Burgess to write against him, and impudently to call him the
pragmatical Arch-prelate of York: being an eminent person of extraordinary
parts, both of Nature and Art, and by reason of his great Honor, being Lord
Keeper of the great Seal, and his education in former times, was by many
degrees far above Dr. Burgess, who never had any honorable place, and was but
a little time in the Universitie, never fellow of any College, as is well
known, and how poorly and pitifully he had performed his Exercises in Oxon.
when he took his degree, is very well remembered, and particularly mentioned by
the Learned Dr. Heylin page 182. So Dr. Burgess terms the Learned Dr.
Davenant Bishop of Salisbury, only a speculative Divine: He being an eminent
and principal Divine, Head of Queens College in Cambridge and public
Professor, and chosen by King James to be sent to the Synod of Dort, and by his
Learned works publicly famous and renowned. Such malapert language against
such Honorable and eminent Bishops, from an inferior Doctor, is not to be
endured, without sharp censures.

Now though some Canons may seem to forbid the Bishops and Clergy to
intermeddle with secular affairs, yet that is not absolutely forbidden, but in
a qualified sense, as in the famous Council of Cl^veshoe, under Cuthbert
Archbishop of Canterbury, Anno 747. Can. 1. Negotiis secularibus, plusquam Dei
servitiis, quod absit, subditus existit. To attend secular affairs more then
spiritual, and to be wholly employed and conversant, in Temporal matters,
without due regard to the better part: But it will not hinder sacred studies,
nor the diligent preaching of the Gospel, that some principal men at convenient
times, have a charge and oversight of Temporal affairs, and the carriage of
public business; And concerning this see more in Bishop Davenants
Determinations at Cambridge, Quest. 11. Civilis jurisdictio jure conceditur
personis Ecclesiasticis.

Thus much might serve for Reply to the Examiner Dr. Burgess, especially upon
the fifth reason, which I hold to be the only thing material in the whole
Discourse; for the rest will appear to be needless if this be cleared. But if
he would look back to former times, he shall find that our Kingdom and
Government, followed the ancient manner of Gods own people of Israel, whose
Ceremonies and Rituals, though they be now abolished, yet the general rules of
Justice, Equity, Government and Order, do still remain. And as God made the
priesthood then honorable in the Kingdom of Israel, and committed a great
part of the Government unto them; so doubtless now under the Gospel, the
priesthood ought to be Honorable, and to have a principal part in the ruling
and governing of the Kingdom: To be a Priest in Israel, was to be a chief man,
Levit, 21. 4. and therefore in all their Courts of Justice the priests and
Levites were chief men in authority for deciding all causes, both in the great
Court of Sanedrim at Jerusalem, (which was a Continuation of the 70. Elders,
appointed by God himself Numb. 11. and was answerable in authority to our
Parliaments, it being the highest Court of Judicature in that Kingdom) and so
in the second Court of Judgment as our Savior calls it, Mat. 5. 22. where
there were 23 Judges, whereof 7. were of the Laity, (as we now call them)
Elders of the Cities, and every good City consisted of (...) Families; unto
which 7. of the Elders, there were added 14 Priests and Levites, as Josephus
shows lib. 4. cap. 8. where though he seem to say, that the number of the
Judges was seven; yet if his next words following be well observed, he shows
the addition of two priests and Levites, to each of the other Magistrates of
the people [(...)] Nam (...) intellig it singulos magistratum gerentes, quibus
singulis bini erant additi adsessores periti juris, quos Josephus (...) vocat:
Septem ergo municipes loci erant judices, praeterea adsessores quatuordecim,
qui ex Levitis maxim sumebantur; his supernumer arii accessisse videntur unus
and alter.] So Grotius in Mat. 5. 21. and so also the English Translation does
render the place. [In every City or Township, let there be seven Governors
such as are approved in virtue, and famous for their Justice; and let each of
these Magistrates have two Ministers of the Tribe of Levi.

In this Court of Judgment all manner of causes were heard of Life and Death,
whatsoever matters of Controversy within their gates, Ecclesiastical or
Temporal; Yet excepting some weighty businesses concerning a whole Tribe, or
the high priest, or a false Prophet, which belonged only to the great Council
at Jerusalem. Whether also they might appeal, in any doubtful cause, which was
too difficult for the inferior Courts.

Iudices in portis cujusque Civitatis jus super causis majoribus reddebant, and
in homicidas lege agere solebant, de quibus agitur, Deutr. 16, 18. and 21, 22.
(...) autem paena erat gladius, quia de homicidis inibi cognoscebatur, ut and
Moses nos docet and Christus.] Grotius in Mat. 5. 21.

When King David was old, and neet his Death, he appointed Solomon to be King
after him, and caused a Parliament of all Israel to be assembled, wherein he
gathered together all the Princes of Israel, with the Priests and Levites, 1
Chr, 24 1. 2. In this great Parliament the priests and Levites were not
omitted, not in any Court of Justice in that Kingdom: For as it is p. 4. There
were six thousand of them appointed Officers and Judges throughout the land of
Israel, which is the thing that now many of our Common people do much dislike,
not well enduring a few Justices of Peace to be of the Clergy, whereas we have
the example of David, guided and directed by the Spirit of God, as the Text
says, 1 Chronicles. 28, 12, 13, 19. So disposing and ordering the Levites, that he
appointed some for the outward business over Israel, for Officers and Judges;
a thousand and seven hundred were Officers of Israel, on this side Jordan, in
all businesses of the Lord, and in the service of the King. This Text is very
plain to prove that the same man, may be employed in Ecclesiastical matters of
the Church, as also in the Kings Service. So page 32. David appointed two
thousand and seven hundred chief Fathers, to be Rulers over the Reubenites,
Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasses, who were beyond Jordan, for every
matter pertaining to God, and affairs of the King; and c. 26. 14. Zecharias a
Levite, is commended for a wise Counselor. But that now any of the Clergy
should be Councillors, Judges, or Officers, unto Princes, is accounted by some
an unlawful thing, or at least not very commendable: Whereas we see by this
very law and direction of King David, that the Levites might attend business,
belonging to the worship and service of God, and instruction of the people, as
also of the public service and affairs of King and State: So the Divines in
their late Annotations on the Bible, do acknowledge that the Levites did study
the Judicial and politic Laws, and had power to see the law of God, and
injunctions of the King to be observed, and to order divine and humane affairs,
1 Chronicles. 26. 29, 30. 2 Chronicles. 19. 8, 11. So the Learned Grotius, Sicut lex erat
uan, praeptrix divini omnis humanique juris, ita apud Hebraeos, penes eosdem
erat juris utriusque interpretatio. Upon Mal. 2. 4. and so other Commentaries
do affirm, as Lavater in cap. 23. Per Civitates and Provincias judicia
Ecclesiastica, and civilia exercu^runt -- and so Peter Martyr, in 2. Reg. cap.
11.

Neither will it hinder the study of Divinity, or care of preaching the Gospel,
if some fit men be employed sometimes in the Government of the public (as to
be Justices of the peace) for the well ordering of the public; and
preservation of Peace and Justice will more advance the Gospel, and abundantly
countervail some intermission of preaching, which cannot possibly be so
continually attended, but that there will be some hindrances, not only by
sickness and private businesses of ones Family and Estate, but also by public
meetings, Convocations, Synods, and such general assemblies.

Besides the Commonwealth and Church is a mixed Government and consists of
all manner of persons, of infinitely several conditions, Trades, and Courses of
Life; and seeing the Clergy are mingled among them, and infinitely entangled,
especially of late days being made subject, (which they were not formerly) to
all temporal laws, Suits, Arrests, Executions, Imprisonments, Impositions,
Taxes, Charges, and Subsidies, it is but reasonable that the Clergy should have
some of their own Tribe in place of Judicature and Office, to see the inferior
Members defended, and fair carriage showed to them: Aristotle says, lib. 3.
Polit. cap. 1. Civis nulla re alia magis definitur, quam participatione judicii
ac Magistratus. Whosoever are Citizens in a Kingdom, meaning properly
Citizens, and of the better sort, (not Laborers, Porters, Scavengers) they
ought to have voice and suffrage, and to be capable of Magistracy and Office,
if they be worthy and fit for it by any excellent parts of Learning, Knowledge,
and Wisdom: wherein the Clergy have some opportunity to excel others, and
often go beyond the ordinary sort of men, that are not bred up in Learning,
Arts, and Sciences.

Sir Francis Bacon observes out of the ancient Roman Law, that there belongs
to every Subject, certain common rights and privileges which cannot be taken
away from any of them, 1. Ius Civitatis. 2. Ius Connubii. 3. Ius Suffragii, 4.
Ius Petitionis and Ius Honorum. These four ordinary rights and freedoms, are
by the Customs and original principles of humane Societies, due to all
Citizens of quality. Such as ever the Clergy have been esteemed, and still
ought to be, if men will profess themselves to be true Christians indeed; and
to honor the Messengers and Ambassadors o^ our Savior Christ, whom he has
appointed to instruct and govern his Church and people. The Pope deprived his
Clergy of the two former rights, by accounting them separate and exempt from
the Common Laws of all Kingdoms, and forbidding marriage to them: And now our
zealous professors would deprive out Clergy of the two la^ter privileges, the
right of voice and suffrage in all principal businesses, and the right of
Honor and Office, whereof they would make them incapable, and render them
base, and equal only to the inferior multitude, and scum of the Common People.

Lord Coke 2. Instit. cap. 2. page 3. Upon Magna Charta. Concessimus Deo, quod
Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit, and habeat omnia sua jura integra, and
libertates suas illaesas. True it is, that Ecclesiastical persons have more and
greater Liberties, then any other of the Kings Subjects; wherein to set down
all, would take up a whole Volume of it self, and to set no examples, agrees
ill with the office of an expositor: therefore some few examples shall be here
expressed. There he puts down many particulars which are very considerable,
and I refer the Reader to him. But in the end he concludes, that all the
liberties of the Clergy are lost or not enjoyed. But why should the Clergy be
deprived of so many liberties, rights, and privileges, being so fully settled
upon them, by the fundamental Laws of the Land. We may thank such unworthy
fellows, as to please the vulgar people, will be content to see the Clergy
stripped of all their rights and liberties, from the first to the last, as it
happens in these troublesome times. But the true reason is, because that Dr.
Burgess, and such as he is could not obtain the principal dignities and
preferments of the Church, that so they might with the preferments, have had
the benefit of the privileges and liberties.

Ambition and Covetousness has always been the bane of the Church: Whereof
there are many examples in all ages; as in the beginning of the Jewish
Churches. Corah being^ Levite of the Cohathites, which was the chief Family of
the Levites, as is observed on Numb. 3. 38. he took offense (as S. Iarchis
notes on Numb. 16.) and envied at the preferment of Elizaphan, the Son of
Uzziel, whom Moses had made Prince over the Sons of Cohath. Numb. 3. 30. When
he was of the youngest Brother Uzziel: and Korah himself was of Izkar, elder
then he: See Numb. 3. 29. 30. But by the Sequel it appears that he lift up
himself not only against Elizaphan, but against Moses and Aaron, and sought the
priesthood also, page 10. as Ainsworth observes on Numb. 16.

So in the Christian Church, Arrius the infamous Heretic was displeased,
because he could not obtain the Bishopric of Alexandria, and thought himself
as worthy as Alexander: and being discontented at his loss of so rich a
bishopric, Centur* Magdeb. 4. p. 371.
raised that Heresy which plagued the Church 300. years. So A^rius offended
because he could not obtain a Bishopric, took exception against the Dignity of
Bishops, As Epiphanius shows; Haeres. 75.
and many more such examples are obvious in the Ecclesiastical Histories.

And so at this instant of our Troubles, the Presbyterian Divines were offended
because they could not obtain the chiefest dignities of the Church. Mr. Stephen
Marshal a principal Presbyterian, did once petition the King for a Dean^ry, and
at another time for a Bishopric: Which because he could not obtain as the King
told him at Holdenpy, where he attended upon the Commissioners, therefore he
would overthrow all.

Doctor Twist was an earnest Suitor for the Deanery of Salisbury; which because
he could not obtain, nor a Prebend in Windsor, which he once desired but failed
of it, Mr. Hales of Eaton College being preferred before him, therefore he was
angry and discontented that he must rest and sit down upon his living at
Newberry.

Doctor Burgess, was one of the same shape, he never had a fellowship, or any
like place of Continuance in any College, but left the University after he was
Master of Arts: yet he got two livings, St. Magnus in London, and Watford, near
St. Albans; and then endeavored to be made the Kings Chaplain, which once he
obtained, but was shortly put out, by means of the Archbishop: So that he being
offended, did only watch for a time, when he might fish in troubled waters;
when the late troubles began, he became the chief Leader of the rascal rabble
out of London, to cry out for Justice against the Earl of Strafford, and
against the Bishops, and at length he i^vaded the Deanty of Paul's, being
allowed a Stipend of 400. l. yearly. And since he has invaded the House of the
Bishop of Wells, and much of the Lands: But had he been made Dean of Paul's, or
Bishop of Bath and Wells by King Charles, he would never have opposed the
Bishops.

The like is known concerning Mr. Henry Burton, The original of his discontent
is well known: He lost his place at Court, which for a little time he enjoyed
under Prince Charles, and so losing his hopes of further preferment, he was
enraged with envy and revenge against the Bishops, and all Church Government,
and at length degraded and punished according to his demerits. Thus Ambition
and Covetousness, was the true motive of all the Presbyterian fury and rage
against the Bishops and Ecclesiastical laws and Courts.

But to return to our former purpose and discourse, why it is fit and
reasonable, that some principal men of the Clergy should be in power and some
places of Judicature, to preserve the inferior Clergy from oppression and
contempt, whereunto they are now ob^oxious. Whereas if the Clergy might now
enjoy those ancient privileges, which are mentioned in Scripture, as Genesis 47.
of King Pharaoh, who in the time of Famine and great extremity, spared the
Priests Lands, and allowed them their portion, so that they sold not their
Lands: Then men might better talk of applying their studies, and meddling with
no common or worldly business. Artaxerxes the Persian King (Ezra 7. 24.)
commanded that for all the Priests and Levites, and Ministers of the House of
God, it should not be lawful to impose Toll, Tribute, or Custom upon them:
Whereas now the Clergy being made subject to the most sort of payments,
charges, and impositions, in a greater proportion commonly then other men, it
is but requisite that some principal men of the Clergy should have voice and
suffrage in making the Laws, that are enacted for their Government and
Taxations.

Besides the course of Laws and Government is now much altered from what it was
in former times, when Holy Fathers spoke of wholly applying themselves to
prayers and sacred studies, and diligent preaching of the Gospel, as if they
were to do nothing else, not so much as to provide bread and necessaries for
their Families, for then they lived most part single in Colleges, and
Monasteries, and Societies under the Bishops, where all necessary provisions
were made by Stewards and Officers, appointed for the purpose; so that their
cares in all those respects, were lessened and abated much; that they might
apply their studies only, and forsake all worldly business, which now they
cannot foregoe, being secular and parochial Ministers, married men, and thereby
charged with Children and Families, and also made obnoxious to all Laws, Suits,
and Impositions, without any exemptions or privileges. So that it is but a
Monastical, and in part a Popish fancy, to talk so much of applying their
studies, and only preaching in the Gospel; for by many a writ and warrant from
several Courts of justice, and Constables, they shall be hindered and commanded
to attend secular and litigious proceedings, and answer to all Bills of
Complaint, Declarations and vexations, that shall hinder their preaching and
studies, more then a voluntary employment at fit seasons, in some public
office.

Further it is but a Popish opinion, that Regimen Ecclesiasticum est distinctum
a politico. De Romans Pontifice. l. 1. cap. 5.
Which Bellarmine maintains (taking it for granted on both sides) only to
advance the Papacy above Kings and Princes, and to exempt the Clergy from
secular authority. Calvin affirms as much, 4. Instit cap. 11. Sect. 1.
Ecclesia Dei sua quadam spirituali politia indiget, quae tamen a civili prorsus
distincta est, etc. -- But under Correction, I take it to be a great Error,
though now it is the Common Idol of every man's fancy: because that in our
Kingdom since the Conquest, but not formerly as has been already declared,
cap. 2. the Courts of justice are divided, the Temporal from the
Ecclesiastical, and so in most other Kingdoms: Which yet I do not think to be
the ancient manner, not to be the best course, though things being settled as
now they are, at this present, it is not safe to change much; for in a
Kingdom, the Courts of justice which have been long settled, cannot easily be
altered without danger and ill consequences. But yet without any alteration of
Laws or Courts, the Courts may be furnished with judges of all sorts, some
Ecclesiastical persons, as well as any others, for it is against humane nature,
and Society to debat the Clergy, and shut them out of all public places of
Trust and judicature: The Issue and event whereof can be no less then the
disgrace and reproach of the Clergy, and to make them as the filth of the
World, and offscouring of all things.

Whereas it is well known, that many Doctors of Divinity, are as fit to be
justices of peace as any Knights, or Esquires; The Doctors being learned in
many kinds, but very few of the Gentlemen eminent for Learning: or if they be,
they are such as will be glad to have the Society and Company of Learned
Doctors, who are oftentimes skilful in Civil and Common Law, and other parts of
good Learning, which do enable them for public employments.

There is a Discourse about Puritans, lately published by a Lawyer, one Mr.
Parker, wherein the excepts against Calvin, and I think not amiss, in that he
does according to the Popish grounds maintain, that Spiritual jurisdiction
differs from Temporal, because it proposes not the same ends, but several,
which by several means may be better compassed.

But says Parker, The Spiritual Magistrate (as I conceive) can purpose no
other end, then which the secular ought to aim at; for either the Prince ought
to have no care at all of the honor of God or of the good of men, and that
which is the prime end of both, true Religion; or else his ends must be the
same which the Prelate aims at, viz. to vindicate Religion by removing or
correcting scandalous Offenders: Secondly to preserve the innocent from
contagion by the separation of open Offenders: Thirdly, To prevent further
obduration, or to procure the amendment of such as have transgressed, by
wholesome Chastisement. Thus he, and I think not much amiss; the scope and end
of both is the same, and as he says in his Discourse;

Clergy men being as well Citizens of the Commonwealth, as Sons of the Church,
and their cases importing as well perturbance of the State, as Annoyance to the
Church, there can be but one head which ought to have command over both, and in
both. It is manifest also that many cases are partly Temporal and partly
Spiritual, that scarce any is so Temporal, but that it relates in some order to
Spiritual things: Or any so Spiritual, but that it has some relation to
Temporal things, so that the true Subject of Ecclesiastical and civil Justice
cannot rightly be divided.

I demand then why should the Courts be divided? which was done first among us
by William the Conqueror: And why should there not be judges partly Spiritual,
as well as Temporal in all Courts? As it was anciently among our Ancestors the
Saxons; or at least why should not the Supreme Court of justice, which is to
give Law to all other inferior Courts, be well tempered and mingled with all
sorts of men, Ecclesiastical and Civil, the most learned, wise and choicest
that can be found in the whole Kingdom: Why not Priests and Levites admitted
into the number, as well as in the Sanedrim of the Jews, which was equal to our
Parliament, and was first instituted by God himself? And I take it there can be
no just exception, but that our Christian Kingdoms may most safely follow the
general Rules of Policy and Government, which God ordained among his own chosen
people, without any imputation of judaism.

Now among them some chief Fathers of the Priests and Levites, were not only
judges and elders in their own Cities, which were allowed them, to the Number
of forty eight in the whole, but sat with the Elders of other Cities, and were
Judges and Officers over Israel. Yea many things by Gods law, were wholly and
chiefly reserved to the Knowledge and Sentence o^ the Priests, As Leprosy,
Jealousy, Inquisition for Murder, Falsewitnesse, and such like, (which now
among us, for most part belong to the Common Law) in which cases the People and
Elders were to consult the Priests and take direction from them.

And so Bertram in his Treatise De Politia Iudaica cap. 9. does make it
manifest. -- Prorsus est extra Controversiam judices manicipales cujusque
Civi^atis ut vocantur, seniores fuisse Chiliarchos, Centuriones,
quinquag^narios, and decuriones tot quot esse po^erant in quaque Civitate, ita
ut ex illis Levitae quidam in praefectos assumerentur, si modo in ea aliquot
erant Levitae; sin minus, ex proxima urbe Levitis assignata advocab^ ntur.

And again in his Cap. 10. David in Civili politia, dicitur ex Levitis
destinasse judices and prafectis sexies mill, Ex Leviti^ judices and praefecti
assumpti sunt, hac ratione, ut primum essent ex Levitis quidam, qui Adsessores
essent Iudicum, Ordinariorum, and Municipalium, qui seniores dicebantur: Qui
and aliquando de plano, (ut vulgo loquuntur) judicar^nt, de rebus levi^ribus,
quales erant pecuniariae; vel soli, vel assumpto uno aliquo ex loci vel Vrbis
se^ioribus: Deinde ut essent etiam quidam alii qui judicatas res exequerentur.
Vel certe quod verisimilius est, qui assessores erant judicum ordinariorum, qui
ut ipsi de rebus pecuiariis cognoscerent, and judicarent. ipsamque rem
judicatam exequerentur, -- etc. --

Ex eadem familia adhibiti sunt ad regendam and ad Civilem politiam
gubernandam: Ita tamen ut nulla esset, utriusque politiae confusio and
permixtio, Et cap 11. Ad utrumque judicium (tam civil, quam Ecclesiasticum
adhibiti sunt Levitae in praefectos, eodem videlicet modo, quo eos ad id
muneris desig naverat David, -- etc.

Thus and much more to this purpose, Bertram does often throughout his Book,
deliver his judgment, that the priests and Levites were Judges in the civil
Courts of Justice, and not only in the Ecclesiastical.

To this Sigonius agrees, lib. 6. Repub. Hebrae^rum cap. 7. speaking of the
Sanedrim.

Inivere hoc Concisium Rex cum principibus populi, ac septu^aginta senioribus
populi, and Pontifex cum principibus sacerdotum and scribis, id est, legis
doctoribus, ut per spicere liqueat ex Evangeliis, ubi agitur de judicio
Christi: Voco autem principes populi, duodecim princ^pes tribuum, qui Reg^
assidebant, Quare Joseph. ab Arimath. Senator sive decurio nobilis idem
Concilii particeps fuit; siquidem scriptum ^st, ipsum cum caeteris assensum
damnationi Christi non praebuisse. Principes autem sacerdotum dico illos, qui
vicenis quaternis sacer dotum classibus seu vicibus, singuli singulis
praeerant. Scribas vero ipsos legis Doctores, quos Prophetas Josephus vocavit.
It is manifest hereby, and by the reasons alleged already in cap. 2. that is a
gross error of Doctor Burgess, who affirms that in Numb. 11. There is no
foot-step appears that the Priests were any of the 70. Elders appointed by
Moses. page 19.


Now seeing David appointed no less then six thousand Levites for the outward
businesses, it could not be, but that many of them were employed in their
secular and civil affairs; whereas now there is not one hundred of the Clergy
employed throughout our whole Kingdom, there being not above two or three
Justices of peace in a whole Shire. But their presence and assistance at
public meetings of Justices, as at the Assizes and Quarter Sessions, and other
occasions, is very necessary to the rest of the inferior Clergy, who will
otherwise be crushed and trampled on, in many businesses, debates and
contentions that do happen continually, from the perverse and obstinate party
of the Laity: For, Laici semper sunt infesti Clericis, is a true saying in the
Common Law.

The Priests, the Sons of Levi (says God) shall come near, or forth (out of
the Cities where they were placed in every Tribe) and by their word shall all
stri^e and plague be tried. Remembering always that doubtful and weighty
matters were reserved to the great Council of Priests and Judges that sat in
the place, which the Lord did choose for the Ark to rest in, as, Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 9.
-- etc. If there come a matter too hard for thee in judgment between blood and
blood, cause and cause, plague and plague of matters in question, within thy
gates, thou shall arise and go up to the place, which the Lord thy God shall
choose, and shall repair unto the Priests and Levites. --

This Council or Senate of the Elders residing at Ierusa^em, 1 Chr. 19.
in Iehosophats time, (who no doubt did not infringe, but rather observe the
Tenor of the Law) consisted of Levites and of Priests, and of the heads of the
Families of Israel. And had Amazias the high priest chief over them in all
matters of the Lord, as Zebediah, a Ruler of the House of Judah, chief for all
the Kings affairs, and was a Continuance of the 70. Elders, which God adjoined
unto Moses, and bare the burden of the people with him: And this Court cannot
be better resembled among us, then to our Parliament; for there was but one
Council of that nature in the whole Land of Jury, and that consisting of some
of the chiefest of every Tribe; and they not only debated and concluded the
highest affairs of that Realm, as War, peace, appeals from all inferior
Courts, punishments of whole Cities and Tribes, and such like, but also ruled
and rectified all cases omitted, or doubted in Moses Law; and were obeyed
throughout the Land, upon pain of loosing goods or life, or being for ever
excluded from the people of God, as they pronounced or prescribed. Thus the
reverend and Learned Bishop Bilson in his perpetual Government. cap. 4.

Besides in every City there were private and peculiar Rulers, (21. in number
as Josephus says) and also to every Magistracy in those Cities, there was
allotted two of the Tribe of Levi for assistance, as Josephus witnesses* and
if those could not determine the bus^nesse, then they did appeal to the great
Council. And so Grotius shows most accurately, upon Mat. 5. 21. Now God
appointed these offices and dignities and power of Judicature to the Priests
and Levites, besides their attendance upon Gods service; and the Course of
every Priest and Levite, was but one Week in half a year, to attend at the
Temple, as Josephus and Scaliger, and Selianus does show, with other accurate
Chronologers; so that beside their attendance upon Gods Service, they had time
and leisure enough to be helpful in the Government of the Kingdom. Yea
sometimes the principal Judges were chosen out of the Tribe of Levi, as at the
beginning of their Commonwealth, Moses himself of that Tribe the greatest
prophet and prince that ever was among them. So after in succeeding times, Ely
the high Priest, was made Judge in his time: So also Samuel a Levite was chief
Judge in Israel, as 1, Sam. 7. 15. who judged Israel all the days of his life:
And he went from year to year in circuit to Bethell, and Gilgal, and Mispeh,
and judged Israel in all those places, much alike as our judges do go their
Circuits every year throughout the Land. p. 17. And his return was to Ramah,
for there was his House and there he judged Israel, and there he built an Altar
to the Lord. And his three Sons after him, Samuel made them (being Levites)
Judges over Israel, though they did not walk in their Fathers ways, but turned
aside after lucre, and took bribes and perverted judgment.

After the Captivity of Babylon, for some 500, years till the coming of Christ,
the Priesthood had the greatest stroke in the Government: As Ezra the Priest
and brother to Jesus the high priest that returned from the Captivity, whose
memory is honorable among the righteous, as learned Montague shows against
Seldom. page 377. He had Commission from the Persian Emperor Artaxerxes, to
govern and order the Controversy, Ezra. 7. 12, 25. and gave him authority to
set Magistrates and judges, which might judge the people, and power to execute
the laws of God and the King. page 26. and to inflict punishments unto death,
or banishment, or to confiscation of goods or imprisonment. So that Ezra had
great authority and full power given him, and his worthy Acts are there
recorded.

So afterward under the Maehabees, who were priests, the Commonwealth was
governed, and it pleased God to make that Family victorious as any other almost
that ever governed that Commonwealth, as Sir Walter Raleigh shows. lib. 2.
cap. 15.

If thus it were anciently among the chosen people of God, why then should any
in these days be so much displeased, that a Bishop or a Clergy man, should
have any part in the Government of the Commonwealth, or assistance of
Government, for the better Ordering and Directing of judgment, or to be
Counselor to a Prince; as Zechariah the Levite was a wise Counselor, 1 Chronicles.
26. 14. Benajah a Priest, son of Iehojadah, was one of David's twelve
Captains: 1 Chronicles. 27. 5.
being the third Captain of the host for a month, and in his Course consisting
of 2400, was his son Amizabad: 1 Chronicles. 11. 22.
Benajah also was of David's principal Worthies, having the name among the
three Mighties. He was also Captain of the guard to David, and after the death
of Ioab, he was made Lord General of the Host, by King Solomon, in Ioabs room.
1 Kings 22. 35.

So, and much rather may a Clergy men now be an Officer, in great place, or a
Justice of Peace in the Country, who handles Matters of Equity and good
Conscience, for preserving of public peace, order and quietness among
neighbors, wherein happen many businesses that depend much upon the Conscience
of a Justice, and the Equitable rules of Scripture, whereof Clergy men are the
most competent interpreters: As also many Causes happen touching the Estates
and persons of the Clergy, who have little reason to be subject only to
secular Judges, without some of their own tribe on the bench to see fair
carriage and indifferent dealing.

But for matters of Religion, concerning God and his Worship, and difficult
points of Divinity, the Clergy then were, and so ought now to be the principal
men to be employed; as may clearly appear by the doings of K. David, about
removing of the Ark to the place that he had provided for it: upon which text,
King James has written a very pious and excellent Meditation, Page 81. upon
the 1 Chronicles. 15. some of those words are fit to be here recited.

When the Ark of God, (whereunto they sought not in the days of Saul) had
continued long at Kiriah-jearim, 2 Samuel 6.
David out of his Zeal and Piety was moved to prepare a Tent for it, in the
City of David; and when he began to remove it, he called a great assembly of
principal Men, but did not make that use of the Priests and Levites as he ought
to have done, and therefore the Action prospered not; but there happened a
terrible judgment upon Uzzah, which hindered the progress of the good work,
and David was afraid of God that day, saying: How shall I bring the Ark of God
home to me? so the Ark rested in the House of Obed-Edom. But afterward upon
better advice, David perceived his Error, and confesses it. Cap. 15. 12, 13.
Speaking to the Chief of the Priests and Levites: Sanctify your selves, both
ye, and your brethren, that you may bring up the Ark of the Lord God. For
because you did it not at the first, the Lord God made a breach upon us, for we
sought him not after the due order.

This was a great and a godly work that was then intended, and therefore King
David called a great Assembly about it. 1. Of the Elders of Israel. 2. Of the
Captains of thousands, and hundreds, whose Names and Praises are recorded. 1 Chronicles. 11. 26.
3. The Priests and Levites, Who did it not at the first. But now upon better
advice, King David assembled at first the Children of Aaron and the Levites. v.
4. So that men of all Estates, were now present in this godly work: This is to
be marked well of Princes, and of all those of any high Calling or Degree that
have to do in Gods Cause: David does nothing in matters pertaining to God
without the presence and especial Concurrence of Gods Ministers, appointed to
be spiritual rulers in Gods Church: And at the first meant to convay the same
Ark to Jerusalem, finding their absence and want of their Counsel hurtful;
therefore he says to them, Ye are the Chief Fathers of the Levites, because ye
did it not at the first. Thus says King James of blessed memory: but now there
is a generation of men, who do not think the Clergy necessary Men to be
consulted: that will interpret Scriptures, remove the Ark of God (as it were)
and do things without the presence, vote, and suffrage of the Chief Fathers of
the Levites: which how it agrees with this pious Example of King David, and
King James's Meditations upon it, I leave to be Considered.

CHAP. VII.
I^ the first frame of our English Commonwealth, the Bishops in every Diocese,
were the principal Judges. The Charter of William the Conqueror, for the
dividing the Courts: The Statute of Circumspecte agatis 13. Ed. 1. and Articuli
Cleri. 9 Ed. 2. appointing what Cause shall belong to the Ecclesiastical Courts.
THe first frame of our English Commonwealth was so settled and ordered by the
Saxon Kings, when once they became Christians, That the Bishop of the Diocese,
together with the Aldermen of the County (and so their Deputies in-inferior
Courts under them) should be equal Judges, together upon the same Bench, in the
same Courts, and there determine all Causes: in the forenoon Churchmatters, and
in the afternoon secular business: as Seldom shows in his notes upon Eadner.
p. 166. and Bishop Jewel in part observes in his Defense of the Apology, Part
6. p. 522. This Course continued till William the Conqueror, and perhaps it
had been very happy for our Kingdom, if the frame of our Laws and Courts had
so still continued joined together: for many reasons that I will not now
further insist upon.

Gulielmus primus, sacrum a Civili discriminavit forum, etenim florente Saxonum
imperio, mutuas injure dicundo veluti tradebant operas, atque eodem utebantur
his quotannis for^ Dioeceseos Episcopus simul and provinciae Praeses, seu
vice-Comes: quem and Sheriff nunc dicimus, and interdum Ealderman nominabant,
etc.

The Conqueror first separated the Temporal Courts from the Ecclesiastical:
yet not diminishing the authority of the Churches Jurisdiction, which by his
oath he confirmed and promised to preserve: affirming -- Quod per Ecclesiam Rex
and regnum, Proem ^ul. 1.
solidum habent subsistendi fundamentum. So that he subverted rather
Ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction; but as formerly in the County, or in the
Hundred, so now in the Bishops Court all Ecclesiastical Causes were heard and
determined. For the old manner, the Laws of King Edgar do show it. Cap. 5.
Intersit unusquisque Hundredi Gemoto, Glossar. p. 315. Lambar. p. 80.
ut superius est praescriptum, and habeantur burgemottitres, quotannis duo vero
scire-gemotti: de istis adsunto loci Episcopus and Aldermannus, doceatque alter
jus divinum, alter saeculare: In Hundredo aderant Thani (quos Barons vocant
posteri) ut patet e. L. Ethelredi. Cap. 1. ipsique judices Ecclesiastici, cum
partis illius Clero: in Hundredo enim non minus quam in Comitatu, una haec
agebantur, quae ad forum pertinent Ecclesiasticum and quae ad saeculare: donec
Gulielmus Conquestor, divisis jurisdictionibus hanc ab illa separavit.

For the Division of the Courts, and the Erection of the Ecclesiastical to sit
by themseves under the Bishop and Archdeacon, it appears by the Charter of
King William to the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln. And though it be sent in the
direction by name to them only, yet it seems, it grew after to be a general
law, no otherwise then the Statute of Circumspecte agatis, that has a special
reference only to the Bishop of Norwich: as Lord Coke says, 2 Instit. 487.
The Bishop of Norwich is there put but for example, but it extends to all the
Bishops within the Realm.] And so Seldom telateth in his History of Tithes.
Cap. 14. Sect. 1. and in his Ianus. Lib. 2. Sect. 14. And in his notes upon
Eadner. p. 167. The words of it, as they are recorded are,

Willielmus gratia Dei Rex Anglorum, Comitibus, vice comitibus, and omnibus
Francigenis and Anglis, qui in Episcopatu Remigii Episcopi terras habent,
salutem. Sciatis vos omnes, and coeteri mei fideles qui in Anglia manent, quod
Episcopales leges quae non been, nec secundum sanctorum Canonum praecepta,
usque ad mea tempora in regno Anglorum fuerunt, Communi Consilio, and Cousilio
Episcoporum and Abbatum, and omnium principum regni mei, emendandas judicavi.
Propterea mando, and regia authoritate Praecipio, ut nullus Episcopus vel
Archidiaconus de Legibus Episeopalibus, amplius in Hundret. placita teneant,
nec causam quae ad regimen animarum pertinet, ad judicium secularium hominum
adducant; sed quicunque secundum Episcopales leges, de quacunque causa, vel
culpa, interpellatus fuerit, ad locum quem ad hoc Episcopus elegerit and
nominaverit veniat, ibique de causa sua respondeat, and non secundum Hundret,
sed seeundum Canones* and Episcopales leges rectum Deo and Episcopo suo faciat.
Which I the rather transcribe (says Seldom) because also it seems to give the
Original of the Bishops consistory, as it sits with us divided from the Hundred
or County Court, wherewith in the Saxon times, it was joined.

And in the same Law it is added further,

Hoc etiam defendo, ut nullus laicus homo de legibus, quae ad Episcopum
pertinent, se intromittat. Thus Seldom: Only the words of the Charter are more
fully recited out of the Records by another Learned Author. -- Si vero aliquis
per superbiam elatus, ad justitiam Episcopalem venire noluerit, vocetur semel,
and secundo and tertio. Quod si nec ad emendationem venerit, excommunicetur. Et
si opus fuerit, ad hoc vindicandum, fortitudo and justitia Regis vel
vicecomitis adhibeatur. Ille autem qui vocatus ad justitiam Episcopi veniro
noluerit, pro unaquaque vocatione legem Episcopalem emendabit. Hoc etiam
defendo, and mea authoritate interdico, ne ullus Viceeomes aut praepositus, aut
minister Regis, nec aliquis laicus homo de legibus quae ad Episcopum pertinent,
se intromittat: nec aliquis laicus homo alium hominem sine justitia Episcopi ad
judicium adducat. Iudicium vero in nullum locum portetur nisi in Episcopali
sede, aut in illo loco, quem ad hoc Episcopus constituerit.

And the punishment for disobedience to the Ecclesiastical Judges, was much
alike as formerly was enacted under the Saxon Kings, as by King Alured; Si quis
Dei rectitudines aliquas deforciot, reddat Lathlite cum Dacis, Witam cum
Anglis: Council. p. 568. c. 17.
And the same Law is afterward confirmed and renewed by King Canutus, and by
other Kings: Whereby it appears how before the Conquest, and likewise after,
for a long time, the authority and jurisdiction of the Church was maintained
and upheld by the settled Laws of the Kingdom. How they had power in their
Courts to excommunicate, and further by the help of the King and the Sheriff,
to proceed against stubborn offenders, and such as opposed or contemned their
authority; so that here is the present practice and Law confirmed, by the
continual practice of many hundred years.

The Law being thus made by the Conqueror, to separate the Ecclesiastical
Court from the Temporal, there followed after in succeeding times Statutes to
direct and appoint what causes shall belong to the Bishops Jurisdiction: As the
Statute called Circumspecte agatis made 13. Edw. 1. and Articuli Cleri 9. Edw.
2. which besides others, Coke does expound in the 2. Instit. at large page 489.
599. So that the Ecclesiastical Laws and Courts being thus settled by ancient
Statutes and Magna Charta, and besides long use and Custom, the Laws are
Fundamental and necessary as well as any part of the Common Law, and cannot be
wholly taken away without great injustice, confusion, and great disorder in the
Kingdom and Church, as it happened most pitifully in these troublesome times:
But Parliaments are obliged to maintain the Fundamental Laws of the Land, as
they have often professed solemnly in many of their Declarations, Protestations
and Remonstrances: But in conclusion they have overthrown all Ecclesiastical
Courts and Laws, though never so ancient and Fundamental, and now they would
pretend to set up new laws and orders, which they call Presbyterian Government
by Lay Elders in every Parish, a fond and foolish project (contrary to the Laws
of God and Man) such as they have heard to be at Geneva, and some other places
beyond Sea, where there are no Lords, Knights, Esquires, or Gentlemen, as with
us in England: But their new States are popular, without degrees of Honor and
distinction of Gentry: They do as their Neighbors at Strasborough, and the
Switzers, of whom Bodin says, lib. 6. c. 4. Argentinenses, Caesa and prostrata
nobilitate, cum imperium populare invasissent, legem communibus suffragiis
tulerant, ne quis summos in Civitate Magistratus adipisceretur, nisi a
cerdonibus aut coriariis aut id genus sordidis opificibus stirpem traxisset;
idenim veteribus Gr^cis usit atum erat, ut in iis civitatibus quae popularia
imperia stabilire ac tueri vellent, cives omnes, quantum quidem fieri posset,
opibus, honoribus, imperiis, ac vitae condition exaequarent: ac si quis
prudentia, justitia, fortitudine, aut ulla virtute caeteris praeluceret ac
emineret, hunc ostracismo exterminabant; aut ne virtutitam aperte bellum
indicere viderentur, accusationibus and calumniis opprimebant, atque id unum
efficere conabantur, ut singuli Cives, non magis sui similes essent, quam omnes
omnium.

They either banished or put to death all their Nobility, and so made
themselves a popular state, and further made a law, that no man should bear any
public office among them, but such as would derive their Descent and Pedigree
from some base Trade, a Cobbler, or Carrior, or such like.

Among such people, Presbyterian Government may be better allowed then in a
Kingdom flourishing with all degrees of Honor, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Barons, Knights, etc. --. But where only Tradesmen are, chapmen, Ped^ars, and
Artificers, as they are at Geneva, there any government in the Church may
better be tolerated then in a Monarchy: The Glossary shows to that purpose
that Tradesmen are base fellows in Herauldry, page 110.
and among base fellows any base government may serve the turn. Burgenses and
Mercatores sunt sordidum hominum genus; as Tully said Burgenses dum cauponandis
mercibus and rei Mechanicae navarent, generosae turbae (militiam omnino
admiranti) despectui erant, adeo ut cum illis nec connubia jungerent, nec
Martis aleam experirentur: and so also the Civil law says, patritii cum
Plebeis conjugia ne contrahunto. And in our law it is reputed a disparagement
for a Ward in Chivalry (which in old time was as much as to say a Gentleman) to
be married to the Daughter of one that dwelt in a Borough; as Lambard shows
in his perambulation of Kent, page 504. So the old Statute of Merton Anno Dom.
1235. cap. 7. De Dominis qui maritaverint illos quos habent in custodia sua,
Villanis and aliis, sicut Burgensibus, ubi disparagentur, etc.

Lord Coke shows what causes belong to the Court Christian, viz. Probate of
Wills and Testaments, Legacies, Reparation of Churches, and Churchyards,
Tyths, Oblations, Mortuaries, and such like duties; Matrimonial causes, degrees
of Affinity, or Consanguinity Divorces, and what else belongs thereunto. And
diverse other particulars, as appears in diverse statutes, and the Books of the
Civil Lawyers, as punishment of Adultery, Fornication, and Incontinency,
Incest, with many other the like, as Heresies, Schisms, Errors, Abuses,
Offenses, Contempts, and enormities, as Lord Coke says, 4. Instit. page 325.
and so also the excellently learned Lawyer Dr. Cousin, Dean of the Arches, in
his Apology for Ecclesiastical Courts and their proceedings against Simony,
Usury, Defamation, Sacrilege, Disapidations, -- etc. --

But now the Presbyterians neglect, and cast off most of these particulars,
that there is no punishment for those gross offenses and sins, which are not
fit to be mentioned among Christians says the Apostle. There is of late an
infinite number of bastards gotten, and the Justices of peace only take care
for keeping the Bastard: But there is no punishment or correction for the
scandal to Religion; and the vulgar people, go together like Dogs and Bitches,
without license or publication of banes in any parish. The Holy Communion is
cast aside and neglected in most parishes most shamefully: The Common People in
most parishes will rather be without the Sacrament, then give one penny to buy
Bread and Wine for it, that they are become Atheists in most places; and many
Sectaries profess publicly that they will not have Churches or Stone-houses,
nor Ministers or Magistrates: And yet the Parliament pretended to reform all
according to the word of God in all things; to advance the Throne of Christ,
and the Tribunal of Christ, with all his holy ordinances in full force and
power, as the Language is of the Presbyterian Ministers.

CHAP. VIII.
Some Observations out of the Civil Law in the Empire, concerning the
separation of Courts, and some also out of the ancient Statutes, as Seldom has
related them: Lord Cooks Defense of the Bishops being in Parliament, and of the
Convocation, and High Commission, and other Ecclesiastical Courts.
AS the Courts Ecclesiastical and Temporal were separated in our Kingdom: so
anciently there was some such division in the Empire, yet the Emperor gave
great power and authority to the Ecclesiastical Judges, according to that which
Justinian says of spiritual Causes in the Novell. 123. si pro Criminal. si
Ecclesiasticum negotium sit, ^ullam Communionem habento Civiles Magistratus cum
ea disceptatione, sed religiosissimi Episcopi finem imponunto. If it be an
Ecclesiastical Suit, let the Civil Magistrates have nothing to do there with
that plea, but let the Bishops end it. Whereby it appears, that prohibitions
from the Temporal Courts were not then allowable, which certainly came not into
use, till after the Council of Clarendon under Hen. 2. Wherein the Clergy were
enforced to appear in the Temporal Courts, one Canon thereof being

Clerici accusati de quacunque re, summoniti a Iusticiario Regis; veniant in
Curiam responsuri ibidem de hoc, unde videbitur Curiae Regis quid ibi sit
respondendum; and in Curia Eeclesiastica unde videbitur, quod ibi sit
respondendum. It a quod Regis Iusticiarius, mittet in Curiam sanctae Ecclesia
ad videndum quomodo res ibi tractabitur, and si Clericus vel confessus vel
convictus fuerit, non debet eum de caetero Ecclesia tueri. But touching this
and the rest of the Constitutions in that Council Math. Paris. An, 1164.
does sharply inveigh against them,

Hanc Recognitionem five Recordationem de Consuetudinibus and libertatibus
iniquis, and dignitatibus Deo detestabilibus, Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and
clerus, cum Comitibus, Baronibus, and proceribus juraverunt. And as he adds,

His itaque gestis, potestas laica in res and personas Ecclesiasticas, omnia
pro libitu, Ecclesiastico jure contempto, tacentibus aut vix murmur antibus
Episcopis, potius quam resistentibus, usurpabat. And this appears also by
that which Seldom relates in his notes upon Eadner. page 268. that long after,
in Edward the seconds time, the Clergy had so many oppositions and hindrances
in their proceedings from the Temporal Courts, that they exhibited a petition
in Parliament, wherein they recite the grant and constitution of Will. 2.
allowing them their own Courts by themselves, and specify their complaints
particularly, which he calls, Gravamina Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and says, they
are those mentioned in the proem of Arti^uli Cleri. And in this age we have
great cause to complain of Prohibitions, but thereof I will say no more now; as
for the Temporal Courts, the Conqueror appointed them to follow his Court
royal, which Custom continued for many years, till under King John at the
instant request of the nobility it was granted --

Ut Communia placita non sequerentur Curiam (i. e. Regis) sed in loco certo
tenerentur. That the Court of Justice for Common Pleas, should not follow the
Kings Court Royal, but be held in a place certain, as now commonly they are, in
Westminster Hall: Whereas before, the Kings appointed one Grand Lord Chief
Justice of all England, who for his authority and power, was a greater officer,
both of State and Justice, then any in these last ages; and ever since that the
greatness of that office was abated by King Edw. 1. most of those great
Justices were Bishops, as Sir Henry Spelman shows in his Caralogue of them.
Glossar. page 401. Dignitate omnes Reges, proceres; potestate omnes superabat
Magistratus; De potestate valde (inter alia) claret, quod quatuor summorum
judicum hodiernorum muneribus solus aliquando fungeretur, scilicet, Capitalis
Iustitiarii Banci Regis, id est, pl^citorum Coronae, seu criminalium: Capitalis
Iusticiarii Banci Communis, id est, placitorum Civilium, Capitalis Baronis
Scacarii* hoc est, Curiae ad s^crum patrimonium, and fiscum pertinentis. -- etc.

Most of these great Justices were Bishops, as appears by the Catalogue of
them, they being the principal men for Knowledge and Learning in those days,
and had, no doubt, power of voting in all Parliaments, Councils, and assemblies
of State.

And so in these later times, Lord Coke shows their abilities, and rights. 4.
Instit. page 321. The King is well apprised of all his Judges, which he has
within his realm, as well spiritual as temporal, as Archbishops, Bishops, and
their officers, Deanes and other Ministers, who have spiritual jurisdiction.

It is declared by the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons
in full Parliament. That the spiritualty (now being called the English Church)
always has been reputed, and also found of that sort, that both for knowledge,
If so then, much more at this day, says Coke.
integrity, and sufficiency of number, it has been always thought* and is
also at this hour sufficient and meet of it self, without the intermedling of
any exterior person, or persons, to declare and determine of such doubts, and
to administer all such offices and duties, as to their rooms spiritual does
appertain.

The Adversaries have made diverse objections against our Archbishops and
Bishops -- Ever since says Coke. -- But these pretenses being (in truth) but
mere Cavils, tending to the scandal of the Clergy (being one of the greatest
States of the realm, as it is said in the Statute of 8. Eliz. cap. 1.) are
fully answered by the said Statute, and Provision made by authority of that
Parliament for the establishing of the Archbishops and Bishops both in
praesenti, and in futuro, in their Bishoprics.

By the Statute also of 39 Eliz. cap. 8. the Archbishops and Bishops, are
adjudged lawful, as by the said Act appears. And by these two Statutes, these
and all other objections against our Bishops, one has answered, which we have
thought good to remember, seeing we are to treat of their jurisdiction, Ut
obstruatur os iniquae loquentium, says Lord Coke: Yet the fury and rage of
these times have stirred up more anger, which in the issue will turn to the
Confusion and Dishonor of them that began these wars and broils against the
Church, and Bishops, and fundamental Laws and Statutes, which have so fully
asserted their rights and authority.

Thus the Lord Coke premiseth, being to treat of the Ecclesiastical Courts and
all the jurisdiction belonging to the Clergy, and established by the
fundamental Laws of the Land against both Papists and Puritans: and first he
begins with the Court of Convocation, and of the high Commission in Causes
Ecclesiastical, which is absolutely necessary for the suppression of all manner
of Errots, Heresies, Schisms, abuses, offenses, Contempts, and enormities.

But upon suppression of this Court, by the late long Parliament, there has
broken forth such an infinite number of heresies, schisms, sectaries, and a
rascal rabble of factions, as is prodigious to relate, and intolerable to be
suffered: For as it is in the Common Law, if there were not Assizes and
Sessions, to punish Malefactors, Thieves, Cu^purses, Offenders, and Rogues of
all sorts, the Land would be so Oppressed with the Multitudes of them no man
could enjoy his house, or goods, freehold, or life: therefore in London they
have every month a public sessions to punish, Condemn, and Execute all sorts
of Malefactors.

And Corporations in principal Cities have the like authority by Commission,
and Patent from the King.

But for the high Commission to punish Offenders against Religion, and the
Church, Lord Coke says, page 331. That the Kings Majesty has, and Queen
Elizabeth had before him, as great and ample Supremacy and jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical, as ever King of England had before them, and that had justly
and rightly pertained to them, by diverse other Acts; and by the ancient Laws of
England, if the said clause of annexation in the said Statute of 1. Eliz. had
never been inserted. That it was a g^osse Error, and a notorious offense of I.
Pym, to affirm as he did in his Speech in Parliament; 4. Caroli. That the high
Commission was derived from the Parliament. An impudent, ignorant, and
seditious speech; which if it had been spoken in the time of Henry the eighth,
when he recovered his Supremacy from the Pope, the King would quickly have
hanged, or burnt him, as he did many in his Reign, upon that point of his
Supremacy: For though Parliaments may submit and acknowledge the Kings
Supremacy, yet they are not the Donors or Authors of it, it is originally
vested in the Crown, and is a principal Flower thereof; that cannot be denied
ot taken away from the King by any of their Votings or Ordinances. And the King
may again restore the Court of High Commission, without the help of a
Parliament, and appoint such Judges and Commissioners as he shall think fit,
without direction or assistance from the House of Commons, as the King does
appoint Judges in all other Courts without their consent, and so may do still
in this Court: Which is absolutely necessary to be done, to suppress the
abominable and detestable increase of Sectaries, and Schismatics, that are now
risen up in this Inter-Regnum of the Kings Authority.

CHAP. IX.
The Example of the late wars in Bohemia, Germany, and France, might well have
forewarned us in England. The Godly Covenant of Bohemia, might well have given
us Caution to take heed of a Covenant without the Kings consent: The Church
Lands taken away formerly, are restored by the Emperor. Grotius his Censure of
the Presbyterians for raising Wars.
TO return again to our former matter of the separation of the Courts, it is to
be considered that the Courts being now divided in the Kingdom, many hundred
years since, the ancient manner of their union is forgotten and unknown, save
only to the Learned; and the scars of the Norman Conquest are so overgrown,
that few men are sensible, what relics of Slavery do still remain upon us, by
changing the order of the Courts, the Language of the Law, in great part, with
other things that I will not now mention. But being so settled by the
Conqueror, and continued by his Successors, the Temporal Courts in process of
time grew too powerful for the Ecclesiastical, and by their injunctions and
prohibitions, stopped many proceedings, especially after the Council of Clarendon
under Hen. 2. Wherein the power of the Clergy was much abated, and all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction so crushed, that it continued lame ever after.
Though the Clergy by appeals to Rome,, and the Popes Legates that were often
sent hither, did oftentimes help themselves, and much molest their Adversaries.
At length under Hen. 8. upon his breach with the Pope, the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction was much abridged and restrained in many particulars, and reduced
to a narrow compass, becoming much more subject and obnoxious to the
Injunctions, Orders, and prohibitions of all the Temporal Courts, that now I
mervail that any should complain and envy at their power and greatness, there
being no cause of any value or moment but by one order or other, is drawn from
them to the Temporal Courts. And now at last, there want not some that would
have all Ecclesiastical authority and jurisdiction, either wholly suppressed
from the first Court to the last, or at least so abated, mingled, or changed,
that what form or force of Government shall be left remaining, seems very
uncertain.

But if Presbyteries and such like Consistories of the foreign and new fangled
devising were erected, there will follow great confusion and disorder to the
infinite disturbance of peace and quietness in the Kingdom, by alteration of
so many laws and customs, and of the Common Law it self, whereby the Kingdom
has been governed so many years, and settled in peace, and all men's estates and
Lands held in certain possession. For such great and universal changes, as will
follow upon the dissolution of the Hierarchy; and taking away the Votes of
Bishops in Parliament, and other eminent parts of Government, will produce such
ill events and troublesome distractions as will not be pacified and composed
within the compass of any man's life now living: And what further mischief may
follow is uncertain, but surely great troubles are like to ensue, as indeed it
has happened in a most lamentable manner.

But if our Nation could have taken warning by the example of the late wars
that happened these last 40. years, in France, Germany, and Bohemia, they might
have prevented much evil: for there the Wars began by men of the same spirit
and humors, as our Presbyterians are among us, and had the same ends and
purposes as ours had, which is to take away the Honors, Lands and Revenues of
Bishops, and all that belonged to them: The ill s^ccesse of their names might
well have forewarned us, if there had been men among us, wise, and knowing of
the Histories of the present age: When we saw the Flame and Smoke of ^he
Bohemian War ascend to heaven in our sight, in most hideous manner: And in the
end all the zealous party were utterly undone and confounded, that began the
war against the Emperor, to take away the lands of all the Clergy,, Bishops,
Deans, and Chapters, -- etc. -- Which they account to be the flesh of the Whore
of Babylon, and the bones of the old Whore, that is, of the Pope* So Brightman,
and Pareus, and other zealous men do interpret the Text, Revel. 17. 16. All the
Lands of the Church, and Revenues, among which they reckon Tithes, are the
flesh of the Pope, which they must e^^e and devour, not Physice, but Mystice,
says Pareus in his Commentary: For otherwise to eat the flesh of the Pope
naturally, being commonly an old man and perhaps full of Diseases, would be no
good meat or pleasing Diet: But mystically to eat him, that is, to take away
the lands, revenues, and riches of the Church will bring in profit and money,
that will provide better diet to feed upon then the body and flesh of an old
Pope.

This Sacrilegious appetite and outrageous covetousness, to get the lands of
the Church and Bishops proved very tragical to Bohemia, and most parts of
Germany: And to show a little their manner of proceeding, I will digress a
little, because it is so remarkable and fresh a Case within these last 40.
years. First therefore, the Bohemians in the year 1619. assembled a Parliament
without the Emperors Consent: They raised a great army, and put Garrisons also
in all the best Towns and Castles: They made a Godly Covenant consisting of an
100, articles just the same in Substance with our late Scottish Covenant; they
raised great Taxes, and excise to maintain their armies and garrisons. For two
years they prevailed much, and brought in a new King, the Palsgrave; but at the
end of two years, the Emperors great armies came upon them, and fought the
great Battle of Prague 8. November. 1620. The Duke of Bavaria came with twelve
thousand men, and other great Commanders joined, as the Count of Bucquoy, the
Count of Tilly, the Count of Papenheim, the Count of Maradas. Besides other
great Captains of note, having an Army of 40. thousand men, and fought the
great Battle near Prague, and prevailed powerfully. Next day the City of Prague
was surrendered, the Palsgrave fled away, and of 30. Committee Men in Prague,
which directed all business, twenty seven were apprehended; and the next year
after they had been tried and condemned by the Common Law of the land, for
rebellion and raising armies, and Committees, they were put to death upon one
stage the same day. Not long after, ten thousand protestant Ministers and
Churches were suppressed, and the Ministers banished out of the Kingdom and
the provinces annexed, of Moravia, Silesia, Lusatia, and other Countties of the
Emperor. The Covenanters who had seized on the Lands and Revenues of the
Bishops and Deans and other societies, by way of Sequestration first (which
word they used in one article of their Covenant) were forced to yield up those
lands, and to restore them to the former owners: and so also in many other
parts of Germany, Lands and Houses of the Clergy, which were taken away an
hundred years before, were restored to the right owners.

And for the Godly Covenant they renounced it, and would have been glad to have
enjoyed the favors, which the Emperors formerly permitted them out of his
Clemency: But since they raised such a bloody War, he would not suffer them
longer to enjoy his former favors. So that the Bohemians and most parts of
Germany, who enjoyed peace and great happiness in all respects, lost all by
striving to overthrow the Bishops, and the Ecclesiastical Laws, and to take
their Lands.

This miserable event might well have forewarned us in England, not to offend
in the same kind, as they did, to overthrow Bishops, and all the preferments of
the Church, to bring in Pre^byterian purity, and lay elders, and to impose a
godly Covenant, which was indeed a wicked combination and Conspiracy, far worse
then the Covenant of the low Countries, or that of France against Hen. 3. and
Hen. 4. which had almost confounded all France, and was at length the
destruction of those two great Kings who were both miserably murdered, and put
to death; as our King Charles was in most abominable manner, and in many
respects, more horribly then those two Kings: for they were stabbed on a
sudden by two villains and without the consent of the people, and severe
punishments were inflicted upon them speedily: But King Charles in a deliberate
manner, by men that pretended Justice and upright dealing, who called an high
Court of Justice never heard of before, no Judges of the Land consenting, or
approving, and so openly in the face of the sun and of all the world, with an
high hand, and professed malice, and outrageous fiery zeal, that the Emperor
Maximilian did justly say, that the Kings of England were Kings of Devils. And
though the Presbyterians would excuse themselves, that they never intended the
Kings destruction, yet that is a frivolous and foolish excuse: for as Sir
Walter Raleigh says truly: Our law does Construe all levying of war without
the Kings Commission, and all force raised, to be intended for the Death and
Destruction of the King, not attending ^he sequel: and so it is judged upon
good reason, for every unlawful and ill action, is supposed to be accompanied
with an ill intent.]

Lord Coke. 3. Instit. page 12. speaking fully of all kinds and degrees of
treason: says -- Preparation by some overt Act, to depose the King, or take
the King by force, and strong hand, and to imprison him, until he has yielded
to certain demands: this is a sufficient overt Act, to prove the compassing and
imagination of the death of the King: for this upon the matter is to make the
King a subject, and to despoile him of his kingly office, of royal government.
And so it was resolved by all the Judges of England, Hill. 1. Iac. Regis, in
the Case of the Lord Cobham, Lord Gray, and Watson, and Clark, seminary
Priests: and so it had been resolved by the Justices, Hill. 43. Eliz. in the
Case of the Earls of Essex, and Southampton, who intended to go to the Court
where the Queen was, and to have taken her into their power, and to have
removed diverse of her Council, and for that end did assemble a multitude of
people; this being raised to the end aforesaid, was a sufficient overt Act, for
compassing the death of the Queen, and so by woeful experience in former times
it has fallen out, in the Cases of King E. 2. H. 6. and E. 5. that were taken
and imprisoned by their subjects.

The Presbyterians did offend in this kind notoriously, and therefore committed
Treason manifesty: for they imprisoned the King in diverse places, and at length
in a remote place, in the Ifle of Wight, and what followed after is well known.
And all this done by them, that were for the most part Presbyterians, out of
their design to compel the King to yield to their projects, to overthrow the
Bishops, and to take their Lands and Revenues, which they account to be the
flesh and bones of the whore of Babylon, which they must devour, and make the
old whore, naked, bare, and desolate.

The excellently learned Grotius, who did perfectly understand, and discover
the practices of the Presbyterians, as appears in many places of his works,
has one remarkable passage in his treatise de Anti-Christo, page 65. which
shall here follow.

-- Iam vero fi illi qui dicuntur Dii intelligendi sunt Reges, liber
flagitiosissimus Boneherii, de abdicatione Hen. 3. Galliarum Regis, non
argumentis tantum, sed and verbis desumptus est, non ex Mariana, aut
Santarillo, se ex Iunio Bruto (quis is sit, sat scio, sed quia latere voluit,
lateat) and ex viris doctis quidem, at factionis ejusdem. Dictis facta
congruunt, and haec est illa mica salis, de qua infra aget Borborita, quae
facta est in mare salsum, faetens apud Reges, and omnia circumsata corrumpens.

Circumferamus oculos per omnem historiam (quod unquam saeculum tot vidit
subditorum in principes bella sub Religionis titulo? and horum Concitores
ubique reperiuntur ministri Evangelii, ut quidem se vocant: quod genus hominum
in quae pericula, etiam nuper optimos Civitatis Amstelodamensis Magistratus
conjecerit, nihil hic narrari opus est, sapientibus dictum sat est. Laudanda
omnino est Regis Christianissimi prudentia and virtus, qui suos paris
sententiae subditos tam solennia insanire vetuit.

Videat si cui libet, de Presbyteriornm in Reges audacia, librum Iacobi
Britanniarum Regis, cui nomen, Donum Regium: videbit eum, ut erat magni
judicii, ea praedixisse, quae nunc cum dolor and horrore conspicimus.

Peter Moulin, who was well versed in the Controversies of the times, and
suffered much in the late wars and Combustions of France, when the Protestants
did call and hold Parliaments there without the Kings consent, as at Loudun and
Rochel 1627. and did garrison the City very strongly against the King: Moulin
does take occasion to speak thereof in his Anatome Missae. page 246. Where he
reckons up the wars of Bohemia, and what was done against Hierom of Prague,
and John Husse, and the fortunate battles fought by Zisca; in the end he
concludes, and infers this: Haec non ideo a nobis allata sunt, quod
probemus actiones Ziscae aut tumultus populorum, qui ut persecutiones and
martyrium effugiant, arma sumunt adversus dominos suos; etenim veritas
Evangelica non his stabilitur rationibus and modis, Christus ad crucem p^st se
ferendam nos voeat: Sanguis martyrum plus habet efficaciae and virtutis ad
ampliandam Ecclesiam, quam bellorum ^ertam^^a.

Thus it appears that (...) does not justify the taking up of arms against
Princes to reform Religion: He was sensible of the Errors and losses of the
Presbyterians in France, in the wars they undertook against their King Lewis.
13. Who in the end suppressed them, took their strong towns, and reduced them
to obedience, though he granted them the exercise of their Religion: and how
much they lost by the wars, Moulin, then liying in France, and seeing both the
beginning and end of the war, could not be ignorant.

But the principal reason why the Presbyterians do maintain these desperate
opinions of taking up arms, is, that they may pull down the Bishops, and seize
upon their revenues and lands, as they have done notoriously of late, both in
Bohemia, Germany and France (and now with u^;) but they were enforced to
regorge, and restore them, as appears fully in the late Histories, which might
have forewarned our Puritans -- Si men's non laeva fuisset. The Emperor has
restored not only in his patrimonial Countries, all the Lands and Estates of
the Bishops and Clergy, which the puritans there had seized on of late years,
but those also which were taken away an 100 years ago, as in the Duke of
Wittenbergs Country, whereof there are two volumes published at Tubing in
Germany, 1639.

The Learned French Divine, Chamier, Tom. 2. lib. 15. c. 8. at large disputes
the question. An tolerari debeat a Christianis Rex infidelis aut haereticus?

Pontificii dicunt; non licet Christianis tolerare Regem infidelem aut
haereticum, si conetur pertrahere subditos ad suam haeresin, vel infidelitatem,
-- etc. --

Haec vero fax est seditionum, scaturigo parricidiorum, lerna malorum, quibus
hisce multis annis Anglia tentata est, sed tentata tantum; Deo protegente,
regiaque capita praesentibus periculis eripieute. At nostrae Galliae Theatrum
jam ter misere cruentatum duorum proxime Regum sanguine: sic enim ratiocinati
sunt parricidae, aut qui parricidis sicas tradiderunt. Non esse tolerandum
Christianis regem incommodum Ecclesiae, itaque deponendum. Quid si non possit
judicio solenni, tamen ipso facto, qui dignum se exhibuerit depositione,
censerl depositum: ac proinde non amplius Regem, sed Tyrannum; ideoque jure
occidi, id est tolli, quacunque possit ratione. Quos furores si nulla alia
revinceret ratio, certe tam immania sceler aabunde debent hominum animos
abominatione replesse: Viderint homines; Deuteronomy certe non dormit.

If Chamier had lived to see the murder of King Charles, he would have said
more then he did Hisce multis Annis, Anglia tentata est; sed tentata tantum.
God did preserve Q. Elizabeth oftentimes, and King James from the Gunpowder
Treason: Upon both which occasions much has been written by learned, wise and
excellent men both at home and abroad. Against that wicked doctrine of raising
arms against Kings to reform Religion. Whereof not only the Papists are guilty,
but the Puritans. As Bancroft proves fully against Knoxe and Buchanan,
Goodman, Gilly, Cartwright and many others -- lib. 2. c. 1, 2, 3 4, of his
dangerous positions.

The Puritans in England could be content to second King James writing against
the Pope and Papists for deposing and murdering of Kings: But for their own
parts, they account Parliaments to be superior to all Kings, and therefore
maintain that Doctrine of Calvin, that the tres ordines Regni, 4. Instit. C.
20. Sect. 31.
the three estates of Parliaments may correct and punish Kings: Which Doctrine
David Pareus defended: But his books were burned for it at London and both
Universities. But of late, not only the three estates of the Kingdom, but the
third estate, the Commons, the representative of the peopledome may correct and
punish Kings: For they have styled themselves The Supreme authority of the
Nation, without the House of Lords, whom they voted to be useless and cast
them out, and make Statutes, (which they call Acts of Parliament) without the
House of Lords, or the Royal assent. Contrary to all the statutes recorded in
the Book of Statutes.

Bancroft in the very end of his Book of dangerous positions, does plainly
foretell, that the Puritans would never give over their Clamor for
Reformation, till they had utterly ruined the whole Kingdom and Church, as now
it appears manifestly they have effected their desires in great part. But says
Bancroft, there are divers-men that will needs hood-wink themselves and stop
their Ears, with the Serpent in the Psalm, of purpose, because they would
gladly have these things smothered up: He means men in great place, that were
willing to think, that the Puritans were no such dangerous men, as he and
others did take them to be, only scrupulous and peevish perhaps about
Ceremonies, and therefore were willing to forbear them, and not to censure them
sharply: But Bancroft does wisely tell them, that if any such mischeifs (which
God forbid) shall happen hereafter, they were sufficiently warned, that both
should and might (in good time) have prevented them, and withal it would then
be found true, which Livy says, -- Urgentibus Republicam fatis Dei and hominum
falutares admonitiones spernuntur. Lib. 2. Doc. 2.


When the Lord for the sins of the people, is purposed to punish any Country,
he blinds the eyes of the wise, so as they shall either neglect or not
perceive those ordinary means for the safety thereof, which very simple men,
(or babes in a manner) did easily foresee. Which Judgment I pray God turn far
away and long from this and all other true Christian Lands and Kingdoms.

The principal end and project of the Presbyterians was, not only to reform
some things amiss, but to pluck up both root and branch of Episcopacy, and all
Ecclesiastical laws and Courts, though never so ancient and Fundamental, settled
by Magna Charta, and many other Fundamental statutes; as Circumspecte agatis,
13. Edw, 1. Articuli Cleri. 9. Ed. 2. as Lord Coke does expound them at large
2. Institut. and for payment of Tithes and all Duties belonging to the Church,
there is both Common Law and Statute Law, as Lord Coke shows fully, 2.
Instit. page 693. upon the Statute of 18. Edw. 3. and 2, Edw. 6. and if the
Presbyterians would not loose and foregoe Tithes, they must maintain and uphold
those statutes: for better Laws for the true payment of Tithes and all Duties
cannot be made.

But the Presbyterians account all humane laws but trash of humane Iuvention;
They will reform all according to the word of God in all points. Their position
is, We must do nothing, not so much as take up a rush or a straw, without
warrant from the Word of God. As Cartwright affirmed, and Hooker confuteth him
accurately, lib. 2. and lib. 3. 8. 2. 3. etc. He shows that in Scripture
there is not a particular form of Church Government contained. So the learned
Francis Mason in his Sermon upon 1. Cor. 14. 40. Also the Learned Dr.
Sanderson, in the Preface to his 14. Sermons, and in his 4. Sermon ad Clerum,
upon Rom 14. besides many others. But though Hooker has written with singular
Wisdom, Learning, Godliness, and Moderation, yet the Puritans will not read
him, as Dr. Sanderson complains of them.

But what Bancroft did foresee, and foretell so fully, is now come to pass in
our times, to the great ruin and desolation of the Church: King James in the
conference at Hampton Court, did something to pacify the Puritans: But in the
conclusion he passed them over only with admonitions to be quiet, and accepted
their promise to be obedient for the time to come, not to oppose the Bishops
nor the Ecclesiastical Laws, but to behave themselves as dutiful Subjects. And
the King with the Lords of his Council, appointed Bancroft to write unto all
the Bishops to deal moderately wi^h the Puritans, which Letter is extant in
print, as full of moderation, and gentle cautions, as possibly could be
expected. But that mild proceeding of Bancroft and the Bishops, and forbearing
to bring them to obedience and submission by Ecclesiastical censures and other
courses, which might have been taken, to put a final end to their wrangling
humors, gave the Puritans hope to find the like favor always, in succeeding
times, as they did under Archbishop Abbot, which Levity and forbearance,
occasioned the present troubles of these times, in great part.

But the Puritans are an implacable generation, who did only forbear till they
had a further opportunity to promote their designs. Which now they have in
great part effected and verified the praediction of Bancroft and Hooker. Who
did foresee plainly their restless disposition, and endless contentions, not
caring to set fire on the whole Kingdom, as they have done these last 40.
years, in Germany, Bohemia, and France, upon the same grounds and principles as
our Puritans have done among us.

Being indeed secretly displeased, because the Puritans were not preferred to
the best offices and dignities in Church, and Commonwealth, which now they
have invaded by open force and violence, in most outrageous manner; especially
the Puritan Ministers without any regard to the Laws of God or man, thrusting
themselves into the best preferments, by way of Sequestration; and then getting
Acts and Orders to be continued in for their lives, without any respect to the
Title of the lawful patrons, whose rights they set aside and suspend as well as
the Incumbents, most unjustly. Whereas they are neither by desert for Learning
nor education in the Universities, capable of the best preferments, they being
only such as have been only poor Lecturers, poor Vicars, poor Schoolmasters,
and poor new lights, such as are not qualified as the Statute requires, to
enjoy the best Livings of Value. 13. Elizab. cap. 12.

CHAP. X.
The Division of the Courts in the Empire, and the manner of proceeding in them
by the Bishops and Ecclesiastical Lawyers under them.
NOw because what I have formerly said touching the uniting of the
Ecclesiastical and Iemporal Courts, may seem strange to many, I desire not to
be mistaken, as if I persuaded any innovation or change of settled Laws and
Courts of Justice. Which would be a thing of dangerous consequence, that no
wise man would advise, but leave all to the wisdom of Superiors, to whom it
properly belongs. Only I will add a few lines touching the ancient form and
manner of Government in the Empire, after that the Emperors became Christians,
from whom it is likely, the example was taken both among us, and in other
Kingdoms.

Touching the division of the Courts Temporal from the Spiritual, though
William the Conqueror began the Separation with us in England, yet there was
the like done long before, even by Constantine the great, and first Christian
Emperor, who first gave leave to the Christian Bishops, to meet in Councels,
and to make Canons to govern the Church. Canones ut generalium Conciliorum (ut
Isidorus ait l. 6. Elym. c. 16.) a temporibus Constantini coeperant, in
praecedentibus namque annis, persecutione fervente, docendarum plebium minime
dabatur facultas: Inde Christianitas in diversas haereses scissa est, quia non
erat licentia Eiscopis in unam conveniendi, nisi tempore supradicto
Imperatoris. Quae fuit plenaria Conciliarum forma.
Although ever since the Apostles held their first Council in Jerusalem, Act.
15. where they made certain Canons, for the pacification of the Church of
Antioch; there were also some provincial Councels held by the Bishops, as the
violence of persecutions would permit and suffer them to assemble, and the
necessity of the times did require, as may be seen in the first Tome of the
Councels, before the great Nicene Council was assembled by Constantine: who
being the first Christian Emperor, did greatly labor to settle and advance the
dignity of Episcopal government: And because he knew well, that superiority in
the Church without power and jurisdiction was to little purpose, Therefore the
good Emperor in his Christian Zeal Enacted.

Etsi Praecipuum Pontificis sen Episcopi munus est, doctrina verbi populum
moderari, tamen quia non omnes dicto audientes sunt, nec ejusmodi persuasione
ad disciplinam perduci, vel in efficio retineri possunt; and superioritas, in
qua sunt Ecclesiastici ats^abdue; imperio and jurisdictione, non satis habet
nervorum and authoritatis; denique quoniam Ecclesia matter and ^ultrix est
Iustitiae, Ideo Ep^scopis peculiaris quaedam jurisdictio Ecclesiastica, Civili
dignior, in personas and causas legibus Imper* est attributa, etc. Ut jus
dicant Clericis. -- etc.

And lest the Emperor in his Constitution, in these words, Ut jus dicant
Clericis -- should seem to keep short and restrain the Bishops in their
Audience, or Consistories, to Clergy men only, there follows a praeterea, in
the same title in the Code, De Episcop. audient. Not long after this, praeterea
(says the Emperor there) ju^ dicant laicis*

And as before the age of Constantine, for want of power in the Church, and the
assistance of a Christian magistrate, the Bishops could not restrain, nor
suppress the many haeresies and schisms, that did arise in those first ages,
most of which heresies were such, as were fit to be beaten down by authority,
rather then by reason and argument; they being so impious, insolent and
blasphemous; so after his time, when he had settled the Bishops authority, yet
there being two Courts, where did arise many differences and debates between
the Bishops and the secular Judges of that time, touching cognizance of some
Causes; Justinian the Emperor made a l^w, like unto that, Circumspecte agatis
of our King Ed. 1. agreeing with it in substance of matter, and arising from
the same ground, and pointing to the same end.

The Novel is thus -- Si delictum sit Ecclesiasticum, Novel. 83 Cap. 10.
egens castigatione vel mulcta Ecclesiastica, Deo amabiles Episcopi hoc
discernant, nihil commnnicantibus clarissimis provinciae Iudicibus: Neque enim
volumus talia negotia scire omnino Civiles Iudices, cum oporteat talia
Ecclesiastice examinari, and emendari secundum sacras and divinas regulas; quas
etiam sequi nostrae non dedignantur leges.

And further for the greatness of the Bishops authority, it will appear fully,
if we look upon the Laws, as they lie concatena^ae in the same title; where it
is said of the Bishops. -- Cum sint ordinarii Iudices. -- And again: Similes
praefectis praetorio, and further, Ordinary quoque procedant. The linked Texts
in that title of the Code as they stand cited, do fully show the greatness of
the Bishops Co^^^^ and authority, when they are compared and said to be,
Similes praefectis praetorio, who were Illustres Iudices, and so styled in the
law: they being indeed the most supreme Judges in the whole Empire, there being
but three in that spacious Empire. One in Asia; Praefectus praetorio Orientis:
Another in Europe; Praefectus praetorio Illyrici: The third in Africa;
Praefectus praetorio legionibus and militiae Africanae.

The Civil Magistrates were respectively Judges of the Causes, which the
Emperor had translated from the Empire to the Church, which when the Emperor
had done, and made the Bishops the Judges in the Church, as the praefecti
praetorio were in the Empire before, it appears hereby fully, how great the
authority of the Bishops and their Consistories were, wherein they were
assisted by their vicar-generals whom we now call Chancellors (as a learned
Civilian observes) who are no upstarts in the world, rising out of the Bishops
Sloth; (as one though otherwise Learned and Eloquent mis-called them) but had
their original from the law it self.

Touching whom I will here say something out of the learned Civilians, Bacon.
because commonly their place and original is much mistaken by the ignorantly
zealous people, who do now abound in the world, and think nothing lawful in
government, unless their be express text of Scriture for it; as if no calling,
government, or subordination of officers in the Church were lawful, but what is
expressly and fully set down in the Scriptures, and no power and authority
left in the hands of Christian Kings and Magistrates, to appoint Judges and
Officers for Church Discipline, as well as for Civil Judicature.

Therefore to return, as the praefecti praetorio, quia illustres erant, and
antestabant caeteris dignitatibus, ideo habebant vicarios suos; in Civilibus
causis audiendis and terminandis. So were the Bishops then, and so are they
now: Illustres judices and antestabant and antestant caeteris dignitatibus in
Ecclesia. For the law parallels them in the Church with the Chief Judges in the
Empire, as well in this, as in the rests of the Parts of their Honor,
wherewith the Emperor had honored them and the Laws honor them at this day.
Justinians Code has sundry laws, some of his own, some of the Emperors
before him, even from the days of Constantine the great: which show that
Bishops in their Episcopal audience, sat not without their Chancellors;
although their Chancellors sat often without the Bishops* whose higher charge
in Christ's Church permitted not the Bishops presence in Court-Causes
ordinarily. And though not under the name and title of Chancellors, nor always
vicar generals, officials, or Commissaries, yet they had other titles, but the
same offices. Ecclesiastic^ or Episcoporum Ecdici, as much as to say, as Church
Lawyers, or Bishops Lawyers, professed Civilians and Canonists of that age, the
very self same officers and office, that the Bishops vicar-generals then were,
and now are, who together with the Bishops then made and do now make, but one
and the same Tribunal and Consistory: their Commissions they held from the
Bishops, but their Jurisdiction from the Law. And the Cause why the Imperial
power furnished the Bishops with these officers was the multitude and variety
of Ecclesiastical Causes, more in that age then now, the decision whereof in
their Consistories being left to the Bishops, the Emperor doubted might have
drawn them from prayers and divine exercises. And a second reason was, that the
cause of the cognizance of their Courts, were more likely to have thereby a
more speedy, ready, and Judicious trial, before Judges of the same learning,
which require a whole man, then before Judges of another, then an higher,
requiring (as the Bishops pastoral office does) a whole man too. And a third
reason also may be added, because the Clerks suites and quarrels, should not be
divulged, and spread abroad amongst the secular sort, which trenched many times
upon the whole profession, especially in capital matters, wherein Princes
anciently so much tendered the Clergy, that if a Clerk had committed an offense
worthy of death or open shame, whereby he became perpetually infamous, he was
not first executed or put to open shame, before he was degraded by the Bishop
and his Clergy, and so was executed and put to ^hame, not as a Clerk, but as a
lay malefactor, for the Honor and Dignity of Priesthood. It were to be wished
this Order were retained still, that Clerks should not pass immediately, when
they fall into such excesses, from the Altar to the Halter: but hang or suffer
other shame without their Priesthood; which Order if it were retained still, or
might be restored, would much honor the Church, and no whit derogate from the
jurisdiction of the Crown.

The Determination of a Question made by the right Reverend John Davenant late
Lord Bishop of Sarum.
QUEST. 11th.
Civil Jurisdiction is by right granted to Ecclesiastical persons.
IT is by the warrant of Christ himself that the Church does claim and execute
a Spiritual Jurisdiction in punishing the offenses of her Children: For it can
admit an accusation against the inordinate courses of any Christian, and has
power to chastise him, being by sufficient witnesses convicted, either by
denying him the Sacraments, or if he continue obstinate in his wickedness, by
an utter exclusion of him from the fellowship and Communion of other
Christians. I know none so malignant or unskilful in Ecclesiastical affairs,
that will deny this authority, which indeed goes not beyond excommunication, to
have been conferred upon Churchmen from the beginning by Divine Institution:
But in this our Church, Christian princes have further allowed the Clergy
authority, by virtue whereof they inflict civil punishments, on Heretics,
Schismatics, and other despisers of the Church. As also many sage and grave
Divines are in diverse places, endowed with the public power of Justices of
peace: Concerning this jurisdiction, let us inquire, whether it may lawfully be
granted to Churchmen, which that it may lawfully be done, these following
reasons have induced me to believe.

It is first to be considered, Argum. 1,
that both these jurisdictions, tend to the same end of promoting justice, and
brideling Vice; but with this difference: That that power, which is merely
Spiritual makes use only of Spiritual means, 2. Cor. 10. 4, 5, 6,
whereas the weapons of Civil authority be coactive and external, as
Imprisonment, Fines, and corporal punishments, Here therefore would I know, why
it should be esteemed a wicked and unlawful Act, not suiting to the holy
function of a priest, to correct Heretics, Schismatics, and other like and
notorious disturbers of the Christian Commonwealths peace, as well with civil
and bodily Chastisements, as those of the Spirit, where power is given so to
do, to resist and pull down Vices, -- etc. --

To resist and pull down Vices by either way is a good and plausible action, and
of it self misbeseeming no person, though never so holy. Act. 12. 23.
The blessed Angels of heaven, deem it a thing in no wise contrary to their
Sanctity, in the name and command of God, to smite the profane with corporal
punishments; why then should the Angels of the Church think it not lawful, to
adjudge the same Delinquents to any deserved punishments, Apoc. 2. 1.
when by the Decree of their Sovereign Gods Vicegerent here upon earth, it is
so determined? For the execution of Civil authority is not of it self repugnant
to any person how holy soever, nor disagreeing to the office of priesthood.

Again the high and absolute power of the giver, persuades me that Churchmen
do by good right exercise this Jurisdiction. Argum. 2.
For the King being by Gods appointment, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
the Fountain of all Civil authority, may without offense derive some rivolets
thereof to what persons he shall think fit, whether Lay or Ecclesiastical; I
said but some rivolets, because (though no Temporal office by Gods Laws are
forbidden the Clergy) Wisdom and Equity permit not Kings so far to burden
with State affairs, as wholly to divert them, 2 Timothy 3, 4.
from their spiritual function. This power therefore is so to be entrusted to
them, as it may be an ornament or furtherance to the Church Government, no
hinderance or obstacle thereunto. But it is not for every vulgar judgment, or
envious piece to determine how far, this Jurisdiction is to be granted to the
Clergy, so that it may help and not trouble them in their Ministry. But what
Aristotle the Life of Philosophers said, concerning the mean in virtues, that
it is to be ordered (...) as the wise man shall think fit, may be applied to
this Temporal Jurisdiction, that it is so far to be communicated to Churchmen,
as a judicious and wise prince shall think convenient.

Seeing then that it has pleased christian Kings to arm the Clergy with some
civil jurisdiction, and ordain, 1 Timothy 2, 2.
that to the greater improvement of Christianity, and casting down of
wickedness, Romans 13. 3, 4.
they should exercise both Ecclesiastical and civil jurisdiction, it is most
apparently lawful and pious, and plainly necessary by the aid of both
Jurisdictions, as with a two-edged sword, to preserve piety and the peace of
the Church, and cut off its opposers.

Thirdly, Argum. 3.
because to many it seems unfitting, the Successors of the Apostles should
exercise an authority which the Apostles themselves had nothing to do with: Let
us observe the difference of times, and thence gather that this civil
Jurisdiction is as expedient and necessary to the Divines of our time, as it
was altogether unnecessary and unprofitable to the Apostles. Civil Jurisdiction
is by the chief Magistrate to be conferred on those that are subordinate, and
according to his Laws to be administered. As long therefore as the Rulers of the
earth waged war against the truth of the Gospel, neither could they assign, nor
the Apostles without scandal to Christ and the downfall of Religion, have
received any temporal power from their hands. But since Kings and their Laws
began to subject themselves to Christ, civil Authority by them given to the
Ministers of Christ, might have been a great furtherance to the advancement of
the Gospel, and more happy Government of the Church. Furthermore the Apostles
and Fathers of the primitive Church were from heaven endowed with an
extraordinary and miraculous power, which did more avail to the confirmation of
Christians in faith and obedience, then any civil authority: But now the
government of the Church is in the hands of ordinary ministers, who being
disarmed of that divine and miraculous power, are conveniently guarded with
this Temporal and ordinary Jurisdiction.

Lastly, When the Christian Church was in her infancy, piety was more deeply
rooted in the breasts of the Disciples, and if they would have resisted the
Discipline of the Church, their rebellious minds were soon quelled by the
cruelty of persecution, and hourly imminent danger of violent death: But now
the Christian world wholly possessed and carried away with pride and Luxury,
has so clean laid aside all respects of piety and modesty, that all the
spiritual power of the Clergy and Church Discipline, if not seconded by civil
jurisdiction, breeds rather scorn and contempt, then amendment in the malicious
remorse of this present age.

Think then what rash and incompetent Judges they are, who from the Apostles,
and their days conclude, temporal Authority not requisite to our ordinary
ministers.

A fourth argument may be drawn from Gods own institution, Argum. 4.
and the most ancient practice of the Church: God himself did annex civil
jurisdiction to the office of Priesthood, it is therefore no strange thing, nor
against the divine Law, that a Clergyman should bear sway in temporal affairs.
[As appears fully in the former Treatise here before cap. 1. and 2. Where it is
showed, that in all Courts of Iustic^ in Israel, the priests and Levites were
the principal Judges, both in the great Council sitting in the Temple at
Jerusalem, and in the second Court of Judgment residing in principal Cities.]
Eli, Samuel, the Macchabees, together with all the Highpriests in the Old
Testament, did exercise this kind of authority: But why it continued not for
some hunhundred years after the Gospel, is made evident by reasons above
alleged. But since Constantine the great submitted his Imperial Scepter to
Christ, you shall in all ages find the godly Bishops and Fathers of the Church
administering Civil Jurisdiction by Religious Emperors to them imparted; which
if time would serve might be clearly testified, out of Ecclesiastical Histories
and Councels, and out of the Emperors own laws; but these are so sufficiently
known to the learned, that the citation thereof would prove an unnecessary
trouble.

Lastly, Argum. 5.
let us out of our adversaries own grants and confessions, prove what
themselves deny. They grant the Clergy a jurisdiction whereby they can cite
before their Courts, Heretics, Drunkards, Adulterers, and such like infamous
persons; admit accusations against them, hear and examine witnesses, and give
sentence of excommunication on those that are lawfully convicted. If by virtue
of spiritual jurisdiction from Christ received, they can do these things, why
shall they not by the accession of secular jurisdiction by the King conferred,
imprison the same malefactors, or by such like civil punishments restrain their
base incontinencies? This Act of correction is no less warrantable in its own
nature then that of excommunication: both being put in execution by just and
legitimate authority, niether do corporal punishments, less conduce to the
Reformation of delinquents, and the Churches good, then those merely spiritual.
Therefore by the allowance of superior authority, it is no less expedient,
that Clergymen should inflict one kind of chastisement, rather then another.
In a word learned M. Calvin does grant that what Controversies soever happened
between Christians, to avoid strife and division they were wont to refer them
to their Bishops by their judgment to be decided. De opere Monach^r. 28.
And St. Austin tells us, that he daily spent some time in secular affairs,
either by his sentence determining and settling them, or cutting them off by his
interposition. Furthermore he records that St. Paul employed Churchmen in such
troublesome matters: If private Christians do lawfully commit their civil
Controversies to the arbitrament of Bishops, surely Christian Kings may to the
same Bishops lawfully commit the judgment of the like Causes: if at the request
of private men, it be nor unlawful for Churchmen to intermedle with secular
businesses, it cannot be unlawful to do the same by the appointment of the
King. For as the matter stands, he does no less interest himself in state
affairs, who decides controversies as an Elect Arbitrator, then he who decides
the same as a Judge ordained by the Prince. Let us conclude, that ambitiously
to hunt after, or with prejudice to the Function of Priesthood, to exercise
Civil Jurisdiction from the hand of a King, and to administer the same to the
better establishing of the peace and discipline of the Church, is an Act lawful
and praiseworthy, most agreeable to the ancient practice of the Church, and no
ways repugnant to the Divine Scriptures.

To this Determination of the learned Bishop Davenant, there is nothing replied
by Dr. Burgess, but in an insolent manner, he terms him only a speculative
Divine, as if such a famous professor in the university, and a most learned
Bishop for twenty years together, who was highly reputed for learning and
piety, should be so scornfully neglected by one that never spent seven years in
the university, nor ever enjoyed any fellowship, a place of continuance in any
College, to gain more then common learning in a trivial way; as appeared fully
when he came back to the University to go out Doctor, and would needs take upon
him to answer the Divinity Act, which he performed so contemptibly, that he was
hissed and scorned publicly by all the Auditors, and accordingly censured by
Doctor Prideaux, who reprehended him sharply in public for his ignorance and
insuffiency: and some Papists, who are commonly present at such public Acts
among the multitude, hearing him to be so destitute of Latin, Logic, and
distinctions upon the state of his questions, publicly were heard to say, --
Alas poor black sheep, what makes thee here? Whereof I was both an eye, and
ear witness.

But as is formerly affirmed, if some principal men of the Clergy be not in
places of Authority, and Judicature, and some be not Justices of the Peace in
every Shire, the ordinary Clergy will be trampled on by the vulgar people in
most vile manner, taxed, and assessed unreasonably by Constables, and
Committee Men, and all such officers, as is well-known by many instances, which
might be alleged and are commonly known: to say nothing of the insolency of
Soldiers, and Quarter Masters, who will be sure when they come to any parish
to set first upon the Ministers house, and furnish him with company enough to
consume all that he has in barnes, or buttery, without any mercy, or
compassion, which may be easily proved, but that it is a thing notoriously
known, past denial; so that the Clergy may complain with the Apostle, that they
are made the fisth of the world, 1 Cor. 3. 13.
and are the off scouring of all things to this day. And all this done by the
Parliament-members and officers, who pretended to advance religion, to maintain
and uphold Ministry, as well as Magistracy. But the Laws being taken away, or
suspended, whereby Ministers should be preserved and maintained, there is risen
up such a swarm of Sectaries, Anabaptists, Quakers, and a rascal rabble of
others who deny the calling of ministers, and are as ready to oppress them in
as violent manner, as those Rebels that did rise in the 5. Rich. 2. Wat Tyler,
Jack Straw, Jack Shepherd, Tom Millar, Hob. Carter. and such like fellows, as
Cowper relates them in his Epitome of Chronicles: and as John Stow reports
in the Confession of Jack Straw at his death, They would have destroyed all
Bishops, Monks, Canons, and Parsons, and would have dispatched them all: Only
begging Friars should have lived, that might have sufficed for ministering the
Sacraments in the whole Realm.

Poor begging Friars having no good Lands or Revenues, were not the object of
the peoples malice; but all rich men, Lords, and Gentlemen, especially Clergy
men, should have been made a prey: And so, or worse is the Case of the Clergy
in these times: All principal al learned Divines, if they have any Estates, are
miserably cast out of their houses and livings, Bishops, Deanes, and Doctors or
others of any eminent note are shamefully persecuted: Only poor Curats, poor
Lecturers, poor New-lights, poor Schoolmasters, who are like the begging
Friars, are suffered to continue, and yet the Anabaptists, and Quakers, and
such like are ready to cashier them, to pull down Churches Steeple Houses and
Stone-houses, as they call Churches in derision: but as Solomon says, there is
no new thing under the Sun: from the beginning of the world to the end it is
so, that necessitous men, thieves, and beggars will seize upon the estates of
rich men, if they have once power in their hands, and can but lay hold on them.

The Speech of Doctor WILLIAMS Lord Archbishop of York, in defense of the
Bishops Rights to Sit and Vote in Parliaments.
I Shall desire as much water or time, of your Honorable Lordships, as your
Lordships can well afford in a Committee, because all that I intend to speak in
this business, must be to your Lordships only, as Resolved for mine own part,
to make hereafter no Remonstrance at all to his most excellent Majesty for
these several reasons.

1. That I have had occasion of late to know, that our Sovereign (whom God
bless and preserve) is, I will not say above other Princes, but above all
Christian men, that ever I knew or heard of, a man of most upright, dainty and
scrupulous Conscience, and afraid to look upon some actions, which other
Princes abroad do usually swallow up and devour: I know (for I have the
Monuments in my own Custody) what Oath, or rather oaths, his Majesty has taken
at his Coronation, to preserve all the rights and Liberties of the Church of
England: And you know very well, that Churchmen are never sparing in their
Rituals or Ceremonials, to amplify and swell out the Oaths of Princes in that
kind: Your Lordships then know right well, that he is sworn at that time to
observe punctually the laws of K. Edward. The first Law whereof, as you may see
in Lambards Saxon Laws, is to preserve entirely the peace, the possessions, and
the rights and privileges of the Church; And truly I shall never put my
Masters Conscience that I find resenting and punctillious, when it is not bound
up with oaths and protestations, to swallow such Gudgeons, as to fill it self
with these doubts and scruples.

2. My second Reason is, that if his Majesty were free from all these Oaths and
Protestations, I durst not without some fair invitation from himself, advise
his Majesty to run shocks and oppositions against the Votes of both these great
Houses of Parliament.

3. And lastly, if I were secretly invi^ed to move his Majesty, ^o advise upon
the passing of this Bill, yet speaking mine own heart and sense, and not
binding any of my brethren in this opinion, if I found the major part of this
House, to pass this bill without much qualification, I should never have the
boldness, nor desire to sit any more, in any judicial place in this most
honorable House.

And therefore my Honorable Lords, here I have fixed my Areopagus, and dernier
resort, beign not like to make any further appeal: Which makes me humbly desire
your patience to speak for some longer time, then I have accustomed in a
Committee: In which length I hope notwithstanding to use a great deal of
brevity; Some length in the whole, and much shortness in every particular
head, which I mean so to distinguish and beat out, that not only your
Lordships, but the Lords my brethren may enlarge themselves upon all the
particulars, which neither my abilities of body can perform, nor does my
intention nor purpose aim at at this time. I will therefore cast this whole
bill into six several heads, wherein I hope to comprehend all that I shall say,
or any man else can materially touch upon in this bill.

The first is the Rise or Motive of this Bill, Sect. 1.
which is the duty of men in holy orders: For the words are persons in holy
Orders o^ght not to intermeddle, -- etc. -- And this duty of ministers may be
taken in this place two several ways, either for their duty in point of
Divinity: or for their duty in point of Convenience, which we commonly call
policy. In regard of either of these duties, it may be conceived that men in
holy orders, ought not to intermeddle in secular affairs, -- etc. -- And this
is the Motive, Rise and Ground of this bill.

The second point are the persons concerned in this bill, Sect. 2.
which are Archbishops, Bishops, Parsons, Vicars, and all other in holy orders.

The third point contains the things inhibited from this time forward to such
persons by this Bill, Sect. 3.
and they are of several sorts and natures.

First, Freeholds and Rights of such persons, as their suffrages, votes, and
legislative power in parliament.

Secondly matters of princely favors, as to Sit in Star Chamber, to be called
to the Council Board, to be Justice of peace, -- etc. --

Thirdly, matters of a mixed or concrete nature, that seem to be both Freeholds,
and favors of former princes, as the Charters of some of the Bishops, and some
of the ancient Cathedrals are conceived to be. And these are all the matters,
or things inhibited from those persons in holy orders, by this present bill.

Fourthly, Sect. 4.
the manner of this Inhibition, which is of a double nature first under a high
and severe penalty; and secondly under a Cains mark, an eternal kind of
disability or incapacity laid upon them from enjoying hereafter any of these
Freeholds, rights, favors, or Charters of former princes; and that which is
the heaviest point of all, without killing of Abel, or any Crime laid to their
charge more then that in the beginning of the bill it is said, ^oundly, and in
the style of Lacedemon, that they ought not to intermeddle in secular affairs.

The fifth point is a Salvo for the two Universities, Sect. 5.
but none for the Bishop of Durham, nor for the Bishop of Ely* not for the De^
of Westminster their next Neighbor, who is established in his Government by an
especial Act of parliament that of the 27. of Q. Elizabeth.

The sixth and last point is a Salvo, Sect. 6.
for Dukes, Marquilses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons or Peers of this Kingdom, that
either may be or are such by descent: which clause I hope in God, will prove
not only a salvo to those honorable persons, (whereof if we of the Clergy were
but so happy, as to have any competent number of our Coat. -- quot Thebarum
portae, vel divitis ostia Nili, This bill surely had perished in the womb, and
never come to the birth) yet I hope that this clause will prove to this bill, a
felo de se, and a murderer of it self, and intended for a Salvo for noble
ministers only, prove a Salvo for all other ministers, that be not so happy as
to be nobly born; because the very poor minister, for ought we find in
Script^re or Common reason, is no more tied to serve God in his Vocation, then
these (...), and nobly born ministers are. And therefore I hope these noble
ministers will deal so nobly, as to pull their brethren the poor ministers out
of the thorns and briers of this bill. And these are all the true heads and
contents of this bill. And amongst these six heads, Your Lordships shall be
sure to find me; and I shall expect to find your Lordships in the whole tract
of this Committee. And now with your Lordships honorable leave and patience, I
will run them over almost as briefly as I have pointed and pricked them down.

For the first, Sect. 1.
the rise and motive of this bill, which is the duty of men in holy orders not
to intermeddle with secular affairs, must arise either from a point of
divinity, or from point of convenience or policy: And I hope in God it will not
appear to your Lordships that there is any ground either of divinity or policy,
to inhibit men in orders so modestly to intermeddle with secular affairs, as
that the measure of intermedling in such affairs, shall not hinder and obstruct
the duties of their calling. They ought not so to intermeddle in secular
affairs, as to neglect their ministry, no more ought Laymen neither; for they
have a calling and Vocation, wherein they are to walk, as ministers have, they
have wise and children and families to care for, and they are not to neglect
these to live upon Warrants and Recognizances, to become a kind of Sir Francis
Michel, or an Ignotus nimis as Solomon calls it; That place 2 Timothy 2. 4. No man
that wars, entangles himself with the affairs of this life, will be found to be
applied by all good Interpreters, to Laymen as well as Churchmen, and under
favor nothing at all to this pupose: Besides that the word ((...)) does point
at a man that is so wholly taken up with the affairs of this life, that he
utterly neglects the offices and duties of a Christian man; and so I leave that
place as incapable of any other exposition nor ever otherwise interpreted but
by Popes, Legars, and Canonists, that make a Nose of Wax, of every place of
Scripture they touch upon.

But that men in holy orders ought not in a moderate manner, together with the
duties of their calling, to help and assist in the Government of the
Commonwealth if they be thereunto lawfully called by the Sovereign prince, can
never be proved by any good divinity: For in the law of nature, before the
Deluge, and a long time after, it is a point that no man will deny me, that the
eldest of the Family was both the priest and the magistrate.

Then the people were taken out of Egypt by Moses and Aaron: Moses and Aaron
amongst his Priests, as it is in the psalm; Then there was a form of a
Commonwealth, fetched from heaven indeed, and planted upon the earth, and
Judiciary laws dictated for the reiglement of the same. Nor do I much care,
though some men shall say, that persons in holy orders ought not to intermed^le
in secular affairs, when that great God of heaven and earth does appoint them
to intermeddle with all the principal affairs of that estate, witness the
exorbitant power of the High priest in secular matters, the Sanedrim, the 23.
the Judges of the Gate, which were the most of them Priests and Levites. And
the Churchmen of that estate were not all Butchers and Slaughter-men: For they
had their Tabernacle, their Synagogues, their Prayers, Preaching, and other
exercises of piety: In a word we have Divinius, but they had operosius
ministerium, as St, Augustine speaks. Our Ministry takes up more of our
thoughts, but theirs took up more of their Labors and Industry: Nor is it any
matter* that this Commonwealth is no more in being^ in suffices it has been
once, and that planted by God himself, who would never have appointed persons
in holy orders, to intermeddle with things they ought not to intermedle
withal. I will go on with my Chronology of persons in holy orders, and only
put you in mind of Ely and Samuel, amongst the Judges of Sadocks employment
under King David, of Iehojadas under his Nephew King Ioash, and would fain know
what hurt those men in holy orders did, by intermedling in secular affairs of
that time, Now we are returned from the Captivity of Babylon, I desire you to
look upon the whole race of the Macchabees, even to Antigonus the last of them
all, taken prisoner by Pompey, and crucified afterward by Mark Anthony. And
show me any one of those Princes (a woman or two excepted) that was not a
Priest and a Magistrate.

We are now come to Christ's time, when me thinks I hear St. Paul, in the 23. of
the Acts, excuse himself, for reviling of the high priest: I wist not Brethren
that he was the high priest, for it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of
the Ruler of thy people, Where observe, that the word Ruler in the Greek is
(...) the very same word that is used by St. Paul Romans 13. 3. where this word
(...) is translated by Peza, Magistrates. Then you must be pleased to imagine
the Church asleep or almost dead under rersecution for almost 300. years, until
the happy days of the Emperor Constantine, and not expect to find many
Magistrates among the Christians: Yet shall you find St. Paul 1 Cor. 6. 5.
offend against this Bill, and intermeddle knuckle-deep, with secular affairs,
by inhibiting the Corintbians very sharply for their Chicanery, their
petty-foggery, and Common battery, in going to Law one with another. Besides
that as all learned men agree, both the Apostles and Apostolical men that lived
presently after them had a miraculous power of punishing exorbitant crimes,
which supplied the power of the ordinary Magistrate; as appears in Ananias and
Saphyra, the incestuous Corinthian, and many others. But then from Constantines
age, till the Reformation begun by Luther, Churchmen were so usually employed
in managing of secular affairs that I shall confess ingenuously, that it was
too much, there lying an appeal from the Courts of the Empire to the Bishops
judicatory, as you shall find it every where in the Code of Justinian. So was
it under Carolus Magnus, and all the Carolovingian Line of our neighbor
Country of France. So and somewhat more it was with us, in the Saxon Heptarchy,
the Bishop and the Sheriff sitting together cheek by joule in their Towns and
Courts: But these exorbitant and vast employments in secular affairs I stand
not up to defend, and therefore I will hasten to the Reformation: Whereas Mr.
Calvin in the Fourth Book of his Institutions, and eleventh Distinction, does
confess that the holy men heretofore did refer their Controversies to the
Bishop to avoid troubles in Law: you shall find that from Luther to this
present day in all the Flux of time, in all Nations, in all manner of
Reformations, persons in holy orders were thought fit to intermeddle with
secular affairs: Brentius was a privy Counselor to his Duke and Prince.
Functius was a Privy Counselor to the great Duke of Borussia, as it is too
notoriously known to those that are versed in Histories. Calvin and Beza whilst
they lived, carried all the Council of the State of Geneva, under their own
Gowns. Bancroft in his Survey cap. 26. observes, that they were of the Council
of State there, which consists of threescore. And I have my self known
Abraham Sculteius, a privy Counselor to the Prince Palatine: Reverend
Mousieur du Moulin, for many years together a Counselor to the Princess of
Sedan: His Brother in Law Mounsieur Rivel, a great learned personage now in
England, of the Privy Council of the Prince of Orange. You all hear, and I know
much good by his former writings of a learned man called Mr. Henderson, and
most of your Lordships understand better then I, what employment he has at
this time in his kingdom. And truly I do believe, that there is no reformed
Church in the World, settled and constituted by the State, wherein it is held
for a point in divinity, that persons in holy orders, ought not to intermeddle
with secular affairs: which is all I shall say of the duty of ministers in
point of divinity.

Now I come to the second duty of men in holy orders, Sect. 2,
in point of convenience or policy; and am clearly of opinion, that even in
this regard and reflection, they ought not to be debarred from modestly
intermedling in secular affairs. For if there be any such inconveniency, it
must needs arise from this, that to exercise some secular jurisdiction, must be
evil in it self, or evil to a person in holy orders: Which is neither so nor
so. For the whole office of a subordinate civil Magistrate is most exactly
described in Romans 13. 3, 4. and no man can add or detract from the same. The
civil power is a divine ordinance, set up to be a Terror to the evil, and an
encouragement to good works: This is the whole compass of the civil power. And
therefore I do here demand with that most learned Bishop Davenant, that within
a few days did sit by my side, in the eleventh Question of his Determinations:
What is there of impiety, what of unlawfulness, what unbecoming either the
holiness or calling of a priest, in terrifying the bad, or comforting the good
Subject, in repressing of sin, and punishing of sinners. For this is the whole
and entire Act of civil jurisdiction: It is in its own nature repugnant to no
person, to no function, to no sort or condition of men, let them hold
themselves never so holy, never so seraphical, it becomes them very well to
repress sin and punish sinners; that is to say, to exercise in a moderate
manner civil jurisdiction, if the Sovereign shall require it. And you shall
find that this doctrine of debarring persons in holy orders from secular
employments, is no doctrine of the Reformed, but the Popish Church, and first
brought into this Kingdom by the Popes of Rome, and Lambiths, Lanfranc,
Anselme, Stephen Langton, and the test, together with Otho and Othobon, and to
this only end; that the man of Rome, might withdraw all the Clergy of this
Kingdom, from their obligations to the King and Nobility, who were most of
them great Princes in those times, and thereby might establish and create (as
in a great part he did) regnum in regno, a Kingdom of Sha^elings in the midst
of this Kingdom of England: And hence came those Canons of mighty consequence,
able to shoot up a priest at one shot into heaven: as that he must not meddle
with matters of blood; that he must not exercise civil jurisdiction, not be a
Steward to a Noble man in his house, and all the rest of this Palea and
Garbage: That is, in plain English, the Priest must no longer receive
obligations from either King or Lords, but wholly depend upon his holy Fathers,
the Pope of Rome and the Pope of Lambeth, or at least wise pay him soundly for
their Dis* ensations and Absolutions, when they presume to do the contrary. In
the mean time, here is not one word or show of Reason, to inform an
understanding man, that persons in holy orders ought not to terrify the bad,
and comfort the good, to repress sin, and chastise sinners; which is the summa
totalis of the civil Magistracy, and consequently so fat forth at the least to
intermeddle with secular affairs, And this is all that I shall say, touching
the motive and ground of this Bill, and that persons in holy orders ought not
to be inhibited from intermedling in secular affairs, either in point of
divinity, or in point of convenience and policy.

The second point consists of the persons reflected upon in this Bill, which
are Archbishops, Bishops, Parsons, Vicars, and all others in holy orders: of
which point I shall say little; only finding these names hudled up in an heap,
made me conceive at first, that it might have some relation to Mr. Bagshawes
reading in the middle Temple, which I ever esteemed to have been very
inoffensively delivered by that learned Gentleman, and with little discretion
questioned by a great Ecclesiastic then in place. For all that he said was
this, That when the Temporal Lords, are more in voices then the Spiritual, they
may pass a Bill without consent of the Bishops, which is an assertion so clear
in reason, and so often practiced, upon the Records and Rolls of Parliament,
that no man any way versed in either of these, can make any doubt of it, nor do
I: Though I humbly conceive no President will be ever found that the Prelates
were ever excluded, otherwise then by their own folly, fear or headiness; For
the point of being Justices of peace the Gentleman confesses he never meddled
with Archbishops, nor Bishops, nor with any Clergy man made a Justice by his
Majesty's Commission. In the Statute made 34. Ed. 3. c. 1. He finds assignees
for the keeping of the Peace one Lord, and with him 3. or 4. of the most
valiant men of the County, the troublesome times did then so require it, and if
God do not bless us with the riddance of these two armies, the like provision
will be now as necessary. He finds these men included, but does not find
Churchmen excluded; no not in the Statute 13. Rich. 2. cap. 7. that requires
Justices of peace to be made of Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of the Law, of
the most sufficient of each County: In which words the Gentleman thinks Clerks
were not included, and I clearly say by his favor, they are not excluded: Nor
do the learned Sages of the Law, conceive them to be excluded by that Statute.
If the King shall command the Lord Keeper to fill up the Commissions of each
County, with the most sufficient Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of the Law,
shall the Lord Keeper thereupon exclude the Noblemen and the Prelates? I have
often in my days received this Command but never heard of this interpretation
before this time: So that I cannot conceive from what ground this general
sweep-stake of Archbishops, Bishops, Parsons, Vicars and all others in holy
orders should proceed. I have heard since the beginning of my sickness, that
it has been alleged in this House, that the Clergy in the sixth of Edw. the
third, did disavow that the custody of the peace did belong to them at all, and
I believe that such a thing is to be found amongst the Notes of the privileges
of this House: But first you must remember, that it was in a great storm, and
when the waters were much troubled, and the wild people unapt to be kept in
orders by Miters and Crosiersstaves: But yet if that noble Lord, shall be
pleased to cast his eye upon the Roll it self, he shall find that this poor
excuse did not serve the Prelates turns: Fot they were compelled with a
witness, to defend their parts of the preservation of the peace of the
Kingdom, as well as the Noble men and Gentry: And you shall find the ordinance
to this effect set down upon that Roll. I conclude therefore with that Noble
Lords favor, that the sweeping of all the Clergy out of Temporal offices, is a
motion of the first impression; and was never heard of in the English
Commonwealth before this Bill.

I come in the third place to the main part of this cause, the things to be
severed from all men in holy orders: which are as I told you of three kinds.
First, matters of Freehold, as the Bishops votes in parliament and Legislative
power. Secondly, matters of favor as to be a Judge in Star Chamber, to be a
privy Counselor, to be a Justice of peace, or a Commissioner in any Temporal
affairs. Thirdly, and mixed matters of Freehold and Favor too, as the Charters
of some Bishops: and many of the ancient Cathedrals of this Kingdom, who allow
them a Justice or two within themselves, or their Close as they call it, and
exempt those grave and learned men from the rudeness and insolency of
Tapsters, Brewers, Innkeepers, Tailours, and Shoomakers, which do integrate
and make up the bodies of our Country Cities, and Incorporations. And now is
the Axe laid to the very root of the Ecclesiastical tree, and without your
Lordships justice and favor, all the branches are to be lopt off quite, with
those later clauses, and the Stock and root it self, to be quite gr^bb'd and
dug up, by that first point of abolishing all Vote and Legislative power in
all Clergy men, leaving them to be no longer any part of the people of Rome,
but mere Slaves and Bondmen to all intents and purposes: And the priests of
England one degree inferior to the priests of Jeroboam, being to be accounted
worse then the Tail of the people.

Now I hope no English man will doubt, but this Vote and Representation in
Parliament, is not only a freehold, but the greatest freehold that any Subject
in England, or in all the Christian world, can brag of at this day, that we
live under a King, and are to be governed by his Laws, that is, not by his
arbitrary Edicts or Rescripts, but by such Laws confirmed by him, and assented
to by us, either in our proper persons, or in our Assignees, and
Representations.

This is the very Soul and Genius of Magna Charta, and without this one spirit,
that great Statute is little less, then Littera occidens, a dead and useless
piece of paper. You heard it most truly opened unto you, by a wise and
judicious Peer of this House, that legem patere quam ipse tuleris, was a Motto
wherein Alexander Severus had not more interest, then every true born English
man: No forty shillings man in England, but does in person or Representation
enjoy his freedom and liberty: The prelates of this Kingdom, as a
Looking-glass and Representation of the Clergy, have been in possession hereof
these thousand years and upwards. The princes of the Norman race, for their own
ends, and to strengthen themselves with men and money, erected the Bishoprics
soon after the Conquest into Baronies, and left them to sit in that House with
their double capacities about them; the later invented for the profit of the
prince, not excluding the former, remaining always from the beginning for the
profit and concernment of the poor Clergy: Which appears not only by the Saxon
Laws set forth by Mr. Lambard, and Sir Henry Spelman, but also by the Bishops
Writs and Summons to parliament, in use to this very day. We have many
preceedents, upon the Rolls, that in Vacancy of Episcopal Seas, the Guardian of
the Spirituals, though but a simple priest, has been called to sit in this
Honorable House, by reason of that former Representation: and such an officer
I was my self over that Sea (whereof I am Bishop) some 25, years ago, and
might then have been summoned by Writ unto this Honorable House, at that very
time by reason of the Spiritualty of that Diocese, which then as a simple
priest, I did by virtue of the aforesaid office represent. And therefore most
noble Lords, look upon the Ark of God representative, that in this time floates
in great danger, in this deluge of waters: If there be any Cham, or unclean
Creature therein; out with him, and let every man bear his own Burden, but
save the Ark, for God and Christ Jesus his sake, who has built it in this
Kingdom, for saving of people; and your Lordships are too wise to conceive
that the Word and Sacraments, the means of our Salvation, will be ever
effectually received from those ministers, whose persons shall be so vilified
and dejected, as to be made no parcels or fragments of this Commonwealth: No
says Gregory, the last trick the Devil had in this world was this, that wh^^
he could not bring the word and Sacraments into disgrace by errors, and
Heretical opinions, he invented this project, (and much applanded his wit
therein) by casting slight and contempt upon the preachers and ministers. And
my Noble Lords, you are too wise to believe what the Common people talk, that
we have a vote in the election of Knights and Burgesses, and consequently some
Figure and Representation in the Noble House of Commons: They of the Ministry
have no vote in these elections, they have no Representation in that Honorable
House, and these contrary assertions are so slight and groundless, as I will
not offer to give them any answer. And therefore right Honorable Lords, have a
special care of the Church of England, your Mother in this point; and as God
has made you the most noble of all the peers of the Christian World, so do not
you give way, that our Nobility shall be taught henceforth, as the Romans were,
in the time of the first and second Punick wars, by their Slaves and Bondmen
only, and that the Church of God in this Island, may come to be served by the
most ignoble Ministers that ever have been seen in the Christian Church, since
the passion of our Savior. And so much for the first thing, which this Bill
intends to sever from persons in holy orders, viz. votes and representations in
parliament. The next thing to be severed from them by this Bill, is of a much
baser metal and alloy, sittings in Star Chamber, sittings at Councel-Table,
sitting in Commissions of the peace and other Commissions of secular affairs,
which are such favors and graces of Christian princes, as the Church may have
a being and subsistence without them: The Fortunes of our Greece, do not depend
upon these Spangles; and the Sovereign prince has imparted and withdrawn these
kind of favors without the envy or regret of any wise Ecclesiastical persons.
But my Noble Lords this is the Case. Our King has by the Statute restored unto
him the Head-ship of the Church of England, and by the Word of God he is,
Custos utriusque Tabulae. And will your Lordships allow this Ecclesiastical
Head no Ecclesiastical Senses at all? No Ecclesiastical person to be consulted
withal, not in any Circumstances of time and place. If Cranm^r had been thus
dealt withal in the minority of our young Josias, King Edward the sixth of
pious memory, what had become of that great Work of our Reformation, in this
flourishing Church of England? But I know before whom I speak, I do not mean to
dine your Lordships with Coleworts, the harsh Consequences of this point, your
Lordships do understands as well as I.

The last robe that some persons, in holy orders, are to be stripped of, has a
kind of mixture of Freehold and favor, of the proper right, and the graces of
the King, which are certain old Charters, that some few Bishops, and many
ancient and Cathedral Churches have purchased and procured from the ancient
Kings before and since the conquest, to enable them to live quiet in their own
pr^cincts and close (as they call it) under a Justice or two, of their own
body, without being abandoned upon every slight occasion to the injuries and
vexations of Mechanical Tradesmen, of which your Lordships best know, these
Country Incorporations do most consist: Now whether these few Charters have
their foundation by favor, or by right, I should conceive under your Lordships
favor it is neither favor nor right ^o take them away, without some just
crime objected and proved; for if they be abused in any particular, Mr.
Attorney General can find an ordinary remedy to repair the same by a Writ of Ad
quod damnum, without troubling of the two Houses of Parliament, and this is all
I shall speak to this point.

And now I come to the fourth part of this bill, Sect. 4.
which is the manner of Inhibition, heavy every way, heavy in the penalty,
heavier a great deal in the incapacity, the weighing of penalty: will you
consider I beseech you, the small wyers, that is, poor Causes, that are to
induce the same, and then the heavy lead that hangs upon these wyers. It is
thus, if a natural subject of England in^ere^^ed in the Magna Charta, and
petition of Right, as well, as any other; yet being a person in holy orders,
shall happen unfortunately to vote in Parliament, to obey his Prince by way of
Council, or by way of a Commissioner^ be required thereunto; then is he
presently to loose and forfeit for his first offense all his Means and
Livelihood for one year, and for the second to forfeit his Freehold in that
kind for ever, and ever. And I do not believe that your Lordships ever saw such
an heavy weight of censure, hang upon such thin wyers of reasons, in any Act of
Parliament made heretofore. This peradventure may move others most, but it does
not me; it is not the penalty, but the incapacity, and as the Philosophers
would call it, the natural impotency, imposed by this Bill on men, in holy
orders to serve the King, or the State in this kind, be they otherwise never so
able, never so willing, not never so virtuous; which makes me draw a kind of
Timanthes vail over this point, and leave it without any amplification at all,
unto your Lordships wise and inward thoughts, and considerations.

The fifth point is the Salvo made for the two Universities, Sect. 5^
to have Justices of the peace amongst them of their own heads of Houses, which
I confess to be done upon mature, and just consideration, for otherwise the
Scholars must have gone for Justice, to those parties to whom they go for their
Mustard and Vinegar: but yet under favor the reasons and inducements cannot be
stronger, then may be found out for other Ecclesiastical persons, as the Bishop
of Durhans, who was ever since the days of K. John, suffered by the Princes,
and Parliaments of England, to exercise justice upon the parties in those
parts, as being in truth the Kings subjects, but the Bishops Tenants, and
therefore not likely to have their Causes more duly weighed, then when the
balance is left in the hand of their own proper Landlords. The Case of the
Bishop of Ely for some parts of that Isle, is not much different, but if a
little partiality does not herein cast some mist before mine eyes, the Case of
the Dean and, City of Westminster, wherein this Parliament is now sitting, is
far more considerable, both in the antiquity, extent of Jurisdiction, and the
warrants whereupon it is grounded, then any one of those places before
mentioned; for there is a clear Statute made 27. Eliz. for the drawing all
Westminster, St. Clemenst, and St. Martins le grand, London, into a
Corporation, to be reigled, by a Dean, a Steward, 12 Burgesses, and 12
Assistants. And if some salve or plaster, shall not be applied unto
Westminster in this point, all that government and Corporation, is at an end:
But this I perceive since is taken into Consideration by the Honorable House of
Commons themselves.

I come now to the last point, Sect. 6.
and the second Salvo of this Bill, which is for Dukes, Marquisses, Earls,
Viscounts, Barons, or Peers, of this Kingdom, which is a clause that looks
with a kind of contrary glance upon persons in holy orders. It seems to favor
some, but so that thereby, and in that very Act, it casts an aspersion of
baseness, and ignobility upon all the rest of that holy profession; for if no
persons in holy orders ought to intermeddle in secular affairs, how come these
Nobles to be excepted out of that universal negative? is it because they are
nobly born? then surely it must be granted that the rest must be excluded as
being made of a rough and base piece of clay: For the second part of this
reason in beginning of the Bill, can never bear out this Salvo, that the office
of the ministry is of so great importance that it will take up the whole man,
and all his best endeavors; Surely the office of the ministry is of no greater
importance in a poor man, then in a noble man, nor does it take away the whole
man in the one, and but a piece of him in the other; I cannot give you many
Instances herein out of Scripture, because you know that in those days, not
many mighty, not many noble were called -- etc. 1 Cor. 1. 26. but when any
noble were called, I do not find, but they did put more of the whole man and
their best endeavors, upon the ministry, then men in holy orders, are at the
least in holy Scripture noted to have done. I put your Lordships in mind of
those noblemen of Beraea, compared with those of Thessalonica, in the 17. of
the Acts of the Apostles: So that this Salvo for the nobility must needs be
(under your Lordships favor) a secret wound unto the rest of the ministry,
unless your Lordships by your great wisdom will be willing to change it into
a Panacea and commonplaister, both to the one, and the other: and under your
Lordships favor, I conceive may be done upon a very forcing argument. The
office of the ministry is of equal importance and takes up the whole man, and
all his best endeavors in the noble born, as well as in the mean born minister,
but it is lawful all this notwithstanding, for the noble born mininster to
intermeddle with secular affairs, and therefore it is likewise lawful for the
mean born so to do. And so in my Conscience I speak it, in the presence of God,
and great noble men; it is most lawful for them to intermeddle with secular
affairs, so as they be not entangled, (as the Apostle calls it) with this
intermedling as to slight and neglect the office of their calling, which no
minister noble or ignoble can do without grievously sinning against God and his
own Conscience: It is lawful for persons in holy orders to intermeddle, it is
without question, or else they could not make provision of meat and drink, as
Beza interprets the place: It is not lawful for them to be thus entangled and
bound up with secular affairs, which I humbly beseech your Lordships to
consider, not as a distinction invented by me, but clearly expressed by the
Apostle himself.

And thus my noble Lords, I shall without any further molestation, and with
humble thanks for this great patience leave this great Cause of the Church to
your Lordships wise and gracious consideration: Here is my Mars-Hill, and
further I shall never appeal for justice. Some assurance I have from the late
solemn vote and protestation of both Houses, for the maintaining and defending
the power, and privileges of Parliament, that if this Bill were now to be
framed, in the one House, it would never be offered without much qualification,
as I persuade my self it will not be approved in the other.

Parliaments are indeed omnipotent, but no more omnipotent then God himself,
who for all that cannot do every thing. God cannot but perform his promise. A
Parliament (under favor) cannot unswear, what it has already vowed. This is
an old Maxim, which I have learned of the Sages of the Law, a parliament
cannot be felo de se, It cannot destroy or undo it self.

An Act of parliament (as that in the 11. and another in the 21* Rich. 2.) made
to be unrepealable in any subsequent parliament, was ipso facto, void in the
constitution; why? Because it took away the power and privileges, that is, not
the plumes and feathers, the remote accidents, but the very specifical form,
essence, and being of a parliament, So if an Act should be made to take away
the Votes of all the Commons, or of all the Lords, it were absolutely a void
Act.

I will conclude with the first Epistle to the Corinthians, Cap 12.

Verse. 15. If the Foot shall say, because I am not the hand I am not of the
Body, is it therefore not of the body?

Verse. 20. But now are they many Members, yet but one Body.

Verse. 2^. And the Eye cannot say unto the Hand, I have no need of thee, nor
again the Head unto the Feet, I have no need of you.

Some Annotations upon the Archbishops SPEECH.
WHereas the Archbishop says, Sect. 3. That the Bishops sat in parliaments
and all public Assemblies of State a thousand years, it is certainly true, as
appears fully by the Subscriptions of their names to all constitutions, Laws,
and Ordinances, made in the several great Councels of the Kingdom, in the
times of the Saxon Kings; the manner being then to give their assent, not by
verbal voting, but by subscribing their names, as fully appears in Sir Henry
Spelmans Edition of the Counsels, at the end of all such Assemblies and
Counsels, as were then held. And whereas the Archbishop says, that the
princes of the Norman race erected the Bishoprics into Baronies, it is very
true, as Cambden shows in his Britannia, page 170. And so the great Abbots
also, heretofore by right and custom were peers of the Kingdom, and did sit
in parliaments, to order, decree, and determine. But the Conqueror ordained
both Bishops and Abbots to be under military Service, erecting every Bishop and
Abbey at his Will and pleasure, and appointing how many Soldiers he would
require of them to be furnished for him and his Successors in times of
Hostility and War. So that the Tenure and Title of Barons, being imposed on
them, it was no addition of honor to them, they being superior to Thanes or
Barons though as Cambdon says out of Matthew Paris. That which was then
complained of by the Cleagy, and accounted as a burden, in the age ensuing was
accounted as the greatest honor. And so it has continued as a Title of Honor
^o the Bishops.

Whereas the Archbishop says, That the Word and Sacraments, the means of our
Salvation, will not be effectually received from those Ministers, whose persons
shall be so vilified and dejected as to be made no parcels or fragments of the
Commonwealth.

This does certainly prove too true, Religion it self is vilified, and the Word
of God and his Sacraments neglected almost in every parish; because the persons
that should perform the duties and offices, are become contemptible for want of
that Honor and Respect which they enjoyed legally heretofore. Therefore God
anciently in the Kingdom of Israel, did greatly honor the Tribe of Levi, when
he made the priests and Levites the principal officers and Judges in every
Court, to whom the people were to be obedient upon pain of Death. Deuteronomy. 17. 12.
The Administration of law and Justice throughout the Kingdom depended o^ them
principally. For God made his Covenant with Levi of Life and Peace. The Law of
Truth was in his Mouth. The Priests Lips should preserve knowledge, and they
should seek the Law at his Mouth, Mal. 2. 5, 6, 7. and so Ezekiel 44. 23. They
shall teach my people the difference between the holy and profane, and cause
them to discern between the unclean and the clean, and in Controversy they
shall stand in judgment and they shall judge according to my Judgment and
they shall keep my Laws, and my Statntes in all my Assemblies; They being the
principal Judges and Lawyers in that Commonwealth of Gods own Constitution.
And whereas it is now granted on all hands, that there was three Courts of
Justice in that Kingdom, 1. The great Council of 70, Elders, 2. The Court of
Judgment consisting of 23. 3. The Court of some three or some few more: The
Priests and Levites were principal men, both Judges and Officers in all Courts,
both Scophtim and Schoterim. as 1. Chron. 19. 8, 11. both to give Sentence and
Judgment, and also to execute the same. So the Divines do affirm also in their
late Annotations upon. 1 Chronicles. 26, 29, 30. and 2. Chron. 19. 8, 11. They did
study the Judicial and ^olitick Laws, and had power to see the Law of God, and
injunctions of the King to be observed, and to order divine and humane affairs.
And they held also other Honorable offices, 1 Chronicles. 26. 14.
for we read that Zechariah a Levite was a wise Counselor: and Benajah a
priest son of Iehojadah, was one of David's twelve Captains, 1 Chronicles. 27. 5
being the third Captain of the Host, for the third month, 1 Chronicles. 11. 22.
and in his course consisting of 2400, was his son Amizabad, Benajah was also
one of David's principal worthies, having the name among the three mighties. He
was also Captain of the Guard to David, and after the Death of Ioab, he was
made Lord General of the Host by King Solomon in Ioabs room 1. King. 2. 35. And
this is fully to be proved by excellent learned men. As Sigonius, Bertram,
Casaubon, Moulin, especially by the learned Hugo Grotius, upon Mal. 5. 21.
Where he does accurately show out of the Text, Josephus, Philo, and other
Monuments of the Jews, that there was no distinction of Courts, the one
Ecclesiastical, the other Civil, (as Calvin and Beza, and some others that
follow them would have it) but the Judges and Courts were united, and the
Priests and Levites the principal Judges and Officers in every Court, to whom
the people were to be obedient, upon pain of Death. Deuteronomy. 17. 12. They being
appointed to hear every cause between blood and blood, between plea and plea,
and between Stroke and Stroke, being matters of Controversy within thy Gates.
And as our Laws call them, Pleas of the Crown, and Common pleas, or whatsoever
else did arise among them, pertaining to God and the King, 1 Chronicles, 26. 30. 32.
for which purpose God did scatter them in every Tribe, and turned the curse of
Jacob into a singular blessing: to be divided in Jacob, and scattered in
Israel, Genesis 49. 7
Appointing 1700 to be on the West Side Jordan, and 2700, on the East Side.

The ancient frame of our Kingdom for 500. years beforre the Conquest, was
thus disposed and governed. As Spelman shows fully in his learned Glossary
and Councels: and happy had it been if things had continued so still: But now
the Law being otherwise settled, and the Courts divided, it is not safe, or
easy to make alteration. Only without change of Law or Courts, the Benches may
continue as they are, though some more Judges be added in most Courts, and some
Eclesiastical persons among them: as in the Saxon times. Comes praesidebat foro
Comitatus, non solus sed adjunctus Episcopo, hic ut jus divinum ille ut hnmanum
diceret; alterque alteri anxilio esset and Consilio: Praesertim Episcopus
Comiti, nam in hunc illi annimadvertere saepe licuit, and errantem cohibere:
Idem igitur utrique territorium, and jurisdictionis terminus. Glossarium in
Comes page 111.

The Bishop and Earl of the County were joint Magistrates in every Shire, and
did assist each other in all Causes and Courts, and so Mr. Seldom in his
History cap. 14. Sect. 1. By this means there was great union and harmony
between all judges and officers, whereas now there is great contention for
jurisdiction, and intolerable clashing in all Courts, by Injunctions,
prohibitions, Consultations, and cross orders, to the great Vexation of the
Clients and Subjects. And by multiplying several Courts, the number of Lawyers
is greatly increased, as Lord Cook shows, 4. Instit. p. 76. Where he gives
diverse reasons of the increase of Suits in Law, and in the same Book reckons
up no less then 74. Courts of Law and justice of all sorts in the Kingdom,
besides the Ecclesiastical Courts: Which are not many for the number, and had
little business to do, when they were in greatest power. For commonly two or
three proctors were enough to dispatch the business of any Bishops Court,
without Advocates.

But in the Courts of Common Law, there is a far^ greater number of Lawyers in
these times, whereas there was but an 140. Lawyers and Attorneys, appointed by
that Martial and Legislative King. Edw. 2. When he distinguished the Courts,
and appointed the number of Lawyers and Attorneys for the whole Kingdom,
whereof the Writ is referred unto by Lord Cook 4. Instit. page 76. But the writ
it self is put down by Spelman in his Glossary page 44. and 58. Sed hodie forte
in uno Comitatu, tot solummodo Atlornati reperiantur.

But the Division and Separation of the Ecclesiastical Courts from the
Temporal, seems to have proceeded first from Pope Nicholas the first, as is
mentioned in Gratian. Com. Cum ad verum 96. Distinct. about two hundred years
before the Conquest, which was imitated among us by William the Conqueror,
whose Statute for that purpose is recited and illustrated by Spelman in his
Glossary, and lately also published by Mr. Seldom and Lord Cook 4. Instit. c.
52. So that as the Pope has been the Author of much evil in the World
oftentimes, so in this particular, when he came to the height of his
greatness, having (de facto) the Supremacy in all Ecclesiastical matters, he
made the Clergy subject only to himself, and his Deputies and Legates and such
officers as he sent among us. But at length Hen. 8. Contested with the Pope,
and recovered the Supremacy of his Crown, though it cost much blood and
opposition in his time. But he having recovered it, and it being approved by
Parliament, it is fully settled upon the King, and vested in his Crown. -- And
as Lord Cook says, 4. Instit. page 331. -- His Majesty has, and Queen
Elizabeth before him had, as great and ample Supremacy and Jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical as ever King of England, had before them; and that had justly
and rightly pertained to them by diverse other Acts, and by the ancient Laws of
England, if the Clause of annexation in the said Statute of 1 Eliz. had never
been inserted. Wherefore the Speech of John Pym (as in Rushworths Collections
4. Caroli) That the Supremacy was given by parliament to the Crown (and as he
seems to understand it) may be taken away by parliament, is a dangerous
opinion not to be endured, Lord Cook says, 4. Instit. page 325. The Act 1.
Eliz, is an Act of Restitution.] not a gift merely given, which was not
formerly due, and belonging to the jurisdiction of the Crown: If therefore the
King has his Supremacy vested in his Crown so firmly, and is Custos ntriusque
Tabulae by the Word of God, as the Archbishop shows; Then this
Ecclesiastical Head must be allowed to have some Ecclesiastical Senses, to be
consulted withal, excellently learned and principal persons of the Clergy; And
as he adds truly; If Cranmer the Archbishop had been thus dealt withal, and
suppressed in the minority of our young Josias Ed. 6. What had become of the
great work of our Reformation: and also if Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, and the
rest of the protestant Bishops (Martyrs afterward) had been set aside and
neglected, the Reformation could not have been effected. Therefore unless the
King have good choice of Ecclesiastical persons, excellently Learned Bishops
both in the ancient Councels, Fathers, Histories, and Controversies, and in
Canon and Civil Laws, requisite to determine of great difficulties that will
continually happen in the Church, whereof the Conusance belongs to the
Spiritualty, as Lord Cook shows out of the Statute 25. H. 8. cap. 21. and
commends them for their Knowledge, Integrity and Sufficiency; and if so then,
much more at this day, I says Coke.] When all kind of Learning is eminently
advanced to an higher degree then in the time of Hen. 8.

John Pym, in another Speech 4. Caroli would have the Arminian points settled
and determined in parliament, -- viz, Concerning Predestination, Absolute
Reprobation, Universal Grace, Free Will, and Final perseverance, before the
King should have Subsidies granted, Tunnage or poundage. But if they would give
no money to the King, till those difficult poins be cleared and resolved, the
King must never have any Subsidies granted. For those Questions are so
mysterious and abstruse, that all the Divines in the world cannot yet resolve
fully upon them. But these and such like difficult questions in Divinity belong
to the Convocation of the Clergy (as Cook shows Instit. page 322.) and they
are to be called in time of parliaments, by the Kings Writ, and are to proceed
juxta legem divinam and Canones sanctae Ecclesiae says Cook. ibid. And they
are divided into two parts, viz. The Upper House, where the Archbishops and
Bishops sit. and the lower House, where the rest do sit. And they have two
prolocutors, one of the Bishops of the Higher House chosen by that House,
another of the lower house, and presented to the Bishops for their prolocutor.
Cook ibid. The Convocation of the Clergy made the thirty nine Articles of
Religion, the Common prayer Book, and the Book of ordination of Bishops,
priests, and Deacons: and the Book of Canons: To all which what subscription is
required by Law, Lord Coke shows page 323. But in the late long parliament
all these Books and good orders are cast aside and neglected, and nothing
established in stead thereof. But it is hoped that the most excellent and
gracious King Charles the Second, will so confirrm the Truth of our Religion
and all good orders, Laws, Customs, and Rights as there shall be a full and
happy Conclusion of all differences, and the peace of the Kingdom and Church
established, to the advancement of Gods glory, and the rejoicing of all that
are truly wise and religious.

Lord Cook shows page 325. How the Commission Court for causes Ecclesiastical
was settled,

That such Jurisdiction Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Power or Authority has heretofore been, or lawfully may be
exercised or used for the Uisitation of the Ecclesiastical State, and Persons:
And for Reformation, Order, and Correction of the same; and of all manner of
Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and Enormities, shall
for ever be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

But not to the House of Commons, or any others: but by the dissolution of the
high Commission, and all other Courts Ecclesiastical, there is risen up such an
infinite and prodigious number of sectaries, factions, divisions in Religion,
enormities and disorders, as is lamentable to behold, and all scandalous sins,
as adultery, fornication, incest, and such as ought not to be named among
Christians, go unpunished daily. If a bastard Child be gotten, the Justices of
the peace do only take care for keeping of the bastard, but for the offense and
scandal given to Religion, they do nothing; that belongs to the
Ecclesiastical Court, to enjoin what penance is fitting, according to
Ecclesiastical Laws, which have been neglected too much of late, though they
are ancient and fundamental, as well as any Common Laws.

But it is testified fully by the best learned Divines in foreign Countries,
that our Church of England was the only Church reformed, by peaceable means,
and gracious Princes; whereas others in France, Germany, and other places, were
reformed most part by tumults, and violent wars: Beza from Geneva, said of the
Reformation by Queen Elizabeth: Doctrinae puritas viget in Anglia pure and
sincere: so said Peter Martyr, and Zanchy, and Damens, when they saw the
Confession of our faith in the thirty nine Articles, and others parts of our
Reformation, so excellently defended by the Renowned Bishop Jewel, in his
Apology and Defense thereof against Harding the Papist, books far more
excellent, and pious, then ever Cartwright, or any Presbyterian published: and
of late times, the learned Deodatus, professor at Geneva: does magnify the
Church of England as the most eminent of all the Reformed Churches, stiling it
-- Florentissima Anglia ocellus ille Ecclesiarum, peculium Christi singular,
Perfugium afflictorum, imbellium Armamentarium, inopum promptuarium, spei
melioris vexillum, -- splendidae Domini Caulae: and much more he adds,
speaking of our happiness before these troubles, and so it might have continued
still, if the Clergy might have enjoyed those rights and privileges, which the
priesthood of God, did anciently enjoy in all ages; for in the Law of nature,
before Moses, the priesthood was honorable: Priests being then the first born
and eldest sons of the Family, not younger Brethren, or poor fellows of the
bas^st of the people: How honorable the Priesthood was in the tribe of Levi, is
well known. Sir James Sempill a learned Knight of Scotland, does show it fully
in his book of Sacrilege in many places. Cap. 6. Sect. 4. speaking of the
dignity of the Church ministry of old: For tithes inheritance in the person of
one Royal Melchisedeck. Royal, I say, in regard of the great odds between that,
and this our age now: For of old, (as writes Josephus) the true mark of
nobility was to derive a man's Pedigree from the Priesthood: so Josephus was a
Gentleman, because (...) sanguine sacerdotali. And in our time, the only best
Tenure and Holding of Possessions, was to hold of the Church, but now all to
the contrary: For Rome has frustrate her ministry of Matrimony, and we at
home, ours of their patrimony: She can bring forth no well begotten Children,
and we but few well beneficed Church men: No Joseph's in her, and all Jobs with
us: and instead to hold of the Church, we hold all from the Church, both much
amiss: And as he says in his preface to King James, -- Truly it never goes
better, then when the Church Courteth it, and the Court Churcheth it, for Moses
and Aaron were Brothers.] Well might the Learned and Religious Knight complain
that things are much amiss, when in the times of the light of Learning, and
Religion reformed has in great measure flourished among us, but of late been
so defaced and deformed, that it is lamentable to report more of it; the
Enormities being so great and scandalous, that unless the Kings Majesty out of
his singular piety and wisdom, do resume the ancient Jurisdiction of his Crown
-- Who only has the proper power, and authority to reform and correct all
manner of Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts, and Enormitie -- ]
as are the express words of the Statute, 1, Eliz. as they are recited and
enforced, by Lord Coke 4. Instit. Page 325. there can be little hope of
Redress, but as the Queen then, did assign and authorize Commissioners to
execute this Jurisdiction, so it may be now done; Commissioners may be
appointed by the King to perform and execute his power in as full and ample
manner, as Queen Elizabeth did, and as Lord Coke says, it may be done without
the help of a Parliament, as the King appoints Judges, and great Officers in
all the Courts in Westminsterhall, without consent of Parliaments. The Learned
Lord Herbert in his History of Hen. 8. relating some passages of the Kings
Reformation of some abuses, affirms, that the first fatal blow the English
Church received, was, when the Redress of her was referred to the House of
Commons: Complaint was made for probate of testaments, and mortuaries, of
pluralities, non-residence, and priests that were farmers of Lands -- etc.

But the King lost, or let go for the present, a principal point of his
Supremacy, whereby he might have reformed what was fit to be done in these and
many the like businesses, without referring to the House of Commons, and we
find that they never left off reforming till they have utterly deformed all,
and wholly suppressed all Ecclesiastical Law, Courts and Jurisdictions. The
King by his Supremacy might have reformed and prescribed Laws, for probate of
Wills, non-residence, pluralities, and many more such matters; the Concurrence
of the Metropolitan had been sufficient to regulate such matters, according to
the Laws Ecclesiastical; for there are Laws Ecclesiastical in this Kingdom as
well as Temporal, and as ancient and fundamental as any part of the Common Law,
and therefore fit to be duly kept and observed. Linwood does gloss upon the
Constitutions made by the Archbishops of Canterbury, which are accepted for
good Laws by the Common Lawyers in Ecclesiastical matters: and so there are
also Constitutions for the province of York, and the Northern parts, all which
are allowed for good Laws Ecclesiastical by those that are truly learned in
the Laws.

Two SPEECHES spoken in the House of Lords, by the Lord Viscount Newarke. The
first concerning the right of BISHOPS to sit and vote in Parliament, May 21.
1641.
MY LORDS,
I Shall take the boldness to speak a word or two upon this subject, first as
it is in it self, then as it is in the consequence: For the former, I think he
is a great stranger in Antiquity, that is not well acquainted with that of
their sitting here, they have done thus and in this manner almost since the
conquest, and by the same power and the same right as the other Peers did, and
your Lordships now do; and to be put from this their due, so much their due, by
so many hundred years strengthened and confirmed, and that without any offense,
nay, pretense of any, seems to me to be very severe: if it be jus, I dare
boldly say it is summum. That this hinders their Ecclesiastical vocation, an
argument I hear much of, has in my apprehension more of shadow then substance
in it^: if this be a reason, sure I am, it might have been one six hundred
years ago.

A Bishop, my Lords, is not so circumscribed within the circumference of his
Diocese, that his sometimes absence can be termed, no not in the most strict
sense, a neglect or hindrance of his duty, no more then that of a Leiutenant
from his County, they both have their subordinate Ministers, upon which their
influences fall, though the distance be remote.

Besides, my Lords, the lesser must yield to the greater good; to make wholesome
and good Laws for the happy and well regulating of Church and Commonwealth, is
certainly more advantageous to both, then the want of the personal execution of
their office, and that but once in three years, and then peradventure but a
month or two, can be prejudicial to either. I will go no further to prove
this, which so long experience has done so fully, so demonstratively.

And now my Lords, by your Lordships good leave, I shall speak to the
consequence as it reflects both on your Lordships, and my Lords the Bishops,
Dangers and inconveniences are ever best prevented elonginqu^, this precedent
come near to your Lordships, and such a one, that mutato nomine de vobis.
Pretenses are never wanting, nay, sometimes the greatest evils appear in the
most fair and specious outsides, witness the Shipmony, the most abominable, the
most illegal thing that ever was, and yet this was painted over with color of
the Law; what Bench is secure, if to allege, be to convince; and which of your
Lordships can say then he shall continue a member of this House, when at one
blow twenty six are cut off. It then behooves the Neighbor to look about him
cum proximus ardet Ucalegon.

And for the Bishops, my Lords, in what condition will you leave them? The
House of Commons represents the meanest person, so did the Master his Slave,
but they have none to do so much for them; and what justice can tie them to the
observation of those laws, to whose constitution they give no consent, the
wisdom of former times gave proxies unto this House merely upon this ground,
that every one might have a hand in the making of that which he had an
obligation to obey: This House could not represent, therefore proxies in room
of persons were most justly allowed.

And now my Lords, before I conclude, I beseech your Lordships to cast your
eyes upon the Church, which I know is most dear and tender to your Lordships,
you will see her suffer in her most principal members, and deprived of that
honor which here and throughout all the Christian world ever since
Christianity she constantly has enjoyed; for what Nation or Kingdom is there
in whose great and public Assemblies, and that from her beginning, she had not
some of hers, if I may not say as essential, I am sure I may say as integral
parts thereof: And truly my Lords, Christianity cannot alone boast of this, or
challenge it only as hers, even Heathenisme claims an equal share.

I never read of any of them, Civil or Ba^barous, that gave not thus much to
their Religion, so that it seems to me to have no other original to flow from
no other spring, than Nature her self.

But I have done, and will trouble your Lordships no longer; how it may stand
with the honor and justice of this House to pass this Bill, I most humbly
submit unto your Lordships, the most proper and only Judges of them both.

The Second SPEECH about the Lawfulness and Convenience of their intermedling
in Temporal Affairs.
MY LORDS,
I Shall not speak to the preamble of the Bill, that Bishops and Clergy men
ought not to intermeddle in temporal Affairs. For truly My Lords, I cannot
bring it under any respect to be spoken of. Ought is a word of Relation, and
must either refer to humane or divine Law: To prove the lawfulness of their
intermedling by the former, would be to no more purpose, then to labor to
convince that by reason, which is evident to sense. It is by all acknowledged,
The unlawfulness by the latter, the Bill by no means admits of, for it excepts
Universities and such persons as shall have honor descend upon them. And your
Lordships know, that circumstance and chance alter not the nature and essence
of a thing, nor can except any particular from an universal proposition by God
himself delivered. I will therefore take these two as granted, first, that they
ought by our Law to intermeddle in temporal affairs, Secondly that from doing
so they are not inhibited by the Law of God, it leaves it at least as a thing
indifferent. And now my Lords, to apply my self to the business of the day, I
shall consider the convenience and that in the several habitudes thereof, but,
very briefly; first in that which it has to them merely as men, qua tales,
then as parts of the Commonwealth, Thirdly, from the best manner (...)
constituting Laws, and lastly from the practice of all (...) both Christian and
Heathen.

Homo sum, nihil humanum a me alienum puto, was indeed the saying of the
Comedian, but it might well have becom'd the mouth of the greatest Philosopher.
We allow to sense all the works and operations of sense, and shall we restrain
reason? Must only man be hindered from his proper actions? They are most fit to
do reasonable things that are most reasonable. For Science commonly is
accompanied with conscience; So is not ignorance: They seldom or never meet.
And why should we take that capacity from them, which God and Nature have so
liberally bestowed?

fruges consumere nati.

Senatus Populusque Romanus, the most glorious Commonwealth that ever was, and
those many others in Greece and elsewhere of eternal memory.

Some things, my Lords, are so evident in themselves that they are difficult in
their proofs. Amongst them I ^^ckon this Convenience I have spoken of: I will
therefore (...) but a word or two more in this way. The long experien^^* that
all Christendom has had hereof for these 1300. years, is certainly,
argumentum ad hominem. Nay my Lords I will go further (for the same reason runs
through all Religions) never was there any Nation that employed not their
religious men in the greatest affairs. But to come to the business that now
lies before your Lordships, Bishops have voted here ever since Parliaments
began, and long before were employed in the public. The good they have done,
your Lordships all well know, and at this day enjoy: For this I hope ye will
not put them out, nor for the evil they may do, which yet your Lordships do not
know, and I am confident never shall suffer. A position ought not to be
destroyed by a supposition, and a pass ad esse non valet consequentia. My
Lords I have done with proving of this positively, I shall now by your good
favors do it negatively, in answering some inconveniences that may seem to
arise.

For the Text, Object. 1.
[No man that wars entangles himself with the affairs of this life] which is
the full sense of the word both in Greek and Latin, it makes not at all
against them, except to intermeddle and entangle be terms equivalent. Besides
my Lords, though this was directed to a Churchman, yet it is of a general
nature, and reaches to all, Clergy and Laity, as the most learned and best
expositors unanimously do agree. To end this, Argumentum symbolicum non est
argumentativum.

It may be said that it is inconsistent with a spiritual vocation; Object. 2.
truly my Lords, Grace and Nature are in some respects incompossible, but in
some others most harmoniously agree, it perfects nature and raises it to a
height above the common altitude, and makes it most fit for those great works
of God himself, to make laws, to do Justice. There is then no inconsistency
between themselves, it must arise out of Scripture, I am confident it does not
formally out of any place there, nor did I ever meet with any learned Writer of
these or other times that so expounded any Text.

But though in strict terms this be not inconsistent, yet i^ may peradventure
hinder the duty of their other calli^g. My Lords; there is not any that sits
here, more for pr^aching than I am. I know it is the ordinary means to
salvation, yet, I likewise know, there is not that full necessity of it as was
in the primitive times. God defend that 1600. years acquaintance should make
the Gospel of Christ no better known unto us. Neither, my Lords, does their
office merely and wholly consist in preaching, but partly in that, partly in
praying and administering the blessed Sacraments, in a godly and exemplary life,
in wholesome admonitions, in exhortations to virtue, dehortations from vice, and
partly in easing the burdned conscience. These my Lords, complete the office of
a Church man. Nor are they altogether tied to time or place, though I confess
they are most properly exercised within their own verge, except upon good
occasion, nor then the omission of some can be termed the breach of them all. I
must add one more an essential one, the very form of Episcopacy that
distinguishes it from the inferior Ministry, the orderly and good government
of the Church; and how many of these, I am sure not the last, My Lords is
interrupted by there sitting here, once in 3. years, and then peradventure but
a very short time: And can there be a greater occasion than the common good of
the Church and State? I will tell your Lordships what the great and good
Emperor Constantine did in his expedition against the Persians, he had his
Bishops with him whom he consulted about his military affairs, as ^uscbius has
it in h^s life, lib. 4. c. 56.

Reward and punishment are the greatest negotiators in all worldly businesses;
Object. 4.
these may be said to make the Bishops swim against the stream of their
consciences, and may not the same be said of the Laity? Have these no
operations, but only upon them? Has the King neither ^rown, honor nor offices,
but only for Bishops? Is there nothing that answers their translations? Indeed
my Lords, I must needs say that in charity, it is a supposition not to be
supposed; no, nor in reason, that they will go against the light of their
understanding. The holiness of their calling, their knowledge, their freedom
from passions and affections to which youth is very obnoxious, their vicini^y
to the Gates of death, which, though not shut to any, yet always stand wide
open to old age: these my Lords, will surely make them steer aright.

But of matter of fact there is no disputation, Object. 5.
some of them have done ill, crimine ab uno discant omnes is a poetical not a
logical argument. Some of the Judges have done so, some of the Magistrates, and
Offi^ers; and shall there be therefore neither Judge, Magistrate nor officer
more? A personal crime goes not beyond the person that commits it, nor can
another fault be mine offense. If they have contracted any fil^h or corruption
through their own or the vice of the times, cleanse and purge them thoroughly.
But still remember the great difference between reformation and extirpation.
And be pleased to think of your Triennial Bill which will save you this labor
for the time to come; fear of punishment will keep them in order, if they
should not themselves through the love of virtue. I have now my Lords,
according (...) my poor ability both showed the conveniences, and answered
those inconveniences, that seem to make against them. I should now propose
those that make for them, as their falling into a condition worse than slaves,
not represented by any; and then he dangers and inconveniences that may happen
to your Lordships; but I have done this heretofore, and will not offer your
Lordships Cram^en bis coctam.

FINIS.

