Advice to the Young: OR, THE REASONABLENESS AND ADVANTAGES OF AN Early
Conversion to GOD DEMONSTRATED, In Three DISCOURSES On Ecclesiastes xii. 1.

By JOSEPH STENNETT.

MICAH vii. 1. -- My Soul desired the first-ripe Fruit. LONDON, Printed by I.
D. and to be sold by Andrew Bell at the Cross-Keys in the Poultrey, MDCXCV.

TO THE READER.
THE following Sermons were preached above a Year ago to a Congregation in
London, and since transcribed partly from some brief Notes I had reserved in my
Study, and partly from the Prints of some remaining Ideas not quite worn off my
Memory; while new Occurring Meditations (here and there interspersed) supplied
the place of those which Time and other Thoughts had effaced.

This was done to gratify a worthy Friend, who as he was not displeased in
hearing them, so was desirous to read 'em too: And after that, would not be
denied the Liberty of making 'em public.

I hope it will not be thought that I have treated on God's Relation to Man as
his Creator, in the first Sermon, after a manner too abstracted and
Philosophical for a practical Discourse, when it is considered that we live in
an Age wherein some Men will hearken to no other kind of Arguments; and wherein
the Minds of others cannot be too well fortified against the Contagion of
Atheism; especially seeing I have taken up but a few Pages in pursuing that
Vein of reasoning, the greatest part of which has been added in transcribing.

What is advanced in these Discourses I have labored to sustain both by
Scripture and Reason; and endeavored to speak to the Understandings as well as
to the Affections of my Auditors, and now of my Readers.

Those who apply themselves with seriousness and attention to the reading of
them, (I hope) will not think their Time and Labor entirely lost: I Am sure I
shall not repent mine in composing 'em, if it shall please God to make 'em the
means of converting one Sinner from the error of his Way; Jam. 5. 20.
and so of saving a Soul from Death, and of hiding a multitude of Sins. To
which great End that they may succeed, I humbly commit 'em to the Guidance of
his Providence, and to the Conduct of his Spirit, with my earnest Wishes and
Prayers.

J. S.

ERRATA.
P. 32. l. 1. f. the r. that. p. 67. marg. r. (...). p. 113. marg. f. wrote r.
written. p. 126. l. 8. r. Tabernacles; l. 10. f. it r. them.

THE Reasonableness and Advantages OF AN Early Conversion to God DEMONSTRATED.
SERMON I.
ECCLES. xii. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, while the
Evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.
HOW much soever the Thoughts of Youth are busied with the amusing
Entertainment of the many sensible Objects that accost 'em, and thereby
rendered unapt for serious Reflections on the Vanity of the World, and on the
Excellency and Happiness of a Spiritual and Heavenly Conversation: Yet one
would think, when Reason, Experience and Religion, all conspire to bespeak
their Attention, (as they do in our Text, and indeed in this whole Book) it
might reasonably be expected that many would have the Justice or Prudence, or
at least the Curiosity, to give three such Monitors a hearing.

When a Prince excelling all other Men in Wisdom, and other Monarchs in Wealth
and Splendour, has so much Charity for Mankind as to turn a Preacher; Eccl. 1. 1.
Who would not be ambitions to become his Auditor? The News of his Wisdom and
Grandeur drew the Queen of Sheba from the utmost parts of the Earth, 1 King. 10.
to become an immediate and admiring Witness of what she had before, at a
distance, and but imperfectly heard (Fame it self, which uses so mightily to
inhance the Glory of other Princes, having, it seems, detracted from his, which
so far exceeded the common Standard, that its Luster was lessened by those
Encomiums which might have been justly counted strained Hyperboles, when
applied to others.) Who would not then, at least, so far imitate that Generous
Princess, as to recollect his roving Thoughts from the ends of the Earth,
whither they are prone to wander, to fix them on a Subject, which the Great and
Wise Solomon recommends to Youth with the greatest Advantage of Reason, and
Strength of Argument? Curiosity (if no other Consideration should) would
undoubtedly prompt many to desire, with the Queen of the South, to hear his
Wise Speeches, (if he were now alive) and to undergo the Charge and Fatigue of
a long Journey to that end. Ought we not then to put a High Value on his
Writings, wherein we have that very Sense, which so much astonished his
Hearers, when he spoke to them; and by which (as it is said of Abel) being Dead,
Heb. 11. 4.
he yet speaks to us? Nor have we need to traverse the Mighty Waters to hear
him, or to say (as Moses speaks concerning the Law) Who shall go over the Sea
for us, Deu^. 30. 13, 14.
and bring his Words to us, that we may hear them and do them? seeing they are
so very near us in the Divine Treatises he has written.

And as his extraordinary Knowledge promises us much, so his large Experience
may justly raise our Expectation still higher. This makes a Man speak both more
feelingly, and with more Demonstration. Besides, it is not only the Experience
of a Man endowed with a vast Stock of Wisdom and good Sense, who, consequently,
was able to make very curious and exact Remarks on the Event of Things; but of
one, who by the Advantage of his elevated Station in the World, and of his
Immense Riches, was also capable of furnishing himself with whatever the World
could yield, Eccles. 2. 4-10.
or his large Curiosity desire. And tho it was his great Unhappiness and Sin to
give his Heart to know Madness and Folly, Eccl. 1. 17.
after that criminal manner he confesses he did: Chap. 2. 1, 3, etc.
Yet even this may make way for his Advice; since he that here decries a loose
and sensual, and commends a strict and virtuous course of Life, is one, who had
thoroughly tried what Pleasures the World could afford; and upon a just Estimate
pronounces them all, not only Vanity, but Vexation of Spirit, at the beginning
of this Book; and at the latter end of it, Eccl. 12. 13.
from his happier Experience of the Worth and Sweetness of a Religious Life,
recommends it as the only way to Happiness. So that since these Thoughts are
the Result, not only of his Speculation, but of his Experience too, and that an
Experience so dearly bought, at the Expense of so much Thought and Invention,
(unhappily employed in making Provision for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts
thereof) of so much Time and Treasure, Romans 13. 14.
and (which is infinitely more) at the Expense of his Innocence and Peace of
Conscience, and this with the great and apparent hazard of his Soul; How much
does it behove those that are Young to become Wise at his Cost, and to attend
to the Testimony of his Experience, as well as to the Evidence of his Reason?

But we have not only the Wisest Man in the World giving us Rules in a matter
of the greatest Weight, and confirming them with the Probatum est of a very
large and long Experience; for, behold, a Greater than Solomon is here. Mat.
12. 42
The Wisest of Men wrote this Book; but the Spirit of Wisdom inspired it. 2 Timothy 3. 16.
If then all the advantageous Characters of Solomon should not much influence
the Minds of Young Persons to regard his Admonitions; yet the Authority of the
Holy Spirit himself, whose Dictates these originally are, lays a strict
Obligation on them to observe 'em, as his own Divine Counsels, with a Religious
Zeal, and to respect 'em as his Precepts, with an awful Reverence.

To form in our Minds a just Idea of the general Drift and Design of this Book,
it is proper to observe, That as it is natural for Man to seek to be Happy, and
therefore the Philosophers of all Ages, and of all Nations, have given Rules
according to their Sense of Things, for the obtaining this great End; We have
Solomon (a very Philosophical Prince, and who of all others deserves best to be
termed the Prince of Philosophers) giving in this Book the History of himself,
with respect to the Method he took in the pursuit of Happiness; recounting to
us his false Steps for our warning; and at last making both the End and Duty,
and Interest of Man, to consist in the Service and Fear of God: All which seems
to be comprised in the Close of this Book, in those Words, Chap. 12. ver. 13.
Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole Matter, Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole Duty of Man: (For if we leave out the word
[Duty] which is not found in the Original, more Scope is given to the Words,
[This is the whole of Man] q. d. his whole Duty, End and Interest.) And while
he is looking back with Regret on the Loss of his own Time, and with a
Penitential Sorrow reflects on the Sins of his Youth, he earnestly admonishes
others to beware in Time of the Rock on which he split, to be warned of taking
a wrong Course by his Fall, to be persuaded to take a right one by his
Repentance; and, as an excellent Mean conducing to both their present and
future Happiness, to devote themselves, as soon as possible, to the Service of
God, or (in the Words of our Text) to Remember their Creator in the Days of
their Youth.

For our better understanding of which Words, Order directs us to take notice
of those in the two last Verses of the foregoing Chapter, on which they have an
immediate Dependence; where the Wise Man seems to obviate an Objection, which
some, especially those whose youthful Heat prompts 'em to pursue the Pleasures
of the World, would raise against his past Discourse, which so much depretiates
'em: If such should say, his Morals are too severe, he answers them, Chap. 11.
v. 9. Rejoice, O Young Man in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the
Days of thy Youth; and walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine
Eyes: Which (according to some) is a Concession of a moderate use of Worldly
Pleasures, and may be thus paraphrased. Imagine not (O Young Man) that I
pretend to make it a Crime for thee to be Cheerful in the use of the good
Things of this Life, which the Providence of God allots thee: No -- Gratify the
Desires of thy Heart, and entertain thy Eyes and other Senses with variety of
pleasant Objects, provided a due Moderation be observed in all these Things, so
that thou use, 1 Cor. ^. 31.
and not abuse 'em; for an Account of thy Management of them must be rendered
before the just Tribunal of the Alimighty: I do not bid thee renounce the Joys
and Comforts of this Life, [But know thou, that for all these Things God will
bring thee into Judgment.] I therefore caution thee of the Danger of being
ensnared by an Inordinate Desire of them.

Others interpret these Words as an Ironical Permission, whereby the Absurdity
of the wild Maxims, and extravagant Sayings, with which Young Persons are wont
to encourage themselves and others to persist in a vicious Course, are exposed;
and a serious Caution thereupon subjoined. Youth (say they) is the Time of Life
most fitted for Pleasure and Joy, the Senses are then most lively and
impressible; and as a multitude of charming Objects are continually inviting
us, so our own Inclinations are prompting us to embrace 'em. Now therefore is
the Time for us to abandon our Selves to Mirth and Pleasure. Well (says
Solomon) Rejoice, O Young Man, etc. q. d. Take thy own Course, give up thy self
to the Conduct of thy beloved Lusts, take thy fill of Jollity and Pleasure; but
mark the Consequence, be assured that for this Course of Life (if obstinately
persisted in) the Great and Just God will Judge and Condemn thee to Eternal
Pains, [Know thou, that for all these Things God will bring thee into Judgment.]

Which last Sense seems to me most Genuine, not only because we have several
Examples of this Ironical way of speaking in the Holy Scripture; as that Saying
of our Blessed Savior to his Disciples [Sleep on now, and take your rest]
seems to be, Mat. 26. 45.
both from the Reproof for Sleeping, v. 40, 41.
and Exhortation to Watchfulness, which he had given 'em just before; and from
the Alarm he gives 'em, not to indulge their Drowsiness, but to rise and be
going, (for the Reason he assigns) just after those Words: v. 45, 46.
And that of the Prophet Micajah to King Ahab, who inquired of him, 1 Kings 22.
15.
whether he should go up against Ramoth-Gilead, [Go and prosper, etc.] whereby
he assumes the Language of the false Prophets; but afterward explains himself
in express Terms [If thou return at all in Peace, v. 17, 18.
the Lord has not spoken by me.] See also 1 Kings 18. 27.
Not only do such Examples as these (I say) justify this Sense of the Words
last given; Ezekiel. 28. 3, 4.
but that which seems especially to make it preferable to the former is, that
those Phrases, in the Sentence we are examining, of [Walking in the way of
one's Heart, and in the sight of one's Eyes] cannot be easily accommodated to a
moderate use of Worldly Enjoyments, (as the former Sense supposes) seeing it is
evident, they are used to quite another purpose in the Scripture, by that
Prohibition God gave the Israelites [not to seek after their own Heart, Number.
15. 39.
and their own Eyes] and by the Curse Job imprecates on himself, [ if his Heart
had walked after his Eyes] Both which show, Job 31. 7.
that to walk after one's Heart and Eyes, is an Expression more fairly
applicable to a Dissolute and Sinful Course of Life, than to a Temperate use of
Lawful Pleasures.

After this Ironical Permission of Sinful Pleasures, and the serious
Premonition of Judgment subjoined to it, follows a Conclusion in these Terms,
Therefore remove Sorrow from thy Heart, and put away Evil from thy Flesh; Eccl.
11. 10.
for Childhood and Youth are Vanity.

Which some will have to be a Continuation of the Irony, and, if taken in a
proper Sense, to speak the Language of those Libertines, who notwithstanding
what he had before said, would still devote themselves to the Pleasures of Sin.
As if he should say, Cast away (as you resolve to do) all serious Thoughts; Fly
the Occasions of Trouble and Sorrow, as much as possible; avoid whatever is
ungrateful to Flesh and Blood: for Time is fleeting; Childhood and Youth, those
Opportunities of Delight and Pleasure, will soon vanish, therefore the Sweets
they afford must be reaped in their Season. For thus do some Sensualists argue,
for the present and earnest pursuit of Worldly Pleasures, from their Vanity in
respect of the shortness of their Continuance, which ought rather (when their
Eternal Ill Consequences are considered) to take off the edg of the Appetite
toward 'em. So the Prophet, Isa. 22. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 32.
and after him the Apostle introduces them arguing; Let us eat and drink, for
to morrow we shall die.

But it seems not so likely that the Irony should be reiterated after so
express and serious a warning of Judgment, as that in the former Verse,
especially seeing this is joined to it by a [Therefore], as a Conclusion
founded thereupon, [ Therefore remove Sorrow from thy Heart, etc.]

I should rather therefore give the Words such a Turn as this, viz. Seeing God
will bring thee to Judgment, therefore, Remove Sorrow, etc. q. d. Mix Innocence
with thy Joy; be Merry and Wise; Reform thy Life, and a good Conscience shall
be to thee a continual Feast. Prove. 15. 15. (...)
The Evil of Sorrow need not possess thy Heart, if the Evil of Sin be
extirpated from thy Flesh: Govern thy Body with Temperance and Chastity, and
Joy shall reign in thy Soul.

Or (as others will have it) Remove Anger from thy Heart, (for so the Word,
here translated Sorrow, (...)
properly signifies) q. d. Be not angry with them that advise thee well, or, be
not displeased with God for the strictness of his Precepts, which I recommend
to thee, or for the Severity of his Judgments of which I warn thee.

Or else the Passion of Anger, because it so violently agitates the Soul, may
be put for all the vicious Affections of the Mind, and then the meaning of the
Words is; Remove all sinful Passions from thy Mind: And put away Evil from thy
Flesh; Romans 6. 19.
q. d. Give not the Members of thy Body to the Service of Sin.

Which Exhortation is urged by this Reason [ For Childhood and Youth are
Vanity] q. d. These Pleasures, thou art so hotly in chase of now, will vanish
and disappear together with thy Youth, which is a Flower that soon fades; and
why should thou, for short-lived Joys, expose thy Soul to the Hazard of
Eternal Misery?

Or else the Sense of the Wife Man may be to this purpose; I have reason to
admonish those that are Young, of the Evil and Danger of a Sensual Life,
because none are so prone to be ensnared by its Charms as they, whose
Imaginations, Words and Actions are generally so vain, that they may be fitly
termed Vanity it self, Vanity in the Abstract; [ For Childhood and Youth are
Vanity.]

Upon which he adds a suitable Exhortation to such, in the Words of our Text,
which are connected to those above with a Particle, which in our Translation is
rendered [ Now], but is no Adverb of Time, (...)
but commonly signifies [ And], and so may be joined to what he had advised
before, viz, -- Put away Evil from thy Flesh, and Remember thy Creator; putting
this Sentence ( For Childhood and Youth are Vanity) in a Parenthesis between
those two Instructions. Or else it may be rendered [ Then] or [ Therefore], and
so is an Inference from the Premises; q. d. If there is a Time of Judgment to
be expected, and Childhood and Youth are Vanity, then it concerns such to
Remember their Creator, etc.

In which Words we have Three Things to consider.

First, A Duty enjoined or exhorted to.

Secondly, The special Time, of engaging in the performance of this Duty,
prescribed.

Thirdly, The Reasons of it intimated.

I. The Duty exhorted to, is [ Remember thy Creator.]

II. The special Time of engaging in this Duty, is signified;

1. In express Terms In the Days of thy Youth.]

2. By an opposite Periphrasis, which contains a Description of Old Age [ while
the Evil Days come not, not the Years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
Pleasure in them] i. e. before the approach of Old Age.

III. The Reasons hereof are couched and insinuated:

1. In the Terms of the Duty set before us, where the Relation we stand in to
God, as he is our Creator, implies the Obligation we are under, to Remember
him, and that in our Youth.

2. In the Terms used to signify the proper Time of this Duty; where the
fitness of the Season of Youth for entering one's Self into the Service of God,
and the Disadvantage of deferring it to Old Age, are suggested.

Of these we shall treat severally in their Order.

I. To explain the Duty to which we are exhorted, we shall consider,

First, The Object of it, namely our Creator; and we shall endeavor to show
what is included in that Title here attributed to God.

Secondly, The Act it self, of Remembering, what it imports.

First, We are first to enquire what is included in this Title of Creator, here
attributed to God.

1. It plainly and expressly declares, that God is the Author and Original of
the Being of Man.

And may also include,

2. That he is the Vpholder and Preserver of our Being.

3. That he is the Restorer and Reformer of Man.

4. That he is the Sovereign Arbiter and Disposer of our Being.

1. God is our Creator, as he is the Original and Author of our Being: For

(1.) He created the Matter of which we are composed, as well as that of all
the other Parts of the Universe. All Beings of which the World consists, all
that we have any Notices of either from Reason or Scripture, are either
Spiritual or Corporeal, and all these are the Works of God. Now Man is a
Creature compounded of both these kinds of Being; his Soul is a Spirit, and his
Body is a Material Substance: And both these Constituent Parts of Mankind were
created by God the Author of the whole Universe.

And here we consider the Term [Create] in its strictest Sense, namely, the
giving a Being to that which had none before, the producing of Something out of
Nothing, i. e. without any preexistent Matter to work upon.

Now it must be granted that the Soul and Body of Man, either are from
Eternity, or else had a Beginning in Time; and if they had a Beginning, that it
must be either from themselves, or from some other Being inferior to God, or
from God himself.

I shall therefore briefly prove, both from Reason and Scripture, that they are
not Eternal, but had a Beginning; and this not of themselves, nor of any other
Being but God himself; as our Text does import, by stiling him our Creator.

1st, Our Substance is not from Eternity: There is no plausible color for such
a wild Conceit; seeing there are no Characters of Eternity engraven on our
Souls, the nobler part of Man; much less are there any Vestiges of it imprinted
on that Clay of which our Bodies are composed.

The Memory we have of our own Existence, extends but to a very few Years;
therefore we cannot pretend, that we remember our selves to have been from
Eternity: Nor has any Eternal Being revealed to us that our Substance is
Eternal, tho we knew it not, or had forgotten it. And is it likely that a
Being, to which Thinking is essential, should have so excellent a Property as
to exist Eternally, and yet labor under so great a defect, as the entire
Oblivion of its own Eternal Duration? Is it to be imagined that if the Minds of
Men had been Eternal, there would have been any room left for those many New
and Great Improvements of Arts and Sciences, which have been so often seen in
the World? How could past Eternity be so deficient, as to leave any thing to
future Invention to discover or cultivate? Is it probable that our Knowledge
even of things much inferior to our selves, would be so inconsiderable as it
is, and that the vilest Insect, nay the most despicable portion of Inanimate
Matter, should so puzzle the most Speculative and Ingenious Minds, that enquire
into their Nature, if those Minds were from Eternity? Is it not much more
reasonable to conclude, that We are but of Yesterday, Job 8. 9.
because we know nothing? And can it be thought that a Being that wanted no
Cause for its Existence, should need a Cause to give it Properties far below
that of Eternity? That a Being which cannot be measured by Time, should yet be
liable to so many Changes and Troubles, as we see the Souls of Men are
continually exposed to?

And if the Soul cannot justly claim this Property, how can the Body, which
consists of dull unactive Matter, and wants those lesser Qualities which the
Soul possesses, be imagined to have that greater Excellency of Eternity, which
the Soul her self cannot reasonably pretend to?

No -- This is the Divine Prerogative, and is not to be attributed to any other
Being than the Supreme; who calls himself, Exodus 3. ^4.
I AM, i. e. Being in the Abstract, Being it self, and JEHOVAH, i. e. The
Eternal One; 1 Timothy 6. 16.
who only has Immortality in this Absolute Sense, and of whom alone it can be
said, Psalm. 9^. 2.
He is from Everlasting to Everlasting. Isa. 63. 16.


For what is Eternal is Infinite and Independent. Infinite in Duration; for
that which had no Cause to produce it does necessarily exist; and that which
necessarily Exists is infinitely Durable, and Independent by the same Reason:
And that which is Independent, and Infinite in Duration, may be justly
accounted Infinite in all other Respects, and so Infinitely Perfect; which is
the sole Prerogative of God, and Incommunicable to any Being inferior to him.

It therefore follows, that we had once no Being; that our Souls and Bodies, as
well as all other Beings (except God) had a Beginning.

And if we had a Beginning,

2dly, We could not be the Authors of our own Being; we could not give our
selves a Being before we had a Being. Nothing can be thought on more absurd;
than that Nothing, which cannot act in any sense, should be capable of Creating.
That Nothing is made of Nothing, Ex ^i^ilo ribil sit.
if taken in this sense, is a true Maxim, viz. That Nothing can make its
No-self to Be: But is not to be construed so as to exempt God, whose Power is
Infinite, from being able to make a Being, which did not Exist before. And

3dly, No other Being (except God) could make us, or any thing else, out of
Nothing: For how can less than an Infinite Power transport any thing from
Nullity to Existence, seeing there is an infinite distance betwixt them? As
appears, in that, if you multiply Nothing to Infinity, it will never amount to
any real Being; and if you in thought diminish any thing that exists to the
lowest degree of Being imaginable, you can never make it appear a mere Nothing?
This Distance therefore being Infinite, it must needs be proper only to an
Infinite Power, to make that Exist which is not yet in being; as it must needs
be only the withdrawment of that Power from supporting the Being of a Creature,
that can annihilate it.

Besides, if no Being, that has had a Beginning, could give it self Existence,
and all things inferior to God, had a Beginning, (as we have proved) Then no
Being inferior to him could make us Exist; for how should that, which does
neither necessarily Exist, nor could give it self a being, be capable of giving
being to any thing else, when it wholly depends on God for its own?

And as Being simply considered is the most Universal Effect, all Creatures
partaking of it in common; it must be owing to the most Universal Cause, which
is no other than God himself: Therefore he only can Create, or make that to be
which was not before.

Nor have we only the Light of Reason in this Case; but that of Divine
Revelation too, Genesis 1. 1.
which assures us, that In the Beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth,
i. e. the whole Universe. He made the first Matter, out of which this Curious
Fabric was built; Ver. 2.
he made the Earth, which was without form and void; and then raised a
beautiful Structure out of it. Heb. 11. 3.
Through Faith (as well as Reason) we understand that the Worlds were framed by
the Word of God, so that things which are seen, were not made of things which
do appear.

(2.) As God is the Author of the Matter of which we consist: So is He also of
our Form and Composition (as well as of that of the rest of the Universe.) It
was a vain Supposition of Aristotle, that this Frame of the World had no
Beginning, and consequently that the Species of Mankind has existed from
Eternity, This Fancy has been sufficiently disproved by the reasons before
alleged against the Eternity of the first Matter of the World; for if That be
not Eternal, much less can the Form of it be so.

Nor is the Epicurean Whimsey less Absurd, which supposes, that from a
fortuitous shuffling of an Infinite Number of self-existent, and self-moving
Atoms, this stately Frame of the World did emerge, and that Mankind, and all
other Animals, sprung out of the Earth by such a Casual way of Generation as
this. As if Dead Matter could move it self, and as if the Collision of Material
Particles could produce a Substance capable of Reasoning and Judging, Willing
and Desiring, such as the Soul of Man is. And what can be more absurd than to
imagine, that the Accidental Motions of those minute Particles could frame the
Curious Structure of a humane Body; nay the whole System of the Universe, and
every Species in it? It Is less unreasonable to imagine, when one sees a
Magnificent Palace, that it was built by the Casual jumbling together of the
Materials that compose it; or that the most curious Watch was framed after this
odd manner; that an elegant Picture may have resulted from the Accidental and
unheeded mixture of Colors; or an Elaborate Oration or Poem (as many have
observed) from a Confused shuffling of the Letters of the Alphabet.

It Is evident from the harmonious Combination of the several Parts of the
World, and the curious frame of each Species in it, and particularly of
Mankind, that all has been disposed in Number, Weight and Measure, by the
Infinite Wisdom and Power of that God, Isai. 28. 29.
who is Wonderful in Counsel, and Excellent in Working.

And this Truth is so very clear, that the Minds of the generality of the
Heathens themselves have been penetrated with the Light of it. Act. 17. 28.
And therefore the Apostle Paul cites to the Athenians one of their Celebrated
Authors, (...).
to prove, (what others of them generally confessed) that God is the Original
Author of Mankind. Aratus.
So that it is manifest from Reason that God has formed us.

And this the Sacred Historian of the Creation expressly asserts, -- God said,
Genesis 1. 26, 27.
Let us make Man in our Image, after our Likeness, so God created Man in his
own Image; in the Image of God created he him: Male and Female created he them.
And again -- The LORD God formed Man of the Dust of the Ground, Genesis 2. 7.
and breathed into his Nostrils the Breath of Life, Jer. 10. 16.
and Man became a living Soul. Psalm. 100. 3.
It Is God (who is the Former of all things) that has made us, and not we our
selves. He both made the Matter of which we consist, and molded it into that
Form which we bear, and by which our Species is distinguished from those of
other Creatures.

(3.) God is our Creator, or the Author of our Being, in that, as he has framed
the Species of Mankind in General; so he is the Former of every Individual
Humane Creature that comes into the World. The Multiplication of Creatures
according to their kind by Natural Propagation, is a Blessing of God pronounced
on them at their Creation. Genesis 1.
But this way ordained by God for the Conservation and Increase of each Species
is very Mysterious and Wonderful, and is in the Scripture termed Creation, and
attributed to God as such. The Psalmist calls the Generation to come, the
People that shall be Created; Psalm. 102. 18.
And speaking of the successive Dissolution and Propagation of Animals, Psalm.
104. 29, 30.
he says, -- Thou take away their Breath, they die, and return to their Dust.
Thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are created, and Thou renewest the face of
the Earth. Here the Term of Creation is used to signify the Conservation and
Multiplication of Animals in the ordinary Course of Nature; and that (as well
as the first formation of each Species) is ascribed to the Spirit of God. Genesis
1. 2.
And God threatens the Ammonites by the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 21. 30.
to judge them in the Place where they were Created, that is, as he explains it
in the next Words, in the Land of their Nativity.

And God is the Creator in this respect, in a sense beyond what is ordinarily
imagined. For it has in vain been attempted by Men to explain the Formation of
Plants and Animals, by the Natural Laws of Motion: And so many insuperable
Difficulties meet 'em, when they would show how their Organs are Mechanically
formed in Natural Generation, that they appear impossible to be solved without
attributing to an Almighty Power the Formation of every Individual Creature (as
well as of every Species) and that in a way more Immediate, at least more
Mysterious than is commonly supposed.

Nor does the Conjecture of the Equivocal Generation of some Plants and Insects
(though it has generally prevailed in the World as an undoubted Truth) seem well
founded; since that Supposition has been of late Years greatly discredited by
many Experiments, Malpigh. de Gallis. Swainmerdam de Generat. Insect.
Lewe^hoeck Epistol.
which render it very improbable, that any Plant is raised without Seed by a
formative Power in the Earth, (as many have pretended) or any Animal
spontaneously produced without Parents. And these God uses only as Instrumental
or Occasional Causes, himself being the Efficient Cause of all Generation; who
in this respect (as the Apostle fays in another) works All in All; 1 Cor. 12.
6.
and though he finished the Creation in Six days, John 5. 17.
yet may be said to Create still, or (as our Savior speaks) to Work hitherto.

So that it appears to be a Work proper to the Creator of Man, to form him in
the Womb, and that after a Method too mysterious to be traced by a humane
Understanding; since the Natural Laws of Motion, at least so far as known by
Men, are not capable of producing so Curious a Piece as a humane body: And as
it is generally supposed that the Souls of Men are Individually formed, and
infused into their Bodies by the hand of God, (since no tolerable Account can
be otherwise given of their Production) so it must be granted, that the form of
each Individual humane Body is to be attributed to the same Divine Power; which
operates after so unsearchable a manner, that every Man may well say (not only
as to the Origin of Mankind in general, but as to the Formation of himself in
particular) as Job did, Job. 10. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Thy Hands have made me, and fashioned me round about -- Thou have made me as
the Clay: -- Have thou not poured me out as Milk, and crudled me like Cheese?
Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh; and have fenced me with bones and
sinews: Thou have granted me Life, etc. And with the Psalmist, Psalm. 139. 13,
14, 15, 16.
-- Thou have covered me in my Mother's Womb. I will praise Thee; for I am
fearfully and wonderfully made. Mavelous are thy Works, and that my Soul
knows right well. My Substance was not hid from Thee, when I was made in
Secret; and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth. Thy Eyes did
see my Substance yet being imperfect, and in thy Book all my Members were
written, which in Continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of
them.

2. It hence follows, that God is the Vpholder and Preserver of our Being. For
this is included in the term [Creator]. When God by the Prophet addresses
himself to the Israelites, to encourage them to trust in him for their
Preservation, and to dissipate their fears of Danger, he speaks to them under
this Title; -- Thus says the Lord, Isai. 43. 1.
that created Thee, O Jacob, and he that formed Thee, O Israel, Fear not, etc.
And to this Exhortation he adds a Promise to preserve 'em when surrounded with
the greatest Difficulties, to be with them in passing through the Water, and
through the Fire: And the Psalmist makes the Relation he stood in to God, as
his Creature, a plea for his Preservation, when he says in his Prayer -- O LORD
-- forsake not the Works of thy own hands. Psalm. 138. 8.


And the Apostle Peter exhorts those that are persecuted, 1 Pet. 4. 19.
to commit the keeping of their Souls to God, in well doing, as to a faithful
Creator: So that from hence it is evident, that the Relation God bears to us as
our Creator, includes his Providential Care for our Preservation: That God who
is our Maker, is also the Preserver of Men. Job 7. 20.
As it was impossible that we should give Being to our felves; so it is beyond
our power to continue our selves in Being: And as we owe not our Existence to
any Being Inferior to God; so neither does the Duration of our Being depend
upon any other than him. It was the Will of God that produced us, consequently
it is the same Will that preserves us. Before he actually willed our Production,
we could not exist; and if he should cease to will the Continuance of our
Being, it would immediately discontinue, and be annihilated: It Is but for him
to withdraw his Hand, to suspend the Influence of his Power, and we sink into
Nothing. So that we are kept by the Power of God in regard of our Natural, 1
Pet. 1. 5.
as the Apostle affirms we are in respect of our Spiritual State: And since the
Divine Will is equally the Cause of our Being, and of the Duration of it; the
term of Creator attributed to God in our Text, may be fitly extended to both;
our Preservation being a Continuation of God's Creating Work: for in this
respect (as well as that mentioned before of the formation of successive
Generations of Men) according to the words of Christ, God works hitherto.
John 5. 17.
And as from him our Being is derived; so in him alone we Live, Act. 17. 28.
and Move, and have our Being still; who upholds all things by the Word of his
Power. And not only We, but all other Creatures lean on the Almighty Hand for
their Preservation, to which they all equally owe their Existence.

3. The Term [Creator] may further include that God is the Restorer and
Reformer of Man. It Is true it does not necessarily follow, that, because he has
made, and preserves us, therefore, after we had undone our selves by Sin, and
effaced the Image of Holiness he impressed on us in our Original Frame and
Constitution, he also must needs actually Reform us: But it does thence follow,
that none but God can restore a Degenerate Creature; and that all those, whose
Corrupt Nature is reformed, derive that Blessing from the Almighty Author of
their Being. The same Divine Goodness, Wisdom and Power, that at the Creation
of the World, Genesis 1. 3.
said, Let there be Light, (which Operative Word produced Light immediately) is
necessary to illuminate the benighted Minds of Men, who are by Sin become the
Children of Darkness; 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5.
and to call them out of that Darkness into the Mavelous Light of Divine
Truth. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
Therefore the Apostle Paul assures us, that it is that God, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
who at first commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, that shines in the
Hearts of such to give the Light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ. He alone, who made all things very Good in their kind at
the Creation, Genesis 1. 31.
and who then made Man upright, Eccl. 7. 29.
is able to rectify the perverseness of his Will, and to purify his Heart from
the Pollution it has contracted: To create in him a clean Heart, Psalm. 51. 10.
and to renew a right Spirit within him. Nothing less than our Creator's own
Divine Goodness could move him to restore depraved Sinners; nothing less than
his own Divine Wisdom could contrive the Method of their Restoration; and
nothing less than his Divine Power could put it in Execution, and accomplish
it: He contrived the Scheme of this Glorious Work, He appointed and prepared
the Means, and He renders them effectual to the End designed.

Who but our Creator is able to restore us, and reform us from Sin; seeing Sin
is a Privation of Sanctity, a Nullity opposed to the Being of Holiness? Nay a
state of Sin is a state of Rebellion against God, a State of Enmity and
Opposition to the Author of our Being; therefore worse than Annihilation it
self: because that which is not, as it can do no Good, so does no Evil; as it
is not for God, so is not against Him. But a sinful Creature commits his Sins
against him, even against Him, Psalm. 5^. 4.
(as the Psalmist emphatically repeats it) and does Evil in his sight; actually
opposes, and disserves Him, who is the supreme Being, and sole Author of the
whole Creation. Therefore though the Word of God brought us out of Nullity, Act.
20. 28.
and gave us Being; nothing less than the Blood of God could avail to redeem us
from that Abyss of Iniquity and Misery we were sunk into by our Apostasy from
Him.

Who but He that established the World by his Wisdom, Jer. 10. 12. and 51. 15.
and stretched out the Heavens by his Discretion and Understanding, could have
formed the Method of our Restoration, so as to glorify his Holiness and
Justice, as well as his Grace and Mercy by it; so as to make Mercy and Truth
meet together, Psalm. 85. 10.
and Righteousness and Peace to kiss each other, as he has done by recovering
fallen Man by the Sacrifice of his only begotten Son? What Depths of Wisdom
appear in this Stupendous Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
God manifested in the Flesh -- That Sin should be punished with the utmost
Severity, and yet the Sinner spared by Infinite Mercy! That our Savior, who
knew no Sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
should be made Sin for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in
him! And the same Characters of Divine Wisdom, that appear in the Foundation,
are seen also in the whole Superstructure of the Church of God, and in every
part of this great Work of Restoration.

Nothing can be more astonishing than that Infinite Mercy that appears in this
Mighty Work; which can have no other Author than that Infinite Being that has
created us. Who, but He that made us, Isai. 27. 11.
would or could have so much Mercy on us? And who, but he that formed us, would
show us so much Favor, as to rescue us from Sin, and the Curses entailed on
it, by so endearing a Ransom, as the precious Blood of his own Son?

And as none but our Maker is capable of Redeeming us; so the frequent use he
makes of the Term [Creator] in his Word, to encourage Men to obey him, and to
trust in him, may well be supposed to intimate the Design he had framed to
restore Sinners to his Favor: For had he not revealed himself to be Willing,
as well as Able, to be our Creator in this Sense, by taking us into his Hand
the second Time to reform us, or create us anew; there would be no room for us,
since we have all violated the Laws of our first Creation, to hope to offer any
acceptable Service to him, or to expect any Favor from him: There would be no
Encouragement to remember him as our Creator in the first Sense exclusive of
this latter; because our Guilt would fill us with Terror at every due
Remembrance of him, who, as he made us for his Glory, so is able to punish us,
and might justly do it, for the Indignities we have offered him by our Sins. So
that whenever God is pleased to press, or encourage us to our Duty in his Word,
by stiling Himself our Creator, we are to consider that Title, as tacitly
including his being our Redeemer too; that the God that made us, Deuteronomy. 32. 15.
is also the Rock of our Salvation.

And we find the great Work of the Holy Spirit in Renewing and Regenerating a
Sinner is frequently termed [Creation] in Holy Writ; 2 Cor. 5. 17.
both to signify the Greatness of the Work, Gal. 6. 15.
and the Resemblance this New Creation in several respects bears to the first;
and also to denote, that both those mighty Works are to be ascribed to the same
Author; and that God may be termed our Creator, not only in that he gave us a
Being, but also in that he often makes Sinners become New Creatures, by
Renewing them in knowledge after his own Image; Col. 3. 10.
and by Creating them in Righteousness and true Holiness: Ephesians. 4. 24.
Who are therefore called his Workmanship Created in Christ Jesus to good
Works, Ephesians. 2. 10.
etc.

And it is worth remarking, that this Word [Creator] in our Text, (...)
is of the Plural Number in the Original [Thy Creators], So Isai. 54. 5.
as if designed to express the great Obligations Men are under to each Person
of the Blessed Trinity, (...)
for Making, Redeeming, (...)
and Sanctifying them; the former of which is eminently ascribed to the Father,
the Second to the Son, and the last to the Holy Spirit, (though all concur in
each of those mighty Works) and to signify that all these Works may be fitly
expressed by this common Name of Creation.

4. As God is our Creator, he is the Sovereign Arbiter, and Disposer of our
Being. He is the Sovereign Judge of the World, inflicting Punishments, and
dispensing Favors, as he pleases. He that has made us, and preserves us, has
power to render us Happy or Miserable: He has the Issues of Life and Death in
his Hand. He that has created us, knows all the Capacity we have of Joy or
Sorrow, Pleasure or Pain; and has power to affect us with either of them, as he
pleases. He can make his Arrows of Terror stick fast in the Conscience; Psalm.
38. 2.
or fill the Soul with unspeakable Joy. He can punish or cheer the Mind with
his immediate Frowns or Smiles; or he can convey Anguish or Joy into the Soul
by the Occasion of different Impressions on the Tabernacle of Flesh and Blood
wherein she dwells: He can dispense Punishments or Pleasures by his own Hand
immediately, or mediately by any of his Creatures. And -- when he gives
Quietness, Job 34. 29.
who then can make Trouble? And when he hides his Face, who then can behold
him? whether it be done against a Nation or against a Man only. 1 Samuel 2. 6, 7,
8.
It Is the Lord (as Hannah speaks) that kills and makes alive: He brings
down to the Grave, and brings up. The Lord makes Poor and makes Rich, he
brings low and lifts up. Which this Holy Prophetess proves by this
Argument; For the Pillars of the Earth are the Lord's, and he has set the
World upon them; where his Sovereign Power over Men, to dispose of their State
as he pleases, is inferred from his Relation to them as their Creator. And when
the Angel in the Revelation protests there should be Time no longer; He swears
by him that created Heaven and Earth, Rev. 10. 6.
and Sea, and the things therein; to show, that God, as Creator of the World,
is the Sovereign Arbiter of it, and that the Consummation of Time, and of
Temporal Things, belongs to him under that Character. So that it is our Maker,
that both shows the Path of Life, Psalm. 16. 11.
and holds in his Hand the Keys of Hell and Death. Rev. 1. 18.
And as he has made all things: So he does whatsoever he pleses in Heaven,
Psalm. 135. 6.
and in Earth, in the Sea, and all deep places. Job. 10. 7.
And, Who can deliver out of his hand? Seeing he does according to his Will in
the Army of Heaven, Dan. 4. 35.
and among the Inhabitants of the Earth; and none can stay his Hand, or say
unto him, What do Thou?

Thus have we endeavored to show what is comprehended in God's Title of
[Creator] on which we have taken the greater Liberty to expatiate, because
hereby a solid Foundation is laid for some of those Reasons, which we are
hereafter to insist on, to enforce the Duty in our Text; in the Division of
which we have observed, that in the Terms of the Duty ( Remember thy Creator)
the Reasons of that Duty are in part insinuated.

Having given some Account of the Object of this Duty, viz. God, under the
Title of our Creator; We shall now

Secondly, Briefly explain the Act it self of Remembering him, and show what
that imports.

The Memory is that Faculty of the Soul whereby she is capable of recalling the
Ideas of things, which have before been present to her.

But here, to Remember does not only signify the exercising of the
Understanding on our Creator, by reflecting on what our Senses, Reason, and
Divine Revelation may have suggested to our Minds, concerning God under that
Character: Psalm. 63. 6.
It does not here barely import [to meditate on him, Luke 17. 32.
and bear him in mind] but, because the Understanding directs the Will and
Affections, and Men move and act very much according to their Conceptions of
things, their Desires following the Conduct of their Thoughts; this Term is
applied both to the one, and to the other. Sometimes it signifies to Esteem and
Respect, See Eccl. 9. 15.
as Psalm. 20. 3. The Lord -- Remember all thy Offerings, and accept thy burnt
Sacrifice. Sometimes to Trust, as Psalm. 20. 7. Some Trust in Horses, and some
in Chariots; See 1 Chronicles. 16. ver. 8, 9, 10, 11.
but we will Remember the Name of the Lord our God. Sometimes to Worship and
Praise, as 1 Chronicles. 16. 12. where after David had exhorted to sing to God, to
glory in him, and seek him, because of his mighty Works, he adds to the same
purpose -- Remember the mavelous Works that he has done, etc. q. d. Adore
and praise him for them.

And this may be further illustrated by the use of the opposite Term of
[Forgetting] which sometimes signifies to disesteem and slight, as Ier. 2. 32.
Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her Attire? yet my People have
forgotten me days without Number. Sometimes to Distrust, as Psalm. 78. 7. --
That they might set their Hope in God, and nor forget the Works of God: And
sometimes to neglect to praise and worship God, as Psalm. 106. 12, 13. -- They
sang his Praise; they soon forgot his Works, they waited not for his Counsel.
Or to forsake the Service of God, as Deuteronomy. 6. 12. Beware lest thou forget the
Lord, that is, by going after other Gods, as it is explained in ver. 14.

So that, to Remember God does not only import, to think or meditate often on
him, but to think worthily and becomingly of him; and to pay him a Respect in
some measure suitable to the Idea we have of him. To remember his glorious
Perfections so, as to esteem and respect him; deliberately to call to mind the
Number and Quality of his Favors, and to recollect, how fit an Object of
Trust, and Praise, and of all Worship, he is; so as to engage our Souls to
confide in him, to offer him the Sacrifice of Praise, and all the Adoration and
Service that we are capable of rendering. In a word, to remember our Creator,
is to remember his Omniscience, Power and Justice, so as to reverence and fear
him; to remember his Goodness, Mercy and Veracity, so as to love and praise
him; and to remember his Holiness and Purity, so as to imitate and obey him:
It Is so attentively and seriously to meditate on his Nature, and on his Works,
Psalm. 39. 3.
that while we are musing, the Fire may burn (as the Psalmist speaks) that our
Thoughts may kindle a holy Flame of Love in our Hearts toward him, which will
break out in becoming Acts of Service, and Obedience to his Glory. It Is to
serve him both with our Understanding, Will and Affections, to devote our
selves entirely to him.

And as our whole Man is to be dedicated to the Service of our Creator; so he
also deserves the whole of our Time: and we ought to begin as early as possible
to remember him: For this our Text shows,

II. In prescribing the special Time for engaging in this Duty; which now falls
under our Consideration.

1. It Is prescribed in express Terms [in the days of thy Youth].

2. By an opposite Circumlocution, containing a Description of Old Age [while
the evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them]; that is, before the approach of Old Age:

As is evident, both in that these Evil Days, etc. are opposed to the Days of
Youth; and in that many elegant Characters are used to decypher the Infirmities
and Miseries of Old Age, in the sequel of this Chapter, immediately after the
Text.

And in this Description of Old Age, we have

1. The Time it self expressed by [Days and Years].

2. The Character of that Time of Life, those [Days are Evil], and those [Years
such as (we shall confess that) we have no pleasure in them.]

1. For the Time it self, it may be called [Days and Years];

(1.) Either emphatically to signify one and the same thing; it being an usual
Elegancy in the Hebrew Dialect, to express the same thing in various synonymous
Terms in two Sentences, immediately succeeding one another, which serve partly
for Illustration, and partly to inculcate Truth in the Mind: Of which we have
Instances in almost every Verse of the 51st Psalm, as well as in many other
places of Scripture, as it is easy to observe. Or else,

(2.) By [Days] to signify the Brevity and Great Uncertainty of the Continuance
of that Time; (which is soon swallowed up by Death, as the fleeting Days of
Youth are soon lost in Old Age) and by [Years] the tedious passing of this
short Time, by reason of the many Afflictions and Infirmities a Man then
labors under: Though the Time is very short in it self, it is made very long by
Misery and Pain, which seem greatly to extend it. For as the Soul, when filled
with Pleasure and Joy, during her easy posture, forgets the Time, as it were,
and suffers it to slide from her with little Notice; which makes it appear
extremely short: So when she is filled with Sentiments of Pain and Sorrow, her
uneasy Situation, and impatient desire of Change, do so constantly apply her
Thoughts to the consideration of that Time, which is the Continuance of her
Misery, that it seems very long and irksome to her: So that the Duration of her
Sorrow seems always to increase proportionably to the Degree of it; and a Man
imagines himself to have been much longer under an acute than under a slight
Pain, when in reality the Time of their Continuance is equal. Thus every Moment
of Time becomes an heavy Burden to one in Misery, who (as Moses says the
Israelites should do, when under punishment for their Sins) cries out, Deuteronomy 28.
67.
in the Morning, Would to God it were Evening! and in the Evening, Would to God
it were Morning! -- And it is well known that this is the Language of Old Age.

And therefore,

2. It Is expressed by the Character of [Evil] Days, and Years wherein [no
pleasure] is to be had; which may be thus explained.

(1.) By [Evil Days] may be understood the Decays and Diseases of Old Age:
Aetas mala. Plaut.
And by [the Years wherein there is no Pleasure] may be signified the
Unhappiness and Misery that those Distempers and Infirmities give the Mind,
these being a great Occasion of her Sorrow, which is then especially
aggravated, when the Guilt of the Soul conspires with the Distempers of the
Body, to make the Man completely miserable; so that he shall say, that is, he
shall confess or complain that, he has no Pleasure in those evil Days, that he
has no Sanctuary of Ease to fly to, no Reflection to make that can allay the
Trouble of his Mind, no Medicine to use, that can remove the Distempers of his
Body. For this is often the Condition of those, Isai. 51. 13.
who forgetting the LORD their Maker in their Youth, grow Old in the service of
Sin. Or,

(2.) By [Evil Days] which is a positive Character, the Time of Old Age may be
represented, as attended with many positive Afflictions and Pains; and by [the
Privation of Pleasure at that Time] which is a Negative Character, may be
signified the incapacity of relishing the Joys and Pleasures of this Life, that
accompanies those unpleasant Years, wherein the Organs of Sense are very much
enfeebled, especially when Old Age has been hastened by the Intemeperance of
Youth.

And now, since it appears that God as our Creator (in the comprehensive Sense
wherein we have explained that Title) requires us to remember him, so as to
devote our selves to his Fear and Service, and that in the Time of our Youth,
before Old Age, with its many Afflictions and Sorrows, overtakes us; if one
makes but a transient Reflection on these things, it is easy to observe that the
Wise Man in this Exhortation intimates,

III. The Reasons of the Duty enjoined;

1. In representing God, the Object of it, to us, under the August Character of
[our Creator]; which evidently entitles him to the Service of our Youth. And

2. In setting Old Age before us, as a Scene of Misery and Horror; as a Time
made up of few and evil Days. Genesis 47. 9.
And in opposing them to the better Days of Youth; thereby to insinuate, that
as Old Age brings with it many great Disadvantages and Impediments to obstruct
our Conversion to God; so Youth is attended with many favorable Circumstances,
that render it the best and fittest Season to initiate one's self in the ways
of Righteousness.

The strength of these Reasons I shall consider at large hereafter: And shall
content my self at present with making some few brief Remarks,

(1.) On the Terms used to prescribe the special Time of the Duty enjoined in
the Text.

(2.) On the Terms, whereby both the Object and Act of this Duty are expres'd:
To show how fitly they are adapted to the State and Circumstances of those that
are Young, who are the Persons to whom this Exhortation is addressed;

With which I shall conclude this Discourse.

1. From the Terms used to show the Time of remembering our Creator, it may be
observed;

(1.) That this double Timing of the Duty, first by expressly prescribing it [in
Youth] and then [before Old Age, with its Miseries come on] gives the Words a
certain Force and Energy, proper to inculcate so important an Admonition: It Is
a giving Precept upon Precept, Isai. 28. v. 10, 13.
and Line upon Line, (as the Prophet Isaiah speaks) which he commends as the
proper Course to instruct the Young, or (to use his own Words) to teach them
Knowledge, Ver. 9.
and to make them understand Doctrine, who are weaned from the Milk, and drawn
from the Breasts -- to gain the Attention of giddy and unthinking Youth, many
of whom, Job 33. 14.
though God condescends to speak once, yea twice, (as he does here) are yet so
dull of hearing, as not to perceive the Reasonableness of their Duty, or at
least not sufficiently to consider it; and the Danger to which the neglect of
it exposes 'em. And

(2.) We may further observe that this Obligation of Remembering our Creator,
extends it self equally with the Capacity we have of Reflecting on God, as our
Maker; and increases proportionably to the knowledge we may obtain of him. So
that none are entirely exempt from it, who are capable of exercising their
Thoughts on God: and therefore those may not pretend to be dispensed with, who
have not arrived to the full maturity of Youth, if they are in any degree
capable of knowing their Creator. As far as they are able to take notice of his
Nature, and of his Will, so far are they obliged to worship and obey him.

And this is further cleared by the Opposition the Wise Man seems to make,
betwixt the Duty in our Text, and the Vanity of Childhood and Youth, mentioned
just before: So that if we take [ Vanity] here in a Moral Sense, the
Exhortation extends it self to Persons that fall under either of those
Denominations, that are either in the state of Childhood or Youth. And if by [
Vanity] Natural Frailty and Mortality be intended, the words are not less
extensive; for then the frailty of Childhood and Youth, is used as a
Consideration to prepare the way for this Admonition; and Children as well as
Young Men, are therefore excited to give themselves to the Service of their
Creator: Because neither are exempt from the danger of Sickness and of Death.

And this may be further collected from the charge given to Youth in the Text,
to remember their Creator, not only before the Evil Days of Old Age are come;
but before those Years [ draw nigh] while Old Age is yet at a distance* Which
shows that none that are capable of reflecting on their relation to God as
Creator; may excuse themselves as too Young to be concerned in his Service. For
as his being our Creator, is the foundation of this Duty of remembering him: So
it is evident, that our Obligation to it is to be measured by the Capacity we
have of knowing him as such. Therefore he may well require that the tender Buds
of Childhood, as well as the maturer Blossoms of Youth be consecrated to him;
Psalm. 8. 2.
who sometimes perfects his Praise out of the mouths of (such who in comparison
of those of riper Years are but) Babes, Mat. 21. 16.
and Sucklings; and therefore, by the Psalmist, Psalm. 148. 12, 13.
calls upon Young Men and Maidens, and Children, as well as Old Men, to praise
and worship him.

2. That the Terms of [ Remembering their Creator] are wisely adapted to the
state of Youth, to engage them early in the Service of God, will appear by the
following Remarks on each of those Terms.

1. God under the Title of Creator, is fitly recommended to the Young, as the
Object of their Worship and Obedience.

(1.) Because it is a Term that easily excites in the Mind a strong and clear
Idea of God's infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness. And the Wise Man having to
do with Youth, whose unexperience for want of Years, and whose unattention, for
want of a habit of steady thinking, renders them less capable of arriving at
the knoledg of the Deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. ^^.
than those who to the advantage of a long observation of things have added
that of addicting themselves to frequent Thoughtfulness and Meditation; he
makes use of that Title of God, which might most familiarly suggest a proper
Notion of him to their Minds. He exposes to them the Alphabet of the Creation,
out of which even Children may easily learn to spell the Being of a Deity. The
Ignorant and the Young, even those that run, Hab. 2. 2.
(as the Prophet speaks) the heedless and unattentive, may read the Characters
of the Divine Attributes, which are plainly engraven on the Pillars even of
this Material World. And (as the Apostle observes) may clearly discern the
Eternal Power and Godhead of the Creator, Romans 1. 20, 21.
who is Invisible, by the curious Fabric of this Visible Creation; so as to
render them altogether inexcusable, if they neglect to glorisy God according to
those sensible notices of him, which they may so easily and constantly receive.

For as the sight of a Magnificent Palace, induces us to consider the Skill and
Ability of the Architect that built it: So when we take a serious prospect of
the Structure and Frame of the World, or of any part of it, it familiarly
raises our Thoughts to its Great Author and Cause: For as every House is built
by some Man; so it is natural to conclude (with the Apostle) that he that built
all things is God. Heb. 3. 4.
And therefore

(2.) This [of Creator] is a Title which God is usually pleased to assume in
Scripture, to distinguish himself, as the True and Living God, from the Idols
of the Heathen; and to convince their Ignorant Votaries, that He is the only
proper Object of Religious Worship. -- The LORD is the True God (says the
Prophet Jeremiah); Jer. 10. 10.
he is the Living God, and an everlasting King. -- The Gods that have not made
the Heavens and the Earth, Ver. 11.
even they shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens. (Then
speaking again of the True God, Ver. 12.
he says) He has made the Earth by his Power; he has established the World by
his Wisdom, and has stretched out the Heavens by his Discretion. And then, V.
14, 15.
having spoken of the Vanity of Idols, he adds; Ver. 16.
The Portion of Jacob is not like them; for he is the Former of all things. And
the Prophet Isaiah introduces the God of Israel, Isai. 45. 12.
proving himself to be the True God, under the same Character. I have made the
Earth, and created Man upon it: I, even my Hands have stretched out the
Heavens, and all their Host have I commanded. And, a little after, the Prophet
insults over the makers of Idols, V. 16, 17.
and then adds, Thus says the LORD, Ver. 18.
that Created the Heavens, God himself, that formed the Earth and made it, he
has established it, he created it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited, I
am the L O R D, and there is none else.

All which serves to show how properly this Title [of Creator] is used in our
Text, to direct the Minds of Youth to the true Object of Love and Adoration;
who are ready to make as many Gods, as there are pleasing Objects in the World;
and to sacrifice themselves, and all they have to those enchanting Idols, that
strike their Senses with any agreeable Impression. And

(3.) This is a Relative Title, denoting the Natural Relation God bears to the
World: For the Terms [ Creator and Creature] mutually suppose one another: And
not only his Relation to the World in General; but to Mankind, nay to every
Individual Humane Creature in particular in the Word, [ Thy Creator] is
proposed as the ground of that Service every one that comes into the World, is
obliged to pay to the Almighty, whose Title of [ Creator] includes our entire
dependence on him. So that the Wise Man prudently makes choice of a Term,
expressing every Man's Relation to God as his Creature; because it is the First
and most Evident Principle, on which to found our Duty of Obedience to him, and
most apt to affect the Soul. For, as when I think on God as Creator of the
World in General, it raises in my Mind a great Idea of his Majesty and
Sovereignty: So when I confider him as MY Creator, that Relative Character
gives an endearing force to the reasonable Obligation I find my self under to
serve and worship him; because I then look upon him, not only as the living
God, but also as the God of MY Life. Psalm. 42. 8.


We may also observe,

2. The Propriety of the Term [ Remember] to express the Respect and Service
those that are Young owe to their Maker.

(1.) [ To remember, etc.] signifying the Exercise of the Thoughts on God, is
fitly urged on the Young; because as the most early Impressions are the most
deep and lasting; so a habit of Holy Meditation is soonest acquired in Youth,
when the Mind is most at leisure, and not embarrass'd with that multitude of
Thoughts and Projects about the Affairs of the World, which riper Years are
usually encumbered with. What fitter Term could be chosen, by which to urge the
duty of Young Persons to their Maker, than that of [ Remembring] him? seeing
the Memory is a Faculty that Young People commonly excel in, and in which they
often glory; a Faculty that grows ripe betimes, and easily retains that
Tincture, with which it is early and thoroughly imbued. It Is as if Solomon had
said; You that are Young, ought to season your Memories with the best
Impressions betimes, when they are most capable both of receiving 'em, and
retaining 'em; and to fill your Minds with the thoughts of God, and of the
Service you owe him, before they are crowded with the Concerns and Business of
a perplexing World.

(2.) A Caution seems to be wisely insinuated in this Term against forgetting
the Worship and Service of God, which heedless Youth too much devoted to
Sensual Pleasure, is often guilty of; for though the Young have the most capable
Memories, yet they are very prone to forget their Duty to their Maker. And how
aptly so ever they remember other things, they often live as if God were not in
any of their Thoughts: Psalm. 10. 4.
For they commonly divert and dissipate their Minds so much with the amusing
Pleasures of this present World, that they don't allow themselves time enough,
either to look backward, to remember that God who created 'em, and to whom they
owe their Preservation; nor forward, to consider, that it is only in his power
to renew and reform them from their Vices and Errors; and that he will one day
judge them; who as he is their Creator, has the Sovereign disposal of their
Being, and has Power either to save, or to destroy: In whose Favor is Life,
and whose Displeasure is more terrible than Death.

THE Reasonableness and Advantages OF AN Early Conversion to God DEMONSTRATED.
SERMON II.
ECCLES. xii. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, while the
Evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.
HAVING before explained the Exhortation in the Text, which the Wise Man
addresses to those that are Young, viz. To Remember their Creator in the Days
of their Youth; or to devote themselves early to the Worship and Service of God:

We are now to consider the Reasons, whereby this Duty is enforced, which are
plainly enough insinuated in the Text, as we have before observed in the
Division of it.

First, In the Terms of the Duty, where our Relation to God, as our Creator,
implies the Obligations we have to adore and serve him.

Secondly, In the words used to signify the proper Time of engaging in this
Duty, viz. [In the Days of Youth, before the Evil Days of Old Age come, etc.]
Where the fitness of the time of Youth to enter one's self into the Service of
God, and the Disadvantage of deferring it to Old Age, are intimated.

First, Then we shall take a view of the Reasons that oblige us to devote our
selves to the Service of God in Youth, which arise from the Relation that is
between him and us, as he is our Creator, and we are his Creatures: And this in
that large and comprehensive sense we have given of the Term [ Creator,] by
which we have laid the Groundwork of our present Reasoning.

1. As God is our Creator and Preserver, we derive from him our Being, and the
whole Duration of it; that is, the whole of our Time: Therefore,

(1.) He has an equitable Claim to us as long as we have a Being, and to our
Youth by consequence: It Is but just that what we receive from his hand, should
be again offered to him; that since we live by his Good Will, we should live to
his Glory. Can we assign any portion of our Time, which we do not equally
derive from our Creator with the rest of it? Why then should any of those
Moments that are allotted us by his mere Favor, be injuriously subtracted
from his Service, and abused to his Dishonor?

The great God, whose chief End in all he does, is his own Glory, because that
is the best and most excellent End of all, made us, and continues our Being for
his own Pleasure and Glory. Therefore to alienate any part of our Time from
him, is to oppose his Designs, and (as much as in us lies) to endeavor to
frustrate his End, and sacrilegiously to rob him of his Honor.

Nor do we only withhold Divine Honor from him to whom it is due, when we
neglect to employ any part of our Time in the Service of our Creator: for Man
being a Creature that can never be altogether idle and unactive, that part of
our Lives, or portion of our Time which we divert from the proper end for which
it is allowed us, is not only stolen from God, but devoted to the service of
Sin. It Is to snatch away a Sacrifice from the Altar of the True God, and
immediately to offer it to the worst of Idols. How provoking must this needs be
to that God who is so jealous of his Glory, that he will not give it to any
other? Isa. 42. 8.
Much less will he suffer it, chapter 48. 11.
with Impunity, to be given to Sin, which is infinitely opposite to his holy
Nature, and which he therefore hates with a perfect Hatred.

No wonder then that he requires the whole succession of our Time to be devoted
to himself, 1 Cor. 10. 31.
and that whether we eat or drink, or whatever we do, we should do it to his
Glory; making that the chief end of all our Actions, which is the end of our
Being, and of the Continuation of it. And this seemed so highly reasonable to
the Psalmist, that after a long Meditation on the Works of the great Creator,
it influences him to a firm Resolution to honor and worship the Author of his
Being throughout the whole course of his Time. Psalm. 104. 33.
I will sing unto the LORD (says he) as long as I live; Ps. 146. 2.
I will sing praise unto my God, while I have my Being.

Now if the whole of our Time be the Propriety of our Creator, not given us to
squander away as we please, but lent us to improve to his Honor, then he may
justly claim our Youth to be dedicated to his Service: If he is the Proprietor
of the whole of our Time (as we have proved he is) in that he is our Creator,
he has a right to each part of it: If we withhold from him the Service of our
Youth, we detain a part of our Time from him, who has a Natural Right to the
whole of it. And that part of Time, when once elapsed, being irrevocable, there
remains but a part of the whole to offer; and we can then only render to the
great Author of our Being, a defective and mutilous Sacrifice. And,

(2.) As our Youth belongs to our Maker, as a part of that Time, of which the
Sum Total is his Due, so it is his Propriety, as it is the First Fruits of
that Time, the succession of which we enjoy by his mere Favor and Bounty. To
be served first is considered as a Token of Honor and Respect amongst Men; how
reasonably then does the Infinite Dignity of our Creator, joined to the
Obligations we owe him as such, claim at our hands an humble and solemn
dedication of that part of our Time, especially to himself, which he first
bestows, and in which he first renders us capable of offering him Service? The
Sacred Historian of the Creation representing the Sanctification of the
Sabbath, as immediately succeeding the Creation of Man, (the last of God's
Works on the last of his Working-Days) seems to signify the Obligation we are
all under to consecrate our Youth, the First Fruits of our Time, to the Service
of the Author of our Being; and that as the first Day our first parents lived
after their Creation, was especially sacred to God as an Oblation of the
first fruits of their Time; so we their Posterity, ought to devote our Youth to
our Maker, and to serve him, as soon as we are capable of knowing him.
Righteous Abel paid an acceptable Homage to his Creator, Genesis 4. 4.
by presenting him a Sacrifice of the Firstlings of his Flock. Exodus 22. 29.
And as the first fruits of the Holy Land were yearly consecrated to God as the
Great Creator and Sovereign Proprietor of it: chapter 23. 19.
So his Right over his Creatures was also anciently acknowledged, Exodus 13. 2,
1^.
by the dedication both of the firstborn of Cattle, and of Men to his Service.
All which certainly is written for our Instruction, and may fairly enough be
applied to our present purpose: For if God has a Special Right to the first of
all we have, (as these ancient Institutions seem to signify) then he may
reasonably challenge the first of our Time, as having a peculiar Title to that
part, by the dedication of which we acknowledge we are indebted to him for the
whole; and the refusal of which is an implicit Assertion of our Independency
on him, as if we owed only to our selves our own Being, and our Time, which is
the duration of it.

So that they think very preposterously, who count the Time of Youth the most
unseasonable of all for the Service of God, when it is evident, that if it were
allowable to substract any part of our Time from him (as it is not, yet) of all
the parts of it, it would be the most indecent and disrespectful to withhold
from him this of Youth, (taken in a large sense, not only to contain Childhood,
but all the Flower of our Time) because he not only claims a Right to it, as
it is a part of our Time, the whole of which is derived from him; but as it is
that peculiar part of it, which ought to be dedicated to him as an Homage,
whereby we acknowledge the Obligation he has laid us under for the whole he is
pleased to allow us. Nor has our Creator a more reasonable claim to our Youth,
as his peculiar, because it is the first part, than he has,

(3.) Because it is also the Best part of our Time, wherein the Faculties of the
Soul have ordinarily no less Gracefulness and Vigor, than the Members of the
Body have Beauty and Strength; wherein we are most capable of engaging in any
great Undertaking, and possess suitable Advantages for the accomplishment of it
(as we shall have occasion hereafter to show more at large.) It Is then but
just, that he that made us what we are, should have the best of what we have.
If he has a Right to all our Time in general, because we receive it all from
his hand, he has a peculiar Right to the best of our Time, as that which his
own Infinite Excellency, and his great Goodness to us, direct us to consecrate
to him, as most proper for an Offering. Why has our Maker ordinarily adorned
Youth with so many delectable Flowers, with so much Strength and Agility of
Body, and Comeliness of Form, such a Capacity of Memory, and Quickness of
Fancy, such a Readiness of Perception, and Vivacity of Spirit? Why has he
crowned it with so many advantageous Qualities, but to indicate by these
Preparations, that he has designed it for a Special Sacrifice. (...) a (...)
elegit, vel selegit.
The word used in our Text and elsewhere for Youth, properly signifies the
Choice of our Time, our Select or Chosen Time, and does import not only that
our Creator chooses that part of our Time for himself, but that it has several
Advantages that render it the most eligible; that it is in it self the most fit
to be chosen, and set apart for his Service.

It Is therefore to offer a great Indignity to our Creator, to refuse him the
prime of our Time, on pretense that we'll offer him our Decrepid Age, the worst
of our Days, and the very dregs of 'em, as if he were unworthy of the best part
of what he has given us, as if we could offer any thing beyond his Deserts, who
has given us our All; nay, as if the Devil, the World, and our own corrupt
Inclinations, were more worthy Objects of Worship than the ever Blessed God who
has made us; as if he were to be postpon'd to the vilest and most detestable of
all Idols; As if both the first and best of what we have ought to be devoted to
these; and as if the Lame and Blind and Maimed were the only Sacrifices
becoming his Altar.

The Priests under the Law were consecrated in their Youth, Numb. 8. 24, 25.
and continued in the Service of the Sanctuary only to that Age wherein it is
ordinary for Natural Strength visibly to abate; to signify that that part of
our Time, wherein we are most capable of serving our Maker ought especially to
be devoted to him as the most acceptable Portion of our days. And is it not fit
that he that has made us for himself, should have the Best of our Service? That
the strength of our Bodies should be dedicated to him that molded and composed
'em? And that the powers of our Souls should, in their most flourishing and
vigorous state, be offered to the great Author of all our Faculties? Ought not
the most attentive Regards of our Understandings to be employed in
contemplating him that has made us Rational, and the most sprightly and eager
Sallies of our Wills to be directed toward him who has made us desiring
Creatures? Certainly as God is our Maker, he deserves as well as requires that
we most seriously contemplate, and most intensely love him, on the account both
of his own Infinite Perfections, and of the Emanations of his Goodness toward
us his Creatures; and consequently that we improve the best of our Time in
those Holy Exercises of meditating on him and aspiring after him.

2. As the Notion of [ Creator] includes, that upon the Supposition of Man's
Fall by Sin, God alone is able to perform this mighty Work of Reforming or
New-Creating him; and as the manner of the use of this Term in the Holy
Scripture further intimates his Willingness so to do (as we have shown at large
before:) This further shows the reason we have to devote our Youth to his
Service. And this Consideration renews and redoubles the force of the former
Reasons: For what is Man (fallen Man) that God should be mindful of him? Psalm.
8. 4.
And the Son of Man that he should visit him? What great Grace has the great
God manifested to us, that when we had forfeited all the Blessings to be
expected of him, as our Creator, in rebelliously casting off that Natural
Obligation we were under to obey him, he should neither make us cease to be his
Creatures, and entirely dissolve that Relation, by forsaking the Work of his
hands, or annihilating us; nor vindicate his injured Authority, by upholding
our Being only to render us miserable, and by treating us as his Enemies rather
than as the Objects of his Favor; but on the contrary that he should still
show respect to us as the Works of his hands, by preserving our Being, by
exercising Patience and Long-suffering toward us, by encompassing us with many
Temporal Favors, and by opening and consecrating a New and Living way, Heb.
10. 20.
whereby we might return to him, by proposing to us Terms of Peace and
Reconciliation by the Blood of the Cross; Col. 1. 20.
and by offering to renew us in the Spirit of our Minds; Ephesians. 4. 23.
in a word, to make us New Creatures after his own Image; Col. 3. 10.
that so we might be not only again entitled to those former lost Blessings,
that were naturally suited to obedient Creatures of that order and rank of
Being wherein God had placed us at the Beginning; but might have our Happiness
highly improved, as well as effectually secured by that new and nearer Relation
to God through Jesus Christ, which interesses them that believe in his Name in
those unconceivable Joys which he has merited: Upon which account our Creator
treats those that are thus reconciled to him, not only as his Creatures but as
his Children; and since his only begotten Son, Heb. 1. 2.
whom he has appointed Heir of all things, Heb. 2. 11, 12, 13.
is not ashamed to call them Brethren, he refuses not to treat 'em as
Ioint-Heirs with him, Romans 8. 15, 16, 17.
nor disdains to be called their Father.

So that the consideration of God, as the Author of this New and Spiritual
Creation, lays on us the strongest Obligation imaginable to serve and obey him,
in that it contains both the highest Reason and the strongest Motive of that
Obedience: For as it is very reasonable that we should obey him that has Wisdom
and Power enough to change and reform, and render happy such sinful, depraved
and miserable Creatures as we are, so it is the greatest Good that can be done
us, and therefore is to be earnestly sought at the hands of the infinitely
gracious God: and seeing he is so liberal as to offer to give his holy Spirit,
LIuk. 11. 13.
the Principle of all Grace and Spiritual Life, to them that sincerely ask and
diligently seek it of him; here is the greatest Motive and encouragement to
engage us in his Service, since (I say) he is not become inexorable by our
Sins, Isa. 30. 18.
but still waits to be gracious to us, Jer. 31. 33.
offering to write his Law in our Hearts, Heb. 8. 10.
and to put his Fear into our inward Parts by the power of his Spirit, and also
assuring us, Ps. 19. 11.
that in keeping his Commandments there is great Reward.

If therefore the first and best part of our Time is God's peculiar Claim as he
has made us, much more ought we to offer the first fruits of our Time to the
Service of him who is become reconcilable to us in Christ Jesus, and is both
able and willing to add to the Obligation of the first, that of a second and
more Glorious Creation. Surely we owe not only the first and best, but the
whole of our Time now upon a new account to our Creator, since he has made such
provision for our Reformation, and so for our Happiness, not only through the
course of our Time here, but through an entire Eternity hereafter; which leads
me to the last thing I have to urge from the import of the Term [ Creator,] viz.

3. As this Title implies that God is the Sovereign Arbiter and Disposer of our
Being, because this is a necessary consequence of that Relation of Creator; it
carries with it a forcible Argument to engage those that are young in the
Service of God. Ps. 31. 15.
Our Times are in his hand, who can prolong or contract them as he pleases; and
we must be accountable to him for the Days he has lent us, and receive a
Sentence according to our Improvement or Abuse of them. How reasonable is it,
and how much for our Interest to offer that part of our Time to our Creator
which he peculiarly lays claim to; nay, to consecrate the whole of it to his
Service, seeing as he is the Author of our Being he has a right to the
Sovereign disposal of it; and if we withhold any part of our Time from him, can
fill up the Remainder of our days with pain and sorrow, or cut us off in his
Displeasure in the midst of our days, and force us into an Eternity of Anguish
and Misery? How terrible a thing is it thus to fall into the hands of the
Living God, Heb. 10* 31.
who, as he has made us, knows how to punish our Disobedience with all the
kinds and degrees of Torment of which he has made, or can make our Nature
capable! And how highly does it concern us to dedicate the Blossoms and early
Fruits of our Youth to the Service of him who is able to reward our early
Obedience with a long and happy Life here (if he pleases), and to fill up a
whole Eternity in communicating various Pleasures to the Soul in another and
better World; who knows all the kinds and degrees of Joy and Solace we either
are or can be capable of, and how to give us the most ravishing Delights, and
to excite in our Souls the most lively sentiments of that Joy which is
unspeakable and full of Glory! 1 Pet. 1. 8.


How much does it concern us to offer to the Author of our Being, the Sacrifice
of the prime portion of our Age, seeing he is able either eternally to sustain
our Bodies and Souls, by his Almighty Hand, from sinking into Nullity, amidst
the everlasting Torments of Hell, that so our Woe and Misery (ten thousand times
worse than Annihilation) may become eternal too! Or can uphold our Being by his
everlasting Arms, so as to give us the strength and beauty of an eternal Youth
both in Soul and Body, and to entertain us with the uninterrupted Views of his
Divine Countenance, and with the constant Emanations of his Infinite Love! Who
can entertain the Soul with continual Impressions of the highest Joy, without
the dissolution or enfeebling of her Being, or any Faculty that belongs to it!
For he that has created us is the Sovereign disposer of what he has made; Exodus
33. 20.
and to him it is possible to make Men even to see his Face and live. 1 Cor. 13.
12.


Nor is this Duty of dedicating our Youth to the Service of our Creator, 1 John
3. 2.
as that Character involves his Power to dispose of us as to Happiness or
Misery, (as he pleases) barely to be argued from that awful and stupendous
Power and Authority; but also from the manifest discovery our Creator has made
in this case, as well of his Will and Pleasure, as of his Right and Power. For
he has declared, That the Wicked shall not live out half Psalm. 55. 23
their days, and that they shall die before their Time; Eccl. 7. 17.
that it shall not be well with the wicked, Eccl. 8. 13.
neither shall he prolong his days, because he fears not before God. And he
has added a promise to the fifth Precept of his Law, Exodus 20. 12.
(which is the first Command with promise) of a long and happy Life to those
that show an early Piety by their obedience and respect to their Natural
Parents, the Instruments of their Production, as an instance of their respect
to their Heavenly Father, the original Author of their Being. As the Apostle
well expresses it, Children obey your Parents in the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3.
for this is right. Honor thy Father and Mother, (which is the first
Commandment with promise) that it may be well with thee, and thou may live
long on the Earth. And tho God in the Wise and Mysterious way of his
Providence, makes some Exceptions from these General Rules of extending or
contracting the Time of Men in this World, sometimes suffering an accursed
Sinner to live an hundred Years, (...). 65. 20.
and an early Convert to die betimes: Yet if the Vices committed in Youth be
impenitently persisted in, that an eternal state of Misery will be the dreadful
consequence of it; as on the other hand, that our Creator not only can, but
certainly will reward the early Consecration of our Time to him, with an
eternal state of Bliss, cannot be doubted, by such as read and give credit to
the Scriptures of Truth. For as a multitude of Threatenings contained therein
give assurance of the former, so the latter is no less confirmed by variety of
great and precious Promises, which, if they ascertain Glory to all the Saints
in general, must not only comprehend those that were sanctified betimes, but
may reasonably raise their hopes to expect a distinguishing Reward.

And because the Title of [Creator] comprehends that of a Judge, it is probable,
that Solomon, after a Caution to Youth against Sin, because of the certainty of
the future Judgment of God, Eccl. 11. ^
brings in the words of our Text by way of Argument thereupon, [Therefore
remember thy Creator, etc.] (as we have before shown it might have been
translated) i. e. because he that has made thee, has a right to dispose of thy
Being, and will judge thee.

So that how well soever it fares with the wicked in this World, we may
conclude with the Wise Man, Eccl. 8. 12.
Tho a Sinner do evil an hundred times [q. d. repeat his Sins never so often]
and his days be prolonged; yet (says he) surely I know that it shall be well
with them that fear God, that fear before him: and that implies a Woe unto the
hardened sinner, and that (as the Prophet Isaiah speaks) it shall be ill with
him; Isai. 3. 11.
for the reward of his hands shall be given him.

From the Reasons included in the Term [Creator], wherein our Relation to God,
as his Creatures, implies we are under great obligations to remember to love
and serve him early; We pass

Secondly, To the Arguments insinuated in those words, which express the proper
time of engaging in this Duty, viz. [In the days of Youth before the evil days
come, and the years draw nigh, when we shall say, we have no pleasure in them,]
wherein the Advantages that attend the Time of Youth, and the contrary Evils
and Impediments that accompany Old Age, which render the former the far more
eligible Time in which to begin to devote one's self to the Service of God, are
suggested. Which Advantages on the one hand, and Disadvantages on the other, we
are now to consider.

1. Then it behooves us to dedicate our selves betimes to the Service of our
Creator, because the Work of Conversion is much more easily performed in Youth
than in Old Age. And seeing there is a necessity of our turning to God once in
our Lives, or else we become irrecoverably miserable; Prudence directs to the
choice of the best Time for so weighty a purpose. The Wise Man tells us, Eccl.
3. 11.
God has made every thing beautiful in its season, and that there is a fit time
for every Purpose under the Heaven; Eccl. 3. 1-10.
and if all Wise Men are careful to choose a convenient season for the common
Affairs of the World, that relate only to their Temporal Interest, how
prodigious a piece of folly must it be for a Man to suffer the fittest season
to escape him for the performance of that Work, which is the most difficult of
all others to be well done; and upon the due accomplishment of which, both his
present and future Happiness depends! For,

(1.) Youth is the best Time for our Conversion: Because the Soul is not then
so much vitiated by evil Habits, as when she has run through the several stages
of Life in a continued course of Wickedness. Tho Sin is deeply enough rooted in
our Nature, which is all defiled with the Original Stain: Yet we very much
fortify our corrupt Inclinations by producing them into Act; and by multiplying
those Sinful Acts, till they become familiar and customary to us, and till we
drink down Iniquity like Water: Job 15. 16.
So that the difficulty of turning from Sin increases together with the Time of
our continuance in the practice of it. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or
the Leopard his Spots? Jer. 13. 23.
Then may ye also do Good, that are accustomed to do Evil, (says the Prophet.)
Is it to be thought that Conversion to God is so slight and easy a matter, that
any Time may serve for its Accomplishment? Are not the difficulties that a long
habit of Sinning will lay in the way of that great and important Work to be
feared? Is it not much more easy to bend a Young Twig than an Aged Oak, and to
prevent evil Habits than to rectify 'em? A little observation of the World may
suffice to inform us, that long Custom or Habit is so bewitching a thing, that
scarce any thing can be imagined more ridiculous, absurd, and inconvenient than
many things which the long usage of some Persons, nay of some whole Nations,
has authorized.

And if Men are so tenacious of any silly and troublesome thing which they have
been much addicted to, and sacrifice their Reason, their Honor and their Ease
to the Tyranny of Custom; how much more prevalent must a long habit, and course
of Sin be, which besides its deep rooting in our Nature, and besides the
ordinary force of mere Habit, has both its flattering Promises and Pleasures to
tempt us to its Embraces, and its Threats and Terrors too (in suggesting all
the mortifying Circumstances of a virtuous course of Life) to raise in our
Minds the most frightful Idea of Piety and Religion. So that, if Custom and
Habit in general be proverbially styled a Second Nature, (...)
the habit of Sin may of all others most fitly be so termed: And the force of
its Dominion over our Souls, and the difficulty of its Extirpation out of them,
must needs have an increase proportionate to the Time of its Duration in them.
Can any thing then be more evident, than that in the days of our Youth, when
Sin has not yet so deeply rooted it self in our Hearts by evil habits, as in
Old Age after a long course of Vice, in a multitude of repeated Acts, our
Conversion must needs have the most easy and kindly accomplishment?

(2.) This further appears, in that the Minds of the Young are ordinarily the
most capable of Instruction. It was a saying of a Philosopher; (...) Di^g.
^^ert. ^ib. 6.
that to Cure a Dead Man and Teach an Old Man, were things equally difficult:
For (tho in some respects Youth is sufficiently addicted to Pride, yet) there
is a kind of Natural Modesty and becoming Humility often discernible in the
Young, arising from a Consciousness of their Ignorance, and unexperience of
things, which disposes them to a more Docible frame of Mind, than is usually to
be found in Elder Persons, whose Maturity of Age often makes 'em unwilling to
be informed, especially in matters of Religion, either because they imagine they
already know what others may pretend to teach 'em, or because they are
unwilling to undergo the shame of being accounted so long ignorant of Religion,
and their concern therein, which every body ought to be early acquainted with.
And upon this account ('it is likely) our Savior tells his Disciples, that
except they should humble themselves and become as little Children, Mat. 18. 3,
4.
they should not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. unless they should
imitate Children in Modesty and lowliness of Mind; that the Sense of their
Ignorance might make 'em Teachable.

Besides the Minds of Youth are generally a much fitter Soil for Truth, than
those of the Aged, because not usually so overrun with the Briars and Thorns
of strong and deeply rooted Prejudices. The Soul of Man will not long remain
empty, if it be not early stored with Truth, 'twill be gradually stuffed with
Errors; and as it is much more troublesome to alter and correct a Writing full
of Nonsense and Confusion, by much razing out and interlining, than to write a
handsome piece of good Sense on a blank Paper: So it is abundantly harder to
instruct or rectify a Mind long prepossessed with Falsehood, than to make deep
impressions of Truth on a Soul more simple and unprejudiced; which, if empty of
Knowledge, yet is not filled with Error, which as it has not yet learned to judge
right of things, so neither has been much used to judge wrong; and if not happy
enough to be well stocked with good Notions, yet is not so unhappy as to be
crowded with bad ones.

Now seeing to capacitate us to serve God, John 4. 24.
who is a Spirit, and therefore will be served with our Spirits, (without which
Bodily Exercise profits little) there are many great Truths to be learned;
Romans 1. 9. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
and tho he has promised the help of his Holy Spirit to reveal these to the
simple, yet seeing he requires us to be diligent in the investigation of Truth,
Prove. 8. Psalm. 4. 4. John 5. ^^.
and very attentive to the Voice of Reason and Scripture to that End, it is easy
to see by reflecting on what has been just now said, That the Young, whose
Minds are yet unformed, have a mighty advantage above the Aged for learning the
knowledge of the ways of God, and for obtaining a more copious and solid
understanding of Truth: So that we may well say with the Prophet, (tho perhaps
he speaks in another sense) Whom shall he teach Knowledge? Isa. 28. 9
And whom shall he make to understand Doctrine? Them that are weaned from the
Milk, and drawn from the Breasts.

(3.) Again, there is a certain Tenderness of Spirit attending our first Years,
and not ordinarily to be found afterward, which renders Conversion more
feasible. The Heart is more malleable, and more easily receives Impressions
from the Promises and Threatenings recorded in the Word of God, and from the
Mercies and Judgments distributed in the World by his Providence. Therefore we
find few Persons, whose Education has given them any tolerable means of the
knowledge of Divine things, who do not remember themselves to have been much
affected in their Youth in attending to the Word of God, or in observing some
remarkable Passages of his Providence. If deep Conviction is a great step
toward Conversion, Experience shows this is most easily wrought on one that is
young: How often do we see such a one weep at a transient glance on Death and
Judgment (in a Sermon), or at a general reflection on the Sufferings of Christ
for Sinners, while the cered Consciences of those that have been long hardened
in Sin hold proof against the most pathetick and awakening Discourses of the
certainty of Death, the dismal Circumstances that attend a Sinner at the
approach of it, and the great consequences that depend on that amazing Change,
or against the most lively description of the most Cruel and unexampled
Sufferings wherewith our Blessed Savior was tormented for our Redemption? That
makes no impression on the Adamantine Heart of the latter, which is often found
to effect a deep compunction of Mind in the former; and the Eyes of the one can
hardly be kept open by a Discourse that dissolves those of the other into
Tears. The affections of Fear and Hope, Joy, Sorrow, Compassion, and the like,
more easily move the tender Minds of Youth, and consequently make way for
lasting impressions of Piety, to the purposes of which these Affections, when
guided and regulated by an enlightened Mind, do mightily conduce.

(4.) The Zeal and Resolution which the warm Temper of Youth enages them in,
for what they embrace, renders a thorough Conversion to God more easy to them
than to the old; who by having either tasted much of the Afflictions of the
World themselves, or by having been Witnesses to the Miseries of many others,
often retain so terrible an Idea of Worldly Troubles, that the Mortification
and Self-denial prescribed to the followers of Christ, gives them a strange
disgust for a strictly Religious Life: Besides the abatement of their natural
heat and vigor, (a good degree of which is useful to any great enterprise)
makes 'em with the Sluggard continually complain of a Lion in the way. Prove.
22. 13.
But the Young who have not been so balked with Disappointments, nor felt or
seen so many Miseries, and who have also a great sense of Honor, and are
commonly ambitious of high Achievements, and disdain to have their Attempts
defeated, are hereby disposed more readily to take up the Cross of Christ, and
to 1 Timothy 6. 12.
fight the good fight of Faith, that they may lay hold on Eternal Life. Add to
this, that that Disease of Covetousness, that so often attends the Aged, who
from experience either in themselves or others, of the difficulty of getting
and keeping, and the danger of losing, and the inconveniency of wanting the
things of this World, become more tenacious of them then when they are nearest
the unavoidable necessity of parting with them; that this Disease (I say) which
is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10.
which is Idolatry, Col. 3. 5.
and therefore opposite to the true Service of God, and which renders it almost
impossible for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 19. 24, 25,
26.
does not so usually reign amongst the Young (who are rather apt to run into
the contrary extreme) so that their motion in the ways of God, is not clogged
with this dead weight, which so mightily incumbers those whose Hearts have
taken deeper root in the Earth. Thus we see how much more easy the Work of
Conversion is likely to be, when we engage in it in our tender Years, than if
we defer it to Old Age.

But all this while I would not be thought to make the work of Conversion,
considered as the Act of God, (who alone can turn a Soul from darkness to
light, Act. 26. 18.
and from the power of Satan to himself) to be more difficult in one Subject
than another, for all things are equally possible to him; but I have hereby
made an Essay to show that the Heart of an old Sinner is a Subject much more
untractable and obstinate in it self, than that of one, who (by reason of his
Youth) is yet but a Novice in Vice? That the work of Mortification and
Sanctification is commonly begun with less difficulty, and carried on with more
ease and speed on the Young than on the Old, and that a greater degree of Grace
is necessary to reform the latter than the former; and whether the Almighty
will grant such an extraordinary measure of his Grace to one that is grown old
in wickedness, may well be doubted (as we shall show hereafter.)

Since then the work of Conversion is of the greatest consequence, as it is for
our truest interest both in this World and that to come, certainly it ought to
be performed in Youth, seeing that is the most seasonable Time, as will further
appear,

2. In that much Good is lost, and much Evil contracted by deferring our
Conversion to Old Age; but much Evil (on the contrary) is prevented, and much
Good obtained, through the Course of our days, by an early turning to God.

(1.) Much Sin is prevented, and consequently much Spiritual good obtained by
an early Conversion, which will appear to be no small advantage: For seeing
Sin, as it is directly opposite to the pure Nature of God, is the worst of
Evils, and seeing the Excellency or Vileness of a Creature is to be measured by
its likeness or contrariety to God, who possesses absolute perfection in
himself; it necessarily follows, that nothing can so deform a Creature, nothing
can so defile it, nothing can debase it so much, and set it at so great a
distance from Excellency and Perfection, as Sin does. It must then certainly be
our Interest to break off our Sins by an early Repentance; since every sinful
Act, and much more a continuance in a course of Sin, does so much corrupt,
debase, and deform the Soul. And if we desire the meliorating of our Nature,
and would become more excellent Creatures than we are, instead of degenerating
and becoming worse: It highly concerns us to begin early to extirpate that
which has stripped the Soul of much of her Intellectual and (which is worse) of
her Moral Excellency; and will render her, by so much the more Vile, by how
much the longer we indulge it; and to devote our selves betimes to Religion and
Holiness, which is the principal Beauty and Glory of a Rational Soul, and that
which chiefly makes a Man resemble his Creator.

(2.) Much Sorrow and Trouble is hereby prevented, and much Joy and Pleasure
obtained and secured. For though some Examples may be found of Wicked Men, who in
respect of their Temporal prosperity for a little Time, may be said to spread
themselves like a Green Bay Tree; Psalm. 37. 35.
not to be in Trouble like other Men, Psalm. 73. 5, 6, 7, etc.
and to have more than Heart could wish: Yet God does not leave himself without
witness of his Displeasure against Sin, in that he often wounds the heads of
his Enemies, and the hairy Scalps of them that go on still in their Trespasses,
Psalm. 68. 21.
by signal Judgments in this World, as all Places and Ages can testify. Nor has
the Divine Providence been wanting to signalize the Righteous by frequent
Instances of peculiar Temporal Blessings, which it has conferred on them.
However, the Anguish of a guilty and self-accusing Conscience, which the Wicked
often labor under, together with the common and unavoidable Afflictions of
this World, which make a very deep Impression upon them, whose Appetites are
fierce and eager after sensual pleasure (their hope being only in this Life)
and whose Passions soon fall into a violent Ferment, because they want the Holy
Art of allaying the heat of them by serious Reflections on the Sovereignty,
Justice, Wisdom, and Goodness of that God, whose Providence governs the
Universe; these things I say occasion them abundance of Grief and Trouble,
which one that becomes an early Convert to Holiness avoids; who besides the
joyous Testimony of a good Conscience, that gives a Relish to all his Temporal
Comforts, and takes away the sting of all his outward Trials, is so mortified
to this World, and raised so far above the Interests of it, by a lively hope of
Eternal Bliss; and is so thoroughly convinced of the good Conduct of the Divine
Governor of the World, that he finds no such great reluctance in himself to
submit to the Will of God, when he is pleased to afflict him. In a word, Jer.
2. 19.
if it be both an evil and a bitter thing to go on in a Course of Sin; and if
all God's Ways are ways of pleasantness, Prove. 3. ^7.
and all his Paths are Peace; it must needs be a mighty advantage to enter
betimes into so sweet and delightful a Walk.

3. The Evils of Old Age (if we arrive to that) are aggravated by deferring
Conversion till then; but alleviated and rendered tolerable by an early Piety.
If he that neglects in the Time of his Youth and Strength to make provision for
the Time of Age and Sickness, when he has a fair opportunity of doing it, is
justly censured as inconsiderate and imprudent; because he takes not care to
prepare that which might give him some Relief then, when many Infirmities will
certainly encompass him, and the neglect of which will inhance his Misery: Then
to neglect to turn to God in Youth is a Folly of the grossest kind; because
nothing can tend so much to support us under the pressure of the many Evils
that attend Old Age; nothing can tend to take off so much of the weight of that
Burden, as an early Conversion; and nothing can make those Miseries so
grievous, as the neglect of it. For

(1.) By an early Conversion a large stock of Grace, and of Experience, is
treasured up, which mightily strengthens the Soul under the burden of Age: A
long Habit of Mortification of Sensual Things, Will render Carnal Pleasures
insipid; 1 Cor. 15. 31.
and he that dies daily to the World, in the Time of Youth, when it appears
most aimable and charming, will not feel much regret in his Mind, when he finds
Old Age has almost quite taken away the relish of those perishing Sweets; since
Reason and Religion had long before allayed the keeness of his Appetite to
them. The long and good use he has made of his Spiritual Senses, makes him
patient under the decay of his Natural ones. What though (as Solomon phrases it)
the Keepers of the House tremble, Eccl. 12. 3.
and the strong Men bow themselves; V. 5.
and fears be in the way? etc. How can this make him unhappy, 2 Cor. 4. 16.
whose inward Man has been renewed day by day, even before his outward Man
decayed; Who therefore is become strong in the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 10.
and in the Power of his Might, Isai. 35. 3, 4.
which strengthens the weak hands and confirms the feeble knees, and makes them
that are of a fearful heart strong? Eccl. 12. 3.
What if those that look out at the Windows be darkened? How can Dimness, or
even loss of Sight, render him miserable, who through the course of his Life
has endeavored to be blind to those Objects that might tempt him to Sin, Job
31. 1.
having made a Covenant with his Eyes to guard himself from it; and has
constantly prayed that God would turn them away from beholding Vanity? Psalm.
119. 37.
How can he be much concerned at the want of Natural Light, Heb. 11. 1.
who has been long accustomed to see things that are invisible by the piercing
Eye of Faith? and v. 27.
How can he be much discontented at the decay of the once quick Sensation of
his Palate, or at the want of Appetite to his Food; Psalm. 34. 8.
who has so often tasted, 1 Pet. ^. 3.
and still tastes that the Lord is Gracious? Though all the Daughters of Music
be brought low; Eccl. 12. 4.
How should Deafness be an intolerable grievance to him; who has often heard,
and still hears the still and small Voice of the Spirit of God speaking in his
Conscience, 1 Kings 19. 12.
and testifying with his Spirit that he is one of the Children of God? Romans 8.
16.
How can the Obstructions that the Organs of Speech suffer, which render his
Voice weak, and Vnmusical, discourage him, who knows that as his Praises and
Prayers have often been Melodious in the Ears of God, Cant. 2. 14.
so they still are very pleasant to him, Prove. 15. 8.
who chiefly minds the Tuneable frame of the Heart? Eccl. 12. 2.
And though the Sun and the Light, and the Moon and the Stars be darkened, etc.
How can the Infirmities that impair the Understanding, and Judgment, the Fancy
and Memory, etc. be insupportable to him, who has long understood the Great
Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
so as to know the only True God, John 17. 3.
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, which is Life Eternal: 1 John 5. 20.
Who has received an indelible impression of this Knowledge in his Mind; Jer.
31. 33.
and has the Law of God deeply engraven on his Heart: And whose long experience
of the Divine Goodness; makes him with Holy Confidence still say, 2 Timothy 1. 1.
with the Apostle, I know whom I have believed, -- and with the Aged Psalmist;
Psalm. 71. 5.
Thou art my Hope, O LORD God, Thou art my Trust from my Youth? Who (however
weak his Memory is as to other things, yet) still remembers his Creator, Psalm.
119. 16.
and will not forget his Word; Nay tho all the Evils and Infirmities of Old
Age, which the wise Man enumerates after our Text, attack him, and threaten a
speedy Dissolution of the Frame of his Body: Romans 7. 24.
How can this disspirit him, 2 Cor. 5. 1-8.
who has long groaned for deliverance from that Earthly Tabernacle, that he
might be rid of those remains of Sin that lurk in it: And has often wished that
this Vail of Mortal Flesh were rent asunder, because he knows it hinders him
from seeing God Face to Face; who has so familiariz'd the Grave to himself, by
frequent Meditations on the Victory his Savior has obtained over it; 1 Cor.
15. 54-57.
and is so well persuaded of that Blessed Resurrection which his lively hope
has long acquainted him with, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
that he can look into the Gloomy Valley of the shadow of Death without
Consternation, Psalm. 23. 4.
and cheerfully commit his Spirit into the hands of God, 1 Pet. 4. 19.
as his Faithful Creator; Psalm. 73. 24.
who as he has guided him by his Counsel, so (he knows) will receive him to
Glory.

But on the other side; if Conversion be deferred to Old Age, these and the
like Advantages of a long Exercise of Grace, and of a large Spiritual
Experience being wanting, how difficult will it be for a weak Mind and a
languishing Body to bear up under those pressing Miseries that will then attend
them? And it will be no small Affliction to a late Penitent, even after his
Conversion, to think on his Imprudent neglect of early laying up this Spiritual
Provision, against those Evil days of Age, and Weakness, when the Soul stands
in so much need of it,

(2.) An early Conversion has greater Characters of Sincerity and Truth than a
late One; thereby administers great Ease and Comfort amidst the Infirmities of
Age. For, as the true Peace and Comfort of the Soul results from the good and
safe posture wherein she finds her self: So according to the Evidence or
Obscurity of the proofs a Man finds in himself of the reality of his Conversion
to God; the more stable or wavering is his Hope and Comfort. Now those that
have been converted in their Youth, have usually much clearer Evidences of the
Truth of their Conversion, than they who have been reclaimed from Sin by a late
Repentance: And therefore the Joy of the former commonly far surpasses that of
the latter.

How often does the disturbed and doubtful Mind of a late Penitent, thus
commune with her self: I find indeed an unwonted Sorrow in my self on the
account of Sin; But how shall I be assured that it is a Godly Sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.
^^.
that works a Repentance to Salvation not to be repented of? Is it not wholly
from a fear of Evil of Punishment, and not at all from the Sense of the Evil of
Sin? Not because I have violated the Law of God, but only because I have
rendered my self obnoxious to the Curse of it? Is it not rather because I have
weakened my Body, and hastened Old Age by my Vices; than because I Have defiled
my Soul, and enfeebled her Powers by them? I feel in my self some Abhorrence
and Aversion from the Sins I formerly took Pleasure in; But is this the Effect
of the sickness of my Soul; or of the Distempers of my Body? (...). 9.
Do I really loath my former disorders, and is Temperance my choice? Is it not
rather the weakness of my Appetite, and the decay of my Palate, that makes me
abstemious? I delight not in sensual Mirth and Jollity as formerly: But may I
not justly question, whether this does not more proceed from the weakness of my
Fancy, than from the tenderness of my Conscience, and the rectitude of my Will?
I seem somewhat mortified to the things of the World: But is not this rather a
kind of Natural than a Moral Death? A dying to the World of Necessity and not
of Choice? Do I forsake it because it is unworthy of my Love; and not rather,
because it has first forsaken me; and is incapable of affording me its former
Pleasures, now the Evil days of Old Age have overtaken me? I find in my Soul an
earnest desire after Holiness: Is it because I take delight in pleasing God; or
only because I fear to suffer the weight of his Displeasure? Is it because I
have a mind to live a Holy Life, now when the best, and almost the whole of my
Time is spent; Number. 23. 10.
or only that I may die the Death of the Righteous, and that my last end may be
like his? I am now willing to devote my self to the Service of God: But why
have I not done it long before, when I had Time and Strength, and other
Advantages to serve him with? Is it not rather to serve a turn of my own, than
to serve him, that I offer my self so late to his Service? Have I not Reason to
doubt whether I am sincerely willing to choose my blessed Lord, as my Head and
Ruler, as well as my Sanctuary and Savior? And whether I am willing to be
purified as well as redeemed, to be sanctified by his Grace, as well as
justified by his Righteousness? The Heart is deceitful above all things; Jer.
17. 9.
And how shall I be assured that I do not deceive my self about the safety of
my Soul?

These and such like Thoughts often occasion great Hesitations in the Mind of
an Aged Convert, and make him doubt of the sincerity of his Heart, and of the
security of his State.

Whereas, on the other hand, He who after an Initiation in the Service of God
in Youth, and a Proficiency therein through the Time of his Strength, is at last
arrived to a good Old Age, may greatly solace himself in scanning over the
Marks and Proofs of the Truth and Reality of his Conversion, which are Great
and Numerous.

He deeply mourned for Sin at an Age when Sorrow and Pensiveness seem most
unseasonable in the Judgment of the World; and when the warmth of the
Imagination and the briskness of the Senses dispose most to Carnal Mirth: He
loathed Sin, when it seemed most Charming, and denied himself its Sensual
Pleasures, at an Age when they have the highest Gust; and when their evil
Consequences almost quite disappear through their great supposed Distance. He
forsook the World, when 'twas just spreading its Charms before him, and making
its Court to him after the most obliging Manner. (...). 5. 6.
He hunger'd and thirsted after Righteousness, at a Time when it had the most
Affliction and Bitterness attending it; and dedicated himself to God then, when
he had a large prospect of hard Services and Sufferings to undergo for his sake.

And accordingly his Life since his Conversion yields a multitude of Instances
that prove the sincerity of it. The proof of his Faith in God, and of his Love
to him, has been like that of Gold and Silver in the melting Furnace, amidst
various temptations. He has had occasion to give ample proofs of his Fidelity
to the Captain of his Salvation, Heb. 2. 10
by having long warred under his Banner: And has Reason to believe himself to
have been truly converted in his Youth; since all the flattering Sweets, and
Pleasures of the World could never seduce him; nor all the threatening Frowns,
and Troubles of it terrify him into a change of his Resolution for the Service
of his God. And his having held out so long, gives him hope that he shall hold
out to the end; (...). 4.
and since he finds his Faith has on it the Character of [unseigned], 2 Timothy 1.
5.
his Joy must needs abound; when he considers, that he that is the Author of
that Faith, Heb. 12. 2.
is the Finisher of it too: That he that long ago began, and has long
cherished the Work of Grace in his Soul, Philip. 1. 6.
will carry it on until the Day of Iuesus Christ: And that as he has the
evident Signs of Faith in the Sanctification of his Heart; 1 Pet. 1. 9.
so he shall have the end of it too in the Salvation of his Soul. And it hence
follows,

(3.) That an early Conversion furnishes Old Age with comfortable Reflections
on Time past; and on the contrary the thoughts of an ill-spent Life are then
most grievous, when we are near the Close of it. What a dreadful thing must it
be for an Old Man, Job 20 11.
whose Bones are full of the Sins of his Youth, to look back upon his former
course of Life! Suppose him a late Penitent of the Eleventh Hour; Mat. 20. ^.
and that God is pleased even then to indulge him a Pardon* With what horror
will he review his Life! What a loathsome sink of Abominations must he rake
into! What innumerable Evils will he see himself encompassed with! And with
what a mighty weight will they press his Soul! Is it likely that that God whom
he has so long wearied with his Iniquities, Mal. 2. 17.
and pressed with his Sins, Am. 2. 13.
as a Cart is pressed with Sheaves, will show him Mercy now, without giving him
a taste how Bitter as well as how Evil a thing Sin is? Jer. 2. 19.
And without showing him that, if he be saved, 1 Cor. 3. 15.
it shall be so as by Fire? Is it strange if that God to whose Calls he has
been long deaf, and from whose Reproofs and Counsels he has so often turned
away, should suffer him to call a while in the Distress and Bitterness of his
Soul, before he condescends to give him an answer of Peace?

And seeing it is the ordinary course of the Almighty, when he converts Men,
first to impress their Minds with great Horror from the sense of Sin; as well
to make 'em loath and consequently to forsake their Vices, as to make 'em
highly value his Favor, and adore his pardoning Grace; it seems necessary in
an ordinary way, that an old and hardened Sinner should undergo the Terror of
the Lord to a high degree, 2 Cor. 5. 11.
because the long time he has spent in the service of Sin, gives him so great
an occasion of Remorse, when his Conscience is once enlightened and awakened;
and because to extirpate these long and deep habits of Sin, there is need of a
kind of violent Turn in the Soul. Mark 1. 26.
For as the evil Spirit tore the poor Man (in the Gospel) when forced to leave
him; so it is not usual that Sin leaves a Man, of whose Soul it has had a long
possession, without occasioning great convulsions of Mind, and as it were,
rending the Soul in pieces: And how hard will this be to be endured, at a time
when the Spirit of a Man can scarce bear the common Infirmities of Age? Prove.
18. 14.
Who then can bear a wounded Spirit?

And when these terrors of Mind are over, and these pangs of Conscience that
give hope of a new Birth are succeeded with some Peace that follows that happy
Change; John 3. 3.
yet who knows how far it may be allayed, and how often interrupted by
reiterated Scruples and Fears? And how long the Soul that has been so violently
moved may retain her doubtful Vibrations, after such astonishing Impressions of
Divine Wrath, in a time when even Natural Infirmities render the Mind weak and
timorous; Eccl. 12. 5.
and when the King of Terrors, who daily expects the Aged, loudly alarms the
tremulous Soul to prepare speedily to pass into Eternity, the near approach of
which mighty Change must needs add terror to every Scruple; and when Satan a
subtle Adversary (of whose Devices, 2 Cor. 2. 11.
for want of experience, he is in a great measure ignorant) shoots his fiery
and envenomed Darts to weaken the Hope, Ephesians. 6. 16.
and to heighten the Fears, and to increase the Troubles of the Soul? Who knows
(I say) what gloomy and dark Intervals these things may occasion? It Is true,
God can surmount all these Difficulties by proportionate effusions of his
Grace, and can fill such a Soul (if he pleases) with unspeakable Joy. But is it
likely that he should indulge those with the highest and most uncommon
Privileges, that hold out longest in Rebellion against him? And may such
reasonably expect he will go out of his ordinary Methods to meet them, that
have all their Life past gone astray from him? And that he will bestow the
sealing Evidences of his Holy Spirit on them to a degree which he does not
always allow his early Disciples, and those that have long followed him? May it
not rather be thought, That tho God should forgive their Iniquities, Psalm. 99.
8*
he will take Vengeance of their Inventions? That tho they should die in the
Lord, Rev. 14. 13
they will set in a Cloud, and go to the Grave with Hezekiah's Lamentation, when
under the sense of the Wrath of God, and under punishment for his Sins.
Ireckon'd (says he) till Morning, Isai. 38. 13, 14, 15.
that as a Lion he will break all my Bones: From Day even to Night will thou
make an end of one. Like a Crane or a Swallow; so did Ichatter, I did mourn as
a Dove: Mine Eyes fail with looking upward, O LORD, I am oppressed, undertake
for me. What shall I say? He has both spoken unto me, and himself has done
it; I shall go softly all my Years in the bitterness of my Soul. And with that
of Job; Job 13. 26.
Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the iniquities
of my Youth. Is it strange, if, as they have consumed their Time in Sin, and
have grown old in Wickedness, Psalm. 6. 7.
their Eyes should be consumed with grief and wax old with Sorrow? And if, as
they have wallow'd long in Vice, so they should be made to swim long in Tears,
V. 6.
and to water their Couches with continual weeping?

But what a comfortable Review of his Life may an early Convert take in old
Age? What joy to look back on that solemn Oblation of the first fruits of his
Time which he made to God, and on the early favor which God expressed to him!
To remember the kindness of his Youth, and the love of his Espousals, which
even God himself delights to remember! Jer. 2. 2.
To turn over the large Volumes of his Experience, to look on past Temptations
and Conflicts; these Reflections will give him a pleasure as much beyond that
of an ancient Sailor, when he thinks on the many Rocks and Sands and Storms he
has escaped, and that of a valiant Soldier, when he recollects how many Dangers
he has past, and how many Victories he has obtained; as he conceives the
interest of the Soul is beyond that of the Body, and that Eternal Life is to be
valued above Temporal. With what Admiration mixed with Joy will he be filled,
when he calls to mind what God has done for him! For tho the failings of his
Life ( since no Man lives and sins not) give him occasion of Godly Sorrow and
Humiliation, 2 Chronicles. 6. 36. Eccl. 7. 20.
yet these will not hinder a Religious Joy from reigning in his Soul, from his
happy experience of the Mercy of his God; which will make him with the Apostle,
Romans 7. 24, 25. 2 Cor. 12. 9, 11.
glory in the Grace of God in the midst of his Contrition, and (tho in himself
he is nothing) will make him say with the Psalmist, Psa. 18. 29.
By my God I have run through a Troop, and by my God I have leaped over a Wall!
With what delight will he recollect the signal favors of the Divine Providence
that beautify the History of his Life! Psalm. 23. 5.
How his God has spread his Table, and filled his Cup in the presence of his
Enemies; V. 4.
and has made both his Rod and his Staff co comfort him. With how much pleasure
will he turn his Mind to the House of God, to think how often he has gone
thither with the voice of Joy and Praise, Psalm. 42. 4.
with the Multitude that kept Holiday! Psalm. 27. 4.
How often he has beheld the Beauty of the LORD, while he has been enquiring in
his Temple! How he has been stayed with Flagons, Cant. 2. 5.
and comforted with Apples, when sick of Love to his Savior! How he has sat
down with great delight under his shadow, V. 3.
while his Fruit has been sweet to his Taste: How he has been satiated as with
marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63. 5.
When his Soul has hungered after Righteousness: Mar. 5. 6.
How he has often disburden'd his Mind by pouring out his Complaints into the
Bosom of his Heavenly Father; how he has often received an answer of Peace,
sometimes beyond his Hope, nay beyond his Desire, Isai. 65. 24.
and sometimes even before his Prayer: What precious Seasons of communion with
God he has enjoyed, when retired into some corner alone to worship him: What
fervent desires he has then felt; what earnest aspirations of his Soul after
him! What smiles of the Divine Love have on such occasions cheered his Spirit;
2 Cor. 1. 22.
what sealings of the Holy Spirit have assured his Faith: Ephesians. 1. 13.
What prospect he has had of him that is invisible; Heb. 11. 27.
What Joy unspeakable and full of Glory! 1 Pet. 1. 8.


Such Reflections will even make the Soul forget her temporal Afflictions, and
render the burden of Age supportable. These Thoughts will obviate fears and
temptations, and inspire the Mind with holy Courage and Resolution, and furnish
her with Arguments for Prayer, like that of the Psalmist. I will go in the
strength of the Lord GOD; Psalm. 71. 16, 17, 18.
I will make mention of thy Righteousness, even of thine only. O God, thou have
thought me from my Youth; and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous Works. Now
also when I am old and gray headed; O God for sake me not, etc.

In a word, Tho every Man has occasion to be humbled for his Sins, and that, in
every part of his Life, it must needs be a great, and next to the Light of
God's Countenance through the face of Jesus Christ, the greatest occasion of
Joy in the World; when a Man can lie down in the Grave in Peace, with the
satisfaction of having made Religion the great Business of his Life, of having
served his Generation faithfully by the Will of God, Acts 13. 36.
having from his Youth exercised himself in this, to have a Conscience always
void of offense both toward God and toward Men: When at the shutting up of his
Days, he can, by the Grace of God, safely appeal both to him and to Men, as
aged Samuel did; 1 Samuel 12. 2, 3.
Behold -- I am old and gray headed -- and I have walked before you from my
Childhood unto this day: Behold here I am, witness against me before the Lord,
and before his Anointed: Whose Ox have I taken? Or whose Ass have I taken? Or
whom have I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? Or of whose hand have I received,
any Bribe, to blind my Eyes therewith? etc. And as he that has served God from
his Youth can look back with Pleasure, so he may look forward with exceeding
Joy. For,

(4.) An early Conversion furnishes old Age with much more comfort than a late
one, in that it usually gives a brighter and more glorious prospect of Reward
in the other Life.

As this Life is not valuable, but as it may be improved in order to a better;
so the strong and well-grounded Hope of eternal Bliss in the World to come, is
that which sweetens the most bitter Afflictions of a Christian here, and makes
him as much more happy as he is more excellent than his Neighbor (whereas if
his Hope were only in this Life, Prove. 12. 26. 1 Cor. 15. 19.
he would be of all Men the most miserable.) And a Man's true Happiness in this
World is therefore to be measured by the strength and liveliness of his Faith
and Hope for the Blessings of the other; for by these he receives an Earnest of
the Heavenly Possession, and has some foretastes of that Glory, with which he
expects in a little time to be fully satisfied. For every one knows that there
is pleasure in hoping for any thing that we think will add to our Happiness,
especially when that Hope is thought to be well founded, and the things
expected of great consequence, and speedily to be obtained: With what an
extraordinary Joy then must the Hope of everlasting Bliss and Glory inspire him
that firmly believes he shall suddenly enjoy it! And that this Hope makes a
Saint the most happy Man even in this Life is evident, some of the Enemies of
Religion themselves being Judges. It Is worth remarking, that an Eminent Person,
The late E. of Roch^ster, see his Life wrote by Dr. Burnet, p. 68.
(who was one of the greatest Sinners, as well as one of the greatest Penitents
of this Age) even while he maintained his Atheistical Principles, and led a
most flagitious Course of Life, confessed, That whether the Business of
Religion was true or not, he thought those who had the Persuasions of it, and
lived so that they had quiet in their Consciences, and believed God governed
the World, and acquiesced in his Providence, and had the Hope of an endless
Blessedness in another State, the happiest Men in the World: And said, He would
give all that he was Master of, to be under those Persuasions, and to have the
Supports and Joys that must needs flow from them. So Just a Thought had he even
then of the Joy of a Good Conscience, and the Pleasure which the bare
Expectation of future Glory in Heaven occasions, that he thought it far
out-ballanc'd the pleasures of Sin, which are but for a season; and thus does
Religion triumph over her Enemies, extorting from their own Mouths a plain
Acknowledgment of what the Psalmist assures, that Happy is the People, Psalm.
144. 15.
whose God is the LORD.

Now it cannot be expected, that a late Convert should have an equal portion of
this Hope and Joy, with one that has feared the Lord from his Youth. 1 Kings
18. 12.
The former is commonly exercised with greater and more frequent Doubts
concerning his Interest in eternal Glory than the latter; and the Eye of his
Faith is often too weak to read his Evidences for it; because (as we have shown
before) he is apt to question the truth of his Regeneration, John 3. 3, 4, 5.
without which, he knows, no Man can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And this
makes him often thus reason with himself: 1 Cor. 2. 9.
Eye (indeed) has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart
of Man the things which God has prepared for them that love him. But I fear I
shall fall short of the Glory of God, because I question the sincerity of my
Love to him. Is not this fullness of Joy reserved for them that have nauseated
the Pleasures of this World, Psa. 16. 11.
with which I have glutted my sensual Appetite, even from my Infancy? Are not
those Rivers of pleasure at the right hand of God, only to refresh his diligent
Servants that have born the burden and heat of the day in laboring and
suffering for him? May not I, who have spent my Days in Vanity and Sin, Romans
13. 13.
in Rioting and Drunkenness, in Chambering and Wantonness; and who now am
incapacitated either to do or suffer much for God, just at the Period of my
Days, justly fear being excluded from the participation of this Bliss? Is it
likely that these Joys that are so spiritual and refined, will be poured into
such a Soul as mine (when parted from this languishing Body) which has been
debauched and corrupted for so many Years, with the base and sordid delights of
Sin? Or may I presume to deposite this vile and mouldering Carcass in the
Grave, in hope of having it rendered a Glorious Body at the Resurrection of the
Just; Luke 14. 14.
when I have through the Best of my time abused it to the Vilest purposes of
Sensuality and Vice? Shall these Eyes that have so often been full of Adultery
be admitted to see the Lord in Glory? 2 Pet. 2. 14.
And this Tongue be tuned to praise him with sacred Anthems in Heaven, which
has thus long lodged in it a World of Iniquity, Jam. 3. 6.
and desecrated his Holy Name by profane Oaths and Blasphemies on Earth? That
these Feet that have been swift to attend the Places of Debauchery, and the
Assemblies of the Ungodly, Psalm. 1. 1.
shall stand within the Gates of the Heavenly Jerusalem, Ps. 122. 2.
and find a welcome place in the General Assembly and Church of the firstborn,
Heb. 12. 22, 23.
which are written in Heaven? Or that these Hands that have so long been
executing Acts of Unrighteousness here, shall be eternally lifted up with
Praises, and employed in applauding the Name and Works of God there?

May not I more reasonably be afraid, Heb. 10. 31.
that my Soul should fall into the hands of the living God, 1 Pet. 4. 19.
than cheerfully commit it to him, now my Days are near expiring? And justly
apprehend that the expense of my Time in Wickedness will be punished with an
eternity of Misery? And that after I have so long walked in the ways of Sin,
Isa. 50. 11.
I must now at last lie down in the Grave in Sorrow? And O how pungent is that
Sorrow, while my trembling Soul looks into the consequences of such a Death!
For, if I die in my Sins, not only am I deprived of all this Happiness, which I
have been viewing at a distance, but must sink into that Abyss of Misery, Mark
9. 44.
where a never-dying Worm, Rev. 20. 14, 15.
and an unquenchable Lake of fire are the just and dreadful Rewards of a sinful
Life.

These and such like Jealousies and Fears, carry so specious an appearance of
Reason with them, that without a more than common measure of Faith, they must
needs give the Soul a great deal of Disquiet. And it is no wonder if the
Righteous and Holy God suffer the Mind often to labor under these troublesome
Thoughts, as a proper method both to embitter Sin to one that has been long
accustomed to indulge it, and to testify for the encouragement of Holiness,
that he reserves some peculiar Rewards even in this Life, for them that have
served him with a peculiar Zeal and Constancy; Heb. 10. 22.
and that full assurance of Faith and Hope, Heb. 6. 11.
and a clear prospect of those invisible things which he has laid up for those
that love him, Heb. 11. 1.
is a Blessing wherewith he seldom crowns any but those who have been for some
considerable part of their Lives, gradually raising their Affections, Col. 3. 2.
and fixing them on things above, habituating themselves to converse in Heaven,
1 Timothy 6. 12.
and fighting the good fight of Faith, that they might lay hold on eternal
Life. For since God is pleased to propose Rewards as motives to his Service,
it is natural to conclude, That the consolating Hope of these Rewards (which is
also a Reward it self) does ordinarily bear proportion to the Time and Degree
of our Obedience: And therefore he that has long devoted himself to the Service
of God, as he has commonly a clearer prospect of future Bliss, and of the
security of his interest in it; so to advance his Joy still to a higher point,
he has reason to expect a distinguishing Reward in the Celestial Glory; that if
he has served his Lord much in his Church, which is his Kingdom on Earth, he
shall not be the least in the Kingdom of Heaven: Mat. 5. 19.
For though he has no ground to hope to be rewarded for his Works on the
account of Debt, because when he has done his best he is but an unprofitable
Servant; Luke 17. 10.
yet, since God himself has promised it, he may believe, that he shall be
rewarded according to his Works, Mat. 16. 27.
on the account of Grace. Thus as the early Convert looks back upon all the
Sufferings he has endured for the sake of his Divine Master with Comfort, Job
11. 16.
as on Waters that are past away; so the Thoughts of these raise both his
Desire and Expectation earnestly to look for a distinguishing Recompense of
future Glory.

And how unexpressible is that Joy which a Holy Man feels, when the Eye of
Faith can with a great degree of strength penetrate, and with equal steadiness
contemplate the unseen Glories of the Heavenly State, as firmly interessed
therein! What Joy does the early Convert often taste, especially toward the
Close of his Days, when he approaches the Mark of his long Desire and Hope;
Philip. 3. 13, 14.
when he considers that as he has been long laboring to increase in the
Knowledge of God, he shall suddenly see him as he is; and that as he has been
long endeavoring after a Conformity to him, 1 John 3. 2
he shall not only see him, but be like him too: That as all the Powers of his
Soul have been dedicated to his Service, so they shall be in a little time
entirely filled with his Glory, and incessantly employed in his Praise; Romans 6.
13
and as the Members of his Body have been Fellow Servants of Righteousness with
the Faculties of his Soul, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44.
so their refined Matter and elegant Form at the Resurrection shall render them
fit to become their Partners in Glory.

Thus have we made it evident, that the Time of our Youth is in many respects
the best and fittest for the Great Work of remembering our Maker, and of
engaging in his Service; and this, even upon the Supposition of our being sure
of obtaining an opportunity of repenting in old Age, tho we should not reform
before.

But we have further to show, that as the Time of Youth is the Best; so it may
be, and is most likely to be the only Season wherein it will be possible for us
to devote our selves to our Creator, or wherein our Service will be acceptable
to him: Which gives us the clearest proof of all, of the Danger and Folly of
neglecting to consecrate to him the Morning of our Days. But the Consideration
of this we shall refer to another Discourse.

THE Reasonableness and Advantages OF AN Early Conversion to God DEMONSTRATED.
SERMON III.
ECCLES. xii. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, while the
Evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.
TO the Disadvantages of delaying Conversion till the evil Days of old Age, and
the Advantages of devoting one's self to the Service of God in Youth, which we
have already insisted on, we have this one farther Consideration to add, viz.
That

4. Our Eternal Interest is extremely hazarded by deferring Conversion to old
Age, and best secured by an early change* For

(1.) We are always uncertain of future Time for the accomplishment of this
Important Work. Our Time is at the Disposal of our Maker; and he has not
entrusted our lavish hands with the whole stock of this precious Treasure, but
only suffers it to run through them by Moments; so that we can recall no past,
nor can we command any future Time, it is therefore our Business to improve the
present; being ignorant how long the Divine Bounty will continue our Time in
this World. Upon this account the wise Man instructs us well, not to boast our
selves of to Morrow, Prove. 27. 1
seeing we know not what a Day may bring forth: And the Prophet Isaiah
reprehends the folly of those that encourage one another to go on in sinful
Excesses, by profanely promising themselves, Isa. 56. 12.
that to Morrow should be as the present Day, and much more abundant. The
Apostle James also shows the Vanity of such foolish Presumptions: Go to now
(says he) ye that say, James 4, 13, 14, 15.
to day, or to morrow, we will go into such a City, and continue there a Year,
and buy and sell, and get Gain; whereas you know not what shall be on the
morrow: for what is your Life? It is even a Vapor, that appears for a little
time, and then vanishes away: For that ye ought to say, If the Lord will, we
shall live, and do this or that.

And Experience, as well as Scripture, assures us, Psalm. 39. 6.
that every Man walks in a vain show; and that Man (in this respect) even at
his best Estate is altogether Vanity: V. 5.
That some die in their full strength, Job 21. 23, 24, 25.
being wholly at ease and quiet; their Breasts being full of Milk, and their
Bones moistened with Marrow: As others die in the bitterness of their Souls,
and never eat with pleasure: That they lie down alike in the Dust, and the
Worms cover 'em. It Is evident to every one's observation that Youth does not
exempt us from Death, nor ensure to us any farther portion of Time than what we
at present enjoy. But on the contrary, that the far greater number of Mankind
go early to the Grave; and for one that reaches to old Age a multitude fall
short of it.

Nor is it an uncommon thing for Persons of the most vigorous and hardy
Constitution of Body to be suddenly snatched away into the other World by some
violent Disease, or otherwise: For so many fatal Strokes are we obnoxious to;
and so frail is the Texture of our Earthly Tabernacle, that some of the least
and most contemptible things in the World are capable of giving it a mortal
shock; and the very Pores of the Skin sometimes prove Breaches wide enough for
the King of Terrors to enter in at. Job 18. 14.


This is well enough known, and often enough thought upon by the generality of
Men, to engage them to use Precautions to secure themselves or their Posterity,
as much as they can, from the prejudice their temporal Affairs might otherwise
receive from sudden Death. And the Rate an Estate for Life is usually valued
at, sufficiently shows, that to such purposes as these Men need not be taught
to know their End, Psalm. 39. 4.
and the measure of their Days what it is, that they may know how frail they
are.

And if there be no comparison between Earth and Heaven, between the uncertain
Wealth of this World, and the durable Riches of the other, between this Life
and that which is to come: Then it is infinitely more imprudent for a Man to
neglect but for a moment, 2 Pet. 1. 10.
to make his Calling and Election sure, (whatever future Time here his Youth
and Strength may seem to promise) than for him carelessly to suffer the security
of his temporal Estate to depend merely on the uncertain Life of another Man,
when he need not put it to that hazard; or to expose his Posterity to Poverty
and Misery by omitting to make due provision for them against his own
Mortality, when he has a fair opportunity of doing it.

It Is Folly and Madness to leave that undone to day, which must be done at one
time or other, or else we are ruined for ever, and which may (for ought we
know) be impossible to be performed to morrow: To neglect to improve the
present Time in doing that on which our eternal Bliss depends; when the
precious opportunity of doing it may the next moment by sudden Death or some
stupifying Disease become irreparable.

Even the Impious Atheist, and the Profane Epicure make speedy provision for
the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof; Romans 13. 14.
from the consideration of the shortness and uncertainty of their Time in this
World, and seek to gratify and indulge their Senses to day, because they are
not sure of doing it to morrow. Isa. 22. 13.
Let us eat and drink (say they) for to morrow we shall die: 1 Cor. 15. 32.
And they have so far reason on their side, in that they act in Conformity to
their Principles, because their Hope is only in this Life, and they profess not
to expect another. How unaccountably stupid then are they, who tho they believe
there is a future State after this Life, Eccl. 9. 5.
and tho they know that they shall die, and that they know not how soon, yet in
their vain Imaginations put the evil Day of Death afar off, Amos 6. 3.
and defer from time to time the great Work of laying up Treasure in Heaven,
Ezekiel. 12. 27.
till the Season of doing it is irretrievably lost! Mat. 19. 21.
And in vain is so precious a Talent as Time put into the hands of such Fools,
Prove. 17. 16.
who have no heart to improve it.

If the wise Man argues rightly when he excites to diligence even in the
ordinary Affairs of this Life, because of the speedy approach of Death: This
Reason infinitely multiplies its force when applied to our present purpose, and
may therefore most fitly be used to stir us up to an early and diligent
improvement of the Time of Youth in the Service of God, Eccl. 9* ^0.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do (says he) do it with thy Might; for there is
no Work, nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave, whither Thou go
-- For Man also knows not his Time: Ver. 12.
as the Fishes that are taken in an evil Net, and as the Birds that are caught
in the Snare; so are the Sons of Men snared in an evil Time, when it falls
suddenly upon them. It Is therefore our prudence and interest, John 9. 4.
to work while it is day, seeing we know not how soon the night may come upon
us, wherein no Man can work. But further,

(2.) If our Time were in our own hands, Psa. 31. 15.
as it is in the hand of God, so that we could extend it many Years beyond the
ordinary Course of Life; or if we had the certain fore-knowledg of the limits
which the Almighty has fixed to Job 7. 1.
our Days, Job 14. 5.
if we knew the number of our Months, and any of us could read our selves
ancient in the Book of the Divine Decrees, this could by no means justify or
excuse our Negligence, if we should thereupon presume to delay our Conversion
till toward the Close of our Time, because of the uncertainty of the
continuance of the Day of God's Patience and Grace. For as the Days of our
Lives are uncertain, so is the Day of Grace too; and as those are very short,
so this may be much shorter, Luke 19. 44
and we may soon outlive the Time of our Visitation from Heaven, Ver. 42.
and so the things that belong to our Peace may be finally hidden from our Eyes.

It Is infinite Mercy in the Great and Holy God to give a wretched Sinner one
Smile, one single offer of Reconciliation; and it is great Ingratitude and Folly
in a guilty Creature but once to refuse to hearken to so Gracious a Call. But
what words can express the Goodness and Condescension of the Almighty to a
miserable Worm, when he importunately repeats the Terms of Peace to invite, 2
Cor. 5. 20.
nay to beseech him to be reconciled to him! And how provoking must the guilt
of that Sinner be, who, after all this kindness of God toward him, stops his
Ears at his Counsel, Psalm. 58. 4, 5.
like the deaf Adder that will not hearken to the Voice of Charmers, charming
never so wisely! And therefore it is not to be wondered at, if his abused
Patience and Mercy be turned into Indignation and Wrath: And thus it often
comes to pass, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12.
Because Men receive not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved; God
sends them strong Delusion, that they should believe a Lie, and that they all
may be damned, who believe not the Truth, but have pleasure in Unrighteousness.
2 Cor. 2. 16.
And the Word of God instead of being the savor of Life unto Life, Jer. 44.
10, 11.
becomes the savor of Death unto Death to them. 2 Chronicles. 30. 8.
Thus the Righteous God sets his Face against them that stiffen their Necks
against him, Neh. 9. 16.
and hardens their Hearts in Judgment, Romans 9. 18
who themselves have hardened them against the offers of Mercy. Exo. 8. 15.
If the declining Church of Ephesus was threatened with the removal of her
Candlestick, Acts 19. 9.
in case she refused to hearken to the Voice of our Savior, Rev. 2. 4, 5.
when he called her to Repentance; how justly may every impenitent Sinner fear
the speedy ending of the Day of Grace to him? And if at one Sermon of the
Apostle Paul's, Acts 28. 23 -- 28.
as some of the Jews, his Auditors, were converted, so others of them were
judicially sealed up in hardness of heart, and blindness of mind, (the most
dreadful punishment on this side Hell) and the Gospel, which they had rejected
and despised, was suddenly snatched from them to be carried to the ignorant
Heathen: Is it not still to be feared, that they that defer to yield themselves
to the obedience of Faith, Romans 1. 5.
when the glad Tidings of Salvation have been again and again published to
them, Heb. 3. 19.
may utterly fall short of Happiness by this their Obstinacy and Unbelief? Heb.
12. 16, 17.
And if profane Esau, who for one morsel of Meat sold his Birthright, was
afterward rejected, when he would have inherited the Blessing, and found no
place of Repentance, tho he sought it carefully with Tears; How justly may God
reject them, Acts 7. 51.
who have often resisted the Spirit of Grace? Prove. 5. 11
And suffer them to mourn at last without pity in their greatest Distress, Ephesians.
4. 30.
who have often grieved the Holy Spirit in gratifying their sinful
Inclinations? And seeing he has said his Spirit shall not always strive with
Men, Genesis 6. 3.
who knows how soon he may shut up his tender Mercies in Displeasure against
those that have long rebelled against him; Psalm. 77. 9.
and swear in his Wrath, Ps. 95. 11.
that they shall never enter into his Rest? Heb. 3. 18.
How soon he may accomplish that terrible Threatening he has pronounced against
the Impenitent, He that hardens his Neck, Prove. 29. 1*
being often reproved, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy?

(3.) There is not only a possibility or a bare likelihood of the expiration of
the Day of Grace, to those that spend the best of their Time in Rebellion
against their Maker, before they arrive at old Age: But on the contrary, there
is only a possibility, and no likelihood, that the Holy Spirit should continue
to strive with them at the winding up of their Days, who through the greatest
part of their Time have resisted his Counsels and Motions. And it is not only
Reason that furnishes us with proofs of this from the Sovereignty and Justice
of God considered with the great Aggravations of Impenitency under the means of
Grace, or the Threatenings in the Holy Scripture that plainly include this
danger, (as appears from the last Head insisted on) but Experience joins issue
in this matter, and evinces that what our Savior says of Rich Men, may with as
much reason and force be applied to old Sinners, namely, That it is easier for a
Camel to pass through the eye of a Needle, Mar. 19. 24
than for such to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And if this Saying seem
severe to any, in respect of these last, as it did to the Disciples of Christ,
Ver. 25.
in regard of the other, it cannot justly be softened with any farther addition
than that which our Savior subjoined to qualify his words in the first case,
Ver. 26.
viz. That nothing is impossible with God. It Is a thing possible, because all
things are so to God, but very unlikely, and not to be often expected; and when
at any time it comes to pass, God may be said to make a step out of the
ordinary method of the Dispensation of his Grace, somewhat like that he makes,
when he works a Miracle in the Sphere of Nature. In this matter (I say) one may
safely appeal to Experience. Let any one that is acquainted with a considerable
number of pious and aged Persons, ask each of them from what time he dates his
Conversion; and for one that has had that happy Change wrought on his Soul,
since he became Old, he shall find many that turned to God in the strength and
verdure of their Youth.

And can there be a greater instance given then of the deceitfulness of Sin,
Heb. 3. 13.
and of the bewitching power it has over the common Sense and Reason of
Mankind, than we have in the vain promises of Repentance in old Age, wherewith
so many flatter themselves, and by which they seem to hope to render God
propitious to them? Is any kind of Folly so great in its Degree, or so
dangerous in its Consequences as this? For Mortals to lull themselves asleep in
Sin, and sing a stupifying Requiem to their Souls, while they hang on the brink
of eternal Perdition, when their vain Hope has merely this uncertain
foundation, That there is a bare possibility, that their old Age may be
accepted of God, tho they spend their Youth in sinning against him? What an
unparalled presumption! For a Man to neglect to make provision for his
everlasting Bliss at present, only because it is not absolutely impossible that
he may do it in time to come: To refuse the present improvement of the Time of
Grace God is now pleased to allow him, because the Divine Goodness can afford
him the like advantage hereafter; tho it is very improbable that he will grant
it to so presumptuous a Criminal! Will any Man fall without fear upon the point
of his Sword, because it is possible he may not receive a mortal Wound by it? Is
any Man so mad as to poison himself with the most subtle Venom, because he
thinks there is some possibility of his obtaining an Antidote? Or will any one
in his Wits carelessly suffer his Body to languish under a violent Disease,
without seeking for Cure, till his strength is almost quite exhausted, and he is
ready to expire, thinking himself secure enough of Recovery, because it is not
utterly impossible, that a Man may be restored to Health when almost reduced to
the last Gasp by violent Sickness? No, Men are more careful of their Bodies
than to hazard 'em at this rate, how careless soever they are of their Souls:
They are prudent in the Affairs of this Life, but act after the most absurd and
improvident manner, about the great Concerns of the World to come.

But whether we will act reasonably or no, what has been argued does abundantly
demonstrate that it is both highly reasonable and advantageous for young
Persons to devote themselves to the Service of their Creator in the Days of
their Youth; and that it is as dangerous as it is unreasonable to defer that
important Work to the Days of old Age, which are very uncertain, in that we
know not whether we shall attain them or not; and, if we do, will prove so
evil, if this great Business of our Lives be till then neglected, that we shall
have occasion to complain that we have no pleasure in them.

I shall now endeavor to improve the things I have insisted on, by way of
Application.

And shall address my self;

1. To those that are advanced in Years.

2. To those who have not yet exceeded the Days of Youth.

First, As for you that are advanced in Years:

What has been said must needs offer you an occasion to enquire of your own
Consciences, Whether you have dedicated your selves to the Service of God, or
not? Whether you have yet remembered your Creator in the sense of our Text, and
are truly converted to him.

If you have not so remembered him, consider,

(1.) How extremely dangerous your Case is. Can you be secure on the very brink
of Destruction? Surely it is more than high time for you to awake, Romans 13. 11.
lest you sleep the sleep of Death. It will be a Miracle of Grace, Psalm. 13. 3.
if ever you be recovered out of the Snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
who have been so long led Captive by him at his Will. It has been your great
folly to defer to Lay up in store for your selves a good foundation against the
Time to come, 1 Timothy 6. 19.
till now; but your folly in deferring it longer will still increase together
with your guilt and danger; of which if you are sensible, seek immediately to
escape: Fly from the Wrath to come, Mar. 3. 7.
which is hastening toward you; for tho you may carelessly slumber, 2 Pet. 2, 3.
your Damnation slumbers not, but will soon overtake you, if you don't speedily
awake to righteousness, 1 Cor. 15. 34.
and to the serious remembrance of your Creator; Psalm. 9. 17.
for the Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that FORGET God.
If any of you have vainly flattered your selves all your Days with the
presumptuous thoughts of having still time enough before you for the great Work
of your Conversion: Let me warn and exhort every such person in the words of
the Apostle Peter to Simon Magus; Acts 8. 22, 23.
Repent of this thy Wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine
Heart may be forgiven thee; For I perceive that thou art in the gall of
Bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity. And to Day, while it is called to Day,
remember your Maker, Heb. 3. 13.
lest any of you be further hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin.

(2.) If you are convinced of the folly and sinfulness of your Neglect; Do not
absolutely conclude, it is now too late to obtain Mercy, nor continue that
neglect by Despair, which you have long persisted in by Presumption. As you
cannot set limits to the Justice of God, so neither can you measure his
Long-suffering and Goodness: Therefore you ought not now to say, Psalm. 77. 7,
8, 9.
His Mercies are quite gone for ever, and he will be favorable no more.
Encourage your selves to turn to God, and to rely on his Mercy, at least with
the same Argument the famished Lepers used to engage one another to throw
themselves on the Compassion of the Syrian Army. 2 Rings 7. 3, 4.
Why sit we here (say they) until we Die? If we say we will enter into the
City, then the Famine is in the City, and we shall Die there: And if we sit
still here, we Die also. Now therefore come, and let us fall unto the Host of
the Syrians; if they save us alive, we shall Live, and if they kill us, we
shall but Die. Reason with your selves after the like manner. Why sit we still
in a state of the greatest danger? If after the sense of our danger, we return
to our former Course of Life, we must perish; if we remain in our present
posture, and neglect to try the Father of Mercies, whether he will commiserate
such inveterate Sinners, we inevitably perish too. Let us cast our selves at
his Feet; if he will save us, we shall live eternally; if he refuse, we can but
perish. Say as David did (in another case,) 2 Samuel 16. 1^.
It may be the LORD will look on our Affliction. Venture to prostrate your
selves at the Throne of Grace, Esth. 4. 16.
as Queen Esther did at the Feet of the Persian Monarch, with an ( If I perish,
I perish): And who knows, but the Scepter of Divine Mercy may yet tender you a
Pardon? It Is possible that the Prodigal may be accepted, tho he return late to
his Father's House; Luke 15. 20*
and that God may place you among the rare Instances of his free and sovereign
Grace. And if you are deeply sensible of your past Iniquity, and earnestly
groan for a Change in your Souls, for a New and Pure Heart and a right Spirit;
Ps. 51. 10.
it is to be hoped, that God, whose Compassions are infinite, has now at last
opened your Eyes, that you might not sleep the sleep of eternal Death; Psalm.
13. 3.
has made you hunger and thirst after Righteousness, Mat. 5. 6.
with a design to satisfy you, and has wounded your Spirits by a Godly Sorrow,
2 Cor. 7. 10*
with a purpose to heal them with the Oil of Joy, Isa. 61. 3.
with the Comforts of his Free Spirit. Ps. 51. 1^*
You have run a strange Venture to delay a Work of this nature, and of this
consequence till now; but if God has given you deep and serious Repentance, he
designs you favor; and your Contrition give hope of a Pardon. Let the wicked
forsake his Way, Isa. 55. 7.
and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and let him return unto the LORD, and he
will have Mercy on him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. But

2. If you are truly converted, it is your Happiness and Honor. Prove. 16. 31.
The hoary Head is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of Righteousness.

But did you consecrate to your Creator the Flower of your Youth? Or have you
only offered him your later Years?

It may be, Mat. 20. 5, 6.
you began to work in his Vineyard but at the Tenth or Eleventh Hour, or at
least since your Sun has been declining. If so, then

(1.) Admire and adore that Grace of God, which kept back your feet from
Destruction, when you were ready to step into eternal Misery, and indulgently
plucked you out of the way of approaching Ruin, Genesis 19. 16, 17.
as the blessed Angels did Lot, to secure him from the impending Shower of Fire
and Brimstone, which threatened Sodom, when he lingered in that vicious and
accursed City. How can you choose but reflect with astonishment on the Danger
you have escaped, and bless that Divine Hand that kindly diverted you from that
presumptuous Course, that was ready to cast you on a Rock, on which you have
seen so many dash themselves in pieces. Praise him (I say) who has saved you
from so great, 2 Cor. 1. 10.
and so near a Death; and remembered you in Mercy, when you had forgotten him
Days without number. Jer. 2. 32.


(2.) Let the sincerity of your Thankfulness, and of your Repentance too
appear, by the improvement of that little portion of Time which you have yet
remaining. Redeem your Time, Ephesians. 5. 16.
now at least, because the Days are evil. Improve the evil Days of old Age with
the utmost Diligence, since the better Days of Youth are past recalling.
Evidence both to your selves and to others, that your late Repentance is true,
by such an industrious management of your remaining Days, as may convince the
World, that it is no small grief of Heart to you, that your Repentance was so
late. Recover your lost Time as much as possible by your present diligence, and
let none of your precious Moments for the future be heedlesly expended, Philip.
2. 12.
but husband 'em well in working out your Salvation with fear and trembling.
Let your frequent hours, and acts of Devotion, make up the long want your
selves have had of those sacred Privileges that attend the Exercises of Holy
Worship, and thereby make restitution (as much as in you lies) to your Creator,
for the Sacrilege you have often committed, in robbing him of those pious
Offerings, those continual Sacrifices with which you should daily have
furnished his Altar. Let your Example be as beneficial to Mankind, as it has
been injurious: And as you have tempted others to Sin, strive now to incite
them to Piety. If you bear the Character of Parents or Masters, labor to
convince those young Persons, who are under the influence of your Counsel, or
the awe of your Authority, of the great Advantages of an early Conversion: And
let them know you now seriously lament the past Follies of your Youth: That as
your ill Counsels, and vicious Patterns have long made you Partakers of other
Men's Sins; 1 Timothy 5. 22.
so your Religious Exhortations and good Examples, may obtain on your
Acquaintance, and those that are under your Conduct, so as to entitle you (in
some sort) to other Men's Virtues. In a word, remember that you are under a
special Obligation, that (as the Apostle speaks) you should no longer live the
rest of your Time in the Flesh to the Lusts of Men, 1 Pet. 4. 2, 3.
but to the Will of God. For the Time past of your Life may suffice to have
wrought the Will of the gentiles, when ye walked in Lasciviousness, Lusts,
excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquetings, and abominable Idolatries.

If your Case be otherwise, and you began early to give your selves up to the
Service of your Creator:

(1.) Bless and magnify that God who was the Guide of your Youth; Jer. 3. 4.
who wrought that happy Change on your Souls, who were Children of Wrath by
Nature as well as others. Ephesians. 2. 3.
What copious Subjects of Praise will your Experience furnish you withal, when
you reflect on the long Series of Divine Favors, that have attended you
through the various Parts and Changes of Life! And what a pleasant Review may
you take of a well-spent Life, directed to the Glory of God, and conducted by
his Grace! What matter of thanksgiving may you find in the many Assurances of
his Love, and in the Evidences of the Work of his Grace upon your Souls; and in
the frequent and familiar prospect he has given your Faith of that invisible
and ineffable Glory you have been so long aspiring after, and are now so near
enjoying! You have reason to bless your Creator, as well for preventing your
commission of the many Sins you have escaped, as for forgiving of those you
have committed: For preserving your Innocence on many occasions, as well as for
pardoning your Guilt on others; for making you happy so soon by an early
Conversion, and for giving you the hope of a distinguishing Crown of Glory; for
honoring the best of your Time by accepting it in his Service; and for
sweetning the worst of it (the evil Days of old Age) with all the Comforts
which the Reflection on a Life of Grace, and all the Joys which the prospect of
a Life of Glory can inspire. Ps. 149. 6.
Surely the high Praises of God should be in your Mouths; for (to use the Words
of Christ on that solemn occasion when his Disciples cried Hosanna to him) I
tell you, Luke 19. 40
if you should hold your Peace, the Stones would immediately cry out.

(2.) You ought to manifest the truth of your early Conversion by the extent of
your Knowledge in Divine Things, and by the warmth of your Affection to them. I
write unto you, Fathers, 1 John 2. 13, 14.
(says the Apostle John) because you have known him that is from the beginning.
Both God and Men expect that your growth both in Knowledge and in Grace, should
bear some proportion to the Time you have spent in the School of Christ; that
you should be the tallest Cedars in Lebanon, that have been so long planted
there; and the most fruitful Vines, that have been so often watered with the
River of God. Seeing you are not Babes, Psalm. ^5. 9.
either in regard of the time you have lived in the World, or of that you have
spent in the Church of God; but Persons of full Age, Heb. 5. 13, 14.
who by reason of use ought to have your Senses exercised to discern both good
and evil: Let it not be said of you, Ver. 12.
that when for the Time you ought to be Teachers, you have need that one teach
you again which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and that you are
again become such as have need of Milk and not of strong Meat: Or that you are
of the number of those, who are over learning, 2 Timothy 3. 7.
and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth. You should be greatly
mortified to this World, who have a long time professed to be convinced of its
Vanity, and to be dying daily to it; 1 Cor. 15. 31.
and who find old Age ready to transport you to the other. And since you have
long pretended to have had your Conversation and business in Heaven, (...).
certainly you ought to have gained much by that happy Commerce; Phil. 3. 20.
and to have laid up much Treasure in the Regions of Glory, as well as to have
been rich in good Works here below: 1 Timothy 6. 18.
and you should be dextrous in putting on and handling the Christian Armor,
Ephesians. 6. 11. -- 18.
who have often had occasion to try it: And so skilful in defeating the
Projects of your Adversary the Devil, 2 Cor. 2. 11.
(since you are supposed not to be ignorant of his Devices) as after the
sharpest Conflicts to become more than Conquerors through him that has loved
you. Romans 8. ^7.


These things may reasonably be supposed and expected of you. But do you fill
up these Characters that so well agree with your long standing in the Church of
God? Are you Fathers in Knowledge and Piety as well as in Years? And is the size
of your Spiritual Stature pro. portionate to the time of your Natural Life, or
at least of your Spiritual Life, which commenced not long after the other? Are
you become very humble by a long acquaintance with your own Hearts, and with
that God who is the searcher of them? Jer. 1^. ^^.
Is your Faith become strong by a long exercise? Your Hope firm by your long
and familiar acquaintance with the Promises of God, and with him in whom all
those Promises are Yea and Amen [True and Faithful]? 2 Cor. ^. 20.
Have your various Afflictions taught you to possess your Souls in Patience?
Luke 21. 19.
And have the many Favors you have received of God so tuned your Hearts to his
Praise, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.
that you can in every thing give thanks? Does your spiritual vigor advance,
as your natural Strength declines? And is your inward Man renewed day by day, 2
Cor. 4. 16.
as your outward Man perishes? Have you made such a Proficiency as this in
Religion? Or is it otherwise? Examine your selves strictly and seriously about
it. May not your Creator send you back to learn of those that are much younger,
and who have had less Advantages of Improvement than you? Nay may he not send
you back to be instructed by your selves, I mean, by the former part of your
Lives? And shame your late Backslidings, by putting you in mind of your early
Zeal? May he not justly reprove you in reminding you of your former Kindnesses
to him (as well as of his to you) as he did the Jews of old; Jer. 2. 2, 3.
and say, I remember thee, the kindness of thy Youth, and the love of thy
Espousals, when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a Land that was not
sown: Israel was Holiness to the LORD, and the first fruits of his Increase?
May he not charge you as he did the Ephesians, Rev. ^. 4, 5.
with having left your first Love? And with having fallen short of your first
Works?

Surely it becomes you now strenuously to persist in fighting the good Fight of
Faith, 1 Timothy 6. 12.
when you are near the consummation of all your Victories in an eternal
Triumph: Philip. 3. 13, 14.
To press forward vigorously in your spiritual Race now at last, when you have
almost attained the Mark; and to aspire earnestly after that Diadem of Glory,
with which you are so suddenly to be crowned: To converse constantly in Heaven,
now you are just forsaking the Earth; to live entirely by Faith, Heb. 11. 13.
since you are going to die in it; Rev. 14. 13.
to die in the Lord, and that in order to live with him in a State that will
turn your Faith into Vision, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
and your Hope into Enjoyment.

If thus while Age bends you toward the Earth, Grace raises your Hearts toward
Heaven; if your Faith grows sagacious, while your Eyes grow dim; and your Hope
grows firm, while your Hands and Knees are feeble; if the Warmth of your Love
to God increases as your natural Heat abates; and the Sallies of your Souls
after him grow strong and lively, as the Motions of your animal Spirits grow
weak and languid: Then, as your last Works will be more than your first, Rev.
2. 5.
so you will honor God as well in the worst part of your Time, -- Primis sic
major Gratia Pomis;
as you have done in the best of it. Hybernae pretium sic meruere Rosae.
And as by bringing forth much fruit even in old Age, Psalm. 92. 14.
you will glorify your Heavenly Father: Joh. 15. 8.
So your Hoary Hairs will be honorable in this World, and an exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory will be your Portion in the World to come. 2 Cor. 4. 17.


Secondly, Let me now address my self to you that are Young; and entreat you
also to put this important Question to your own Hearts, Whether you have yet
remembered your Creator, so as to dedicate your selves to his Service, or not?

If you have devoted to him the firstfruits of your Time:

1. It behooves you with profound Humility and Reverence to ascribe to God the
Glory of his Grace, who made you willing in the Day of his Power to serve him
in the Beauties of Holiness, Ps. 110. 3.
even from the Womb of the Morning of your Time, and to offer him the early Dew
of your Youth: For no Flesh may glory in his Presence; 1 Cor. 1. 20.
seeing all Flesh is Grass, Isa. 40. 6.
and the goodliness thereof as the fading Flower of the Field, 1 Pet. 1. 24.
in a Moral as well as a Natural sense. If you have been distinguished from
others by early impressions of Piety; know, 1 Cor. 4. 7.
that it is Grace that has made the difference, Psalm. 8. 2.
and glorify that God, Mat. 21. 16.
who perfects his praise out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings; luke 10. 21.
and reveals that to Children, which he sometimes hides from the Wise and
Prudent. Bless him that has redeemed you from the Earth, Rev. 14. 3, 4.
and from among Men, at a time when the Pleasures of Sin, and the Society of
Sinners appear in the most alluring form. Praise that God, who by the early
Seeds of Holiness he has sown in your Hearts, is preparing you to reap a
plentiful Harvest of Graces and Blessings here, and of Glorious Rewards
hereafter.

2. Consider the mighty Obligations that are upon you to engage you in a Holy
Conversation. As you have received more than many others, more is required of
you: And what we have said may be justly expected to be found in those old
Disciples that have followed Christ from their Youth, sufficiently signifies
the Mark you are to aim at; and the exalted degrees of Grace you are to aspire
to. In order to which you ought to be cautious of the least degree of Apostasy.
Have a care, lest after having seemed to begin in the Spirit, Gal. 3. 3.
you should miserably end in the Flesh. 2 Timothy 2. 22.
Therefore flee youthful Lusts. Ver. 3.
And endure hardship as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ: Inure your selves to
Self-denial; Col. 3. 1, 2.
and set your Affections on things above. Mat. 26. 41
Watch and pray, that you may not enter into Temptation, or at least that your
Faith may not fail you, Luke 22. 32
when you are tempted: And to that end read and meditate on the Word of God Day
and Night, Psalm. 1. 2.
that you may know how to manage that Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17.
so as to wound the Head of your potent and subtle Adversary. 1 John 2. 13, 14.
I write unto you young Men (says the Apostle John) because you are strong,
and the Word of God abides in you, and you have overcome the wicked one.
Govern your selves in every thing by the exact Rule of the Holy Scripture; Ps.
119. 9.
For wherewith shall a young Man cleanse his way, but by taking heed thereto
according to that Divine Word? Take heed lest the Holy Religion you profess be
dishonored by your Practices: Let your manner of Life be so circumspect and
unreproachable, that it may stop the Mouths of Blasphemers; stop them did I
say? Nay that it may open them in favor of Religion, that when they see your
good Works they may be induced to glorify your Heavenly Father, Mat. 5. 16.
and to worship him, and to confess that God is in you of a Truth. 1 Cor. 14.
25.
Let a becoming Modesty and Gravity adorn your Conversation: Let your Speech be
always with Grace, seasoned with Salt: Col. 4. 6.
Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouths, Ephesians. 4. 29.
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister Grace to
the Hearers. Provoke others to a Holy Emulation by the luster of your Examples,
and choose the excellent Patterns of the most devout and experienced Christians
for your own Imitation. Let your Zeal be constantly directed by Knowledge, and
your Knowledge always ballasted by Humility. In a word, Psalm. 16. 8.
Set the Lord always before your Faces, that you may not sin against him.
Remember your Creator, what he is, and what Homage and Service you owe him:
Romans 12. 1.
Remember how reasonable that Service is, and how entirely your true Interest
and Happiness is involved in it, and industriously improve all the Advantages
of your Time to the Glory of him, who is the God of your Life; Psalm. 42. 8.
that if you live to be aged, you may be able to make happy Reflections on your
Youth; and on the endearing Favors of him that has been with you from your
Youth to old Age, Isa. 46. 4.
and has carried you (as the Prophet speaks) even to hoary Hairs: That coming
to the Grave in a full Age, you may be like shocks of Corn that come in in
their season, Job. 5. 26.
fully ripened and prepared for Heaven: Or if you are called to lie down in the
Grave before, that you may be ripe for Glory, and made meet to be partakers of
the Inheritance of the Saints in light betimes; Col. 1. 12.
that your Names may be great on Earth, and your Rewards may be great in Heaven.

As for you that are still Young, but have not yet made an offering of your
Youth to your Creator:

(1.) Let me ask you, What hinders you from presenting so reasonable a Service
to him? You have seen that the reason of this Duty, which our Text urges, is
founded in your very Being, in the Relation you bear to the Almighty as his
Creatures; and since your greatest Interest too is embarked in it, Why should
so just, and so useful an Exhortation be rejected? Will you yet continue to rob
your Maker of the Homage and Service you owe him? And deprive your selves of
the Honor and Privilege of serving him? Will you yet be unmindful of the Rock
that begat you, Deuteronomy. 32. 18.
and still forget the God that formed you? Is the great God ready to accept
your Service, and will you still refuse to offer it? What Illusions of Sense
are those that charm you? What Bonds of Iniquity are those that captivate your
Souls, Act. ^. 23.
and hold you, both against the forcible Arguments, and the indulgent
Invitations of the Divine Word?

As we have taken a view of the Arguments that oblige you to your Duty; let us
also, to remove the chief Stumbling Blocks that obstruct your way, enquire a
little into the pretended Reasons that detain you in your Sin.

Will you say, It Is a rigorous Demand to require us to forsake the World almost
as soon as we come into it; and to renounce the charming Sweets wherewith it
flatters our Senses, even before we have so much as tasted many of the
Pleasures to which it invites us: And this in that part of our Life, that gives
us the highest relish of these Delights, when our Senses are most lively and
active, and when the World shows it self most obliging and kind, and presents
us on every side with thousands of pleasant Objects?

But tell me, Are the Promises of the World like the Promises of God? Are those
Pleasures, the highest relish of which vanishes (by your own confession)
together with your Youth, and so may be soon out lived by your selves, to be
compared with the eternal Joys of Heaven? Are the Smiles of the World, and the
Pleasures of Sense to be preferred to the Smiles of God, and the Joy of a good
Conscience here, and to the refined and spiritual Delights of the other World?
Is a Life of Sin, which will prove bitterness in the latter end of it, 2 Samuel
2. 26.
which is enjoyed but a few Moments, but followed with the gnawings of a Worm
that never dies, Mar. 9. 44.
to be chosen before a Life of Holiness, which is accompanied with inward Peace
in the Soul, and followed with Immortal Glory and Pleasure? Is it worth the
while to purchase a few hours delight in gratifying your sordid and brutish
Appetites, with the loss of your precious Souls? Will you rather hazard an
eternal privation of the Joys of Heaven, and expose your selves to the danger
of everlasting Perdition, than curb the extravagant Inclinations of your vain
and sensual Hearts? Will you still flatter the levity and unsteadiness of your
youthful Minds, in pursuing all the vain Fantoms your extravagant Imaginations
can represent? Will you continue to follow those gay Bubbles, which will yield
you scarce any thing but Disappointment, Vexation and Guilt; when you are
invited to fix your Minds and your Hearts on your Creator, to make him the
Object of your Thoughts and of your Desires, who gives his Votaries the Hope of
Immortal Glory, which produces in their Souls a great degree of Happiness at
present, and who will hereafter fill them with Joys infinitely beyond the most
raised Expectation?

Will you further urge, But we have no mind to be singular, to distinguish our
selves from the generality of Mankind by an Affectation of a strict Course of
Life; and that at an Age, when every one allows the Senses an Indulgence. There
is a proper season for every thing. Youth is the Time for Pleasure, and Old Age
for Repentance; for the latter part of our Lives seems destined to trouble and
sorrow: And then it is fit to live a spiritual Life, when Age has deaden'd the
Senses, and so prepared us to live after that abstracted manner.

And is it not as easy as it is reasonable to reply, That it is a foolish
Scrupulosity to be so careful to avoid Singularity as to run from it into a
Common Destruction: To refuse to be holy and happy, and to choose Sin and
Misery, Mat. 7. 13, 14.
because the way to Life is narrow and unfrequented, and the way to Damnation
broad and full of Company? Is not this a vain affectation of Conformity to the
World, for you to follow a Multitude to do evil, Exodus 23. 2.
tho their Ways lead to Hell, and go down to the Chambers of Death; Prove. 7. 27.
to abandon your selves to the Torrent of evil Examples, tho they drown you in
Perdition; 1 Timothy 6. 9.
to sacrifice your own eternal Interest in complaisance to the Custom and
Humor of other Men, Psalm. 1. 1. and V. 6.
and to walk in the Counsel of the Ungodly, tho you damn your selves for
Company?

And because some rather seem to pity, (or even indulge) than blame many of the
Follies of Youth, partly from the Consideration of their Vnexperience and
giddiness of Mind, and of their great Propensity to carnal Pleasures; partly
because Custom has rendered the Vices of Youth familiar to the World, and
partly because many of those that are advanced in Years, instead of reflecting
on their youthful Vanities with Sorrow, are yet so insensible, as to look back
upon them as excusable Follies, or as Sins of small consequence; must therefore
an Opinion that has so rotten a foundation, obtain Credit in the World, as if
it were a Maxim of undoubted Truth? Does the Holy Scripture, or Reason allow
Youth any such Dispensation for Sin? Is so great an Evil to be at any time
indulged? Is any scope in Vice allowable to the Time of Youth any more than to
the Time of Old Age? Is not Sin always evil, and always to be avoided? Can you
think it deserves the very best of your Time, and that your Creator is unworthy
of such an Offering?

You have heard it sufficiently proved that Youth is the most proper Time of
all, and Old Age the most unfit for the great Business of Conversion to God;
that it is the greatest proof of the Reality of our Self-denial, when we
restrain the vicious Inclinations of our Youth, that are so eager after sensual
Pleasures: And that an aged Sinner is so far from being likely to be a true
Penitent, that the long Time he has been hardening himself in his Wickedness,
renders the Change of his Heart impossible, without a more than ordinary effort
of Grace, which God is seldom pleased to grant to them that are grown old in
Wickedness.

Will you say after this, God whose Mercies are infinite, is Gracious enough to
receive us into his Vineyard at the last hour of the Day; and to give us a
place in Paradise; if, like the Thief on the Cross, we begin to repent, when we
are ceasing to live; and we may hope to die happily, tho we have lived
viciously?

After having so largely detected the Vanity of such Hopes as these, as we have
already done, we need not add much more. Is not this to build an imaginary
Happiness on a thousand Uncertainties? And what a daring presumption is it,
Romans 6. 1.
to continue in Sin, that Grace may abound? Because the Gracious God has given
one Example in his Word, of a Sinner converted at the last hour of his Life, is
it reasonable for every Sinner to conclude, That he may expect the same
extraordinary favor, and so may safely defer his Repentance, till he is ready
to expire? No; this great Instance of Mercy in the crucified Malefactor, was
given to prevent a true (tho late) Penitent from despairing; not to encourage
any bold Sinner to turn the Grace of God into Lasciviousness by his
presumption. Jude 4.
And how many fatal instances might be given of the Vanity of such hopes as
these! How few of those daring Sinners have arrived at the Time, which they
pretended to devote to religious Purposes! How very few of those that have
reached old Age, have become sensible of their Guilt and Danger after a long
Life spent in the Service of Sin! Have they not generally supinely doz'd away
their last Moments (as they vainly spent their first) without awaking, till
they have found themselves in everlasting Burnings? Or if they have received
some Convictions of their Guilt, Isa. 33. 14.
these have not always produced on them the Characters of a Repentance to
Salvation, 2 Cor. 7. 10.
but have sometimes filled their miserable Souls with Despair and Horror; and
their former delusive Hopes of obtaining pardon at the last hour, Heb. 10. 27
have only issued in a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery
Indignation to devour them. Learn therefore, Psa. 92. 12.
before it be too late, so to number your Days as to apply your Hearts to
Wisdom!

Will you, after all that has been said, still persuade your selves, that it is
yet time enough for you to remember your Creator; and that you may safely
enough defer the securing of your Salvation yet some time longer, if not quite
to the evil Days of Old Age; that it is best for you first to establish your
selves in the World, as firmly as you can, and to make provision for your
temporal Interest; and afterward at your leisure to think on the Affairs of
another Life?

These things have been also sufficiently answered before; let me further add,
That as your Time is very uncertain on the one hand, so your Resolutions are
yet more fickle on the other: For how common a thing is it for Men to assume a
purpose of Repentance, and presently to relinquish it again! How often do they
violate their Promises to God and to themselves, while they are perpetually
fixing a new future season of Amendment! So deceitful is the Heart of Man, Jer.
17. 9.
and so desperately wicked, who can know it?

And how preposterous is the Course you take, to endeavor to provide for your
Bodies before your Souls, and to secure your Temporal before your Eternal
Interest: Hearkening rather to the deluding Suggestions of the Father of Lies,
Joh. 8. 44.
who tempts you with the gilded Vanities of this perishing World, than to the
Counsel of him who is Wisdom it self, 1 Cor. 1. 24.
who advises you to seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness; Mat.
5. 31, 32, 33.
and assures you that then the things of this World ( i. e. so far as may
conduce to your Welfare) shall be superadded?

Since therefore your Creator requires your present Time, it is your Prudence,
your Interest, and your Duty, without conferring with Flesh and Blood, Gal. 1.
16.
immediately to obey him; Psalm. 32. 6.
to seek him, while he may be found, Ps. 145. 18.
and to call upon him while he is near, and while he calls upon you; lest if
you persist to slight and forget your Maker and his Counsel any longer, he
should so remember your Iniquity and visit your Sins, Hos. 8. 13, 14.
as to pronounce on you this dreadful Sentence. Prove. 1. 24-32.
Because I have called and ye refused, I have stretched out my Hand, and no Man
regarded: But ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my
Reproof: I also will laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your fear comes:
When your fear comes as Desolation, and your destruction comes as a
Whirlwind: When Distress and Anguish comes upon you. Then shall they call
upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not
find me; for that they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the LORD:
They would none of my Counsel, they despised all my Reproof: Therefore shall
they eat of the fruit of their own Way, and be filled with their own Devices:
For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of Fools
shall destroy them. How will you bear such a dismal Sentence as this? O with
what Terror will it strike your guilty Souls, especially when you are under
the Apprehensions of approaching Death, or bowed down under the burden of Age!
What will you do in those Days of Evil, Psalm. 45. 5.
when the Iniquity of your Heels shall compass you about? Job 20. 11
When your Bones will be full of the Sin of your Youth, which shall lie down
with you in the Dust? When the Terrors of God shall strike your Consciences,
and all your past Life shall accuse and condemn you? When the Heaven shall
reveal your Iniquity, Job 2^. 27
and the Earth shall rise up against you? When your Flesh upon you shall have
pain, Job 14. 22.
and your Souls within you shall mourn? Tho Wickedness be now sweet in your
Mouths, Job 20. 12, 13, 14.
and you therefore hide it under your Tongues; tho you spare it, and forsake it
not, but keep it still within your Mouths; yet its luscious Taste shall be
turned into bitterness in your Bowels, and into the Gall of Asps within you. Is
it not better to repent early than to be reduced to mourn despairingly, when
it is too late? When the Almighty shuts out your Prayers, and when a fire is
kindled in his Anger, Deuteronomy. 32. 22.
that will burn to the lowest Hell; when he that made you will not have mercy
on you, Isa. 27. 11.
and he that formed you will show you no favor? If once that dreadful Day
overtakes you, each of you will then lament his Folly with the saddest Accents
of Sorrow and Anguish, and turn upon himself with indignation and fury, saying,
Prove. 5. 12. 13.
How have I hated instruction, and my Heart despised reproof! And have not
obeyed the Voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine Ear to them that instructed
me! And bewail himself (as our Blessed Lord did Jerusalem, when he wept over
that unhappy City) crying, O that I had known, even I, Luke 19. 42.
in that my Day, the things that belonged unto my peace, but now they are hid
from mine Eyes.

Now consider this ye that forget God, Psa. 50. 22.
lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

If you now begin to entertain serious Thoughts of Religion, to stir you up
further to this great (tho miserably neglected) Duty of remembering your
Creator in the Days of your Youth, let me entreat you to consider two or three
things,

1. That God has been often pleased to dignify them with special Marks of
Honor in his Church, who have honored him by the early dedication of their
Youth to his Service, and has rendered their Services as eminent in the World,
as their Piety has been early and exemplary.

As the forward Piety of Joseph kept him incorrupt in his tender Years amidst
the evil Examples of his envious Brethren; Genesis 37. 2, 3, 4.
so he was blessed with the largest share in the Affection of his aged Father:
And tho his Zeal for their Reformation rendered him the Object of their Hatred,
(as well as of his Father's Love) yet the Divine Providence wonderfully
prosper'd him, Genesis 39. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and gave him favor in that strange Country, whither their unnatural Malice
had exiled him. And as he there preserved his Chastity when it was tried after
so extraordinary a manner, V. 7-20.
that it was become impossible for him to keep himself Innocent without
incurring the Odium of being reputed Guilty, as well as enduring other severe
Punishments: So the Purity of his untainted Soul (who rather chose to be
accounted Vile than to be so) was afterward strangely cleared up by the Wise
and Gracious Providence of the Almighty; and his injured Name celebrated with
the highest Honors of the Court of Egypt: Genesis 41.
The Just and Holy God whom he served, having endowed him with a Prophetic
Gift of interpreting Dreams; and by that Divine Skill opened a way for his
advancement from Prison to ride in the second Chariot of the Kingdom. So that
he became a Prince and a Father to that Nation whither he was brought a
Stranger and a Slave; and proved the happy Instrument not only of preserving
Multitudes of People from the Rage of a tedious Famine of seven Years
continuance, but also of nourishing his Father's Family in that time of common
Calamity. Genesis 43. and Chapter 44.
And by this means he had the honor of the most obsequious Addresses of those
very Brethren of his that had been his Persecutors, Chapter 45.
and at last had the God-like Pleasure of melting them into a deep Conviction
of the unreasonableness of their Enmity against him, by the most endearing
Caresses, and sweetest expressions of Brotherly Love and Tenderness, and the
satisfaction of that truly generous and innocent kind of Revenge, of overcoming
Evil with Good. Romans 12. 21.
Thus God was pleased to reward the eminent Piety of his Youth, by making him
the Darling of his Providence; and to lay the foundation of his Glory in those
Sufferings which were the proof of his Virtue.

Samuel, a young Votary to the Service of God in his Tabernacle, as he grew up,
1 Samuel* 2. ^6.
became the Favorite both of God and Men: So eminently was he anointed with the
Spirit of Prophecy, and that in a Time, 1 Samuel 3. 1.
when the Word of the LORD was very precious, that all Israel from Dan, 1 Samuel
3. 19, 20.
even to Beersheba, knew that he was established a Prophet of the LORD.

That Piety which seasoned the tender Years of David, (...)Dilectus.
rendered him (according to his Name) so BELOVED both of God and Men, that God
was pleased to fill him with a Prophetic Spirit; 1 Samuel 17. 33, 42, 56.
and both God and Men thought good to choose him to wear a Regal Diadem. The
supreme Ruler and Arbiter of the World, was pleased to reward his forward Zeal
for Him, by raising him from the Fold to the Throne, and by making him exchange
his Shepherd's Crook for a Royal Scepter: so that from a Feeder of Sheep he
became both the Prophet and King of a mighty Nation; 2 Samuel 23. 1.
the sweetest Psalmist, and most valiant Prince of Israel.

Religious Josiah, who began to reform himself at Eight Years old, 2 Chronicles. 34.
3.
and to reform the People under his Government before he had exceeded Twelve,
was honored of God with the happy accomplishment of that glorious Reformation
in the Kingdom of Judah, Ver. 8.
when he could scarce write himself Man, having seen the Light but Eighteen
Years, and had the earliness of his Piety signalized by the Delay of those
Judgments that Jerusalem was threatened with, V. 23-28.
till the expiration of his Religious Reign: God was pleased to honor his
early Zeal with a peculiar protection given for a Time to the Nation under his
Conduct, for his sake; and would not fill his Reign that was so famous for his
Piety, with those Scenes of Horror and Misery, which darkened the Times of his
unhappy Successors. The Divine Compassion would not suffer him to see that City
stained with the Blood of its Inhabitants, which he had been so industrious to
purge from Superstition, and from the Worship of Idols. And as his Life was
honorable to himself, and of the greatest advantage to his Subjects; 2 Chronicles.
35. 24, 25, 26, 27.
so his Death was attended with their solemn and universal mourning, (an Honor
which was refused to his profane Successor) and his Funeral celebrated with the
Lamentations of a great Prophet; and his Memory preserved fresh and eternally
fragrant in the sacred History of the Kings of Judah.

As John the Baptist first devoted his Youth to the picus Meditations of a
retired Life, Luke 1. 80.
and then to the public Service of God in his Generation: Luke 3. 2, 3, 4.
So he was invested with the honorary Title of MESSENGER to the Messiah, Luke
7. 26, 27, 28.
to prepare the way before him; who says, he was not only a Prophet, but much
more than a Prophet; and that among those that had been born of Women, there
was no greater Prophet than he.

The early Piety of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
who was well acquainted with the Holy Scriptures from his Childhood, was
honored with the most endearing Love of the great Apostle of the Gentiles, and
with an eminent Station in the Church of God, wherein his prudent and Religious
Deportment secured his Youth from Contempt; 1 Timothy 4. 12.
and made the Apostle give him that singular Character, to the Philippians,
when he assures them that he had no Man like-minded, Philip. 2. 20.
who would naturally care for their State.

The beloved Disciple is reported to have been very young, John 13. 23.
when proselyted to the Doctrine of Christ; and perhaps this was not the least
occasion of his being made the Bosom-friend of his Divine Master.

Nay, most of those who were dignified with the sacred Office of Apostleship,
seem to have been converted in the Flower of their Time, by several
Circumstances of their History in the Gospel, and by the many Years some of
them spent in Travels, and other hard Services and Sufferings, after the
Ascension of our Savior.

On the contrary we find not like Instances of Persons being called to such
eminent Services for God, and receiving such distinguishing Marks of Honor
from him in old Age, after a flagitious Life, almost quite wasted in the sordid
Drudgery of Sin.

What a generous Emulation then should these illustrious Examples, we have
mentioned, kindle in the Breasts of you that are Young! With what an Holy
Ambition should they inspire you, to become the early Candidates of Religion!
Who knows in what eminent Services it may please your Maker to employ You? And
who knows what signal Favors and Tokens of his Divine Love, he may confer on
you, if you consecrate to him the first of your Strength, and the best of your
Time?

But the Example, which of all others shines with the greatest Glory, and
communicates the sweetest Influence, that is most capable both of raising your
Wonder, and of exciting your Imitation, is that of our Blessed Redeemer, who
came into the World to teach us by his Life, as well as to save us by his
Death: He was pleased to honor the Youthful state of Life by passing through
it, Heb. 5. 7.
in the Days of his Flesh, while he dwelt with Men, and did not defer his
Father's Work to old Age (a Stage of Life, which he never vouchsafed to enter
on;) in his very Childhood he waxed strong in Spirit, Luke 2. 40.
was filled with Wisdom, and the Grace of God was upon him. His Soul advanced
in Divine Knowledge, as his Body did in Stature, and so he grew in favor with
God and Man. Ver. 52.
At Twelve Years of Age he was found reasoning with the Jewish Doctors in the
Temple, Ver. 42, 46, 47.
with that Sense and Understanding that amazed all the Auditors, and with that
Zeal that became him, who made it his Delight to be about his Father's
Business. Ver. 49.
All the time he lived amongst Men may be properly enough called the Time of
Youth, for there is reason to conclude from his History in the Gospel, that he
accomplished the whole of his Work before he was advanced much beyond Thirty
Years. And what a glorious Example does his short Life present us, a Life
without spot or blemish, without the least sign of any inclination to Sin,
without the least show of Injustice or Uncharitableness toward Men, or the
least appearance of Disobedience or Indevotion toward God: Nay, a Life spent
in the greatest Acts of Charity to Mankind, and in the highest Elevations of
Piety to his Father: A Life that consumed it self in the Zeal of his House;
Joh. 2. 17.
that expired in a Sacrifice to the Glory of God, and for the Salvation of the
Souls of Men.

So that you have not only the Precept, but the Prescription too of your
Creator to engage you in your Duty. He by whom you were made, by whom you are
preserved, by whom alone you can be restored from a state of Sin, and by whom
you must be finally judged, was pleased to assume humane Nature, Heb. 2. 17.
to be made Man in all things (Sin only excepted) on purpose to exemplify the
Duty in our Text by his Life, as well as to conquer Sin and Hell by his Death.
And since he calls you to learn of him, Mat. 11. 28 29, 30.
to bear the Yoke to which he meekly condescended to bow his own sacred Neck,
in his tender Years, surely it is good for you to stoop to that Yoke in your
Youth too. Lam. 3. 27.
Ought you not to apply your selves as well to his Example for Direction, as to
his Sufferings for Salvation? And is it not both for your Honor and Interest
to be conformable to that blessed Life, that was first taken up to instruct
you, and then laid down to redeem you?

2. Consider how small that Oblation is, which is required of your hands, when
your whole Life is claimed as the Right of your Creator; seeing it is but a part
of it, that can be directly and immediately offered to him. The Secular Affairs
that the Necessities of your Bodies engage you in, and Sleep together with the
other Reparations of Nature that are requisite to make those frail Tabernacles
Tenantable, divide between 'em so great a share of the Time of Life, that it is
but a little portion of it that can be allotted to Pious Exercises, how soon
soever you apply your selves to the practice of 'em; and will you grudg your
Maker this small share of your Time, for the whole of which you entirely depend
on him? Can you think much to allow a part of every day to Devotion, to the
immediate Service of God, and for the Welfare of your Souls, when he allows you
so large a part of your Time to provide for the present Ease and Welfare of
your Bodies, in procuring them the Conveniences of Life? Is it not more
reasonable to grudg that these Houses of Clay should have so much of your Care
and Time, and that your Souls, nay, and your Creator should have so little of
them? And ought you not rather to study how to improve even that Time which you
spend in supporting and accommodating this animal Life, so as to render it
subservient to the great Ends of honoring your Maker, and of saving your
Souls, than to contrive Excuses for entirely squandering away the best part of
that little Time in Vanity and Sin, which you ought to devote to the Holy
Exercises of Piety and Religion?

And (once again) can you think you shall bring an acceptable Sacrifice, if
after the consumption of the prime of your Days in Vanity, you should come to
offer only some of your last hours to your Creator? Will the Days, in which you
will confess you have no Pleasure your selves, be a proper Offering for him to
take pleasure in? Is it fit to reserve only the Blind and Lame and Sick for
sacred Services? May not such a Return be reasonably expected to every such
Oblation, as God by the Prophet Malachi makes to the profane Jews in another
case; Mal. 1. 8.
Offer it now to thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy
Person? says the LORD of Hosts. Would you not have reason to fear that such
nauseous Services would be cast back as Dung upon your Faces? Mal. 2. 3.
And that you would have an Answer somewhat like that, which you may imagine a
Subject would receive, who after having wasted his Youth and Strength in
bearing Arms against his Sovereign, should come on Crutches in his Old Age to
tender himself to be listed under his Banner? Such a kind of Answer, I say, as
such an inveterate Rebel might expect; but as much more terrible as it is a
greater Crime to sin against the great Creator than to offend a Creature, and
as the Resentments of the Living God are more dreadful than the Anger of a
Mortal Man.

3. To conclude, Consider whether the largest Portion of that little Time,
which you can possibly spend in the Service of God here, makes any figure, when
compared with an Eternity to be employed in the pleasant Contemplation and
Enjoyment of him hereafter. Can you think much to dedicate the few Moments God
is pleased to lend you in this World to him, who will reward the Service of
those Moments with everlasting Bliss in the next, among those Blessed Ones,
whose Happiness as well as Business it is to be perpetually devoted to the
Service of their Maker; who enjoy Immortal Youth, and feel an unconceivable
Pleasure in employing it wholly in the Contemplation of his Perfections, in the
Celebration of his Praises, in the entire Performance of his Will, and in the
perfect Enjoyment of his Favor?

Can it be thought that any of those Blessed Spirits that are possessed of this
Glory, can think much that they spent a little Time here below to obtain it?
May it not rather be supposed that they all unanimously wish (if such a Wish be
consistent with that perfect State of Bliss) that they had improved evety
Minute of that little Time which their Creator allotted them in this World, to
his Glory? It Is not to be doubted, that the Holy Angels and Saints in Heaven do
incessantly worship and serve their Maker with the greatest Alacrity
imaginable, because they constantly behold his Face, and are always enamored
of his Glory: They are under a continual impression of the Reasonableness and
Goodness of his Will, and know perfectly well that their own Excellency and
Happiness consists in their exact Conformity to it; and accordingly they find
unexpressible Delights in doing his Pleasure: And if they count not an Eternity
too much for the Service of their Creator, can you think the short Time of your
sojourning here below too large an Offering for him?

Seeing then the Law of your Creation, and the Dictates of Reason; the
Importunities of the Divine Word, and the Warnings of the Holy Spirit; the
Command of your Maker, and the Example of your Redeemer; the Experience of the
Saints on Earth, and the unanimous Sense of the Saints and Angels too in
Heaven; together with your own highest Interest both in Time and Eternity, do
all conspire to oblige you to devote the first and best of your Time to the
great Author of your Being: How can you any longer refuse to give up your YOVTH
to be tied by these many sacred Bonds Psalm. 118. 27.
as a Sacrifice to the Horns of his Altar?

Behold NOW is the accepted Time; 2 Cor. 6. 2.
Behold NOW is the Day of Salvation. Psalm. 95. 7, 8.
Therefore to Day, if you will hear his Voice, Heb. 3. 7, 8.
harden not your Hearts.

FINIS.

