A BRIEF COMMENTARY UPON THE Ciij Psalm.

WITH THE SEVERAL Axioms or Doctrines therein contained, AND Uses thereupon
inferred.

LONDON, Printed by M.F. for Timothy Garthwaite. 1649.

To the READER.
THese notes upon this entire Psalm were by a reverend Divine of pious memory
left behind him penned in the Latin tongue. They were to him as the
groundwork, whereupon he built his larger discourses. They that heard and knew
him, will easily perceive how far these come short of expressing him; as
defective in that wherein he was conceived to excel many other.
Notwithstanding, the Translatour hoping they may do some good in a tongue
known both to the learned and the unlearned, has, for the common benefit of
both, presumed to expose them to the public view.

The Analyze of the whole Psalm.
This Psalm is a psalm of blessing God. To this duty David excites Himself
from the 1 verse to the 20th, and in the latter part of the 22th. and that
generally 4 times thrice in the same words, viz. in the beginning of verse. 1,
2. end of verse. 22.
once to the same sense, in the latter part of verse. 1.
specially by Thanksgiving, in the latter part of verse. 2. and so to verse. 19.
Praise, verse. 19.

Other men by way of Apostrophe to the Angels, verse. 20, 21. all Gods works,
verse. 22.



PSALM CIII.
VERSE 1. Bless the LORD, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless His
holy Name.
1. Axiom or Doctrine. DAvid says, Bless the LORD, O my soul.
1. (...) The LORD.] Explication.
of (...) as (...) Exodus 3.14. of (...) which signify Being, because the LORD
has (or rather is) His own being of Himself most perfectly. gives being to all
creatures. His promises. threatenings.



2. (...) Bless.] The creature in Scriptures is said to bless God in respect
of the thing it self, by way of praise. thanksgiving.
manner improperly, or objectively: so all the works of God, in the last verse
of this Psalm. properly, or actively: so reasonable creatures men. angels.




The Blessing here meant, is the proper or active praising of God, or giving
Him thanks. These two differ, 1 Because Praise is expressed in words; Gratitude
or thankfulness in deeds also, and that principally. 2 Because Gratitude has
respect only to benefits, and those bestowed either on our selves, or on
others as in relation to us: but Praise looks at any excellency whatsoever. Yet
sometimes they may be coincident: as when we praise one for his benefits
bestowed upon us or ours, and express our gratitude in words.

3. (...) Soul.] The soul of man is taken in Scriptures sometimes properly, for
the spiritual part of man, which being united to the body gives life, sense,
reason, etc. improperly or tropically, 1 By Metonym. effic. for the life, 1 Samuel 19.5. 2 By Synecd. memb. for the whole man: so frequently. 3 By Synec.
memb. and integ. for the body, Psa. 89.48. 4 By Synec. integ. the whole soul
is put for the apprehensive part, Ios. 23.14. for the appetitive part, or some
branch of it, Habak. 2.5.


In this place it is taken properly.

What David says to his soul here, (...), or Proof.
he says again in the same words, verse 2, and 22. and in the first and last
verses of the next Psalm 104. And to the same sense in the latter part of this
verse, and in diverse other places.

His reasons. 1 He knew; For the thing it self, 1 That God requires this,
(...), or Reason.
Deuteronomy. 8.10. and that in many regards He ought to be obeyed. 2 That Gods
benefits toward him and others that were dear unto him, and His excellency in
Himself abundantly deserved it. 3 That this part of Gods worship is in its own
nature of all other the most noble. (In prayer, as beggars; in hearing, as
scholars or disciples, we expect something from God: here according to our
measure and ability we give something unto God.) That hereby God esteems
Himself to be in special manner honored, Psalm. 50.23. 2 Cor. 4.15. and
therefore according to His promise, 1 Samuel 2.30. He will honor them that
rightly perform it. 2 For the manner, 1 That whereas God is a Spirit, and the
Father of spirits, it is most fit that the soul, which is a spirit, and created
by God after His own Image, should principally bless him. 2 That this is
absolutely necessary in respect of Gods will, Who requires such worship, and
has promised to accept it, but rejects and punishes the contrary as
hypocritical. 3 That if the soul or heart bless God, the tongue will not be
wanting, Psalm. 45.1, 2.

2 Being a man after Gods heart, his will and affections, the fountain of
actions, being elevated by grace, raised him up to act proportionably to his
illumination, that he might honor God in the excellency of His nature, the
merit of His actions, and the justness of His will.

Uses.
Here we learn 1 Who it is, Instruction.
to Whom especially all blessing is due. We may our selves desire praise from
others, so it be upon a just ground, and for a right end, 2 Cor. 12.11. In like
manner we may praise others, 1 Cor. 11.2. Yea our selves, 2 Cor. 11.5, etc. But
the chief object of all praise must be God. Not that He any way at all needs
it, as being infinitely perfect; but that he infinitely deserves it, and we by
this means testify our gratitude and reverence toward Him, and may hereby win
others to Him.

2. That it is not enough to bless God with the mouth unless the soul also
concur. He that is the Creator, and Preserver, and Redeemer, and Glorifier
of the whole man, deserves and requires the obedience and service of the whole.
But chiefly He will be worshipped in spirit, and above all requires the heart;
hating such as draw near to Him with their mouth, and honor Him with their
lips, when their hearts are far from Him.

3 Seeing David says thus to his soul, therefore the greatest, mightiest,
wealthiest, etc. are not exempt from this duty. Yea, as blessing implies
thanksgiving, they of all other are most obliged to it, as who would otherwise
be justly liable to that complaint of Guilielm. Parisiensis, Qui majores terras
tenent, minorem censum solvunt, They who hold the greatest farms pay the least
rent.

Again, this example of David thus exciting his soul to bless God,
Reprehension.
reproves as opposite hereunto, 1 Such as neglect at least the manner of the
duty, not doing it with the soul. But of this in the third Axiom.

2 Such as neglect the whole duty it self, not doing it at all. As namely, such
who causlesly absent themselves from Gods public worship, or being there,
talk, sleep, or think of other matters, and do not join their tongues and
souls with the congregation in blessing God: And who in private either perform
no religious duty at all, or with those 9 Lepers, Luke 17.12, etc. are
altogether upon petition for what they want, but never return to give God the
glory, by blessing, praising, thanking Him for what they have received.

3 Such as bestow this act upon objects most unworthy of it: who bless wicked
men, and that in and for their wickedness, ( Psalm. 10.3. 1 Samuel 23.21.)
themselves in their sins ( Deuteronomy. 29.19.) idols ( Judge. 16.24. Dan. 5.4.) which
is paralleled with killing a man, cutting off a dogs neck, and offering swines
blood, Isa. 66.3.

4 Such as, in stead of blessing, blaspheme God, by denying those Attributes
which of due belong to Him, and attributing to Him that which is most contrary
to His nature, and ascribing to others that which is proper only to Him.

Lastly, Exhortation.
David's example may serve as a ground of exhortation to us to imitate him in
thus exciting our souls to bless God. And the considerations before mentioned
as Reasons of the Doctrine, may likewise serve as Motives to enforce this
Exhortation, and also as Means to dispose us to the performance of this duty.

2 Doctrine. The LORDS Name is holy.
1 (...) Name.] Expl.
The Name of the LORD is here (as often elsewhere in Scripture) put for the LORD
Himself. Hence that saying of the Hebrews (...) God Himself is His Name, and
His Name is Himself.

2 (...) Holy.] Gods holiness is the same with His universal justice, or
righteousness. And as in other things, so much more in God (by Whom all other
things are sanctified or made holy) it imports a separation, as of that which
is pure and excellent from that which is either unclean and vile, or at the
best common and vulgar. Hence Gods Holiness, and His Glory are near akin; and
Hallowing Gods Name is all one with Glorifying it, Ezekiel. 36.20, etc. and 38.23.
and 28.22. Levit. 10.3. Isa. 6.3. and Exodus 29.43. it shall be sanctified by My
glory.

This Attribute is frequently in Scripture given both to the Name of God, (...)
(as Psalm. 33.21. and 99.3. and 105.3. and 106.47. and 145.21, etc.) and, which
is all one, to God Himself, as Psalm. 22.3. and 99.5, 9. Jos. 24.19. Yea 1 Samuel
2.2. There is none holy as the LORD. The faithful in this life are holy but
imperfectly; and both they and the Angels in the life to come, though perfectly
in their kind, yet finitely and derivatively: God only is holy infinitely,
originally, essentially. Hence He is called, as by His proper Name (...) (which
is more emphaticall then if it were with the article (...)) the Holy one, Isa.
40.25. Job 6.10. Hos. 11.9. Habak 3.3. And Isa 6.3. it is three times repeated,
Holy, Holy, Holy, (or the Holy one, the Holy one, the Holy one) the LORD of
hosts. So Revel. 4.8. where according to some Greek copies it is nine times
(that is, thrice three times) repeated. In relation to His people also He is
called their Holy one, Isa. 43.15. and 49.7. and, the Holy one of Jacob, Isa.
29.23. and above 30 times the Holy one of Israel.

Reason, (...).
why God is holy, none other can be given, but because He is God; this, as all
the rest of His Attributes, being essential to Him, yea His very essence.

Uses.
This affords us diverse instructions. Instr.
1 Hereby we in part understand the nature of God: Whom to know is so
behoofefull unto us, that therein consists eternal life, Joh. 17.3. so
necessary, that vengeance in flaming fire is taken on all them that know Him
not, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. For the sum of religion consists in a right understanding
of God, and a due observance of Him, which affective knowledge includes. The
knowledge therefore of this Attribute of God does not a little promote piety,
and further our salvation, as will appear in that which follows. In the mean
time this should beget in us humility and holy fear, chiefly when we draw near
unto God, Isa. 6.2, 5. 1 Samuel 6.20. Luke 5.8. So also godly sincerity,
especially in matter of religion.

2 If God be holy, then whatsoever proceeds from Him, is holy. Holiness in
mortal men is imperfect (as was said before) and the most holy of them working
according to the relics of corruption bring forth something that is evil. In
which regard both al men ought to pray, Forgive us our trespasses, and every
one ought to take heed that he do not follow others further then they are
followers of Christ. Yea even Adam in his innocence, though he had no
corruption, yet was mutably holy, and so by the abuse of his free will might
commit evil, which also he did. But God being perfectly and essentially holy,
all his works are necessarily holy. And so all His laws or commandments, Romans
7.12. Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9. Therefore we must not murmur against God when He
afflicts us or our friends, or suffers us to be unjustly afflicted by men; or
when He spares or does good to our enemies. Neither must we doubt or delay to
obey any of His commandments; seeing, if it appear to be a command proceeding
from God, there is no question to be made but it is most holy, and just, and
good.

3. If God be holy, then also He loves holiness and righteousness in men, and
hates iniquity, Psalm. 5.4, 5. and 11.7. Habak. 1.13. Would thou therefore
know whether thou beeft in the favor of God or no? say not, Who shall ascend
into heaven to search the secrets of God, and certify me of mine election?
Neither consider the affluence of temporal things. But descend into thy self,
and consider whether thou be truly and sincerely holy. If so, thou need
not doubt of Gods love and favor.

4. Hereby we see how necessary Christ is for them that would come unto God.
For as we are altogether polluted and unclean, till we be sprinkled and washed
with the blood of Christ; so the best works that can proceed from us in our
best estate in this life, would stink in the nostrils of the most holy God, if
they were not accepted in and for Christ.

This also reproves diverse sorts of men, Repr.
as offending against Gods holiness. 1. Them that make so holy a God the
author of sin. It is true indeed there is scarce any to be found that dares
aver this in direct terms. The Manichees themselves would rather feign
another principle, an evil god, then make the good and holy God the author of
sin. But neither can they be excused from this blasphemy, who embrace and
stiffly maintain such opinions, from whence this follows by necessary
consequence.

2. All that live impurely; whether they do it openly, as profane persons; or
closely, as hypocrites. These surely are either atheists denying God, or His
omniscience or His hatred of sin; or else they are notoriously hardened, that
they dare commit such things before His most holy eyes, which they would be
ashamed to commit before any ordinary honest man. Let such men know, that the
Holy one of Israel hates iniquity, and will without respect of persons render
to wicked men the wages of their sin, that is, eternal death. The holiness
of God urges their damnation in a double regard; namely, both in regard of His
hatred of sin, as directly contrary to holiness, and in regard of His truth,
in executing his threatenings.

3. More specially such as offend against the 3d Commandment by taking this
holy (...) and imperate the performance of it; the Affections of Love, Desire,
Joy, Hope, etc. to carry it on amain through all obstacles or impediments.

Thus Psalm. 9.1. (...).
I will praise the LORD with my whole heart (or with all my heart.) Here is the
heart, and the whole heart, or all the heart. So Psalm. 86.12.

For he knew, (...).
1 That God requires this integrity of all, and intensnesse of every part of
man in His service, Dent. 6.5. 2 That Gods infinite excellency, and namely His
holiness ( Psalm. 99.3, 5.9.) His beneficence also, and His having made all
that is within us, and that for this end, abundantly deserves this. 3 That
these faculties of the soul are so linked together, that, unless they all
concur, none of them can be rightly exercised. The Apprehension, though never
so clear, yet without a suitable motion of the heart, is idle. On the other
side, there can be no motion of the heart at all without some apprehension
going before: Every affection presupposes some act of the understanding, an
orderly affection a distinct act, a vehement affection a press and intense act.

Uses.
Here then we see of how great moment Instr.
this work of blessing God is, to which all that is within us is required.

But how far are they from this duty, Repr.
who call together all that is within them to do the works of the flesh, the
world, and the devil!

Now as before for the thing, Exh.
so here for the manner and degree, David's example should excite us to imitate
him.

Motives. See the (...).

Means. 1 By way of removing impediments: Away with all things that may
overcharge the soul ( Luke 21.34.) or hinder us from lifting it up to God as we
ought (1 Timothy 2.8.) or which may divert any faculty of the soul another way. So
in the act of blessing God we must watch over our thoughts that they wander not
after other objects: for then they will draw the affections after them, and so
make them cold and slack in the performance of this duty. 2 Direct. When we are
about this work, consider Gods special presence, and the weightinesse of the
business.

Verse 2. Bless the LORD O my soul, and forget not all His benefits.
1. Doctrine. David says again, Bless the LORD O my soul.
For 1. (...).
He earnestly desired to perform this duty so as it might be pleasing and
acceptable unto God, for the Reasons mentioned in the 1 and 3 Doctrines of the
former verse. And in such case reiteration is usual: As in prayers, Psalm.
51.1, 2, 7, 9. Dan. 9.17, 18, 19. And in precepts, Prove. 4.13, 14, 15. Romans
12.14. 2 He knew that as this could not be done unless the soul concurred, so
the soul was not easily excited and prepared in such manner as it ought: 1 In
regard of the weightinesse of the duty. 2 In regard of the infinite Majesty of
God, before Whom, and to Whom it is to be performed. 3 In regard of the
relics of corruption, which hinder or slacken the soul in this performance,
or draw it another way.

Uses.
Now in that David thus again and again excites himself to bless God, Instr.
we see 1 How necessary and important a thing the right performance of this
duty is. For it is the property of children and fools, not of a man of David's
wisdom, to be so earnest in a matter of small moment.

2 How difficult a thing it is, duly to prepare the soul hereunto. For though
the duty were of never so great importance, yet if it were not also of some
difficulty, this earnestness were superfluous.

3 That we must use all diligence, and never cease till the soul be
competently prepared.

This reproves 1 Such, Repr.
who if their soul be not presently excited, do not diligently endeavor it,
but defer the duty. Such men should remember the saying, Qui non est hodie,
etc. They who are so remiss in so excellent a work of God, may justly by Him
be left to themselves, and to the tempter; who, if he once see them so easily
taken off, will be sure daily to cast in their way more and more impediments.

2 Much more such as diligently excite themselves to work iniquity: who, when
their conscience (by the light of nature, Scripture, the admonition and example
of others, the Spirit of God also striving together) checks and restrains them,
yet never leave till having extinguished the light, cast Gods Commandments
behind their back, and grieved his Holy Spirit, their conscience becomes
seared, and their soul so addicted to iniquity, that they are ready to drink it
like water, to draw it with cords of vanity, and sin as with cartropes, to
do evil with both hands greedily. To sin is to depart from God, and to draw
nigh to hell: Now do they think they cannot depart far enough from God, or
draw nigh enough to hell (from whence there is no redemption, where the
torments have neither end nor intermission) without all this diligence?

On the other side here is comfort and encouragement for such as truly desire
to bless God. Consolation, and Exhortation.
If at any time they perceive their souls to be not without some difficulty
excited to this duty; let them not be discouraged or give over, but endeavor
it so much the more earnestly. And by how much the more and greater obstacles
or hindrances they shall break through, so much the more they shall testify
their love to God, and conscience of doing their duty, and so much the more
comfort and sweetness they shall find in it.

2 Doctr. He says, Forget not all his benefits.
1 (...) His benefits. Explic.
] The prime and proper signification of the verb (...) is simply and absolutely
afficere bono vel malo, to do one good or evil, to deal well or ill with
him. And so it is taken in the good part, Prove. 11.17. and frequently being
spoken of God, as Psalm. 13.6. and 116.7. and 119.17. and 142.7. Isa. 63.7. In
the bad part, Genesis 50.15, 17. Psalm. 137.8. Prove. 3.30. In both, Prove. 31.12.
Sometimes in reference to a precedent cause or occasion in the object it may
signify to reward, recompense, or requite. So by our last English Translatours
it is rendered in the good part, 2 Samuel 19.36. and 22.21. Psalm. 18.20. In the
bad, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Isa. 3.9. Joel 3.4. 2 Chronicles. 20.11. Psalm. 7.4. and in the 10th
verse of this 103. Psalm. In both, 1 Samuel 24.17. But in all these places it
might as well have been translated simply and absolutely, to do, or deal with,
(as for example, in the 10th verse of this Psalm, where (...) in the latter
part of the verse is but exegeticall to (...) in the former part) and in diverse
of them much better, as wherein it may (at least) be doubted whether there be
any reference at all to any precedent cause or occasion. In like manner the
nown (...) primely and properly signifies a deed or thing done to another,
whether good or evil, a good or ill turn, a kind or unkind office, a benefit
or a hurt. Thus it is taken in the good part, Judge. 9.16. 2 Chronicles. 32.25. Prove.
19.17. In the bad, Psalm. 137.8. and 28.4. where (...) is but exegeticall to
(...) and (...). And wheresoever in our English it is translated [ recompense,
or reward] which is commonly in the bad part, it rather signifies the deed or
thing rewarded, then the reward it self: Or if it do signify the reward, it
is by a Metonymie (as (...) and (...) often do) So Prove. 12.14. Isa. 3.11.
Which may be translated, The work of a man's hands: Obad. v. 15. Thy deed, or,
That which thou have done. But here in the Text it is taken in the good part:
and therefore it is rightly translated according to the prime and absolute
signification benefits, and so by Symmachus (...), better then by the LXX
(...), or by the Vulgar Latin, (which in the Psalms follows the LXX)
retributiones. So (...) Psalm. 116.12. Neither does this exclude but rather
include Gods retributions or rewards, which are the fruits of His second love.
For these also are benefits, and so matter of blessing God, not only by way of
praise, but also by way of thanksgiving too, as being not of debt but of grace,
Romans 4.4, 5. I have insisted the longer upon the explication of this word,
because both the verb, and the nowns derived of it, are usually mistaken and
restrained to retribution, as if that were the principal signification of
them; whereas indeed it is scarce any signification at all, but by a trope, and
that but seldom. 2 (...) forget not.] As a man may be said to remember 2
ways, viz. either notionally, or affectively; so in like manner he may be said
to forget, 1 Notionally, when the notions of things formerly known are either
altogether or in part vanished away, Psalm. 59.11. Jam. 1.24. 2 Affectively,
when, though he still retains the notions, yet he is not answerably affected,
neither does act according thereunto, Genesis 40.23. compared with chap. 41.9.
etc. Psalm. 106.21. And thus God is said not to remember the sins of them that
repent, Jer. 31.34. Ezekiel. 33.16. likewise the righteousness or righteous acts
of him that apostatises, Ezekiel. 33.13. to forget the affliction of his people,
Psalm. 44.24. and 13.1. And so indeed it is always taken, when it it spoken of
God. In this place both are to be understood; Forget not notionally, Forget not
affectively. 3 (...) all.] In this manner of speaking the negation is sometimes
referred to the nown, and so denies but in part, as Numb. 23.13. Mat. 7.21.
Sometimes to the verb, and so it denies the whole, as Exodus 12.43. Ezekiel. 12.28.
Gal. 2.16. And thus it is taken in this place; Forget not all His benefits,
that is, Forget none of His benefits, or, Remember all His benefits.
To bring any proof of David's care in this particular, (...).
is needless; it being generally throughout this whole book of Psalms his
chief work to commemorate Gods benefits, and to excite both himself and others
to a thankful commemoration of them; many whole Psalms being spent in nothing
else.

For 1 he knew that ingratitude (especially toward God) is always a hamous
finne; (...).
and much more would it have been so in him, a man that made such profession of
religion, and whom God had laden with so many, so great benefits. 2 He knew
also that he that is forgetful of benefits can not be grateful. For
whatsoever gratitude does, it looks at the benefits as the ground thereof; and
the requital or recompensing of them is the only end it aims at. Therefore
the keeping them in memory is the first work of gratitude, upon which all that
follow are founded, and without which they all fall to the ground. If the
memory retain them not, neither can the mind worthily esteem them, nor the
heart love the benefactour for them, nor the tongue praise him or them, nor the
deeds recompense them. He knew moreover that to remember Gods benefits only
notionally and not affectively, was worse ingratitude then utterly to forget
them as being more voluntary.

Uses.
In that David excites himself to remember, Instr.
or not to forget Gods benefits, it is presupposed 1 That he had observed, or
taken notice of Gods benefits toward him. For that which was never taken notice
of, can not be the object either of remembrance or forgetfulness.

2 That unless the memory be ever and anon rubbed up, there is danger that
forgetfulness of benefits received may creep upon us. For such is the
perverseness of our nature, that those things which we should forget (viz. our
benefits bestowed upon others, and their injuries done to us) we engrave in our
memories as in a marble table with a pen of iron and the point of a diamond;
but those things which we should most remember (the benefits which we have
received from others, even from God Himself, obliging us to gratitude) we write
in the water or dust.

3 That we must in no wise forget any benefits received, especially from God.

This reproves 1 Such as do not remember Gods benefits affectively; Repr.
that is, who are not so affected, neither so carry themselves toward God, as
becomes them who are so infinitely obliged to Him. The goodness of God ought
to lead men to repentance, Romans 2.4. His loving us first ought to stir us up to
love him again, 1 John 4.19.

2 Such as never take notice of, or never acknowledge Gods benefits, at least
not as benefits, that is, not as freely bestowed; but ascribe the good things
they have received, either to their own power, wisdom, industry, etc. or at
least to their own merit or desert. This was a sin which it seems the old
Israelites were very prone to. And therefore Moses diligently admonishes them
to beware of both the branches of it. Of the former, Deuteronomy. 8.17, 18. Of the
latter, Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5, 6, etc. The Psalmist disclaims both, Psalm. 30.7. Thou
LORD of Thy goodness (or, in Thy favor, or good pleasure, (...)) have made my
hill so strong. Upon which words Saint Augustine, Non in viribus nostris, non
in meritis nostris, etc. Not by our own power; for it is Thou LORD: not for our
own merits; for it is of thy goodness. See also Psalm. 44.3. They who offend in
either of these kinds, can not possibly be thankful unto God. Such as
attribute Gods blessings to their own merit, howsoever they may seem to
acknowledge His justice, yet they deny His liberality, grace, and favor;
accounting the things they receive to be paid them as debts, not given or
bestowed upon them as benefits. But such as attribute them to their own
strength, wisdom, industry, etc. deny not only Gods liberality, but also His
justice, providence, and all, setting themselves in the place of God, Habak.
1.15, 16. Dan. 4.30. And in like manner do they offend, who attribute Gods
benefits to any other but Him; as to idols, Judge. 16.23, 24. Hos. 2.5, 8.

3 Such as remember Gods benefits, but so as to vilify them and set them at
naught, yea, to account them as ill turns or injuries, to hate and murmur
against Him for them, as if they proceeded from His hatred, not from His love
toward them, Deuteronomy. 1.27. In this height of ingratitude do all they offend, who
hate the word or messengers of God, just reproof, etc. Thus Ahab hated
Micaiah, 1 King. 22.8. and accounted Elijah his enemy, Chap. 21.20. who yet was
the charet of Israel, and the horsemen thereof, 2 King. 2.12.

But let David's example exhort us to imitate him in ever thankfully remembering
and exciting our selves to remember, Exh.
and not forget all Gods benefits.

Motives. See the (...). Beside, the remembrance of these may and ought to stir
us up to diverse other duties. viz.

1 To beware of sin, which is a rendering unto God evil for good. And the more
good we have received from God, the greater is the evil of the sin. So David's
sin is aggravated by Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9. and Hezekiah's pride, 2 Chronicles.
32.25. Therefore as Joseph fortifies himself against his mistresses temptation
Genesis 39.8, 9. Behold my master, etc. How then can I do this great wickedness
and sin against God! So when we are tempted to any sin, we should say to our
selves, or to our tempters, Behold, God has done these and these great things
for me, has bestowed these and these blessings, these and these deliverances
upon me, How then can I do this great wickedness and sin against God! When
the Proconsul moved Bishop Polycarpus to blaspheme Christ, These 86 years
(says that holy man) have I served Him, and He never yet did me any hurt: How
then can I blaspheme or speak evil of my King, which has bestowed salvation
upon me! Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 15. 2 To serve God cheerfully, Who is so kind and
bountiful a Master, Who prevents us with His (...) or benefits before we have
done Him any service, much less will He be slack or behinde-hand with us in
rewarding us when our work is done. It was true which the devil said (though he
said it with a diabolical, that is a slanderous intent) Job 1.9. Job did not
serve God for naught. And he proves it in the next verse from Gods protection
and blessing upon Job and all that he had. So let any of us consider how many
ways both positively and privatively God has been good to him, and he must
needs acknowledge that he has not, does not, shall not serve God either for
naught or in vain, either without cause or without hope, either without desert
or without reward. Therefore as the Apostle exhorts us 1 Cor. 15.58. Let us be
steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as
we know that our labor is not in vain in the Lord. 3 To trust in God for the
future. So David, 1 Samuel 17.37. The LORD that delivered me out of the paw of
the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, He will deliver me out of the hand of
this Philistine. So S. Paul 2 Timothy 4.17, 18. and 2 Cor. 1.10. On the contrary,
Mat. 16.8, 9, etc. 4 To be patient in afflictions. Job 2.10. Shall we receive
good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? 5 To be free and
bountiful in contributing to any work, which concerns Gods immediate honor
and service. Though indeed this cannot be accounted an act of bounty or
liberality, but of justice, gratitude, duty; seeing we do but render unto God
his own (...) or the things which He has formerly bestowed upon us: which, as
they proceeded from Him to us, were truly benefits; as they return from us to
Him, are but due debts. And therefore whenever Gods occasions call upon us in
this kind, we must contribute thereunto as on the one side readily and
cheerfully, and (which will follow thereupon) richly and plentifully according
to our ability; so on the other side humbly and modestly, without pride or
boasting, or thinking that we thereby make God a debtor to us, or merit any
thing at His hand. An admirable example of both we have in David, 1 Chro. 29. 6
To be beneficial unto our brethren; both that we may be the children of our
heavenly Father by imitation of His goodness, Mat. 5.45. and also that we may
thereby show our gratitude to Him, Who takes what we do to our brethren (His
children, Christ's brethren) as done to Himself, Prove. 19.17. Mat. 25.40.
All these duties will be the fruits of remembering Gods benefits, and therefore
may be as so many Motives to excite us to it.

Means Direct. Means Removing impediments.
Direct. 1. Take diligent notice of all Gods benefits, both in themselves, and
with respect to the Author; that is, both that such and such good things we
enjoy, and that we have received them from God. This means is the ground of all
the rest, and is absolutely necessary not only to affective, but even to bare
notionall remembrance, which can have no object, if notice or apprehension go
not before. 2 Make a due (that is a high) estimate or valuation of them. For
what we most esteem, we best remember. Even old men, whose memories most fail,
yet what they greatly regard they seldom forget, as where they have laid their
treasure, (Cic. de senect.) Now Gods benefits are highly estimable (or rather
inestimable) whether we consider them in themselves (their greatness,
multitude, variety, convenience, etc.) or in respect of God the Author and
Donour of them; Whose greatness and majesty illustrates and amplifies His
benefits, and Whose goodness commends and endears them to us, as proceeding
not only from His love or good will, but also from His grace or free will. 3
Add to Estimation Admiration: for that also will add to the keeping Gods
benefits in memory. For as what we esteem as great, so what we admire as
strange, we do not easily forget: Which is one reason why the things which we
observe when we are children, are better retained in memory then those which we
observe in riper years. Now we may justly admire Gods benefits bestowed upon
us, if (beside their excellent value in themselves, and the infinite greatness
and goodness of God the Author) we consider our own meanness and vileness;
that we being but worms and worms meat, dust and ashes, so great a God should
vouchsafe to bestow such great things upon us. This made David stand amazed and
cry out, LORD what is man, etc. Psalm. 8.4. and 144.3. But much more may we be
astonished with admiration, if beside our meannesse we consider also our
sinfulness; how often, how grievously we have offended God, and provoked the
eyes of His glory; how justly we have deserved not only to be deprived of all
good things, but to be overwhelmed with all evils and punishments; and yet how
God still renews His mercies to us every morning, Lam. 3.23. 4 Meditate
frequently of Gods benefits, when thou art by thy self; and, when in fit
company, be telling them to others, especially to them who have near relation
to thee, and together with thee are partakers of them, and obliged to remember
them, as thy wife, children, etc. This means God Himself prescribes as for the
keeping His words in remembrance, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. and 11.18, 19, 20. so for
the keeping His works or benefits in remembrance, Deuteronomy. 4.9. etc.
By way of removing impediments. Beware of such things as may hinder any of the
direct means, viz. either the Apprehension, or Estimation, or Admiration, or
Meditation and narration, and consequently the remembrance it self of Gods
benefits. I shall instance only in two.

1 Earthly-mindednesse: which makes a man not value, not regard, not relish the
chiefest of Gods benefits, that is, His spiritual blessings; and for
temporal, so look at that which is before that he forgets that which is
behind, think all, that he has received, little or nothing, whilst he
greedily gapes and thirsts after more; At least it so drowns him in the care of
keeping, or in the pleasure of enjoying and using the benefits themselves, that
he never looks up to the Author and Giver of them. As swine under an oak. 2
Pride: which is yet more unreasonable, making the chief of Gods benefits (a
man's strength, wisdom, virtues, etc.) the ground of forgetting both them and
all the rest to be Gods benefits; whilst he ascribes these to himself, and the
rest to these, either as to the effecting, or at least as to the meriting
causes, and so neither of both to God, or, if to His power, yet not to His
bounty or grace. And by how much the more it makes a man magnify himself in
the opinion of his own worth and deserts, so much the more it makes him slight
and vilify Gods other benefits, as all too little for him.
Verse 3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities: Who heals all thy diseases.
That he may bless God by way of thanksgiving, he recounts Gods benefits
bestowed upon himself, v. 3, 4, 5. which are either privative, deliverance from
the evil of sin, ver. 3. punishment, v. 4. in the beginning.
positive, conferring of good things in general, v. 4 latter part. temporal,
v. 5.
others also, v. 6. to the 19.




His deliverance from the evil of sin he mentions in this verse. And it has
two branches, viz. being either from the guilt of sin, by forgiveness, or
remission of it, which is Justification. viz. being either from the corruption,
and dominion of sin (signified by healing his diseases) which is the former
part of Sanctification.


In the former branch are 3 Axioms or Doctrines.

1. Doctrine. David had his iniquities.
(...) thine iniquity, Expl.
or iniquities.] The verb (...) signifies properly to be crooked, Eccles. 1.15.
and 7.13. Lam. 3.9. And whereas a man may either voluntarily make himself
crooked by writhing or distorting his body, or be made crooked by a disease (
Luke 13.11.) by a heavy burden etc. hence by a Metaphor it signifies sometimes
to sin, (specially of crooked manners, perversely, deliberately, 1 King 8.47
and more generally any way whatsoever, every sin being a deflexion from the
right way or rule) sometimes, to be pressed by calamities, Psalm. 38.6. Hence
also the nown (...) by the same Metaphor signifies most commonly sin (whether
of perverseness or otherwise) but sometimes affliction or punishment, 1 Samuel
28.10. And so that speech of Cain, Genesis 4.13. may be interpreted either way.
Here it is taken for all David's sins, whether of perverseness, as in the matter
of Urijah, or otherwise.

That David had his iniquities, (...).
as it is here necessarily implied in the pronown affixed to it ( thine
iniquities, that is, the iniquities of David's soul, or of David himself) and
in the act of God exercised thereabout, viz. forgiveness, (for that which is
not can not be forgiven) so he elsewhere confesses it more expressly and at
large, As 2 Samuel 12.13. and 24.17. Psalm. 40.12. and 51.1, etc.

Now sin being most hateful to God, (...).
(to Whom we owe whatsoever we have or are) and, beside other discommodities,
most pernicious to him that commits it, in respect of the punishment both of
loss and sense, and bringing no good at all with it, which may in any wise
recompense or countervaile these evils; therefore to sin is contrary to all
reason, and consequently it can not be expected that any just reason should be
given why David had his iniquities. Yet how or by what means this came to
pass, it will not be amiss to enquire; that so we (for whose sakes this and
all things else are written) may the more diligently beware, lest the same
things, which were able to overthrow so valiant a champion, do much more get
the victory over us.

The causes then of these iniquities were external. The causes then of these
iniquities were internal.
The external cause was the devil (the common cause of sin, 1 Job. 3.8.) whose
hatred and envy against God and all mankind is such, that he leaves no man at
all untempted. But especially and above others he would labor to draw such a
man as David into sin, in a double respect, viz. of his profession, and
authority. For the former, the devil knew full well, that the sins of David,
who had made so great a progress in the profession and practice of religion,
would give great occasion both of scandal to the weak, and of blasphemy to the
wicked and profane, 2 Samuel 12.14. For the latter, the subtle serpent knew that
most men would frame themselves after the kings example; and therefore that
such who had before kept themselves at least within the bounds of outward
civility for fear of displeasing the king, when they should know how greatly
he had sinned, would break out into all impiety. He might hope also that by
that means the kings mind might be alienated from good men, as whom he might
suppose to be offended at his sins; whereupon happily he might raise persecution
against them (2 Chronicles. 16.10.) and thereby such as had not already entered into
a godly course of life, might be kept back, and such as had, might apostatise
or fall back from it. Or, suppose David's sins could have been concealed from
the vulgars notice, yet it would have been very probable, that a king conscious
to himself of such sins would not have been very severe in punishing others;
whereby sin upon hope of impunity would have spread far and wide, and have
overflowed the whole land.

The internal causes are different according to the diversity of sins. But
the principal and direct cause, perse and consilio, was the will determining
the power or faculty to an undue object, or an undue manner. The previous or
antecedent causes, which made way for that determination, were negligence in
using the means to avoid sin (viz. watchfulness, prayer, attention to Gods
word etc.) and the entertaining and harboring wicked thoughts so long, till
they had driven away the Spirit of grace, captivated right reason, and obtained
the consent of the will.

Uses
Hereby we learn 1 That even the best men are not in this life free from
possibility of sinning; Instr.
and therefore that Christianity is not a state of security but of
watchfulness, wherein we ought to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling.

2 That even the greatest and mightiest of men (for who greater then a king? or
who can challenge any exemption or prerogative above him?) are yet subject to
the law of God. For sin is a transgression of the law: now no man can
transgress the law but he that is subject to the law. The sins therefore of
great men are sins: and seeing He that is higher then the highest observes them
( Eccles. 5.8.) they must (without repentance) render an account to Him of
them, and that so much the heavier, by how much their sinful example has been
more dangerous to others, and their sins in themselves so much the more
heinous, as they being obliged to God by more benefits have broken more bonds
of duty.

This reproves, Repr.
1 Libertines etc. who think they are come to that height of perfection, that
they can not by any temptation be drawn into sin; yea that the acts which they
commit, though sins in other men, (as drunkenness, theft, whoredom etc.) yet
in them are no sins, neither can defile them, seeing to the pure all things are
pure. But against this opinion (so absurd, that it is a wonder the devil
himself is not ashamed to persuade any man to it) there needs no more to be
said for the present, but that David (another manner of man for holiness and
perfection then the best of them) had his iniquities, and so called and
accounted of them.

2 Carnal Gospellers, who have little or no care of hearing the word, or
performing other duties of religion, who know not what belongs to the girdle of
sincerity, the helmet of hope, etc. yea who dare adventure upon any occasions
of sin, and yet think they have so good command of themselves that they can
keep within compass well enough. What Is the matter? I wonder. Is sin grown
less dangerous, or men more skillful to avoid it now then heretofore? Sin was
wont to be very watchful and crafty to catch men, Gal. 6.1. Ephesians. 4.22. Heb.
3.13. 2 It was wont to be so strong that none but Christ, Who has power to
subdue all things unto Himself, was able to deliver any that once came within
the reach of it. 3 It was wont to be so cruel, that look who were not plucked
out of its jaws by Christ, it would use them most unmercifully. All the
miseries of this life proceed from sin, and yet all do not satisfy the cruelty
of it, but at last it brings to death, Romans 5.12. Nor is it yet satisfied: for
it draws the soul also to the place of torment, and at last the body also
united to it, and so drowns the whole man in woeful perdition. Nor is it yet
fully satisfied: for being committed against an infinite justice, it requires
that the sinner should likewise undergo an infinite punishment. But because
the creature being finite can not undergo a punishment infinite in measure,
therefore it rests (though hardly) content with a punishment infinite in
duration. Such was sin wont to be. And is it now grown to some better terms of
moderation? No surely, it is as ready to entrap men now as ever; which appears
by the abounding of it every where, and daily ensnaring such as would think
much not to be accounted very wise men. And 2ly it holds those it once seises
upon, as fast now as ever: for still that stands good, that there is no Name
under heaven whereby men can be saved, but only the Name of Jesus; it is only
He that can save His people from their sins. Lastly, the rigor in binding
over to punishment is nothing abated; the same law being broken, and the same
infinite justice offended. Well then, sin being the same it was wont to be, why
are not we so watchful against it as the servants of God have been in former
times? who were so wary that in some things they would not do all they might,
but used to make railes on either side their way to heaven, lest unawares they
should fall into sin; as never thinking themselves far enough out of the
reach of it, till they should get to heaven. But oh the piercing wit, the
undaunted courage, the firm faith of our age! All foregoing generations were
but babes to us the world had never any men to show till we came in play. We
know so exactly how far we may go in every thing, and can so accurately (to
the very cleaving of a hair) distinguish between the use and abuse of things,
that we scorn to lose any jote of our privileges. Yea many times we make a
sport of it, to show how nigh the pits brink we can go, and yet not fall in.
Nay we mock, and sometimes deadly hate such as dare not go so far as we think
they might. Those proverbs of not touching pitch, or not putting coals into the
bosom, etc. befitted those simple souls in time of yore, but are now out of
date. Simple Job! why would thou so restrain thy self as to make a covenant
with thine eyes not to look upon a maid? ( Job 31.1.) we have such as can dally
with them, and dance with them, and court them whole nights together, and yet
look to the main chance well enough: who much delight in lascivious songs,
wanton plays, and such like frothy execrable filth, and yet never any
infection once comes near them; nay they can pick as good lessons out of these
as others do out of sermons. David, what a silly weakling wast thou, to think
thou could not keep Gods commandments, unless thou did first proclaim,
Away from me ye wicked? ( Psalm. 119.115.) And Solomon, thou the wisest of men,
and had no more wit, but to forbid ill company, and that six times together
with a breath? ( Prove 4.14 15.) He is no body now adays that is not for all
companies. We have them, that care not if the devil himself came into their
company, if he would not hurt their bodies; and would not fear a straw what he
could do to their souls. No, their knowledge is so sound, their faith so
strong, and their hearts so good to God, that they scorn any company should do
hurt on them. And Paul, why would thou be so strict as to keep under thy
body, etc. (1 Cor. 9.27.) as though a man may not pamper himself with all
variety of delicates, and yet be far enough from reprobation? Not to bring any
more instances, we have some taste of the mavelous wit of our happy age. But
if it be well compared with the wisdom of those forenamed Saints of God, we
shall find, that they out of a deep desire of Gods glory and their own
salvation, and a suspicious fear of the strength of sin and their own
weakness, bent their whole endeavor to keep as far from sin as possibly they
could; and our men out of a love of their lusts, and a tickling desire to give
them some satisfaction, labor to come as near to sin as possibly they can
without falling into it: Whereas we may well imagine it is not for nothing that
the only wise God has forbidden the occasions so expressly in Scripture. See
for the occasions of drunkenness, Prove. 23.20, 31. Of whoredom, Prove. 5.8.
and 6.25, etc. and 7.6, etc.

On the other side here is comfort for an humble broken hearted Christian,
Consolation.
who is so possessed with the horror of his sins, that he makes question
whether they can be pardoned or no. Consider well of this Doctrine, David haed
his iniquities: And were not they as ill as thine? But say that for the matter,
or outward act, and number, thine be worse then his; yet weigh the
circumstances. He was more bound to God by outward blessings then thou art: and
I suppose, thou that think so meanly of thy self, wilt not say but he had
more strength of grace to have resisted his sins, then ever thou had. But yet
suppose that both for substance and circumstances, thy sins be every way worse
then his; yet do thou think that he tasted the very utmost of Gods mercy? Is
there no further degree of it, then was showed on him? Yes surely, Gods mercy
reaches unto the clouds, yea is infinite as Himself. But it must be remembered
all this while to whom I speak, to the humble, brokenhearted sinner: for him
alone is this comfort provided. If any of you had a dish of dainty meat
provided for some special friend ill at ease, or weary with travel etc. and a
licorous boy should begin to finger it before it came at the table, I suppose
you would rap him over the knuckles, and tell him, Hands off, it was not
provided for him. Even so must I deal with any wicked profane man, that shall
offer to catch at David's example. Thou must know that this serves to refresh
such as are weary and heavy laden with their sins, and not to pamper thine
unruly lusts. Oh, but thou will say, I do not mean to lose my hold so: this is
the best refuge that I have against censorious precise fellows. When they
check me for my faults, I can tell them, I am not the first, nor shall be the
last: I have my faults, as who has not? I hope David himself was not without.
And thus I can bear out the matter in some good fashion. But take this plea
from me, and then all is gone. Well then, if thou will needs stick so close to
David's example, let us make some brief comparison between him and thee, and see
how far ye run parallel. David had his faults, so have thou: he repented of
them, so do not thou: he upon his repentance obtained pardon and salvation,
so shall not thou in thine impenitence. And what good now will David's example
do thee? But for such an one as I spoke of before, let not the horror of thy
sins drive thee to despair, but stir thee up to godly sorrow, working
repentance unto salvation not to be repented of.

Lastly, Exh.
seeing sin so prevailed against David, it behooves us much more warily to arm
our selves against the assaults of it. To this purpose we have need both of
Diligence and Confidence. That without this soon languishes and vanishes into
Desperation. This without that grows up into Presumption and foolhardinesse,
and consequently into idleness and carelessness. Both therefore must be
equally nourished.

1 Diligence. For the whetting whereof, consider 1 How terrible an adversary
the devil is, who tempts us to sin. 1 In respect of his power, Ephesians. 6.12. for
which he is compared to a lion, to a strong man armed, etc. 2 In respect of his
subtilty both natural and acquired. This is signified by diverse words in
Scripture, (...) Ephesians. 6.11. (...) 2 Cor. 2.11. (...) Revel. 2.24. For this he
is called The old serpent, Revel. 12.9. a serpent for the subtilty of his
nature, and an old serpent for his so many years experience. 3 In respect of
his vigilance and indefatigablenesse Job 1.7. and 2.2. and 1 Pet. 5.8. To whom
eminently agrees that which Hannibal said of Marcellus; Sive vincat sive
vincatur, semper instaurat pugnam: Whether he give or take the foil, he ever
reinforces the fight. 4 In respect of his cruelty; for which he is compared to
a red dragon, a roaring lion etc. 2 Consider how easily, if we take not the
more diligent heed, we may fall into sin. 1 In respect of the weakness of our
understanding. 2 In respect of the perverseness of our affections. Our
understanding is so weak, that 1 it may be ignorant of many things necessary to
be known, 1 Cor. 13.12. 2 It may know something in general, and yet fail in
the particular application. 3 Both in general and particular, it may know
habitually, and yet not actually consider; as being hindered by multitude of
business, bodily distemper etc. Our affections also are so addicted to be led
by sense rather then by right reason, that there is many times great danger
lest seeing and approving that which is better, yet we embrace and follow that
which is worse, contrary to our knowledge and conscience. 3 Consider how prone
we are to negligence, to put off our arms, and to be lulled asleep with the
pleasures of the flesh. 2 To diligence we must add Confidence. Which we must
not put in our selves, or in any earthly helps, Jer. 17.5. but we must
ex-spectare look out of our selves, and lift up our eyes to God and His
promises, whereby He has given assurance of victory to them who manfully
resist the devil, Jam. 4.7.
2 Doctrine. The LORD pardoned all David's iniquities.
1 The object of this forgiveness was all David's iniquities, that is, Explic.
both Adams sin imputed, and the actual sins committed by himself, as
whereof he had actually repented. 2 The pardoning of sin is all one with not
imputing it to condemnation; or, the freeing a man from the guilt of it, and
consequently from the punishment due upon the guilt. 3 The LORD, that is, the
whole Trinity; seeing it is opus ad extra a work or act of God terminated upon
a thing without Himself. Yet as in the Persons there is an internal natural
order of being one from another, so also there is an order of working from and
by one another even in external and voluntary actions. For as the Father is
from none, the Son from the Father by generation, the Holy Ghost from both by
procession; so the Father creates of Himself by the Son and the Holy Ghost,
the Son from the Father by the Holy Ghost, the Holy Ghost from both. So here
the Holy Ghost making men conformable to the stipulation of the covenant
immediately applies the remission of sins: the Son taking our flesh upon him
merited and procured it: but primarily and in a more special manner this act
is ascribed to the Father, Who dwells in the light that no man can approach to,
sitting continually in the throne of his Majesty, and keeping his authority
whole and entire to Himself without any condescension of his Person; and
therefore the power and right either of justly punishing or graciously
remitting sins does after a more principal manner belong to him


Forgive us our trespasses, as which he knows are all forgiven already. David
was converted long before the business of Urijah. If therefore this opinion
stand good, see to what purpose all that earnestness was Psalm. 51. and what
answer had befitted his petitions. Have mercy upon me. Answ. It is not now to
do, I had mercy on thee long ago (yea before thou stoodest in need of it) for
those very sins. Blot out my trangressions. Answ. They were never upon record,
but pardoned before they were committed. Wash me, purge me, cleanse me. Answ.
No such need; thy sins being forgiven aforehand, have not defiled thee. Deliver
me from bloodguiltinesse. Answ. It was never imputed to thee, etc. See Romans
3.25. This opinion tends directly to take away all care of avoiding sin, and
all repentance for sin committed. For why should any that is thus persuaded, be
afraid to commit any sin whatsoever, or repent of any that he has committed?
Lest he fall into condemnation? There can be no such fear but very foolish, if
a man be sure that all his sins are pardoned aforehand. Neither can he in
common sense fear lest God should be displeased: For if clearly foreseeing all
his sins in their nature, kind, and degree, with all their circumstances, He
fully forgave them all before they were committed; how is it possible, that,
without manifest change of mind, He should be displeased, when any of them are
conmmitted?

But to return to the Doctrine, (...).
That David's sins were forgiven by God, see also Psalm. 32.5.

The principal cause of this forgiveness, (...).
is the Mercy of God, whereby He appointed His Son to be the Mediator, and
made a covenant with Him, the Stipulation whereof see Psalm. 40.6, 7. the
Promise, Isa. 53.10, 11. Then also the Justice of God, which (Christ having
exactly performed the stipulation) requires the performance of the promise,
though made freely and of mere grace. The Apostle seems to comprehend both
together, Romans 3.24, 25, 26.

Uses.
Here then 1 we see that though we all have our sins (as the former Doctrine
put us in mind) yet the case is not desperate, Instr.
There is hope in Israel concerning this thing. It is an Article of our Creed,
I believe the remission of sins.

But then 2 we see also to whom this remission belongs: namely not to such as
go on in their sins without repentance, but to such as David was.

3 Behold the greatness of Gods mercy. For (...) all notes the generality of
the object: and (...) the participle of the present tense notes the
continuation of the act, and that it is ever present as need shall require.

This may be a ground of comfort 1 Against the terrors of conscience.
Consolation.
Thy sins are many, but Gods compassions are far more: those great, but
these infinitely greater.

2 Against death, whose only sting is sin, (1 Cor. 15.56.) which being taken
away, there is nothing in death that can hurt: and a Christian is so far from
fearing it, that he desires and longs for it, as rest from his labors, and the
way to heaven.

3 Against all the afflictions of this world, positive or privative, which
(forgiveness of sins supposed) all work together for our good, Romans 8.28.
etc.



a priore, from that which goes before forgiveness, thus: It is most certain
that God will do whatsoever he has promised, Number. 23.19. For as being most
faithful and simply immutable He neither will nor can change His mind; so
being omniscient He knows, and being omnipotent He is able abundantly to
perform His word. If therefore we would know whether our sins be forgiven;
we must see whether our spirit can witness, that we by the grace of God are of
the number of them, to whom God has in Scripture testified the promise of
forgiveness, Prove. 28.13. Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. Mat. 6.14, 15. and 11.28. Act.
2.38. and 10.43.

The other Note is taken a posteriore, from that which follows forgiveness.
For as there is a great difference in man before and after the forgiveness of
his sins; so the providence of God concerning him is far different. In
temporal goods there is a wide difference: seeing to a sinner they are given
only out of Gods first or general love (whereof a man may taste deeply and yet
never come near the kingdom of heaven; yea the more of this is afforded to
him, if he be not thereby brought to repentance, the greater shall his
condemnation be:) but to him that has obtained remission of sins, they are
given out of Gods second or special love in Christ unto salvation. Yet can not
any Note be taken from hence, Eccles. 9.1, 2. because these things are given
indifferently to the good and bad; yea for the most part wicked men have herein
the greatest share. And for the manner and intent of giving them (wherein the
whole difference is) it can not be known by us, unless we first know that our
sins are forgiven. But in spiritualls the very actions themselves in the
substance of them differ. For sinners by the just judgment of God have their
minds daily more and more blinded, and their hearts hardened: the assistance of
Gods Holy Spirit (whereby infirmities should be helped and temptations
repressed) after long resisting and quenching the motions of it, is more
withdrawn: yea they going on still in notorious sins are at last delivered over
to a reprobate mind and strong delusion, to the lusts of their own hearts and
the power of Satan. But they who have their sins forgiven, though they may
have their relapses sometimes, as David and others had, yet for the general
course of their life they grow in grace; perhaps not sensibly every hour, day
etc. ( Mar. 4.27.) yet so as considering how it is with them now, and how it
was some while ago, it will appear that they are grown. The Holy Spirit more
and more enlightens their eyes, purges their hearts, and makes them fit for
every good work, comforts them in adversity, helps them in temptations etc.

Hence also we have a ground of a double exhortation. Exhort.
1 To seek forgiveness of our sins at Gods hands.

Motive. 1 Without this a man is in a most miserable condition, worse then
never to have been born, as being liable to the wrath of God, to the dominion
of sin and the devil, to all kinds of punishments. 2 On the other side, the
forgiveness of sins has blessedness annexed to it ( Psalm. 32.1.) which
imports the removal of all evil, and the obtaining of all good. 3 None can
forgive sins but God only.

Means. 1 Christ the principal, as Who has satisfied the justice of God, and
so merited and procured forgiveness for such as seek it through Him. His blood
is the fountain of all remission. 2 That we may obtain forgiveness by Christ,
there is required of us 1 Repentance, Mar. 1.4. Luke 3.3. and 24.47. Act. 2.38.
and 3.19. and 5.31. On the contrary they that remain in their sins without
repentance, have no portion in the remission of sins. 2 Faith, Act. 10.43.
For true repentance is never separated from true faith in Christ. Hence the
Apostle so often beats upon Justification by faith. 3 New obedience and
amendment of life; Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. For this cannot be separated either from
true repentance, Mat. 3.8. Act. 3.19. or from true faith, Jam. 2.14.

2 When we have obtained forgiveness, 1 To be thankful to God, Who has most
freely and graciously bestowed so excellent a benefit upon us. Now
thankfulness or thanksgiving is partly internal, partly external 1 Cor.
6.20. The internal proceeds from the understanding acknowledging this infinite
benefit, and the heart fervently loving the Author of it. The external
consists 1 In words, when we seasonably and sincerely praise the benefit and
the Benefactors, as in this Psalm, and Revel. 5.8. etc. 2 In deeds, namely
(seeing we are not able to render any thing to God, which He any way needs, or
which, if good, proceeds not first from Him the Author and giver of all good
things) in referring this benefit to its due end, Luke 1.74, 75. Tit. 2.14.

2 To forgive our brethren, as God has forgiven us, Mat. 18.33. Ephesians. 4.32.
Coloss. 3.13.

Motiv. The argument holds from the greater to the less in many respects.

1 In respect of the object of the forgiveness, our offenses against God, and
our brethrens against us a between which there is no comparison either for
number or weight. 1 For number, the offenses even of the best men are
innumerable. For whereas the Scripture calls some men just, upright, perfect
etc. it speaks of perfection of parts, not degrees; comparatively (in reference
to men not converted, or newly converted) not simply; in respect of some
particular action, not of their whole conversation; evangelically, not legally
etc. Which appears plainly by other evident places of Scripture, 2 Chronicles.
6.36. Eccle. 7.20. Jam. 3.2. 1 John 1.8, 10. Psalm. 40.12. And if this be our
condition, when we are at the best in this life; what is it whilst we are yet
carnal, sold under sin? Romans 7. See Genesis 6.5. Job 15.16. Isa. 5.18. Romans
3.10. to the 19. How few therefore are the offenses of our brethren against us,
if compared with the numberless number of ours against God! 2 For the weight
or greatness of an offense (seeing evil strictly taken is a mere privation,
not a being) it is estimated according to the greatness of the good to which
it is opposite. Our offenses then being against the infinite Majesty of God,
our brethrens against us but against dust and ashes like themselves, what are
these in comparison of those? Surely lighter then vanity, less then nothing.
Which will yet more appear, if we take in all aggravating circumstances;
especially the ingratitude of our sins against God, more then can be imagined
in any offense of one man against another. Our Savior in His Parable, Mat. 18.
sets forth this comparison between our sins against God and our brethrens or
fellow servants offenses against us, both in the number and greatness, under
the similitude of 10000 talents, v. 24. and 100 pence, ver. 28. For greatness,
Talents to pence (one talent containing 6000 pence) For number 10000 to 100.
that is, a hundred to one. Put both together, the proportion of the one above
the other is six hundred thousand fold. Which, though it be a vast disparity,
yet is but a shadow of the truth in the reddition, and comes infinitely short
of it. Now if our offenses against God so far exceed our brethrens offenses
against us, both for number and weight, and yet God so graciously forgives us;
how much more reason is it that we should forgive our brethren?

2 As great a disparity also there is between God and us in respect of power.
God is Omnipotent, able at pleasure to take vengeance upon sinners without
resistance, without any hurt or danger to Himself either by (...) in the
precedent Doctrine. 2 The convenience of it, both in that we all need it, our
sins presupposed (there being no other way to be freed from them) and in that
it abundantly satisfies our need, taking away our sins as clearly as if they
had never been committed. Whereof see more, v. 12. Doctrine. 2. 3 The fountain
from whence it proceeds, Gods infinite love to us, and that of His free grace,
both which are signified by those two [(...) merciful and gracious] in the 8th
verse of this Psalm.

Joh. 3.16. and on the part of Christ Himself freely taking this office upon
Him. 2 Whereas (in regard both of Gods Justice, and of our behoof and benefit)
it was requisite that there should be such an expiation of sin made by Christ;
and that being perfectly made without any help of ours, God might now most
freely, without violation of His Justice or Truth pardon our sins: this
pardon upon that expiation is so far from derogating from the Grace of God or
the freeness of this benefit, that it much more illustrates and amplifies it.

Uses.
For our instruction 1 Here we see to which of all Gods benefits David gives
the precedence, viz. to remission of sins. Instr.
For till a man's sins be forgiven, he is liable to all kinds of miseries, and
(as that which fills up the measure of all) to eternal death. And whatsoever
good things or blessings he receives from God (though such indeed in
themselves) they are turned into curses ( Mal. 2.2.) unless leading him to
repentance they become means of his obtaining forgiveness of sins. On the
other side forgiveness obtained, as it makes way for all other blessings, so
it makes us bear all kind of afflictions patiently, as knowing them to be none
other then fatherly chastisements or trialls, and which shall all work together
for our good.

2 In that David blesses God for the forgiveness of all his sins, we see
there is no sin so small or light, but that it both needs forgiveness, and
being forgiven deserves and requires that we should bless God for it.

Hence are reproved 1 Such as never regard or look after forgiveness of
sins, Repr.
this great and prime benefit for which David gives thanks in the first place:
Nay who are so far from seeking forgiveness of sins past, that they daily heap
up new sins, and wait for occasions and opportunities of sinning, Job 24.15.
Psalm. 10.8, 9, 10. Prove. 1.11. Jer. 20.10. Luke 11.54.

2 Such as happily desire forgiveness of sins, but not upon those terms or
conditions, upon which God has promised it; thinking they may obtain it,
though they walk in the stubbornness of their hearts. Such men the Lord
threatens that He will not pardon [(...)] He will not yield or consent to
pardon, though desired; (for so the word (...) is commonly used) but His anger
and His jealousy shall smoke against them, Deuteronomy. 29.20.

3 Such, who, though they nothing doubt, but think themselves surer then David
of the forgiveness of their sins, yet do not with David show themselves
thankful to God for it. In words happily they will sometimes give Him thanks:
But how little they either value the benefit in their minds, or love the
Benefactour in their hearts, appears by their conversation, and secure
continuance in their sins. Which shows that they either never truly repented
of their sins at all (for true repentance begets the fear of God, Psalm.
130.4. by which men depart from evil, Pro. 16.6. and carfulness to avoid sin
for the future, 2 Cor. 7.11.) or that they are again returned with the dog to
their vomit, and with the sow to their wallowing in the mire: whose latter end
(unless they timely beware) will be worse then their beginning.

But let us imitate David in a true, hearty, Exhort.
and real thankfulness to God for the forgiveness of our sins; and to that
end enlarge our meditations upon the reasons before mentioned, which will be
strong Motives to excite us hereunto.

We have seen the first part of David's spiritual deliverance, namely from the
guilt of sin by Justification or remission [Who forgiveth all thy sins.] The
2d follows [Who heals all thy diseases.] Wherein also three things are in
like manner to be considered in the three following Axioms or Doctrines.

4. Doctrine. David had his diseases.
(...) thy diseases.] This word, Expl.
as also (...) and (...) and the verb (...) whereof they come, properly
signify the diseases of the body: but by Metaphor they are transferred
sometimes to the body politic, Isa. 1.5. sometimes to the soul, signifying
the distempers of it, either penal, Prove. 13.12. or sinful, Eccle. 6.2.
(where he speaks of sordid covetousness or tenaciousnesse.) In this place the
word seems to be taken not in the proper sense for the diseases of the body
(which are rather intimated in the beginning of the next verse among the causes
of bodily death or destruction) but in the metaphorical for the diseases of
the soul, namely sinful corruptions, whether inclinations or habits. For the
healing of these being a great benefit of God (and indeed greater then
forgiveness, as sin is worse then damnation) therefore it is not probable
that David, reckoning up particularly the causes of his thankfulness, would
pass this over in silence, and insist twice upon another far less then it.
(...).


That David's soul had such diseases appears in the Text (in like manner as
was said of his actual sins in the 1 Doctrine of this verse) both by the
pronown affixt, and by the act of God exercised about them. So Psalm. 41.4. And
it is further evident by the history of his life, by his own confessions and
complaints in this book of Psalms, and by those very actual iniquities before
mentioned, which are the effects of these diseases. So for the general, Prove.
20.9. (...).


For 1 Adams sin is according to the tenor of the first covenant imputed to
all that are naturally propagated from him: whereupon being deprived of
original justice and wisdom, we become blind in our minds and perverse in
our hearts, and so sold under sin, that till we be in some measure freed by
the grace of God, we cannot but do viciously, and daily contract and strengthen
ill habits, Joh. 15.5. 2 Cor. 3.5.

2 Although believers (having the Son, Joh. 8.36. and the Spirit, 2 Cor.
3.17.) are freed as from the guilt of sins past, so also from the dominion of
sin: yet the flesh still lusts against the Spirit, and there remain still in
them to be further mortified (...) those earthly members, Coloss. 3.5.

Uses.
Here then we see 1 How miserable our condition is in this life. Instr.
How many troubles and dangers our bodies are subject to by diseases etc. we
are not ignorant. The soul also has her diseases too, and those sinful
diseases (the tympany of pride, the burning fever of filthy lust, the dropsy
of covetousness, the consumption of envy etc.) which as they are in number not
inferior to those of the body, so in their nature they are far more
dangerous. The diseases of the body tend only to the death of the body, which
of it self must necessarily die, and by the power of God shall most certainly
rise again; but the diseases of the soul tend to the eternal death and
destruction both of body and soul.

2 That those places of Scripture, where the faithful are said to be dead unto
sin, buried with Christ, to have the world crucified unto them, and
themselves unto the world etc. are to be understood not according to rigor,
but according to the (...) or equity of the Gospel. Repr.


Here come to be reproved 1 Such as are not sensible of the diseases of their
souls; like men who having their brain distempered by some hot and violent
disease, know not that they are ill, when they are even hard at deaths door,
but sometimes rail at the physician, sometimes are merry and laugh, whilst
their friends stand about them with tears in their eyes. But here is the
difference, that these men's ignorance of their disease is invincible, they can
not help it: but those we speak of, are ignorant of their estate either
affectedly, or of extreme negligence, which can neither excuse nor be excused.
For if they would examine themselves by the Scriptures (as they might and ought
to do) they would easily discern, if not straightway all, yet many of their
diseases, and the rest by degrees. Which because they do not, their condition
is far worse then theirs, to whom we liken them; not only because the death
and destruction of the soul, whereof they are in danger, is far worse then
that of the body, but also because they are in more danger of it. For they who
are bodily sick, by how much the less sensible they are of their disease
themselves, have their friends so much the more solicitous for them: and the
physic which is administered to them, (though they desire it not, neither
perceive when they take it) working by the natural virtue which God has put
into herbs etc. may restore them to their health. But they who are spiritually
sick and yet wilfully refuse to know or acknowledge it, can not whilst they so
continue, receive any good by spiritual physic, neither will Christ the great
Physician of souls take in hand to cure them, Luke 5.30, 31, 32.

2 Such as daily cast their souls into new diseases. There are two principal
means of preserving health and preventing diseases, Diet and Exercise. But for
the former (as it is Hos. 12.1.) many so feed themselves with vain and impious
principles not only speculative but practical, that thereby the mind and
heart and whole man fall into sundry and great distempers. Some eat the bread
of wickedness and drink the wine of violence, Prove. 1.17, 18, 19. and 4.17.
Some eat the bread of deceit, which is sweet at the first tasting, but
afterward fills the mouth with gravel, Prove. 20.17. Some swallow down riches
ill gotten, which prove the gall of aspes within them, Job 20.14, 15. Some by
oppression swallow up the needy, Amos 8.4. And is it any wonder, if such diet
breed diseases? So for Exercise, many giving themselves to spiritual idleness
altogether neglect the exercises of piety; and so both of themselves contract
abundance of ill humors, and also give the devil opportunity to infect their
souls with his temptations, yea tempt him to it. Standing waters putrify,
breed frogs, noisome vermin etc.

Again this doctrine as it informs us of our misery, Consol.
so it ministers unto us some comfort. I Against the trouble which arises from
the sense of these diseases. For as the diseases themselves are common, less
or more, to all Gods children in this life, so the sense and trouble arising
thereupon is a good both sign and cause of amendment. We may and ought, whilst
we live here, to be daily gathering strength against these diseases: but
perfect and uninterrupted health is to be expected only in heaven.

2 Against the imperfection of our good works, if grieving for what is wanting
in them we seriously and diligently endeavor to grow in grace, and holiness.
He were a cruel master that should require the same work of a sick, which he
does of a sound servant. The Father of mercies (Who knows our mold and temper,
how weak and sickly our souls are) does not expect from us a conversation so
every way perfect in all points, as He did from Adam in the first covenant: but
if He sees us truly sorry for our imperfections, and daily to our power
endeavoring toward greater perfection, He accepts of our endeavors in
Christ, and pardons what is wanting.

Two things we are here to be exhorted to. Exhort.
1 To withstand these diseases as much as may be, both by way of prevention,
and by way of remedy.

Motiv. 1. From the worth and price of the soul the subject of these diseases.
2 From the great and imminent danger wherein it is by reason of them. 3 From
the difficulty of overcoming them. 4 From the possibility (notwithstanding) of
doing it in some competent measure by the power of Gods grace.

Means. 1 Withdraw whatsoever may nourish or foster these diseases. 2 Feed
upon the sincere milk and solid meat of Gods word, and exercise the graces of
His Holy Spirit.

2 To search diligently what diseases we have.

Motiv. 1 It is too certain we have our diseases, we shall not seek a knot in a
bulrush. 2 Unless we know them, we cannot be healed of them; as we heard
before Repr. 1. 3 The sense of them will humble us, will excite us diligently
to seek after the means of health, will make us more ready to pity and help
others.

Means. 1 Consider out of Gods word what is required to the health of the
soul. 2 Examine our selves according thereunto.

5 Doctrine. The LORD healed all David's diseases.
Here we have three things to be explained. Expl.


1 Wherein this healing consists. As before it was said of diseases, so (there
being the same reason of contraries) healing also [(...)] bath for its proper
subject the body natural ill affected by some disease or wound; but by
Metaphor it may be transferred to other things also. For as in the proper sense
he is said to heal, who takes away that which hinders the health of the body
so in the metaphorical, he who takes away from any thing that which hinders
the well being of it. So 2 King. 2.21, 22. Psalm. 60.2. And thus it is often
transferred to the soul: though here the similitude holds not in every point.
For in the body, nature being freed from the noxious humor does of it self
breed good blood, and supply it to the repairing the strength of the whole
impaired by the disease. But in the soul after lapse, there is no power to any
saving good.

2 How this healing is wrought: Namely by the Spirit of God using the Word and
Sacraments. It is the work of the Spirit of God, Who is therefore called Holy,
because He sanctifies the faithful, and this work of healing is a part of
sanctification. But the Spirit does not effect this without us, Romans 8.13. That
therefore we may be fitted for this work, the Spirit uses the word, which is
compared to a medicine, Prove. 4.20, 21, 22. 1 Timothy 6.3. The Spirit therefore by
the word and with the word 1 shows us our diseases. 2 moves the will to seek
to be healed, by disswasives from remaining under the dominion of sin, and
perswasives to holiness. 3 directs the action. It uses also the Sacraments,
by which we are united unto Christ, (Baptism for initiation, the Eucharist for
progress) and so we are gathered (as sometimes He would have gathered the
children of Jerusalem) under his wings, wherein is healing, Mal. 4.2. Yea the
Sacraments, sealing the great benefits of God to us, and our duty toward Him,
do both encourage us to seek healing, and afford most effectual arguments to
move us to it.

3 How far. In all that truly repent and believe, God heales all diseases,
but not straightway perfectly, nor in all equally, but by different degrees.
For the Scripture makes 3 distinct degrees of believers. 1 Beginners, who are
called Children using milk, Hebr. 5.12, 13. 2 Proficients, Ephesians. 4.14, 15. 3
Perfect or strong men, Romans 15.1. But in all true believers this healing is so
far made, as to take away the dominion of sin, and that it may not hinder
their salvation; and in none perfectly or in every point in this life. The word
in the Text is [(...) Who is healing] God so heales the diseases of our souls
here, that He is still healing them more and more. Perfect health is not to be
enjoyed but in heaven.

In this sense God is said to heal his people, (...).
2 Chronicles. 30.20. And in the same sense in proper terms he is often called The
Sanctifier of his people.

For God, (...).
and God only has 1 perfect knowledge of all our diseases. 2 Power or ability
to cure them, as being Omnipotent, and so nothing hard to Him. 3 Liberty and
authority, His justice saved; which Christ by His obedience and death has so
far satisfied, that it not only permits, but (upon the Covenant between Him
and the Father) requires that all that believe in Him should be healed. 4 Will,
as in this particular of David desiring his cheerful obedience in his general
calling, and specially in the administration of the Kingdom, and thereupon
David's salvation. His own glory.


So in every man according to his calling.

Uses.
We see then 1 That the diseases of the soul, Instr.
though dangerous, yet are not incurable.

2 That they, who are qualifyed as David was, have their diseases healed. For
there never are, nor can be any such but that God always Omnipotent is able to
heal them; and there is no respect of persons with Him.

3 That this healing is to be sought of God.

This reproves 1 Such who enjoying greater means then David had, Repr.
yet are not healed. 1 Not of all their diseases. Of some perhaps they are
willing to be cured (as Herod) it may be out of some kind of conscience toward
God. But this they do only for fear of punishment; or that they may have
something wherewith to stop the mouth of their conscience, that so they may the
more sweetly sleep in their other sins; or because they are not so addicted
to these sins, and therefore better contented to part with them etc. But
whatever the cause be, it is evident they do it not out of a sincere
conscience: for then they would endeavor to have all healed, and those most
especially, whereof they are most sick. 2 Not of gross and foul diseases. 3
Not of any at all. 4 Who are so far from being healed, that they grow every
day more and more diseased.

2 Such as do not seek healing of God in due manner, that is, not diligently
using the means by God thereunto appointed. 2 Not at all, but passing Him by
rely upon other means, which cannot help them. 3 Who are so far from seeking
to be healed of God, that they daily more and more provoke Him.

3 Such as are herein altogether unlike to God. 1 Negatively, who regard not to
heal their brethrens diseases, but say, as the Priests and Elders to Judas,
Mat. 27.4. What is that to us? See thou to it. 2 Positively, who hinder their
healing, or also increase their diseases.

Let this exhort us to seek the healing of our diseases, and to seek it at Gods
hands. Exhort.


Motiv. For the thing it self. 1 These diseases are deadly to the soul, Romans
8.13. give strength and sting to the diseases and death of the body, and to all
afflictions; and whilst they continue in their vigor, make us unfit for any
good, prone to sin etc. 2 They being healed, we become temples of the Holy
Ghost, fit and cheerful to serve God, to work out our own salvation, to help
others etc.

For the seeking it only at Gods hands. 1 There are some diseases of the soul,
which none but God (no not the sick man himself) can discover or find out,
Psalm. 19.12. 2 None but He can cure any disease of the soul at all. 3 He can
sufficiently cure all: As before in the (...).

Means. See Explicat. 2.

6 Doctrine. David mentions this as an argument of blessing God.
So Psalm. 30.1, 2, 3. (...).


For 1 He knew 1 That this was a benefit worthy of all gratitude. (...)
2 That it was from God. 3 That it was a part of his duty (to which he was
bound necessitate praecepti) to bless God for it. 4 That it would be a means
both to continue and perfect the cure in himself, and to encourage others to
seek it where he had found it.

2 As he knew all this, so being a good man, desirous to perform his duty and
to promote the spiritual good both of himself and others, he would not detein
the truth in unrighteousness, but act according to his knowledge.

Uses.
Here we see 1 That a man may with David know that his diseases are healed;
Instr.
namely, if with him he valiantly resist sin, and diligently work that which
is good.

2 That a good man is of a grateful disposition, ever mindful of and
thankful for benefits received.

3 See Doctr. 3. Instr. 2.

This reproves 1 Scrupulous men, Repr.
who, though the word of God teach them that their diseases are healed, yet
will not believe it, and so vex themselves without cause, and are wanting to
this duty of being thankful to God for it.

2 Such as are too negligent of this duty. Some happily for fashions sake will
give shanks for their meat and drink, but scarce for any other blessing or
deliverance. Some perhaps for temporal, but not for spiritual blessings, as
the healing the diseases of their souls etc. So in respect of the acts, some
give thanks in words, but not in deeds; and so not with the heart, which has
command of the whole man, nor with the mind, or else they detain the truth in
unrighteousness. Lastly, in respect of the intensnesse of the acts, some do
it, but coldly, faintly, carelessly; not diligently, fervently, with all the
heart, with all the soul, with all the mind, and with all the strength.

3 Such as do not think this healing to be a benefit, (and so neither a cause
of thankfulness) as being in love with their diseases. And therefore neither
do they desire it at all, but on the contrary when God by His ministers offers
to heal them, they are angry and murmr at them, and return injuries in stead
of thanks.

4 Such as give thanks for the strengthening of their diseases, 1 Samuel 23.21.
Zech. 11.5.

The Exhortation arising from hence is, Exh.
that we should imitate David herein.

Motives. See the (...).

Verse. 4. Who redeemeth thy life from destruction: Who crowns thee with
loving-kindnesse and tender-mercies.
We have seen David's deliverance from the evil of sin, viz. both from the
guilt. dominion.
There remains his deliverance from the evil of punishment, in the former part
of this 4th verse. Wherein we have 3 Axioms or Doctrines.

1 Doctrine. David's life was in danger of destruction.
(...) signifies corruption or destruction: Explic.
Also the pit, the place of corruption, or, which receives them that are
destroyed. Now seeing destruction is either temporal or eternal, and so the
pit or place of destruction either the grave or hell; there is nothing hinders
but that all these may be here understood. Yea the scope of David, being to set
forth the greatness of Gods deliverances, may seem to require that the word be
taken in its greatest latitude: namely, that David was in danger both of bodily
death (viz. untimely death) and so of the grave; and likewise of eternal
death, and so of hell.

For bodily death, and so for the grave, (...).
how often he was in danger of it, the history of his life abundantly
testifies. See 1 Samuel 20.3. There is but a step between me and death. And Psalm.
119.109. My soul (or my life) is continually in mine hand: Which phrase notes
great danger of death, Judge. 12.3. 1 Samuel 19.5. and 28.21. Job 13.14. For
eternal death, and so for hell, his danger appears by his fears and agonies
frequently expressed in this book of Psalms; which (considering his valiant
and undaunted courage) would never have been so great, had the cause or object
of them been only bodily death.

And it is yet more evident from the causes. (...).
Of temporal death he was many ways in danger. Whilst he lived a private
life; by the bear and lion which he encountered; by Goliath (so terrible to the
whole Army of Israel) with whom he entered a single combat; by the envy of Saul
etc. After he was come to the kingdom; by many foreign enemies, with whom he
had continual wars (more particularly see 2 Samuel 21.15, 16.) by comesticall
treasons and rebellions, of Abner and the house of Saul, of Absalorn and
Achitophel (whose desperate counsel see 2 Samuel 17.1, 2, 3.) of Sheba, 2 Samuel
20. Of eternal death he was in danger by reason of his sins: For this death
especially is the wages of sin, Romans 6.23.

And what is here said of David, is for the same or the like reasons true of
men in general We are all both many ways subject to danger of untimely bodily
death (as dwelling in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which
are crushed before the moth, Job 4.19.) and by our sins liable to Gods wrath,
and thereby to eternal death both of body and soul, Romans 3.19.

Uses.
The consideration of both may afford us several instructions. Instr.
1 For bodily death, 1 If we be so many ways in danger of it before our time,
we may take it the more patiently and contentedly either in our selves or our
friends, when it comes in its full time, in a ripe age, in an ordinary course
of nature: which is elegantly expressed, and promised as the complement of all
Gods temporal blessings, Job 5.26. (...). Zenob. 2 Hereby we see how little
reason we have to set our hearts upon outward things, which the Apostle calls
(...), the things pertaining to this life, 1 Cor. 6.3, 4. For 1 the life, which
is the foundation of enjoying them, is (as we see here) very casual, and
uncertain. 2 The things themselves are yet more casual, more uncertain then
the life to which they pertain; both because a man is less careful of them,
( Job 2.4. Prove. 13.8.) and because Gods providence also is less watchful
over them. For although God being always every where present has a continual
inspection upon all things, and so far as he sees expedient preserves them, (
Psalm. 36.6. Heb. 1.3.) yet His providence has its degrees, as being more
intensely exercised about things of more worth, 1 Cor. 9.9. Now of all outward
things food and raiment are the principal, and most necessary; and yet the
life is more worth then these, Mat. 6.25. And therefore Job 1.12. though God
gave the devil power over all that Job had, yet he restrained him from touching
his person. And chap. 2.6. when he extended his power to his person also yet he
excepted his life. If therefore our life (which both Gods providence and our
own especially tenders) be yet liable to dangers, how much more the things
which pertain to it? And how vain a thing then is it to set our hearts upon
them!

2 For eternal death, if David and all men be by sin liable to it, then
there is no respect of persons with God, Romans 5.12, 18. We being all fallen in
Adam are alike become the children of wrath and liable to eternal death. Only
therefore the grace of God in Christ exempting out of the common mass those
who obey him, makes a difference between man and man.

And if we be all in danger both of temporal and eternal death, Repr.
what a strange lethargy possesses their souls, who so live as if they were
liable to neither of both! whose deeds declare that they do not believe, or at
least that they do not think of either! Were it not for bonds, indentures etc.
a man might well think they never dreamed of death. There indeed upon supposall
and fear of their own death they will put in heirs, executors, and
administrators, make many provisos in behalf of posterity. But they lay their
worldly projects for one, seven, ten, twenty years, without once looking
after any proviso for their own eternal security, if death happen in the mean
time. Kind hearts! that are so much more careful of the outward estate of
their children, then of the eternal welfare of their own souls. But will
neither the remembrance of all their ancestors dead before them, nor the daily
examples of mortality, nor so many clear testimonies of Scripture that all must
die, nor that Statute of the immutable and omnipotent God ( Heb. 9.27.) any
thing at all move them? The reason, sure, is that which the Philosopher
touches, Rhet. lib. 2. cap. 5. (...). All men know they must die; but because
it is not near, they regard it not. Or, that which Thomas says, Plerique non
timent mortem, quia apprehendunt sub remota distantia. Most men fear not
death, because they apprehend it as at a remote distance. And for the same
reason they much less fear what may come after death.

But let us make it our continual meditation. Exhort.
1 Of bodily death: to which we are so liable, that there is no possibility of
avoiding it; and for the time, as we know it cannot be far off, so we know
not how near it may be. This meditation will be of excellent use, 1 For the
taking down of our pride (the worst of evils) what ever the ground of it be:
whether we be proud of the goods of the mind ( Psalm. 146.4.) or of the goods of
the body, strength, beauty etc. ( Job 21.23, 24, 25, 26.) or of our kindred (
Job. 17.14.) or of outward things, riches, honors etc. ( Psalm. 49.16, 17.) 2
For the moderating our desires of earthly things, as which can neither keep off
death nor continue with us after death. 3 For the bridling our unruly passions,
anger, envy, impatience, whether at our own or our friends sufferings, or at
the prosperity of Gods and our enemies ( Psalm. 37. and 73.)

2 Of eternal death: which, though it be far worse, yet is avoidable. And
the meditation of it will be both a Motive and a Means to us to avoid it, by
hastening our repentance and taking heed of sin for the future. To this
purpose is that redoubled admonition of our Savior to His friends, Luke 12.5.
Fear Him, Who, after He has killed, has power to cast into hell: yea, I say
unto you, Fear Him.

2 Doctrine. The Lord redeemed David's life from destruction.
(...) Who redeemeth.] Expl.
This word signifies 1 To preserve a thing which otherwise would be lost,
Levit. 27.27. Lam. 3.58. 2 To recover a thing that is lost, and that either by
price, Levit. 25.25. power, Ex. 6.6. Psalm 77.15.


Here understand it the first way, viz. the preserving David's life, which
otherwise would have been lost.

This David often acknowledges. In general, (...)
Psalm. 19.14. In special for temporal death, 2 Samuel 4.9. for eternal death,
Psalm. 71.23. So Nathan tells him, 2 Samuel 12.13.

For the Reason hereof, (...).
though the first cause of all Gods benefits be that which is mentioned in the
latter part of this verse, His own loving-kindnesse and tender-mercies, and the
last end His own glory: yet among the benefits themselves also there may be a
subordination, so that one benefit may be the cause or end of another. So here,
God out of His free love to David and to His people Israel, and for His own
glory and their good, had decreed from all eternity to set him as king over
them, and for a testimony thereof had commanded Samuel to anoint him, 1 Samuel
16. In order therefore hereunto, and that the immutability of His counsel and
the truth of His promise might appear, He redeemed or preserved David's life
from temporal death, both whilst he was yet a private man, that He might
bring him to the kingdom, and after he was king, that he might go through
with the administration of it to the ends before mentioned.

For eternal death, his preservation from it necessarily follows upon his
deliverance from the guilt and dominion of sin, verse. 3. And therefore that
deliverance is the immediate cause of this, and the causes of that do mediately
and by necessary consequence infer this.

Uses.
Our instructions from hence may be 1 Concerning temporal death. Instr.
1 We see what it is to walk under Divine protection. How many and how great
dangers David's life was liable to, we heard before: yet out of them all the
Lord delivered him. Of this David was thoroughly sensible, Psalm. 23.4. and could
say experimentally of himself in particular what he says of the righteous in
general, Psalm. 34.19. 2 We see also who they are that may expect this
protection from Almighty God; viz. not such as wander in the bypath of sin,
provoking God continually to His face (Such men indeed God sometimes delivers
from many dangers: but 1 they have no promise from God, whereupon they may rely
to expect it. 2 Though such deliverance be in it self good, and by God intended
for their good, yet if they go on in their sins, it will through their own
fault prove very ill to them, as giving them time to heap up more sins, and
so more wrath against the day of wrath) but such as are like unto David, who
serve God and trust in Him: who though they have not such special promises for
this as David had, yet they have Gods general promises, Psalm. 84.11. and
33.18, 19. etc. Whereupon they may expect protection from temporal death so
far as is expedient for them, that is, so far as that death would be truly
hurtful to them.

2 Concerning eternal death, we see 1 The great mercy of God, not willing to
deal with mankind; fallen into sin, according to the rigor of His justice,
but finding out a way whereby we may be delivered from it, 2 To whom this
deliverance belongs, viz. to David, and by the like reason to all that observe
the condition of the covenant. For in this David had no special promise, nor
any other then what all true believers in like manner have.

Here are reproved 1 In respect of bodily death 1 Such as presume to be
delivered from it, Repr.
when yet by their own deeds they call it unto themselves; as by immoderate
worldly sorrow 2 Cor. 7.10. by envy Job 5.2. Prove. 14.30. by drunkenness Prove.
23.29. etc. In like manner by gluttony, idleness, quarrelling, unwarrantable
venturing upon dangers etc. 2 Such as do not trust or seek to God for
deliverance from it, but to secondary means whether in themselves lawful (as
Asa 2 Chronicles. 16.12.) or unlawful.

2 In respect of eternal death, 1 Such as expect of God deliverance from it,
but presumptuously, as being nothing less then such as David here was. 2 Such
as expect it otherwise then from God.

Two things we are here to be exhorted to. Exhort.
1 In respect of our selves, To flee unto God for protection from both kinds of
death.

Motiv. 1 In respect of the objectum quod, the deliverance it self which we
seek. 1 We stand in great need of it, in regard of the many dangers both bodily
and spiritual, to which we are liable. 2 The good or benefit of it is as
great; whereof something shall be said in the Reason of the next Doctrine. 2 In
respect of the objectum per quod, the means whereby we must be delivered. 1 No
creature can do it but as Gods instrument. 2 God, even without the help of any
creature, is able to do it. 3 If we rightly seek to Him, He will most readily
deliver us both from temporal death, so far as shall be expedient, and from
eternal death simply and absolutely.

Means. That we may rightly expect any thing from God, it is required of us, 1
That we be such as by the tenor of the covenant have part in Gods promises. 2
That we diligently do those things which on our part are to be done in order
thereunto, viz. dispose our affairs providently ( Genesis 32.7.) recommend our
selves to God by prayer, fasting etc. 3 That we seek Gods deliverances (as all
His other benefits) in their due manner and order; that is, spiritual and
eternal things chiefly and absolutely, temporal things moderately and with
submission to Gods will.

2 In respect of others, To procure their deliverance as much as in us lies;
that so we may be like unto God, and according to our ability promote his work.
Not that He, Who is omnipotent, stands in need of our help, but that He
requires of us to love our brethren, and by this means to testify our love. We
must therefore endeavor to deliver them 1 From bodily or temporal death. For
if he who is in danger of it, be a good man he is dear to God, Mal. 3.17. 1
Pet. 2.9. and God tenders him as the apple of His own eye. Therefore our
concurrence herein will be acceptable to God, and honorable to our selves:
also profitable unto others, whom a good man, whilst he lives here, is
continually exciting to glorify God, both by his example, Mat. 5.16. and by
his godly exhortations etc. and besides is beneficial to them in temporal
things also, by his prayers and other endeavors keeping off evils and
procuring good things, Genesis 18.23, etc. and 19.21, 29. Jer. 5.1. 2 King. 3.14,
15, 16, 17, 18. Psalm. 106.23. But if he be a wicked man, his loss of this life
is the loss of eternal life; whereas if his life here were longer continued,
he might happily come to repentance and so to eternal life. (See Eccle. 9.4.) To
omit the good, which such a man being converted might do before his death, as
S. Paul etc. 2 From eternal death. Motiv. 1 From the horriblenesse of it, and
irrecoverablenesse from it. 2 From the danger of falling into it, in regard of
the multitude of sins and enemies. 3 From the possibility, and
(comparatively) the facility of the means of preventing it.

3 Doctrine. David mentions this as an argument of blessing God.
So he does his deliverance from bodily death, (...).
Psalm. 18. the whole Psalm being composed for that purpose, as appears by the
Title, So Hezekiah blesses God for delivering him from his sickness, which
was the messenger of death, Isa. 38.9. etc. David also exhorts others to do the
like, Psalm. 107. where mentioning diverse deliverances (from hunger, thirst,
imprisonment, sickness, shipwreck) at the end of every member he adds these
words, Oh that men would therefore praise the LORD etc. For his deliverance
from eternal death he does it Psalm. 51.14, 15. and 71.23. So Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 1. whereas he had been a blasphemer, a persecuter, and injurious (by which
sins he had deserved eternal death) and yet had obtained mercy, ver. 13, 14,
15, 16. he praises God for it, ver. 17. So he exhorts the Colossians chap. 1.
verse. 12, 13.

The Reasons mentioned in the former benefits may be applied to this also. viz.
(...).
1 He knew 1 That this redemption was fit matter of gratitude. 1 For the
greatness of the benefit. Deliverance from untimely death of the body is of
great moment, whether a man be godly or wicked. Gods promise of it ( Exodus
20.12. and 23.26. Zech. 8.4. and elsewhere) proves it to be a great blessing to
the godly. God has set the mark of honor upon old age, Levit. 19.32. Prove.
16.31. and 20.29. Hence Saint Paul to Philemon styles himself Paul the aged,
verse. 9. And when ancient men are dishonored (especially by young men) it is
noted as a great ataxie or disorder, Isa. 3.5. Lam. 5.12. Lastly, with the
ancient is wisdom, and in length of days is understanding, Job 12.12. Hence
old men are wont to be taken into counsel. The seventy that were joined in
assistance to Moses, were (...) of the Elders of Israel, Number. 11.16. So amongst
the Egyptians. Psalm. 105.22. So the (...) of the Lacedaemonians, and the Senatus
of the Romans. And we know what happened to Rehoboam, when forsaking the old
men's counsel he followed that of the young men, 1 Kin. 12. The reason why old
men get wisdom, is, because their long life both affords them much time to
learn, and has experience as a most certain guide. And that their wisdom
may not be idle and speculative only, they are freed from many lusts, and
passions wherewith young men are usually troubled (whence David, Psalm. 25.7.
mentions the sins of his youth, and Saint Paul admonishes Timothy to flee
youthful lusts, 2 Timothy 2.22.) and so may the more easily apply themselves to
the practice of wisdom, for the glory of God, the adorning their profession,
and the furthering their own accounts, Psalm. 92.13, 14. On the other side, if a
man be yet wicked, and in the state of sin, a speedy death throws him headlong
into hell, whereas long life affords him time to repent. Whether therefore a
man be godly or wicked, deliverance from untimely death is in it self a great
blessing. But deliverance from eternal death is so great an one as can not be
expressed or imagined, whether we consider the greatness of the evil escaped,
or of the good obtained. 2 For the convenience, yea necessity. How obnoxious
David was both to temporal and eternal destruction, was showed before in the
first Doctrine of this verse; whereupon in respect of himself he stood in need
of redemption from both. But besides, the state of the Kingdom and Church,
miserably afflicted under the wicked and unhappy government of Saul, greatly
needed the prolonging of David's life to restore it again.

2 He knew also that his redemption from both these destructions was from God,
and that of His love. free grace.


3 That to be grateful to God for it was his duty, and a duty both in it self
most excellent, and to God most acceptable.

2 Being a man according to Gods heart, he would not detain the truth in
unrighteousness, but cheerfully perform that which he knew for so many and so
great causes ought to be performed.

Uses.
Here (beside the general instructions touched before, Instr.
verse. 3. mutatis mutandis) 1 we see what just ground we have to pray, as we do
in our public Letany, against sudden death. That a long life (whereby death
comes upon us not suddenly and unexpectedly, but maturely and according to the
ordinary course of nature) may lawfully (with submission to Gods will) be
desired, abundantly appears by what has been said in the Reason of this
Doctrine, and sufficiently by this act of David here. For thanksgiving rightly
ordered (as we must suppose it here to be) always implies the cause of it to
be some benefit or good thing; which therefore being absent may lawfully at
least be desired.

2 It is clear, that our deliverance from eternal destruction, much more our
eternal happiness in heaven, is of Gods free grace, not of the merit of our
works (which is opposed to grace, Romans 11.6.) for there is no thanks due but
for a benefit freely bestowed, Luke 17.9.

Here are reproved 1 They that are unthankful to God for their redemption or
reprive from bodily death. Repr.
Such must they needs be, who do not acknowledge it to be received from God:
for the first degree of gratitude, is to acknowledge the benefactour. But much
more unthankful are they, who, when God has delivered them from any
sickness, employ their recovered health and strength to sin against Him.
Such men show plainly that they think their life serves only for the
satisfying of their lusts, as if they were born for none other end but to
sin: and therefore having been hindered in their business by sickness, as
soon as they are recovered, they double their diligence for the regaining that
time. And this is still so much the worse, when done after promises and vows
of amendment. Oh what saints do some men seem upon their sick beds, when they
think themselves in danger of death! How do they blame their former courses!
What promises do they make for the future, if God shall restore them to health!
But being recovered, no such matter appears. With the dog they return to their
vomit: the courses, which they so disliked in their sickness, they rush into
again, as the horse into the battle. Against the amendment then promised they
bear an aversation, in respect of their lusts anew urging them to their old
courses, and of their companions, who would hate them, if reformed. Such
persons little consider with Whom they have to do; having never heard, or not
regarded, that Galat. 6.7. God is not mocked. He knows whether people be like
those Hos. 7.14. who cried not unto God with their hearts, when they howled
upon their beds etc. High time it is then for such to recount what vows they
have made in their distress, and speedily to go about the performance of them.
Otherwise let them make account to bear the punishment not only of
unthankfulness, as the former, but moreover of breaking vows; and those not
of things indifferent (which yet God will strictly require) but either the same
with, or branches of their vows formerly made in Baptism. When thou vowest a
vow unto God, defer not to pay it, Dent. 23.21. Eccles. 5.4. Not only Deny
not, or Forget not, or Omit not; but (...) Defer not, Slack not, Put not off
till afterward. For if thou do, remember that God can every moment bring
thee into the like or greater danger: And then with what faee can thou look
up unto Him again, with Whom thou have before dealt so perfidiously? See Job
27.8, 9, 10.

2 They who so live, that they can not give thanks to God for redeeming them
from eternal destruction; seeing they will not be redeemed from it. But are
there any such? Answ. It is incredible indeed that any man, if so be he believe
there is any such destruction, should simply be unwilling to be redeemed from
it. But we must distinguish of the act of willing, which is either efficacious.
inefficacious.
Essicaciously to will redemption from eternal destruction they only can be
said, who diligently frame themselves according to the prescript of the
Gospel, truly repenting of their sins, fleeing to Christ the Redeemer by
true faith, and for the time to come ceasing to do evil, and learning to do
well. Thus wicked men are not willing to be redeemed, and therefore not
efficaciously. It remains therefore, that, if they will it at all it is but
inefficaciously: which kind of willing is called velleity, or woulding rather
then true willing. Which as it is always vain, so here it is also foolish and
impious. For seeing that impenitent sinning and eternal destruction are
inseparably linked together by God, as the Scripture every where testifies; how
foolishly do impenitent sinners will to be redeemed from eternal destruction!
Yea how impiously! For what else do they will, but that God, Who is infinitely
and necessarily faithful, should break the new covenant established in the
blood of his Son, and confirmed in the promises and threatenings thereof by
his oath, and so should become not only a liar, but perjured? Such kind of
willing God so makes no account of, that judging not according to men's foolish
thoughts, but according to the truth of the thing, he plainly says that such
men will to die, Ezekiel. 18.31. Doubtless according to their own opinion they do
not will eternal death: but yet continuing in their sins, they do by
consequence, in the causes altogether necessary, most truly will it. See Prove.
8.36. and 21.6. and 18.6. and 17.19.

But let us imitate David. Exhort.
Motives, see the (...).

We have seen the privative benefits, viz. Deliverances from evil both of sin
and punishment. Come we now to the positive, The conferring of good things: And
first in general both spiritual and temporal are comprehended in the latter
part of this 4th verse.

4 Doctrine. The LORD crowned David with loving-kindnesse, and tender-mercies.
1 (...) loving-kindnesse.] Explic.
This word properly signifies goodness, or, an affection of doing good any
way, and so is often joined with (...). By a Metonymie of the Efficient it is
put for the effect thereof, viz. the benefit it self, or the good deed done, as
Genesis 20.13. 2 Samuel 2.5, 6. (and so often joined with (...)) and in the plural
number almost perpetually, as 2 Chronicles. 32.32. Nehem. 13.14. Genesis 32.10. Psalm.
106.7. Now these effects have reference to all kinds of good, as well privative
(in deliverance from evil, whether of sin or punishment) as positive; as may
appear by the several places where the word is used. But one may suffice for
all, viz. Psalm. 136. where this word is 26 times used, in reference sometimes
to positive, sometimes to privative benefits. Now though David in this Psalm
gives thanks to God for both sorts of benefits; yet having spoken of the
privative particularly vors. 3. and in the former part of this verse, this
lanter seems rather specially to intend the positive, and so the word (...)
here to be restrained to them.

2 (...) tender-mercies.] The verb (...) is once used in the Kal. viz. Psol.
18.1 signifying to love, not simply and absolutely (...) largely. And so the
sense is, That God had given him not only some few, but very many blessings,
as it were compassing him round about on every side: amongst which were first
spiritual gifts, wherewith his soul was wonderfully adorned and made
beautiful in the eses of God and all good men; also wisdom, valor, beauty
and comeliness of person, wives, children, power, authority, and riches,
lastly frequent victories and from thence ample spoils etc.

That Gods benefits bestowed upon him were many, (...).
see Psalm. 40.5. and 68.19. and 139.17, 18. For his spiritual ornaments,
faith, hope, charity, humility, zeal, justice etc they are every where obvious.
For his wisdom see 1 Samuel 18.14. His valor he showed by the acts which he
did. His beauty is mentioned 1 Samuel 16.12. His wives 2 Samuel 12.8. His children
1 Chronicles. 28.5. Power and authority he had, as being made King over all Israel,
and having subdued many other nations to his dominion. His wealth may be
conjectured by what he had provided for the building of the Temple, viz. 100000
talents of gold, and 1000000 talents of silver etc 1 Chronicles. 22.14. To which he
added out of his own peculiar treasure 3000 talents of gold of Ophit, and 7000
talents of refined silver, Chap. 29.4. A talent (after the balance of the
sanctuary) being of our money in silver 375 l. and in gold (after a twelvefold
proportion) 4500 l. Of his victories and spoils and subduing his enemies we
read every where.

Now all these God according to His own good pleasure bestowed upon David,
(...).
to the end that he being both furnished therewith might be able, and being
excited by the consideration thereof might be willing and ready to serve Him
cheerfully, to his own salvation and Gods glory.

Uses.
This instructs us 1 Who is the Author of all good things, namely the LORD.
Instr.
Man himself may be a means of some good things, to himself by his diligence,
to others by beneficence. But 1 Of some only, not of all; for who can add one
cubite to his stature, or make one hair white or black, or endue the soul
with understanding, judgment, memory etc? 2 Neither of any at all
othertherwise then as an instrument under God, without whose blessing all man's
industry is but vain, Psalm. 127.1, 2. Habak. 2.13. That others also have to
give unto us, and are willing to do it, is of God, Ezra 7.27, 28. God therefore
is truly the Author of all good things; of most the solitary cause, of the
rest the principal cause. And this David acknowledges, not only here, but
often elsewhere. See 1 Chronicles. 29.14. So Saint James chap. 1.17.

2 How these things come from God, viz. not of His strict remunerative justice,
Job 22.2. and 35.7. and 41.11. Psalm. 16.2. Romans 11.35. but of His
loving-kindnesse and tender-mercies; as the Scripture every where testifies.
Hence that admiration of David, 2 Samuel 7.18.

3 What it is to serve God, viz. not vain and unprofitable, as many imagine,
with them Mal. 3.14. For consider how many and how excellent benefits God here
bestowed upon his servant, which (as comprehended under the metaphor of
crowning) we before in some sort explained. Neither these things only which
are here according to the context specially understood, but also deliverances
from evil (of which before) and that which is added ver. 5. Nor was the measure
of these things either the power of God, as though He could not have given
more; or His love to David, as though that had wholly spent it self in these
things, and were not willing to bestow more: but the convenience in respect of
David, 2 Samuel 12.8. Lastly all these things were but as a few drops in respect
of those rivers of pleasures, but a few mites in comparison of the true
treasure, but the first fruits of a far more ample harvest to follow, but the
earnest of an eternal and incorruptible inheritance etc. And seeing God is a
Lord or Master, Who is no respecter of persons, therefore these benefits are
not peculiar to David only, but common to all his fellow servants; for the
greatest and best of them (grace and glory) most certainly, for the rest also
so far as shall be convenient for them, Psalm. 19.11. and 31.19. and 84.11.

Here are reproved 1 Such as through their own fault are not crowned with Gods
blessings; Repr.
as simply in respect of spiritual grace (whilst they not only neglect but
reject the means of it, yea esteem it as nothing worth, yea think it
dishonorable and prejudicial to them) so many times in respect of other
things also. So they, who do not seek outward things of God, or seek them only
to this end, that they may confume them upon their lusts, Jam. 4.2, 3. So (to
speak in a word) they who by their sins of what kind soever provoke God, Isa.
59.1, 2. Ier. 5.24, 25.

2 Such as uncrown themselves, decaying in grace, besotting brave wits by
drunkenness etc. bringing deformities and diseases upon bodies formerly both
comely and able, choosing such wives as are a rottenness in their bones, and so
bringing up their children that they are a shame and grief to them, squandring
away such wealth as friends have left them, polluting their hoary heads with
sin etc.

3 Such as are unlike to God herein. So they who are wanting in loving
kindness toward others. More, they who secretly envy those that are crowned
of God. Most of all, they who out of envy persecute and do injury unto others.
These indeed crown others, but as Saul crowned or compassed about David 1 Samuel
23.26. or as the foldiers crowned Christ Mat. 27.29.

The heads of exhortation may be 1 According to David's scope (that I may here
briefly touch the relative consideration of these words) that we be thankful
to God that crowns us. Exhort.
But of this something has been spoken in the 2d verse.

2 That we expect and seek from God only whatsoever good things we want. See
the 2d Doctrine of this verse. Exhort. 1.

3 That we imitate God in loving kindness and tender mercies.

Verse. 5. Who satisfyeth thy mouth with good: so that thy youth is renewed as
the eagles.
This verse (containing a special benefit) may be considered in it self,
wherein the benefit. effect of it.
as it affords an argument for gratitude.

1 Doctrine. The LORD satisfied David's mouth with good.
These words contain the Benefit, viz. an abundant supply of all things
necessary for this life.

That God did so supply David see Psalm 23.5. (...).


For 1 God had much work for David to do, (...).
in fighting his bettells against so many bitter enemies, in administering
justice and judgment to so great a people etc.

2 Though the soul or spirit be willing and ready to perform these actions,
yet (they being to be done by the ministry of the body) it can not, unless
the body be vigorous and able.

3 God knew, that as all men have need of these things, Mat. 6.32. so a King
much more, and in greater abundance.

Uses.
For our instruction. Instr.
1 In the word ((...) good) we see what David looked at in the things of this
life, viz. the goodness of them. Some men so little practice self-denial even
in the smallest things, that they let loose the raines to their appetite, and
deny it not any thing, though it be such a thing which reason and common
experience tells them is hurtful to the body. Others out of curiosity etc.
seek after those things, which for the novelty, rarity, or dearnesse, may serve
for pomp, or to please dainty palates, rather then to minister true and solid
good to the body. Not so David, who in these things looked at the goodness,
that is, the fitness to nourish the body and give it health, strength etc. as
in the latter part of the verse.

2 In the word ((...) satisfying) we see 1 That David was not a man of an
unsatiable appetite (as they Isa. 56.11.) but rested not only contented, but
amply filled and satiated with the portion that God had given him. 2 That he
did not sordidly hoard up his riches, but used them to those ends for which God
had given them: which also is the gift of God (and indeed the greater gift of
the two) Eccles. 5.18, 19, 20. as the contrary is a vanity and an evil
disease, in the words immediately following, chap. 6.1, 2.3 David ascribes this
benefit (viz. the giving of these things for the quality good, for the quantity
satisfying) to God.

This reproves 1 Such as hinder God from bestowing this benefit upon them: Repr.
as idle persons, or niggardly toward themselves etc.

2 Such as are unlike to God, not only not satisfying the empty souls, not
filling the hungry souls with good, but by injurious means taking away from
them that which God has given to satisfy them. See Job 24.2, 3, 4, 9, 10.

It exhorts us 1 To seek this benefit of God, Exhort.
Mat. 6.11.

Motiv. 1 It is necessary for the sustentation of life, good, and satisfying,
that we may cheerfully perform the duties of our calling. 2 We need it daily,
seeing it perishes with the using. 3 God can abundantly give it.

Means. 1 Seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, Mat. 6.33.
Prove. 13.25. 2 Be diligent in thy particular calling Prove. 13.4.

2 To imitate our heavenly Father in satisfying the mouths of our needy
brethren with good things.

2 Doctrine. Hereby David's youth was renewed as the eagles.
Explic.
The Hebrew here (for the grammatical construction) is subject to diverse
interpretations. Most render it as it is in our Translation [thy youth is
renewed like the eagles.] Others think this incongruous, because (...) and
(...) agree neither in gender nor number (though such Enallages are not
altogether unusual in the Hebrew tongue) Junius therefore renders it [servas
te recentem, tanquam aquila, tanquam pueritia tua] Others otherwise. Perhaps it
might be more simply and more to the letter translated thus [ thou shall renew
thy self, thy youth shall be as an eagle] For the pause Rebhiah at (...) seems
to be against the ordinary interpretation. But whatsoever the syntax be, the
meaning of the whole clause is plain enough, viz. David here illustrates Gods
benefit of satisfying his mouth with good by this effect of it, that thereby
his youthful strength and vigor was still repaired, and so continued beyond
the ordinary time: which is further argued a simili, [like an eagle.]
Concerning the eagle Aristotle and Pliny (who were diligent observers of
natural things) tell us; the former, that she is (...) long-lived; the other,
that she dies at last not through age or any inward sickness or decay of
nature, but by mere hunger, her upper beak being so overgrown, that the
crookedness thereof hinders her from taking her meat. Others say, that in her
old age she casts or breaks off that crookedness, and so renewes her strength
and youth. But we need not go so far, the Scripture it self having many
passages concerning the vigor of the eagle. Strong and swift men are compared
to eagles 2 Samuel 1.23. Hos. 8.1. Yea God himself is likened to an eagle Exodus
19.4. Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12. This similitude therefore serves most fitly to express
David's great vigor, the effect of Gods satisfying his mouth with good, as was
said before. And so it is used, Isa. 40.31.

That such was David's vigor even in his latter days see Psalm. 18.32, 33, 34.
(...).
For that that Psalm was composed by him toward the end of his life after the
subduing of all his enemies, appears by the Title of it; as also by the order
of the story in the 2 book of Samuel. For his last enemy that rose against him
was Sheba; and he was slain in the 20th chapter, and this Psalm is recorded
chap. 22.

The Reasons are the same here, (...).
as in the former Doctrine. For as 1 God had much work for David to do, for the
performance whereof 2 he had not been able, unless his body had been lusty and
vigorous, nor 3 could it so have been, had not God satisfied his mouth with
good; so neither 4 had that been sufficient without Gods special blessing
thereupon. That therefore David's body might be lively and fit for the
businesses imposed upon him, God as He plentifully supplied him with good
things in the former part of this verse, so here He blesses the use of them
with this effect of renewing or continuing his youthful strength and vigor
like the eagles.

Uses.
The instructions which hence arise, Instr.
are 1 From the thing it self, the continuance or renewing of David's strength
or vigor. Where we see what is the end or use of those good things, wherewith
God satisfies us, and particularly of meat and drink. Feasts are not simply
unlawful; but, so they be used moderately and seasonably, the Scripture
allows them: 1 For mirth or cheerfulness Eccles. 10.19. (of which sort are
marriage-feasts, at one whereof our Savior was present with his disciples Joh.
2. and when they wanted wine, supplied it by a miracle; to which also is
likened the preaching of the gospel Mat. 22.1. and the participation of
eternal glory Mat. 25.1. etc.) 2 to preserve mutual love Job 1.4. (which Job,
though a most careful father, did not dislike, as appears by the context) 3
for a thankful commemoration of Gods benefits Genesis 21.8. Nehem. 8.10, 12. Est.
9.19, 22. Luke 5.29. But the ordinary use and end of those things is for the
strengthening of the body Eccles. 10.17. that so men performing the duties of
their general and special callings may be saved, and God glorified thereby.

2 From the expression of strength and vigor by youth. Where we see to what
age these ordinarily belong. Every one must not look to have his strength
renewed or continued to old age, to be so lusty and vigorous when years come
on, as David here was. Many years commonly bring many infirmities with them.
Therefore we must not spend our youth idly, but in this spring or summer of our
age, whilst time and strength permit, gather something (with the ant) whereby
the winter time of our life may be sustained and passed with more comfort. But
especially hearken to Solomon, Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the
days of thy youth, etc.

3 From the similitude, whereby this is illustrated, viz. [as the eagle.]
Whence we may gather that the prorogation of youthful strength and vigor,
though an excellent benefit, yet is not of the best kind of all. For those God
has prepared peculiarly for his children: but this he bestows not only upon
wicked men Job 21.23, 24. Psalm. 73.4. but also upon eagles and other
unreasonable creatures. Therefore let no man from these things make an argument
to himself either of the favor of God because he has them, or of His
displeasure because he has them not. Eccles. 9.1. Neither let any man by using
unlawful means for the continuance or recovery of his bodily health or
strength hazard the eternal health of his soul.

But how opposite to Gods intentions and their own good are gluttons, Repr.
drunkards etc. who when God has supplied them with plenty of good things, and
given them a rule, according to which if they would walk in the use of them,
their bodies might by his ordinary blessing be kept in health and strength,
contrariwise abuse these good things to the impairing and dishonouring their
bodies: and so through their own fault that curse of the Psalmist Psalm. 69.22.
falls upon them. By immoderate eating and drinking they overcharge their
hearts, oppress their strength, cast themselves headlong into many infirmities
and diseases, and consequently into untimely death. And if at any time they
pray to God for better health, yet themselves still hinder Him from granting
their desire: according to that of the Poet, Poscis opem nervis, corpusque
fidele senecta.
Esto, age: sed grandes patinae, tucetaque crassa
Annuere his superos vetuere, Jovemque morantur.
Pers. satyr. 2. These men (to say nothing of their souls, their credit, their
estates) in stead of renewing or continuing their youth to their old age,
precipitate their old age upon their youth; and are so far from attaining to
the eagles vigor or swiftness, that sometimes their feet are not able to do
their ordinary office, so that they are fit for nothing but to stretch
themselves upon their couches with those gluttons Amos 6.4. or to ly along and
wallow in their vomit with the drunkard Ier. 48.26. their brain besotted,
their bodies and faces bloted, their bellies of the barrel fashion, their
liver enflamed, their lungs corrupted, from the sole of their foot to the crown
of their head scarce any sound part.

But let us, Exhort.
when God has done His part in satisfying our mouth with good things, and that
to this end, that thereby we might renew our youth as the eagle, not be wanting
to our selves, but by a right use of Gods blessings improve them to the end for
which He has appointed them.

Motive. Long life is indeed desirable (verse. 4. Doctr. 3. (...)) but with this
condition, among other, that we may enjoy tolerable health and strength to
promote Gods glory, our own salvation and the good of others. For otherwise,
although we must patiently bear whatsoever it shall please God to send, there
is small comfort in living long and groaning under almost continual pain and
sickness, being unable to help our selves, and a daily trouble and burden to
others.

Means. Let us 1 implore Gods blessing by prayer. 2 That our prayer may
prevail, 1 use these outward things moderately. 2 employ the strength we have
or shall have by them to the diligent and faithful performance of our duty in
our general and special callings, to the glory of God.

3 Doctrine.
David mentions this as an argument of blessing God.

And to the same end he mentions it Psalm. 23.5. (...).
(...).


For (as we have noted upon the former benefits) 1 He knew 1 That this was just
matter of gratitude. 1 Because to be satisfied with good, and with such an
effect, was a great benefit, no less then prolonging of life and supplying of
strength to glorify God in the diligent performance of his duty. 2 It was a
benefit necessary for David, as without which he had not been able rightly to
have undergone so great burdens and of such great necessity. 3 God bestowed
this benefit upon him out of His love and goodness for ends most profitable to
David. 4. Of His free grace without any precedent merit of David, or hope of
subsequent reward. 2 That gratitude was enjoined of God, and necessary for
diverse most excellent ends.

2 What he thus knew to be just and necessary to be done, he being a pious man,
and according to Gods own heart, would in like manner perform.

Uses.
Here then we see 1 That even Kings themselves, Instr.
much more they who are far inferior and subject to them, are but tenants or
almesmen to Almighty God, not lords or owners of the things they possess, and
therefore are bound to render thanks to God for them, of Whose only gift, and
that most free gift, they have received them.

2 If David gave thanks to God for meat and drink and such like corporal
things which perish ( Joh. 6.27.) and that with the using ( Colos. 2.22.) much
more ought we to give thanks for the meat which endures to eternal life, that
is, for Christ offered to us in the Word and Sacraments, Who is the bread that
came down from heaven, Whose flesh is meat indeed etc.

Hence are reproved diverse sorts of men unthankful to God even for this
particular benefit of meat and drink, Repr.
wherewith, according to the letter, their mouths are satisfied.

1 Such as go to and from their repast like brute beasts, without ever
blessing God at all either before or after; as if their mouths were made to be
filled only with His good things, but never with His praises ( Psalm. 71.8.)
to be open when they should receive his benefits but shut when they should
return Him thanks for them. What though they have gotten the things they live
upon, by their labor and industry? yet that these things are to be gotten at
all, that they are able to take pains for them, that their labors have any
success, that these things have power to do them good etc. is all the mere
gift of God.

2 Such as give thanks indeed, but only for fashions sake; with the lips, not
with the heart: as appears 1 In that they never either in their closets
privately by themselves, or in their houses with their families pray or give
thanks to God for any thing else (For how can it be that they should seriously
give thanks for corporal things, when they never do it for spiritual, which
are of far more worth?) 2 In that, even whilst they are filling their
mouths with Gods good creatures, they are murmuring and finding fault with
them, either that they are not good enough in their kind, or that, there is no
more variety, or that they are not daintily enough cooked and seasoned for
their palate etc. though perhaps being but slaves and varlets in comparison of
king David, scarce worth so many pence as he talents, their fare be in every
respect better then his was many times. Which we may the rather think,
considering the Scripture so often speaks of butter, honey, and oil as
precious food in Canaan. When Abraham entertained 3 Angels, whom he took for
men of more then ordinary rank (though he was a mighty prince Genesis 23.6.) his
cheer was but milk, and butter, and veale, and cakes baked upon the hearth
Genesis 18.6, 8. So when Jael would make show of kind entertainment to Sisera the
chief captain of King Jabins host Jud. 5.25. So 2 Samuel 17.27. three of David's
potent friends are mentioned, who brought him relief. And what was it? See
verse. 28, 29.

3 Such as out of the same mouth, wherewith they seem to give thanks, belch out
horrid oaths, and filthy communication, wherewith they dishonor God. What is
such thanksgiving worth? Does a fountain send out at the same place sweet
water and bitter? By art it may; as men may make a conduit run with wine at
some solemn time, which ordinarily sends forth water: So these in a formality,
and as an usual table complement, can give thanks, whose mouths ordinarily
abound with words of a far other strain.

4 Such as live of ill gotten goods, who eat the bread of wickedness, and
drink the wine of violence. These men receive not their meat as from God; and
therefore either they do not give Him thanks, or else they mock Him in so doing.

5 Such as do not use the strength received by their nourishment to Gods glory:
much more they, who many ways abuse it to His dishonor.

But let us be exhorted to imitate David. Exhort.


Motives. See the (...). Beside, 1 See the example of Saint Paul even among
Pagans Acts 27.35. Yea he takes this for granted in every true Christian Romans
14.6. 1 Cor. 10.30. See also the example of Christ Himself, Who being Heir and
Lord of all, and thinking it no robbery to be equal with God, yet in the days
of His flesh, being made under the law, has gone before us in the practice of
this duty Mat. 14.19. and 15.36. and 26.27. Joh. 6.23. Luke 24.30. (from which
place compared with verse 35. some gather that Christ used ordinarily the same
form.) And if we must do thus for our meat and drink, much more for all our
substance that God has given us. Genesis 32.10. 1 Chronicles. 29.10 etc. 2 By
thanksgiving the creatures are sanctified, which without it are polluted and
unclean to us, 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5.

Verse 6. The LORD executes righteousness and judgment for all that are
oppressed.
Hitherto David has given thanks for Gods benefits bestowed upon himself in
particular. Now he comes to those which concern others also. These belong
either generally to all that are afflicted, as here verse. 6. specially to the
children of Israel, either
all v. 7. the godly, v. 8. to the 19th

This verse then generally concerns men afflicted or oppressed, and Gods
benefit toward them.

1 Doctr.
The LORD excuteth righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed.

1 (...) oppressed.] Expl.
The verb (...) and the nowns that come of it, properly signify wrong. And as
wrong in English, so these in Hebrew, though they may sometimes be taken in a
more general sense for all kind of injury whether by fraud or violence, yet do
more specially note that kind of injury, which is done by wringing, griping,
violence, robbery, oppression, that is, not so much without the knowledge as
against the will of the party wronged. This appears 1 From the object upon
which it is commonly exercised, viz. the poor, needy, stranger, fatherless,
widow etc. Deuteronomy. 24.14. Jer. 7.6. Zech. 7.10. Mal. 3.5. 2 From the subject or
agent, to whom it is attributed or by whom it is practiced, the proud, mighty,
rich, great man, at least comparatively in respect of him that is wronged,
Psalm. 73.8. and 119.122. Job 35.9. Both together Eccle. 4.1. 3 From the words
of the same signification commonly joined with it by way of exegesis, as (...)
Dent. 28.29. (...) verse. 33. (...) Ezekiel. 22.29. More plainly Jer. 21.12. and
22.3. where the agent is (...) the patient (...). The LXX render both the verb
and the nown sometimes by (...), and (...), and (...), even there where they
are evidently taken for oppression or violent injustice. Whom Saint Luke
follows, chap. 3.14. and 19.8. In both which places (...) most properly
signifies to do wrong by violence, extortion, or oppression; which is more
agreeable to soldiers and publicanes, then to do it by fraud or cousenage. So
the word (...) is here fitly translated [them that are oppressed.]

2 (...) righteousness and judgment.] These are sometimes put for the word of
God: (...) Psalm. 119.13. and often in that Psalm (...) verse. 142. Hence to do
justice and judgment, when it is spoken of private men, seems to be nothing
else, but to walk according to the word of God in all the duties both of their
general and particular callings, Genesis 18.19. Ezekiel. 18.5. (and what this is, is
showed briefly, v. 6, 7, 8, 9.) Sometimes it is specially attributed to the
magistrate, 1 King. 10.9. 2 Samuel 8.15. Ezekiel. 45.9. And then it seems to
signify the performance of the duty imposed by the word of God upon
magistrates: Whereof there are 2 parts, Psalm. 72.4. 1 Pet. 2.14. Deuteronomy. 25.1.
(to which are contrary Prove. 17.15.) See Job 29.14, 15, 16, 17. where justice
and judgment verse. 14. seem to be illustrated by their several effects; the
former by his relieving the afflicted, ver. 16, 17. the latter by his punishing
the wicked, v. 17. For (...) often signifies mercy (as verse. 17. of this
Psalm. 1 Samuel 12.7. Jud. 5.11. Mic. 6.5. Dan. 4.27. and 9.16. and so the LXX
here translate it (...)) and (...) the sentence of condemnation and the
execution thereof. Here in resemblance to magistrates or earthly gods, the same
acts are eminently attributed to the God of heaven, Who is called the Judge of
all the earth, Genesis 18.25. and, the great King over all the earth, Psalm. 47.
And the words may here in like manner not unfitly be distinguished, so that by
Gods executing righteousness be understood His relieving the oppressed; by his
executing judgment. His punishing the oppressor.

Moreover in that both these words are of the plural number, it signifies
(according to the usual idiome of the Hebrew tongue) an Auxesis or intension
in both, Omnimodam justitiam and judicium. He will do it in every particular,
He will do it thoroughly and to the full, perfectly both for parts and degrees.

For proof hereof, (...)
That God is a God of righteousness and judgment, and administers the same to
all men in general, see Psalm. 89.14. and 97.2. and 33.5. and 99.4. etc. More
particularly, that He executes both these for the oppressed, (in righting them
and punishing their oppressors; for both acts commonly go together) see Psalm.
146.7, 8, 9. and 140.11, 12. and 10.14, 18. Prove. 22.22, 23. Deuteronomy. 10.17, 18.

1 Righteousness for the oppressed He executes out of the multitude of His
mercies and compassions toward them. (...)
For such is Gods mercy, that He pities the afflictions even of them that
suffer most justly, yea far below their desert, Jud. 10.16. 2 Kin. 14.26. How
much more will He pity them that are unjustly oppressed of men? Act. 7.34. So
Isa. 63.9. In all their affliction he was afflicted etc.

2 Judgment upon oppressors He executes out of His hatred against oppression.
Zech. 8.17. Yea He so hates it, that He hates to have any thing, which is
gotten thereby, dedicated to His service, Isa. 61.8. And no marvel, seeing
oppression is directly contrary to Gods goodness, and to His will not only in
Scripture every where declared, but known even to the heathen by the relics
of Gods image. Also it hurts those whom God loves and pities. So that even the
Mercy of God also is a reason of this as well as of the former act. See Exodus
22.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. where in the last words this is given as the
cause of all that goes before [for I am gracious.] Moreover God therefore
shows exemplary judgments upon oppressors, that others may beware.

Uses.
Here 1 we see David takes it for granted that at all times there are men
oppressed, Instr.
and those not a few; seeing he speaks not of one or of some, but of all. And
this the experience of all times (since men began to multiply upon the face of
the earth) plainly shows. If therefore in these last and dangerous times, and
as it were the dregs of the world, there be many such, it is not to be wondered
at. Eccle. 5.8. Indeed it is strange, that a man, to whom reason dictates the
sum of the law and the prophets (that every man should do as he would be
done unto) and much more that a Christian man, notwithstanding so many
dehortations and threatenings, so many examples of Gods judgments against
oppressors in Scripture, yea so many precepts and exhortations to defend,
relieve, and do good to others, should yet wrong and oppress his brethren. But
if we consider how great covetousness, pride, envy etc. reigns in many men,
and with all what reasons and good ends God has, for which He is pleased to
permit oppression so far as He does, and not altogether to hinder it, as by
his omnipotency He could: we shall see it is not without cause, that David here
takes it for granted, that there always have been, are, and will be
oppressors, and men oppressed by them.

2 This also is by David here presupposed, that there is no oppression, but
that God sees: otherwise how could He execute righteousness and judgment for
all that are oppressed? Thus Psalm. 10.13, 14. Wherefore does the wicked (that
is the oppressor or persecutour, v. 2.) blaspheme God, saying in his heart,
Thou will not require it? Thou have seen it: for Thou beholdest mischief and
spite, to requite it with Thy hand; the poor commits himself unto Thee, for
Thou art the helper of the fatherless. If God did not see both what the
oppressor does, and what the poor orphane suffers, he could neither requite
the one, nor help the other. See also Psalm. 94. where we have at large set down
1 The oppression practiced by wicked and proud men, and their triumphing in it,
verse. 3, 4, 5, 6. 2 Their blasphemy, that God did not see or regard it, ver. 7.
3 The refutation of it, verse. 8 etc. And Eccles. 5.8. He that is higher then
the highest regards it, or, observes, keeps it in mind etc. In general
see Hebr. 4.13.

3 We see how God stands affected to oppression; viz. so, that He will execute
righteousness for all that are oppressed, and judgment upon their
oppressors. Gods patience animates many men to do wickedly, Eccle. 8.11. And
hence they imagine God to be such an one as themselves, Psalm. 50.21. And some
of the heathen did hereupon deny Gods providence. But the wiser sort even
amongst them observing more diligently the event of oppression, were of another
mind. Whence those common proverbs, (...). Gods mils grind slowly, but they
grind small. and, Male parta, male dilabuntur etc. Much more should we, who
have the Scriptures for it, undoubtedly believe, that God, howsoever He
reserves in His own hand the time (unknown to us) yet will most certainly
(sooner or later) execute both righteousness, and judgment for all that are
oppressed.

This then should terrify oppressors, Repr.
if they be not altogether hardened in their sin. For 1 Let not them or theirs
expect that they shall long enjoy goods so gotten. God will execute
righteousness for the oppressed, in restoring to them their own, making the
oppressors vomit up again the riches they have swallowed down, and pulling
them out of their belly, Job 20.15. Neither 2 shall the guilt of their sin be
taken away together with the gain of it: God will execute judgment also as
well as righteousness. What judgments remain for them in this world we know
not: but (without repentance) they are sure of the judgment of eternal
damnation in the world to come. For how can they escape? He Who has taken upon
him to execute this judgment, is God: from Whose all-seeing eye they can not
be hid, Whose almighty power they can not resist, Whose will concerning them
(unless they be changed by repentance) is unchangeable. Now is the day of
grace, when truly repenting of what they have done, and restoring what they
have wrongfully taken away or detained, and for the time to come despising the
gain of oppression ( Isa. 33.15.) they may obtain pardon. But if they slip this
time; that succeeds, wherein every man shall be rewarded according to his
works. And if he shall have judgment without mercy, who showed no mercy; where
shall the injurious and oppressor appear?

This sin of oppression has many aggravations. I shall insist only upon
those which are from the persons, both oppressed and oppressing.

1 The persons oppressed are commonly (as was showed before) the poor, needy,
strangers, orphans, and such like miserable and helpless persons: whom to
oppress is a violation not only of the 8th Commandment, but of the 6th also.
See Isa. 3.14, 15. Mica. 3.1, 2, 3. From such even to take to pawn any thing of
daily use (especially if it be not timely restored) is a sin, Exodus 22.26,
27. Job 24.3. Yea not to give to such is damnable, Mat. 25.41. etc. How far
therefore is it from the duty of a Christian to oppress such? The punishment
hereof is described in general Job 31.21, 22, 23. More particularly here God
delights to render like for like; that both the oppressors themselves and all
the world beside may see, both that it is His hand, and that His judgment is
just. So Exodus 22.22, 23, 24. Prove. 22.16. Psalm. 109. ver. 9, 10, 11, 12.
compared with ver. 16. So in the negative, as oppressors refuse to hear the
voice of God and the poor, God also in like manner refuses to hear their
voice when they cry unto Him in their misery, Prove. 21.13. Mic. 3.2, 3, 4.
Zech. 7.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. But of all that can be said or thought, that is the
most terrible Prove. 22.22, 23. where the spoilers shall be spoiled, not only
of outward things by men (as Isa. 31.1.) but of their precious souls by God.
There may be many other aggravating circumstances in the persons oppressed; as
in respect of their innocence, piety, sacredness, usefulness to the public,
relation to or well deserving of their oppressors etc. But I instance in that
which is most general.

2 The persons oppressing are commonly (as Saint James observes cha. 2.6.) the
rich and great men of the world; at least, great in comparison of the
oppressed, as was said before. Which gives a double aggravation to the sin. 1
In that they do it not for any need (though no need should make a man sin)
but either of extreme covetousness, or of pride, malice, envy, or of wanton
cruelty, or some such like devilish disposition. 2 In that their wealth,
power, greatness etc which God has given them to this end, that they might
therewith defend, relieve, and do good to the poor, they abuse to the quite
contrary purpose, to mischief, robbery, and oppression, and that of the poor.

Contrariwise, if base and mean men get the power into their hands to oppress
the great, rich, noble, and honorable; the oppression may be, and commonly is,
in other respects yet far worse on both sides.

1 In respect of the persons oppressed it is greater, both because the subject
matter, or that whereof they are spoiled, is greater, and because such persons
being reduced from one extreme to the other must needs be more sensible of it:
And beside, they being by their education, experience, places etc more fitted
to glorify God, and do service to the public, are hereby disabled to the
prejudice of both.

2 In respect of the oppressors, as it is more against nature and order ( Isa.
3.5.) so it is commonly more insolent and cruel, and more contemptuous and
despitefull to the persons oppressed. Asperius nihil est etc.

But for them, Consol.
who either in themselves, or in those that are near and dear unto them, are
either already under oppression, or at least in imminent danger of it, here is
abundant comfort, and armor of proof against all those afflicting and
tormenting passions of fear, grief, anger, envy, despair, impatience etc.
Fear or dread of what they may suffer, grief or sorrow for what they suffer,
anger and envy against the authors of their sufferings (their oppressors)
despair or impatience in respect of the continuance of their sufferings.
Against all these it is enough to oppose as a full and sufficient ground of
comfort the Doctrine here in hand, That the Lord executes righteousness and
judgment for all that are oppressed.

And 1 for Fear see Psalm. 27.1. and 46.1, 2. and 56.3, 4. and 118.6. Isa.
51.12, 13. For what though they, who threaten to oppress, be mighty? The Lord
that dwells on high is mightier: though they be crafty, He is wiser, and can
take them in their own craftiness: though they be unjust, He is righteous:
though they be cruel, He is merciful. His Power and Wisdom make Him able,
His Justice and Mercy make Him willing to perform what David here affirms of
Him. Therefore though the fear, whereby we draw nigh to Him for protection,
and use all honest means for our safety (as Genesis 32.) be lawful and
commendable: yet so to fear men as not to trust in God, or (which is worse) so
to fear men as not to fear God, or to fear men more then God, and so to comply
with them (affirmatively or negatively) in things displeasing to God, for fear
of being oppressed by them, this is utterly unlawful and unreasonable. See
Matthew. 10.26, 28, 31, 33. Revel. 21.8.

2 For them, who are already under oppression, and so in grief, sorrow or
heaviness thereby, the comfort is the same: God, Who sees all their sufferings
and hears their groans, yea Who as it were suffers together with them, and is
afflicted in all their affliction, He will take the matter into His own hand
and execute righteousness for them. Their right, though oppressed for the
present, yet is not dead but sleeps: God can and will assuredly revive and
restore it to them again with advantage, either in kind, or in that which is of
better value, so that they shall lose nothing by the hand.

3 As this should moderate their sorrow and grief in respect of themselves or
their friends, who are oppressed; so, much more should it refrain and quiet
those more violent passions of anger, envy, and (as the effect of both) desire
of revenge against their oppressors. For this is Gods part: He executes
judgment against oppressors, as well as righteousness for the oppressed.
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord, Romans 12.19. It is mine, not
thine; and therefore thou ought not to revenge thy self: And, I will repay;
therefore thou need not. And woe to those oppressors that shall fall into
Gods hands. If we consider the danger they are in, we had need to pity and pray
for them, that God would forgive them and turn their hearts. But if they shall
still persist in their sin, yet however let us quietly commit our cause to
God, and rest assured, that as we shall be no losers, so our enemies shall be
no gainers by oppressing us.

4 And lastly, if by reason of the long continuance of the oppressions that ly
upon us, we be tempted either altogether to despair of relief, as though it
would never come (which is contrary to the prime act of faith and hope) or at
least to be weary and impatient, as thinking it too long in coming, and so to
say with him 2 King. 6.33. What should I wait for the LORD any longer? (which
is contrary to that act or effect of faith and hope, that is called (...) or
(...), the patient abiding or expectance of the thing believed and hoped for,
Heb. 11.1. Romans 8.24, 25. as the LXX often translate (...) and (...)) here is
comfort against that also. God Who has undertaken the thing best knows His own
time (and His time is the best time) for executing both righteousness and
judgment; and beyond that time He will not defer it. As the vision Habak. 2.3.
so here the righteousness and judgment of God, is (...) for a set or
appointed time; but at the end it shall speak and not lie: Therefore though it
tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry. Though it
tarry, it will not tarry: that is, (...) though it linger and stay some while
before it comes, yet (...) ( non posterior abit as I may say) it will not come
tardy, it will not come after the appointed time, nor after the due and fit
time. And he that believes, will not make have, Isa. 28.16.

Lastly here is a ground of Exhortation to all men in general, Exhort.
that every man in his place and calling would imitate God in executing
righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed. Chiefly it concerns
magistrates, as being Gods deputies and ministers for this purpose especially.
But it extends also to masters of families within their bounds of domestical
government: Yea to private men also, in such acts hereunto conducing, as belong
to them; as by way of testimony, solicitation, or other assistance to the party
oppressed, or as the magistrates instruments for execution of his office herein.

2 Doctrine. David mentions this as an argument of blessing God.
So Psalm. 99. (...)
where declaring this act of God verse. 4. he exhorts to this duty verse. 3, 5.
And Psalm. 107. verse. 10, 13, 14, 15, 16. In like manner Moses and the
Israelites being freed from the Egyptian oppression, sing a song of
thanksgiving Exodus 15. So Deborah and Barak Judge. 5.

The grounds or reasons hereof are in general the same, (...).
as in other benefits before mentioned verse. 3, 4, 5. Which therefore may in
like manner be hereunto fitted and applied.

Uses.
Here we learn 1 That we are not to regard our selves alone, Instr.
or to be sensible only of our own oppressions and deliverances; but to be
alike affected in those which concern others also: as David here gives thanks
for Gods executing righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed.

2 We may lawfully rejoice for Gods judgments upon oppressors. To rejoice for
them out of malice, as they are hurtful (...) comes to be executed upon
themselves for such as they have oppressed?

But let us imitate David. Exhort.


Motives. See the (...).

Verse. 7. He made known His ways unto Moses, His acts unto the children of
Israel.
Now follow Gods benefits bestowed upon the Israelites. And first upon all, in
this verse. Where we have a double benefit, according to a double act of Gods
notification, viz. Of His ways unto Moses. acts unto the children of Israel.


Which yet we must not so divide, as if Gods ways were made known only to
Moses, and His acts only to the children of Israel: for both were made known
to both. Only with this difference, that God made known His ways first and
immediately to Moses, and by him mediately to the children of Israel: but His
acts He showed immediately to all; as being of themselves so conspicuous, that
the very doing them was making them known, so that no man could open his eyes,
but he must see them.

1 Doctrine. The LORD made known His ways unto Moses.
What a Way is in the proper acception, Expl.
all men know. Metaphorically, being attributed to God, it is taken especially
in a double acception. 1 For the way wherein He Himself walks, that is, for
his counsels and actions. Deuteronomy. 32.4. Psalm. 145.17. 2 For the way, wherein He
will have us to walk, that is, His Commandments prescribing us our duty.
Psalm. 119.1, 3, 14, 15, 27, 32, 33. and frequently in that psalm, and other.
So Isa. 2.3. and 30.21. Both these are here meant, but the latter especially.

That God showed His ways unto Moses, (...)
and that after a more eminent manner, then to any other, see Number. 12.6, 7, 8.
That He showed them to the children of Israel, and that more peculiarly then to
any other nation, see Psalm. 147.19, 20. That He showed them to Israel by
Moses, is plain throughout all the books of Moses, and Malac. 4.4. Whereupon
Moses is called the mediator of the Old Testament, Gal. 3.19.

Now this God did out of His love to Moses and Israel, (...).
and so to us also, to whom (the partition wall being broken down by Christ)
belongs whatsoever Moses wrote, so far as it may stand with the New
Testament. The immediate end was, that the Doctrine of God might not be as a
candle put under a bushel, but set on a candlestick, that it might enlighten
the whole house of Israel, yea the whole Church throughout all succeeding
generations. The end, to which this was subordinate, was the leading and
uniting men unto God, for their salvation, and His glory.

Uses.
The instructions, Instr.
which hence may be gathered, are these.

1 If there need a way to lead us unto God, then we are absent from God. God is
indeed in Himself infinite, and therefore always every where necessarily
present after a general manner, Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9, 10. Act. 17.27, 28. More
specially also He is said many ways to be present; as in courts of judicature
2 Chronicles. 19.6. Psalm. 82.1. Also, to come near to the wicked to judgment Mal.
3.5. etc. But according to our purpose here He is specially present by the
manifestation of grace and glory. Now in respect of His glorious presence in
heaven, whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor.
5.6. Grace He manifests in the fruits either of His first love, and so He is
present to all men, especially in the visible Church; or of His second love,
and so he is far from the wicked, Prove. 15.29. and is present only to the
godly, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. Seeing then we are by nature the children of wrath, dead
in sins before our regeneration, so we are absent from God. And seeing there
is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins not, Eccles. 7.20. Jam.
3.2. and how much we sin, so much we are absent from the God of pure eyes;
therefore whilst we are in this world, we never so enjoy the gracious presence
of God, but that still we have need daily more and more to draw near unto Him.
This our condition (I say) that we are altogether absent from Gods glorious
presence, and from His gracious presence (in respect of the fruits of his
second love) totally before our regeneration, and in part even to the end of
our life, we may gather from hence, viz. in that there needs a way to lead us
unto Him; which needed not, if we were already present with Him.

2 Such is the love of God to mankind, that He has not left us in this misery
destitute of all hope, but has made known unto us His ways, which will most
certainly and directly lead us unto Himself, both to His gracious and glorious
presence.

3 See part of that depth Romans 11.33. viz. that in the time of the Old
Testament God out of all nations chose the Israelites (whose Doctor or teacher
was Moses) to be a peculiar people unto Himself Deuteronomy. 10.14, 15. He left not
Himself without witness among the heathen, but revealed (...), the effect of
the Law, affording them some means of seeking Him, if happily they might feel
after Him and find Him. But this was but little in respect of his ways in His
Word, which He made known unto Moses, and by him to the children of Israel.

4 Behold our privilege above the old Israelites. They had the ways of God
made known to and by Moses: We have those also (the Moral law, for a
perpetual rule of life; the Judicial law, out of which we may take
constitutions, if expedient for us; and the Ceremonial law, to strengthen our
faith in Christ, in whom all those shadows had their due accomplishment) but
not only those. God has moreover spoken to us by His Son the Mediator of a
better Testament Hebr. 8.6. Who coming forth out of the bosom of His Father
(where He was admitted to the most intimate knowledge of His secrets) revealed
the Gospel to us, which far excells the Law of Moses. See the comparison of
them largely handled 2 Cor. 3. Briefly, Moses (as Saint Peter the Apostle of
the Jews confesses, Acts 15.10.) put on such a yoke as neither their fathers
nor they were able to bear. But Christ says, Come unto me etc. for my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light, Mat. 11.28, 29, 30.

And if Gods word be His way, Repr.
then surely they are much out of the way, who so live as if there were no word
of God at all, according to which they ought to walk. As concerning Gods
precepts many are like unto them, Hos. 8.12. accounting the great things of
Gods Law as a strange thing. For whilst they go on obstinately in such things
as please them, they think it strange that any rule of religion should be
pressed upon them, other then the fashion of the country, the sway of the
times, the custom of foresathers, and their own devises. What? do they think
there is no word of God at all prescribing men their duties? But the text here
demonstrates the contrary. Do they pretend ignorance of it? But that excuse
will help no man; seeing God both in Adam after the fall, and in Noah revealed
the word of His grace unto all, denies the word to no people or man, but either
for their own or their forefathers sins, Amos 8.11. But least of all will it
help them, who live amongst us, where we all either see the way by which we
ought to walk (that is, the word of God) or else we shut our eyes. Let such men
know that it very ill agrees with the nature of God and their own condition,
that they should prescribe the rule of His worship: and what cost or pains
soever they so bestow upon it, their reward shall be a check, Who required
these things at your hands? In vain do they serve me etc. Whatsoever is not of
faith (that is, of a persuasion, that it is either prescribed or permitted by
God) is sin etc. As concerning Gods promises, some men giving way to the
temptations of Satan, melancholy doubtings etc. judge of their estate out of I
know not what apprehension (which they call feeling) and so sometimes greatly
torment themselves without any just cause: as if there were not promises in the
word (confirmed by Gods oath and the death of Christ) upon which we ought to
depend, but we must measure all things according to the suggestions of the
father of lies and our own foolish imaginations. Lastly as concerning Gods
threatenings in His word, many lightly esteeming them, and relying upon their
own presumptuous conceits, go on securely in their sins and yet promise
themselves all good things. Such men shall one day know whose word shall stand,
Gods or theirs, Jer. 44.28. Exhort.


But let us be exhorted to acquaint our selves with, and guide our selves by
the ways of God in all the parts thereof.

Motiv. 1 It is simply necessary for us (unless we will be eternally
miserable) to enjoy Gods gracious (according to His second love) and glorious
presence. 2 Only the ways of God lead us thereunto. In other journeys though
a man err from the right way, yet he may come to the place he intended by some
other way, though less compendiously. But unless we insist in the ways
prescribed by God, it is impossible ever to come unto Him. For all other ways
(though for the present one be much different from another) at last meet in the
broad way of destruction. 3 He that undertakes an earthly journey, may be in
the right way and yet ignorant of it. But so we cannot be in Gods ways: if we
do not know our selves to be in the way, we are certainly out of it. It is a
part of Gods ways, to know His ways; God requiring of us, not only that we
walk according to his prescript for the substance of our actions, but that we
do it out of certain knowledge that He has prescribed it: otherwise we walk
not of faith, and therefore sin.

Means. 1 For preparation, Come 1 with humble reverence in respect of God, Who
makes known His ways. 2 With a firm purpose and resolution to believe
whatsoever the Scripture teaches, to perform and omit whatsoever it commands
and forbids.

2 For the more immediate actions, After Gods blessing implored, 1 Read the
Scriptures privately, meditate upon them, and as occasion is offered, confer
thereabout with others. 2 Seeing private persons can not herein do much without
some man to guide them ( Acts 8.31.) the knowledge and understanding of the
Scriptures is to be sought at the priests mouth ( Mal. 2.7.) 1 by attending to
him in the public preaching. 2 by consulting him privately, as need and
opportunity shall be.

2 Doctrine. He has made known His acts to the children of Israel.
1 (...) His acts. Expl.
] He means the wonderful works of God in Egypt, the wilderness, and the land
of Canaan. Which may be reduced to His works of mercy toward the Israelites,
and of justice against the Egyptians, the rebellious Israelites, the
Midianites, Amalek, and the Canaanites. The particulars every where occur.

2 (...) to the children of Israel.] Children (by a Synecd. spec. familiar to
the Hebrews) are put for posterity. Why they should be denominated (as here and
generally they are) of Israel, rather then of Abraham, or Isaac, the reason may
seem to be, because these had children of deferent religions (Abraham had Isaac
and Ishmael, Isaac had Jacob and Esau) but Jacobs children, though many, were
all of one faith and religion. Why of Israel rather then of Jacob, the reason
may be, because the name of Israel was given him by God Himself, and that of
honorable signification, (A prince with God) and bestowed upon him for his
great and pertinacious piety, Genesis 32.

That God had before David's time made known His acts to the children of Israel,
(...).
abundantly appears in all the books of Moses, Josuah, Judges, and Samuel. See
Deuteronomy. 11.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Reasons. 1 For the impulsive cause, (...).
Gods acts of mercy (viz. His delivering the Israelites out of Egypt, leading
them to the land of Canaan, bringing them into it, placing them in it, and so
the acts tending thereunto) proceeded from Gods truth and fidelity, which
required the performance of His promises made unto their fathers. His acts of
justice proceeded from His hatred of sin. And all from His love to that
nation, even those acts of justice, which He showed on the rebellious
Israelites: for so he plucked up the ill weeds that the corn might grow the
better; and punished some exemplarily, that others fearing might be kept in
their duty, See Deuteronomy. 17.13.

2 The end in general was, that they (so many as were not taken away by his
judgments) and their posterity (to whom they were often commanded to declare
His acts) might the more diligently keep His commandments (Who had done so
great things for them) to their own salvation and His glory. So Deuteronomy. 11.7, 8.
Your eyes have seen all the great acts of the LORD, which He did: Therefore
shall ye keep all the Commandments etc. So chap. 6.20. etc. and 10.12. So
Psalm. 105. Where beginning from Abraham verse. 9. and briefly reckoning up the
acts of God, he concludes with the end of all, verse. 45. That they might
observe His statutes, and keep His Laws. Hence Psalm. 78. Not to forget Gods
works and to keep His commandments, verse. 7. and on the other side to forget
those, and not to keep these, verse. 10, 11. are joined together as causes and
effects. In special, for his works of mercy, that they and their posterity in
all their dangers and necessities might put their trust in God, Who had showed
such great power and love toward them, Deuteronomy. 7.17, 18, 19. Psalm. 77.10, 11, 12.
and 78.7. For want of which duty Moses reproves them, Deuteronomy. 1.29. etc. as
Samuel those of his time, who for fear of Nahash asked a King, when God, who
had formerly so many ways delivered them, was their King, 1 Samuel 12. Also that
they might always have matter of praising and giving thanks to God, Psalm. 9.1.
and 26.6, 7. So Psalm. 105. and 106. and 136. where earnestly exhorting to
praise and give thanks to God, he takes his argument from these works of God.
For His works of punitive justice, that beholding therein His power and hatred
of sin, they might fear to offend Him by committing it, Numb. 16.40. Levit.
18.24, 25, etc. and 20.22, 23.

Uses.
Hence we may observe 1 That God rests not in desires, Instr.
purposes etc. of doing good to the godly and punishing the wicked, but in due
time proceeds to acts of mercy and justice. Many men think they have done a
great matter, if they inwardly wish well to the godly and ill to the wicked,
desire to do good to those and punish these; though when they have power,
authority, and opportunity they will not do it. Or if their love to those
proceed as far as to word or tongue in praising, promising etc. and their
hatred to the sins of these express it self by dispraising, threatening etc.
they think they have almost obliged God to them by it. But this is not to
imitate God, Who has His (...) His acts both of mercy to the godly, and of
punishment against the rebellious And such affections and words shall be so
far from doing them any good, that they plainly convince them to be wicked
servants, who knowing their Lords will, yet do it not.

2 Though God have some secret things belonging to Himself, Deuteronomy. 29.29. some
judgments unsearchable, and ways past finding out, Romans 11.33. yet His acts,
which it behooves men to know, He has made known unto them; that His mercy and
justice might be manifest, to the ends abovesaid, and the like. And herein He
is to be imitated by us, but with caution; that is, so as it be not done (...),
(...), to the dispraise of others, or boasting of our selves but to the good of
others, and our own necessary defense, and that modestly.

3 Behold here, that God is no respecter of persons. For there were many
nations at that time far superior to the Israelites in all earthly respects:
yea of Esau's progeny there were many Dukes, Genesis 36.15. etc. when the
Israelites lived miserably and despicably in Egypt. Yet God out of all nations
chose these children of promise, to whom He would make known His acts.

Here we may see the reason, why God was more angry at the Israelites sinnng
against Him, then at any others. Though He left not Himself without witness
amongst other nations, and therefore might justly punish them also for their
sins, and so many times did: yet that witness, if compared with the
manifestation of His ways (in the former Doctrine) and of His acts (in this)
to the children of Israel, was but little. And therefore of them, to whom He had
committed much, He might justly require more; and for want of it, more often
and more severely punish them.

By Gods thus manifesting His acts, Repr.
are reproved, 1 Such as will not observe or take notice of them. Psalm. 28.5.
Isa. 5.11, 12. And now more especially among us, to whom God has made known
those acts not only in the writings of Moses, but also in the Psalms, and
often elsewhere in the Old Testament, and likewise in the New. And not those
only, but many other acts of God also beyond all admiration, especially the
miracles wrought by our Savior Christ, and in His Name. Yet how few of us set
our hearts upon them, so as thereby to learn to keep Gods commandments, to
hope in Him, to fear Him, to glorify Him etc? But let us assure our selves, if
we neglect Gods acts of mercy toward others we shall not enjoy the like our
selves: and if we slight the acts of His punishing justice upon others, we
shall feel them in our selves; and be made examples unto others, because we
would not be warned by other men's examples. And if they deserve reproof, who do
not mark the things which were done of old to others; much more they who
neglect Gods acts done unto themselves. Yet thus do many men, who not
acknowledging Gods hand in those things which befall them, attribute their good
things either to other men or wholly to themselves, and impute their evil
things either to the instruments which God uses, or to fate, fortune etc. But
worst of all are they, who think and speak ill of these acts; who through
covetousness, ambition etc despise the callings, wherein God has set them,
and the estates He has bestowed upon them (though herein He has been much
more liberal to them, not worthy to breath the common air, then to many of
his dear children) murmur at their afflictions as undeserved, when indeed they
are far short of what they have deserved. How far are such men from
salvation, who make those acts of God an occasion of departing further from
Him, whereby, according to His intention, they ought to be moved daily to draw
nearer to Him!

2 Such as do not manifest their own acts beseeming those to whom God has thus
made known His acts. Many draw near to God with their mouths, and honor Him
with their lips, bring forth plentifully the leaves of profession; but few
abound in the fruits of obedience. Others by hypocrisy labor to hide their
acts from God. Of these the Scriptures often speak, and always with
detestation. It is in vain for them to attempt it, Jer. 23.24. Luke 12.1, 2.
For how can He, Who most clearly sees the darkest and secretest corners of
their hearts, be ignorant of their acts? Or how can any act be hidden from Him,
in Whom the agent lives, moves, and has his being? Yea Woe is denounced
against such, Isa. 29.15. And no marveli, seeing such a thought smells rank of
atheism. But most impudent are they, who openly commit iniquity, Isa. ^.9.
which is yet worse in respect of the place (the visible Church, Isa. 26.10. the
Temple, Ezekiel. 8.16, 17.) the manner, when a man glories in it etc.

This should exhort us, Exhort.
1 Diligently and affectively to consider these and the like acts of God, which
He has or shall make known unto us.

Motiv. 1. To this end He has revealed them Romans 15.4. 1 Cor. 10.11. 2 The
consideration of them is profitable for those further ends intended by God,
mentioned in the 2d Reason of this Doctrine. 3 If we do it not, Rahab the
harlot, and the Gibeonites will rise up against us in judgment: for they were
moved upon a lesser and less certain report of some few of Gods acts.

2 To declare and make known Gods acts unto others.

Motiv. 1. The example of God, Whom in so doing we shall imitate. 2 His precept
for it often inculcated by Moses in the institution of the Passover, Exodus, 12.
3 The example of holy men, Psalm. 78.4, 5, 6. 4 It is profitable to others, as
to us in the former Exhortation. 5 Many have great need of it: as children, who
by reason of their age, and some (though of riper years) who by reason of their
natural dullness or want of education can not of themselves consider the acts
of God; others through negligence etc will not.

3 Doctr. David mentions this manifestation of Gods ways acts
as an argument of blessing God.
So for His ways, Psalm. 119.62, 164. (...).
and 147.19, 20. For His acts, David both does it himself Psalm. 92.4, 5. and
exhorts others Psalm. 150.2. and both every where throughout this book.

For (according to the heads of Reasons mentioned in the former benefits ver.
3, 4, 5. (...).
) 1 David knew 1 The greatness and convenience of this benefit, as which
directly looks at man's chiefest good: For by the manifestation of Gods ways
and acts we are brought to the fruition of eternal happiness, Act. 20.32.
Jam. 1.21. But without this we can not avoid eternal misery, Prove. 29.18. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. 2 The good will and free grace of the Benefactour; which in this
above many other of His benefits is conspicuous, by His writing His word at the
first in the heart of Adam, and manifesting unto him His works of creation, and
afterward (notwithstanding sin) by diverse revelations and works of
providence before the time of Moses; in the time of Moses, by writing His law
in the Tables, and inspiring Moses to write more, as also by many mighty works,
in delivering them out of Egypt etc. Lastly, by continuing them unto David's
time, yea and adding to them, notwithstanding the great and often repeated
apostasies of the Israelites.

2 As he knew etc so being etc he would act accordingly.

Uses.
Here we see, Instr.
to Whom our thanks is due for whatsoever benefits we receive by the
manifestation of Gods ways and acts. To Gods ministers indeed we owe much Gal.
4.15. 1 Timothy 5.17. Phile. ver. 19. But the principal thanks belong to God, Who
has given His Word, and confirmed it by so many miracles, Who has fitted and
called men to preach it, Who opens the hearts of the hearers etc. Repr.


Hence also several sorts of unthankful men are reproved.

1 They that do not give real thanks, by learning their duty out of Gods word
and acts, and practicing accordingly, and so referring this benefit to the ends
intended by God. 2 They who do not praise God for this benefit; yea who are not
afraid to slander and rail at His word, when it crosses their beloved ways and
actions. So they who abuse it to scurrilous jests etc. 3 They who are not
inwardly and heartily thankful. For such men also either are not outwardly
thankful at all, or if they be, it is but in hypocrisy. Who these be, God and
their own hearts best know. Men can judge no further then by the fruits. 4 They
who are so far from being thankful for this benefit, that they will not
receive it; as neither hearkening to Gods word, nor observing His acts.
But let us imitate David here, Exhort.
in blessing God for the manifestation of His ways and acts.

Motiv. 1 The benefit is far greater to us now under the Gospel then it was
in David's time. 2 It is no less freely and graciously on Gods part bestowed
upon us: yea much more, by how much both the benefit is greater and we more
unworthy of it.

Verse. 8. The LORD is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in
loving-kindnesse.
The common benefit bestowed upon all the Israelites we had in the former
verse, viz. Gods affording them the means of salvation. Now follow those which
are more special and peculiar to some only: The subject whereof, or the
persons to whom they are given (that wicked men may not assume them to
themselves) are described from their effects of fearing God, ver. 11, 13, 17.
of keeping His covenant and commandments, ver. 18.

And here we have 1 The foundation or impulsive cause of these benefits in the
Attributes of God set down in this verse: which are four, viz. Mercy. Grace.
Long-suffring. Loving-kindnesse.
2 The benefits themselves, v. 9. to 19.

1 Doctrine. The LORD is merciful.
(...) merciful. Explic.
] This word we explained together with the conjugate (...) v. 4. Doct. 4. Here
it seems to be taken in the proper and strict acception for that Attribute of
God, whereby He is inclined to succor them that are in misery. This is either
general, or special. Gods general mercy has for the object of it not only
men (even them which are strangers from the faith) but also unreasonable
creatures, even all Gods works, Psalm. 145.9. His special mercy looks at
sinners repenting of their sins, Joel 2.13. And this is principally here
meant, as appears by the exercise of it in the words following, especially
ver. 13. And so it signifies a pronenesse to succor or relieve a man in
misery, notwithstanding sin. The act or effect hereof is Deliverance,
immediately from the Guilt of sin by Remission, and from the Dominion by
Mortification; by consequence, from Afflictions (so far as is expedient) and
from Hell.

This Attribute of God is most frequently celebrated in Scripture. (...).
But let us hear the immediate testimony of God Himself Exo. 34.6. which very
words David repeats not only in this place, but also Psalm. 86.15. and 145.8.
So others, Nehemiah chap. 9.17. Joel chap. 2.13. Jonah chap. 4.2.

Seeing Mercy (considered in it self, (...).
or in actu primo, as here it is) is an essential Attribute of God; there can
be no reason given of it: but He is merciful, because He is merciful, or
because He is God. For God is (...), without cause: otherwise, either He must
be the cause of Himself, and so before and after Himself, which can not be; or
else some other thing must be the cause of Him, and so He should not be Alpha,
the first and independent, but should depend upon His cause, as in nature
before Him. But contrariwise He is the cause of all things, and upon Him all
things necessarily depend both in their essence and operation.

Uses.
Seeing this Attribute belongs to our use especially in the exercise of it
(whereof David speaks afterward) I shall therefore here be the briefer.

For our Instruction. Instr.
1 If God be merciful to sinners repenting, then certainly much more is He
tenderly affected toward them, who having already repented of their sins,
and mortified the works of the flesh by the Spirit of Christ (into Whom they
are engraffed by faith) serve Him diligently in holiness and righteousness,
and bring forth plentiful fruit, whereby He is glorified.

2 We see how it comes to pass, that sin does not presently damn, but that
there is hope in Israel notwithstanding sin. If Gods punishing justice should
strictly take place, there could be no hope. But God is merciful, and out of
His mercy according to the prescript of His wisdom He so remits of His
justice, that there remains certain hope of salvation to all that repent,
though worse then Manasseh, the Jews, Act. 2. (who notwithstanding Christ's
innocence, the excellency of His doctrine, frequency greatness and goodness
of His miracles, crucified Him) etc.

3 We see also the true cause of damnation. It is not want of mercy in God to
deliver men, and so to save them: but they are wanting to themselves in that
they will not walk in the ways to which God in his wisdom has annexed and
restrained His showing mercy, lest His justice should be contemned.

This reproves 1 Such as do not carry themselves as becomes this mercy of God;
viz. either despairing presuming
of it.

Despair as it is in it self a great sin, Repr.
so it is also to man very dangerous. It is great in it self, as being (which
many other sins (...) which he could not hinder) may be of a harsh
disposition, which can never in this life be quite remoyed, yet by the
powerful grace of God it may be so far rectified, that a man shall have a
merciful heart, and in the general course of his life exercise it, though he
can not so express it in speech and countenance as others can. But he that
gives way to such a disposition, without grieving for it, and laboring to
mortify it, is not like our heavenly Father. For He is merciful; and so must
we be, if we will be His children, Lu. 6.36. Much less are they like Him, who
contrary to their natural inclination draw upon themselves a habit of cruelty
by frequent acts out of self-love, pride etc.

Here is also Comfort 1 for them, Consol.
who groan under the burden of their sins. See ver. 3. Doct. 2. Consol.

1 Against the cruelty of men. If they refuse to pardon us, when we have
offended them (though we duly crave pardon of them) or if they punish us
altogether undeservedly, not for any offense or fault of ours, and that beyond
all moderation, without all mercy; and if others also have no compassion of us
being so used: yet let this comfort us, that there is mercy with God. And as
the mercy of men can not procure our salvation, so neither can their cruelty
hinder it, God being merciful unto us.

Let this also exhort us 1 To labor that we may be partakers of this mercy.
Exhort.


Motiv. 1 Otherwise we are undone for ever. 2 If we truly seek it, we shall not
seek it in vain. 3 This is able to relieve all our miseries etc.

Means, Repentance.

2 To be merciful toward others. This belongs chiefly to the exercise of
mercy: Yet something may be said briefly of the inward affection.

Motiv. 1 The external acts of pardoning them that have injured us, relieving
them that are in misery etc if the heart be void of mercy, are not acts of
mercy, but of some other principle, what ever it be, from whence they proceed,
perhaps of vainglory, cowardlinesse etc and therefore shall not only fail of
the reward promised to the merciful, but be punished as hypocritical at
least, if not otherwise sinful. 2 If we have the inward affection, though for
want of power or opportunity we can not exercise the outward act, God will in
this case accept and reward the will for the deed.

Means. 1 Seeing Christ is full of grace, of Whose fullness we all receive
grace for grace; it is necessary that being taken out of the wild olive we be
graffed into Him the true olive tree. 2 Seeing Christ communicates by His
Spirit, Which is therefore called the Spirit of grace; let us labor to be
endued with it. 3 By the grace of His Spirit exercise mercy, that by frequent
acts the habit may be gotten and confirmed.

3 To give unto God the glory of His mercy.

Motiv. 1 God, working all things for Himself, has revealed this, as all the
rest of His Attributes to us in His word and works, that we may glorify Him. 2
Holy men in Scripture every where show us example: David especially in this
book of Psalms. 3 It is most just: seeing the mercy of God is the fountain of
all the good we have or hope for. That eternal glory and happiness is
prepared for us, that Christ was sent to merit and procure it, the Spirit to
apply it, the word and other ordinances, which the Spirit uses to this end
etc. is all the work of mercy.

Means. 1 Meditate of the excellency of Gods mercy, as it is described in the
word. 2 Observe the sweet operations thereof in thy self and others.

2 Doctrine. The LORD is gracious.
(...) gracious. Expl.
] The grace of God is often by a Metonym. effic. put for a double effect of it,
noting 1 holy habits begotten in the mind and heart, as saving knowledge of
God, faith, hope, charity etc. 1 Cor. 1.4, 5. 1 Pet. 4.10. 2 The continual
assistance of the Holy Spirit, 2 Cor. 12.9. But here it is taken in the proper
signification: and so it imports the manner, according to which God out of His
goodness, love, mercy, delivers the creature from evils and enriches it with
good things, namely gratis, or freely. For deliverance from evil, Psalm. 51.1.
For bestowing of good, Genesis 33.5, 11. When therefore God is said to be
gracious, the meaning is, that He is ready to remove evil from His creature,
and to bestow good upon it, not upon any precedent merit or debt, or yet out of
hope of recompense, whereby any thing may accrue to Himself; but only that it
may be well with the creature.

For the Proof and Reason, (...).
See the former Doctrine.



well agree. Whereupon the Scripture ascribing our Justification to Grace, does
also often teach that we are justified by Faith. And so for salvation, Ephesians.
2.8. By grace ye are saved through faith etc. Yea Romans 4.16. Therefore it is of
faith, that it might be by grace etc. For it is of the mere grace of God, that
He would make a new covenant; that omitting the rigor of the Law He would
require Faith for the condition of it; that we are either able or willing to
believe, Philip. 2.13. These two therefore may very well stand together, That
all who are justified and saved are justified and saved of the mere grace of
God, and yet, That no man is justified or saved but by Faith. God does not
enter covenant with us, as needing any thing that we can do unto Him. Who is in
Himself Allsufficient and Blessed from everlasting to everlasting. He does not
enter covenant with us, as thereby to cut off that absolute right of creation
and redemption, in regard of which He might require of us whatsoever we could
perform, without making any promise to us, or covenanting thereby for our
obedience. His covenant is so framed, that He commands what we are to do, and
adds a terrible threatening of death, if we do it not, and promises a reward as
of grace and free gift, if we do it: we tender the condition to Him from His
own power, as our duty, and seek the reward by humble entreaty, that He would
remember His holy covenant. So that he enters into covenant, to excite us the
more willingly and cheerfully to do Him service; not to imply that He needs to
us, or that we can merit any thing at His hands.





Uses.
For our instruction, Instr.
1 Here we see whence it is that God often plentifully bestows upon wicked men
the good things whereof they are most unworthy, and averts the evils which they
have most justly deserved; though out of His Omnisciency He most certainly
foresees their obstinacy to be such that they will not by these riches of His
goodness be led to repentance. Hereupon some of the heathen denied Gods
providence, and sometimes holy men envy the wicked. But we may easily resist
these temptations. The former (of the heathen) if we think of the grace of God,
which looks at neither antecedent merit nor subsequent recompense in the
bestowing of good or averting of evil, and out of which He will do good even
to bad men, that He may satisfy His love to His creature, though He certainly
foresee that (by reason of their contumacy) He shall not obtain his prime end
of bringing them to repentance, which He seriously intends, and for which He
uses sufficient means. The other temptation (of the saints) we may also
resist 1 If we consider the same grace of God, whereby He may do with His own
what He will (For is it not lawful for Him so to do? Is our eye evil, because
He is good?) 2 If we consider how long He so deals with the wicked of His
grace: Not for ever, but only so long as He thinks fit to expect their
conversion. But if they will not be converted but turn His grace into
wantonness; the Spirit of grace, to which they do such despite, will not
always strive with them, but there will be a time, when, stripping them of all
good, God will cast them into eternal misery, so that it shall be manifest to
all, that they are nothing less then the object of envy.

2 See here a just and effectual cause of patience when either good things are
wanting, or evils ly upon us. If we could deserve, or God did any way ow us the
bestowing of those good things or the averting of those evils, it were another
matter. But seeing He is gracious dispensing all His benefits freely, why do we
yet complain as if He dealt injuriously with us? Yea rather let us set in
order before our selves our many and great sins, and amongst the rest our
abusing of Gods benefits; and then I dare boldly say we are very blind, if we
do not see most just cause of acknowledging the great grace of God toward us,
that any good at all, even our life and breath, is still continued to us, and
that we are not at this very hour in hell. And further we must consider that
Gods withholding temporal good things, or His sending temporal evils, do not
always proceed from an intention of revenge, neither are as it were
forerunners of condemnation; but, that He often even of the same grace fatherly
chastises us for our good, yea many times only proves us, that His graces may
be exercised and increased in us, that so He may enlarge His blessings upon us
in this life, and in the life to come set a more shining crown of glory upon
our heads. Seeing then that the afflictions of both these kinds proceed from
the grace of God, and are unspeakably profitable for us; shall we be so mad as
to be vexed at our own great good, and to be impatient against God for being
gracious unto us?

3 See also a sovereign remedy against pride and boasting of any good thing we
have. For what have we that we have not received, not only without but
contrary to our merit, of the mere grace of God? And if we have so received it,
why should we boast our selves as if we had not received it? Psalm. 75.4, 5, 6,
7.

4 See a just reason why the Scripture so often requires of us thankfulness to
God for all His benefits. If we did deserve them, there were no thanks due to
God; as doing but that, which in justice He were bound to do. But seeing He is
gracious, dispensing His benefits freely without any desert on our part; our
thanks (which would be due even to a man, that should bestow any benefit upon
us) must needs be most due unto Him.

This reproves 1 Such as abuse the grace of God. Repr.
God indeed is gracious: But will He so give all things to all men? Indeed He
is willing and ready to give unto all according to such conditions as are
agreeable to the honor of His justice; and He does often give plentifully the
things of this life and the means of salvation to wicked men. But eternal
salvation He will not give to any (I speak of them who are adulti and have the
use of reason) but only to true believers, as appears manifestly every where
in Scripture.

2 Them that will not reward such as by taking pains for the good of their
souls, bodies, or estates, deserve it in the strict rigor of justice. How
unlike are these to God, Who gives His rewards to those that no way deserve
them? And with what face can they expect such a reward of grace, who will not
give a reward of debt?

3 Much more those who unjustly by fraud or violence take away a man's own from
him, or requite evil for good.

On the other side here is again a further ground of Comfort for them who groan
under the burden of their sins, Consol.
doubting of obtaining forgiveness and salvation. If there were no remission
to be had without works of satisfaction done either plenarily or in respect of
temporal punishments (which latter the papists affirm in the Council of
Trent Sess. 4. cap. 8, 9.) we might well indeed doubt of it, confidering on the
one part the enormity of sin and the infiniteness of Gods Majesty offended
thereby, and on the other part our own weakness. But God is gracious, and
forgives sins (if truly repented of according to the prescript of His
Gospel) freely. And though He may in respect of some sins retain the
temporal punishment (as in Moses Deuteronomy. 32.48. etc. and in David 2 Samuel 12.13,
14.) this is not, that satisfaction might be made Him (Whom Christ has fully
satisfied) but to humble them, with whom He so deals, and make them beware for
the time to come, and to admonish others by their example etc. So for
salvation, if it depended upon our own merits, we might cast away all hopes and
thoughts of it. But God is gracious: and, by grace we are saved ( Ephesians. 2.8) as
many as are saved. Therefore if we frame our selves carefully after the rule of
the Gospel, our salvation according to the covenant of grace is most certain.

Let this exhort us 1 To come to the throne of grace. Exhort.


Motiv. 1. We need many things. 2 With God is all sufficiency. 3. From God
sitting upon the throne of Justice (as it is contradistinguished to Grace)
nothing can be expected by us but the wages of sin. 4 At the throne of grace
all things, which are truly good for us, may easily be obtained; where neither
merit is prerequired, nor recompense looked for at our hands, but God (as a
debtour to no man, and standing in need of nothing) gives all things freely. 5
God not only admits them that come, but of his own accord invites them that
are slack, Heb. 4.16. Isa. 55.1.

Means. That is simply necessary and abundantly sufficient, whereupon the
Apostle grounds this exhortation in the place now quoted, Hebr. 4.16. viz. that
(as it is ver. 14, 15.) we have Jesus Christ for our High Priest to make
intercession for us in the Holy of Holies. To this end we must attend to Him as
a Prophet teaching us, and obey Him as a King commanding us to repent and
believe, and to bring forth fruits meet for repentance, showing the truth of
our faith by a serious and constant endeavor of denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts etc. Tit. 2. This means is absolutely necessary, because God
according to the prescript of His wisdom, for preserving the honor of His
justice, has peremptorily decreed not to give the grace of salvation unto any
but such as are engraffed into Christ. And it is abundantly sufficient, because
Christ has so satisfied Gods Justice, that nothing hinders but that He may
according to the natural inclination of His Grace most tenderly love all those
who are partakers of Him, and do good to them in all things whereof they stand
in need: which that He will also do, His promises every where, oath, seals
etc. do assure us.

2 Freely to do good to others. To imitate God here in all points we are
neither bound nor able. To some men we are debtours, as to our parents,
creditours, benefactours etc. Many things also we our selves have need of; and
therefore if we should do all things freely without expectation of recompense,
we should be destitute of necessary means of life. In which respect God
commands that the labourer should have his wages, and that they, who preach the
Gospel should live of the Gospel; and in like manner, that all who exercise
any lawful calling should be maintained thereby: which could not be, if a
labourer should have nothing for his pains, and a tradesman should give away
his commodities etc. But so far as other men's necessities require, and our
own abilities will bear, we ought to do it.

Motiv. 1 To requite them that have given to us, or to give to them who are
like to requite us, is a small matter: publicanes and sinners do so, Mat.
5.46, 47. Luke 6.32. etc. 2 By doing good freely, viz. to them who have not
deserved it, or who have deserved the contrary, we shall be the children of our
Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5.44, 45. 3 How freely soever we study to do
good to others, yet we shall not do it freely ((...) gratis) in respect of
God; as Who both has already abundantly deserved of us; and will also
plentifully recompense unto us whatsoever we do for His sake, Mat. 10.42. Luke
6.35. and 14.12, 13, 14.

3 Doctrine. The Lord is slow to anger ( or, long-suffring.)
(...) long of anger. Explic.
] Which is meant not in respect of the continuance of His anger (for so he is
quite contrary, as we shall see in the next verse, and Psalm. 30.5. Isa. 54.8.)
but in respect of the beginning of it: that is, He is long ere He will be
angry. For thus is the phrase every where taken, whether spoken of God or man.
And so also (...) Prove. 19.11. The discretion of a man deferres his anger, or,
makes him slow to anger. So Isa. 48.9. In like manner (...) Eccles. 7.8. To
which are contrary (...) short of anger and (...) short of spirit, that is,
soon angry, or hasty of spirit, Prove. 14.17, 29. And this also (as the former
Attribute) is here to be understood in actu primo, as noting a propension in
God to refrain His anger in the effects of it (viz. revenge or punishments)
notwithstanding the greatness, continuance, or frequent iteration of men's
sins.

For the Proof and Reason see Doctr. 1. (...) and (...).


Uses.
For our instruction 1 This Attribute of long-suffring presupposes in God a
natural hatred of sin: Instr.
His refraining for a time the effects of His displeasure implies that He is
displeased at it. And both these presuppose Gods omnisciency, whereby He knows
all sins.

2 See here the true cause why sinners many times go so long unpunished: Not
their desert, nor that God either sees not, or hates not their sins, or is
not able to punish them; but His long-suffring, or slownesse to anger.

3 Hence also it appears that the sins of impenitent persons are not at all
remitted by Gods long-suffring. Quod differtur, non aufertur. Forbearance is no
quittance. Their punishment is only put off, not taken off. Gods suffering is
long, but not for ever. If men will find no end of sinning, God will find an
end of suffering, and a beginning of punishing.

This reproves 1 Such as are unlike to God, Repr.
(...) Prove. 14.17. and (...) verse. 29. (...), that are soon angry, hasty of
spirit, who like tindar or gunpowder, take fire presently at the least spark
of any offense, yea sometimes where there is none at all, but only in their
misapprehension.

2 Such as abuse the long-suffring of God to quite contrary ends; viz. to
pride, luxury, oppression etc. to foster impious conceits of God, that He is
such an one as themselves, Psalm. 50.21. to set their hearts fully to do evil,
Eccles. 8.11.

3 Such as envy Gods long-suffring toward others, yea pray for speedy
vengeance upon them.

It exhorts us 1 To hasten our repentance, Exhort.
lest that come upon us, Romans 2.4, 5. etc.

2 Patiently to suffer afflictions, though they seem very long to us.

Motiv. 1 Let us consider how long God has suffered our sins most unjustly
committed against Him, and be ashamed not to suffer patiently His chastisements
most justly inflicted upon us, yea far below our desert. 2 They are sent by
God to purge and take away our sins, Isa. 27.9. that we should not be
condemned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32. but be made partakers of His holiness,
Hebr. 12.10. and consequently of eternal happiness. Shall not we then
patiently bear afflictions, which are sent for our great good, when God
patiently bears our sins which are good for nothing ( Romans 6.21. Ephesians.
5.11.) yea which are directly contrary to the greatest good, Gods glory and our
salvation? 3 How long soever the time of our sufferings seems to us, certainly
it shall last no longer then is requisite to the ends before mentioned, Lam.
3.33. And shall not we so long endure the hand of God, Who has with so much
patience endured us pressing Him with our sins, as a cart is pressed that is
full of sheaves? Amos 2.13.

3 To imitate God in being long-suffring, or slow to anger, patiently enduring
the injuries offered to us by others, though great, though many, though long
continued and often repeated.

4 Doctrine. The Lord is plenteous in loving-kindnesse.
1 (...) loving-kindnesse. Explic.
] This we explained before, Verse. 4. Doctr. 4. Where we showed that it extends
both to deliverance from evil and to the bestowing of positive good. But it is
most commonly taken the latter way: And so it is here; the former being
expressed by (...) merciful.

2 (...) plenteous.] This signifies a large quantity, either continued (that
is, magnitude or greatness) Psalm. 48.2. or discrete (that is, multitude) Psalm.
3.1, 2. But seeing Gods loving-kindnesse (taken in actu primo, as here it is)
is one and the same essential Attribute of God, therefore the former
signification is proper to this place; He is (...) that is, exceeding propense
to communicate good. And so Psalm. 145.8. in stead of (...) it is (...) Though
in the effects this (as the rest also of Gods Attributes) is (...) many ways
manifold, as we shall see immediately in the proof.

Beside the places quoted for the proof hereof in the first Doctrine, (...).
the plenteousnesse of Gods loving kindness may be further demonstrated by the
multitude and greatness of the effects of it.

The multitude will appear, if we consider 1 How many they are to whom God
does good, even as many as there ever have been, (...) their sin and the
reprobate by their final impenitence in their sins deprived themselves of it.

Uses.
Here 1 See what encouragement we have to pray unto God. Instr.
Such is our need, that though he, by whom it were to be supplied, were most
tenacious, we had cause to beat his ears continually by our uncessant
clamours, that if he would not for any other cause, yet being wearied with our
importunity he might grant us what we ask. But God (Who not only admits but
invites us to pray) as He has an inexhaust plenty of all good things, so He is
also as plenteous in kindness and ready to give. But if He defer His giving,
the reason is, because that which we ask is not convenient for us, or because
we ask amiss, or are not yet fit to receive, or because it is expedient for us
that our faith, hope, patience etc be thereby exercised etc. Otherwise it would
come to pass (as Isa. 65.24.) that before we should call, God would answer,
and whilst we were yet speaking. He would hear. See Dan. 9.20, 21, 22, 23. Let
the papists therefore with their will worship go to their he and she saints:
but let us go to God with our prayers, as both His commandment lays a
necessity upon us, and this Attribute abundantly encourages us.

2 See the fountain of all good; whence both what we have is received, and what
we want is to be sought.

3 If God be so plenteous in loving kindness even toward all; how much more
toward His children!

4 If any man do not abound with good things, let him know that the cause is
not in God (Who is plenteous in loving kindness) but in himself.

This reproves 1 Such as seek the good things they desire, Repr.
from any other then from God. These are like unto them Jer. 2.13. they commit
two evils etc. For whereas every transgression of the law is sin, they
transgress two ways at once. Which their transgression (as all sins are not
equal) see 1 how impious it is. 2 how unprofitable and foolish. 1 For the
impiety, the degree of it (which for the substance is to be estimated by the
Commandment which is violated) is very great: because it is against a
commandment of the first Table which immediately respects God Himself, and so
the violation of it, caeteris paribus, is worse then the violation of any of
the commandments of the 2d Table, which respect our neighbor. And whereas the
first Commandment of the first Table concerns the having of the true God (as
the rest the true manner of worshipping Him) therefore the breach of that is
most heinous. See the story of the Samaritanes 2 King. 17. God sent lions
against them that did not at all acknowledge Him, ver. 25. but withheld them
from those that worshipped Him though after Jeroboams manner. Now whereas the
first commandment enjoines the having of the Lord for our God, and forbids
other gods; these men violate both parts of it, the affirmative by forsaking
the Lord, the negative by digging themselves other cisternes. For Trust is an
act eminently due only to God, and not to be placed in any thing else but with
subordination unto Him: And therefore in what thing soever a man principally
trusts, that he makes his god. 2 How unprofitable and foolish this is, appears
by the description of God and these cisternes. God is the fountain of living
waters: The cisternes, which they dig, as (being but cisternes, not fountains)
they have no water of themselves, so (being but broken cisternes) they can not
hold the water that is put into them to supply those that dig them. For all
creatures as they are from God, so they depend upon Him for their operation,
yea and for the continuance of their being: and therefore unless they be
preserved by God, and enabled by Him, it is impossible they should help us. Now
He will be so far from blessing the creatures wherein men idolatrously trust,
that He curses those that trust in them, Isa. 31.1. Jer. 17.5. and many times
takes away and destroys the creatures themselves, Isa. 31.3.

2 Such as are unlike to God 1 Privatively, such as either through their own
fault have not spiritual or temporal good things wherewith to profit others
or who having them are not ready to communicate them. 2 Positively, such as are
plenteous in mischievousnesse; who are so much worse then the former, by how
much commission of ill is worse then omission of good, which it includes in it
self and superadds to it.

On the other side this serves to comfort 1 Sinners, if truly penitent. Consol.
Benhadad having lost the day, and being in great fear of losing not only his
kingdom but his life, his servants comforted him with the fame that they had
heard, that the Kings of Israel were (...) merciful Kings, 1 King. 20.31. but
we know most certainly that the God of Israel is a merciful God, (...)
plenteous in mercy or loving kindness, as here.

2 Much more the godly. For if God be so plenteous in loving kindness to men,
whilst they are yet His enemies; how much more when they are reconciled to
Him, and become His friends and His children, whom He tenders as the apple of
His eye, more then a mother her sucking child? Can we think that Jacob feared
the famine after he knew there was come enough in Egypt, and the disposal
thereof in the power of his son Joseph? Yet among men love descends, so that
the love of a son toward his father, is not equal to that of a father toward
his children: and the love of any earthly father whatsoever is nothing to the
love of our heavenly Father; whether we consider the tenderness, or the
constancy, or the efficacy of it. Of how little faith therefore are we, if so
great kindness of so loving a Father can not comfort us against any grief or
fear whatsoever!

Let this also exhort us 1 For the good things we yet have not, Exhort.
to expect and seek them of Gods loving kindness.

2 For those we have already received, to be thankful to Him.

3 To imitate God in this Attribute also as in the former.

Motiv. 1 The dignity of man consists in being like unto God. Some courtiers
have imitated even the imperfections of their princes. And shall not we much
more imitate our God every way most perfect? And particularly in His bounty or
loving kindness: seeing, as it is more honorable in the eyes of men, so it is
a more blessed thing before God to give then to receive ( Act. 20.35.) to be a
help rather then a burden to others. 2 The good things we have, whether
spiritual or temporal, are not our own, but are only to be dispensed by us
according to Gods prescription. And He has prescribed us this duty, Gal. 6.10.
3 We are all brethren in our first parents, of the same flesh and blood, Isa.
58.7. Act. 17.26. partakers of the same natural, capable of the same gracious
and glorious image of God. 4 Hereby God shall be glorified, His doctrine
adorned, we shall give good example to the good, win them who are yet
enemies, or else stop their mouths, we shall get and keep the peace of
conscience, other men will be moved to help us when we shall need, or (if men
be ungrateful and inhumane) God will most amply recompense us here, and
minister unto us abundantly an entrance into His heavenly kingdom hereafter.

Verse. 9. He will not always chide, neither will He keep His anger for ever.
In the precedent verse we had the foundation of all Gods benefits which He
bestows upon them that fear Him, in those four Attributes of His. The
benefit upon which the Psalmist principally insists, is the moderation of His
anger. Which moderation is illustrated from the proegumenall or internal
moving cause, verse. 11, 12, 13. and from the procatarcticall or external cause
or occasion, verse. 14. to the 19. In which illustration other notable benefits
of God are also mentioned. This moderation of Gods anger is either in respect
of the duration of it, verse. 9. measure of it whilst it endures, verse. 10.


Of this 9th verse both the parts are almost coincident: but the latter seems
to be something larger. For whereas anger appears either in words or deeds, the
former part speaks of Gods anger expressed in words, the latter of His anger
simply, which yet we may understand specially of His anger expressed in deeds.

1 Doctrine. The LORD will not always chide.
(...) signifies to contend in words that is, Explic.
to chide. This God does by reproving. threatening.
Now to be always chiding may be denied of God in a double sense. 1 When,
unless men mend their manners within a time limited, He ceases any longer to
show His anger in words, and proceeds to deeds of severe punishment. 2 When
being appeased He does not any further show His anger so much as in words. In
the former sense He said, Genesis 6.3. My Spirit shall not always strive with man
etc. his days shall be 120 years: After which time He brought the flood upon
them and swept them away from earth into hell, 1 Pet. 3.19. But here the latter
sense is to be understood, as appears by the latter part of the verse. For in
the former sense, when he ceases to chide, He keeps His anger in a greater
degree. Understand it also of the same persons. For as often as the word is
read or preached, some are reprehended or chidden.

That God will not always chide, take it from His own mouth, Isa. 57.16. (...).
(...) I will not chide (or contend) for ever. etc. God chode with Job, chap.
38. and 39. and 40. and 41. But see chap. 42. where He rather chode for him
against his three friends, verse. 7. and turned his captivity, verse. 10. etc. He
chode with David by Nathan, 2 Samuel 12. But as soon as he had said, I have
sinned against the Lord; he received answer, The Lord has also taken away thy
sin, thou shall not die. So He chode with Ephraim, especially by the Prophet
Hosea: But upon their repentance see how His voice was changed toward them,
Jer. 31.18, 19, 20.

The Reason hereof David shows, (...).
verse. 11. etc.

Uses.
Here we see 1 That God may and does many times chide either with particular
persons or whole nations for their sins. Instr.
Even Christians as they are subject to sin, so they are liable to be
chidden, that is, reproved, and threatened for it.

2 That yet this chiding shall not be forever. With some it cease, because
there is no more hope that it will do any good for the end primarily intended
by God, viz. their amendment, Prove. 9.8. Hos. 4.4. Mat. 7.6. With such God
ceases to chide, that He may begin to punish, Prove. 29.1. But with His own
people and servants He cease to chide, out of His love to them: because, they
repenting He will not any longer show His anger against them so much as by
chiding. Repr.


This reproves 1 Such as are impatient at Gods chiding that is, at reproofs and
threatenings out of His word, whether they be used publicly by the minister of
God, or privately. So Ahab, 1 Kings 22.8. I hate him (Micaiah) for he does not
prophecy good concerning me, but evil, that is, he reproves and threatens me.
He should rather have hated himself, concerning whom no good could be
prophesied. This was Ahab, who had sold himself to work wickedness. What such
entertainers of this act of Gods word may expect, see 2 Chronicles. 25.16.

2 Such as being of a bitter spirit so give way to it, that they are always
chiding, always reproving and threatening. These are altogether unlike to God.
And if they pretend Gods word for it, they make God like unto themselves,
contrary to the Doctrine here in hand.



any longer then they are so qualifyed.

This also may minister comfort 1 To them, Consol.
with whom God chides for the present. He will not always chide. And therefore
let them set themselves to repent and cast away their sins, for which only
God chides. And as soon as they sincerely endeavor this (though they be not so
thoroughly purged as to stand before Him, if He should mark every thing that is
done amiss) He will cease to chide. Yea as the pillar, which was a cloud and
darkness to the Egyptians, gave light to the Israelites, Exodus 14.20. so the
Scripture, which chides a man remaining in his sins, comforts him when he
repents.

2 Much more to the godly against the chidings of men. God, to Whom they must
stand or fall, speaks peace to them, and not only blesses when men curse,
Psalm. 109.28. but blesses the more because of their cursing, 2 Samuel 16.12.

Lastly this should exhort us to imitate God herein. Exhort.


Motiv. 1. Unless our chiding be principally for Gods cause, it is railing.
Now how can it be for Gods cause, if we chide, when He chides not? Nay indeed
Gods cause is only pretended, that we may vent our own spleen and malice,
whereby their hearts are made sad, whom God would not have to be sad. 2
Instruction and Exhortation are the ordinary food of the soul; Reproofs and
threatenings are purging physic, as Comforts are cordialls. The former
therefore are constantly to be used: these latter only upon occasion; and
Chiding, so long only, till sins be (evangelically) purged out.

2 Doctrine. He keeps not His anger for ever.
Anger is ascribed to God only (...), Explic.
after the manner of man, by reason of the likeness of the effects. A man out
of anger intends revenge, and declares this his intention by threats and
punishments. And so God is said to be angry, when for the evil of sin He
decrees to repay the evil of punishment, and by threatenings or actual
punishments manifests that His decree. And in the same sense He is said to keep
His anger. And seeing it is expressed either by words or deeds, and of the
former we have spoken in the precedent Doctrine; here we will speak of it as
expressed in deeds: but still understanding it with respect to them that repent.

For proof hereof we have Gods own word, Isa. 57.16. Jer. 3.5, 12. (...).
Psalm. (...) 5. Examples, Judge. 10.16. Manasseh, etc.

The Reasons see afterward, (...).
verse. 11. etc.

Uses.
For our Instruction. Instr.
1 As in the former Doctrine, mutatis mutandis.

2 See, how we are to understand Gods immutability, of which we so often read
in Scripture. Two ways only we can imagine God to be immutable toward m^n;
viz. either by constantly following the rule of the new covenant (that is,
being angry with the impenitent, and comforting them that repent) or else by
carrying Himself always alike to the same particular persons. And these 2
ways can not stand together, unless we suppose the same persons to be always
alike qualifyed. For if He follow the rule of the Gospel, then He must carry
Himself differently to men differently qualifyed: If He carry Himself always
alike to the same persons, though differently qualifyed, then He does not
follow the rule of the Gospel; for that requires a different carriage. Whether
way then shall we understand Gods immutability? To affirm the latter were to
make God in His own nature (requiring that He should follow the rule dictated
by His Wisdom, decreed by His Will, manifested by His word, confirmed by His
oath etc. and therefore that he should not carry Himself alike to the same man
at different times differently qualifyed, viz. penitent and impenitent)
mutable, yea a liar, and perjured; and to cast them, against whom He is angry,
headlong into despair, others into presumption. And it is confuted as in
infinite other places, so here, where we see God does not always keep His
anger against those at whom He is once angry. Yea it were unbefitting an
earthly god (who ought constantly to be a terror to them that do evil, but
for the praise of them that do well) so to be either well or ill affected to
any man, as to be still the same to him, whether he do well or ill, and so to
respect the person of a man above justice. Wherefore the former immutability is
that which the Scripture so often attributes to God, and so much celebrates;
viz. that God without any respect of persons is angry at the impenitent, and
well pleased with them that repent. And thus He is, without any change at all
in Himself; seeing His carriage only (out of His immutable observing the rule
of His covenant) is changed upon a change in the object. The fire hardens the
clay, and softens the wax; not that there is any change or difference in the
fire but in the objects.

3 See what encouragement God affords for serving Him. 1 We may certainly know,
that upon supposition of perseverance in faith and obedience to Gods
commandments we shall be saved, and that upon Gods promise. 2 We may know
also, that we are in that estate, wherein if we persevere, we shall be saved. 3
That we may persevere in that estate, so that no power of men or devils shall
be able to remove us from it; that no temptation can happen from the flesh the
world, or the devil, but that we may overcome it by grace, either by the grace
which we now have, or by that which (if we rightly ask it) God will not deny
us. 4 If we do sin, that God will indeed chide; that is reprove and threaten
us: but if we repent (to which there shall not want means to those that
diligently seek them) He will not always chide. 5 That if chiding will do no
good on us, He will also show His anger in real effects, by afflicting and
punishing us: but still if we return unto Him and amend, He will be again
reconciled to us, and will not keep His anger for ever. And what further
certainty of our salvation would we have, unless we would be certain to be
saved how ever we shall live? Repr.


This reproves 1 Such as are impatient of afflictions sent by God: though, if
they continue long, themselves are in fault, who continue in their sins.

2 Such as keep their anger for ever. Against such ( in sensu composito, that
is, continuing such) God also will keep His anger for ever. For they are only
such as repent and fear Him, against whom He will not keep His anger. But
against His enemies He is expressly said to keep it, Nahum 1.2. Which also is
evident by all those places in which eternal damnation is threatened against
the impenitent. Now they who keep their anger, are plainly Gods enemies because
therein they transgress His Commandments whereof this is one Levit. 19.18.
(...) (the word here in the Text) Thou shall not keep [thine anger] or, Thou
shall not bear any grudge against the children of thy people. And, Let not the
sun go down upon your wrath Ephesians. 4.26. 2 Because by continuing their anger
longer then God, they are angry against Gods friends, to whom upon their
repentance He is reconciled.

Here also (as in the former Doctrine) is a ground of Comfort 1 Against Gods
wrath. Consol.
To them who ly under it there is hope; and, if they avoid the cause confidence
also.

2 Against the wrath of men unjustly kept.

Lastly this should exhort us 1 To break off our sins. Exhort.


Motiv. 1. We shall thereby remit not of justice (as God by breaking off His
wrath) but of iniquity. As long as we continue in our sins, we provoke God,
wound our own consciences, strengthen ill habits etc. 3 Unles we break them
off in this life, the guilt will follow us and subject us to the eternal wrath
of God in the world to come.

2 To imitate God, in not keeping our anger.

Motiv. 1. Anger is a fruit of the flesh ( Gal. 5.20. Colos. 3.8.) which in a
Christian should never appear; or, if it do at any time break out, it is not to
be retained. 2 Unles we break it off at the first, it will bring a world of
evils. For by reason of the swiftnes and violence of its motion, it takes away
the ultimate judgment of the reason ( Eccle. 7.9.) and so at once both excites
a man vehemently to act, and takes away the rule according to which he ought to
act. 3 Anger being continued causes hatred or malice, which is far worse then
anger. For Malice or hatred desires malum alterius, qua malum, the evil of
another as evil, and so infinitely: whereas Anger desires it tanquam bonum
honestum and justum, under the notion of good for just revenge; and that to a
certain measure, which being fulfilled, it rests, being exceeded, it pities.
Again Anger deals plainly and openly, and so may the more easily be resisted:
Hatred or malice goes closely and cunningly to work, and lays wait to do
mischief, both dissimulando, by concealing the ill it intends, and simulando,
for a better color pretending the contrary. Prove. 26.24, 25. 2 Samuel 3.27. and
^0.9. Anger may be appeased Prove. 15.1. but Malice for the most part is
implacable. Anger, if it do not turn to malice, does by little and little cease
of it self: but Malice grows and increases.

3 To bless God for this and the former.

Verse. 10. He has not done unto us according to our sins, nor dealt with us
according to our iniquities.
Gods anger being no further by his long suffering to be deferred, may be
mitigated 2 ways. viz. 1 By facility to pardon, in respect of the duration of
it. 2 By gentleness or clemency, in respect of the greatness of it, (...) spoken
to the Apostles, and in respect of their ministry, they being master builders)
and that 1 Cor. 2.15. and 1 John 2.27. which places are not to be understood
generally of all things (for then they should know the secrets of other men's
hearts, which is proper to God only, and all Divine mysteries, which S. Paul,
though eminently spiritual and holy, knew but in part) but of things necessary
to be known unto salvation. But if these men err not, in thus thinking
themselves free from error, surely David (who acknowledges here for himself,
and the faithful of his time, amongst whom were Nathan, Gad etc. that they had
their errors, who also speaks generally Psalm. 19.12.) had not the same spirit,
which these men have. Happily they will object the difference between the Old and
New Testament Ans. Then they prefer themselves before the best under the Old
Testament. And indeed in respect of the objects or things revealed by the
Spirit, the least in the Kingdom of heaven (that is, under the Gospel) is
greater then John the Baptist, as he then those which went before him. But
seeing the old Prophets, in those things which they delivered to the Church,
had an infallible assistance of the Holy Spirit (as appears by their
prophesies, and S. Peter testifies, 2 ep. 1.21.) it is great arrogance in this
respect to prefer before them any under the New Testament, except the
Apostles. But suppose these men excel the old Prophets; what shall we think of
the primitive Christians, or faithful under the New Testament? It is certain
that these also (not the Apostles themselves excepted) had their sins, 1 John
1.8. yea many, Jam. 3.2. and therefore also their errors. Seeing then the best
of Gods servants, whilst they lived, had their errors; let us so much the
more take heed, lest either by relying upon our own understanding, or by too
much admiring of others, we fall into error. But if we do fall into it, let
us not despair (seeing it is the common condition) but be careful we do not
persist in error, but return into the way again. And if others err, let us
not be too rigid toward them.

2 We see that sins (though of ignorance) in their own nature deserve Gods
anger. Otherwise David had not had cause to praise Gods goodness and clemency
in this respect, viz. for not doing unto us according to our errors. 3 See the
goodness and clemency of God, in not doing unto us according to our errors.
Rept

This reproves 1 Such as make no account of their errors: whereas yet if God
should do unto us but according to our errors, it would go ill with us. If
He should not forgive us our daily trespasses, we could not hope He would give
us (as a blessing) our daily bread.

2 Such as strictly take notice of every small offense of their brethren,
though but an error, but a sin of ignorance or infirmity, and do to them
according to it, if not beyond it.

But let us 1 imitate David here in giving thanks to God that He has not done
to us according to our errors: Exhort.
from which (especially considering the number of them) He might justly have
taken occasion to have shown the effects of His anger upon us, not only in
depriving us of His benefits, but also in inflicting positive punishments upon
us.

2 Imitate God in not dealing with our brethren according to their errors.

Motiv. Beside Gods example, Consider 1 Thine own infirmity, who have offended,
or at least may offend others, yea those very men who have offended thee; and
yet would be loath that they should deal with thee accordingly. 2 What
measure thou measurest unto thy brethren, the same will God also measure unto
thee. He shall have judgment without mercy etc. Jam. 2.13. 3 If thou dealest
with thy brother according to his errors, thou will show thy self to be void
of charity the chief of all virtues (for that has contrary effects. 1 Cor. 13.
Prove. 10.12.) without which all that thou have or do is nothing worth, 1
Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. thy prayers are vain, Matthew. 6. thy preaching or hearing of
the Word, receiving of the Sacraments etc. are all vain.

2 Doctrine. He has not dealt with us according to our iniquities.
1 (...)] Of this word in the beginning of this verse, and Verse. 3. Doctr. 1.
Expl.


2 (...)] Of this at large Verse. 2. Doctr. 2.

The sum of the Doctrine is, That God, notwithstanding not only our errors,
as in the former part of the verse, but even our iniquities or sins perversely
committed against Him, yet moderates His anger toward us, and not only
mitigates His positive punishments, but bestows also His (...) (whereof verse.
2.) His benefits upon us, and continues them unto us.

Thus for the mitigating His punishments, (...).
Ezra 9.13. Lam. 3.22. yea even the wicked in this life are not punished
according to their iniquities. No nor yet in hell shall any man or devil suffer
so much punishment, but that God could and might justly, if He pleased, make
him capable of more, and inflict it upon him. For the bestowing and continuing
His benefits notwithstanding men's iniquities, see Mat. 5.45. Luke 6.35.

The Reason see verse. (...).
11. etc.

Uses.
Observe here 1 That even good men sometimes (though not as such) have their
(...) their iniquities or sins perversely committed. Instr.
As verse. 3.

2 and 3 as in the former Doctrine mutatis mutandis.

4 That God does not punish of necessity. He is indeed necessarily just, and
hence affected to punish sinners: but He is also necessarily merciful, and
hence affected to spare where He might punish. If He should deal strictly
according to Justice, all sinners should perish: and if altogether according to
Mercy, all should be saved. Wherefore His Wisdom dictates, and His Free will
determines, how and how far both these Attributes are to be exercised.
Amongst men, justice requires that we do injury to no man, either by deteining
from him the good due, or by inflicting upon him the evil not due: but it
requires not, that we should not do him more good, or inflict upon him less
evil then is due. He that withholds either totally or in part the good that is
due, is unjust: but he that gives, over and above what is due, is not unjust,
but bountiful. He that punishes an innocent man at all, or a nocent man
beyond his merit, is unjust; but he that either punishes below the desert, or
totally remits an offense committed against himself, is not unjust, but clement
and merciful. And if this be so amongst men, much less may this liberty be
denied to God the supreme Lord of all. His justice requires that He should not
give less then He has promised (for having promised He becomes a debtour,
though not to the creature, yet to Himself, Heb. 6.10.) but it is His bounty,
not injustice, to give more then He has promised. Again His justice suffers
Him not to punish them that are innocent, nor yet sinners beyond their merit:
but to forgive sins freely for Christ's sake, or not to deal with sinners
according to their iniquities, is not injustice, but mercy. Repr.


This reproves 1 Such as are too strict and severe even against great offenses
of their children, servants, brethren: Whereas even their beasts are not to be
cruelly used.

2 Such as deal with erring (or perhaps innocent) men according to iniquities,
laying great punishments upon them for small or no faults. We read but of once
that God opened the mouth of a beast to speak, and then it was to reprove the
madness of him that offended in this kind, though but against his beast, Numb.
22. 2 Pet. 2.

3 Such as requite evil for good. So Nabal 1 Samuel 25. Absalom far worse; who
being himself most ungrateful and ungracious to his father, yet could accuse
Hushai of ingratitude, 2 Samuel 16.17. Of such David complains Psalm. 35.12. and
109.4, 5. not without an imprecation, verse. 6. etc. So Jer. 18.20. and that
also with an imprecation, verse. 21. See also Prove. 17.13.

4 As worst of all, Such as requite God evil for good: God, I say, from Whom
comes whatsoever good we have or are, Dent. 32.15. etc. Isa. 1.2. etc. Hos.
2.8. And especially, if from Gods clemency (of which here) they take occasion
to presume, Ezra 9.13, 14.

But let the clemency of God exhort us 1 To patience under afflictions, Exhort.
seeing whatsoever we suffer is less then we have deserved.

2 To imitate Him in moderating our anger and the effects of it, not only
toward errors (as in the former Doctrine) but even toward offenses committed
perversely against us.

Motives, as in the former.

3 That our thankfulness (as David's here) should rise by the same gradation as
Gods clemency does. If we ought to bless and praise Him for not doing to us
according to our errors: much more for not dealing with us according to our
iniquities.

The grounds of thankfulness in both are the same in general with those in
the former benefits, verse. 3. etc. viz. 1 The greatness of the benefit. 2 Our
need of it. 3 and 4 The love and free grace of God from which it proceeds.

Verse. 11. For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is His mercy
toward them that fear Him.
Now follows the Reason of the foregoing benefits. And 1 From the Causa
proegum. the internal moving cause, that is, the Mercy or loving-kindnesse of
God: which is illustrated 1 From the greatness of it, in this verse. 2 From
the effects, verse. 12, 13. The greatness is illustrated 1 From the subjects,
or persons to whom it is showed, (...) them that fear Him. 2 From a
similitude, As the heaven is high above the earth.

1 Doctrine. The heaven is high above the earth.
1 The heaven.] Expl.
There are 3 heavens 1 The lowest, the air, wherein the fowle^ fly, and from
whence the rain etc. descend, Mar. 4.4. Jam. 5.18. 2 The middlemost, wherein
the sun, moon, and stars are placed, Genesis 1.14, 15, 17. Mar. 13.25. 3 The
highest of all, or the heaven of the blessed, Mat. 7.21. and 18.10. This number
is gathered from the Apostles words 2 Cor. 12.2. where he says he was caught
up into the third heaven: which was the highest, as appears by the context.
And this also is meant in this place, as fittest for David's scope; though even
this also comes infinitely short of that which it is here brought to
illustrate. 2 The earth.] The earth here by a Synecd. memb. signifies the whole
globe consisting of earth and water; as it is often taken in Scripture, yea
indeed always, where the frame of the world is divided into heaven and earth,
except only where mention is made of the first act of creation: for there by
the heaven is to be understood the highest heaven with the Angels the
inhabitants thereof; and by the earth the chaos, out of which all other things
were formed in their several degrees. (...).

For the height of the heaven above the earth see Prove. 25.3. And how high even
the 2d heaven is, may hereby be gathered, in that the stars (whereof those of
the first magnitude are said to be every one above 107. times as big again as
the whole earth) do yet seem to us but as so many small sparks or spangles. But
how high the 3d heaven is above them, can not be conjectured, Ephesians. 4.10.

The Reason hereof is from the will and power of the Creator. (...).


Uses.
For our instruction, Instr.
see here 1 The immensity of God, Job 11.7, 8, 9. Isa. 66.1. Yea whereas the
distance of the opposite parts of heaven, is double to the distance of either
of them from the center of the earth, yet God fills the whole, Jer. 23.24. Yea
it cannot contein Him, 1 King. 8.27. Yea it is but a spanne with Him, Isa.
40.12. and 48.13. Although therefore God be otherwise in heaven then in earth,
otherwise in the Temple then in private houses, otherwise with the saints then
with the wicked: yet He is always every where present; within all things,
though no where included, without all things, though no where excluded.

2 Behold the great condescension of God, Who though He dwells in the highest
heavens, yet vouchsafes to take care of earthly things, (it is David's
observation Psalm. 113.4, 5, 6.) numbering the hairs of His children, ordering
the flying of every sparrow etc. Mat. 10.29, 30. But especially Our Saviors
abasing Himself, in coming down out of the bosom of His Father, from the
height of heavenly glory to the earth, and there living above 30 years in the
form of a servant, subject to many inconveniences and injuries, and at last
being obedient to the death of the cross, and lying three days in the heart
of the earth, and all this for our sakes, who had very ill deserved it at His
hands.

Again, Repr.
if the heaven (Gods dwelling place) be so high above the earth, how mad are
they that fight against God! For 1 Gods nature admits not that he can suffer
any hurt. 2 Suppose He could, yet He is Omnipotent, and so able to repel it. 3
Grant He were not, yet we know the higher ground is great advantage in fight.
It was that the Jebusites were so confident in 2 Samuel 5.6. See Job 35.5, 6.
Psalm. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.

This should also exhort us to humility and reverence before God. Exhort.
Solomon gives this reason for it in prayer, Eccles. 5.2. And there is the same
reason in all other things.

It should also dehort us from the immoderate love of this world. Dehort.


Motiv. True felicity is in heaven, Psalm. 16.11. Luke 12.33. In a word, there
Christ is, Acts 3.21. Heb. 7.26. Coloss. 3.1. Look therefore how great the
distance is between heaven and earth, so far are we distant from true and
perfect felicity, and absent from Christ our hope and our life, whilst we are
at home in the body, creeping as worms upon the ground. Let us not therefore
say of this world, as S. Peter of the mount in another respect, It is good to
be here: but let us so live, whilst we are here, that we may be admitted into
heaven after this life; that is, let us do the will of our Father, Which is in
heaven, and then with the Apostle (2 Cor. 5.8.) desire rather to be absent from
the body, and present with the Lord.

2 Doctrine. As the heaven is high above the earth, so is Gods mercy great
toward them that fear Him.
1 (...) mercy, Expl.
or loving-kindnesse.] Of this, Verse. 4. Doctr. 4. and Verse. 8. Doctr. 4. Here
it is taken largely, for propensity both to remove evil from us, and to bestow
and continue good to us, and that notwithstanding the demerit of our sins. 2
(...) them that fear Him.] The fear of God here notes the whole worship or
service of God. For that was the phrase of the Old Testament, whilst the
heir, being yet a child, had indeed the Spirit of adoption, but tempered with
the spirit of bondage. The same thing (that is, the observation of the
condition of the covenant) in the New Testament is called Faith or Trust. 3
(...) toward] This preposition according to the nature of the speech wherein it
is used, is diversely rendered. Most commonly [over] of (...) to ascend. Now a
thing may be over another, either as being far above it (as the heaven is
(...) over or above the earth) or, as contiguous to it, and so upon it. And
whereas a thing may be so upon a man either for evil, Judge. 16.30. or for good,
Psalm. 133.2. hence it sometimes signifies [against] 2 Samuel 11.23. Psalm. 2.2.
sometimes [towards] Psalm. 4.6. (that is, Be favorable to us, or manifest Thy
love toward us) So here. 4 (...) usually signifies [to prevaile] Now one thing
may prevail over another, either in strength (and so it is commonly taken) or
(amongst other things) in height, as Genesis 7.19, 20. where the LXX render it
(...). And feeing height commonly imports greatness, therefore our
Translatours here render it not amiss [is great.] 5 The particle ((...)) here
signifies not exact parity, but similitude.
For the greatness of Gods mercy or loving-kindnesse see Psalm. 108.4. (...).
where it is said to be above the heavens, as here the heavens above the earth.
See also the places before quoted verse. 8. where God is said to be (...) and
(...) great or plenteous in mercy.

Now the Mercy or loving-kindnesse of God in it self or in acta primo (as was
said before verse. 8.) is His essence, (...).
and therefore is (...) without cause. But in actu secundo, that is, in the
exercise, or effects of it (as here) toward them that fear Him, it has a
cause; viz. 1 His mercy in actu primo (that is, His pronenesse to do good)
from whence in Christ (Who has satisfied His Justice offended by our sins)
He has graciously promised to show mercy or loving-kindnesse to them that
fear Him. 2 His Justice, Truth or Fidelity; which require the performance of
His promise, though graciously made.

Uses.
Here then 1 we see there is in God infinite mercy or loving-kindnes, Instr.
whereby men may be invited to fear Him.

2 Seeing the subject or object of this mercy is limited to a certain
qualification, we may learn that God is so merciful that He also does not
neglect His justice whereby he hates sin.

3 Seeing this qualification is the fear of God; we see to whom, and to whom
only this mercy belongs.

4 It appears how naturally miserable the condition of men (even of them that
fear God) is, to need such mercy; and how happy in obtaining it. The least
degree of Gods mercy showed to such is excellent; because it proceeds from His
second love, and is a pledge of greater following. But the greatness of it we
have here illustrated by a comparison; not fully, but as the nature of the
world will afford, wherein the greatest height is that of the heaven above the
earth, that being the highest part of the world, this the lowest.

The limitation of Gods mercy to them that fear Him, reproves them, who, Repre.
though they fear Him not, yet presume of His mercy.

On the other side it affords singular comfort to them who truly fear Him.
Consol.
Whatsoever good they lose, or whatsoever evil they suffer for this cause, it
is all nothing to this Mercy. It comforts them also against the greatness of
their former sins, if they now truly repent and fear God: For how great
soever they were, they can not be so great as Gods mercy. Likewise against
whatever calamities or afflictions they can suffer. For though they have not
always the sense of Gods mercy, He sometimes for a while hiding His face from
them, either to try them (as in the history of Job) or to make them (before
happily not sufficiently esteeming it) desire and seek it more earnestly being
absent, and love and delight themselves in it the more being recovered etc: yet
it is most certain, that Gods mercy is exceeding great toward them, and will
so appear to them in due time.

Lastly this should exhort us 1 To fear God, Exhort.
that we may be qualified to be partakers of His mercy.

2 To imitate our heavenly Father, that as He is kind to all Psalm. 145.9. Mat.
5.45. but more exceedingly to them that fear Him, so should we study to do
good unto all, but especially to them which are of the household of faith, to
them that fear God.

Verse. 12. As far as the east is from the west, so far has He removed our
transgressions from us.
We have seen the greatness of Gods mercy, The effects follow: The former in
this verse, viz. the removing of our sins or transgressions from us; which in
respect of the space is illustrated by the distance of the east from the west.

1 Doctrine. The east is far distant from the west.
This Axiom seems little to belong to Divinity, and therefore shall be the
more briefly handled.

By the East and West (as the notation of the words import (...) of (...) to
arise, Explic.
and (...) of (...) the evening) are signified the places of the rising and
setting of the sun, and so the two terms ( a quo and ad quem) of the motion
of it above our Horizon.

These (the sun being in the Equator) are points diametrically opposite,
(...).
and so as far distant one from the other, as any can be in the same globe
whether of the earth or heavens. And the Psalmist instances in these rather
then in the North and South, or any other points; because to that part of the
earth, to which they relate, their opposition and distance is more visible and
remarkable, in regard of the suns daily access to it in the one and recesse
from it in the other. And thus is this phrase often used in Scripture to
signify the greatest space and distance that can be imagined. So Psalm. 50.1.
and 113.3. Isa. 45.6. and 59.19. Mal. 1.11. And the like Deuteronomy. 4.32.

Uses.
And this even in the Protasis may be of some use. As first, to reprove the
sluggard. Repr.
Solomon sends him to the ant Prove. 6.6. But this perhaps is too much labor
for him, or it may be dangerous, A lion in the way: I will set him an easyer
task, Let him, whilst he stands or sits still, or lies along upon his bed or
couch, look upon the sun, which in the day time moves from East to West
(though so far distant) and in the night from West to East, and so daily
Eccles. 1.5. And then let him but take the pains to think what a shame it is,
that the sun being continually in so swift motion, he should ly tossing and
tumbling in his bed (after nature is satisfied with sleep) as a door turns
upon the hinges Prove. 26.14. or sit lazily folding his hands together, when the
sun since its setting is come so many 100000 miles to give him light to go
about some honest labor, according to Gods appointment Psalm. 104.22, 23.

This should also excite us to praise God, Exhort.
Who, though the distance from the cast to the west be so great, yet makes the
sun in 24 hours to run from east to west, and so on from west to east again:
so that (taking the whole year together) every part of the earth has as much
day as night, and all parts equal day and night one to another.

Motive 1 David's example Psalm. 19.4, 5, 6. and 136.7, 8.

2 The greatness of the benefit from the light and heat of the sun by day,
yea and from the vicissitude also of darkness and coolness through the
absence of it by night.

2 Doctrine. So far has He removed our transgressions from us.
That we may understand how our sins are removed from us, Explic.
we must know in what sense they may be said to remain or be present with us
after the commission, viz. not in themselves, but in the effects, which are
especially two, 1 The guilt, whereby a man stands charged with the fault and
obliged to the punishment denounced by God against it. 2 A disposition or
propension to sin for the future, by strengthening the lusts from which
sins proceed. In both these respects God removes our sins far from us;
but in the latter respect not but by degrees, and never totally in this life:
and therefore that seems less agreeable to this place. Here then by sins
understand (metonymically) the guilt thereof. And seeing guilt is an accident
(whose being is to be in the subject) therefore neither can it properly be said
to be at such distance removed from us: but as soon as we are absolved from it,
it quite vanishes. The speech therefore is metaphorical: Guilt is compared to
a hurtful creature, lion, serpent etc. from which, if present, or near, we are
in great danger; but if it be far off, we are safe. And the sense is, that
God wholly remits the sins of his people. And so this Doctrine is for
substance the same with the 2d in the 3d verse. But seeing remission was there
mentioned as applied to David only, here as extended to all the faithful, and
the form of speaking also is more emphaticall; something may be added.

And for proof, (...).
those places may serve, where by the like metaphors God is said to blot out
and not remember our transgressions Isa. 43.25. to cast them behind His back
Isa. 38.17. to subdue our iniquities and cast them into the depths or bottom
of the sea Mica. 7.19. See also Isa. 1.18. and 44.22. Jer. 31.34. and 33.8.
Ezekiel. 33.16.

Zeph. 3.7. So Moses and Aaron for their sins at the waters of Meribah, David,
etc. and therefore that God does not so wholly remit the sins of His people,
or remove the guilt thereof so far from them.

I answer, ^^sw.
1 The guilt of sin consists primarily and principally in the imputation of
the fault, secondarily and less principally in the obligation to punishment.
Now in respect of the imputation of the fault, the guilt of sin is clearly
and wholly at once taken away by the remission (that is the non-imputation) of
it. 2 For the obligation to punishment, or absolution from it, these depend
upon the sanction and promise annexed to the ^ovenant. Concerning which we must
know, that although godliness (and so repentance) has the promises, sin and
impenitence the threatenings of this life as well as of the life to come yet not
in the same tenor. The eternal promises and threatenings being of things
simply and absolutely good and ill, are therefore absolute and peremptory: so
that no man, who truly repents of his sins and lives godly, can ever fail of
the eternal promises; nor any man, who continues in his sins without
repentance, can ever escape the eternal threatenings. But the temporal
promises and threatenings being of things not simply good and ill, are not
therefore so absolute, but reserved by God in His own power, to be dispensed
according to His wisdom and good pleasure, in reference and subordination to
the eternal. And therefore as a man even whilst he goes on impenitently in
his sins, and so lies under the heavy guilt of them, may yet be free from
temporal punishment, yea enjoy all prosperity in this world all his life long
even to the envy of Gods children ( Psalm. 73. Jer. 12.1, 2. Job 21.6. to the
16.) so on the other side he that has truly repented of his sins, and by
the mercy of God obtained full remission, whereby he is clearly freed from the
guilt of them, as to the fault, and to the eternal punishment, may yet for
some time after ly under the temporal punishment for the reasons before
mentioned (verse. 8. Doctr. 2. Consol.) and the like. But 1 it is but for a
time, and that a short time, the time of this life at the longest; which ended
(and sooner, if God see it expedient) that also shall have an end. 2 In the
mean time, the good which God brings out of it, and the other comforts,
wherewith He sweetens it, do in a manner take from it the nature of punishment.

Uses.
For the Instructions, Instr.
which hence arise, see Verse. 3. Doctr. 2. And for the last, the greatness of
Gods mercy was there showed from the universality of the object, here from the
act.

Hence also are reproved 1 Such as do not seek remission of sins; Repr.
much more such as rejoice in their sins past (especially if gainful and
delightful) and still securely rush into more. Of which, neither can stand
with desire of remission Prove. 28.13.

2 Such as seek it not of God. Consol. Exhort.


The uses of Consolation and Exhortation see Verse. 3. Doctr. 2. as before.

Verse. 13. As a father pitieth his children; so the LORD pitieth them that
fear Him.
Here we have the latter effect of Gods mercy or loving-kindnesse, illustrated
also 1 from the object [(...) them that fear Him] 2 from a similitude [ As a
father etc.]

1 Doctrine. A father pitieth his children.
1 (...) pitieth] Of this verse. 4. Doctr. 4. Expl.
and verse 8. Doctr. 1. 2 (...) sons.] Synecd. spec. for children of both
sexes. 3 (...) a father.] Synecd. genesis for a father that does the office of a
father, and so shows himself worthy of this title.
That such a father does pity his children, (...).
see Mal. 3.17. Luke 15.20. And the example of Jacob Genesis 33. who, when Esau,
whom he feared, was coming toward him, set his children in the last place verse.
2. See also verse. 13, 14. And chap. 43. how hardly, and with what caution he
let Benjamin go into Egypt.

And this proceeds partly from the instinct of nature, (...).
which has the same effect even in brute creatures. But because men in these
things are not so subject to it, as brutes, but by their free will to evil may
extinguish the light of nature, and sin against the laws of it; therefore God
has given man a precept for it, inclusively in the 5th commandment,
expressly elsewhere. And reason it self dictates the same, in as much as the
son is a natural effect of his father, begotten according to his image, his
own flesh and blood and bone, yea as it were a new and second self to him, in
whom he lives after death, and attains to a kind of eternity in this world,
which in his own person he can not have. From this double obligation (viz. the
conscience of Gods command and the dictate of right reason) that natural
affection, whereof I spoke before, is both intended and regulated. And hence it
is, that, whereas in brute creatures that instinct cease to have any further
operation after that the young ones are able to provide for themselves,
contrariwise man continues his affection and the effects of it to his children
and childrens children, as long as he lives, laying up for them, 2 Cor. 12.14.
and when he is ready to die, giving them his charge and blessing, Genesis 49.

Uses.
Hence we may observe 1 If children be the objects of pity, Instr.
then they are also the subjects of misery. For commiseration always supposes
misery in the object of it. And this is evident not only to experience but
reason, if we seriously consider the condition both of their bodies and souls.

2 He is unworthy the name of a father, that does not pity his children.

3 Those married folk who have children, have indeed a blessing, Psalm. 127.3,
4, 5. but a worldly blessing, and so not without troubles attending it.
Therefore they who think of marriage must consider beforehand, that if God
shall send them children, though never so good, they must not look to have them
causes only of joy and comfort, but sometimes also of grief and pity. How much
more if they be deformed, sickly, idiots, etc. On the other side, if they have
no children; as they want those of whom they may rejoice, so those also, whom
sometimes they may have cause to bemone and pity.

And if this be the duty of a father to pity his children, then they are to be
reproved, Repr.
who want this natural affection, who do not pity their children. 1 In respect
of their souls, wherein folly is bound ( Prove. 22.15.) like to break out into
actual sins, which will bring eternal damnation, if not prevented. Those
parents therefore have no pity of their children, who seeing them lying under
that misery and danger, do not endeavor with the rod of correction to drive
away that folly, which is so bound in the hearts of their children. And much
more are they to be reproved, who will not so much as teach their children how
to avoid that so great an evil. 2 In respect of their bodies. So they who by
their own sins heap temporal punishments upon the heads of their children,
Exodus 34.7. Psalm. 109.14, 15. Jer. 32.18. Especially idolaters, Exodus 20.5.
Sacrilegious and rebellious men, Jos. 7.24. Number. 16. etc. So they who either
through idleness do not get, or through riot and prodigality lavish out and
spend that wherewith they should provide necessaries for their children. These
are worse then heathen, yea then brute beasts. Neither are they only in this
fault, who do not supply their childrens necessities for the present, but they
also, who do not providently take care for them for the future so far as
lawfully they may, 2 Cor. 12.14. Some men bring up their children daintily
enough, yea too daintily, for the present, but forgetting that rule of
oeconomicks (That ordinarily a man's revenews should exceed his expenses) they
spend profusely what their parents have left them, and so leave little or
nothing for their children: whereas by reason of their dainty education they
will be more sensible of hardship and penury, and so more miserable. So they
who are too severe and cruel toward their children, provoking and discouraging
them, Coloss. 3.21.

This also should exhort 1 Parents to pity their children. Exhort.


Motiv. 1. Consider the miseries which they either do or may suffer. 2 All are
commanded to pity those that stand in need of pity, Job 6.14. and 19.21. Lam.
1.12. Romans 12.15, 20. 1 Pet. 3.8. Prove. 12.10. Exodus 23.5. Much more ought
parents to pity their children 1 For their near relation. Kindred, though more
remote, are called our bone and flesh, Genesis 29.14. 2 Samuel 19.12, 13. Much more
are children so unto their parents. That therefore which the Apostle writes to
Philemon ver. 16. holds much more in parents in respect of pity. If every man
ought to pity every man in misery for Gods commandments sake, then parents
surely above others should pity their children, both for the commandment, and
in regard of their relation. 2 Because parents have been the means of bringing
misery upon their children: all thus far, in that they have begotten and
brought them forth into this miserable world, and derived to them that
spiritual corruption of nature, which themselves have received from their
parents, and all from Adam: some yet further transmit unto their children
bodily infirmities, and such a temper or constitution, whereby they are more
then ordinarily prone to some notorious vices: some by their own actual sins
draw down Gods temporal judgments upon their children etc. And shall they not
pity those, whom themselves have made miserable?

2 Children, thankfully to requite according to their ability the care and
tender affection of their parents, who take such pity on them.

2 Doctrine. So the Lord pityeth them that fear Him.
1 (...)] Of this before. Expl.
Here it notes the exercise of Gods mercy strictly taken, as it signifies an
affection of relieving them that are in misery. 2 For the particle ((...)) we
must always remember that when similitudes taken from the creatures are
applied unto God, we must separate the imperfections of the creatures, and
understand their finite perfections juxta modum eminentiae, after an eminent
manner befitting God, Who is infinitely perfect. So here 1 A father, though
never so wise and good, yet may sometimes be ignorant of the condition of his
children, and so either not pity them when there is cause, or pity them when
there is no cause; as Jacob did not pity Joseph, when he was cast into the pit
and sold by his brethren, but extremely grieved and mourned for his as dead,
when he was well entreated by Potiphar, and after when being governor over all
the land of Egypt, he gathered come to sustain them all in the time of famine:
But God is always every where present, ignorant of nothing, and therefore
pities always and only where there is just cause of pity. 2 A father
oftentimes out of inordinate affection pities foolishly, so tendering the bodies
of his children, that he suffers their souls to perish; whilst for fear of
grieving them a little by reproof or correction, he lets them run headlong
into eternal torments and stays them not: But God always pities most wisely,
sparing the body indeed so far as the necessity of the soul requires; but
when it is so that external prosperity can not consist with eternal felicity,
He spares not to afflict His children temporally, that he may make them happy
eternally. 3 A fathers pity many times can go no further then the affection,
can not produce the real effect of helping His children and relieving their
misery: But God, as He is metaphorically said to have the affection Judge.
10.16. so He has also all-sufficient power to remove any evil present, or to
avert any that is imminent, from those whom He pities; which also He does.
This Doctrine for the substance we have had twice before, viz. Verse. 4. Doctr.
4. and Verse. 8. Doctr. 1. Therefore we may pass it over the more briefly here.

For further proof we may add Isa. 63.9, (...).
15. 2 Samuel 24.14. Lam. 3.32. Nehem. 9.19, 27, 28, 31. Psalm. 119.156.

The Reason, (...).
as Verse. 11. Doctr. 2.

Uses.
1, Instr.
2, 3. As Verse. 11. Doctr. 2.

4 We see the fear of God does not exempt men from all misery.

1 Gods pronenesse to pity reproves such as are contrary, Repr.
Verse. 8. Doctr 1. Repr. 2. 2 The qualification annexed [them that fear Him]
reproves them that presume God will pity them, when they do not fear Him. God
indeed often so far pities wicked men, as to remove some temporal evils from
them, Amos 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and also to afford them means of salvation, 2 Chronicles. 36.15. But as they have no promise whereon they may rely to expect this,
so if they go on in their sins, it shall aggravate their guilt and increase
their damnation. But it is most certain that such shall not obtain Gods
saving pity, as which is proper to them that fear God. Yea of such see Jer.
13.14. Ezekiel. 7.4, 9. Prove. 1.24. etc.
This also may abundantly comfort them that fear God. Consol.
What matter is it who hates them or endeavors to hurt them, when they have
Him, Who is Almighty, so tenderly pitying them? In the midst of all
calamities, diseases, death it self, how sweet is the remembrance of Gods
mercy! The compassion of men (though when they can only pity, not help) is
some comfort to a man in misery (not in regard of the grief it self, but of the
love which is the cause of it) how much more then Gods compassion, which both
proceeds from His love as the cause, and produces relief as the effect?

Lastly this should exhort us, Exhort.
(as Verse. 11. Doctr. 2.) 1 To fear God.

2 To imitate Him, in being pitiful, as He is pitiful.

3 Doctrine. Because such is Gods mercy and compassion, Verse. 11, 12, 13.
therefore He mitigates His anger, Verse. 9, 10.
The 11, 12, 13. verses were before considered absolutely; here relatively.

Thus Psalm. (...).
136. 23, 24. Jer. 3.12. Lam. 3.22. Mic. 7.18.

Why God should out of His mercy be prone to mitigate His anger, (...).
no reason can be given. He is so, because He is so. It is His nature. But why
it may stand with the honor of His Justice so to do, the cause is Christ,
satisfying Gods Justice, and by His Spirit making us conformable to the
covenant.

Uses.
1 Then if at any time we perceive the anger of God mitigated toward us; Instr.
behold the cause, not in us, but in Himself.

2 They that fear God need not doubt of the mitigation of His anger, it being
the effect of His Mercy, which never fails, as being infinite and essential
to Him.

This reproves such as attribute the mitigation of Gods anger to their own
merits, Repr.
satisfactions etc.

Lastly it exhorts us 1 To gratitude for the mitigation of Gods anger. Exhort.
For by this Doctrine it appears to be a benefit most free and of Gods mere
grace.

2 To imitate God, as in the thing ( verse. 9, 10.) so in the manner. If we
mitigate our anger only toward such as deserve the mitigation of it, what
great matter do we more then the publicanes and heathen?

Verse. 14. For He knows our frame, He remembers that we are dust.
Now follows the procatarcticall cause or occasion of Gods mitigating His
anger, that is, man's misery in respect of his soul. body for the matter. like
to grass or flowers, ver. 15, 16. unlike to Gods mercy, verse. 17, 18.




1 Doctrine.
Our frame (or figment) is evil.

This 14th verse is by most expounded of the body, Explic.
as if both the parts of it tended to the same thing, viz. that God knows and
remembers that we are framed of the dust. So the Old Translation more plainly
[He knows whereof we be made, etc.] And this sense is also good: seeing it
cannot be denied but that in the Psalms and other parts of Scripture
(especially those which are most elegant) the same thing is often expressed in
diverse phrases; and seeing (...) also may be referred to the body as an earthen
vessel framed of the clay. But this word may also be referred to the soul,
according to the more frequent use of it in Scripture; and so it seems to be
in this place. For first the verb (...) as it often signifies to frame a
corporeal or bodily thing (as Adams body Genesis 2.7. the molten calf Exodus 32.4.
a pot or other vessel, whereof a potter is called (...)) so it sometimes by
metaphor signifies to imagine, devise, purpose, or decree any thing in the
mind, whether well, as Isa. 46.11. Jer. 18.11. or ill, as Psalm. 94.20. From
this metaphorical signification, the nown (...) for the most part signifies
the figment or imagination of the mind, and the affection of the heart suitable
to it; once promiscuously, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. twice in the good sense, Isa. 26.3. 1 Chronicles. 29.18. elsewhere in the bad sense, Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. Deuteronomy. 31.21. And
the analogy of faith will bear the same sense here; seeing the Scripture
testifies that God knows our thoughts and affections. (see the (...).) Lastly,
the scope of the place makes for it. For David (as we see) intends to render a
reason from the misery of man, why God mitigates His anger. Now the condition
of the body in respect of the matter will sufficiently appear by the latter
member of the verse: therefore that part of the reason will lose none of the
force or evidence, if this member be otherwise referred. And if it be referred
to the soul, the reason will be more full; viz. that God mitigates His anger,
not only because He remembers the frailty of the body, but also because He
knows the state of the soul, how prone men are in their minds to think ill,
and in their hearts to affect ill. Nor does it seem probable that David would
altogether omit the soul, which is the chief part of man, and whose misery is
far the greater. Therefore (saving other men's judgments) I shall understand
this part of the verse of the figment of the mind and heart. Nor shall I do it
alone: For the Targum also so explains this place [He knows our evil figment
or thought, which impelleth to sin.] According to this interpretation
therefore the figment of our mind and heart is illustrated 1 from the Adjunct
evil (for this is intimated by the ^^ope, seeing otherwise it should not
pertain to the misery but happiness of man) 2 from the Adjunct occupied about
it, Gods knowledge.

That the imaginations of man's mind, (...).
and the thoughts of his heart are evil, see Prove. 20.9. And hear the
confessions of holy men, 2 Samuel 24 10. Psalm. 73.22. and 51.5. And it appears by
Jobs cautelousnesse, Job 31.1. and Joseph's, Genesis 39.10. and S. Paul's, 1 Cor.
9.27. by the admonition Prove. 4.14, 15. and 5.8. and often. Lastly by the falls
of the saints.

Reason 1.2. (...).
see verse. 3. Doctr. 4.

Uses.
See then 1 what an ataxie or disorder sin has brought in. Instr.


2 How dangerous our condition is in this life, who have not only without us a
most subtle enemy the devil, the delights of the world to allure us, the enmity
to affright us, but also within us the evil frame of our own mind and heart
conspiring with them.

3 How necessary it is for us to deny our selves: which Christ requires of all
those that will follow Him, Mat. 16.24.

4 How those clogies of the saints in Scripture are to be understood, viz. of
their wisdom, righteousness, purity, perfection, etc.

5 If such be the condition even of them that fear God, it easily appears what
the condition of the wicked man is, in whom natural corruption is nothing
abated, but much increased by custom of sinning. See Romans 3.10. to the 19.
Ephesians. 4.17, 18, 19.

This reproves 1 Such as are content with their natural estate. Repr.


2 Such as do not carefully avoid occasions of sin, yea boldly thrust
themselves upon them, yea seek them.

3 Such as rail at others, who being conscious to themselves of the evil frame
of their minds and hearts diligently eschew occasions of sin, and will not
run with them to the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.4. Consol.


On the other side it comforts them that are cast down with the consideration
of their evil frame. Ill inclinations do not hinder salvation (for then none
should be saved, seeing these are found in all men more or less) but walking
according to them without repentance and mortification.

2 Doctrine. The LORD knows this.
So Genesis 6.5. and 8.21. Deuteronomy. 31.21. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. (...).


And this is necessary from the infiniteness of Gods understanding, (...).
( Psalm. 147.5.) whence it is, that there neither is nor can be any thing
intelligible, but that He must needs understand it as it is, and that after a
most eminent manner, viz. the meanest things most excellently, the obscurest
things most clearly, the impurest things most holily. How then shall He not
know the frame or figment of His creature?

Uses.
Here 1 we see the dissimilitude between God and man, Instr.
which is declared 1 Samuel 16.7. Man can not directly behold the hearts of other
men, but only judges of the tree by the fruits; wherein he is often deceived.
For there are many men which are (...) double minded, have (...) a heart and a
heart: and therefore when according to that heart, which lies next their tongue
and hand, they speak and do those things which are for the substance good,
others out of charity judge them to be good men; whereas in their other heart,
that lies more inward, there are seven abominations. But God knows the very
innermost frame of the mind and heart most thoroughly and infallibly.

2 If He see and know the frame of the soul as it is of it self evil and
corrupt, then also as it is in any measure rectifyed by His grace. And so He
sees and knows it with approbation. And therefore it is but a small matter to
be by men rashly judged of hypocrisy, ill intentions, malice etc. so long as
God sees and knows it to be otherwise.

3 If He see the inward disposition of the soul whether good or ill, then no
man can doubt but that he knows also our words and deeds of what kind soever.

This then reproves 1 Such as think God sees not their wickedness, Repr.
Psalm. 94.7. Isa. 29.15.

2 Such as so live as if God did not see them. Would men live in drunkenness,
whoring, swearing etc. if they thought indeed that God the Judge of all saw
them? It must needs be that such either think He sees them not, or (which is
worse, if worse can be) care not for Him.

Here also is comfort 1 Against the unjust censures of men, Consol.
when we know our own innocence and sincerity. Jobs friends accused him of
hypocrisy and many sins, Chap. 22.5. He answers Chap. 23.10. God knows the
way that I take; when He has tried me, I shall come forth as gold. So to
Eliphaz his charge chap. 15. he answers chap. 16.19. My witness is in heaven,
and my record is on high. David had many adversaries, who defamed him and laid
to his charge things that he knew not, Psalm. 35.11. His appeal was to God
verse. 1, 17, 22, etc. So Psalm. 7.9, 10. and 17.2. etc. So S. Paul against the
sinis^er judgment of the false apostles and the Corinthians deceived by them 1
Cor. 4.3, 4, 5.

2 Against the secret practices of our adversaries. Let them dig as deep as
hell to hide their counsels, they are all before God. Psalm. 69.19. He knows
all their plots and devises.

Let this also exhort us that we study to rectify the frame of our souls,
Exhort.
and approve it unto God, and so always to order all our actions, even those
which are most secret, as having God our beholder.

Motiv. 1. Consider how foolish a thing it is for us not to look at Him, or not
to frame our selves according to His beck, when He continually looks upon us,
and beholds our most secret thoughts. 2 Consider also what a contumely and
desite it is to God to do even to His face the things which He abhorres. If we
could conceal from Him the things which we do, yet love and ingenuity should
keep us from doing any thing contrary to His will, Who has so highly deserved
of us: How much more, when we have Him always present, and a witness of all
that we do, speak, or think?

3 Doctrine. We are dust.
We have seen man's spiritual misery, or that of his soul: The temporal, or
that of the body, follows. And 1 in respect of the matter.

1 (...) We.] Synecd. integ. Explic.
that is our bodies. For our souls are of a spiritual nature, not made either
of the dust or of any other pre-existent matter, but immediately created of
nothing by God. 2 (...) dust.] This sometimes signifies the dead. Psalm. 30.9.
(for this is all one with that of Hezekiah Isa. 38.18, 19.) But this sense is
altogether improper to this place; where David renders a reason why God
mitigates His anger toward them that fear Him, not the dead but the living,
and includes himself. Sometimes it signifies a multitude of men. Number. 23.10.
But neither is this sense agreeable to this place; seeing multitude makes not
to the misery of men, from whence the reason is here taken of Gods mitigating
His anger. Wherefore we according to our bodies are here called Dust, in
respect of the matter whereof they are made. For although only Adams body was
made immediately of the dust Genesis 2.7. Eves of his rib, and all ours (who are
their posterity) of the seed of our parents: yet mediately our bodies also are
made of the dust, because derived from Adams, which was made immediately of it.
But David here does not respect the matter of the body simply (for though Adams
body was made immediately of the dust, yet before the fall he was not therefore
miserable; yea the body of Christ, Who was in all things made like unto us,
sin only excepted, now glorious in the heavens, was first made of the dust)
but as it is now since the entrance of sin, subject to diseases and many
miseries, and sooner or later to be turned to dust again.
That we are dust, (...).
see Genesis 3.19. and 18.27. Eccle. 3.20. and 12.7. And to the same sense Job
4.19.

And that we are dust so as to be thereby miserable (as was said before to be
here meant) the reason is from sin. (...).
Adams body indeed was made of the earth, but elevated to a state of
incorruption. But sin took away the means of upholding it: and so that
portion of earth returned to its former condition. And happily this may seem to
be intimated, in that God never said to Adam, Thou art dust, till after the
fall. He was before indeed formed out of the dust; but then he became dust.

Uses.
Here then 1 we see the wonderful condescension of God, Instr.
who vouchsafes to choose these bodies of ours to abide and dwell in Joh. 14.23.
to sup in Revel. 3.20. yea to be His Temples 1 Cor. 3.16. (See Psalm. 113.6. 2 Chronicles. 6.18. Luke 1.43. where David, Solomon, and the Blessed Virgin wonder at
it) but especially the unspeakable both love and humility of our Blessed
Savior, Who unites them to Himself as His members 1 Cor. 12.27. and 6.15.
Ephesians. 5.30.

2 We may not think them too good to do God service by reading, hearing,
kneeling, praying etc. yea (if occasion be) suffering death for Him. Rather we
should rejoice, and think our selves highly favored and honored by God, if
being so infinitely glorious, He will deigne to accept of any action or passion
of our vile bodies to glorify Himself thereby.

3 If the body it self be so mean, then surely the things which serve for the
body can be of no great value; that which is for an end being always inferior
to the end it self.

4 If the bodies even of those that fear God be mortal dust, much more the
bodies of them, who still continue in that which made them so, viz. in sin.

This reproves 1 Them that make their bodies yet viler. Repr.
A thing may be debased 1 in it self, when the matter or fashion of it is
spoiled by taking away or putting to. 2 when it is put to a base use. Both
which ways many debase their bodies. In the former rank drunkenness has the
first place etc. For the latter, so every sin debases the body. For if he
that commits sin be the servant of sin, Joh. 8.34. then he that puts his
body to the committing of any sin, makes his body a servant to that sin.
And what honor is like to come of that service, where the master is worse then
the devil, the work abominable drudgery, and the wages eternal damnation?

2 On the contrary such as prefer their bodies before their souls, bringing
their souls within danger of Gods displeasure and everlasting condemnation for
the procuring of those things, which are only for the service, yea sometimes
for the disservice of the body, and which in effect tend to make it more
miserable.

3 Such as are proud of their bodies. 1 They are proud of naught. 2 What have
they, which they have not received?

This also should exhort us seriously to meditate of this our condition. Exhort.
But of this in the next Doctrine.

4 Doctrine. The LORD remembers this.
The memory in man is a faculty of the soul belonging to the understanding
(largely taken) whereby notions once known and judged, Expl.
are laid up and preserved: and that either perfectly, so as that they readily
occur whenever a man will actually think of them; or in part, when the
notions are in some sort so obliterated, that to the renewing of them there is
need of reminiscency or recordation, whereby from those things which yet
remain, we recall those which are slipped out of memory. This latter act of
memory can have no place in God (to Whom all things are always most present)
but only the former, and that after an eminent manner beseeming God. And
whereas the memory (as was said before verse. 2. Doctr. 2.) is either merely
notionall or affective also, here the latter is to be understood.

To the same effect with this Doctrine is that Psalm. 78.39. (...).
He remembered they were but flesh, a wind that passes away and comes not
again.

For 1 that we are dust, (...).
the former Doctrine taught us. 2 As God knows all things that are, all things
that are done by the creatures, so He can not be ignorant of that which is done
by Himself. Now it was He Himself, Who first formed Adam of the dust, and also
for sin made both him and his posterity dust in this sense here in the Text,
by taking away from them the means of immortality and appointing unto all men
once to die. 3 He can not by any means forget any thing of what He knows;
seeing this is a point of infirmity or imperfection, which can no ways agree
to Him Who is absolute perfection it self.

Jer. 23.39. and 31.34. Ezekiel. 33.13.



Uses.
Now if God remembers what we are, Instr.
then by the same reason (seeing He is not like to us, who of those few things
we know, remember some and forget many more; but as He knows all things, so He
can never forget any thing) He remembers also whatsoever we do, good or evil.
1 For good deeds, Heb. 6.10. Ephesians. 6.8. So whosoever has from the beginning
of the world relieved Christ in His members, He, at His coming to judge the
quick and the dead, shall remember, acknowledge, and recompense, Mat. 25. And
therefore they are said to be written in a book Mal. 3.16. 2 For evil deeds
Hos. 7.2. So 1 Samuel 15.2. I remember (says God) that which Amalek did to
Israel etc. though it was done about 400 years before. Yea Cains murder, and
whatsoever other sin has been by any man committed since the beginning of
the world, whereof he shall not have repented, God shall in the end of the
world remember and punish as a righteous Judge. And therefore these also are
said to be written Isa. 65.6. Jer. 17.1. Our sins may be concealed from men,
but God can not be deceived. We may forget our own sins; but God will be sure
most perfectly to remember them, and hereafter, unless we repent, will set
them in order before us. And both for good and evil deeds, if God should forget
any of them, we might say with Saint Paul Romans 3. How shall He judge the world?
How should He bring every work to judgment with every secret thing, whether it
be good or whether it be evil ( Eccle. 12.14.) if He did not both know and
remember all our works both good and evil?

And if God remember that our bodies are dust, Repr.
why do we our selves forget it? Whereupon we either on the one side too highly
prize our bodies and too much pamper and trim them; or on the other side are
too little sparing of them, laying more upon them then dust can bear, or not
affording them such necessaries as their frailty requires.

Yea let us ever remember, Exhort.
and often actually recount with our selves what God here remembers, viz. That
we all are dust.

Motiv. 1. In respect of our selves, If every one of us remember that himself
is dust 1 It will humble us before God, that when we are to pray (as Abraham
Genesis 18.) or to perform any other duty of religion, we shall think with our
selves, Behold we have taken upon us to speak unto the Lord in prayer, to hear
His word, to approach unto His Table etc. who are but dust and ashes: with what
reverence therefore had we need to come before Him? 2 It will beget in us a
hatred of sin, as out of sense of the punishment, so especially because it is
so hateful to God: both which are here manifest in that God for one only sin
of Adam has made us all dust in this miserable sense. 3 It will make us
careful to search our hearts and try our ways, vigilant against Satan and all
occasions of sinning, and more diligent and constant in the use of the word,
sacraments, and all other means serving to strengthen our souls. 4 Whereas no
care can long preserve the body from death, it will excite us so to live, that
when the dust shall be turned to the earth as it was, the spirit may with
comfort return to God, Who gave it, in Him quietly resting, and expecting a
joyful resurrection of the body and reunion with it self. 2 In respect of
others, If we remember that they are dust, 1 It will restrain us from envying
the prosperity of wicked men. Psalm. 37.1, 2. and 73.16. etc. 2 It will make us
more favorable to them, who slip through infirmity. 3 It will make us not too
much to trust in humane helps, Psalm. 146.3, 4. Isa. 2.22. 4 On the other side,
not to fear the wrath and power of men, Isa. 51.7, 8, 12. 5 It will moderate
our grief for the death of our friends: For to him that considers all are dust,
it will not seem strange that the dust should return to dust again. So
Anaxagoras when he had news of the death of his son, answered, Sciebam me
genuisse mortalem, I knew that I begat him mortal. 6 It more specially
concerns masters of families, that they should not entreat their servants too
hardly in imposing of work, inflicting of correction, abbridging them of
necessaries etc. but afford them convenient rest, especially on the Lords day,
moderate their corrections according to prudence and clemency, and readily
allow them all things necessary and convenient for them, Prove. 31.15, 21.
Otherwise let them think they hear their servants complaining with Job ( chap.
6.12.) Is my strength the strength of stones, or is my flesh of brass, that I
should have so much business and correction laid upon me, and so slender
provision afforded me? Let them also consider and say of their servants as Job
of his, chap. 31.15. Did not He, that made me in the womb, make him? etc. So
S. Cyprian contra Demetrianum, Domini and servi eadem sors nascendi, conditio
una moriendi, corporum materia consimilis, animarum ratio communis etc.
Whereupon he inferres to such dominering masters, Non agnoscis Dominum, cum sic
exerceas dominatum?

Verse. 15, 16.
As for man, his days are as grass; as a flower of the field, so he
flourishes.

For the wind passes over it, and it is not; and the place thereof shall know
it no more.

The frailty of our life intimated in the latter part of the precedent verse,
is here lively painted out under the similitude of grass and a flower of the
field. The Psalmist here seems to consider our life 1 In it self, and so he
likens it to grass: 2 With the additions of wit, judgment, strength, beauty,
honor, riches etc. and so he compares it to a flower, whereof he shows the
reason, or analogy, verse. 16. And that this distinction is here intended,
seems to be gathered from the word [(...) flourisheth] And more plainly Isa.
40.6. All flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof as the flower of the
field. (...) which the LXX there, and S. Peter 1 ep. 1.24. render (...), S.
James chap. 1.11. (...).

1 Doctrine. The days of man are as grass. Explic.

The days of man often note the duration of his life, Genesis 47.9. Job 14.1. and
8.9. and 10.5. Psalm. 39.4, 5. and 90.10. etc. So here.

This similitude of grass the Scripture often uses to express man's life.
(...).
The places (so much as suffices) we shall see in the (...), or Reason.

The Reason consists in the analogy between the two things likened or compared
together, (...).
or the qualities wherein they agree. Now among all the qualities of grass
wherein our life may be likened unto it, the frailty is here, according to the
scope of the place, to be understood. The frail condition of grass the
Scripture puts especially in 3 things manifest to sense and experience, in
respect whereof it likens our life to it. 1 Grass is often eaten up by beasts:
And so enemies devour and destroy the life of men, Deuteronomy. 32.42. 2 Samuel 20.19.
Dan. 7.4, 5, 6, 7. (Hence (...) the mouth of the sword, Genesis 34.26. and (...) a
sword of mouther, Psalm. 149.6.) This similitude is used by Moab Numb. 22.4. And
how like man's life is to grass in this respect, abundantly appears by the
numberless number of men slain by enemies, whereof we read both in Scripture
and other stories, and now a days so often hear of. 2 Grass is often cut up:
So the life of man is often untimely taken away by diseases or other casualties
administered by Gods providence. This comparison is used. Psalm. 37.2. and 90.5,
6. And how like herein our life is to grass, the experience of all times
clearly shows, especially when the pestilence and other epidemicall diseases
rage. And as the since cuts up as well the grass newly sprung, as that which is
ripe and full grown; so diseases and other casualties take away as well young
men, children, infants, as men of riper and declining age. 3 If grass be
neither devoured nor cut up; yet at last the moisture, which the root yielded,
being spent, it withers away: And so man's life, if it escape both the sword of
the enemy and all other untimely casualties, yet at last, the radical humor
being spent, perishes by old age. This similitude we have Isa. 40.6, 7, 8. and
elsewhere. And how fitly it agrees, the experience of all ages testifies, even
of those first generations of men before the flood, when they lived diverse
hundreds of years, yet all dyed at last, Genesis 5.

Uses. Instr.

Here then 1 we see how much God desires that we should have our mortality and
the frailty of our life always in mind and before our eyes; seeing He not
only frequently tells us of it in Scripture, and really confirms the truth of
it unto us by taking away all the generations that have been before us, giving
us no fewer examples of it then there have been men in the world from the
beginning (Enoch and Elias only excepted, who yet also suffered a change
answerable to death) Eccles. 1.4. Zech. 1.5. but also here and often, as we
have heard, likens our life to grass, of the frailty whereof no man, that has
the use of reason, can be ignorant.

2 This suggests to us a most profitable meditation, when we travel or walk
through the fields; namely, that our life is like unto that grass, which we
see eaten up or trodden down by beasts, cut down or shortly to be cut down with
the since, withering or to wither of it self, if no way else prevented etc.

3 See the misery of them, who have all their hope and portion in this life,
placing their happiness in the things of this world. Such in sensu composito
(that is, continuing such) cannot attain to the true felicity in heaven, Luke
16.25. Jam. 4.4. They will not be persuaded to seek the true happiness: and
that which they have is miserable. For 1 the things wherein they place it, can
not satisfy the soul; which proceeding from God, can not rest in the enjoying
any thing but Him. 2 If they could satisfy it for the present, yet they are
very slippery and fading, as reason and experience teach us. 3 Though they were
most stable, yet the foundation of enjoying them is this life, Eccles. 5.15. 1 Timothy 6.7. The life therefore (which is like unto grass) being taken away, all
that happiness is taken away with it, yea ends in eternal misery: which shall
be so much the greater, because such men are idolaters, placing their love,
trust etc. which are due only to God, upon the creatures; and blasphemous, in
attributing to the creatures, and those of the meaner sort, that which is
peculiar to God alone, viz. to be the beatificall object. And this misery shall
be so much the more grievous to them, as being suddenly cast headlong into it
out of that sweet dream of their supposed happiness.

This also reproves them, Repr.
who unmindfull of their mortality and frailty, promise themselves long life;
as if their days were like unto oaks, not unto grass. They are worse then the
heathen Poet, who though he referred it to an ill end, namely to Epicureisme,
yet for the thing it self was right,

Vitae summa brevis spem nos vetat inchoare longam. Hor. lib. 1. carm. 4. Young
men usually abound in hope, (among other reasons) because as Aristotle, and out
of him Aquinas 12z. 40.6. c. Multum habent de futuro, and parum de praeterito
etc. they have but little of their life past and (as they think) much to come;
and therefore memory being of things past, hope of things to come, they have
less of memory, more of hope. But to diminish this hope, they must know, that
whatsoever they have of that which is past, they have not much of that which is
to come, unless in their own imagination, reckoning without their host. For
God ( in whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all
mankind Job 12.10) says unto all, To day, if ye will hear his voice etc.
Psalm. 95. And, Boast not of to morrow Prove. 27.1. Rabbi Eleazar said, that we
should repent one day before the day of our death: And when his scholars asked,
Which should be the day of their death? he answered. That was uncertain, and
therefore it was best to repent to day. The Jews have a proverbiall speech;
That many times Old camels carry young camels skins to the market. And how
often do we see elder folk carry young men's, and childrens bodies to the grave!
It is then a fault even in young men to presume of long life: How much more
therefore in old men, who have already one foot in the grave, and yet under
gray hairs nourish green hopes and desires!

Lastly, Exhort.
this serves for exhortation 1 To such who in respect of their callings are
commonly exposed to more then ordinary danger of their lives. See that the
thing thou go about, be lawful; that it lie upon thee in respect of thy
calling; that it be such as God would not have thee to omit, whatsoever may
thereby befall thee: and then go on courageously and do it. Thy life is like
unto grass. It is appointed unto thee once to die, and but once. If therefore
that once shall then happen, bless God, that He will accept of thy death as a
free-will-offring, which of it self was due unto nature. Or, if that thy danger
be from men; consider, that their life also is like unto grass: and therefore
though thou may so far fear their power and malice, as to implore Gods
help the more earnestly, and to order thy business the more cautelously (as
Jacob Genesis 32. and Jehoshaphat 2 Chronicles. 20.) yet do not so fear them, as to be
wanting to a good cause and thy duty. Thus God Himself reasons Isa. 51.12.
Sennacherib gave out great threats against Hezekiah and Jerusalem 2 King. 18.
But his soldiers, in whom he trusted, were but grass; and one Angel in one
night mowed down 185000 of them, Chap. 19.35.

2 Seeing this life is so frail, let us so much the more diligently seek that
life, which is eternal in the heavens and fades not away.

3 Seeing our life is like unto grass, which perishes so many several ways,
therefore let us always every where expect death, and be ever ready and
prepared for it.

2 Doctrine. As a flower of the field, so he flourishes.
Thus is the life of man compared Job 14.2. (...).
Isa. 28.1. and 40.6. Jam. 1.10, 11. 1 Pet. 1.24.

Why or in what respect David likens the flourishing estate of man to a flower,
(...).
himself is his own best interpreter verse. 16. Which tending only to this
purpose, we may here consider it without further handling. In a flower
therefore David observes two points of frailty or vanity. 1 In respect of the
essence of it: Though no hand pluck it, nor foot tread it down, nor beast crop
it, nor any other casualty befall it; yet as soon as the wind (that is, the
nipping or blasting wind, such as the cast wind Genesis 41.23.) passes over it,
(...) it is not; that is, it neither continues any longer in being, nor
returns any more into being. So how greatly soever any man flourishes in his
time, yet as soon as a deadly wound or disease comes upon him, all his glory
can not save his life, (...), he is gone, he is not; he both must die, and
being dead he returns to this life no more, Psalm. 78.39. Job 14.7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12. 2 Samuel 12.23. and 14.14.

2 Which necessarily follows upon the former, in respect of the appearance of
it. Though whilst it flourishes, the place of it seems as it were to know
nothing but it, the glory and beauty of it draws all eyes to it, nothing else
of all that is round about it is looked at or regarded; yet, when it is once
nipped with the wind, not only the glory and beauty of it, but even all
appearance and sign of it perishes together with the essence, and never
returns again [the place thereof shall know it no more.] So, though whilst a
man is in his flourishing estate, he is eminent in his place, looked upon and
regarded by all, pointed at and shown by one to another, This is the man: yet
when his life is once taken away, his glory and appearance in this world
vanishes together with it, and never returns again, yea being once out of
sight he grows by little and little out of mind also, little thought of, less
spoken of, many times not so much as his name mentioned or remembered in the
next generation. Job 7.8, 9, 10. and 14.10. Where is he? Eccles. 1.11. ((...)
of former men) and 2.16. ((...) every man) and 8.10. and 9.5. Hence the state
of the dead is called (...) the land of forgetfulness Psalm. 88.12. And Psalm.
31.12. I am forgetten as a dead man out of mind. And that this is the meaning
of this phrase, appears not only by the place first before quoted Job 7.10.
but by diverse other places also, where this and the like phrases are so used.
See Job 20.9. Nahum 3.17. Psalm. 37.10. compared with verse. 35, 36. of the same
Psalm.





Uses. Instr.

Observe here 1 That men ordinarily have a time of flourishing, whilst their
gifts of mind (faculties and habits) their endowments of body (health,
strength, beauty etc.) their outward good things (wealth, power etc.) are in
their prime. And all these come down from the Father of lights, and are given
unto men, partly that by enjoying them the many calamities of this pilgrimage
may be mitigated; but chiefly, that they may glorify the Giver, promote their
own salvation, benefit the Church, commonwealth, and particular persons, by
the rightuse of these according to Gods word.

2 When they most flourish, they are but like unto a flower, whose short
continuance and fading condition no man but knows: And that to a flower not of
the garden (which is much sheltered from sharp winds, fenced from the teeth and
feet of beasts, from the hands of children, strangers etc.) but of the field,
which lies open to all inconveniences. Psalm. 39.5. Not some man, but every man;
is, not vain, but vanity; not in some measure, but altogether; not in his
childhood or decrepit age, but in his best estate. Neither is this spoken as a
thing doubtful or probable only, but as most certain, Verily. Lastly, it is
not spoken by some simple man of no experience, but by David enlightened by
Gods Spirit, and having experience in himself, what the endowments of mind and
body, and outward privileges could do.

3 At length, sooner or later, something (like a blasting wind) will pass over
them, which will take away this life how flourishing soever.

4 Being once taken away there is no returning to it again in this world.
(...) denies it once for all; as not only the places of Scripture before
quoted plainly testify, but experience taught the heathen themselves, Hor. lib.
4. car. 7. Cum semeleccideris, and de te splendida Mines Fecerit arbitria;
Non, Torquate, genus, non te facundia, non te Restituet pietas.
The life once lost God will not restore, the creatures cannot.

5 Together with their life their appearance also in this world must needs
vanish, never to return. Even in their own place, where they lived, they cease
to be known, and by degrees their very names also to be remembered.

This reproves 1 Such as trust in the goods of this life. Repr.
Trust is a part of the honor due unto God by the prescript of the first
Commandment. Whence it is manifest, that it can not be put in the creatures
(except only in a remiss degree and with subordination to God) without
idolatry and horrible injury to the Creator. But let us see what kind of
cisterns these men dig for themselves: Certain it is, that what ever they be,
none of them can in this case hold any water. For they cannot make men to be
other then like unto flowers, and those of the field too; and therefore can not
defend them from death. Yea as the flower is many times blasted with the wind,
or cropped by the hand of him that passes by, when the grass remains
untouched: so these things many times expose those, that have them, to greater
dangers. To omit other for brevities sake, Let us see concerning riches, which
men are most prone to trust in, ( Prove. 18.11. 1 Timothy 6.17.) because they may
thereby procure other men (and Vis unita fortior) to use their skill, strength,
care, (and what not?) for their help. But he that possesses these, seeing he
flourishes but as a flower of the field, which, when the wind passes over it,
is not, therefore I can not by these preserve himself from death, Psalm. 49.6,
7, 8, 9, 10. yea 2 is by reason of them exposed to many dangers, Eccles. 5.13.
Isa. 39.5, 6, 7.

2 Such as are proud of any endowments of the body. And whereas of all
temporal things beauty makes a man most like unto a flower, they who are proud
of it may be more particularly here reproved. For what is the most beautiful
face but a piece of red and white clay mixed together? And therefore beauty,
even whilst it remains, is not much to be esteemed, Prove. 31.30. is many
times found in them that are none of the best, as in Cains posterity Genesis 6.2.
harlots Prove. 6.25. etc. Yea the more beautiful men or women are, the more
they are in danger (unless they take the more heed, and the grace of God
restrain them) to defile themselves with uncleanness, both in regard of their
sanguine constitution, and in regard of mutual temptations and allurements.
Which if it happen, their beauty will be but little praise to them, Prove. 11.22.
Beside, the beauty, which is for the present, how long does it continue? A fit
of sickness may take it away, Psalm. 39.11. But if sickness spare it, so will
not old age, 1 Pet. 1.24.

Lastly, Exhort.
this should exhort us 1 To labor that we may flourish in the graces of the
Holy Spirit.

Motive 1 From the beautifulness of grace in the eyes of God and all good men,
yea and sometimes even of wicked men also, so that by seeing it in others they
are converted unto God. 2 From the profitablenesse of it, as having the promise
of glory, and enabling us to glorify God and to work out our own salvation. 3
From the necessity of having it, as without which we are unable to do any
good, without God and Christ and the Holy Ghost, dead in sins etc. 4 From the
durablenesse of it. Psalm. 92.12, 13, 14.

Means. God is the fountain of all grace, 1 Pet. 5.10. And in Christ He would
have all the fullness thereof to dwell, John 1.14, 16. Christ communicates
grace by the Spirit, Heb. 10.29. The Spirit by the word Act. 20.32. Wherefore
diligently using the word, and not quenching but cherishing the motions of the
Holy Spirit, come to the throne of grace through the mediation of Christ, that
thou may of God obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need, Hebr.
4.16.

2 To use the things of this life well, whilst we have them.

Motive 1. So may great benefit arise thereby, as appears by those ends before
mentioned (Instr. 1.) to which they are given by God, and fit by His grace. 2
If we neglect the present time, we know not how soon the wind may come, which
passing over us we are gone. And then though we would never so feign, we can
not use them, but must be judged according to all that we have done in the body.

Verse. 17, 18.
But the mercy of the LORD is from everlasting and to everlasting upon them
that fear Him, and His righteousness unto childrens children:

To such as keep His covenant, and to those that remember His commandments to
do them.

We have heard how like we are to grass and a flower, in regard of the frailty
and shortness of our life. Now the Psalmist shows how unlike we are to Gods
mercy or loving kindness: whereof we have here the adjunct, Eternity. object
them that fear God. their childrens children.



Some would have the 18 verse to expound who they are that truly fear God.
And indeed it is most true, that all they and only they truly fear God, who
keep His covenant etc. But it is more probable that David intended another
thing, viz. to propound the condition, upon which Gods righteousness shall be
extended to the childrens children of them that fear Him, namely, if those
childrens children keep His covenant, and think upon His commandments to do
them. This (I say) is more probable, 1 Because he does not say (...) (as (...))
but (...) (as (...)) 2 The Scripture in promises made to the posterity of good
men uses to add this condition, as Psalm. 132.12. 2 Chronicles. 6.16. And how
necessary this limitation is, appears by the pronenesse of men to promise
themselves all good things because they come of godly parents or ancestors,
though they do not walk in their steps. See Matthew. 3.9. Joh. 8.33, 39. To which
also our Savior alludes in the parable Luke 16. where he brings in the rich
man thrice calling Abraham father: whereby is signified how vain it is for a
man to derive his pedigree from Abraham, and not to imitate his faith and works.

1 Doctrine.
The mercy (or loving-kindnesse) of the LORD is from everlasting and to
everlasting upon them that fear Him.

1 (...) mercy or loving-kindnesse. Expl.
] Here it signifies both aversion of evil and bestowing of good, especially
spiritual and eternal.

2 (...) from everlasting and to everlasting.] This phrase may note either
complete eternity, Psalm. 90.2. or else the whole duration of the world from the
beginning to the end. Thus is (...) taken Isa. 46.9. (where they are commanded
to remember the works of God, as those toward their own nation of old, so also
the creation of the world declared by Moses, and the rest showing Him to be
God) and 64.4. And (...) Dan. 7.18. where the meaning is, that after the times
of the gentiles are fulfilled, the Israelites shall have the dominion unto the
end of the world. If the phrase be taken this latter way, the sense will be
[that God is merciful to all that fear Him, whenever they have lived or
shall live, from the beginning of the world unto the end.] And this sense
indeed is true and necessarily included; but it seems not to contain all the
truth. For Gods mercy to them that fear Him is most of all showed after the
end of this world, when their souls and bodies shall be glorified in heaven:
and whatsoever mercy He shows to them both in this world and after for ever,
He had decreed and ordained it all for them before the foundations of the world
were laid. The former acception therefore of the phrase seems to be more full,
as comprehending the latter and something more. And so the sense is, [ That God
is from all eternity, and unto all eternity merciful (or kind) unto all that
fear Him, in what age of the world soever they live.]

The substance of this Doctrine (viz. That Gods mercy is toward them that fear
Him) we had before, verse. 11. and therefore I shall here be the more brief. But
there Gods mercy was illustrated by the quantity in comparison with the height
of the heaven above the earth: here by the duration, from everlasting and unto
everlasting.

That Gods mercy is for ever, (...).
or from everlasting and to everlasting, the Scriptures every where testify. It
is the burden of Psalm. 136. repeated in every verse [(...) for His mercy is for
ever.] And it was the ordinary set form of praising God in the Old Testament,
as appears both by the beginning and end of diverse Psalms (106.107.118.) and
more plainly 1 Chronicles. 16.34, 41. and 2 Chronicles. 5.13. and 7.3. and 20.21. Ezra
3.11. Jer. 33.11. More distinctly and particularly, God from all eternity
foreseeing the fall of Adam, decreed to give His Son for a Mediator, for His
sake to bestow saving mercy upon those that fear Him, to afford means of
fearing Him. In all which there was great mercy from everlasting. And that God
did from all eternity decree all these, it is manifest, because He has
effected them in time: For otherwise He should not work all things after the
counsel of His own will, Ephesians. 1.11. or His will should be mutable, willing
that in time, which He willed not from eternity; whereas yet in Him there is no
variableness nor shadow of turning, Jam. 1. In this life by the means of
salvation (made hereunto effectual by the assistance of the Holy Ghost) He
puts His fear into men's hearts, bestows Christ upon them, frees them from the
guilt and dominion of sin, from the curse of the law, and (so far as is
expedient) from temporal miseries, adopts them for His children, enriches them
with the gifts of the Spirit (renewing them daily more and more according to
His image, assisting them in doing and fuffring, and sealing them to the day of
redemption) bestows upon them the good things necessary and convenient for
this life. After this life He bestows happiness upon the soul, and after the
resurrection upon soul and body jointly for ever. And so His mercy is unto
everlasting.

The Reason, (...).
as verse. 11. Doctr. 2.

Uses.
The Instructions which hence we may gather, Instr.
are

1 From the Object. Seeing David speaking now the third time of Gods mercy or
loving kindness, mentions the fear of God as a condition necessarily required
in the object, see 1 How prone men are to presume of Gods mercy without having
this qualification. For the Spirit of wisdom (which does nothing in vain)
would not so often inculcate the same thing, if there were not need of it. And
indeed experience too plainly proves it. For whereas the fear of God shows it
self in the keeping His commandments, in the eschewing of evil and doing of
good, and that with perseverance, lest God should be dishonored and we
punished; how many may we see every where, who neglecting Gods commandments
(either because they do not think them to be indeed Commandments, signifying
what God would have us to do, but Promises, showing what Himself will do, if
it be done at all; or because they think they were indeed sometime
Commandments, but now are abrogated by Christ, and so do not bind us; or
because they love and prefer their own lusts before Gods commandments) yet
nothing doubt but that Gods mercy belongs to them? 2 How certain it is, that
only they that fear God, shall obtain His mercy. For although we ought to
believe the Holy Ghost once affirming a thing; yet sometimes, that we may the
more firmly believe Him, He uses to reiterate it. Gal. 5.21. Philip. 3.18 and
often elsewhere. Let them therefore who fear God, believe this for their
comfort; and let them, who fear Him not, believe it, that they may be
converted and fear Him.

2 From the duration (...). 1 See how Gods mercy is decreed from everlasting,
or from all eternity, namely to men as considered under the qualification of
fearing God: that is, Gods will decreed mercy to those whom His understanding
foresaw would by His preventing and following grace truly fear Him. Hence
then we may learn how to know whether Gods mercy be from all eternity decreed
to us. Experience teaches that of the Apostle to be true 1 Cor. 2.11. What man
(that is, No man) knows the things of a man save the spirit of man, which is
in him? Wherefore that must needs be much more true, which follows, The things
of God knows none but the Spirit of God. Most certain therefore it is, that
no man can by any means know to whom God has from all eternity decreed His
mercy unless it be revealed by the Spirit of God. Now the Spirit of God here
by David clearly tells us that the mercy of God from everlasting is to them
that fear Him. Let us then see that we truly fear God, and constantly
continue in His fear, and then we may certainly know that we are of them, to
whom His saving mercy is decreed from all eternity. But some man will say. They
that list, may go so far about, but I have a nearer way. For the Spirit
certifyeth me by secret whisperings, without considering of any such
qualification, that mercy is prepared for me from all eternity. I answer with
S. John 1 ep. 4.1. Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they are of God. Now we have no rule, whereby to try the spirits, but
the Scriptures, Isa. 8.20. The spirit therefore, which urges faith and good
works according to the Scriptures, is plainly the Spirit of God; Who having
given us His Word of highest perfection, which nothing may be added to or taken
from, does not dictate any thing inwardly unto men, but according to that,
which He (always constant and like unto Himself) has revealed in that word.
But that spirit, which muttereth any thing in matter of religion contrary to
Scripture, is most certainly the spirit of giddiness and of darkness. If
therefore we consult the Scripture, we shall find both here and every where the
same constant doctrine, That mercy is from all eternity decreed to them that
fear God: but the Scripture no where says that it is decreed to any of us by
name without consideration of this qualification. Whence it follows, that the
Spirit, which by our perseverance in the fear of God certifies us, that mercy
is prepared for us from eternity, is the Spirit of God: but that which suggests
to us that it is absolutely prepared for us without any consideration of such
qualification, is the spirit of error. 2 Seeing the mercy of God unto all
eternity is to men not simply but as fearing God; we must be careful to
persevere in the fear of God, if we would certainly expect His mercy unto
everlasting. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The LORD is with us, Whilst we are with Him: but
if we forsake Him (which we do, if we cast away His fear) He will forsake us.
For then we are no longer under the qualification, to which mercy is annexed.

3 From both together. Behold Gods immutable constancy in showing mercy to them
that fear Him.

This reproves 1 Them who presume of Gods mercy from everlasting, Repr.
and yet are so far from remembering their Creator in the days of their
youth, that they defer their repentance to the hour of death.

2 Them who presume of Gods mercy unto everlasting, and yet do not persevere
in His fear during the few days of this life.

As Verse. 11. Doctr. 2. with a little alteration. Consol. Exhort.


2 Doctrine.
They who remember Gods commandments to do them, keep His covenant.

We have seen Gods mercy toward them that fear Him. Let us now see concerning
their posterity, to whom (from everlasting to everlasting) His righteousness
is extended, not absolutely, but under the condition expressed verse. 18. This
is contained in the effect of keeping His covenant, which is illustrated or
described from another effect, that is, remembering His commandments to do
them. The explication of the condition is first to be handled (in this present
Doctrine) Then the condition added to the promise.

1 (...) His commandments. Explic.
] The verb (...) (among other significations) signifies to give a thing in
charge, to appoint, commit, or command it to be done, 2 Chronicles. 36.23. Numb.
3.10. and 4.27. Job 34.13. Hence this nown in the plural number (...) is
peculiarly used by David in this book of Psalms, and especially Psalm. 119. for
the commandments of God, the things, which He has appointed, given in charge,
or committed to us to observe and do. These things are Repentance, Faith, the
duties of the Moral law; and were under the Old Testament those of the
Ceremonial and Judicial law also.

2 (...) to them who remember.] What it is to remember, and to forget, has
been explained Verse. 2. Doct. 2. and Verse. 14. Doct. 4. And whereas Memory is
either merely notionall, or also affective and consequently operative; here
this latter is to be understood, as appears by (...)

3 (...) to do.] To do Gods commandments here notes 1 The substance of the
act or omission; that is, the doing of things commanded, and eschewing of
things forbidden. 2 The manner of doing, that is, out of knowledge of Gods
commandment, and conscience of obeying it, to Gods glory, our own salvation
etc. with perseverance.

4 (...) His covenant.] Gods covenant with man is twofold, viz. either with man

standing in innocence. fallen by sin.
Here is meant the latter, that is, the covenant which God made with fallen man
in the seed of the woman, viz. Christ the Mediator. This covenant for
substance is but one (as Christ is yesterday, and to day, and the same for
ever) but differently dispensed in respect of the fathers under the (...) or
Promise. us under the Gospel.


The sum or substance of the covenant with both consists in Stipulation, of
the obedience of faith. Promise, of pardon and eternal life.


5 (...) to them that keep.] God is said to keep His covenant, when He
performs His promises, Deuteronomy. 7.9, 12. On the other side, men keep covenant
with God, when they perform the stipulation or conditions required by Him of
them, that is, remember His commandments (before mentioned) to do them.

Thus Exodus 19.5. (...).
the keeping Gods covenant is all one with obeying His voice, that is, (per
metonym. adj.) His commandments. And Deuteronomy. 4.13. He declared unto you His
covenant etc. even ten commandments etc. (See also Exodus 24.7. Psalm. 78.10.
2 Kings 22.8. compared with chap. 23.2. Jer. 11.3, 4.) Now the observation of
the Decalogue necessarily presupposes Repentance and Faith; as without which a
man is without Christ, without Whom he can do nothing.

The Reasons then of both points in the Doctrine are evident. (...).


1 To do Gods commandments is to keep His covenant; because this is the
stipulation or condition of the covenant, which God requires to be performed of
them that are in covenant with Him.

2 Remembrance also is necessary to the doing His commandments; because
knowledge is necessary, and knowledge without remembrance can do nothing.

Uses.
Hence we learn 1 That Gods Covenant is the object of our observance, Instr.
or that which we are to keep, as prescribing us what we ought to do.

2 The keeping of Gods covenant consists in the doing His Commandments.

3 It is not any doing His Commandments that will serve the turn, neither
does it suffice to perform the substance of the acts; but (among other
circumstances which belong to the manner of doing) we must do them out of
remembrance, presupposing knowledge.

4 We may know whether we keep Gods covenant or no. For hither belongs David's
explication here, which aiming only at this, to teach who they are that keep
Gods covenant, were altogether in vain, if this could not be known: which we
can not imagine without injury to the Holy Ghost, by Whom he spoke. And it may
be otherwise also most firmly proved. For 1 The Scripture every where most
plainly shows, what God in His covenant requires to be done of us, and in what
manner. 2 God has given us conscience, both to observe what we do, and how, 1
Cor. 2.11. and to compare our actions with the rule, that is, with His
stipulation, 2 Cor. 1.12. For this was not peculiar to S. Paul only, or such
as he; but all who are not seared, have the testimony of conscience, even the
heathen themselves, Romans 2.14, 15. When therefore the understanding looking at
Gods stipulation truly apprehends what it is, and by reflection observes how a
man carries himself; the conscience comparing the one with the other (the
conversation of man with the stipulation of God) easily and certainly observes
and testifies either their agreement, and so the keeping of the covenant, or
their disagreement, and so the violating of it.

If this be the nature of Gods covenant, Confur.
this refutes 1 Such as feign the Covenant of grace to be altogether without
condition, and wherein God stipulates or requires nothing, but only promises
all. Certainly the Covenant, whereof David here speaks, is the Covenant of
grace; and yet it requires that we keep it, remembering the Commandments of God
to do them.

Isa. 54.8, 9, 10.

belongs unto him? 4 That I may come to the meaning of the place, the Prophet
having foretold ( chap. 53.10, 11.) the event of Christ's death in the
conversion of many both of the Jews and gentiles, in this 54th chapter speaks
of the national conversion of the Jews yet to come. That he here speaks of
the Jews, is plain verse. 3, 4. (for to them, for their crucifying of Christ
and rejecting the gospel, had God given a bill of divorce; whereas the
gentiles, being strangers from the faith, could not properly be called a widow)
6, 7, 11. This covenant therefore seems proper and peculiar to the Israelites,
that they being once converted unto Christ God will no more be angry with them,
but give them mercy and peace. But this is not to be understood of particular
persons, but of the nation; with which God will not so be any more angry, as to
expose them to captivity and destruction as before, though with the impenitent,
unbeleevers, and wicked livers He will be angry. See Isa. 65.18, 19, 20. 2
Whosoever they be with whom this covenant is made, it is not absolute, but
requires a certain qualification, as appears by the conclusion of the chapter
verse. 17. God therefore compares this covenant with that made with Noah, in the
firmness of it (and so the covenant of grace also is like unto it) but not in
the manner of promising. For that covenant of Noah God made not only with men,
but with every living creature ( Genesis 9.12.) absolutely: but this only with
men; not simply, but such as are His servants, retaining and exercising the
righteousness He bestows upon them.



Jer. 9.23, 24. Romans 5.3. 2 Cor. 10.8, 17. and 12.5. and elsewhere. He that
glories of any thing, which he has Of himself, does wickedly. For seeing every
good thing comes down from the Father of lights; a man has nothing of himself,
but sin: and he that glories in this, glories in his own shame. Also to glory
of any good thing as if he had not received it, is ungrateful arrogance; or
not in subordination to Gods glory (1 Cor. 1.13.) is sacrilegious. But to glory
of spiritual good things, which a man has indeed in himself, but given of
God, and to glory in them to Gods glory, is so far from being unlawful, that
it is a part of religious gratitude.

somethings to be done by us, yet we should not give them the name of
Conditions.

the condition of the promise, and the doing the thing forbidden, the condition
of the threatening. In a bond a man ties himself and his heirs to pay a sum
double to that he owes: but the meaning is, that if he pay the due debt at the
day appointed, he shall be free from the forfeiture; but if he fail therein,
it shall lie upon him. And this by all without contradiction is called the
condition of the obligation. Again, when the Lord says to Israel, If thou
obey, thou shall be blessed; if thou disobey, thou shall be cursed etc: all
grammarians and logicians, speaking agreeably to the rules of their art) will
call these conditional propositions; obedience being the condition of the
promise, disobedience of the threatening. See the use of the word in Scripture 1 Samuel 11.1, 2. where the men of Jabesh desiring life, promise servitude; Nahash
promises life, but beside servitude requires the thrusting out all their right
eyes: and this postulation is called there a condition. See also Luke 14.32.
Consider then whether according to this sense and acception of the word, those
duties which God requires of us in His covenant, may not rightly be called
conditions. For He so requires them, that if they be performed, He will
graciously give what He has promised, otherwise not. See concerning Repentance
performed, Ezekiel. 33.11. omitted, Luke 13.3. concerning Faith performed, and
omitted, John 3.36. concerning holy obedience performed, Psalm. 84.11. omitted,
Heb. 12.14.

2 Such as think the Covenant has indeed conditions, but to be performed by
God, not by us. This opinion plainly contradicts this present place; where the
keeping of Gods covenant is required of us. And so every where. Again, if the
stipulation must be performed by God; then He made His covenant not with men,
but with Himself, viz. that if He Himself shall perform that which He
stipulates or requires of Himself, then He will perform His promises unto men:
which is absurd. Furthermore, if God perform the stipulation, then He repents,
believes in his Savior, and obeys: which is not only absurd, but blasphemous
to affirm. Lastly, if the performance of the stipulation belong to God, not to
men; why should He be angry at men, and threaten, and punish them for
nonperformance? Levit. 26.25. and often. For how unreasonable is it, and
unbeseeming Gods justice, to punish men for not keeping His covenant, if it do
not belong to them, but to Himself to keep it? For who knows not, that he, and
he only, is to be punished for not doing a thing, to whom it belongs to do
it? But these things are more absurd, then to need longer confutation. And
indeed it is to be wondered with what sophistry the devil could persuade men
(and men, as themselves think, not the meanest among those that profess the
most pure religion of Christ) to entertain such fantasies contrary to the most
clear shining light of Scripture.

Again, Repr.
if they and they only keep Gods covenant, who remember His commandments to
do them; then all those who do not remember His commandments to do them,
come here to be reproved as violaters of His covenant. Of these there are many
sorts. Some men do some things for the substance of the acts, but not
according to the manner here required; as never learning, or, if they do
learn, forgetting what or in what manner they ought to do. Others do some
things (after a fashion) but wittingly and willingly break Gods commandments
in other things, and so are guilty of the whole law. Others indeed remember
Gods commandments, but to prate or wrangle about them, not to do them. Others
casting Gods commandments behind their backs, rush into all kind of sins as
a horse into the battle. Now we must know that this second Covenant is the
last. To the first Covenant (broken by Adam) this succeeded, opening unto men
(guilty of eternal death by the first) a new way of salvation: And being
confirmed by Gods oath and the death of Christ the Testatour, it shall remain
to the end of the world; nor shall there be any other way or means of
salvation for ever. Wherefore it is simply impossible for any men to be saved,
who finally transgress this: yea the threatening annexed to it (no less
certain then the promise) shall inevitably lay hold upon them. And the evils
denounced against the breakers of this covenant were always from the very
first making of it, worthily heavy; but now under the New Testament so much the
heavyer, by how much greater means of keeping it are afforded us.

The Exhortation, Exhort.
which I shall here touch upon (for as to the thing it self the doing of Gods
commandments, wherein consists the keeping of His covenant, I shall speak in
the next Doctrine) is, that we remember Gods commandments to do them.

Motiv. 1. Unless we remember them, we can not do them acceptably. 2 Unless
we remember to do them, our notionall and idle remembrance will but aggravate
our sin, and increase our condemnation. 3 If we so remember as to do them;
then we shall keep Gods covenant in the stipulation; and so He will most
faithfully keep it in the premises.

3 Doctrine. The righteousness of God is unto childrens children, who keep His
covenant.
1 (...) His righteousness.] Expl.
(...) often signifies justice; either particular justice, whereby we give
every man his own, or universal justice, whereby we carry our selves generally
conformable to the rule of religion. Sometimes it is taken for mercy, or
beneficence, (See Verse. 6. Doctr. 1. Expl. 2.) as which is an eminent part of
universal justice. And so it is taken in this place, and is all one with (...)
in the former part of the verse.

2 (...) Childrens children.] This phrase in the strict sense signifies
grandchildren, or the posterity of the second generation, as Prove. 17.6. But
sometimes it is taken more largely, for the third and fourth generation also.
Exodus 34.7. And yet more largely, for posterity unto all generations for ever.
Ezekiel. 37.25. And so here.

Ezekiel. 18.

Kings 2.12. Ten righteous men had saved Sodom, Genesis 18.32. One Moses stood
in the gap, Psalm. 106.23. So Jer. 5.1. How much more then shall righteous
parents obtein Gods mercy for their children? See 1 Kings 11. verse. 13, 32, 34,
36. 2 For eternalls indeed the children of righteous men shall not obtein Gods
mercy, unless they also be righteous themselves, Ezekiel. 18. But yet they have
far greater sufficiency of means to obtein it then other men. For they are
borne in the covenant, and therefore as soon as they are borne, have right (by
Gods gracious promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed) to the good
things of the covenant. To the observation thereof also they have more and
greater helps then others: namely, in general the prayers and examples of
their godly parents, and the public exercises of religion, with which their
parents acquaint and accustom them; in special, to eschew evil, they have
their parents seasonable admonitions, and (if need be) corrections; to follow
that which is good, their most loving and earnest exhortations.

For proof of the Doctrine see Exodus 20.6. Deuteronomy. 7.9. (...).


The Reason is 1 From the mercy of God, (...).
promising this to them that keep His covenant, and that they may keep it,
working in them the will and the deed.

2 From His justice also, requiring the performance of His promise, though most
freely and graciously made.

Uses.
Here 1 See how greatly God loves those that fear Him; Instr.
seeing He cannot satisfy Himself in doing good to them only in their own
persons, but does it also to their children and posterity for their sakes, 2 Samuel 7.19.

2 See how good a thing it is to be borne of good parents.

3 See the best way of providing for thy children: which consists not in
heaping up wealth, honor etc. for them, but in being thy self such an one as
fears God, and teaching them also to keep His covenant.

4 The mercy of God, at least in bestowing eternal happiness, is not
promiscuously to all the posterity of those that fear Him.

Here are reproved 1 Parents who fear not God; Repr.
such stopping the way to Gods mercy from descending upon their children and
posterity, or at least not opening or making way for it.

2 Children, 1 Relying too much upon the piety of their parents, as if for
their sakes it should be well with them, though they follow not their stepps
but work iniquity. And it may be so indeed in temporalls, but not so in
eternalls; as was said before. Yea they shall be so much the more grievously
tormented in hell, by how much the greater temporal mercy God has for their
fathers sakes bestowed upon them for to win them, and by how much the greater
means their parents have used to bring them to salvation; which
notwithstanding, they have gone on in their wickedness. See what Christ
answered to the Jews boasting of their father Abraham Joh. 8. and Abraham to
the rich man Luke 16. 2 Who hate or contemn their parents for this very thing,
because they fear God. Such an one seems Cham to have been Genesis 9.22. For that
his deriding his father in his drunkenness seems to have proceeded from his
hatred of him for his piety.

3 Any, who so hate them that fear God, that for their sakes they extend their
hatred to their children also.

Here also is comfort for them that are poor, Consol.
and have little or nothing to leave to their children. If they fear God, they
shall leave them for an inheritance Gods first love; and a greater measure of
it, together with His second love also unto eternity, if they teach them to
keep Gods covenant.

Lastly, Exhort.
this should exhort 1 Parents to fear God, as for Gods sake and their own, so
here for their childrens sake also.

2 Children to keep Gods covenant, that upon them may come the blessing
promised to their parents. Genesis 18.19. 1 King. 2.3, 4. and 8.25. 1 Chronicles. 28.7,
9. Psalm. 132.12.

4 Doctrine. Not as our life, so the mercy of God to them that fear Him.
So Isa. 51.7, 8.

The immediate reason of the dissimilitude is expressed in the Text; (...).
viz. in that our life is like unto the grass and a flower, but Gods mercy is
from everlasting, and to everlasting. The cause why our life is such, is sin;
why Gods mercy is such, is His eternity, His constant love to them that fear
Him, and His omnipotency.

Uses.
We see then that they who fear God, Instr.
have not their whole portion in this life. Here indeed they have the
unspeakable riches of grace, and so much of outward things, as is sufficient
and fit for them; which things also, as proceeding from Gods second love, are
very precious to them. But celestial happiness, which belongs peculiarly to
them, as it was prepared for them from all eternity, so after this life ended
it shall continue to them unto all eternity.

This dissimilitude they very ill consider, Repr.
1 who prefer this life of a spanne long before the eternal mercy of God;
for the preservation of this life (which yet they can not long preserve) using
means unlawful and displeasing unto God, getting or keeping unjustly the
things of this life etc. In so doing they plainly cast away the fear of God,
without which His mercy can not be obtained.

2 Who prefer the favor of men (whose life is as grass and a flower) before
the favor of God (whose mercy is from everlasting and to everlasting.) So they
who fear men more then God.

But for them who truly fear God here is comfort against the shortness of
this life, Consol.
and fear of death. Job 19.25, 26, 27. 2 Cor. 5 1. And no marvel, if (walking
not by sight but by faith) they have great consolation against the terror of
death; seeing the mercy of God (which faith apprehends) is extended beyond the
term of this life, even unto eternity. For the far greatest fruits of it are
laid up for us in heaven, out of all danger of ever losing them; nor can we
attain to them but by death. 1 Cor. 15.50. Compare this life, whilst it
lasts, with that in heaven, and see whether death be not a gain, as it is
called Philip. 1.21, 23.

Lastly, Exhort.
this should again exhort us to the fear of God, the keeping of His covenant,
and the remembering of His commandments to do them.

Motives here 1. This life is very short and frail, as we have heard, and the
Scripture (beside the aforesaid similitudes) many ways expresses. Job 7.6. and
9.25, 26. Psalm. 90.9, 10. and 102.11. and 144.4. and 39.5. Jam. 4.14. 2 So we
shall obtein Gods mercy; which toward them that are such is from everlasting
and to everlasting, and after this life is so immense, that they who are dead
in the Lord, as they have cause, so (no doubt) they do rejoice that this
temporal life endured no longer. 3. Whereas God out of His hatred of sin
has His anger no less lasting against them who are void of His fear, then
His mercy toward them that fear Him; unless we do as we are here exhorted,
eternal wrath abides for us after this life.

5 Doctrine. Because God knows this, therefore He mitigates His anger.
Hitherto our misery in soul and body has been considered absolutely verse.
14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Now it is to be considered relatively, as it is a reason
why God mitigates His anger verse. 9, 10.

That it is so, (...).
see for spiritual misery Genesis 8.21. for corporal, Psalm. 78.38, 39. Hence Job
uses this as an argument to God Chap. 7.7. and 10.20, 21. and 14, 5, 6. So
David Psalm. 39.12, 13. and 89.46, 47. (...).


The force of this reason (from our misery) is not by any means as if it
deserved the mitigation of Gods anger (as is evident to any man) nor as if God
needed the help of men justified and saved; but of His own most free and
gracious love to men, which is such and so great, that from our malignity,
deserving eternal damnation, He takes occasion of doing us good, Romans 5.20.
Yea here Gods mercy is so much the more conspicuous, in that all this misery of
soul and body has most justly befallen us for sin.

Uses.
Here then 1 No man can want an argument to urge for imploring the mitigation
of Gods anger. Instr.
But it is to be urged rightly. Namely, come groaning under the burden of thy
sins, desiring above all things absolution from them, and to be in Gods
favor, firmly resolving to live godly for the time to come.

2 If this be a reason of mitigating Gods anger, much more is a pious
conversation. Which Job uses chap. 31. and Hezekiah Isa. 38.3. But most of all
the merit of Christ apprehended by a lively faith.

If this be Gods reasoning, Repr.
how unlike to God are they, who from other men's miseries spiritual or
temporal take occasion of cruelly deriding them! Specially, from their
spiritual miseries, of defaming them, and (if they be of a more choleric
nature) of provoking and vexing them; from their corporal miseries, of
oppressing them.

This should exhort us 1 That (being indeed miserable) we should urge not our
merits with the Pharisee, Exhort.
but our miseries with the Publicane, for obteining mercy. So Psalm. 25.11.

2 To imitate our heavenly Father in taking occasion of mitigating our anger,
from the misery of men, either spiritual (when we may hope they do not commit
evil of set malice, but of ignorance, turbulent passion etc.) or corporal.

Verse. 19. The LORD has prepared His throne in the heavens, and His kingdom
rules over all.
Hitherto David has excited himself to bless God by way of gratitude or
thanksgiving for His benefits bestowed upon himself and others. Now in this
19th verse he excites himself to bless Him by way of praise for His most
excellent Majesty: which appears 1 from the loftiness of His throne, 2 from
the amplitude or largeness of His kingdom. Here therefore, considering the
words both absolutely in themselves, and relatively according to the scope, we
have 3 Doctrines.

1 Doctrine. The LORD has prepared His throne in the heavens.
1 (...) His throne.] Explic.
(...) sometimes signifies any seat. 2 King. 4.10. Prove. 9.14. but for the most
part it notes a Kings throne or seat of majesty. And so here by a metaphor
taken from earthly kings it is attributed to God; as appears by the latter
part of the verse, where His Kingdom is mentioned. And the place of Gods
glorious manifestation of Himself is called His throne; as a king is in state
upon his throne.

2 (...) in the heavens.] Of the three heavens mentioned verse. 11. Doctr. 1.
here understand the highest. Not that God is not always every where present;
but He is said to have His throne there in regard of His continual
manifestation of His glory.

3 (...) has prepared.] or has established, as 1 King. 2.24. 1 Samuel 13.13. 2 Samuel 5.12. and 7.12. 1 Chronicles. 22.10. and 28.7. and 2 Chronicles. 12.1.

For proof see Isa. 66.1. (...).
And so He is represented to the Prophets Dan. 7.9, 10. 1 King. 22.19. Isa. 6.1.

The chief reason hereof is from Gods own pleasure. (...).
For an earthly king has liberty to place his throne where himself lists
within the limits of his kingdom. Much more has God. But as a wise king
chooses such a place as is most convenient for his majesty, and for the
government of his subjects: so God willing to do all things according to the
prescript of His infinite wisdom, has set His throne in heaven. 1 Because
this place in regard of the sublimity, amplitude purity of it, and holiness of
the inhabitants, is most beseeming His majesty. 2 Because mortal men could not
endure His glorious presence. Deuteronomy. 5.23 etc. 3 The placing of His throne not
in earth but in heaven, is most convenient for the proving men's obedience;
whether living by faith they will hear God, Whom they see not, speaking to
them by His ministers, and serve Him with reverence, or whether they will
neglect Him because they see Him not. When God manifested His glory in mount
Sinai, the Israelites said to Moses, Go thou near and hear all that the LORD
our God shall say, and speak thou unto us all that the LORD our God shall speak
unto thee, and we will hear it and do it, Deuteronomy. 5.27. But within the 40 days
that Moses was in the mount (and that according to their request to bring Gods
commandments to them) they most foully sinned by making and worshipping a
molten calfe.

Uses.
Here 1 Behold the majesty of God. Instr.
Earthly kings, that their majesty may appear the greater to their subjects,
have their thrones usually exalted higher then ordinary. But how little is that
height, if compared with the height of the highest heaven? They are wont to
have their thrones made of precious matter with cunning and curious artifice.
But how mean are these in respect of the admirable fabric of the heavens,
that especially where Gods throne is? The most glorious throne we read of, is
that of Solomon, which the Holy Ghost is pleased to describe 1 King. 10.18, 19,
20. Which 1 was a great one: but in respect of heaven (which is all but Gods
throne Isa. 66.1.) seeing the whole globe of the earth and sea is but as a
point, how much less, and as it were nothing, was that throne? 2 For the
matter, it was made of ivory and overlayd with gold. But what is the tooth of a
great beast, or metal dug out of the bowels of the earth in respect of the
matter of the heavens, which is puter then to be seen with our eyes, or
apprehended by our understanding? 3 That throne had six stepps. But what is
that to the height of the heavens? of which something was said verse. 11. Doctr.
1. 4 It had stays on both sides. But these argued partly that Solomon had a
body made of earth, and so tending downwards, as other men, partly that the
throne it self was weak, and needed such supporters. But such imperfections are
not either in God the Father of spirits, or in the heaven His throne, which
remains most firm for ever and ever. And so much the verb (...) here
imports, which as properly signifies fundavit, firmavit, stabilivit, He has
fixed, founded, set fast, established, as paravit, He has prepared. (See
Explic. 3.) But what kind of stays or supporters Gods throne has, see Psalm.
89.14. and 97.2. 5 Solomon's throne was adorned with fourteen lions. But under
Gods throne is whatsoever is most excellent in the earth, yea the sun, moon,
and stars; and on either hand of it, not the images of beasts but 1000000 and
100000000 most glorious Angels, Dan. 7.10.

2 Behold the perpetuity of Gods kingdom. Other kings have their thrones on
earth, where all things are fading, and subject to many changes, where time and
chance happens to all, Eccles. 9.11. But Gods throne is in heaven, where all
things are eternal, incorruptible, immutable. This also the word (...)
signifies, as before. See also Psalm. 145.13. and 93.2.

3 See how miserable is the condition of Gods enemies. Of their sin we shall
see more at large in the next Doctrine: here let us see their danger. It is
most certain the end of this hostility will be deadly to them, Job 9.4. Isa.
27.4 etc. and 45.9. Jer. 7.19. Some reasons may be gathered from hence, that
they can not prevail, seeing Gods throne is established in the heavens, Job
35.5, 6. Psalm. 2.4. For 1 Enemies may hide themselves from men: but He Who has
His throne in heaven sees all things: wherefore David connects these two, The
LORDS throne is in heaven, and, His eyes behold, His ey-lids try the children
of men, Psalm. 11.4. 2 Enemies may overcome men: but He Who has His throne in
heaven, as Himself is omnipotent, so He has all the hosts of heaven most
obedient to Him: And what can silly men do against so many myriades of them,
whereof one in one night destroyed 185000 of the chief of the Assyrians? 3
Enemies may defend themselves against men in fenced cities, as the Jebusites.
But fortifications are of no force against Him Who has His throne in the
heavens, from whence He can rain fire and brimstone upon them. Beside, in
those very fenced cities, though God has not His throne there as in heaven,
yet He is truly present, as He is every where; and therefore fortifications
(which are to keep out the enemy) are vain against Him. 4 Enemies, if they be
too weak, may flee, as Hadad into Egypt: but from Him, Who has His throne in
heaven, and His footstool upon earth, how can any man flee? Psalm. 139.7 etc.

This reproves them who fear and obey men invested with earthly power, Repr.
more then Him, Who has His throne in heaven.

On the other side it comforts and encourages the people of God. Consol.
Confidence in men, even in princes (whose thrones are upon earth) is slippery
and unsafe, Psalm. 146.3, 4. But He, Who has His throne in heaven, has all
power and authority, to deliver His from all evils, and to enrich them with all
good things. If therefore our enemies ask us, as the heathen did the Israelites
Psalm. 115.2. Where is your God? our answer may be with Israel verse. 3. Our God
is in heaven, He has done (does, and will do) whatsoever pleases Him.

Lastly, Exhort.
this should exhort us 1 To seek those things which are above, where Gods
throne is, where Christ now is sitting at His right hand, Colos. 3.1.

2 In the mean time to endeavor that God may be here with us by His gracious
presence.

Motiv. 1. Even this presence of God is unspeakably good and pleasant in it
self. 2 It certainly leads to His glorious presence.

Means 1. By removing the impediment: Flee sin, which separates from God; by
which man forsakes God, and for which God forsakes man. 2 Direct. 1 Be in the
Son of His love. 2 Stir up the gift of God, which is in thee, and in
humility have respect unto all His commandments.

2 Doctrine. His kingdom rules over all.
1 (...) His kingdom.] Expl.
This word, as it belongs to men, may be taken two ways. 1 for the kingly
power it self 1 Samuel 13.13. 2 for the object of this power, that is, the
country, Ester 3.8. together with the inhabitants, Psalm. 79.6. So is the
kingdom of God also taken 1 for the power, Psalm. 145.11, 13. 2 for the place,
Galat. 5.21. Here it is taken the former way; as appears by the following
effect of ruling, which is not an effect of the place but of the power.

2 (...) over all.] This word comprehends all creatures actually existent. Yea
further, Gods kingdom extends to all things possible to be: which with His
word He can make either to be or not to be, to be after this or any other
manner. Nay lastly, even sins also are subject to Gods power: He can at His
pleasure either hinder or permit them; direct them to their object ( Ezekiel.
21.21.) and end; determine them for the time (when they shall be, and how long
they shall continue) and for the greatness, to what height they shall grow;
and finally, either remit or punish them.

That Gods kingdom is over all, (...).
see 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12. 2 Chronicles. 20.6. Psalm. 135.6. This Nebuchadnezzar learnt
by experience Dan. 4.34, 35. And it appears also in that God gave unto Christ
the Mediator all power in heaven and in earth, Mat. 28.18. He has given also
unto all men all the power they have, Romans 13.1. It appears also in that He is
said to be a great King above all gods, Psalm. 95.3. Now there are called gods
(to omit idols) Angels, Hebr. 1.6. out of Psalm. 97.7. Kings, judges, and
magistrates, Psalm. 82.1, 6. If therefore God be King above all these most
potent creatures, then doubtless above all other also.

The Reason of Gods dominion 1 in respect of all things actually existent,
(...).
is founded 1 in the creation of all, Psalm. 24.1, 2. Neither did He create them
of any matter prepared by another, but of mere nothing: for He created them
only by His word, and created them wholly. And therefore He has the first and
chief right over all creatures, having no partner with Him in His dominion; and
this dominion is over all creatures, and over the whole creature, and all that
is in it. 2 In the preservation of them, which is as it were a second creation,
or the continuation of their essence by an univocall influx of the same every
moment of their duration, Act. 17.28. Hebr. 1.3. Hence all creatures so long as
they are in being are necessarily subject to His dominion, nor can by any
means be withdrawn from it. Both these Reasons or foundations of Gods dominion
over all things existent are joined Nehem. 9.6. 2 In respect of things
possible, in as much as all that possibility is founded in His power, whereby
He can at His pleasure either produce them into act, or leave them still in the
womb of nothing, Romans 4.17. 1 Cor. 1.28. 3 In respect of sins, because He is
Lord over the creatures, of which and by which they are committed, and because
He Himself only is the Lawgiver against Whom they are committed, Psalm. 51.4.
Jam. 4.12.

Isa. 1.2. and 65.2, 3. etc. Jer. 5.5. whence it may seem that howsoever He
has right, yet de facto His kingdom does not rule over all.



Uses.
We see then 1 That no creature is sui juris lord of it self. Instr.
Some men indeed have sometimes thought so, as Pharaoh Exodus 5.2. So Psalm 2.2,
3. and 12.4. And the conversation of many among us plainly shows that they
think so; whilst they follow whatsoever pleases them, and refuse whatsoever
stands not with their liking, notwithstanding the precepts, admonitions,
threatenings etc. of God in Scripture. But that all men and all creatures are
subject to Gods dominion, as it is manifest to all (Christians especially) so
these men also shall at last feel. For if they will not now in the day of grace
be subject to Gods fatherly dominion, they shall one day be subject to His
masterly dominion; and when He bids them, Depart into everlasting fire, shall
not be able to refuse or disobey.

2 That no creature can have dominion over another, unless it be derived from
God, Who has the supreme dominion over all, Romans 13.1. Whence both
magistrates should learn so to carry themselves in their government, as being
to give an account to God the chief Lord, and people so to yield obedience to
them as to Gods vicegerents upon earth, from Whom and for Whom they govern.

This reproves all such as go about any way to diminish Gods dominion. So
they, Repr.
who by refusing to obey His commandments do (as much as in them is) withdraw
themselves from under His dominion. Would they vindicate themselves into
absolute liberty and be altogether their own men subject to none other? That is
impossible: For every man obeys either righteousness and God, or
unrighteousness and the devil, Romans 6.16. They therefore who will not obey
God, do voluntarily yield themselves slaves to the devil. Nor can they so shake
off Gods dominion, Who is able to subdue all things unto Himself, and when He
shall visit His house, will say, Those Mine enemies, which would not that I
should reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before Me, Luke 19.27. See
Ezekiel. 20.33. So they who account all they have so fully their own, that they
may do therewith what they list. What spendthrift is there among us, that will
not be ready to say, I hope I spend nothing but mine own? (And yet it were
well, if some of them did not by borrowing or stealing spend that which is
other men's.) So covetous men, they think they are absolute lords of all that
they have (1 Samuel 25.11) otherwise how chance they will not lay out those goods
according to the owners will? So they, who abuse the creatures; which surely
are Gods creatures, He has made them: nor shall any man go unpunished, that
shall usurp or use them otherwise then according to His will. The stone out of
the wall shall cry etc. says the Prophet Habakkuk chapter 2.11, 12. So the
creatures out of the gluttons and drunkards belly shall cry, Woe to them that
rise up early in the morning to follow strong drink etc. Isa. 5.11, 12.

On the other side, Consol.
this may comfort all Gods faithful subjects against whatsoever can happen to
them. If they be in peril by sea, the sea is subject to the kingdom and
dominion of God, Psalm. 93.3, 4. and 107.29. Jer. 5.22. If they be in danger
from men, see 2 Chronicles. 32.8. Isa. 40.15, 17. If from the devil, Hebr. 2.14.
Romans 16.20. 1 John 4.4. If from death and the grave, Hos. 13.14. Phil. 3.21. 1
Cor. 15.

Lastly, Exhort.
this should exhort us 1 to humble our selves before the supreme King and Lord
of all. When Job seemed to trust too much to His innocence or righteousness,
Elihu endeavored to reduce him to due humility by this argument Job 36. and
37. And God Himself especially, chap. 38. and 39. and 40. and 41. The success
see chap. 40.3, 4, 5. and chap. 42.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

2 To obey and honor Him. Motiv. 1 He is most worthy of our honor and
obedience, Revel. 4.11. 2 He is most able to reward His faithful subjects, and
to punish rebels. 3 Consider the example of the Angels, verse. 20. of this
Psalm; yea of the unreasonable creatures, yea of those without sense or life,
Psalm. 148.5, 6. And if He will have any thing done by them, though contrary to
the inclination of their particular nature, they straightwaies obey. The sun
stood still for the space of a whole day, Jos. 10.13. went backward, 2 Kings
20.11. The heaven gives or withholds rain, Jam. 5.17, 18. The water stands as
a wall, Exodus 14.22. Jos. 3.16. bears Christ walking upon it, Mat. 14.25. The
fire, though most extremely ardent, singed not a hair of the three children
walking in the midst of it, Dan. 3.27. The earth swallowed up Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, Numb. 16. The hungry lions hurt not Daniel shut up all night with
them, Dan. 6.

3 To trust in God.

3 Doctrine.
David hence excites himself to bless God.

So Psalm. 145.1, (...).
2, 3. 1 Chronicles. 29.10, 11, 12, 13.

For David knew 1 that God in regard of this His excellent majesty is most
worthy of praise. (...).
For the ground of praise is the good, which one has or does: And by how much
the greater this is, so much the greater praise is due. What therefore can be
compared to this Divine excellency? 2 That God is glorified by praises, Psalm.
50.23. and that we have great cause to glorify Him. 3 That our praising God is
profitable to others, to excite them also to glorify Him. For it is to be hoped
that many do not sin against God obstinately, but because being entangled
with the cares of this life, they do not think of His majesty and excellency;
who hearing the glorious majesty of God set forth by other men's praising Him,
may be brought to glorify Him both in word and deed. And truly God desires to
be praised of us, not that He, being infinitely perfect, wants any thing in
Himself, much less any thing that we can bestow upon Him: but He desires our
praises as He does all our service, first as that which of right belongs to
Him; and secondly for the good and salvation of them that praise and serve Him,
and that by their example others may be invited to do the like, and so to
receive the like reward.

Uses.
Here then see the end and use (amongst others, whereof in the two former
Doctrines) to which the consideration of Gods lofty throne, Instr.
and kingdom ruling over all, ought to serve, viz. that we may hereby be
excited to praise Him. So not only David here, but others also elsewhere,
partly do (as the saints Psalm. 145.10, 11, 12. yea a heathen king; Dan. 4.34,
35, 37.) partly are often invited to do: See only Psalm. 47.1, 2, 6, 7, 8.

This reproves 1 Them that so carry themselves, Repr.
that it is no wonder, if they either do not at all, or do but hypocritically
praise God for the exaltation of His throne. Such are they, who know themselves
to be odious to God by reason of their sins. When Adonijah and his guests
heard of Solomon's being set upon the throne of the kingdom, David's servants
blessing him, and David blessing God etc. they were so far from joining with
them in the same affections and acts, that they were stricken with fear and
fled every one several ways, 1 Kings 1.46. etc. How much greater terror must
it needs be to many to hear or think, that God against Whom they have so often
rebelled, and as it were sought to put Him by His kingdom, has His throne
established in the heavens, and His kingdom ruling over all, is furnished with
absolute and irresistible power to destroy them at any time in a moment, and
cast them into hell? Certainly when the glory of Gods kingdom shall most shine
out, such men shall have little mind to praise Him for it, Revel. 6.15, 16, 17.

2 Such as are so far from praising God for His kingdom ruling over all,
that they do not acknowledge it, at least from their heart. Such, among
others, are they, who abuse His creatures to the dishonouring of Him. If they
do acknowledge it, they shall be judged out of their own mouth.

3 Such as murmr against Gods laws and judgments, and speak against those
that obey Him.

But let us be exhorted, Exhort.
truly and heartily to praise God for the exaltation of His throne.

Motives. See the (...).

Means. That we may rightly praise God, let us see that we so carry our selves
toward Him, as in the former Doctrines is intimated He requires; that we fear
Him, keep His covenant, think upon His commandments to do them. Otherwise
hypocritical praises will but stink in the nostrills of God; and words, with
them, who see our deeds contrary thereunto, will be of no weight to win them
unto God. See what God desires should be joined with praising Him, viz. the
ordering our conversation aright. Psalm. 50.23.

Verse. 20, 21.
Bless the LORD ye His Angels, that excel in strength, that do His
commandment, hearkening to the voice of His word.

Bless the LORD all ye His hosts, ye ministers of His that do His pleasure.

We have heard how David excited himself to bless God 1 By way of thanksgiving
for benefits bestowed upon himself, to the 6th verse. upon others also, to the
19th verse.
2 By way of praise, verse. 19.

Now by an Apostrophe he turns his speech to the Angels, verse. 20, 21, and to
all Gods works, verse. 22. which he closes with an iterated excitation of
himself.

This figure Apostrophe (converting the speech in show to persons absent, or to
things without reason or life, when indeed it is directed to men that are
present) is frequent in other authors, and not unfrequent in Scripture. Moses
Deuteronomy. 31.19. was commanded to teach the song, which follows chap. 32. to the
children of Israel; and so the thing therein intended was their instruction:
yet in the beginning of it he converts his speech by an Apostrophe to the
heavens and the earth. See also Isa. 1.2. Job 16.18. 1 Kings 13.2. Psalm.
114.5. etc. and 148.3. etc. 1 Cor. 15.55. And so here that there is an
Apostrophe verse. 22. where he speaks to all the works of God, it is manifest;
seeing very many, yea innumerable of Gods works have neither voice, wherewith
to bless God, nor yet ears, or at least not understanding, to be capable of
the Psalmists exhortation. And that the same figure is used in his speech to
the Angels in these two verses, may plainly enough be gathered. 1 Because
(beside that no man can ordinarily know what Angels are present, or where, or
when) no man has any warrant to exhort the Angels (the constant tenor of the
Scripture being, Exhort one another -- teaching and admonishing one another
etc.) 2 Because the holy Angels need not man's exhortation to bless God, or to
perform any part of their duty. This latter reason Calvin upon this place
urges, Certe (says he) Angeli magis voluntarii sunt ad hoc officium and
alacres, quam ut indigeant nostris stimulis. And to this sense he expounds the
place, saying, Sed quamvis celeriter pracurrant Angeli nos vix lent sequamur;
David tamen nostra causa canendas Dei lauds illis commendat, ut eorum exemplo
expergefaciat nostrum torporem. Although therefore David converts his speech to
the Angels, yet his intent is to declare unto us what they do, that we may
imitate them. So when he speaks to the sea, to Jordan, to the mountains and
hills, Psalm. 114. he does not propound questions as if he were ignorant of
what he inquires, much less as if he expected an answer from things without
life. But the proper sense of the words (the figurative speech being explained)
is this, O men, see how it behooves you to obey God and to fear before Him,
taking example even from the sea and Jordan, which went back at His command,
from the mountains and hills, which so trembled at His presence (especially at
the promulgation of the Law) that they seemed to skip like rams and lambs.
In like manner here, he speaking by Apostrophe to the Angels, the sense is, O
men, know ye that the holy Angels bless God, and therefore ye also ought to
imitate them.

Verse. 20.
To begin with Verse 20. the words whereof are to be considered 1 in
themselves. 2 in relation to the scope. Being considered in themselves 1 They
contein a Description of the Angels. 2 They show what they do agreeable to the
present business. They are described 1 from their relation (...) His Angels. 2
From their adjunct strength, together with the greatness of it (...) mighty
(or excelling) in strength. 3 From a double effect, 1 principal (...) doing
His word (or commandments.) 2 subordinate (...) hearkening unto the voice of
His word. The effect, which the Angels so described produce, pertinent to the
present scope of the Psalmist, is their blessing the LORD.

In the Description (for of the other effect of blessing God, and the applying
it to the scope of the Psalmist, see the next Verse) are 4 Axioms, or
Doctrines.

1 Doctrine.
The Angels are Gods Angels.

(...) His Angels.] Explic.
It is a name of office in relation to God, His messengers. For their essence,
they are spirits created according to Gods image: whence they are called the
sons of God Job 1.6. and 2.1. and 38.7. and gods Psalm 97.7. That there are
diverse orders among the good Angels, it appears in that the Scripture speaks
of Archangels 1 These. 4.16. So Jude verse. 9. Michael the Archangel: who is
called Dan. 12.1. (...) the great prince. That there are also other Angels of
the same order beside Michael, appears Dan. 10.13. See also Job 38.7. where
they are called morning stars. For that place can not be understood of the
stars properly so called: 1 because there are not many morning stars, but
one only, which is called Lucifer or Phosphorus. 2 Because the stars were
not treated till the 4th day Genesis 1.14. etc. and therefore after the
foundations of the earth were laid. Wherefore that former part of the verse
seems to be understood of the Archangels; which are metaphorically called
morning stars because they shine above the rest, of which in the latter part
of the verse. Amongst the evil angels also there are orders, seeing we read of
the devil and his angels Mat. 25.41. So Revel. 12.7. the dragon and his angels
(which dragon is called the devil and Satan verse. 9.) And in the Gospells there
is often mention made of Beelzebub (or Beelzebul) as the prince of devils:
which being the common opinion of the Jews, Christ at least does not disallow.
Seeing then there is no doubt but that there are different orders among the
Angels; some in this verse understand the princes or chief among the good
Angels, and in the next verse, under the names of hosts and ministers, the
inferior Angels. So Musculus, Ea quae versu vicesimo de Angelis canuntur,
intelligenda erunt de potioribus spiritibus, quales sunt Michael, Gabriel etc.
qui sint inter spiritus caelestes perinde atque duces in exercitu. Nor is such
distinction of the Angels unusual in Scripture. Psalm. 148.2. Luke 2.13.

That the Angels are Gods Angels, (...).
see Genesis 28.12. Mat. 22.30. Luke 12.9. and 15.10. Hebr. 1.6. and often.

And they are His 1 by creation and preservation, (...).
as all other creatures; and that creation according to His image, as has been
said. 2 In respect of His covenant with them. Of this indeed the Scripture
speaks sparingly (it being given especially for us) yet we may thence gather 1
That the Angels were not created in perfect happiness, but in such an estate,
that by the grace which they had, and by that which (if they used the first
aright) God would further give them, they might attain that happiness;
otherwise through their own fault they should utterly perish without hope of
restoration, which, we see, befell the devils, who abode not in the truth,
but left their own habitation. God therefore prescribed them some law, by the
observation whereof they should have been happy, and by the transgression of it
most miserable. Now there can not be denied to be a covenant, where God
stipulating obedience promises a reward and threatens punishment. 2 That the
duty of the Angels is, to love, fear, honor, and praise God, to minister unto
Him, to stand before Him etc. and at His command to minister unto men. Those
first belong to the principal substance of their duty: this last happily was
their symbolicall law; as to Adam was given first the moral law written in His
heart, then the symbolicall law of not eating the fruit of one certain tree.
And it is probable, that some of the Angels contemplating their own excellency
above man, who was to be made of the earth, disdained to minister unto him, and
so fell through pride, as the fathers affirm, and as it is (at least) probable
out of Scripture. The good Angels therefore are Gods Angels, not only because
created and preserved by Him, but also because by covenant bound to do His
commandments. 3 In respect of their actual obedience, and keeping His
covenant.

Uses. Instr.

For our instruction 1 see how glorious God Himself is, seeing the most
excellent of the Angels are His subjects. The like argument see Isa. 10.8. Hos.
8.10. Judge. 1.7.

2 See what we must do, if we would have the Angels our friends: viz. we must
see that we be reconciled unto God in Christ, and walk humbly and uprightly
before Him; and then we shall have the assistance of the Angels (who are His
Angels) ever ready at hand, yea they will be in some sort our Angels Mat. 18.10.

This confutes worshipping of Angels, Confut.
seeing they are not Deus, but Dei, not God, but the Angels of God.

The other uses which might be deduced from hence, may more fitly be reserved
for the following Doctrines.

Only hence we may be exhorted, Exhort.
that we also would be Gods, as the Angels are, in the third respect, viz. of
actual obedience and persisting in His covenant.

2 Doctrine.
The Angels excel in strength.

(...) that excel.] Explic.
of (...) to prevail or excel above others. Now whereas it is manifest, 1
that the most potent Angels are infinitely inferior unto God (as their very
names import, Michael, who as god, Gaebriel, God is my strength etc.) 2 that
any Angel is far stronger then the strongest of men or mortal creatures (and
so, that it makes little to the setting forth their strength, to say they are
stronger then these) therefore the comparison here intimated seems to be
between the principal Angels and the rest, and so to confirm the distinction
mentioned in the former Doctrine. Thus whereas S. Peter and S. Jude speak of
the same thing (blaspheming of Dignities) and use the same argument, viz. that
private men should be afraid (or tremble 2 Pet. 2.10.) to speak evil of those
in authority, seeing the blessed Angel durst not ((...) Jud. 9.) do so to the
devil: S. Peter 2 ep. 2.11. says, (...) the Angels which are greater (that is,
then the rest of the Angels) in power and might; S. Jude more fully explaining
the story says expressly, (...), Michael the Archangel.

That there are Angels excelling in strength, (...).
see 2 These. 1.7. Revel. 10.1. and 18.21.

And this their strength they have from God their Creator, (...).
Who is (...) the mighty one Deuteronomy. 10.17. and gives strength to all His
creatures as it pleases Him.

Uses.
Now if the Angels be so strong, Instr.
then 1 How strong is God! The Angels are called (...) of their strength. But
God is (...) the Strong one (as Junius commonly translates it Deus fortis) and
(...), as before (...).

2 See how much our nature is ennobled in Christ the Mediator, Who is made
far more excellent then the Angels, Hebr. 1.4. Whose ministers they are,
verse. 7. and Whom they are all commanded to worship, verse. 6.

3 See the admirable goodness of God, Who has given such mighty and glorious
creatures to be our keepers, yea to minister for our sakes, Hebr. 1.14.

This may terrify Gods enemies, Repr.
and the enemies of His children.

And on the other side it may comfort His children against the power, malice,
craft, Consol.
and vigilance of the devil, and against all other dangers.

Let us labor to excel in spiritual strength. Exhort.
Motiv. 1 Our natural strength is little worth, Psalm. 90.10. 2 The duties of
religion are necessarily to be performed, and afflictions (which will follow
thereupon) are valiantly to be endured, Act. 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12. Hebr. 12.6, 7,
8. But neither can those be rightly done nor these rightly borne without
spiritual strength. Which may be proved both from the greatness of the things
to be done and suffered, and from the number and strength of our adversaries.
Hence the Apostle prays for the Colossians, that they may be strengthened with
all might etc. Chap. 1.11. Nor should we be content with some small measure,
but endeavor to excel in spiritual strength; not enviously repining at
others, but in a holy emulation striving to outstrip the best. (...). It is a
good contention, when we strive who shall be best, most humble, learned,
obedient to God and our superiors etc.

3 Doctrine. They do His word, ( or commandments.)
1 (...) His word. Explic.
] that is, His commanding word: for other word they ought not to do. And so it
is, to the sense, rightly rendered by our Translatours His commandments. What
these commandments are, see Doctr. 1. Reas. 2. 2 (...) that do.] The Angels
perform or do Gods commandments not only in such manner as we under the
covenant of grace (whose obedience has many infirmities and defects) but
perfectly, as Adam was bound to do under the first covenant.
This appears by many places of Scripture, (...).
where we read that the Angels readily do those things which God commands. And
in the Lords prayer we are taught to pray, Thy will be done in earth, as it is
in heaven, that is, as it is done by the Angels. It appears also in that they
are called the holy Angels, Mat. 25.31. Revel. 14.10.

For what particular Reasons the Angels do Gods commandments, (...).
it little concerns us to know or enquire, but rather to learn and consider
those reasons, clearly set forth in the word of God, why we should do so, and
thereby to be excited unto it. But doubtless there are most weighty reasons to
the Angels also, and those most perfectly known to them. This is certain, they
do it, because according to their admirable wisdom they know that God for the
infinite excellency of His nature, and for His actions toward them (creating
them of nothing in so sublime a condition, and preserving them, when others by
their own fault fell etc.) is most worthy that they should do His
commandments, thereby to glorify Him, and to testify their gratitude. And if
blessedness every way perfect be not yet given to them, but reserved till the
end of the world, that they have finished their ministration about man; then
they have this reason also to do Gods commandments, viz. out of certain hope
thereof, and consideration of the misery into which the apostate and
disobedient angels fell.

Uses.
Here 1 we see that even the greatest of the Angels are not sui juris, Instr.
lords of themselves, nor their own wills their law, but are subject to God, by
Whose word or commandment they are to rule their actions. Much less then may
men dream of exemption. Gods dominion founded in the creation is necessarily
extended to every creature. But if exemption were granted to any, surely to
them especially which are most excellent, 1 Samuel 17.25. And so indeed God has
given the Angels many privileges above us; immunity from troubles, diseases,
and death, to which we are subject; they dwell in heaven, always behold the
face of God etc. But as an earthly king does not free any of his subjects from
all homage, so neither does God altogether exempt any creature from all duty to
Him. Which may firmly hence be concluded a m^jore, where we see that even the
Archangels are bound to do Gods commandments.

2 See how the Archangels employ and exercise that their excellent strength,
whereof in the former Doctrine; viz. in performing Gods commandments. Many
men, who are stronger then others, ill abuse their strength; some bestowing it
upon women, contrary to Prove. 31.3. others upon drunkenness, Isa. 5.22. Others
use it to oppression. Ezekiel. 32.20, 21, 22. This is not to exercise their
strength in doing Gods commandments (as the Archangels) but in breaking them
to the dishonor of God. 3 See how undoubtedly true that is Isa. 46.10. My
counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. God is of Himself
All-sufficient. But if He please not to work immediately by Himself, He can
give strength enough to the inferior creatures, even to the most despicable of
them, to execute His will. Yea He has Angels excelling in strength most ready
to do whatsoever He commands.
This may justly reprove men that will not do Gods commandments prescribed
them. Repr.
If any think themselves too good (that is, too great) to do Gods
commandments (as they Psalm. 12.4. Jer. 2.31.) let them consider how far
inferior they are to the lowest Angels, much more to the Archangels, who yet
think it their glory to do Gods word.

This also confirms the Comfort of the former Doctrine, Consol.
in that as the Angels excel in strength, so they use their strength to the
doing Gods commandments: and that, doubtless, shall be for the good of His
children.

Lastly, Exhort.
this exhorts us to the doing of Gods commandments. The Motive here is from
the example of the Archangels. Which is of force many ways. 1 It is a high
honor to us to follow such glorious examples, to do the work of Archangels. 2
We have more obligations to God then they, in regard of our redemption, and the
covenant of grace built thereupon. 3 Gods benefits to us are of greater grace,
then to them. On them indeed they are bestowed without their merit: on us,
notwithstanding our demerit by our sins. 4 If we do not endeavor to imitate
them we mock God, when we pray, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

4 Doctrine. They do His commandments, hearkening to the voice of His word.
(...) hearkening. Explic.
] (...) sometimes by a Synecd. memb. signifies to obey. Here ( obedience being
expressed beside) it is taken metaphorically for an intellectual perception
analogicall to our sense of hearing. For although God has not properly any
voice formed by corporeal organs, nor the Angels ears (seeing they are
spirits, God the Father of spirits) yet there is necessarily to be understood
something analogicall in both: that is, God manifests His will to the Angels,
not per modum naturae, naturally and necessarily, but per modum libertatis,
voluntarily and freely, when and so far forth as it pleases Him.

Thus therefore the Angels hearken or attend to Gods voice 1 Because they know
(as in the former Doctrine) how much they are bound to obey Him both for His
excellency and goodness, (...).
and in regard of His covenant with them: Also out of sense of the sweetness
and profitablenesse of obedience in themselves, and consideration of the misery
following upon disobedience in the devils. 2 Because the knowledge of Gods will
is necessarily prerequired unto obedience.

Uses.
See the nature of true obedience; Instr.
to which is required, not only that the thing be done, which our superior
wills to be done, but also that His will be first known, and then that the
thing be done because it is known that He wills it. Such must be our obedience
toward God.

This reproves 1 Such as are negligently ignorant of Gods will. Repr.
For this ignorance being voluntary in the root, yet in sensu composito, or
remaining such, necessitates to sin. For the will of him that is so ignorant,
whether it dissent from reason so erring, or consent to it, is evil. Thom.
12ae. q. 19. ar. 5.6. o. 2 It also hinders repentance. For there can be no
repentance of sin, where there is no sorrow for sin: nor can there be any
sorrow, where there is no acknowledgement, yea no knowledge: nor any knowledge
of sin, without knowledge of the commandment against which it is: nor any
knowledge of this, unless we hearken to the voice of His word.

2 Much more such as are affectedly ignorant; namely, who understanding in a
confused notion, that the thing, which God commands, is contrary to their
lusts, will not hear or know it distinctly. He that so sins, does not sin
out of ignorance, that is, ignorance is not the cause, but the object of his
sin. See Job 21.14. Act. 28.27. Hos. 4.6. Prove. 1.24 etc.

3 Such as hearing the truth with a contemplative ear, deteine it in
unrighteousness. Romans 1.18.

4 Such as hearken to the voice of their lusts to fulfill them. For every lust
has a voice, and that an imperious voice. If Envy and malice bid Cain kill his
brother, he will break all bonds of nature to do it. If Ambition bid Absalom
rebel against his father, yea and kill him too, it shall be done, or he shall
want of his will. If Covetousness bid Achan take a wedge of gold, he will do
it, though he know it to be a (...): yea if it bid Judas betray his Lord and
Master Christ, though he have heard before, that it were better for him that
should do it, that he had never been borne, yet he will do it etc.

But let us hearken to the voice of Gods word. Motive. Exhort.
From the example of these Angels of the highest order; who, though of
excellent understanding and knowledge, yet humbly hearken to it.

Verse. 21.
We have seen the Description of the Angels verse. 20. The effect which they
produce is common to them with these verse. 21. (for both bless God) and so
also our blessing God (to which David here intends to exhort) is alike deduced
from both examples. Wherefore these two Doctrines may more commodiously be
deferred to the end of this verse.

In this verse then, as in the former, the words may be considered 1 in
themselves. 2 in relation to the scope. Being considered in themselves, 1 they
contain a Description of the Angels. 2 they propound the effect of them so
described, as applyable to the present business. They are described 1 from
their office, both extraordinary [(...) His hosts.] and ordinary [(...) His
ministers.] 2 from their effect [(...) that do His pleasure.] 2 The effect of
them so described, applyable to the present business, is (as in the former
verse) their blessing the LORD. So here we have 4 Axioms or Doctrines.

1 Doctrine. The Angels are Gods hosts.
(...) His hosts.] Hosts or armies properly consist of men that are warriors.
And so Gods hosts, in the most proper acception, are men who fight His
battles; whether they be His own people and do it of conscience 1 Samuel 17.26,
36. or whether they be strangers and have no respect to Him in their fighting,
but only are used by Him. So Matthew. 22.7. For in this parable, the King is
God; His Son is Christ; they who were first bidden to the wedding, were the
Jews; they who were invited upon occasion of their refusal, were the gentiles;
the armies, which God sent out to destroy the Jews and burn up their city
Jerusalem, were the Romans, as the event showed. By a metaphor, in respect of
their multitude, the whole congregation of Israel brought out of Egypt (wherein
were also women and children) are called the hosts or armies of the Lord, Exodus
12.41, 51. So the locusts for their multitude and order, Prove. 30.27. Joel
2.25. So the Angels; those in the former verse, as captains, these in this
verse as soldiers.

And thus they are called Genesis 32.1, (...).
2 1 King. 22.9. Luke 2.13. Psalm. 148.2. and legions Mat. 26.53.

In an army properly so called may be observed the adjuncts multitude. (...).
order.
ends to which they serve defense. offense.



In all these respects the Angels may fitly be called, by way of eminency, Gods
armies, or hosts.

1 For the multitude, that of Aquinas (1a. 50.3. c.) is uncertain, that the
Angels do in number as it were incomparably exceed all material substances.
But that they are very many is most certain, Dan. 7.10. where he does not
exactly number them, but intends by those numbers to signify a far greater
multitude. For 1 he uses a double expression, and that by way of gradation. 2
That expression is by the two greatest names of numbers ( Thousands, and
Myriades) which the Chaldee or Hebrew tongue (as also the Greek and Latin)
afford. So Deuteronomy. 32.30. 3 Both those are multiplied each into it self (thousand
thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand) which manner of construction
(wherein the same word governes it self, or a word of cognate signification) is
a very usual idiome in the Hebrew and Chaldee, and from them in the New
Testament also, to express an amplification, as (to omit other examples) in
this particular of numbers, thousands of myriads, Genesis 24.60. seaventy times
seven times, Mat. 18.22. and (which alludes to this place of Daniel) myriads
of myriads, and thousands of thousands, Revel. 5.11. 2 That there is order
among them has been already showed in the former verse, Doctr. 1. And God
being the God of order, not of confusion (1 Cor. 14.33.) and having disposed
these inferior things in an admirable order, and requiring order to be
observed by men, especially in the Church, 1 Cor. 14.40. how can it be imagined
that He should not have set order among His own domestics? 3 The ends for
which they serve, are, that they may defend Gods people. 2 King. 6.16, 17.
Psalm. 34.7. (See also Mat. 26.53.) and destroy His enemies, Exodus 33.2. 2 Samuel
24. Isa. 37.36. Psalm. 35.5, 6.
Uses.
The Uses of this Doctrine are much what the same with those verse. 19, 20.
seeing all these three verses tend to one scope, the setting forth Gods power
and majesty; that He has His throne established in the heavens (verse. 19.)
that He has Archangels excelling in power as captains of His host (verse. 20.)
and that He has (as here) an innumerable company of other Angels, as soldiers,
to fight His battles.

I shall only urge it to exhort and encourage us to fight valiantly under Gods
banner, Exhort.
as against carnal enemies, if God shall call us to it, so especially against
our spiritual enemies; which we shall never want, so long as our life is a
warfare upon earth.

Motives. 1 From the military oath or sacrament, where with we have bound our
selves hereunto in our Baptism. 2 From the cruelty of these enemies, who never
a whit the more spare any man for yielding himself to them and most officiously
serving them. 3 From certain hope of victory, if we resist as we ought, Jam.
4.7. Soldiers fighting against worldly enemies can not always assure
themselves of victory, ( Eccle. 9.11. 1 King. 20.11.) seeing themselves are
many times wicked: and though pious, and fighting for a good cause, yet God
has not simply promised they shall always prevail. But against our
spiritual enemies we have most firm and absolute promises of prevailing, if
the fault be not in our selves. 4 The victory shall be most gainful and most
glorious, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Revel. 3.21.

Means. 1 By way of removing impediments, 1 Flee worldly cares and delights, 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. 2 Beware of intemperance, sloth, security etc. 1 Pet. 5.8. 2
Direct. 1 Take the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 2 Follow Gods direction. Mark
the word. 3 Fervently, constantly, and humbly implore His assistance.

2 Doctrine. They are His ministers doing His pleasure.
1 (...) His ministers. Explic.
] This word (...) (according to the constant acception both of it, and of the
verb (...) whereof it comes) being spoken of men, signifies not any servant
promiscuously, but only such an one as gives attendance upon his masters
person, waits upon him, stands before him, serves in his presence etc. So was
Joseph to Potiphar after he found favor in his sight, Genesis 39.4. and to the
chief butler and baker, Genesis 40.4. Joshua to Moses, Exodus 24.13. and 33.11.
Number. 11.28. Deuteronomy. 1.38. Jos. 1.1. Elisha to Elijah, 1 King. 19.21. and 2 King.
3.11. and Elishahs servitour to him, 2 King. 4.43. and 6.15. Amnons to him, 2 Samuel 13.17, 18. Abishag to David, 1 King. 1.4, 15. And so more particularly it
is used of the servants of kings, which are in attendance upon their persons,
whether continually, as their domestical servants, or by courses. See Psalm.
101.6. Prove. 29.12. 1 King. 10.5. 1 Chronicles. 27.1. and 28.1. 2 Chronicles. 17.19. and
22.8. Est. 1.10. and 2.2. and 6.3. In like manner being applied to the servants
of God the great King, it signifies such as are in near and special
attendance upon Him, stand before Him etc. And thus it is peculiarly attributed
1 to His Priests, Levites, and such as minister about holy things (at the least
70. times in the Old Testament) 2 to His Angels, as here.

2 (...) that do His pleasure.] Gods pleasure, which He will have done by all
reasonable creatures, respects both the substance of the act contained in His
commandment, and the manner of doing, viz. out of obedience, or because He
commands it. As therefore it is here necessarily presupposed that the Angels
hearken to Gods voice, so it is expressly said, that they do His pleasure,
that is, His commandments. Whereby it appears, that the same thing for
substance is said here, which we had in the latter part of the former verse:
And therefore we shall not need to insist long upon it.

For proof of the Doctrine see Psalm. 104.4. (...).
cited by the Apostle Heb. 1.7. and alluded to verse. 14. So Dan. 7.10. where
the Chaldee word (...) is all one with the Hebrew (...) (as the Targum expounds
(...) by (...) 1 King. 1.4.) And the Prophet Daniel so expounds himself in the
same verse by another phrase of the same signification, viz. standing before
Him; which is often joined with ministering, as Deuteronomy. 10.8. and 17.12. and 18.5,
7. 1 King. 8.11. 2 Chronicles. 29.11. So the standing of his ministers 1 King. 10.5.

The Reason see verse. 20. (...).
Doctr. 3.

Uses.
Here 1 we may observe concerning the name and office of a minister, Instr.
that it is usually much mistaken, as if it were a name of slavery and
baseness. Of service indeed it is, but of the most free, ingenuous, and
honorable service that is. For 1 it is not for an ordinary man to have (...) a
minister or attendant upon his person (though he may have (...) a servant to
do his business, Prove. 12.9.) as appears by all the places quoted in the
Explication. 2 Of all the servants of the same master, his ministers or those
who are about his person, are nearest unto him, and most in grace and honor
with him. 3 The greater and more honorable the master is, the more honorable
also is his minister. How honorable therefore is it to be Gods minister, Who
is Lord of lords, and King of kings! Herein, they that stand before Him here
upon earth, are (...), of the same rank and degree of service with the Angels
in heaven. And therefore the Apostle thinks it no disparagement, but an honor
even to kings, that they are (...) and (...), Gods ministers, Romans 13.4, 6.
Another mistake there is, which perhaps is the ground of this, viz. that people
account of Gods ministers as if they were their ministers, or rather their
servants. It is true indeed they minister for their sakes, and so in that sense
are said to minister unto them, or rather for them, Number. 16.9. Ezekiel. 44.11.
Coloss. 1.7. Romans 15.16. But so do the Angels also, Heb. 1.14. And yet I
suppose no man can be so foolishly proud, as to think himself their lord and
master, or any way thereby superior to them; but rather contrary, as he which
is committed to another charge, custody, tuition etc. is therein inferior to
him, to whom he is committed.

2 We see here the nature and duty of servants, even of the most honorable
kind of servants (viz. ministers, or attendants upon the person of their lord)
that they are not to do their own will and pleasure, but his, whose servants
or ministers they are. So Aristotle makes it the property of a servant, (...),
to live not as himself lists, but as his master pleases. The name of
servant, or minister ill agrees to him, who does nothing at his masters
command, but what he would do without it. In respect of Gods service, this is
manifest in men since the fall, seeing even the best have some relics of
natural corruption; which though they do not reign in them, and hinder their
obedience to God, yet they do in some sort (more or less as they are stronger
or weaker) incline them to the omission of things commanded, and the commission
of things forbidden. The angels also, though they have no reluctance against
Gods will once known, but most readily obey it, yet should not show their
obedience, if they did not something at Gods command, which they would not do,
if they were left altogether to their own liberty.

For the other Uses, of Reproof, Consolation, Exhortation, they are the same
with those Verse. 20. Doctr. 3.

3 Doctrine. The Angels bless the LORD.
This is the effect of these Angels common to them with those Verse. 20. and
enunciated of them both in like manner by way of Apostrophe, as was said before.

What it is to bless the LORD see Verse. 1. Explic.
And for the Angels, according to the opinion of the ancient Hebrews, they
every day sing praises to God, and that in the morning. This they gather from
Genesis 32.26. Which place the Targum of Jerusalem thus explaines [ Let me go,
for the pillar of the morning ascends, and behold the hour approches that the
Angels are to sing.] And they will have it to be Michael the Archangel, that
wrestled with Jacob, and him to be the precentor in the heavenly quire. But
whatever that be, or however there can be any morning or evening in heaven etc.
most certain it is, that the Angels do bless God, and that after a most
eminent manner.

Thus Isa. 6.1, 2, 3. (...).
from whence is taken that in the song of S. Ambrose [ To thee all Angels cry
aloud etc.] And S. John seems to allude to it Revel. 4.8. Thus Psalm. 148.2.
where by an Apostrophe (as here) the speech indeed is in the imperative mood,
as if it were hortatory, but is to be expounded by the indicative mood, as
narrative of what the Angels do. Particularly, we read that they blessed God
for the creation Job 38.4, 5, 6, 7. for the nativity of Christ Luke 2.13, 14.
So they blessed Christ Revel. 5.11, 12.

For 1 they know that this blessing God by way of praise and thanksgiving,
(...).
is a duty most ingenuous etc. see Verse. 1. Doctr. 1. 2 The foundation of
praise being (as was said (Verse. 19. Doctr. 3.) the good which one has or
does, the Angels though they can not fully comprehend (for that is impossible
for a creature) yet, far more clearly then we, apprehend Gods excellency and
perfection in Himself. They know also the excellency of Gods works, of
creation, preservation, and government of all creatures, redemption of mankind
etc. and the glorious resplendency of Gods Attributes from all these. The
foundation also of thanksgiving being Beneficence, this God has showed to the
Angels in a high degree. For He brought them out of nothing to so great a
height of dignity by creation: and when they used aright the grace which He
first gave them, He bestowed upon them a further supply of grace, whereby, when
others through their own fault fell, they stood: He has also given them their
habitation in the highest heavens etc. The greatness and convenience of which
benefits they fully understand, as also the goodness and free grace of God in
bestowing them. 3 Being holy and good, they act according to their knowledge,
and render unto God the praises and thanks, which they know to be so due from
them to Him.

For our instruction. Instr.
1 We see that in religious blessing (whereof here) the Angels are not the
Objects, but the Agents. We may indeed and ought to praise men, who truly have
or do any good; as especially the godly for their spiritual graces and the
fruits of them, which are eminently good, so both them and others for the good
things of common nature. So many are praised for their strength, swiftness,
valor etc. 2 Samuel 1.22, 23. and 23.8. etc. Absalom for his beauty 2 Samuel
14.25. so the daughters of Job chap. 42.15. Much more may the Angels be
praised, whose gifts and acts far exceed whatsoever is most praiseworthy in
men. But of religious praise the adequate object is only God (from Whom
descends every good and perfect gift; in Whom all things live, move, and have
their being; by whose only power the creatures do whatsoever good proceeds
from them) and to Him only is this praise to be given, and no way communicable
to men or Angels, or any other creature; but on the contrary, all that praise
which is given to them, is ultimately to be referred unto God, and to be
terminated in Him. So for thanksgiving, we may render it unto men, who have
been beneficial unto us, but so, that it must be chiefly and ultimately
referred unto God, Who gives them power and will to do us good, and by His
blessing makes to ^eir benefits truly profitable to us. But in this we may not
proceed so far with the Angels. For although it be certain that we receive
many benefits from them: yet, which of them, among so many myriads, are our
benefactours, we know not, seeing they are spirits, and so invisible; nor, if
we did know, can we (by reason of their invisibility) tell when they are
present to hear us. Or if at any time we might give them thanks, yet it must
be done only in subordination to God, by Whose power, and at Whose command
they do us good.

2 See the dignity of this duty, as in other respects, so in that it is the
work of Angels, even the highest and greatest of them, and that in heaven their
blessed habitation. For it is illustrated both from the persons, and the place.
For the persons, however the faithful after the resurrection shall in some
sort be superior to the Angels in respect of their nearer union to Christ
their brother, husband, head etc. yet consider both simply in themselves, and
the Angels are far more excellent then men, especially as we are now in this
mortal and corruptible condition upon earth. Nevertheless they continually
apply themselves most cheerfully to the performance of this duty: yea by how
much any are more eminent then others, so much the more intensely they do it.
For although the tradition before mentioned of Michaels being precentour is not
so certain, yet certain it is that the greater Angels do the more highly
bless God; both because by reason of their more sublime understanding they
more fully apprehend Gods excellency and goodness, and because being by God
enriched with more excellent gifts they are both more

2 There lies a greater necessity upon us (partly of doing this duty, and
partly of being exhorted to it) then upon the Angels. For 1 the Angels in
heaven need not any incitement to bless God, but are willing and ready of
themselves to do it: But the best of mortal men are not so forward to this
duty, but that they need to be excited by the exhortation and example of
others. 2 The excellency of God is clearly known to the Angels: but amongst men
many little understand it, none sufficiently. And therefore, God distributing
His gifts diversely, whilst every man utters what God gives him to understand
of the Divine perfections and beneficence, all may be mutually instructed one
by another. And hereupon seems to have been grounded that which David diverse
times in the Psalms, and Hezekiah Isa. 38.18. speaks concerning the dead not
praising God; that is, they can not do it so profitably in respect of other
men, as the living may. 3 We have greater cause of blessing God, then the
Angels have. Thomas 22z. qu. 106.2.0. moving the question, Whether an innocent
or a penitent man be more bound to thank God, answers, that an innocent man is
more bound in respect of the greatness of the benefit (caeteris paribus) and
the continuance of it, but a penitent man in respect of the freeness or
graciousnesse of it. So here, the graciousnesse or freeness of Gods
beneficence (at which gratitude looks more then at the greatness of the
benefit) is much more conspicuous toward men: seeing God was indeed
wonderfully good and bountiful to the Angels, creating them of nothing,
enduing them with many excellent gifts, upholding and strengthening them with
His grace, and all this without their merit; but to man He was good and
gracious notwithstanding the demerit of his sins. Whilst we were His
enemies, He so loved us, that whereas His Justice being offended by sin, put
a bar to our salvation, He spared not His only beloved Son but delivered
Him up to an ignominious and cursed death, whereby His Justice might be
satisfied, and our salvation obtained; that He sends His Spirit to apply what
His Son has impetrated; that He shows forth and exercises His Mercy,
Patience, Meekness, Clemency, Facility to pardon; lastly, that He has
prepared for us a condition in some respect superior to the Angels.

Uses.
Here 1 we must diligently observe what the Scripture speaks of the Angels,
Instr.
viz. of the wickedness and misery of the evil angels, that we may be deterred
from sin; of the constancy and happiness of the good Angels, that we may be
incited to obedience.

2 Seeing beside so many precepts and commendations of this duty of blessing
God, and so many examples of pious men, we have also the example of the Angels
(who have indeed many reasons of blessing God, but yet fewer, and in some
respects less then we) here and elsewhere propounded to us to imitate: we may
see how earnestly God desires we should diligently and cheerfully perform this
duty; how sluggish we are to need so many incitements; how inexcusable if we
still neglect it.

Reproof 1, Repr.
2, 3, 4. See Verse. 1. Doct. 1.

This should exhort us to imitate the Angels. Exhort.
Motives, and Means See the (...).

Verse. 22. Bless the LORD all His works in all places of His dominion: bless
the LORD O my soul.
In the former part of the Apostrophe David turned his speech to the Angels. In
this latter part he turns it to the other works of God, that is, to the
creatures without reason, sense, and life: for men are excluded, as being they,
whom he intends by both parts to excite to bless God. Between the parts there
is this difference, that the Angels (to whom he converts his speech Verse. 20,
21.) do properly and eminently bless God, and therefore David's intention was
by propounding their example to exhort us to bless Him; but the inanimate and
unreasonable creatures (having neither speech to utter praises and thanks, nor
understanding to apprehend the excellency and bounty of God) cannot properly
bless God, but bless Him only objectively, in as much as unto us seriously
considering them they afford arguments of blessing Him. The sense therefore is,
that men ought by these arguments to be excited to bless God.

1 Doctrine. All the works of God in all places of His dominion afford
arguments of blessing Him.
1 (...) His works. Explic.
] (...) signifies both motum and rem motu factam, the action, and the effect or
work thereby produced: The former Psalm. 19.1. The firmament shows (...) the
work of His hands, that is, the excellency of the workmanship whereby it was
made: the latter Psalm. 102.25. The heavens are the work of thy hands. Here
understand it the latter way. 2 In all places of His dominion.] Gods dominion
extends over all the world, as we heard verse. 19. Wherefore here understand the
whole frame of the world, that is, the heaven, earth, and sea, together with
all creatures therein contained; except the Angels, of whom particularly verse.
20, 21. and men, whom both there and here he intends to exhort.
That all these afford arguments of blessing God, (...).
see Psalm. 19.1. to the end of verse. 6. So Psalm. 145.10. All Thy works praise
Thee O LORD, that is, afford matter of praising Thee (as the same phrase is
used Prove. 31.31.) See also Psalm. 104. where the Psalmist exciting himself to
bless God draws plenty of arguments from the creatures. So the 24 Elders
Revel. 4.10, 11.

The Reason or ground of these arguments

may be showed distinctly in praise. (...).
may be showed distinctly in thanks.
1 Of blessing God by way of Praise the creatures afford arguments, because in
them the excellency of the Creator wonderfully shines forth, and namely, His
Goodness, Wisdom, and Power.

1 His Goodness in that being infinitely perfect in Himself from all eternity,
and so not needing any thing, yet He took the creatures out of nothing (which
therefore also could merit nothing) and communicated His goodness to them, and
continues it so far and so long as He sees good. Psalm. 145.9. 2 His Wisdom,
whereby He made the whole frame of the world, and all the creatures therein, to
the best end (that is, ultimately to His own glory) and in such manner and
order, that they might be most fit to attain that end. Psalm. 104.24. 3 His
Power, which most clearly appears 1 in the innumerable multitude of the
creatures, and vast magnitude of some of them. 2 in the matter, or rather
term, from whence they were produced, mere nothing. Some men can, and often
do raise lies and slanders out of nothing: but in substantial things the most
cunning artist cannot exercise his art or make his work without some matter to
work upon; that of the Philosopher being here most true, Nothing is made of
nothing. But such is Gods power, that He could and did make all things out of
mere nothing. 3 in the means which He used, or rather in the manner of
working, which was without any means by His bare word Psalm. 33.6, 9. Genesis 1.3.
etc. In these the eternal power of God was clearly seen even of the heathen
Romans 1.20. Now join all these together; Such Goodness, such Wisdom, such
Power afford infinite arguments of praising God.

2 Of blessing God also by way of Thanksgiving all the creatures afford
arguments unto man, as all serving to His use and benefit. The inferior parts
of the world (viz. the earth and waters, and all things created of them) not
only serve for his use, but are also subjected to His dominion, Genesis 1.28, 29.
and 9.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 8.6, 7, 8. The superior parts also (that is, the heavens)
though in respect of the dominion reserved to God alone ( Psalm. 115.16.) yet in
like manner serve for the use and benefit of man; the lowest heaven affording
him breath, winds, rain etc. the second heaven light, heat etc. and the third
(if he rightly serve God) an eternal and most blessed habitation.



in giving Him thanks, but also in praising Him. And therefore if there were
any such creatures, for which we were not to thank God, yet even for those also
He were to be praised, if they make for His praise. And that even those
creatures before mentioned, with the like, do so, is evident, in that the
Goodness, Wisdom, and Power of God, are declared in the creation of them. His
Power without doubt: His Goodness also, at least in communicating good to them
(being, life, motion etc.) and continuing it to His good pleasure: and lastly,
His Wisdom, at least in making them so various, and all in their several
kinds so fit for the punishing men's sins to the glory of His Justice. But 2
God also in wrath remembers mercy: neither has He made any creatures, which
are not some ways profitable unto men, and so contein arguments of gratitude
also. All those mentioned, and the like make for the exercise of carfulness,
industry etc. and to keep us from idleness, to which we are so prone since the
fall, and which is a vice so foul in it self, and the mother of many more.
They make also for the humbling us for our sins the causes of those
annoyances from the creatures; for weaning us from this world, where we are
subject to so many dangers and calamities, and to inflame us with a desire of
heaven, where is perfect happiness. In special, That some creatures assault
our persons, it may admonish us how by the just judgment of God for our
rebellion against Him, these creatures also rebel against us; and may warn us
to take heed of sin for the future, lest these prove but the beginning of
sorrows. The dangers also to which our life is by these means liable, may put
us in mind of the uncertainty thereof, and so prepare us for death; that
whenever it shall happen, we may live eternally in the world to come Job
5.17. to the end of the Chapter. That other creatures also are hurtful to the
things we possess, it may serve to draw us from the immoderate love of those
things, and to excite us to lay up treasures for our selves in heaven, where
neither moth etc. Mat. 6.19, 20. Lastly, all the aforesaid creatures, if men
knew rightly how to use them, are perhaps (beside the moral use before
specifyed) naturally more profitable then hurtful unto man. Of many it is
plain. Nettles, poppy, and other weeds, though hurtful to corn, yet are
helpful in physic, for preserving life, which is more then meat. So are
antidotes made of poisons.

Uses.
For our instruction. Instr.
1 If all Gods works afford matter of blessing Him, then they are all good: for
otherwise they could not be arguments either of thanks, or praise. God indeed
inflicts the evil of punishment Isa. 45.7. Amos 3.6. But this is not evil
simply, but only in respect of us, and that (unless we our selves be the
causes) only to the outward man, and for a little time. For it is very good, as
it illustrates the glory of Gods justice; and good to us also, if we make a
right use of it, Psalm. 119.71. And if some of the creatures be now morally evil
(as the devils and wicked men) the cause is their own sin, whereby they have
cotrupted and marred Gods workmanship, Eccle. 7.29. So Aug. de Civ. Dei lib.
13. cap. 14. Deus creavit hominem rectum; naturarum Author, non utique
vitiorum: sed sponte depravatus, justeque damnatus, depravatos damnatosque
generavit.

2 If all Gods works, then much more those which are more excellent, the
heavens, sun, moon, stars etc. Also if the creatures without reason,
sense, or life, then much more man (to say nothing of the Angels.) His body is
fearfully and wonderfully made. Psalm. 139.14. in the finding out the structure
whereof Anatomists, after the dissections of so many bodies, have still enough
to exercise their industry. But the fabric of the soul exceeds all admiration.

3 If the works of Creation, then much more the work of Redemption, as being
far more noble. In the Creation appeared wonderful Goodness, Wisdom, and
Power: but to the work of Redemption all these three Attributes are required in
a greater degree; and others also beside, whereof in the creation there was no
need. And the reason is from the different condition of the object. The object
of Creation was pure Nothing: wherein as there was no help, so there was no
hindrance to Gods working. But in the object of Redemption was sin, not only
bringing death, but vehemently hindering Redemption. Here therefore was required
1 Greater Goodness, viz. not only simply free, communicating good to them
that deserved it not, but also merciful, doing good to them that deserved ill.
2 Greater Wisdom, which might find out a way how Gods Justice offended by men's
sins, and His Mercy, which had pity on them, might so meet together and kiss
each other, that both Justice might have fitting satisfaction for men's sins,
and yet Mercy might have full content in procuring their salvation. 3 Greater
Power, seeing the terms were more distant, and the way more difficult. 1 The
terms were more distant. In the Creation, man (the most noble creature next to
the Angels) was taken out of the earth, formed after the image of God, and
placed in a happy condition. But when he was redeemed, he was taken out of a
condition worse then the earth ( Job 30.8.) and then nothing ( Mat. 26.24.) and
brought (at last) to an estate better and more worthy, then Adam either had, or
by persisting in his innocence should have attained, yea, then the Angels
either have or can have, in respect of the union with Christ by the marriage
bond. 2 The way also was more difficult. For in the Creation, God only spoke
the word, and it was done: but Gods Justice opposed Redemption; whereupon the
Son of His love took upon Him the form of a servant, and being made under
the law for so many years did and suffered so many and so great things for the
satisfaction of Justice. Another impediment also there was from the infidelity
of men hindering the application of this Redemption: for Christ neither did nor
would so satisfy Justice, that men should be fully made partakers of redemption
without the means of faith. For the removing of this impediment therefore the
Holy Spirit sent by Christ the Mediator for this purpose, strives with men in
much patience, long-suffring, gentleness, clemency etc. Seeing then in the
Redemption there was required, and accordingly showed, a greater degree of
Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, (and besides, Mercy, Patience, Long-suffring
etc. for the exercising whereof there was no occasion in the Creation) it is
manifest, that Redemption is the more noble work, and affords greater matter of
blessing God both by way of praise, and by way of thanksgiving.

4 If God be to be blessed for His works, then also for His word. David joines
both together Psalm 19. praising God for His works in the six first verses, for
His word verse. 7 etc. And so in the 7th verse of this Psalm, and elsewhere
frequently in this book of Psalms. And much more cause have we to do it;
seeing the Scripture is now much fuller then it was in David's time, viz. by
addition not only of a great part of the Old Testament, but also of all the
New. And herein the excellency and beneficence of God do wonderfully lay open
themselves, as might easily be showed. But it is sufficiently manifest of it
self.

Now as the light reproves the darkness, Repr.
so the works of God, which thus afford arguments of praise and thanksgiving,
reprove those works of men, which are diametrically opposite thereunto: viz.
which are 1 so far from deserving praise, that (as the Apostle speaks) it is
a shame to mention them; 2 so injurious to others that in stead of meriting
thanks they force men to cry unto God in the bitterness of their spirit
against the authors.

2 Doctrine. David hence exhorts to bless God.
So does he often in this book of Psalms. (...).
See only Psalm. 148. where by the same figure he exhorts to praise God for the
arguments, which the sun, moon, stars etc. afford.

For 1 Blessing God is a duty in it self most excellent. See verse. 1. Doctr. 1.
and verse. 21. (...).
Doctr. 3.

2 The arguments taken from the creatures have great and evident force, as was
showed in the precedent Doctrine.

Uses.
Only see here the chief use to which the consideration of the creatures is to
be referred, Instr.
viz. that observing the excellency and beneficence of God shining forth in
them, we may thence gather arguments of returning praise and thanks to Him.
That this is the principal use, appears, because so they are directly and
immediately referred to the glory of God, which is the chief end of the
creation, Prove. 16.4.

This reproves 1 Such as do not take occasion from the creatures to bless God.
Repr.
What ever they can pretend, their excuse will be vain: but certainly they can
with no color pretend want of arguments. For seeing all the works of God in
all places of His dominion afford many arguments; and His dominion extends over
all the world, so that there is no place within the whole circumference of the
heavens, wherein there is not something created by God: therefore wheresoever a
man is or can be, he can not want arguments round about him (beside those
within himself) to bless God.

2 Much more such as, in the midst of their prosperity, abounding with Gods
creatures serving for the necessity and pleasure of this life, yet do not
praise God, or give Him thanks for them, but forget both the Creator and the
Giver of them.

3 Such as abuse the creatures to the dishonor of God, by pride, luxury,
oppression etc.

4 Who from some creatures draw arguments of murmuring against God.

But let us (as David here by the Apostrophe intends) be exhorted to draw
arguments of blessing God, Exhort.
from all His works in all places of His dominion.

Motives. See the (...).

3 Doctrine. David says again, Bless the LORD O my soul.
David having exhorted others to bless God by the example of the Angels, and
by arguments taken from the inferior creatures, concludes the Psalm, as he
began it, with exciting his own soul to do the same. But of this, for the
substance, verse. 1. Doctr. 1. and for the iteration of it, verse. 2. Doctr. 1.

Uses.
Here therefore in a word, Exhort.
they who exhort others to any good, are to be exhorted that themselves be not
slothful and negligent in it, but show example of alacrity and readiness unto
those whom they exhort.

Moreover these words joined to the precedent exhortation, may seem to have
the same sense with those Jos. 24.14, 15. And so they, who exhort others to a
common duty, may be exhorted, that whatsoever effect their exhortation obteines
with others, yet themselves would constantly go on in performance of their own
duty.

FINIS.

