A Right Pithy, Pleasant, and Merry COMEDY, ENTITLED, Gammer Gurtons Needle;
Played on the Stage near a hundred years ago in Christs-Colledge in CAMBRIDGE.

Made by Mr. S. Master of Art.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Johnson, and are to be sold by Nath. Brook at the
Angel in Cornhil, Francis Kirkman at the John Fletchers Head, on the Backside
of St. Clements, Tho. Johnson at the Golden Key in Pauls-Church-yard, and Henry
Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane, near Fleet Street, 1661.

The Names of the SPEAKERS i^ (...) ^^^^^y.
DIccoon the (...)
Hod^e, ^^mme^ (...) servant.
Ty^, Gam^er Gurtons Maid.
Gammer Gurton.
Cock, Gammer Gurtons Boy.
Dame Chat.
Doctor Rat, the Curate.
Master Baily.
Doll, Dame Chats Maid.
Scapethryft, Master Bailyes servant.
MUTES.

God save the KING.
The PROLOGUE.
As Gammer Gurton, with many a wide stiche,
Sat pesing and patching of Hodge her man's briche.
By chance or misfortune as she her gear tossed,
In Hodge lether briches her nedle she lost.
When Diccon the bedlam had hard by report,
That good Gammer Gurton was robbed in this sort,
He quietly persuaded with her in that stound,
Dame Chat her dear gossip this nedle had found.
Yet knew she no more of this matter (alas)
Then knows Tom our clarke what the Priest says at mass.
Hereof there ensued so fearful a fray,
Mas Doctor was sent for these gossips to stay;
Because he was Curate, and esteemed full wise,
Who found that he sought not by Diccons device,
When all things were tombled and clean out of fassion,
Whether it were by fortune, or some other constellation,
Sodenlie the nedle Hodge found by the pricking,
And drew out of his buttocke where he found it sticking.
Their hearts then at rest with perfect security.
With a pot of good nale they stroke up their plaudity.
The first Act.
The first Scean.
Diccon. Dic. MAny a mile have I walked, diverse and sundry ways,
And many a good man's house have bin at in my days.
Many a gossips cup in my time have I tasted,
And many a broche spite, have I both turned and basted.
Many a piece of bacon have I had out of their balkes,
In running over the country, with and long weary walks.
Yet came my foot never, within those door cheeks,
To seek Flesh or Fish, Garlike, Onions or Leekes,
That ever I saw a sort in such a plight,
As here within this house appears to my sight,
There is howling and scowling, all cast in a dumpe,
With whewling and pewling, as though they had lost a trump.
Sighing and sobbing, they weep and they wail.
I marvel in my mind, what the devil they ail,
The old trot sits groaning, with alas and alas,
And Lib wrings her hands, and takes on in worse case.
With poor Cock their boy, they be driven in such fits,
I fear me the folks be not well in their wits.
Ask them what they ail, or who brought them in this stay?
They answer not at all, but alack and welaway,
When I saw it booted not, out at doors I hied me,
And caught a slip of Bacon, when I saw that none spied me,
Which I intended not far hence, unles my purpose fail,
Shall serve for a shoinghorn to draw on two pots of ale.

The first Act.
The second Scene
Hodge. Diccon. Hodg SE so cham arrayed with dabling in the dirt;
She that set me to ditching, ich would she had the squrt.
Was never poor soul that such a life had?
Gogs bones this vilthy glay hase dressed me too bad,
Gods soul, see how this stuff tears,
Ich were better to be a Bareward and set to keep Bares.
By the mass here is a gasshe, a shameful hole indead,
And one stitch tear further, a man may thrust in his head.

Dic. By my fathers soul Hodge, if I should now besworn,
I cannot choose but say thy breech is foul betorn.
But the next remedy in such a case and hap,
Is to plaunche on a piece, as brod as thy cap.

Hogd. Gogs soul man, it is not yet two days fully ended,
Since my dame Gurton (cham sure) these breches amended
But cham made suth a drudge to trudge at every need,
Chwold rend it though it were stitched what sturdy packhreed

Dic. Hodge, let thy breeches go, and speak and tell me soon,
What devil aileth gammer gurton, and Lib her maid to frown.

Hodg. Tush man thart deceived, it is their daily look,
They cover so over ye coals, their eyes be bleard with smooke.

Dic. Nay by the mass, I perfectly perceived as I came hither.
That either Tib and her dame has been by the ears together,
Or else as great a matter as thou shall shortly see.

Hod. Now ich beseech our Lord they never better agree.


Dic. By gogs soul there they sit as still as stones in the street
As though they had been taken with some fairies, or else with some ill spreet

Hod. Gogs heart, I durst have laid my cap to a crown,
Chwould learn of some prancome as soon as ich cham to town.

Dic. Why Hodge art thou inspired? or did thou thereof here?


Hod. Nay, but ich saw such a wounder as ich saw not this vii year,
Tome Tankards Cow (he gogs bones) she set me up her sail,
And Hinging about his half aker fisking with her tail;
As though there had been in her arse a swarm of Bees,
And chad not cried tphrowh hoor, shead lept out of his Lees,

Dic. Why Hodge lies the conning in Tom tankards cowes tail?


Hod. Well ich chaue hard some say such tokens do not fail,
But cast you not tell in faith Diccon, why she frowns, or whereat?
Has no man stolen her Ducks or Hens, or gelded gib her Cat?

Dic. What devil can I tell man, I cold not have one word,
They gave no more heed to my talk then thou woldst to a lord.

Hod. Ich cannot still but muse, what mervailous thing it is,
Chill in and know my self, what matters are amise,

Dic. Then fare well hodge a while, since thou do inward have,
For I will into the good wife Chats, to feel how the ale does taste.

The fist Act.
The third Scene.
Hodge. Lib. Hog. Cham aghast by the mass, ich wot not what to do,
Chad need bless me well before ich go them to.
Perchance some fellon spirit may haunt our house indeed,
And then chwere but at noddy to venture cha no need.

Tib. Cham worse then mad by the mass to be at this stay.
Cham chib, cham blamd, and beaten all thours on the day.
Lamed and hunder storved, pricked up all in Jagges,
Having no patch to hide my back, save a few rotten rags.

Hodg. I say Tib, if thou be Tib, as I trow sure thou be,
What devil make a do is this, between our dame and thee?

Tib. Gogs bread Hodge thou had a good turn thou wart not here this while.
It had been better for some of us to have been hence a mile.
My Gammer is so out of course, and frantike all at ones,
That Cock our boy, and I poor wench, have felt it on our bones.

Hod. What is the matter, say on Tib whereat she takes so on?


Tib She is undone she says (alas,) her ^oy and life is gone.
If she here not of some comfort, she is says but dead,
Shall never come within her lips, on inch of meat ne bread.

Hod. Bir Lady cham not very glad, to see her in this dumpe,
Chold a noble her stole has fallen, and she has broke her rumpe

Tib. Nay and that were the worst, we would not greatly care,
For bursting of her huckle bone, or breaking of her Chair.
But greater, greater, is her grief, as hodge we shall all feel.

Hod. Gogs wounds Tib, my gammer has never lost her Neele?


Tib. Her Neele?


Hod. Her neele?


Tib. Her neele hy him that made me, it is true Hodge I tell thee,


Hod. Gogs sacrament, I would she had lost tharte out of her belly.
The Devil or else his dame, they ought her sure a shame,
How a murrion came this chance, (say Tib) unto our dame?

Tib. My ga^mer sat her down on the pes, and bad me reach thy breches
And by and by, a vengeance in it, or she had take two stitches
To clout upon thine ars, by chance aside she lears,
And gib our cat in the milk pan, she spied over head and ears.
A hoor, out thief, she cried aloud, and swapt the breeches down,
Up went her staff, and out leapt gib at doors into the town.
And since that time was never wight cold set their eyes upon it,
Gogs malison chaue Cock and I, bid twenty times light on it

Hod And is not the^ my breches sewid up, to morrow yt I should wear


Tib. No in faith hodge thy breches lie, for all this never the near


Hod. Now a vengeance light on al yt sort, yt better should have kept it,
The cat, the house, and tib our maid, yt better should have swep it
Se where she comes crawling, come on in twenty devils way
Ye have made a fair days work, have you not? pray you say.

The first Act.
The iiii. Scene.
Gammer. Hodge. Tib Cock. Gam. ALas, alas, I may will curs^ (...) ban,
This day that ever I saw it, with gib and the milk pan.
For these and ill luck together, as knows Cock my boie,
Have stacke away my dear neele, and robbed me of my joie.
My fair long straight neele that was mine only treasure,
The first day of my sorrow is, and last of my pleasure.

Hodg. Might ha kept it when ye had it, but fools will be fools still,
Lose that is vast in your hands, ye need not but ye will.

Gam. Go hie thee tib, and run thou hoor, to thend here of the town
Did carry out dust in thy lap, seek where thou porest it down,
And as thou saw me roking, in the ashes where I morned,
So see in all the heap of dust, thou leave no straw unturned.

Tib That chal gammer swithe and tite, and sone be here again,


Gam. Tib stoop and look down to ye ground to it, and take some pain.


Hodg. Here is a pretty matter, to see this gere how it goes,
By gogs soul I think you would loes your arse, and it were loose.
Your neele lost, it is pity you should lack care and endless sorrow
Gogs death how shall my breches be sewid, shall I go thus to morrow

Gam Ah hodge, hodg, if that ich cold find my neele by the reed
Chould sow thy breches ich promise ye, ^o full good double thread
And set a patch on either knee, shull last this months twain,
Now god and Saint Sith I pray, to send it home again.

Hodg. Whereto served your hands and eyes, but your neele to keep,
What devil had you else to do, ye keep ich wot no sheep.
Cham fain abroad to dig and delve, in water, mire and clay,
Sossing and possing in the dirt, still from day to day.
A hundred things that be abrod, cham set to see them weel,
And four of you sit idle at home, and cannot keep a neele.

Gam. My neele alas ich lost hodge, what time ich me up hasted,
To save milk set up for the, which gib our cat has wasted.

Hodg. The devil he burst both gib, and Tib, with all the rest,
Cham always sure of the worst end, who ever have the best.
Where ha you ben fidging abrod, since you your neele lost?

Gam. Within the house, and at the door, sitting by this same post.
Where I was looking a long hour, before these folk came here,
But welawaie, all was in vain, my neele is never the near:

Hodg. Set me a candle, let me seek, and grope where ever it be,
Gogs heart ye be foollish (ich think) you know it not when you it see

Gam. Come hither Cock, what Cock I say?


Cock. How Gammer.


Gam. Go hie thee soon, and grope behind the old brosse pan,
Which thing when thou have done.
There shall thou find an old shoo, wherein if thou look well,
Thou shall find lieng an inche of white tallow candell,
Light it, and bring it ^^te away,

Cock. That shall be done anon.


Gam. Nay tarry hodge till thou have light, and then weel seek ich one


Hodg. Cum away ye horson boy, are yeasleep? ye must have a crier


Cock. Ich cannot get the candle light, here is almost no fire


Hodg. Chil hold the penny, chil make yt come if ich may catch thine ears
Art deffe thou horson boy? cock I say, why can not hears;

Gam. Beat him not Hodge but help the boy and come you two together.


The i. Act.
The v. Scene
Gammer. Tib. Chocke. Hodge. Gam. HOw now Tib, quick lets here, what news thou
have brought hither?


Tib. Chaue tossed and tumbled yonder heap our and ^ver again,
And winowed it through my fingers, as me^ would winow grain
Not so much as a hens turd but in pieces I tare it,
Or what so ever cold or clay I foomd, I did not spare it.
Looking within and eke without, to find your neele (alas)
But all in vain and without help, you neele is where it was.

Gam. Alas my neele we shall never meet, adue, adue for aye.


Tib. Not so gammer, we might it find if we knew where it lay.


Cock. Gogs cross Gammer, if ye will laugh look in but at the door,
And see how Hodg lies tomblinge and tossing amids the flower
Raking there some fair to find among the ashes dead
Where there is not one spark, so big as a pins head,
At last in a dark corner two sparks he thought he sees
Which where indede naught else, but Gib our cats two eyes
Puff quod hodg thinking thereby to have fire without doubt,
With that Gib shut her two eyes, and so the fire was out
And by and by them opened, even as they were before,
With that the sparks appeared even as they had done of yore,
And even as hodg blew the fire as he did thinck
Gibas she felt the blast straight way began to wincke,
Till Hodge fell of swering, as came best to his turn,
The fi^r was sure bewicht, and therefore would not burn:
At last Gib up the stayers, among the old posts and pins,
And hodge he hied him after til broke were both his shins:
Cursing and swearing oths, were never of his making,
That Gib would fire the house, if that ^he were not taken,

Gam. See here is all the thought that the foolish ^rohin takes.
And Tib me think at his elbow almost as merry makes
This is all the wit ye have when others make their moan,
Come down Hodge, where art thou? and let the Cat alone,

Hodg. Gogs heart, help and come up, Gib in her tail has fire,
And is like to burn all if the get a little hier:
Cum down (quoth you,) nay then you might count me a patch
The house comes down on your heads if it take ons ye thatch

Gam. It is the cats eyes fool that shines in the dark.


Hodg. Has the Cat do you think in every eye a spark?


Gam. No, but they shine as like fire as ever man see.


Hodg. By the mass and she burn all, yoush bear the blame for me


Gam. Cum down and help to seek here our neel that it were found
Down Tib on thy knees I say, down Cock to the ground,
To God I make a vow, and so to good Saint Anne
A candel shall they have a piece, get it where I can,
If I may my neel find in one place or in other.

Hodg. Now a vengeance on gib light, on gib and gibs mother
And all the generation of Cats both far and never
Look on the ground horson thinks thou the neel is here.

Cock. By my troth gammar me thought your nedle here I saw
But when my fingers touched it, I felt it was a straw,

Tib. See Hodge what it is, may it not be within it,


Hodg. Break it sool with thy hand, and see, and thou can find it.


Tib. Nay break it you Hodge according to your word.


Hodg. Gogs sides, fie it stinck^: it is a Cats tourd,
It were well done to make thee eat it by the mass.

Gam. This matter amendeth not my neel is still where it wass
Our candle is at an end let us all in ^uight
And come another time, when we have more light.

The ii Act.
First a Song.
Back and side go bare, go bare, booth foot and hand go cold:
But Belly god send thee good Ale enough, whether it be new or old.
I Can not eat, but little meat, my stomach is not good:
But sure I think, that I can drink with him that wears a hood.
Though I go bare, take ye no care, I am nothing a cold:
I stuff my skin, so full within, of joly good Ale and old.
Back and side, go bare, go bare, booth foot and hand go cold:
But belly god send the good Ale inoughe whether it be new or old.
I love no roast, but a nut brown toste, and a Crab laid in the fire,
A little bread, shall do me stead much bread I not desire:
No froste nor snow, no wind I trow can hurt me if I would,
I am so wrapped, and throwly lapt of joly good Ale and old.
Back and side go bare, etc.
And Tib my wife, that as her life loves well good Ale to seek,
Full often drinks she, till ye may see the tears run down her cheeks:
Then does she trowle, to me the bowl even as a malt worm should,
And says sweet heart, I took my part of this joly good Ale and old.
Back and side go bare, etc.
Now let them drink, till they nod and wink, even as good fellows should do
They shall not miss, to have the bliss, good Ale does bring men to:
And all poor souls that have scow^ed boules or have them lustely trolde,
God save the lives, of them and their wives whether they be young or old.
Back and side go bare, etc.
The first Scene.
Diccon. Hodg. Dic WElldone by Gogs malt, wellsong and wellsaid,
Come on mother Chat as thou art true maid.
One fresh pot of Ale lets see to make an end
Against this cold wether, my naked arms to defend
This gere it warms the soul, now wind blow on the worst,
And let us drink and swill, till that our bellies burste
Now were he a wise man, by cunning cold define
Which way my journey lies, or where Diccon will dine
But one good turn I have, be it by night or day
South, East, North or West, I am never out of my way.

Hod. Chym goodly rewarded, cham I not, do you think?
Chad a goodly dinner for all my sweat and swincke,
Neither Butter, Cheese, Milk, Onyons, Flesh nor Fish,
Save this poor piece of barley bread, it is a pleasant costly dish.

Dic. Hail fellow Hodg, and will to fare, with thy meat, if ye have any?
But by thy words as I the^ smeled; thy daintrels be not many

Hod Daintrels dicco^ (gogs soul man) save this piece of dry horsbred
Cha byt no bit this live long day, no crome come in my head
My guts they yawle, crawle, and all my belly rumbleth,
The puddings cannot lie still, each one over other tumbleth
By gogs heart cham so vexte, and in my belly pend
Chould one piece were at the spitlehouse another at ye castles end.

Dic. Why hodg, was there none at home thy dinner for to set?


Hod. Godgs bread dicco^ ich came to late, was nothing thereto get
Gib (a fowl feind might on her light) lickt ye milk pan so clen
See diccon, 'twas not so well washed this vii. year as ich wene
A pestilence light on al ill luck, chad thought yet for all this
Of a morsel of bacon behind the door at worst should not miss,
But when ich sought a slip to cut, as ich was wont to do
Gogs souls Diccon, gib our Cat had eat the bacon to.

Which bacon Diccon stole, as is declared before. Dic. Ill luck quod he, maiy
swear it hodg, this day ye truth to tell
Thou rose not on thy right side, or else blessed thee not well,
Thy milk slopt up, thy baco^ filtched, yt was to bad luck hodg.

Hodg. Nay, nay, there was a fowler fault, my ga^mer ga me yt bodg
See not how cha^ rent and torn, my heels, my knees and my breech
Chad thought as ich sat by the fire, help here and there a stitch
But there ich was powpte indeed,

Dic. Why Hodg?


Hodg. Boots not man to tell,
Cham so dressed amonst a sort of fools, chad better be in hell,
My ga^mar (cham ashamed to say) by god serbed me not weel.

Dic. How so Hodg?


Hodg Hase she not gone trowest now and lost ber neele.


Dic. Her Eele Hodg, who fisht of late? that was a dainty dish.


Hodg. Tush, tush, her neele, her neele, her neele man. tys neither flesh nor
fish.
A little thing with an hole in the end, as bright as any syller,
Small, long, sharp at the point, and straight as any pillar.

Dic. I know not what a devil you m^est, you bringst me more in doubt


Hodg. Know not what tom tailers man sits broching through a clout
A neele, neele, a neele, my gammers neele is gone.
Her neele Hodg, now I smell thee, yt was a chance alone,

Dic. By ye mass you had a shameful loss, and it were but for thy brcehes
Gogs soul man chould give a crown chad it but iii. stitches.

Hodg. How say you Hodg, what should he have, again thy nedle got


Dic. Bem vathers soul, and chad it chould give him a new grot.


Hodg. Can thou keep counsel in this case.


Dic. Else chwold my thong were out.


Hod. Do than but then by my advise. and I will fetch it without doubt,


Dic. Chyll run, chyll ride, chyll dygge, chyll delue, chill toil, chill
trudge shall see:


Hodg. Chill hold, chill draw, chill pull, chill pynch chill kneel on my bare
knee.
Chill scrape, chill scratch, chill syfte, chill seek, chill bow, chill bend,
chill sweat.
Chil stoop, chil stur, chil cap, chil knele, chil crep on hands and feet,
Chil be thy bondsman Diccon, ich swear by Sun and Moon
And channot sum what to stop this gap, cham utterly undone

Pointing behind to his torn breeches. Dic. Why, is there any special causs,
thou take hereat such sorrow


Hod. Kirstian Clack Tom simsons maid, by the mass come hither to morrow
Chamnot able to say, between us what may hap,
She smiled on me the last sunday when ich put off my cap,

Dic. Well Hodg this is a matter of weight, and must be kept close,
It might else turn to both our costs as the world now gose,
Shall swear to be no blab Hodg.

Hod. Chill Diccon.


Dic. Then go to,
Lay thine hand here, say after me as thou shall here me do.
Haste no book?

Hodg. Cha no book I.


Dic. Then needs must force us both,
Upon my breech to lay thine hand, and there to take thine oath.

Hod. I Hodg breecheless,
Swear to Diccon recheless
By the cross that I shall kiss,
To keep his counsel close
And always me to dispose
To work that his pleasure is.

Here he kisseth Diccons breech. Dic. Now Hodg see thou take heed
And do as I thee bid
For so I judge it meet,
This nedle again to win
There is no shift therein
But conjure up a spreet,

Hodg. What the great devil Diccon I say?


Dic. Yea in good faith, that is the way.
Fet with some pretty charm.

Hodg. Soft Diccon be not to hasty yet,
By the mass for ich begin to sweat,
Cham afraid of some harm,

Dic. Come hither then and stur the not
One inche out of this Cyrcle plat
But stand as I thee teach.

Hod. And shall ich be here safe from their claws?


Dic. The master devil with his long paws
Here to thee cannot reach:
Now will I settle me to this gear.

Hod. I say Diccon,, hear me, hear:
Go softely to this matter.

Dic. What devil man, art afraid of naught


Hod. Can not tarry a little thought
Till ich make a curte^e of water.

Dic. Stand still to it, why should thou fear him?


Hod. Gogs sides Diccon, me think ich hear him
And tarry chal mare all.

Dic. The matter is no worse then I told it,


Hod. By the mass cham able no longer to hold it,
To bad iche must beraye the hall,

Dic. Stand to it Hodg, sture not you horson.
What devil, be thine ars stringes brusten?
Thy self a while but stay,
The devil I smell him will be here anon.

Hod. Hold him fast Diccon, cham gone, cham gone
Chil not be at that fraye.

The ii. Act.
The ii. Scene.
Diccon Chat. Dic. FIE shitten knave, and out upon thee
A bove all other loutes fie on thee,
Is not here a clenly prancke?
But thy matter was no better
Nor thy presence here no sweter,
To fly I can thee thank:
Here is a matter worthy glosing
Of Gammer Gurtons Nedle losing
And a foul piece of wark,
A man I think might make a play
And need no word to this they say
Being but half a Clark.
Soft, let me alone, I will take the charge
This matter further to enlarge
Within a time short,
If ye will mark my toys, and note
I will give ye leave to cut my throat
If I make not good sport,
Dame Chat I say, where be ye, within?

Chat. Who have we there makes such a din?


Dic. Here is a good fellow, makes no great danger,


Chat. What diccon? Come nere, ye be no stranger,
We be fast set at trump man, hard by the fire,
Thou shall set on the King, if thou come a little nyer.

Dic. Nay, nay, there is no tarying: I must be gone again,
But first for you in council I have a word or twain.

Chat. Come hither Dol, Dol, sit down and play this game,
And as thou saw me do, see thou do even the same,
There is 5. trumps besides ye Queen, yt hindmost you shall find her
Take heed of Sim glovers wife, she has an eye behind her.
Now Diccon say your will.

Dic. Nay soft a little yet,
I would not tell my sister, the matter is so great,
There I will have you swear by our dear Lady of Bullaine,
S. Dunstone, and S. Donnyke, with the three Kings of Kullain,
That ye shall keep it secret.

Chat. Gogs bread that will I do,
As secret as mine own thought, by god and the devil two.

Dic. Here is gamer gurton your neighbor, a sad and hevy weight:
Her goodly fair red Cock, at home, was stole this last night.

Chat. Gogs soul her Cock with the yelow legs, yt nightly crowed so just?


Dic. That cock is stolen.


Chat. What was he fet out of the hens ruste?


Dic. I can not tell where ye devil he was kept, under key or lock,
But Tib has tikled in Gammers ear, that you should steal the cock

Chat. Have I strong hoor? by bread and salt.


Dic. What soft, I say be still.
Say not one word for all this gear.

Chat. By the mass that I will,
I will have the young hoar by the head, and the old trot by ye throat

Dic. Not one word dame Chat I say, not one word for my cote.


Chat. Shall such a begars brawl as yt think you make me a thief
The pocks light on her hores sides, a pestlence and mischief
Come out thou hungry nedy bytche, o that my nails be short.

Dic. Gogs bred woman hold your peace, this g^re will else pass sport
I would not for an hundred pound, this matter should be known
That I am auctour of this tale, or have abroad it blown
Did ye not swear ye would be ruled, before the tale I told?
I said ye must all secret keep, and the said sure ye would.

Chat. Would you suffer your self diccon, such a sort, to revile you
With slanderous words to blot your name, and so to defile you?

Dic. No good wife chat I would be loath such drabs should blot my name
But yet ye must so order all, yt Diccon bare no blame.

Chat. Go to then, what is your read say on your mind, ye shall me rule herein.


Dic. Godamercy to dame chat, in faith thou must the gere begin
It is twenty pound to a goose turd, my gammar will not tarry
But hither ward she comes as fast as her legs can her carry,
To brawle with you about her cock, for well I hard Tib say,
The cock was roasted in your house, to breafast yesterday,
And when he had the carcas eaten, the feathers ye our flunge
And doll your maid the legs she hid a foot deep in the dunge,

Chat. Oh gracious god my heart is burstes.


Dic. Well rule your self a space
And gammar gurton when she comes anon into this place
Then to the Queen lets see tell her your mind and spare not
So shall Diccon blameless be, and then go to I care not.

Chat. Then hoor beware her throat, I can a bide no longer
In faith old witch it shall be seen, which of us two be stronger
And Diccon but at your request, I would not stay one hour,

Dic. Well keep it in till she be here, and then out let it pour,
In the mean while get you in, and make no words of this
More of this matter with in this hour to here you shall not miss
Because I know you are my friend, hide it I cold not doubtless
Ye know your harm, see ye be wise about your own business
So fare ye will.

Chat. Nay soft Diccon and drink, what Doll I say.
Bring here a cup of the best ale, lets see, come quickly away.

Hodg. Diccon. Dic. YE see masters yt one end tapt of this my short devise
Now must we broche thoter to, before the smoke larise
And by the time they have a while run, I trust ye need not crave it,
But look what lies in both their hearts ye ar like sure to have it

Hod. Yea gogs soul, art alive yet? what Diccon dare ich come?


Dic. A man is well hied to trust to thee, I will say nothing but mum
But and ye come any nearer I pray you see all be sweet.

Hod. Tush man, is gammers neele found, yt chould gladly weete,


Dic. She may thank the it is not found, for if you had kept thy standing
The devil he would have fet it out, even hodg at thy commanding

Hod Gogs ha^t, and cold he tell nothing where yt neele might be found


Dic. Ye folish dolt, ye were to seek, ere we had got our ground,
Therefore his tale so doubtful was, yt I cold not perceive it.

Hod. Then ich se welsomthing was said, chop one day yet to have it
But diccon, diccon, did not the devil cry, ho, ho, ho,

Dic. If you had tarried where thou stoodst, thou would have said so,


Hod. Durst swear of a book, chard him rore, straight after ich was gone
But tell me diccon with said yt knave, let me here it anon.

Dic. The horson talked to me, I know not well of what.
One while his tongue it ran, and paltered of a Cat,
Another while he stamered still upon a Kat,
Last of all there was nothing but every word Chat, Chat,
But this I well perceived before I would him rid,
Between Chat and the Kat, and the Cat the nedle is hid,
Now wether Gib our cat have eat it in her mawe,
Or Doctor Kat our curat have found it in the straw,
Or this same chat your neighbor have stolen it, god he knows,
But by ye morrow at this time, we shall learn how the matter goes

Hod. Can learn to night man, see not what is here,

Pointing behind to his torn breeches. Dic. It Is not possible to make it sooner
appear,


Hod. Alas Diccon then chaue no shift, but least ich tarry to long
Hie me to Sim glovers shop, there to seek for a Thonge,
There with this breech to tatche and tie as ich may.

Dic. Tomorow hodg if we chance to meet, shall see what I will say.

The ii. Act.
The iii. Scene.
Diccon Gammer. Dic. NOw this gere must forward go, for here my gammer comes,
Be still a while and say nothing, make here a little rometh.

Gam. Good lord, shall never be my luck my neele again to spy?
Alas the while tys past my help, where it is still it must lie.

Dic. Now Jesus gammer gurto^, with drives you to this sadness:
I fear me by my conscience, you will sure fall to madness.

Gam. Who is that? what Diccon? cham lost man: fie, fie.


Dic. Mary fie on them yt be worthy, but with should be your troble?


Gam. Alas the more ich think on it, my sorrow it waxes doble.
My goodly tossing sporiars neele, chave lost ich wot not where,

Dic. Your neele, when?


Gam. My neele (alas) ich might full ill it spare,
As god himself he knows nere one beside chave.

Dic. If this be all good gammer, I warrant you all is save.


Gam. Why know you any tidings which way my neele is gone?


Dic. Yea that I do doubtless, as ye shall here anon,
A see a thing this matter touches, within these 20 hours,
Even at this gate, before my face by a neighbor of yours,
She stooped me down, and up she took a nedle or a pin,
I durst be sworn it was even yours, by all my mothers kin.

Gam. It was my neele diccon ich wot, for here even by this post
Ich sat, what time as ich up start, and so my neele it lost:
Who was it leive son? speak ich pray the, and quickly tell me yt?

Dic. A subtle queen as any in the town, your neighbor here dame Chat.


Gam. Dame chat dicco^ let me be gone, chil thither in post haste.


Dic. Take my council yet or ye go, for fear ye walk in wast,
It is a murrion crafty drab, and froward to be pleased.
And ye take not the better way, our nedle yet ye lose it?
For when she took it up, even here before your doors?
What soft dame chat, (quoth I) that same is none of yours
Avaunt (quoth she) sir knave, what pratest thou of that I find:
I would you had kissed me I wot whear: she meant I know behind)
And home she went as brag as it had been a bodelouce.
And I after as bold, as it had been, the goodman of the house:
But there and ye had hard her, how she began to scolde,
The tongue it were on patins by him that Judas sold,
Each other word I was a knave, and you a hoar of hores,
Because I spoke in your behalf, and said the neele was yours.

Gam. Gogs bread, and thinks ye callet thus to keep my neele me fro?


Dic. Let her alone, and she minds non other but eve^ to dress you so

Gam. By the mass chil rather spend the cots that is on my back.
Thinks the false ^uean by such a slight that chill my neele lack

Dic. Slep not you gere I counsel you, but of this take good head
Let not be known I told you of it, how well soever ye speed.

Gam. Chil in Diccon a cleene aperne to take, and set before me,
And ich may my neele once see, chil sure remember the.

The ii. Act.
The v. Scene.
Diccon. Dic. HEre will the sport begin, if these two once may meet,
Their chere durst lay money will prove scarsly sweet
My gammer sure entends to be upon her bones,
With staves, or with clubs, or else with coble stones.
Dame Chat on the other side, it she be fare behind
I am right far deceived, she is geven to it of kind,
He that may tarry by it a while, and that but short
I warrant him trust to it, he shall see all the sport,
Into the town will I, my friends to vysit there
And hither straight again to see thend of this gere
In the mean time fellows, pype up your fidles, I say take them
And let your friends here such mirth as ye can make them.

The iii. Act.
The i Scene.
Hodg. Hod. Sym glover yet gramercy cham meetley well sped now,
Thart even as good a fellow as ever kiste a cow,
Here is a thing in deed, by the mass though ich speak it
Tom tankards great bald curtal, I think could not break it
And when he spyed my need, to be so straight and hard,
Hays lent me here his naul, to set the giv forward,
As for my Gammers neele, the flyenge feind go weet,
Chill not now go to the door ^gain with it to meet:
Chould make shift good enough and chad a candels end,
The chief hole in my breeche, with these two chil amend.

The iii. Act.
The ii Scene.
Gammer. Hodg. Gam. HOw Hodg, may now be glad, cha news to tell thee
Ich know who hais my neele, ich trust soon shall it see,

Hod. The devil thou does, have hard gammer in deed, or do but jest?


Gam. It Is as true as steel Hodg.


Hod. Why know well where did leese it?


Gam. Ich know who found it, and took it up, shall see or it be long.


Hod. Gods mother dear, if that be true, farwell both naule an thong
But who hais it gammer say one chould fain here it disclosed.

Gam. That false fixen, that same dame Chat, that counts her self so honest


Hod. Who told you so?


Gam. That same did Diccon the bedlam, which saw it done.


Hod. Diccon: it is a vengeable knave gammer, it is a bonable horso^,
Can do mo things then that else cham deceived evil:
By the mass ich saw him of late call up a great black devil,
O the knave cried ho, ho, roared and he thundered,
And yead been here, cham sure yould murrenly ha wondered.

Gam. Was not thou afraid Hodg to see him in this place?


Hod. No, and chad come to me, chould have laid him on the face,
Chould have promised him.

Gam. But Hodg, had he no horns to pushe?


Hod. As long as your two arms, saw ye never Friar Kushe,
Painted on a cloth, with a side long cowes tail,
And crooked cloven feet, and many a hoked nail?
For all the world (if I should judge) chould reckon him his brother
Love even what face Friar rush had, the devil had such another

Gam. New Jesus mercy hodg, did diccon in him bring?


Hod. Nay gammer (hear me speak) chil tell you a greater thing,
The devil (when diccon had him, ich hard him wondrous weel)
Said plainly (here before us) that d^me that had your neele.

Gam. Then let us go, and ask her wherefore she minds to keep it,
Seeing we know so much, tware a madness now to sleep it.

Hod. Go to her ga^mer see ye not where she stands in her doors,
Bid her geve you the neele, it is none of hers but yours.

The iii. Act.
The iii. Scene.
Gammer. Chat. Hodg. Gam. DAme Chat cholde pray the fait, let me have that is
mine,
Chil not this twenty years take on fart that is thine
Therefore give me mine own and let me live beside the.

Chat. Why art thou crept from home hither, to mine own doors to chide me:
Hence doting drab, auaunt, or I shall set the further.
Intends thou and that knave, me in my house to murder?

Gam. Tush gape not so, no woman, shall not yet eat me,
Nor all the friends thou have, in this shall not entreat me:
Mine own goods I will have, and ask the no beleve,
What woman: pore folks must have right, though the thing you agreve.

Chat. Give thee thy right, and hang the up, with al thy baggers brood
What will thou make me a thief, and say I stole thy good?

Gam. Chil say nothing (ich warrant thee, but yt ich ca^ prove it well
Thou fet my good even from my door, cham able this to tell.

Chat. Did I (old witch) steal often was thine? how should that thing be known?


Gam. Ich can not tell but up thou tokest it as though it had bin thine own,


Chat. Mary fie on thee, thou old giv, with all my very heart.


Gam. Nay fie on thee you rampe, thou rig, with all that take thy part.


Chat. A vengeance on those lips yt lays such things to my charge


Gam. A vengeance on those callats hips, whose conscience is so large


Chat. Come out Hog.


Gam. Come out hog, and let have me right.


Chat. Thou argant Witch.


Gam. Thou bawdie bitche, chil make thee curse this night.


Chat. A bag and a wallet.


Gam. A carte for a callet.


Chat. Why wenest thou thus to prevail,
I hold thee a grote,
I shall patche thy coat,

Gam. Thou wart as good kiss my tail,
Thou slut, you kut, you rakes, you jakes will not shame make the hide

Chat. Thou skald, thou hald, thou roten, you glotton, I will no longer chid the
But I will teach the to keep home.

Gam. Will thou drunken beast?

Hod. Stick to her gammer, take her by the head, chil warrant you this feast,
Smite I say gammer,
Bite I say gammer,
I trow ye will bekeene:
Where be your nails? claw her by the jaws, pull me out both her eyes,
Gogs bones gammer, hold up her head?

Chat. I trow drab I shall dress thee.
Tarry you knave I hold the a grote, I shall make these hand bless thee
Take you this old hoar for amends, and learn thy tongue well to tame
And say thou met at this bickering, not thy fellow but thy dame

Hod. Where is the strong stued hoar, chil gear a hores mark,
Stand out ones way, that ich kill none in the dark:
Up gammer and ye be alive, chil feight now for us both,
Come no nere me thou scalde callet, to kill the ich were loath.

Chat. Art here again thou hoddypeke, what doll bring me out my spitte,

Hod. Chill broche thee with this, him father soul, chill conjure that foul
sprete:
Let door stand Cock, why coms indeed? keep door you horson boy.

Chat. Stand to it you dastard for thine ears, ise teache ye a sluttish coy,


Hod. Gogs wounds hoar, chill make the auaunte, take heed Cock, pull in the
latche,


Chat. I faith sir loose breche had ye tarried ye should have found your match.


Gam. Fow ware thy throat losel, thoese pray for all;


Hod. Wellsaid gammer by my soul,
Hoise her, souse her, bounce her, trounce her, pull out her throat boule

Chat Comst behind me thou withered witch, and I get once on foot
Thouse pay for all, you old tarlether, i will teach the what long to it
Take ye this to make up thy mouth, till time thou come by more

Hod. Up gammer, stand on your feet, where is the old hoar?
Faith would chad her by the face choulde crack her callet crown.

Gam. A hodg, hodg, where was thy help, when fixen had me down?


Hod. By the mass Gammer, but for my staff, Chat had gone nigh to spyl you
Ich think the harlot had not cared, and chad not com, to kill you
But shall we loose our neele thus,

Gam. No Hodg chwarde loathe do so.
Think thou chill take that at her hand, no hodg ich tell the no

Hod. Chold yet this fray were well take up, and our own neele at home
Twill be my chance else some to kill, where ever it be or whom

Gam. We have a person, (hodg thou knoes) a man esteemed wise
Mast doctor Kat, chil for him send, and let me here his advise,
He will her shriue for all this gere, and geve her penance strait
Wese have our neele, else dame chat comes nere with in heaven gate

Hod. Ye mary gammer, yt ich think best: will you now for him send
The sooner Doctor Kat be here, the sooner wese ha an end,
And here gammer Diccons devil, (as iche remember well)
Of Cat and Chat, and Doctor Kat, a felloneus tale did tell,
Chold you forty pound, that is the way your neele to get again.

Gam. Chil ha him strait, call out the boy, wese make him take ye pain


Hod. What coke I say, come out, what devil can not here?


Gam. How now hodg, how does? gammer, is yet the wether clear?
What would chaue me to do

Gam. Come hither Cock anon:
Hence swithe to Doctor Kat, hye the that thou were gone,
And pray him come speak with me; cham not well at ease,
Shait have him at his chamber of else at mother Bees,
Else seek him at Hobfilchers shop, for as charde it reported
There Is is the best ale in all the town, and now is most resorted.

Cock. And shall ich bring him with me Gammer?


Gam. Yea, by and by good Cock.
Shall see that shall be here anon, else let me have one yt dock

Hod. Now gammer shall we two go in, and tarry for his coming
what devil woman pluck up your heart, and leve of all this gloming
Though she were stronger at ye first, as ich think ye did find her

Gam. Yet there ye dressed the dronke^ sow, what time ye can behind her
Nay, nay, cham sure she lost not all, for set them to ye beginning
And ich doubt not, but she will make small host of her winning.

The iii. Act.
The iiii. Scene.
Tib. Hodg. Gammer. Cock. Tib. SE gammer, gammer, gib our cat, cha^ afraid what
she ayleth
She stands me gasping behind the door, as though her wind her fails:
Now let ich doubt what gib should mean, yt now she does so dote,

Hod. Hold hither, ichould twenty pound, your neele is in her throat,
Grope her ich say, me thinks ich feel it, does not prick your hand?

Gam. Ich can feel nothing.


Hod. No, ich know thars not within this land,
A muriner Cat then Gib is, betwixt the tems and Line,
Shase as much wit in her head almost as chaue in mine,

Tib. Faith shase eaten some thing, that will not easily down
Whether she gar it at home, or abroad in the town
Iche cannot tell.

Gam. Alas ich fear it be some crooked pin,
And then farewell gib, she is undone, and lost all save the skin,

Hod. Tib, your neele woman, I say: gogs soul geve me a knife
And chil have it out of her mawe, or else chal lose my life

Gam. What nay hogd, fie kill not our cat, it is all the cats we ha now.

Hod. By the mass dame Chat hays me so moved, iche care not what I kill, ma god
a vow:
Go to then Lib to this gear, hold up her tail and take her,
Chilse what debit is in her guts, chil take you pains to rake her,

Gam. Rake a Cat Hodg, what woldst thou do?


Hod. What thinckst that cham not able?
Did not Tom Tankard rake his Curtal toore day standing in the stable?

Gam. Soft be content, lets here what news Cock brings from may Rat.


Cock. Gammer chave ben there as you had, you wot well about what
I will not be long before he come, ich durst swear of a book
He bids you see ye be at home, and there fore him to look.

Gam. Where did thou find him bay, was he not where I told thee?


Cock. Yes, yes even at Hobfilchers house, by him yt bought and sold me
A cup of Ale had in his hand, and a crab lay in the fire,
Chad much a do to go and come, all was so full of mier:
And Gammer one thing I can tell, Hobfilchers naule was lost
And Doctor Rat found it again, hard bestde the door post,
I choulde penny can say something, your neele again to fet.

Gam. Cham glad to hear so much Cock, than trust he will not let
To help us herein best he can, therefore till time he come
Let us go in, if there be ought to get thou shall have some.

The ii. Act.
The iiii. Sceam.
Doctor Rat. Gammer Gurton. D. Rat. A Man were better twenty times, be a bandog
and bark,
Then here among such a sort, be parish priest or clarke
Where he shall never be at rest one pissing while a day.
But he must trudge about the town, this way, and that way,
Here to a drab, there to a thief, his shoes to tear and rent
And that which is worst of all, at every knaves commaundme^t
I had not sit the space to drink two pots of ale,
But Gammer gurtons sorry boy, was strait way at my tail.
And she was sick, and I must come, to do I wot not what,
If once her singers end but ache, trudge, call for Doctor Rat,
And when I come not at their call, I only thereby loose,
For I am sure to lack therefore a tithe pyg or a goose:
I warrant you when truth is known, and told they have their tale
The matter where about I come, (is not worth a half penny worth of ale,
Yet must I talk so sage and smothe, as though I were a glosser
Else or the yer come at an end, I shall be sure the loser,
What work ye ga^mer gurto^? how here is your friend M. Rat.

G. A good M. Doctor, cha troubled, cha troubled you, chwot well that


D. Rat. How do ye woman, be ye lusty, or be ye not well at ease?


Gam. By gys master cham not sich, but yet chaue a disease.
Chad a foul turn now of late, chill tell it you by gigs.

D. Rat. Hach your brown cow cast her calfe, or your sandy sow her pigs


Gam. No but chad ben as good they had, as this ich wot weel.


D. Rat What is the matter,


Gam. Alas, alas, cha lost my good neele,
My neele I say, and wot ye what: a drab came by and spied it
And when I asked her for the same, the filth flatly denied it.

D. Rat. What was she that:


Gam. A dame ich warrant you: we began to scold and brawle
Alas, alas, come hither Hodge? this wretch can tell you all.

The iiii. Act.
The ii. Scene.
Hodge. Doctor Rat. Gammer. Diccon. Chat. Hodge. GOd morrow gaffer Vicar.
Come on fellow let us hear.
Thy dame has said to me, thou know of all this gear,
Lets see what thou can say?

Hod. Bym say sir that ye shall,
What matter so ever here was done, ich can tell your maship
My Gammer gurton hear see now,
Cat her down at this door see now,
And as she began to stir her, see now,
her neele fell in the floor, see now,
And while her staff she took, see now,
at gib her Cat to fling, see now,
Her neele was lost in the floor, see now,
is not this a wondrous thing, see now?
Then came the queen Dame Chat, see now,
to ask for her black cup, see now:
And even here at this gate, see now,
she took that neele up, see now:
My Gammer then she yeede, see now,
her neele again to bring, see now,
And was caught by the head, see now,
is not this a wondrous thing, see now?
She tare my Gammers cote, see now
and scratched her by the face, see now
Chad thought shad stopped her throat, see now
is not this a wondrous case, see now?
When ich saw this, ich was wroth, see now
and start between them twain, see now
Else ich durst take a book oath, see now
my gammer had been slain, see now.

Gam. This is even the whole matter, as Hodg has plainly told
And chould fain be quiet for my part, that chould.
But help us good master, beseech ye that ye do
Else shall we both be beaten and lose our neele too

D. Rat. What would ye have me to do? tell me that I were gone
I do the best that I can, to set you both at one.
But be ye sure dame Chat has this your neele found?

Gam. Here comes the man that see her take it up off the ground,
Ask him your self master Rat if ye beleve not me
And help me to my neele, for gods sake and saint charity.

D. Rat. Come nere diccon, and let us hear, what thou can express.
Wilt you be sworn see dame chat, this woman's neele have?

Dic. Nay by S. Benit will I not, then might ye think me rave.

G. Why did not you tell me so even here can you for shame deny it?

Dic. I mary gammer: but I said I would not abide by it,

D. Rat. Will you say a thing, and stick to it to try it?

Dic. Stick to it quoth you master rat, mary sir I defy it,
Nay there is many an honest man, when he such blastes has blown,
In his freindes ears, he would be loath the same by him were known:
If such a toy be used often among the honesty,
It may be seem a simple man, of your and my degree.

D. Rat. Then we be never the nearer, for all that you can tell.

Dic. Yes mary sir, if ye will do by mine advise and counsel,
If mother chat se al us here, she knows how the matter goes
Therefore I red you three, go hence, and within keep close;
And I will into dame chats house, and so the matter use,
That or you cold go twice to church, I warant you here news:
She shall look well about her, but I durst lay a pledge,
Ye shall of gammers neele, have shortly better knowledge.

Gam. Now gentle Diccon do so, and good sir let us trudge*

D. Rat. By the mass I may not tarry so long to be your judge,

Dic. Tys but a little while man, what take so much pain;
If I here none was of it, I will come sooner again.

Hodge Tarry so much, good master Doctor of your gentleness,

D. Rat. Then let us hie inward, and Diccon speed thy business.

Dic. Now sirs do you no more, but keep my counsel just,
And Doctor Rat shall thus catch some good I trust,
But mother Chat my gossap, talk first with all I must:
For she must be chief captain to lay the Rat in the dust.
God deven dame Chat in faith, and well met in this place.

Chat. God deven my friend Diccon, whether walk ye this pace:

Dic. By my truth even to you, to learn how the world goes,
Hard ye no more of the other matter, say me now by your troth?

Chat. O yes diccon: here the old hoore, and hodge that great knave.
But in faith I would thou had seen, o lord I dressed them brave,
She bar me two or three souses behind in the nape of the neck
Till I made her old wesen, to answer again kecke:
And Hodge that dirty dastard, that at her elbow stands,
If one pair of legs had not been worth two pair of hands
He had had his bearde shaven, if my nails would have served
And not without a cause, for the knave it well deserved.

Dic. By the mass I can the thank wench, you did so well acquite' the


Chat. And thadst seen him Diccon, it would have made ye beshite the
For laughter, the horsen dolt at last caught up a club,
As though he would have slain the master devil Belsabub,
But I set him soon inward.

Dic. O Lord there is the thing,
That Hodge is so offended, that makes him starte and flyng.

Chat. Why? makes the knave any moyling, as ye have seen or hard


Dic Even now I saw him last, like a mad man he farde,
And swear up heaven and hell, he would a wreake his sorrow
And leve you never a hen a live by viii. of the clock tomorow,
Therefore mark what I say, and my words see that ye trust
Your hens be as good as dead, if ye leave them on the ruste.

Chapter The knave dare as well go hang himself, as go upon my ground


Dic. Well yet take heed I say, I must tell you my tale round,
Have you not about your house, behind your furnace or lead,
A hole where a crafty knave may creep in for neade?

Chat. Yes by the mass, a hole broke down, even wtin these ii. days,


Dic. Hodge, he intends this same night, to slip in there awayes.


Chat. O Christ that I were sure of it, in faith he should have his mede


Dic. Watch well, for the knave will be there as sure as is your creed
I would spend my self a shilling to have him swinged well.

Chat. I am as glad as a woman can be of this thing to here tell,
By gogs bones when he comes, now that I know the matter
He shall sure at the first skip, to leap in scalding water:
With a worse turn besides, when he will, let him come.

Dic. I tell you as my sister, you know what means mum,
Now lack I but my doctor, to play his part again..
And lo where he comes toward, peradventure to his pain.

D. Rat. What good news Diccon? fellow, is mother chat at house?


Dic. She is sir, and she is not, but it please her to whom:
Yet did I take her tardy, as subtle as she was.

D. Rat. The thing that thou wentst for, have thou brought it to pass?


Dic. I have done that I have done, be it worse, be it better.
And dame Chat at her wyts end, I have almost set her,

D. Rat. Why have thou spied the naele, quickly I pray thee tell.


Dic. I have spied it in faith sir, I handled my self so well,
And yet the crafty queen had almost take my trumpe.
But or all came to an end, I set her in a dumpe:

D. Rat. How so I pray thee Diccon?


Dic. Mary sir will ye hear?
She was clapped down on the backside, by cocks mother dear,
And there she sat sowing a halter, or a band,
With no other thing save gammers nedle in her hand,
As soon as any knock, if the filth be in doubt,
She needs but once puff, and her candle is out:
Now I sir knowing of every door the pin.
Came nicely, and said no word, till time I was within,
And there saw the neele, even with these two eyes.
Who ever say the contrary, I will swear he lies.

D. Rat. O Diccon that I was not there, then in thy stead.


Dic. Well, if ye will be ordered, and do by my read.
I will bring you to a place, as the house stands.
Where ye shall take the drab, with the neele in her hands,

D. Rat. For Gods sake do so Diccon, and I will gage my gown,
To geve thee a full pot of the best ale in the town,

Dic. Follow me but a little, and mark what I will say,
Lay down your gown beside you, go to, come on your way:
Se ye not what is here, a hole wherein ye may creep
Into the house, and suddenly unwares among them leap,
There shall ye find the Bichfox, and the neele together,
Do as I bid you man, come on your ways hither.

Dic. Art thou sure diccon the swel tub stands not here about?


Dic. I was within my self man even now, there is no doubt,
Go softly, make no noise, give me your foot sir John,
Here will I wait upon you, till you come out anon.

D. Rat. Help Diccon, out alas, I shall be slain among them,


Dic. If they give you not the nedle, tell them that ye will ha^g them
Ware that, how my wenches, have ye caught the Fox,
That used to make revel among your hens and Cocks,
Save his life yet for his order, though he sustain some pain
Gogs bread, I am afraid, they will beat out his brain.

D. Rat. Woe worth the hour that I came hear.
And woe worth him that wrought this gear,
A sort of drabs and queans have me blessed,
Was ever creature half so evil dressed?
Who ever it wrought, and first did invent it,
He shall I warrant him, ere long repent it.
I will spend I have without my skin,
But he shall be brought to the plight I'um in;
Master Bailey I trow, and he be worth his ears,
Will snaffle these murderers and all that them bears,
I will surely neither byte nore suppe
Till I fetch him hither, this matter to take up.

The v. Act.
The i. Scene
Master Bailey. Doctor Rat. Bailey. I Can perceive none other, I speak it from my
heart
But either ye ar in all the fault, or else in the greatest part.

D. Rat If it be counted his fault, besides all his greeves
When a poor man is spoiled, and beaten among thieves,
Then I confess my fault herein, at this season,
But I hope you will not urge so much against reason:

Baily. And me thinks by your own tale, of all that ye name,
If any played the thief you were the very same:
The women they did nothing, as your words made probation,
But stootly withstood your forciable invasion,
If that a thief at your window, to enter should begin,
Would you hold forth your hand, and help to pull him in?
Or you would keep him out: I pray you answer me.

D. Rat. Mary hope him out, and a good cause why:
But I am no thief sir, but an honest learned Clarke.

Baily. Yea but who knows that, when he meets you in the dark?
I am sure your learning shines not out at your nose,
Was it any marvel, though the poor woman arose
And strat up, being afraid of that was in her purse,
Me think you may be glad that your luck was worse.

D. Rat. Is not this evil enough, I pray you think?


Showing his broken head. Baily. Yea but a man in the dark of chances do
wincke,
As soon meets his father as any other man
Because for lack of light, decerne him he ne can,
Might it not have been our luck, with a spit to have been slain?

D. Rat. I think I am little better, my scalpe is cloven to the brain,
If there be all the remedy, I know who bears the ^^ockes,

Baily. By my trath and well worthy, besides to kiss the stocks
To come in on the back side, when ye might go about,
I know non such, unles they long to have their brains knocked out

D. Rat. Well, will you be so good sir, as talk with dame Chat;
And know what she intended, I ask no more but that.

Baily. Let her be called fellow because of master doctor,
I warrant in this case, she will be her own Proctor,
She will tell her own tale in metter or in prose,
And bid you seek your remedy, and so go wype your nose.

The vi. Act.
The ii. Scene.
M. Baily. Chat. D. Rat. Gammer. Hodge. Diccon. Baily. DAme Chat, master doctor
upon you here complained
That you and your maids should him much misorder,
And takes many an oath, that no word he fained,
Laying to your charge, how you thought him to murder:
And on his part again, that same man says further,
He never offended you in word nor intent,
To hear you answer hereto, we have now for you sent.

Chat. That I would have murdered him, fie on him wretch,
And evil might he thee for it, our Lord I beseech.
I will swear on all the books that opens and shuttes
He faineth this tale out of his own guts,
For this seven weeks with me, I am sure he sat not down
Nay ye have other minions, in the other end of the town,
Where ye were liker to catch such a blow,
Then any where else, as far as I know.

Baily. Be like then master Doctor, your stripe there ye got not.


D. Rat. Think you I am so mad, that where I was bet I wat not?
Will ye beleve this queen, before she has tried it?
It is not the first deed she has done, and afterward denide it.

Chat. What man, will you say I broke your head?


D. Rat. How can thou prove the contrary?


Chat. Nay how protest thou that I did the dead?


D. Rat. Too plainly, by S. Mary.
This proof I trow may serve, though I no word spoke.

Showing his broken head. Chat. Because thy head is broken, was it I that it
broke:
I saw the Rat I tell thee, not once within this fornight.

D. Rat. No mary, thou saw me not, for why thou had no light,
But I felt thee for all the dark, beshrew thy smothe cheeks,
And thou groped me, this will declare, any day this six weeks

Showing his head. Baily. Answer me to this M. Rat, when caught you this harm
of yours?


D. Rat. A while a go sir, god he knows, wtin les the^ these ii. hours.


Baily. Dame Chat was there none with you? (confess I faith) about that season.
What woman, let it be what it will, it is neither felony nor treason

Chat. Yes by my faith master Baily,, there was a knave not far
Who caught one good Philup on the brow with a door bar
And well was he worthy, as it seemed to me,
But what is that to this man, since this was not be?

Baily. Who was it then? lets here.


D. Rat. Alas sir, ask you that?
Is it not made plain enough by the own mouth of dame chat?
The time agrees, my head is broken, her tongue cannot lie,
Only upon a bare, nay she says it was not I.

Chat. No mary was it not indeed, ye shall here by this one thing,
This after noon a friend of mine for good will gave we warning
And bad me well look to my ruste, and all my Capons pens,
For if I took not better heed, a knave would have my hens,
Then I to save my goods, took so much pains as him to watch
And as good fortune served me, it was my chance him for to catch
What strooks he bare away, or other what was his gains
I wot not, but sure I am, he had something for his pains.

Baily. Yet tells thou not who it was.


Chat. Who it was? a false thief,
That came like a false Fox, my pullain to kill and mischief.

Baily. But know thou not his name?


Chat. I know it, but what than?
It was that crafty cull yon Hodge my gammer gurtons man.

Baily. Call me the knave hither, he shall sure kiss the stocks.
I shall teach him a lesson for filching hens or cocks.

D. Rat. I marvail master Baily, so bleared be your eyes.
An egg is not so full of meat, as she is full of lies:
When she has played this pranke, to excuse all this gear,
She lays the fault in such a one, as I know was not there.

Chat. Was he yot there? look on his pate, that shall be his witness,


D. Rat. I would my head were half so hole, I would seek no redress.


Baily. God bless you gammer Gurton.


Gam. God dilde you master mine.


Baily. Thou have a knave wtin thy house, hodge, a servant of thine.
They tell me that buste knave, is such a filching one,
That Hen, Pig, Goose, or Capon, thy neighbor can have none

Gam. By god cham much ameved, to hear any such report:
Hodge was not wont ich trow, to have him in that sort.

Chapter A theevisher knave is not on live, more filching, nor more false,
Many a truer man then he has hanged up by the halse.
And thou his dame of all his theft, thou art the sole receaver,
For hodge to catch, and thou to keep, I never knew none better

Gam. Sir reverence of your masterdome, and you were out of door,
Chold be so bold for all her brags, to call her arrant whore.
And ich knew Hodge so bad as tow, ich wish me endless sorrow
And chould not take the pains, to ha^g him up before to morrow.

Chat. What have I stolen from the or thine thou ilfavored old trot?


Gam. A great deal more (by God blessed) then chever by the got,
That thou know well I need not say it.

Baily. Stop there I say,
And tell me here I pray you, this matter by the way:
How chance hodge is not here? him would I fain have had.

Gam. Alas Sir, heel be here anon, ha be handled too bad,


Chat. Master Baily, sir ye be not such a fool well I know,
But ye perceive by this lingering, there is a pad in the straw.
Thinking that Hodge, his head was broke, and that gammer
Would not let him come before them.

Gam. Chil show you his face ich warrant the, lo-now where he is.


Baily. Come on fellow, it is told me thou art a shrew iwysse.
Thy neighbors hens you take, and plays the two legged fore
Their chikens, and their capons too, and now and then their Cocks

Hod. Ich defy them all that dare it say, chame as true as the best,


Baily. Wart not-yu take within this hour in dame chats hens nest?


Hod. Take there, no master chould not dot for a house full of gold.


Chat. Thou art the devil in thy cote, swarthis I dare be bold.


D. Rat. Swear me no swearing queen, the devil he geve the sorrow,
As is not worth a gnat, thou can swear till to morrow.
Where is the harm he has? show it by gods bread,
Ye beat him with a witness, but the stripes light on my head.

Hod. Bet me, gogs blessed body, chold first ich trow have burst the,
Ich think and chad my hands loose callet chould have crust the.

Chat. Thou shirte knave I trow you know ye full weight of my fist
I am fowlie deceived, unles thy head and my door bar kiste.

Hod. Hold thy chat whore you criest so loud, can no man else be hard?


Chat. Well knave, and I had the alone, I would surely rap thy costard.


Baily. Sir answer me to this, is thy head whole or broken?


Chat. Yea master Baily, blessed be every good token.


Hod. Is my head whole? ich warrant you, it is neither scurby nor scald,
What you foul beast, does think it is either pild or bald?
Nay ich thank god, chil not for all that thou may spend,
That chad one scab on my narse, as broad as thy singers end.

Baily. Come nearer here.


Hod. Yes that ich dare.


Baily. By our Lady here is no harm,
Hodges head is hole enough, for all dame Chats charm:

Chat. By gogs blessed, how ever the thing he clockes or smolders,
I know the blows he bare away, either with head or shoulders,
Came you not knave within this hour, creeping into my pens,
And there was caught within my house, groping among my hens?

Hod. A plage both on thy hens and thee, a cart whore, a cart,
Chould I were hanged as hie as a tree, and chware as false as you art
Geve my gammer again her washical you stole away in thy lap.

Gam. Yea master Baily there is a thing, you know not on may hap
This drab she kepes away my good, ye devil he might her snare
Ich pray you that ich might have a right action on her.

Chat. Have I thy good old filth, or any such old sowes?
I am as true, I would thou knew, as skin between thy brows,

Gam. Many a truer has been hanged, though you escape the danger


Chat. Thou shall answer by gods pity for this thy foul slander.


Baily. Why, what ca^ ye charge her withal? to say so, ye do not well,


Gam. Mary a vengeance to her heart, the whore has stolen my neele.


Chat. Thy nedle old witch, how so? it were alms thy scul to knock,
So did thou say, the other day, that I had stolen thy Cock,
And roasted him to my breastfast, which shall not be forgotten;
The devil pull out thy lying tongue, and teeth that be rotten.

Gam. Geve me my neele, as for my cock, chould be very loath
That chuld here tell be should hang on thy false faith and troth.

Baily. Your task is such, I can scarce learn who should be most in fault


Gam. Yet shall ye find no other wight, save she, by bred and salt


Baity. Keep ye content a while; se that your tongues ye hold,
Me thinks you should remember, this is no place to scolde,
How know thou gammer gurton, dame Chat, thy nedle had?

Gam. To name you sir the party; chould not be very glad


Baily. Yea but we must needs hear it, and therefore say it boldly.


Gam. Such one as told the tale, full soberlie and coldlie,
Even he that looked on, will swear on a book,
What time this drunken gossip, my fai^ long neele up took,
Diccon (master) the Bedlam, cham ve^^ sure ye know him.

Baily. A false knave by Gods pity, ye were but a fool to trow him,
I durst aventure well the price of my best cap,
That when the end is known, all will turn to a jape.
Told he not you that besides, she stole your Cock that tide?

Gam. No master, no indeed, for then he should have lied,
My cock is I thank Christ, safe and well a fine.

Chat. Yea but that ragged colt, that whore that tib of thine
Said plainly thy cock was stolen, and in my house was eaten,
That lying cut is lost, that she is not swinged and beaten,
And yet for all my good name, it were a small amends;
I pick not this gear (hearst thou) out of my fingers ends.
But he that hard it told me, who thou of late did name,
Diccon whom all men knows, it was the very same:

Baily. This is the case, you lost your nedle about the doors,
And she answers again, she hase no cock of yours;
Thus in your talk and Action, from that you do intend,
She is whole five mile wide, from that she does defend:
Will you say she has your Cock?

Gam. No merry sir that chil not,


Baily. Will you confess her neele?


Chat. Will I? no sir will I not.


Baily. Then there lies all the matter.


Gam. Soft master by the way,
Ye know she could do little, and she could not say naie.

Baily. Yea but he that made one lie about your cock stealing,
Will not stick to make another, what time lies be in dealing.
I ween the end will prove this brawle did first arise,
Upon no other ground, but only Diccons lies.

Chat. Though some be lies as you belike have espied them
Yet other some be true, by proof I have well tried them

Baily. What other thing beside this dame Chat?


Chat. Mary sir even this,
The tale I tulde before, the self same tale it was his,
He gave me like a friend warning against my loss,
Else had my hens been stolen, each one, by Gods cross.
He told me Hodge would come, and in he came indeed,
But as the matter chaunsed, with greater have then speed.
This truth was ^id, and true was found, as truly I report.

Baily. If Doctor Rat ^e not deceived, it was of another sort.


D. Rat. By Gods mother thou and he, be a cople of su^tle foxes,
Between you and Hodge, I bear away the boxes.
Did not dicco^ apoint the place, where you shuldst stand to meet him?

Chapter Yes by the mass, and if he came, bad me not stick to speet him.


D. Rat. Gods sacrament the villain knave has dressed us round about,
He is the cause of all this brawl, that dirty shitten loute:
When gammer gurton here complained, and made a ruful moan,
I heard him swear yt you had gotten her nedle that was gone.
And this to try he further said, he was full loath how be it,
He was content small ado, to bring me where to see it.
And where ye sat, he says full certian, if I would follow his read,
Into your house a privy way, he would me guide and lead.
And where ye had it in your hands, sewing about a clowt,
And set me in the back hole, therebie to find you out:
And whiles I sought a quietness, creeping upon my knees,
I found the weight of your door bar, for my reward and fees.
Such is the luck that some men gets, while they begin to mel,
In setting at one such as were out; minding to make all well:

Hogd. Was not well blessed ga^mer, to escape ye scour and chad ben there,
Then chad ben dressed be like, as ill by the mass, as gaffer vicar.

Baily. Mary sir, here is a sport alone, I looked for such an end,
If diccon had not played the knave, this had been sone amend.
My gammer here he made a fool, and dressed her as she was,
And goodwife Chat he set to scodl, till both parteis, cried alas.
And D. Rat was not behind, whiles Chat his crown did pare,
I would the knave had be^ stark blind, if hodge had not his share.

Hod. Cham meetlie well sped alredie amongs, cham dressed like a coult
And chad not had the better wit, chad been made a doult.

Baily. Sir knave make have dicco^ were here, fetch him where ever he be,


Chat. Fie on the villian, fie, fie, that makes us thus agree.


Gam. Fie on him knave, with all my heart, now fie, and fie again,


D. Rat. Now fie on him may I best say, whom he has almost slain


Baily. Lo where he comes at kand, belike he was not fare,
Diccon here be two or three, thy company cannot spare.

Dic. God blesss you, and you may be blessed so many all at once,


Chat. Come knave, it were a good deed to gled the by cocks bones.
See not thy handiwarke, sir Rat can you forhear him?

Dic. A vengeance on those hands life, for my hands came not near him
The horsen priest has lift the pot in some of these alewives chaires.
That his head would not serve him belike, to come down the stairs.

Bai. Nay soft, thou may not play the knave, and have this language to
If thou thy tongue bridle a while; the better may thou do.
Confess the truth as I shall ask, and cease a while to fable,
And for thy fault I promise the, thy handling shall be reasonable.
Have thou not made a lie or two, to set these two by the ears?

Dic. What if I have? five hundred such have I seen within these seven years:
I am sorry for nothing else but that I see not the sport,
Which was between them when they met, as they themselves report.

Bay. The greatest thing master rat, ye se how he is dressed,


Dic. What devil need he be groping so deep, in goodwife Chat he^s nest


Baily. Yea but it was thy drift to bring him into the briars


Dic. Gods bread, has not such an old fool wit to save his ears?
He shows himself herein you see, so very coxe,
The Cat was not-so madly alured by the Fox,
To run into the snares, was set for him doubtless,
For he leapt in for mice, and this sir John for madness.

D. Rat. Well and ye shift no better, ye losel, lither, and lasie,
I will go near for this, to make ye leap at a Dasie.
In the kings name master Baily, I charge you set him fast,

Dic. What fast at cards or on sleep? it is the thing I did last.


D. Rat Nay fast in fetter false varlet, according to thy deeds


Baily. Master doctor there is no remedy, I must entreat you needs
Some other kind of punishment,

D. Rat. Nay by all Halows
His punishment if I may judge, shall be naught it is but the gallous

Baily. That were too sore, a spiritual man to be so extreme.


D. Rat. Is he worthy any better, sir how do you judge and deam?


Baily. I grant him worthy punishment, but by no wise so great.


Gam. It is a shame ich tell you plain, for such false knaves entreat
He has almost undone us all, that is as true as steel:
And yet for all this great add, cham never the nere my neele.

Baily. Can you not say any thing to that diccon, with least or most:


Dic. Yea mary sir, thus much I can say well, the neele is lost.


Baily. Nay can not thou tell which way that nedle may be found?


Dic. No by my fay sir, though I might have an hundred pound.


Hodg. Thou lier lickdish, did not say the neele would be gitton?


Dic. No hodge, by the same token you were at that time beshitten,
For fear of Hobgobling, you wot well what I mean;
As long as it is sense, I fear me yet ye be scarce clean.

Baily. Well master rat, you must both learn, and teach us to forgeve,
Since Diccon has confession ma^de, and is so clean shreve,
If ye to me consent, to amend this heavy chance,
I will enjoin him here some open kind of penance:
Of this condition, where ye know my fee is twenty pence,
For the bloodshed, I am agreed with you here to dispense;
Ye shall go quite, so that ye grant the matter now to run,
To end with mirth among us all, even as it was begun.

Chat. Say ye master vicar, and he shall sure confess to be your detter,
And all we that be here present, will lobe you much the better.

D. Rat. My part is the worst, but since you all hereon agree,
Go even to master Baily, let it be so for me.

Baily. How say thou diccon, art content th^s shall on me depend?


Dic. Go to M. Baily, say on your mind, I know ye are my friend.


Baily. Then mark you well, to recompense this thy former action,
Because thou have offended all, to make them satisfaction;
Before their faces here kneel down, and as I shall the teach,
For thou shall take an oath of hodges leather breach,
First for master Doctor, upon pain of his curse,
Where he will pay for all, thou never draw thy pursse:
And when ye meet at one pot, he shall have the first pull,
And thou shall never offer him the cup, but it be full.
To goodwife chat thou shall be sworn, even on the same wise,
If she refuse thy money once, never to offer it twice.
Thou shall be bound by the same here, as thou do taken
When thou may drink of free cost, thou never forsake it:
For gammer gurtons sake, again sworn shall thou be.
To help her to her nedle again if it dolie in thee,
And likewise be bound, by the virtue of that
To be of good abering to Gib her great Cat:
Last of all for Hodge, the oath to scanne,
Thou shall never take him for fine gentleman.

Hogd. Come on fellow Diccon, chalbe even with thee now,


Baily. Thou will not stick to do this Diccon I trow,


Dic. No by my fathers skin, my hand down I lay it?
Look as I have promised, I will not denay it,
But Hodge take good heed now, thou do not beshite me.

And gave him a good blow on the buttocks. Hodg. Gods heart thou false villain
do thou bite me,


Baily. What Hodge does he hurt the or ever he begin?


Hodg. He thrust me into the buttocks, with a bodkin or a pin,
I say Gammer, Gammer?

Gam. How now Hodge, how now?


Hodg. Gods malt Gammer gurtons.


Gam. Thou art mad ich trow.


Hodg. Will you see the devil Gammer?


Gam. The devil son, god bless us.


Hodg. Chould iche were hanged Gammer.


Gam. Mary se ye might dress us.


Hodg. Chaue it by the mass Gammer


Gam. What, not my neele Hodge?


Hodg. Your neele Gammer, your neele.


Gam. No fie, do but dodge.


Hodg. Cha found your neele Gammer, here in my hand be it


Gam. For all the lobes on earth Hodge, let me see it.


Hadg. Soft Gammer.


Gam. Good Hodge.


Hodg. Soft ich say, tarry a while.


Gam. Nay sweet Hodge say truth, and not me begile.


Hodg. Cham sure on it, ich warrant you, it goes no more astray


Gam. Hodge when I speak so fair: will still say me nay?


Hodg. Go near the light gammer, this well in faith good luck:
Chwas almost undone: it was so far in my buttocke

Gam. It Is mine own dear neele Hogde, sikerly I wot,


Hodge Cham I not a good son gammer, cham I not?


Gam. Christ blessing light one thee, have made me for ever,


Hodge Ich knew that ich must find it, else chould a had it never.


Chat. By my troth gossip gurton, I am even as glad,
As though I mine own self as good a turn had:

Baily. And I by my conscience, to see it so cone forth,
Rejoice so much at it as three nedles be worth.

D. Rat. I am no whit sorry to see you so rejoice,


Dic. Nor I much the glader for all this noice.
Yet say gramercie Diccon, for springing of the game,

Gam. Gramercie Diccon twenty times; o how glad cham.
If that chould do so much, your masterdome to come hither,
Master Rat, goodwife Chat, and Diccon together:
Cha but one halfpeny, as far as iche know it,
And chil nor rest this night till iche bestow it.
If ever ye love me, let us go in and drink,

Baily. I am content if the rest think as I think.
Master Rat it shall be best for you if we so do,
Then shall you warm you and dressed your self too.

Dic. Soft sirs, take us with you, the company shall be the more,
As proud comes behind they say, as any goes before,
But now my good masters since we must be gone,
And leave you behind us, here all alone*
Since at our last ending, thus merry we be,
For Gammer Gurtons nedle sake, let us have a plaudity.

FINIS.

