THE Twelve Months OR, A pleasant and profitable discourse of every action,
whether of Labor or Recreation, proper to each particular Month, branched
into Directions relating to Husbandry, as Plowing, Sowing, Gardening, Planting,
Transplanting, Plashing of Fences, felling of Timber, ordering of Cattle and
Bees, and of Malt, etc. AS ALSO Of Recreations, as Hunting, Hawking, Fishing,
Fowling, Coursing, Cockfighting. To which likewise is added a necessary advice
touching Physic, when it may, and when not be taken. Lastly, every Month is
shut up with an Epigrame. with the Fairs of every Month. By M. Stevenson.

Humida solstitia, atque hiemes orate serenas.

Virg. London, Printed by M. S. for Thomas Ienner, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange, 1661.

John Earl of Bute etc.


To the READER.
Gentle READER.
I Have in this slender Tractate endeavored thy satisfaction, be thy Condition
what it will, gentle, or simple, Citizen or Countryman; sure I am there is
something in it will please most men, and nothing can please all, Pro captu
lectoris habent sua fata libelli, and hereunto it is a book never out of
season, and (if my hopes flatter me not with a Tympany, for a pregnant womb) it
will take with the most, especially the Judicious, for such are the contents,
and prodesse volunt, and delectare.

For matters of Husbandry, Huswifery, fishing, fowling, and the like exercises,
I confess them somewhat out of my Ro^^l, but I assure you to pleasure you and
satisfy my self, I have consulted the most approved Authors, and given you
here the Cream and marrow of their several experiences in their own express
Characters; nil dictum, quod non dictum prius.

As for the Fairs, if they make our labor look like an Almanac we have
brought our Hogs to a fair Market: yet this must be our defense, Though we
write of the Months, we have nothing to do with the days, except in the
Fairs, which (for ought I know) may sell a Book. Thus Courteous Reader, wishing
thee as much pleasure and profit in reading these papers, as I had in writing
them, I take my leave.

Your Friend, M. Stevenson.

Ianuarius 31 Days

JANUARY.
IT is now January, and winged Time (the measure of motion) begins to turn the
Wheel of his Revolution. The smiling fields and youthful meadows have lost
their parti-colored Liveries; The Woods have parted with their beauteous
verdour, and the amorous Trees that but the other day with out-stretcht arms
embraced each other, stand now at a distance. In a word, the White has routed
the Green Regiment, root and branch. The Squirrel now (that Hector that covers
her back with her Tail) survayes the Nut and the Maple all day, and at night
goes to Bed in her Kell, whilst the proud Oak stoops to the Axe; and the
Hedgehog rowles up himself like a football, and with his natural
fortification stands on his own guard. The Blackbird finds thin shelter in the
bush, and therefore leaves not a berry on the thorn. The Fisherman has now
but a cold Trade, and the frostnipt Sentinel keeps a hard watch, when he dares
not for his ears stir off though he be ready to eat his fingers end. The
Cook-room now is not the worst place in the Ship: And the Shepherd has a
bleak seat on the Mountains. The dried grass is the horses Ordinary, and the
Meal of Oats and Beans makes him trot through the Mire. The Garden Earth is
turned up for her Roots. The Load-horse has his full back burden to the Mill,
and the Wench should not ride on it were she not light. The Thresher in the
Barn tryes the strength of his flaile, and counts it better employment then
washing of Sheep. To conclude; the Hills and the Valleys, and the flowery Meads
do penance in a sheet of snow for their luxury and pride in the Spring;
whilst the hard hearted frost locks up the Worms, and the Pismires, and the
blind Velveteers in the earth.

Hitherto I have shown you in part what January is, which indeed is rather
felt then understood. I now come to advise you, and in the first place, have a
care of Bleeding, except in case of b^uises by falls or otherwise, there your
Physician will advise you to it to prevent accidents that do commonl^ attend
such maladies: Or else in violent Haemorrages, or bleeding at Nose, for
revulsion sake; but truly as to Feavors or Plurysies they have their speedier,
safer, and more proper Cures without Phlebotomy. I therefore give thee the same
advice I mean to practice my self; that is, now and then in snow and frosty
weather, to thaw your congealed veyns, and cherish it with a glass or two of
rich and rasie wines, which are chiefly chosen by these five F's, Fortia,
Formosa, Fragrantia, Frigida, Frisca. Neither would I have you too busy with
Physic without great occasion constrain, for men's bodies are bound up as the
earth in frosty weather, and therefore not without extreme danger are purging
medicines exhibited to open the pores of the body for cold and pernicious Air
to enter. Be sure you have a care of taking the least cold head or foot, for
this Month Rheumes and Phlegm do extraordinarily increase. To fast long is
exceeding hurtful, it fills the stomach and intestines with wind, and renders
thee subject to Collicks, Convulsions, and Illiack passions. But to drink a
draught of Ale and Wormwood wine mixed in a morning, comforts the heart,
scowers the Maw, and purges the Ureters, and is good against gravel or stone.
Let your diet be such as is naturally of a moderate heat, and you may eat a
more liberal meal now then in Summer, for the heat of the Stomach is more
intense, and vigorous to concoct what it requires or receives, then it will be
when the Sun with his nearer neighborhood calls forth that now self-centered
heat to the extimous and cutaneous parts of the body. As to Apparel, I hold it
a needless thing to prescribe, for I presume frost and snow will convince thee
that a freez Jacket, will do ye more service then a Taffita doublet.

For the Country man if he live in stiff simple clayes, let him in this Month
in the first place, plow up his pease earth, that it may lie and take bait
before it be sown: But if he live in fertile and well mixed soyles, then in
this month he shall begin to fallow the field he will lay to rest the next
year; but if he live upon hard barren earths (of which chiefly I write) then
in this Month he shall water his Meadows and pasture grounds, and drain his
arable grounds, especially where he intends to sow pease, oats, or barley the
Seed time following: also he shall stub up all such rough grounds as he intends
to sow the next year.

Now measure and trim up your garden mould, and comfort with manure, sand, or
lime the Roots of all barren fruit Trees, and cleanse away moss and
superfluous branches from them. You may plant, or transplant all manner of
fruit trees, as Apples, Pears, Plums, Cherries, Filbert, Walnut. The fittest
time of setting all manner of Plants or Quicksets (the weather open and the
ground easy) is from the change to the first Quarter.

You may now geld such Cattle as ye intend (the state of the Moon always
considered) and such as are sick or weak ye may drench, Kine with Verjuice and
London-Triacle, and Horses with your common Mashes of water, and ground Malt,
and a little Bran. The time is good to rear Calves, and remove Bees.

Now for the recreations of this Month, they are within, or without doors,
within, as it relates to Christmasse; it shares the cheerful carrolls of the
wassell cup, Beasts, Fowls, and Fish come to a general Execution, and
Hecatombs are sacrificed to cold weather, and Cards and Dice purge many a
purse, and the ventrous youth show their agility in shooing the Wild-Mare. The
Lord of misrule is no mean man for his time; a good fire heats all the house,
and a full Alms-basket sets the beggar to his prayers, Masking, and Mumming,
and choosing King and Queen, the meeting of the friendly, and the mirth of the
honest.

For out door Recreations. Now does the early Hunts-man prevent the Sunrise,
and watches the Stag to his Leire, (which this month he expects in the Corn
fields of wheat and Rye) and having lodged him, home he comes for his Horn and
his deep mouthed Quire; now are the pampered Pransers trampling the Plains as
greedy of sport as their Masters. Now are the finders cast off, and after a
ring or two about, in go the full mouthed chorus, and now the Hunts-man
comforts the Hounds with his Horn, and the sight of the Stagg. Now the Horses
try their heels, and the Riders their throats, whilst the empty Woods Echo the
thunder with a double resound: The horses sweat, the Hunts-man frets, and the
Stag is imbost, the next and last refuge is a set, or a Soil, then comes the
death of the Dear, and the Talbot supples his Tongue, and his Master his hands
with the reeking blood.

Now the Woodcock and the Pheasant pay their lives for their feed, and the Hare
after a Course makes his Hearse in a Pie. The Ox and the fat Weather now
furnish the Market; and the poor Coney is so ferrited that she cannot keep in
her Borough; The Curryer, and the Lime-Rod are the death of the Foul, and a
long Piece, and a good water Spaniel are no bad company. The Faulcons Bells
ring the Mallards knell, and the Hare and the Hound put the Huntsman to the
horn. The barren Do subscribes to the dish, and the smallest seed makes sauce
for the greatest flesh, but the shoulder of an hog is a shooing horn for good
drink. The Maid is stirring betimes, and slipping on her shoes and her
Petticoat, groaps for the tinder box, where after a conflict between the steel
and the stone she begets a spark, at last the Candle lights on his March; then
upon an old rotten foundation of broaken boards she erects an artificial
fabric of the black Bowels of New Castle soil, to which she sets fire with as
much confidence as the Romans to their Funeral Pyles; the comfortable light
whereof is the good fellows Cynosure, and becomes more magnetic then the
Loadstone; for there he stays till like the fly he scorches himself in the
flame, which like that strange Lightning melts the Blade in the Scabberd, I
mean the plate in his Pocket, whilst he is making his offering to Ceres and
Bacchus. To conclude, this Month is the rich man's charge, and the poor man's
misery.

The Names of the principal Fairs in England, and Wales, observed in the Month
of January.
The 3 day at Llanibither: the 5 at Hicketford in Lancashire: the 6 being Twelf
day at Salisbury, at Bristow: the 7 day at Llanginny: the 25. day at Bristol,
at Churchingford, at Gravesend: the 31. at Llandyssel.

Reader, I have described this Month to you;
And what you ought, and what you ought not do.
If you my counsel follow, much good do ye,
If you neglect it, I say nothing to ye.
I tell you what this, or that writer says,
Yet on their sleeves, I will not pin your faith.
I write of work, and recreation too;
Which you will follow, that I leave to you.
Thus not to flatter I have taken pains,
That if you will not, I may have the gains*
Februarius 28 days

FEBRUARY.
NOw is the aspiring Sun got a Cock-stride of his climbing; and the humble
Valleys are covered with a Rug of snow, whilst the lofty Mountains obvious to
every blast are nipt to the heart with a cold. Neptune has glazed his wavy
Court, and left not ^o much as a Casement for his scaly subjects and finny
friends to look out at; who are therefore gone down to his Cellars to carouze
it to the Sun, that Ambassador of Heaven, that ere long will dissolve their
icy fetters, and pay his golden beams for their ransom. The Frog goes to seek
out the Paddock; and the Crow, and the Rook mislike their old Mates. The Usurer
now is lapt in his furs, and the poor makes his breath a fire to his fingers
ends. Beauty is maskt for fear of the Air, and the flea has his subterfuge
in the wool of a blanket. Cards and Dice have scarce yet got their Harvest in,
and Sack, and good Ale are the cause of civil Wars, Muscovia Commodities are
now in much request, and down beds, and quilted Caps are in the pride of their
service, whilst the Cook and (...) Pantler are men of no mean office. An apple
and a nutmeg make a merry Gossips feast; and the Ale and the Faggot are the
Victuallers merchandise. The delay of Lawsuits is the death of hope, and a
cold alms mak^s the beggar shrug. The term travelers makes the Shoo-makers
Harvest, and the Chaundle^s Cheese makes the Chalk walk apace. The Fishmonger
sorts his water-work for Lent, and beats the poor Stock Fish for his
stubbo^nness, whilst the Herring domineers as a Lord of great Service, and
though but yestarday a sorry Jacksprat, he calls himself King of Fishes. The
fruit of the Dairy makes a hungry Feast whilst fasting and mourning is the Life
of the poor, and the Dogs are grown lean for want of bones, and make good
Album Graecum a sca^ce Commodity. The Beasts of the forest have a bare feed,
and the hard Crufts try the beggars teeth. The barefooted Colt has a ragged
coat, and the half mewed h^ad ^isgraceth the Dear. The Shepherd has but
little pleasure in hi^ pipe; and the Soldier finds cold comfort in the sconce.
Penury pinches the Prisoners heart: and the deep fallowes weary the Hunts-man.
The Fisherman is now the Raker of the Sea, and every day sacrifices to his ow^
Net. The Air is sharp and piercing, and the winds blow cold: the Tavernes and
the Inns seldom lack guests; and the Ostler knows how to make p^ofit of his
hay. The hunting Horse is at the heels of the Hound, whilst the ambling Nag
carries the Physician and his foot cloth. The blood of youth begins to spring,
and the sap to rise up out of the Root; Physic has now work among weak
bodies; and he looks well to himself that catches not an Ague before the end of
this Month: there is nothing pleasing but hope that the days will lengthen and
time be more comfortable. And for the small pleasure that I find in it, I will
thus briefly conclude of it: It is the poor man's pick-purse, and the miser's
Cutthroat; the enemy of pleasure, and the exercise of patience.

In this Month eschew all such things as oppilate and stop the Liver and Veins
or do thicken the blood, of which kind are Milk and Rice, and slimy fish; and
yet also forbear meddling with Physic or blood-letting, except necessity does
urge, and the Learned advise you. I gave you a hint of an Ague before, and if
you have a mind to one catch cold and I will warrant you the other.

Now methinks I see (...) Husbandman dress afresh his rusty Plowshare to tear
up the stiffer clay grounds, and the Gardener sending his Seeds their several
beds, and the Garden mould is made a Grave for the Beans and the Pease.

The fliffer and colder the ground is, begin so much the sooner to Plow Prune
and trim your fruit Trees, and cleanse them from moss and Cankers, and from
super^luous Branches, as in January. The best time of grafting from the time of
removing your stock is the next Spring, for that saves a second wound and a
repulse of Sap, if your Stock be of sufficient bigness to take a graffe from
as big as your thumb, to as big as a man's arm, you may graffe less (which I
like) and bigger, which I like not so well. The best time of the year is in
the last part of February or March, and the beginning of April, when the Sun
with his heat begins to make the sap stir more rankly about the change of the
Moon, before you see any great appearance of leaf or flowers, but only knots,
and buds, and before they be proved, though it be sooner; Cherries, Pears,
Apricock^, Quinces, and Plums would be gathered, and grafted sooner in February.

Forward Conyes begin now to kindle, and the fat grounds are not without Lambs,
and it is now a good time for Ewes to bring forth, that their Lambs may be
strong, and able before May day to follow their Damms over the rough fallow
Lands and deep water furrows which weak and feeble Lambs are not able to do;
and although you yean thus early in the winter when there is little or no
grass springing, and the sharpness of the weather also be dangerous, yet the
Husbandman must provide sweet fodder and convenient shelter, and the Shepherd
must bestirre himself, and be vigilant to prevent all incident evils and
inconveniences, and though the Ewe at the first be somewhat scarce of milk, yet
as the warm weather increases and the grass begins to spring, so will her
Milk spring also.

Now does the stood overrun his banks and imitates the Ocean, and the gaping
Oyster leaves his shell in the streets, while the house topping Peacock is
pie-bakt for his Pride. Now runs the poor Hare for neither Pins nor points, but
her life, and like that Senator of Rome is followed and found out by her
scent, to the loss of her life; and unequal Fate she must run for it, or with
Cocles duel an Army. All the night when her eyes should be shut, she is forced
to open her mouth in natures behalf, and all the day she sets melan^^^^^ in a
Bush, her open eyes are her Watch-Towers, and (...) her Sentinels, always
expecting an alarm from the enemy who too too often call her out and make her
lead them a dance, but at last their deep notes are her knell and the Huntsmans
Womb is her Tomb; as at fairest after a Course she makes her hearse in a Pie.
Thus ends this eager pursuit after many doublings and windings squattings and
other shifts and sleights, and where is all the spoil? but a pint of butter to
a Kennel of Hounds; nevertheless, though little she is not without profit and
worth the having: Her flesh, first, is good for all manner of Fluxes, her
Brains good to make children breed their teeth with ease, her Wool excellent to
stanch blood, her Gall sovereign for the eyes, her blood to kill Rheum and
Worms, her stiffling bone being worn takes away the pain of the Crampe, with
many other good things beside, and I believe her Furre-gown would do no hurt
to the knees that labor of a cold gout, especially in this cold moist and raw
Month of February.

The Names of the principal Fairs in England, and Wales, observed in the Month
of February.
THe 1 day at Bromely in Lancashire: the 2 day at Bath, at Bicklesworth, at
Bugworth, at Farringdon, at Codlemew, at Lin, at Maidstone, at Reading, at
Becklesfield, at the Vizes in Wiltshire, at Whiteland: the 3 day at Boxgrove,
at Brimley: the 6 day at Stafford for 5 days with all kind of Merchandise,
without arrest: the 8 day at Tragarron: the 9 day at Landasse: the 14 at
Owndlee in Northamptonshire, at Feversham: the 24 at Baldoc, Bourn, Froom,
Henley upon Thames, Highamserries, Tewksbury, Vppingham, Walden: the 26 at
Stanford, an Horse Fair.

My Web is woven; how ye like my task,
That is the thing that I shall never ask.
If ye applaud, or l^ugh at him that penned it,
All Is one to me, (...) ^isse your Muse and mend it.
I play all Parts, and Virgil-like, appear
A Shepherd, Plowman, and a Cavalier:
Yet labor still in a Laconick style:
As Carr-men drive, and whistle all the while.
Thus end my Lines; my Lines did I these call?
My Packthread rather that must wind up all.
31 Days Marsius

MARCH.
IT is now March, and the Northern Wind dryes up the Southern dirt; the
tender lips are now maskt for fear of chopping, and Pomatum is the
Chamber-Maids lip-salve for the wounds of the wind. The soft and delicate hands
must not be ungloved; but the good Huswife hasts to the open fields, and
bleaches her linen with the breath of Aeolus, which in dirty December had
gotten the yellow Jaundies, and this is the only time to purge them. The Sun is
now risen a pretty step to his fair height, and Saint Valentine calls the
Birds together, where Nature is pleased with the variety of love, and the
little winged Familists make election of their Mates for building, and keeping
of house this Spring. The Fishes, and the Frogs fall to their manner of
Generation, leaving the spawn floating upon the face of the Brooks, and the
Adder dies to bring forth her unnatural frye. Now the Brewer is (...) to store
the Cellars with March Beer, which brewed in thi^ (...) keeps excellently well,
and has the honor to be called (...) ^he Air is sharp but the Sun is
comfortable and cherishes the Banks with (...) Beam, whilst the boisterous
winds purge and saluti^^ra^e the grosser Air. The days begin to lengthen
apace: the forward Gardens give many a fine Sallet, and a nose-gay of Violets
is a present, for a Lady: The Prime-Rose is now in his Prime, and the Trees
begin to bud, and the green spices of grass to peep out of the earth Now is
Nature as it were waking out of her sleep; and sends the Traveller to survay
the walks of the World. The Farrier now is the Horses Physician, and horse
spice and Diapent^ sets the Apothecaryes boys at work. The Thrush and the
Blackbird make a charm in the springs that are young and tender: and the fat
dog feeds the sharp Faulcon in the Mew. The Milk Maid is up as soon as the Sun,
and sings away sorrow to the Cimballs of the Cowes Teats whilst she robs the
Calves of the bounty of nature, she with her best beloved talks away
tiresomnesse to the Market, and where the meaning is honest kind words do no
hurt. The Football now tryes the legs of the strongest, and merry marches
continue good fellowship; but beware of your shins and a broken leg: In sum,
It is a time of much labor, whereof I am about to discourse, and to be short,
I hold it the servant of nature and the Schoolmaster of Art; the hope of labor
and the subject of Reason.

It is now time, honest Countryman, to make an end of sowing of all sorts of
small pulse, and to begin to sow Oats, Barley, and Rye, which is called
March-Rye. Graffe all sorts of Fruit Trees, and with young Plants, and Syens
replenish your Nurcery. Cover the Roots of all Trees that are bared, and with
fat and pregnant earth lay them close, and warm. If any Trees grow barren bore
holes in the Roots, and drive pins or hard wedges of Oak wood therein, and
that will produce fruitfulness. Transplant all sort of Summer Flowers,
especially the Crown imperial, Tulips, Hyacinths, and Narcissus of all shapes
and colors. Cut down underwood for fuel and fencing; and look well to your
Cowes, for this is the principal time of Calving; and if you would be for a
March brood of Chickens, you must be sure to set your Hen in February in the
increase of the Moon, so that she may hatch or disclose her Chickens (...) ^he
increase of the next Moon, being in March, and one brood of March chickens is
worth three broods of any other, for then you shall have the best largest and
most kindly Chickens. You may if you please set Hens from March till October,
and have good Chickens but not after by any means, for the Winter is a great
enemy to their breeding; yet some will attempt to set them in Wintertime in
Stows or Ovens, but it is of little or no use with us in England, and though it
is confessed they may by that means bring forth, yet will the chickens be never
kindly good, nor profitable, but like the Planting of Lemon, Orange, and
Pomegranate Trees in our colder Climate, the fruits whereof come a great deal
short of the charges. If you chufe Hens to set, choose the eldest for they are
constant, and will set out their times. If you choose to lay, take the youngest
for they are lustier, and prone to the act of engendring, but for neither
purpose choose a fat Hen, for if you set her she will forsake her nest, and if
you keep her to lay, she will wax sloathfull, and neither delight in the one,
nor the other act of nature, such then are fitter for the dish then the
Hen-house. Turkies in this Month and the next lay all their Eggs, and always
sit in April when the weather is warm, to bring forth their tender brood.

In this Month the Humors of man's body begin to increase the tenth of it being
accounted the beginning of the Spring. Now look to your diet, for gross
feeding breeds gross and thick blood, and gross humors, therefore use meats
of good digestion* and such as breeds good juice (which Physicians call
Euchymia) and nourishes the body, as Veal, Lamb, and sucking Rabbets, these
are good for weak stomachs; Smallage and Nettle Pottage make good blood, and
the diet for the Rheum does now many a good cure. It is now good to purge, and
clarify the blood by potions, and to take away a little of the grosser blood
is good to breath the veins, which thereby will have more room for the rest to
stir and clarify it self in, or any such way as the learned Doctors shall
prescribe the patient, or as the cause of the disease shall require: also this
Month sweet meats and drink are commendable.

For this Months Recreation, it consists of profit as much as Sport: It is
either sho^^^^g or Hunting; shooting in Muskets or Fowling pieces at the (...)
cowes and such Vermin as constantly wait upon the yeaning Ewes to pick out the
eyes of their new fallen weak and feeble Lambs. To the same end also is the
exercise of Hunting the Fox and Badger, which would else hunt the poor, silly
Lambs and devout them to Feast his Cubbs. The Fox Chase is pleasant for the
time, for so soon as ye have unkenneld him, by reason of his strong Scent
there are few or no defaults, but a continued sport if you observe his Haunts,
and stop up his Kennels, and prevent his earthing; the worst is, he runs bad
ground either for horse or foot, but the enterprise is noble, and necessary.
For the Badger, his is night work, and he is rather baited then hunted adays.
If you look for the Hare you shall be sure to have her in low grounds, for in
March she always sets wet bretch.

The Names of the principal Fairs in England, and Wales, observed in the Month
of March.
THe 1 day at Llangadog, at Llangevellah, at Madrim: the 3 day at
Bremwell-braks in Norfolk: the 4 at Bedford, at Oakham: the 8 at Tragarron, the
12 at Spaford; at Wooburn, at Wrexam, at Bodnam, and Alsome in Norfolk: the 13
at Wye, Bodwin in Cornwall, at Mountbowin: the 17 at Parrington: the 18 at
Sturbridge: the 20 at Ailesbury, at Durham: the 24 ^t Llannerchemith: the 25 at
S. Albanes, Ashwell in Hartf. at Burton, at Cardigan, at Car Walden in Essex,
at Huntington, at S. Jones in Worcester, at Malden, at Malpas, at Newcastle, at
Northampton, at Onay in Buckingham, at Woodstock, at Whiteland, at great
Chatte: the 31 at Malmsbury.

Gallants look to it! Cupid has got his Bow,
And strung't with wanton eyes to shoot at you;
And now the Spring has filled your veins with blood,
Active and fresh, he is not to be withstood.
Beware too how your veins you over heat.
If not for fear of lusts, for fevers yet,
And give your vigorous spirits an allay
With cooling drinks and clarified Whay.
Ceres and Bacchus, Wine and Dainties, these
Are those that wound ye, Venus else would freeze.
Aprilis 30 Days

APRIL.
WElcome sweet April! thou gentle Midwife of May's Pride, and the Earths green
Livery. Methinks I hear the little sweet birds making ready their wa^bling
Accents to entertain the Rising Sun and welcome him from the Antipodes and
those remoter Regions that have all this Winter robbed us of his comfortable
beams and benign influence. But now the Cuckoe is come and the laborious Bees
look about for honey. The Nightingale begins to tune her melodious throat
against May: and the Sunny showers perfume the Air. The Dew hangs in Pearls
upon the tops of the grass; while the Turtles sit billing on the little green
boughs. The beasts of the Wood look out into the plains: And the Fishes out of
the deep run up into the shallow waters. The Fowls of the Air begin to build
their Nests, and the senseless Creatures gather life into their bodies. The
Sun with his refulgent rays enlightens and warmes the Air, and the little
Flies to Flock and swarm in it. Now the Muses try the Poeta^ters in the
Pamflets. Time is now gracious in Nature, and Nature in time. The Air is
wholesome, and the earth pleasant, and the Sea not uncomfortable. The Trowt
begins to play in the Brooks, and the Salmon leaves the salt Sea, and in spite
of Wind and Tide will sport it in the fresh Rivers, and like the Hyeroglyphick
Snake, takes his Tail in his Mouth, and mounts it over the Mill-Dams. The
Garden Banks are full of gay Flowers; and the Thorn and the Plumme are white
with fair blossoms. The March Colt begins to play; and the Cosset Lamb is
learning (...) in the Chimney Corner. The youth of the Country m^ke ready for
the Morris-dance, and the Merry Milkmaid supplies them with ribbands her true
Love had given her. The little Fishes lie nibling at the bait; and the Porpus
plays in the pride of the Tide. The Shepherds Pipe entertains the Princes of
Arcadia with pleasant Roundelayes: And the healthful Soldier has a march of
delight. The Aged feel a kind of youth; and youth has a spirit full of life
and activity: the Aged hairs refreshen; and the youthful cheeks are as red as
a Cherry: The Lark and the Lamb look up at the Sun, and the Labourer is abroad
by the dawning of the day. The Sheeps eye in the Lambs head tell kind-hearted
Maids strange tales; and Faith and Troth make the true Lovers Knot: It were a
World to set down the worth of this Month; for it is Heavens blessing, and the
Earths Comfort; It is the Messenger of many pleasures; the Courtiers Progress,
and the Farmers profit; the Laborers Harvest, and the Beggars Pilgrimage. In
sum, there is much to be spoken of it, but to avoid tediousness I hold it in
all that I can see in i^, the Jewel of Time, and the Joy of Nature.

In the month of April finish up all your Barley Seed, and begin to sow your
Hemp and Flax, sow your Garden Seeds and Plant all sorts of Herbs, finish your
graffing in the Stock, but begin your principal inauguration, for then the
rind is most pliant and gentle. Open your Hives, and give your Bees free
Liberty to look into the Garden and the blossoming buds; leave to succor them
with food, and let them alone to labor for their living.

Now cut down all great Oak timber, for now the Bark will rise and be in
season for the Tanner. Now scower your Ditches, and gather such manure as you
make in the Streets, or high ways into great and convenient heaps together.
Now also lay your Meadows and slight your Corn ground; gather away stones,
and repair your highways; set Oziers and Willowes, and cast up the banks and
mines of all decayed fences. As yet ye may graffe or proine Vines, and also set
Citrons, Melons, Cucumbers, Artichoaks, and Pole-hops. And you that are
Tanners, it is your season now to look out for the ruff skins of the lofty
looking Oak that yields to good Day-men natures abundance.

The best time to put your Stallion and Mares together is about the Middle of
last Month, if you have any graffe, and you should have great care for that
purpose, and one foal falling in March is worth two failing in May, because he
passes as it were two winters in a year, and is thereby so hardened, that
almost nothing can afterward impair him: And the best time to take your Horse
from the Mares again is at the end of April or middle of May, a months
continuance together is ever sufficient; but be sure to put them together in
the increase of the Moon, for foals got in the Wane are not accounted strong
and healthful.

In this instant Month of April the pores of man's body are opened by the
approach of the Sun, and apt to receive Physic, and they that refuse the same,
I commit them to the benefit of Nature, for of all times of the year, this is
the best to prevent causes of sickness, or for speedy Remedy in extremities,
for now nature does renew strength through all the body of man, so that where
sickness happens she soon disburdeneth her self by the assistance of
Physic, and of this be confident, what cannot be done now will hardly be ever
capable of Remedy after: Take time therefore by his foretop for he is bald
behind; you may very safely either take purging Medicines or any physic your
approved Physician shall advise you to. You may Bathe freely or bleed, provided
the Patient be not under fourteen years, or above fifty six Old, or be
exceeding fat or very lean; in such cases, by all means abstain. Lastly, Use
wholesome Diet that breeds good sanguine Juice, such as Pullets, Capons, sucking
Veal, Beef not above three years Old, a draught of morning milk fasting from
the Cow, Grapes, Raysons, and Figs be good before meat, Rice with Almond Milk,
birds of the Field, Feasants and Partridges, and fishes of Stony Rivers, Hen
Eggs potcht and such like. Use wholesome recreation, for then moderate exercise
there is no better physic.

The Names of the principal Fairs in England and Wales, observed in the Month
of April.
THe 2 day at Hitchin, at Nerthsteet, at Rochford: the 3 at Leek in
Staffordshire: the 5 at Wallingford, the 7 at Darby: the 9 at Billingsworth:
the 11 at Newport-pagnel: the 22 at Stafford: the 23 at Amphil, at Bewdley, at
Brewton, at Bristock, at Bils^n, at Bu^y in Lancashire, at Castlecombes, at
Charing, at Chichester, at Engfield in Sussex, at Gilford, at Bishopshatfield,
at Hinningham, at Ipswich, at Kisborough, at Lonquer, at Northampton, at Nutlay
in Sussex, at S. Pombes, at Sabridgworth, at Tamworth, at Wilton, at Wortham,
at Riliborough, at Harbin in Norfolk, at Sapsar in Hartfordsh. The 25 at Bourn
in Lincolnsh. at Buckingham, at Calne in Wiltshire, at Cliffe in Sussex, at
Colebrock, at Dunmow in Essex, at Darby, at Innings in Bucking. at Oakham, at
Vtroxiter, at Winchhombe: the 26 at Tenderden in Kent, at Clear, at Sudbury the
last Thursday, Friday, and Saturday in April.

Hail April, true Medea of the Year,
That make all things young and fresh appear.
What praise, what thanks, what commendations due
For all thy pearly drops of morning Dew?
When we despair, thy seasonable showers
Comfort the Corn, and cheer the drooping Flowers;
As if thy Charity could not but impart
A shower of Tears to see us out of heart.
Sweet, I have penned thy praise, and here I bring it,
In confidence the Birds themselves will sing it.
Majus 31 Days

MAY.
NOw comes that merry May Day so long expected, hoped, and prayed for of the
Fodder-scan^ed Farmer, for now shall his almost famished Beasts break up their
tedious Lent; now is his mouth full of thanks, and theirs full of grass; his
heart full of joy, and their bellies full of food. Now gentle Zephyrus fans the
sweet Buds, and dripping Clouds water fair Flor^^ great Garden; the Sunbeams
bring forth fair Blossoms; and the perfumed Air refreshes every spirit; the
Flowery Queen now brings forth her Wardrobe, and richly Embroydereth her green
Apron. The Nymphs of the Woods in consort with the Muses, sing an Ave to the
Morning, and a Vale to the Evening. The male Deer puts out the velvet head, and
the pagged Do is near her Fawning. The Sparhawk now is drawn out of the Mew,
and the Fowler makes ready his Whistle for the Quail; the Lark sets the Morning
Watch, and the Nightingale the Evening. The beautified Barges keep the Streams
of (...) ^weet Rivers, like so many pleasant Bowers; whilst the dappled
Mackarel with the shade of a Cloud is taken prisoner in the Ocean. The tall
young Oak is cut down for a May Pole, and the frolic Fry of the Town prevent
the rising Sun, and with joy in their faces, and boughs in their hands, they
march before it to the place of Erection; and if any kind Sweetheart left her
Maidenhead in a Bush, she has good luck if she find it again next May Day; The
Sithe and the Sick^e are the Mowers furniture; and a month of fair Weather
makes the Labourer merry. The Physician now prescribes the cold Whey to his
Patient, and the Apothecary gathers the Crystal Dewy Drops for a Medicine.
Butter and Sage are now the wholesome Breakfast, but fresh Cheese and Cream are
meat for a dainty mouth; the early Peascods and Strawberries want no price with
great Bellies; but the Chicken and the Duck are fatted for the Market; the
sucking Rabbet is frequently taken in the Nest; and many a Gosling never lives
to be a Goose. In a word, it is the month wherein Nature has her full of
mirth, and the Senses are stored with delights; It is therefore from the
Heavens a grace, and to the Earth a gladness; I hold it a sweet and delicate
Season, the Variety of Pleasures, and the Paradise of Love.

In the month of May, sow Barley upon all light sands and burning grounds, so
likewise order your Hemp or Flax, and also all sorts of tender Garden Seeds, as
are Cucumbers, and Melons, and all kind of sweet smelling Herbs, and Flowers;
Fallow your stiff Clayes; Summer-stir your mixed earth, and Soil all loose hot
sands; prepare all barren earth for Wheat and Rye; Burn Bait, Stub Gorse, and
Furs, and Root out Broom and Fern; Begin to Fold your Sheep, lead forth
Manure, and bring home Fuel, and Fencing; Weed your Winter Corn, follow your
common Works, and put all sorts of Grass either in Pasture, or Teather; You may
this month also put your Mares to Horse; let nothing be wanting to furnish the
Dayrie, and now look and Pot up your Butter; true it is, you may if you please
Pot it up at any time betwixt May and September, observing to do it in the
coolest time of the morning; yet the most principal season of all is in this
month of May; so now the Air is most temperate, and the Butter will take Salt
the best, and be the least subject to reesting.

If during the month of May before you Salt your Butter, you save a Lump
thereof, and put it into an earthen pan, and so expose it to the Sun during the
whole month you shall find it exceeding sovereign, and medicinable for
wounds, strains, aches, and such like grievances.

Now put off all your winter-fed-Cattel, for now they are scarcest, and
dearest; Put young Stiers, and dry Kine now to feed at fresh Grass, and away
with all Pease-fed Sheep, ^or the sweetness of G^as-Mutton will pull down their
prizes. You may weed your Gardens, and watch your Bees, which now call upon
your care; and so I shall conclude with the old P^overb, Set Sage in May, and
it will grow always.

Now you that set any price by your healths, rise early in the morning, for May
does not love any sluggards; Let such as be in health, and able, walk into the
Fields, and eat and drink betimes; for it is good and wholesome: Abstain from
all meats that be of a hot nature; and for such as be sick, it is a very good
time to let blood, or to take Physic; for such as be whole, God keep them in
health, and let them use Drinks that will cool, and purge the Blood, and all
other such Physical preventions as Art and Observation shall direct them; for
such as be sick, God send them good Physic, and learned Physicians; but above
all things, beware of Mountebanks, and old Wives tales; the one has no Ground,
and the other no Truth, but are both nothing but senseless babble, and apparent
cousenage.

If you take delight in Angling, I shall here suit your Baits and Fi^h to the
month, that with the more ease you may follow your Recreation; and therefore
know in the first place, If you angle for the Carp, you must have a strong Rod
and Line, of at least seven or nine hairs, mixed either with green or watchet
silk, your Cork long, large, and smooth, your Lead smooth, and close, and fixed
near the Hook, and the Hook almost of a three-peny compass; he is very dainty
to bite, but at some special hours, as very early in the morning, or very late
at night, and therefore he must be very much enticed with Paste; His best baits
are the Moss-worm, the Red-worm, or the Menew, for he seldom refuses them,
the Endis-worm is good for him next month; Let your Paste be of sour Ale,
white of Eggs, and Bread-crums, this much entiseth him. If you will Angle for
the Chub, Chevern, or Trout, all your Instruments must be strong and good; your
Rod dark and discolored, your Line strong, and short, and small too, your Hook
of a two-penny compass; and if you angle with a Fly, then nor Lead, nor Cork,
nor Quill; if otherwise, then all of an handsome and suitable proportion. Thus
much for present, I shall give you a further account in the next.

The Names of the principal Fairs in England, and Wales, observed in the Month
of May.
THe first day at And^ver, Brickhil^, Blackburn in Lancashire, Chelmsford,
Congerton in Cheshire, Fockingham, Grighowel, Kimar in Leighton, Leicester,
Lichfield if not Sunday, Lexfield in Suffolk, Linfield, Llatrissent, Louth,
Maidstone, Ocestre in Shropshire, Perin, Philips Norton, Pombridge, Reading,
Rippon, Stansted, Stow the old, Stocknailand, Tuxford in the Clay, Vske,
Harveril, Warwick, Wendover, Worsworth. The second day, at Powletlieley in
Caermathenshire. The third day, at Abergavenny, Ashborn-peak, Arundal,
Bramyard, Bala, Chersey neet Oatlands, Chipnam, Churchstretton in Shropshire,
Cowbridge in Glamorganshire, Darby, Denbigh, Elstow by Bedford, Hinningham,
Merthyr, Mounton, Non-eaton, Huddersfield, Ratsdale in Lancashire, Tidnam,
Waltham Abbey, Therford in Norfolk. The fifth day, at Marcheuleth in
Montgomery, Almesbury, Hoy, Knighton. The seventh day, at Bath, Beverley,
Hanstop, Newton in Lancashire, Hatesbury, Oxford, Stratford upon Avon,
Thunderley in Essex. The ninth day, at Maidstone. The tenth day, at Ashborn in
the Peak. The eleventh day, at Dunstable. The twelfth day, at Grayes Thorock in
Essex. The thirteenth at Bala in Merionethsh. The fifteenth, at Welchpool in
Montgogomery. The sixteenth, at Llangartanong in Cardigan. The nineteenth, at
Mayfield, Oderhill, Rochester, Wellow. The twentieth, at Malmesbury. The twenty
fifth, at Blackburn. The twenty ninth, at Crambrook. The thirty one, at
Pershore.

Why should the Priest against the May Pole preach?
Alas! it is a thing out of his reach:
How he the Error of the time condoles,
And says, it is none of the Celestial Poles:
Whist he (fond man!) at May-poles thus perplexed,
Forgets he makes a May Game of his Text.
But May shall triumph at a higher rate,
Having Trees for Poles, and Boughs to celebrate;
And the Green Regiment in brave array,
Like Kent's great Walking-Grove, shall bring in May.
Iunius 30 Days

JUNE.
NOw is it June, and the stately Heart is at layre in the high Wood, while the
Hare in a Furrow sits washing her face; the Leaves begin to whisper of the
blessings of the Air, whilst with outstretched Arms the Courtly Trees embrace
each other; the Lambs and the Rabbers run at Base in the sandy Warrens, and the
Plow-lands are covered with Corn; the Bull makes his walk like a master of the
field, and the broad-headed Ox bears the Garland of the Market; the
self-pleasing Angler with a Fly deceives the wanton Fish, while the little
Merline has the Partridge in the foot; the honey Dews sweeten the Air, and the
Sunny Showers are the comfort of the Earth; the Greyhound on the plain makes
the fair Course, and the deep-mouthed Hound makes the Music of the Woods; Idle
Spirits are banished the Lists of Honor, while the studious Brain brings forth
his Wonder; the azure Sky shows the Heavens are gracious, and the glorious Sun
glads the spirit of Nature; the Hay-makers are mustered to make an Army for the
field, where (not always in Order) they march under the Bag and the Bottle,
when betwixt the Fork and the Rake, there is seen great force of Arms; The Hook
and the Sickle are making ready for Harvest, and the Cuckoe is still in his
Note; the Meadow grounds are gaping for Rain, and the Corn in the Ear begins to
harden; the little Lads make them Pipes of the Straw, and they that cannot
Dance, will yet be Hopping; the Air now grows very warm, and the cooler
W^nds are very comfortable; the nimble Footman runs now with delight, and the
Sunburned Sayler rides his Wooden Horse with pleasure: Now does the
broad-spreading Oak comfort the weary Laboure^, while under his Shady Boughs he
sits singing to his Bread and Cheese; the Hay-cock is the poor man's Lodging,
and the fresh gliding River is his gracious Neighbor; Now the Faulcon and the
Tassel try their wings at the Partridge, and the fat Buck fills the great
Pasty; the Trees are all in their rich Array, but the poor silly Sheep is
turned out of his Coat; the Roses, and the sweet Herbs put the Distiller to his
Cunning, while the green Apples on the Tree are ready for the great-bellyed
Wives; Now begins the Hare to gather up her heels, and the Fox looks about him
for fear of the Hounds. In brief, I thus conclude, I hold it a sweet season,
the Senses perfume, and the Spirits comfort.

In the month of June, carry Sand, Marl, Lime, and Manure of what kind
soever, to your Land; Bring home your Coals, and other necessary Fuel, fetched
far off; Cut rank low Meadows, and make the first Return of your fat Cattle;
Gather early Summer Fruits; It is now good time to distill all your Simple
Waters, as Roses, and all manner of Herbs and Plants, and to make Syrups of
Flowers and Juyces; Now also gather what Herbs you mean to lay up for Winter
Service, but be sure you dry them in the shade, for the vigor of the Sun will
else exhale all the virtue from them, and leave only the Terreity or earthy
part, which signifies nothing in Physical Use; Nevertheless after you have
dried them in the shade, it is necessary to expose them in a Sive or brown
Paper to the Sun, to exhaust the Phlegm, and make them through dry, left when
you paper them up, they do in moist weather give again, and mould. Good
Husbands and Huswives are now be-weeding the Corn, and the Garden, and Shearing
their early fat sheep. The Season serves to set Rosemary and Gilly-flowers;
take heed of cutting Trees, Hedges, or Herbs with a knife, but rather gather
them with your Fingers; Now you may set Saffron, carry out Compost, make Hay,
rid Gardens of Snails, Ants, and Pismires.

I promised you in the conclusion of my last monthly Exercise a further
account of the Recreation of Angling, and therefore if you be for the Bleak,
Ruff, or Perch, you must know, they are Fishes which bite neither high nor
low, but (for the most part) in the midst of the water, therefore your Line
must be very lightly plumb'd, and far from the Hook; the Baits which most
entice them, besides the red Worm, are the House-fly in the Summer, and fat of
Bacon in the VVinter; In April, May, or June, they will bite at the Bob-worm,
or the Maggot, and in all other Seasons, they seldom refuse any Worm or
Canker; your Line would be small, and well armed from the Hook, a handful at
least, with small wyre, for the teeth of the Perch will else gnaw it asunder.

For a Chevern, the best standing to take him is, concealed, behind a Tree, or
an Arch of a Bridge, or a Wall; their haunts are in clear waters, which run
upon Sand or Gravel; and they are in best season from March till Michaelmass.

Now for the season in which all Baits are most profitable, you shall
understand that the red Worm will ^erve for small Fish all the year long, the
Maggot is good in July, the Bob and Dor in May, the brown Flies in June, Frogs
in March, Grasshoppers in September, Snails in August for the Roch, Bleak or
Gudgeon they serve the Pikes at any season; all Pastes are good in May, June,
or July, dried VVasps in May, Sheeps-blood and Cheese in April; for
Bramble-berries, Corn, and Seeds, they are good at the Fall of the Leaf;
Lastly, for your dead Flies, which are most proper for the Trouts, or
Graveling, you shall know that the Dun-fly is good in March, the Stone-fly is
good in April, the red Fly, and yellow Fly in May, the black Fly, the dark
yellow Fly, and the moorish Fly in June, the wasp Fly and the shell Fly in
July, and the cloudy dark Fly in August, and lastly, the tawny Fly part in May,
and part in June: You must understand, that these Flies are as well Artificial
as Natural; but to show you that, will be the work of the next sheet.

The Names of the principal Fairs in England, and Wales, observed in the Month
of June.
THe third day, at Alesbury. The 9. at Maidstone. The 11. at Holt, Kinwilgate
in Caermarthen, Llanybither, Llanwist, Llandilanador in Caermarthen, Maxfield,
Newborough, Newcastle in Emling, Okingham, Wellington, Newport panel, Skipton
upon Stow, Stremel in Norfolk. The 13. at Newtown in Kedewen in Montgomery. The
14. at Bangor. The 15. at Vizes, Pershore from Worcester 7. miles. The 16. at
Bealth in Brecknock, Newport in Reams. The 17. at Hadstock, Highamferries,
Lla^villing, Stowgreen. The 19. at Bridgenorth. The 21. at Ystaadmerick. The
22. at S. Albones, Shrewsbury, Derham in Norfolk. The 23. at Barnet, Castle
Ebithenin, Monmouth, Dolgelly in Merioneth. The 24. at Ashborn, S. Annes,
Awkinbrough, Bedford, Bedle, Beverley, Bishops Castle, Broughton-green Market,
Bosworth, Brecnock, Bromesgrove, Cambridge, Colchester, Crambrook, Croyden,
Farnham, Gl^cester, Hallifax, Hartford, Hartstone, Horsham, Hurst,
Kingston-war, Kirkham-Aund, Lancaster, Leicester, Lincoln, Ludlow, Pemsey,
Preston, Reading, Romford, Shaftsbury, Straitstock; Tu^bridge, Wakefield,
Wenlock, Westchester, Winfort, Wormsters, York. The 26. at Northop. The 27. at
Burton Tent, Folkstone, Llangdogain. The 28. at Hescorn, Marchenlero, at S.
Pomnes. The 29. at Ashwel, Bala, Barkamstead, Bennington, Bibalance, Bolton,
Bromely, Buckingham, Buntingford, Cardiffe, Gorgan, Hodesdon, Holdworth,
Horndon, Hudderfield, Lower Knotsford, Lempster, Llamorgan, Hanbeder,
Mansfield, Marlborough, Mountfort, Mounstril, Onay, Peterborough, Peterfield,
Ponstephen, Sarstrange, Sennock, Southam Stafford, Stockworth, Thorockgrayes,
Tring, Vpton, Wem, Westminster, Witney, Woolverhampton, Woodhurst, York. The
30. at Maxfield in Cheshire.

I have presented (Reader) to thine Eye,
Eclogues, and Georgicks, Junes Oecunomy,
The Oaten Pipe, the Sickle, and the Sithe,
The Man that labors, and the Boy that is biythe;
The Faucon, Partridge, Hounds, Hare, Bucks, Does,
Herbs, Plants, and Flowers, the Lilly and the Rose;
Pismires, and Bees, their various industries:
Grasshoppers, Cankers, Maggots, Worms, and Flies;
Sun, Moon, and Stars, and all the Elements,
Fire, Air, Earth, Water; These be the Contents.
Days 31 Julius

JULY.
IT is now July, and the Worlds great eye, the Sun, is mounted on the highest
loft of the Horizon. The grass of the Mountains withers, and the parched
earth would be glad of a draught of Rain to slake her thirst. Now does the
Farmer make ready his Teame, and the Carter with his whip has no small pride
in his whistle. The Cannons of Heaven begin to rattle, and when the fire is put
to the Charge, it breaks out among the Clouds, and the Stones of congealed
water cut off the ears of the Corn. The Cuckoe spits and storms, and the
blackness of the Clouds affright the faint-hearted. The Stag and the Buck are
now in their Pride and their prime, and the hardness of their Heads makes them
fit for the Horner. Now has the Sparhawk the Partridge in the foot: And the
Ferret is tickling the Coney in the Borough. The Sparrows make a charm upon
the green Bushes, till the Fowler comes and take them by douzens. The Lark
leads her young out of the Nest, for the Sithe and the Sickle will down with
the Grass and the Corn. The old Partridge calls her Covey in the Morning, and
the Shepherd folds his flock in the Evening. The Hedges are full of Berries,
the high ways of Rogues, and the lazy Limbs sleep out their dinner. Malt is
now above wheat with a number of mad people. Pears and Plumbs now ripen apace,
and being of a crude watery substance are the cause of many diseases. The
Butler now has the better of the Cook, and a fine shirt is as comfortable as a
freeze Jerkin. The Pipe and the Tabor now follow the Markets, and he that has
money gets many a good Pennyworth. The Ant and the Be are at work for their
Winter provision: and after a frost the Grassehopper is no more seen. Milk,
Butter and Cheese are the laborers diet; and a pot of good Beer quickens his
spirit. If there be no plague the people are healthful, for continuance of
motion is Natures preservative. The fresh of the morning, and the cool of the
evening are the time the Court walks; but the poor dusty Traveller treads out
the whole day. The Smelt is now in season, and the Lamprey out of the River
leaps into the Pie. The Soldier now has a hot March, and the Lawyer sweats in
his lined Gown. Don Pedro the Peddler has a long walk; and the dram of the
bottle sets his face on a fire. In a word, this is a profitable season, The
Laborers gain, and the rich man's wealth.

Now Courteous Country man, make Hay while the Sun shines, for a day slackt is
many pounds loft, chiefly when the weather is unconstant; sheare all manner of
field Sheep, and Summer-stir rich stiff grounds, soil all mixed earths, and
latter soil all loose hot sands. Let Herbs you would preserve now run to
seed. Cut off the stalks of outlandish Flowers, and cover the Roots with new
earth, so well mixed with manure as may be. Sell all ^uch Lambs as you feed for
the Butcher, and still lead forth sand, marle, Lime, and other manure, fence up
your Copses, graze your elder underwoods, and bring home all your field Timber.

In this Month use cold Herbs and cool diet, and abstain from physic by
reason of the intemperate heat of the weather. The Rivers now are more wholesome
and delightful then the Baths. Let the Sun be up before ye walk abroad in the
time of contagious diseases, as plagues or pestilence. Keep your chamber
windows shut, and open then only when the Sun shines with vigor, be sure
every morning to perfume your house well with Tarr and Angelica Seeds burnt in
a fire-pan, or chafing dish of coals, then which nothing is better. It is good
to drink a draught of Beer in a morning fasting, wherein Card^us Benedict^s
has been boiled, or else when you walk out in the morning, eat the quantity of
a hasle Nut of Venice Triacle and old con^erve of Roses equally mixed, it is as
good an Antidote as you can take, bleed not but upon necessity, and have a care
of over-heating your blood, and meddle neither with Bacchus nor Venus.

The Recreations and Country contentments more properly appertaining to this
Month are Bathing and swimming in the cool and Crystal Rivolets; or shooting
at Buts, Pricks, or Rivers. And Bowling (however termed like Cards and Dice
unlawful) I am sure is an healthful exercise and good for the body, and has
been prescribed for a recreation to great persons by the Learned Physicians, in
which there is a great deal of art and judgment to be seen especially in the
expert Bowler in choosing out his ground, and preventing the many hanging,
win^ing, and many turning advantages of the same, whether it be in open wide
places, or in Allies, and in this sport the choosing of the Bowl is not the
least of the cunning belongs to it; your fla^ Bowls being best for close
Allies, your round biased bowls for open grounds of advantage, and your round
Bowls like a Ball for green swarths that are plain and level. Others are
Fishing in the Crystal current for the fine speckled Trout, whose baits are
this Month either the Grasshopper or the humble Be, dried Wasps or dried
Hornets, or some of their young brood in the Combs, these are your baits proper
to the Season, and I think a word of caution and Direction is not much out of
season.

Having gotten your baits you must look that they be good sweet and fine, for
else they are useless, and you might as well have been at home as by the
Riverside; then you must not angle in unseasonable times, for the Fish being
not inclined to bite, it is a strange enticement that can compel them. You
must also be careful neither by your apparel motion or too open standing to
give affright to the fish; for when they are ^cared they fly from you, and
leave you seeking society in an empty house. Then you must labor in clear and
untroubled waters, for when the Brooks are any whit white or Muddy, or thick
through inundations or other trouble, it is impossible to get any thing with
the Angle. In the next place, you must be sure to have a respect to the temper
of the weather, for extreme wind, or extreme cold takes away all manner of
appetite from Fish, so does likewise too violent heat, or Rain th^^ is heavy,
great and beating, or any storms, snowes, hail or blusterings, especially that
which comes from the east, which of all is the worst. Those which blow from
the South are the best, and those which come from the North or from the West
are indifferent. Many other observations there are, but remember these and it
may be sufficient.

The Names of the Principal Fairs in England, and Wales; observed in the Month
of July.
THe 2 day at Ashton und. lin. Congerton 3 days, Huntington, Rickmansworth,
Smeath, Swansey, Wooburne: the 3 at Haverson, the 5 at Burton upon Tr. the 6 at
Haverkull Llanibither, Llan^dlas: the 7 at Albringtop, Burntwood,
Chippingnorton, Castlemaine, Chappel-frieth, Canterbury, Denbigh, Emlim,
Haverford, Richmond, Roystone, Shelford, Sweaton, Tenbury, Vizes, Vppingham:
the 11 at Lidde, Partney: the 13 at Fedringham; the 15 at Greensterd,
Pinchback: the 17 Stevenage, Belth, Llanvilling: the 20 at Winchcomb, Awferton,
Barkway, Barley, Boultons, Bowlin, Gatesby, Chimmock, Coolldge, S. Margarets,
Mead, Odiham, Tenby, Vxbridge, Woodstock: the 21 at Barnards castle,
Battlefield, Bicklesworth, Billeticay, Bridgenorth, Broughton, Calne,
Clitherall, Colchester, the 22 at Ichleton, Keswich, Klmolton, Kingston,
Mawdl-hil, Win Maudle^hil, Hey, Marlborough, Newark, Trent, Northwich, Chapter
Ponterly, Lldwalley, Roking, Stonystratford, Stokesbury, Turbury, Witherall,
Withgrigge, Yadeland, Yarn, the 33 at Carnarvan, Cheston: the 15 at Abbington,
Aldergame, Ashwell, Baldock, Barkhansted, Bilson, Bistower, Boston, Bristoll,
Bromesgrove, Bromely Broadoke, Buntingford, Cambden, Capeljago, Chichester,
Chilholme, Darby, Doncaster, Dover, Dudley, Erith, Hatfield, S. James London,
S. James near Ipswich, Kingston, Lisle, Kirkkam, Linfield, Liverpool,
Llandergiram, Louth, Malpar, Malmsbury, Machenbleth, Ravenglasse, Reading,
Richmond, Nor, Rosse, Safsron, Walden, Shiffnall, Shipton, Crav. Stamford,
Stone, Stackpool, Themblegreen, Thikam, Thrapston, Tilbury, Trowbridge, Walden,
Warrington, Wetherby, Wigmore, the 26 at Bewdley, Raladirgwy, Tiptery. the 27
at Ashwell, Canterbury, Chappelfrieth, Horsham: the 30 at Stafford.

The Flowery Mead that smild so Yestarday,
As if it had dreamt of an eternal May.
Now times two handed Razor shaves it down
Bare as Birds britch, and bold as his own Crown:
The Sun that gave it verdour in the Spring,
Is now to make of it another thing;
And the fair Maids in Peticoats and Smocks
Are ready at a beck to raise the Cocks,
And wisely they so fair a warning take,
While the Sun shines so hot their h^y to make.
Augustus Days 31

AUGUST.
NOw do the Reapers try their Backs and their Arms, and the lufty Youths pitch
the sheafs into the Cart, the Furmenty pot welcomes home the Harvest Cart, and
the Garland of Flowers crowns the Captain of the Reapers; the Battle of the
Field is now stoutly fought, and the proud Rye must stoop to the Sickle; the
Sun is somewhat toward his Declination, yet such is his heat, as hardneth the
soft Clay, dries up the standing Ponds, withers the sappy Leaves, and
scorcheth the skin of the Naked; now begin the Gleaners to follow the
Corn-Cart, and a little Bread to a great deal of Drink makes the Travelers
Dinner; the Melon and the Cucumber are now in their season, and Oil and Vinegar
dance attendance to the Sallad-herbs; the Alehouse is more frequented then the
Tavern, and a gently gliding River is more comfortable then a fiery Furnace;
the Bath is now much visited by diseased bodies, and in the fair Rivers,
swimming is a sweet exercise; the Bow, and the Bowl pick many a purse, and the
Cocks with their heels kick away many a man's wealth: Zephyrus now with his
sweet breath cools and perfumes the parching beams of Titan, while the ripened
Fruits dangling down the Boughs, show the wealth and the beauty of the Earth;
the Pipe and the Taber are now busily set a work, and the Lad and the Lass will
have no lead on their heels; the new Wheat makes the Gossips Cake, and the
Bride-Cup is carried above the heads of the whole Parish; O it is the merry time
wherein honest Neighbors make good cheer, and God is glorified in his
blessings on the Earth. In sum, for that I find, I thus conclude, August is
the worlds welfare, and the Earths warming pan; or thus, I hold it to be the
Heavens bounty, Earths beauty, and the Worlds benefit.

Apply your selves now to your Harvest, for if ye had as many hands as
Briarius, they must all turn Corn-cutters; Shear down your Wheat and Rye, and
Mow your Barley and Oats; but have a care your early Sickle prevents not the
maturation and ripening of your Corn. And as I would not you should reap too
green, so neither would I you should gather it wet, for moist or unhardned Corn
when it is sheafed up close together, or stackt, or mowed up, sorthwith
gathers heat, and either sets the Co^n on fite, Or else the moisture being
in less quantity, and not apt to flame, yet it corrupts the Grain, and Straw,
and brings a stinking mouldiness or rottenne^s, so that the grain either
becomes dung or dirt, or at best it is so stinking and unsavory, that it is
good for no use or purpose, as is daily to be seen, where careless Husbands
gather in their Corn without respect or Government, making the old Proverb
true, that Haste bri^gs Waste.

The cure and prevention of this inconvenience, is the well-husbanding and
managing of the Harvest, first with a careful and well-judging eye to look upon
your Corn, and to know by the hanging downward of the Ear, whether it be ripe
or not; for when it is so, it will look as it were back again to the ground,
then to look into the cleanness of the Corn, as whether it be full of greeness,
as grass, weeds, and such like; or clean of it self, without any mixture; If
you find there be any weeds mixed with it, then you may reap it so much the
sooner, though the kernel be not so well hardened as you could wish; but having
shorn it so full of weeds, by no means sheaf it, but spreading it thin in the
Sun, let the grass wither all the day, which when you perceive to change
color, and grow dry, then bind it up in sheafs, and let it lie single a day,
that the Wind and Sun may get into it, and dry the greeness more sufficiently,
then lay it in shocks of six or eight sheafs a piece, and in those shocks turn
the Ears so inward, that the other bigger ends may defend them from rain, wet,
or dew that may fall upon them; then a day or two after lay them in shocks of
twenty, or four and twenty sheafs a piece, and in those shocks let them take a
Sweat; then b^eak them open in a bright Sunshine day, and let the Air pass
through them to dry them, fo^thwith lead the Grain home, and either house or
stack it, and (be sure) when thus ordered and dried, it can never take hurt.

Now ye may make the second return of your fat Sheep and Cattle; Gather all
your greater Summer fruits, Plumbs, Apples, and Pears, make your Perry and
Cider; set slips of all sorts of Gilly-flowers, and Siens of other Flowers, and
transplant them that were set the Spring before; and at the end of this month,
begin to winter-rig all fruitful soyls whatsoever; you may now also very
seasonably geld your Lambs, carry Manure from your Dove-cots, and put your
Swine to the early or first Mast.

They that would have good seeds for their Gardens next Year, must now gather
of their own, lest in buying their expectation be frustrate, and so they lose
their labor, and their layings out; and such as desire to have Lettice, or
other Herbs for the Winter, they must sow their seeds in the Increase of the
Moon.

In August moderate diet is good Physic, for now there is danger of surfets,
and take heed of heats, and then colds, for it is the high way to a Pleurisy,
and use not to sleep much, especially after Noons, for fear of oppilations, and
stopping Phlegm, and for the avoiding of Agues, Headache, and Catarhs; avoid
Physic, unless necessity compells, and abstain from Wine, shun Feasts and
Banquets, and only take delight in diet and drinks that are cool, and temperate.

I had a touch at your Recreations before, and that your Cock may not kick your
Coin out of your pocket, I shall give you some marks to choose a good one by;
know then, that the best characters observable in a fighting Cock, are his
shape, color, courage, and sharp heel; for his shape, the middle size is ever
accounted best, because they be ever most matchable strong, nimble, and ready
for your pleasure in his battle; and so the exceeding little Cock is as hard to
match, and is commonly weak, and tedious in his manner of fighting; He would be
of a proud and upright shape, with a small head, like a Spar-Hawk, quick large
eye, and a strong back crookt, and big at the setting on, and in color suitable
to the plume of his feathers, as black, yellow, or reddish; the beam of his leg
would be very strong, and according to his plume, blew, gray, or yellow, his
spurs long, rough, and sharp, and a little bending, and looking inward; for his
color, the gray pyle, the yellow pyle, or the red with the blanck breast, is
esteemed the best, the pyde is not so good, and the white and dun are the
worst; if he be red about the head like scarlet, it is a sign of lust,
strength, and courage; but if he be pale it is a sign of sickness and
faintness; for his Courage, you shall observe it in his walk, by his treading,
and the pride of his going, and in his Pen by his often Crowing; for the
sharpness of his heel, it is only seen in his fighting, for that Cock is said
to be sharp or narrow heel'd, which every time he rises, hitteth and draws
blood of his adversary, gilding his spurs in blood, and threatening at every
blow an end of the Battle. I wish you such a Cock. Farewell.

The Names of the principal Fairs in England and Wales, observed in the Month
of August.
THe 1. at Bath, Bedford, Chepstow, Dunstable, S. Eedes, Exceter, Feversham,
Flint, Hay, Hersnay, Kaermarthen, Kaerwilly, Llantrissent, Llawrwin, Ludford,
Loughborough, Mailing, Newton in Lancashire, Newcastle Trent, Northam-church,
Romney, Selby, Shrewsbury, Selbourn, Thaxted, Wisbich, Yelland, York. The 4. at
Radnor, Linton. The 6. at Burdney, Peterborough. The 9. at Aberlew. The 10. at
Alchurch, Banbury, Blakamore, Bodwin, Brainford, Chidley, Chorley, Croyley,
Diffringoliwick, Doncaster, Farnham, Frodisham, Fullsea, Harleigh, Hawk-hurst,
Horn-castle, Hungerford, Keilow, Ludlow, Marras, Molton, Moubray, Moirworth,
Newborough, Owndle, Rugby, Sherborn, Torceter, Waltham Abbey, Waldon, Weidon,
Wormster, Winstow. The 15. at S. Albones, Bolton, Cambridge, Carlisle,
Cardigan, Dunmow, Huntington, Marlborough, Northampton, Preston, Ross, Stow,
Strowd, Swansey, Wakefield. The 24. at Ashby de la Zouch, Beggars bush, Bromley
Pagets, Chorley, Croyley, Dover, Faringdon, Kidderminster, London, Monmouth,
Mongommery, Nantwich, Northallerton, Norwich, Oxford, Tewksbury.

Sluggard, where art? Is this a time to sleep?
When Heaven for the whole Year does Market keep.
Go to the Ant, and but consider how
To live in Winter, she bestirs her now;
If Harvest thee in such a slumber rocks,
Thy mouth shall muzzled be, and not the Ox.
God but for labor sells good things to none,
The Bees are busy, and abhor a Drone.
The Reapers heads shall be with Flowers crowned,
When thou shall lie neglected on the ground.
30 Days September

SEPTEMBER.
IT is now September, and the glittering Charioteer of heaven is driving down
the hill apace, and the beauty of the earth is generally decaying, seeming no
longer a lively act of Nature, but a mere Landscape, which the teeth of time has
more then half defaced; the sap of the Trees sinks down into the earth, and the
wi^hering leaves fall after it; the lofty Ash that but the other day locked up
his moisture in his arms, and vertical boughs, now has got a Palsy, and lets
his keys fall. In a word, the whispering woods are now fain to quit their
leavie pretenses, and come to the naked truth; the Meadows are left bare by the
mouths of the hungry Cattle, and the Hogs (those four-footed Swains) are become
the Plowers of the Cornfieldsd; the wind begins to bluster among the Apples,
and knock their heads together on the Trees, and the wind-falls are gathered to
fill the Pies for the Household, except the old Sow return by chance from her
Field-labour, and eat them raw to qualify the heat of her stomach; the Saylors
fall to work to get before the wind, and if they spy a storm it puts them to
prayer; the Soldier now begins to shrug at the weather, and prays for the
dissolution of the Camp, that he may get to his Landladies fire side in a
Garrison. The Lawyer now is hard at his Harvest, and with his Tongue and his
Tarbox reaps most of the gain of his poor Clients Sickle, while his laboring
hands pay for his lying tongue; the Inns now begin to provide for guests, and
the night-eaters in the Stable pinch the ^oor Traveller in his bed, while the
Ostler behind the Masters back, cheats his Horse to his face. Paper, pen, and
Ink, are much in request, and the Quarter Sessions take order with the
Vagabonds, and Way-layers; Wood, and Coals make toward the Chimney, and Sack,
and good Ale are in account with good Fellows; the Butchers now knock down the
great Beeves, and the Poulterers feathers make toward the Upholsters; now
Walfleet Oysters are the wealth of the Fishwife, and Pippins fine are the
Costermongers Merchandise; the Flayl and the Fan fall to work in the Barn, and
the Market is full of Bakers: the Porkers now are driven to the Woods, and the
home-fed Pigs make Pork for the Market. In brief, I thus conclude of it, I hold
it the Winters forewarning, and the Summers farewell.

In the month of September reap your Peace, Beans, and all other Pulse
whatsoever, making a final end of your Harvest; now bestow upon your wheat land
your principal manure, and now sow your Wheat and your Rye born in rich, and
in barren Climates; now put your Swine to mast of all hands, gather your Winter
fruit; now for your Winter fruit, you shall know its ripeness, by observing his
change of color upon the Tree, but you must be sure to gather it in a fair,
Sunny, and dry day, in the wain of the Moon, and no wind in the East, also
after the Sun has exhaled the dew, for the least wet or moisture will make
them subject to rot and mildew, you must also have an apron to gather in, and
to empty into the great basket, and a hook to draw the boughs unto you, which
you cannot reach with your hands at ease, the apron is to be an ell every way,
loopt up to your girdle, so as it may serve for either hand without any
trouble, and when it is full, unloose one of your loops, and empty it gently
into the great basket; for in throwing them down roughly, their own stalks may
prick them, and those that be once pricked will ever rot; again, you must gather
your fruits clean without either leaves or brunts, because the one hurts the
Tree, (for every brunt would be a stalk for fruit to grow upon) the other hurts
the fruit by pricking and bruifing it as it is laid together, and there is
nothing sooner rotteth fruit, then the green and withered leaves lying among
them; neither must you gather them without any stalk at all, for such fruit
will begin to rot where the stalk stood.

Quinces should not be kept with other fruit, for the scent is offensive both
to the other fruit, and to them that keep it, o^ come amongst it; therefore lay
them by themselves in sweet straw, where they may have Air enough; they must be
p^ckt with Medlars, and gathered with Medlars.

Now as touching Windfalls, or such fruit as falls from the Tree, and are not
gathered, they must not be laid with the fruit that is gathered; and of
fallings there are two sorts, one that falls through ripeness, and they are
best, and may be kept to b^ke or roast; the other beaten down by the wind, and
they must be spent as fruit (nor being ripe) else they will wither and come to
nothing; and therefore it is not good by any means to beat down fruit with
poles, or to carry them in Carts, loose or jogging, or in half filled Sacks,
where they may be bruised; and thus much for fruits. Now to other Concerns.

Farmer, make fale of your Wool, and other Summer Commodities, now put off
those stocks of Bees you mean to part with; or such as you mean to take for
your own use, close thatch, and dawb warm all the surviving Hives, and look
that no Drone, Mouse, or other Vermin be in or about them: Now thatch your
Stocks and Reeks, Thrash your Seed, Rye, and Wheat, and make an end with your
Cart of all Foreign journeys.

Lastly, In this month such as have need, may safely take Physic, or if
occasion be, may bathe, and bleed, all such things are in their proper Nature
and Virtue; and such Fruits as are ripe, and not corrupted, may safely be eaten
by those that have good stomachs; It is now good time to make Conserve of
Quinces and Barberries; Winter Herbs may now be sown; now likewise is the time
to set your Artichoaks, Rose-trees, Apple Trees, Wardens, Strawberries,
Violets, Gilly-flowers, sow Parsnips, and in dry weather gather your Hops, and
it is no bad Huswifry to make Verjuyce, and pluck Hemp. They say so many days
old the Moon is on Michaelmass day, so many Floods after.

The Names of the principal Fairs in England, and Wales, observed in the Mouth
of September.
THe 1. day at Chappelsilvy, S. Giles, Neath. The 7. at Ware, Woodbury-hill.
The 8. at Atherstone, Be^maris, Blackburn, Brewood, Bury in Lancashire,
Caerdigan, Cardiffe, Chatten, Caulton, Drayton, Dryfield, Gisborough, Gilbourn,
Hartford, Huntington, Llandisel, Malden, Northampton, Partney, Reculver Smeath,
Suyde, Southwark, Sturbridge, Camb. Tenby, Vicester, Wakefield, Waltham, Wou,
West Name, Whiteland. The 12. day at Worsmouth, Woolpit, Luxford. The 13. at
Newtouredwin, Powlethel^y, Vahslay. The 14. at Aberga^enny, Barsley,
Churchstretton, Chesterfield, Denbigh, Hidome, Hetsbury, Monckton, Newborough,
Newp. Penhad, Rippon, Richmond, Ross, Rockingham, Sm^lding, Stradford Av^n,
Waltham Abbey, Worton^^d. hedge. The 15. at Rajardagwp. The 17. at Cliffe,
Llanidlass. The 20. at Llanvelly, Ruthin. The 21. at Abergwilly, Bladock,
Bedford, Braintry, Brackley maiden, Bulwick, Canterbury, Clapon, Croydon,
Daintny, Dover, Eastred, S. Edmond-Bury, Helmsley, Holden, Katharin-hill,
Knighton, Kingstone, War. Marleborough, Malden, Midnal, Nottingham,
Peterborough, Shrewsbury, Stratford, Vizes, Wendover, Witherall, Woodstock. The
23. at Pancridge Stf. The 24. at Llanvilling, Malton a week. The 28. at
Dolgeth, Kaermarthen. The 29. at Abercomway, S. Albones, Asleborn Park,
Balmstock, Basingstoke, Bishopstratford, Blackburn, Burningham, Buckland,
Burwell, Canterbury, Chichester, Cockermouth, Market Deeping, Michael Dean,
Headley, Hay, Higham ferries, S. Ives, Kingston, Hull, Killingworth, Kingsland,
Llavenham, Lancaster, Leicester, Llanidlasse, Llanvihadgel, Lloychyr, Ludl^t,
Maiden, Marche^leth, Methyr, Newbury, Selby, Shelford Bed, Sittingburn, Stow
Linc. Sudbury the last Thursday, Friday, and Saturday, Tottington, Tuddington,
Vxbridge, Weyhilloy, Andover, Weymar 7. day. Westchester, Wiltham, Woodhamferry.

The Sun declines, and now no comfort yields
Unto the fading offspring of the fields;
The Tree is scarce adorned with one wan Leaf;
And Ceres dwells no longer at the sheaf:
The careful Client has his Harvest done,
And now the Lawyer's reaping is begun:
Arms yield to Arts, I see; the Gown-man stands
Exacting Tribute at the Plowmans hands:
And somewhat still of Reason here appears,
The Lawyer speaks, and Tongue will challenge Ears.
OCTOBER.
NOw follows the merry-goe-sorrow of the blythe, and bleak Month of October.
The Coaches rattle through the Street, and the Ladies Ride in their Boots,
while the finicall City Geese go on Patterns. Muffing and Cuffing are now in
request, and he that will go to Billinsgate fort may have a Cuff on the ear:
It is now not amiss to play at Hot-cockles hot, unless Coals be the cheaper.
The little Tom-Tit-mouse makes his Cell in a hollow Tree; and the blackbird
sets close in the bottom of a hedge for fear an ill wind should blow him no
good. The forward Dear begin to go to ru^, and the barren Do is not out of
season. The Basket-makers now gather their rods, and Fishermen lay their Nets
in the deeps. The lofty winds are the Hogs Caterer, and the falling of the
Aco^ns is the rising of their flesh, and puts them quite out of mind of Pearl.
The Load horses go apace to the Mill: and the Corn is in the flower puddings,
and Pancakes are meat for the Lads, and -- Pyes are the delight of the Lasses.
The Hare on the hill makes the Greyhound a fair course; and the loosing of
labor is the saving of life. The Fox just unkenneld makes the Huntsmen laugh,
and the Hounds cry. The scarcity of people makes a plenty of Wares, but a
smooth and soft tongue vents many a hard bargain. The Mariner now bestirreth
his stumps while the Merchant lives in fear of the weather. The Cooks are
preparing the great feasts for the City; but the poor must not beg for fear of
the Stocks. A good fire and a pair of Cards keep the guess in the Ordinary;
and the smoke of Tobacco is precious, and held sovereign for Catatths, and
troublesome Rheums. The Shuttle-cock and Battledore is a good house exercise,
and occupies the Lady before she be dressed. Tennis and Baloon are sports of some
charge, and a quick bandy is the Court keeps Commodity. Dancing and Fencing are
now in some use; and true Lovers lie close to keep off the cold. To be short,
for the little pleasure I find of October, I thus conclude of it; I hold it a
Messenger of ill news, and a second service to a cold dinner; Autumnes
North-Nuntio to Winters well-a-day, Farewell but not frost.

Days 31 October


In the Month of October finish all your wheat seed; and scower all your
ditches and ponds: Plash, and lay your Hedges and Quicksets; plant, or
transplant all manner of fruit Trees of what nature or quality soever. Make
your Winter Cidar and Perry: You may spare your private pastures, and feed up
your Co^n fields, and Commons; and now make an end of winter-ridging; draw
furrows to draine and keep dry your new sown Corn. Rear all those Calves
that you mean shall fall; and weane those Foales from your draught Mares which
the Spring before were foaled. Now sell all such Sheep as you will not Winter;
give over your Foaling, and separate the Lambs from the Ewes which you purpose
to keep for your own stock, and follow hard the making of your Malt, not
forgetting the Proverb, that Soft Fire makes sweet Malt. Nor shall I here think
it amiss, no^ you (I hope) tedious, if I insert a few directions to the young
and unexperienced touching the drying and cleansing your Malt.

Dry it with a gentle and soft fire, ever and anon turning it (is it dries on
the Kilne) over and over with your hand, till you find it sufficiently well
dried. Now as soon as you see the Corn begin to shed, you shall in the turning
the Malt rub it well between your hands, and scowre it to make the Come fall
away; then finding it all sufficiently dried, first put out your Fire, then let
the Malt dried cool upon the Kilne for four or five hours at lest, then
raising up the four corners of the hair cloth, and gathering the Malt
together on a heap, empty it with the Come, and all into your Garner, and there
let it lie (if you have not occasion to use it) for a month, or two, or three
to ripen, but no longer, for as the Come or dust of the Kilne for such a space
melloweth and ripeneth the Malt, making it better both for sale, or expense, so
to lie too long does engender weevell, worms and Vermin which do destroy the
grain.

Now for the dressing and cleansing of Malt at such time as it is either to be
spent in the house, or sold in the Market; you shall first winnow it with a
good wind either from the Air, or the Fanner, and before the winnowing you
shall rub it exceeding well between your hands to get the Come or sproutings
clean away; for the beauty and goodness of Malt is when it is smug, clean,
bright, and likest to Barley in the view, for then there is least wast and
greatest profit, for Come, and dust drinks up the liquor, and gives an ill
taste to the drink. After it is well rubbed and winnowed, you shall then Ree it
over in a fine sieve, and if any of the Malt be uncleansed, then rub it again
into the sieve till it be pure, and the rubbings will rise on the top of the
sieve, which you may cast off at pleasure, and both those rubbings from the
sieve, and the chafe, and dust which comes from the winnowing should be safe
kept, for they are very good swines meat and feed, well mixed with whey or
swillings; and thus after the Malt is well Ree'd, you shall either sack it up
for especial use, or put it into a well cleansed Garner, where it may lie till
there be occasion for expense; and thus much I think sufficient to speak of
Malt.

Now to your health. As for what concerns your health, take my counsel, refuse
not any needful physic if you be advised thereunto by your skillful
Physician. If occasion serve use warm baths; get good hot meat and drink, and
good and wholesome wines to nourish good blood. Keep your feet dry, and warm,
and beware of taking cold, for quartane Agues are gotten this Month, and gotten
rid of God knows when. Use all moderate Recreations, for any thing is good
which by stirring and warming the blood reviveth the spirits.

They say if leaves now hang on the Tree, it portends a cold Winter, or many
Caterpillars.

The Names of the Principal Fairs in England and Wales, observed in the Month
of October.
THe 1 day at Banbury, Caster: the 2 at Salisbury: the 3 at Boultonmoors: the 4
at S. Michaels: the 6 at Hevent Hamsh. Maidstone in Kent: the 8 at
Bishopstratford, Chichester, Hereford, Llanibither, Ponstephen, Swansey: the 9
at Ashburupeak Blyth in nor. Devizes, Gainsborough, Harborough, Sabridgeworth,
Thorockgroyes: the 12 at Boulton farnac. Llangoveth: the 13 at Aberstow,
Charing, Chuston, Colchester, Draiton, Edmu^dstow, Gravesend, Hichen, Newp.
H^dner, Leighton buz. Marshfield, Newport Mon. Royston, Stopforth, Stanton,
Tamworth, Windfore: the 18 at Ashwell, Burbury, Barne^, Brickhill, Bridgenorth,
Bishopshatfield, Burton upon Trent, Charlton, Cliffe Regis, Ely, Farringdon,
Henley in Arden. Holt, Kidwelly, Isk, Louhaddon, Marloe upon Tham. Middlewick,
Newcastle, Radnor, Thirst, Tisdale, Tunbridge, Vpheven, Wellingborough, Wigham,
Wrickley, York: the 19 at Fridiswid by Oxford: the 21 at Saffron-Walden,
Cicester, Coventry, Hereford, Lentham, Llanibither, Tokestey: the 22 at
Bickelsworth, Knottford, Low, Rasdale, Preston, Whitechurch: the 25 at Beverly:
the 28 Abercoway, Ashby de la Zou. Bidderdes, Hellaton, Heart, Lempster.
Llanedy, Newmarket, Oxford, Preston Aund. Standford, Talisamgreen, Warwick,
Willon, Wormester: the 31 at Abermales, Chelmesford, Powlethely, Ruthin,
Stocksley, Wakefield.

Now the swollen cheeks of Aeolus advance
Their bag-pipes, and the wooden castles dance.
Now cutting capers to the skies, and then
Come tumbling down to the infernal Den.
Thus at no certain, betwixt Heaven and Hell,
Erasmus like, they know not where to dwell,
While the one-bottom'd Merchant calls to fare,
To pity theirs, yea, and his own estate.
Both are in danger of the furious blood,
This of his life, that of his livelihood.
November 30 Days

NOVEMBER.
THis is a hopeful dirty month, the penultima of Christmas, the next close to
the holy days, and the Schoolboys think long to Break up, and the M^ids to be
with their Sweethearts; but the Woodcock comes time enough, if not too soon to
the Cockshoot; the young Hern, and the Shoulerd are fatting for the great
Feast; the Warreners now begin to ply their Harvest, and the Butcher after a
good bargain puts in at next Alehouse, and drinks a health to the Grasier; the
Cook and the Comfit-maker make ready for Christmas, and the Minstrels in the
Country are tuning their Instruments, and for false Notes, beat their boys to
some tune; now wheels the Proverb about, Let the Thresher take his Flayl, and
the Ship no more Sail; for the high winds, and the rough Seas will try the Ribs
of the Ship, and the hearts of the Saylors; now come the Wenches all-wet to the
Market, and the toyling Carryers are pitifully moyled; Scholars before
Breakfast have but cold stomachs to their books, and a Master without Art is
fit for an A B C. Herrings and Sack make a war in a weak stomach, while the
poor man's pinching Fast is to be preferred to a gluttonous Surfeit; Dishes and
Trenchers are necessary servants, and they that have no meat may go scrape; a
Spit and a Dripping pan would do well, if well furnished; and a lock to the
Cupboord door keeps a bit for a need; now begins the Goshawk to weed the wood
of the Phesant, and the Mallard loves not to hear the Bells of the Faulcon; the
wind now is cold, and the Air chill, and the poor perish because men's charity
is colder then both; alas, she is now grown so barren, she has no children;
and so marble-hearted, she knows none but her self; she was always said to
begin at home, but now she will not look out of doors; Butter and Cheese begin
to raise their price, for the Higlers forestall the Market; now the Chandler
knows how to make the best of his Merchandise, and Kitchin-stuff is a commodity
that every one is not acquainted with; In sum, with the conceit of the raw and
rustic constitution of it, I take this month of November to be the discomfort
of Nature and the trial of patience.

In this month you may sow either Wheat or Rye in exceeding hot Soyls,
afterward you may remove all sorts of Fruit Trees, and plant great trees either
for shelter, or ^haddow; now cut down all sorts of Timber Trees for Ploughs,
Carts, Axel-Trees Naves, Harrows, and other Husbandry Offices; make now the
last return of your grass-fed Cattle; bring your Swine from the Mast, and feed
them for slaughter; Rear what Calves soever fall, and break up all such Hemp
and Flax as you intend to spin in the Winter season, concerning which Hemp or
Flax, I shall a little in this place, because it comes in my way, give the good
Wife a word or two of direction, and first for Hemp.

If you intend to have an excellent piece of Hempen Cloth, which shall equal a
piece of very pure Linen, then after you have beaten your Hemp excellently
well, and Heckled it once over, you shall then roll it up again, dry it as
before, and beat it again as much as at the first, then Heckle it through a
fine slaxen Heckle (and the Towe which falls from the Heckle, will make a
principal Hemping) but the Leaf it self a cloth as pure as fine Huswifes
linen, the endurance and lasting whereof is rare and wonderful. But,

Now concerning Flax a word also; Flax, after it has been twice swingled,
needs neither more drying or beating, as Hemp does, but may be brought to the
Heckle in the same manner as you did Hemp, only the Heckle must be much finer
and straiter, and (as you did before) the first Heckle being much courser then
the latter, holding the strike stisse in your hand, break it very well upon
that Heckle, then the Hurds that come off you shall save to make fine Hurden
cloth of, and the strike it self you shall pass through a finer Heckle, and the
Hurds which come from thence, you shall save to make fine middle cloth of, and
the tear it self for the bent linen.

To dress Flax for the finest use that may be, as to make fair Holland cloth of
great price, or thread for the most curious use, you shall take your Flax after
it has been handled as is before showed, and laying three strikes together,
plat them in a plat of three, so hard and close as is possible, joining one to
the end of another, till you have platted so much as you think convenient, and
then begin another plat, and thus plat so much as you think will make a roll
like unto one of your Hemp-rowls, and then wreathing them hard together, make
up the roll, and so many rowls more or less, according to the purpose you dress
them for; this done, put the rowls into a Hemp-trough, and beat them soundly,
rather more then your Hemp, and then open and unplat it, and divide every
strike from other very carefully; then heckle it through a finer Heckle then
any formerly used, for of heckles there be ever three sorts, and this must be
the finest, and in this Heckling you must be exceeding careful to do it gently,
and deliberately, lest what you heckle from it should run to knots, as it is
apt to do, but being done artificially, as it ought, you shall have it look and
feel like fine Cotton, or Jersey wool, and this which thus looks and feels,
and falls from the Heckle, will notwithstanding make a pure fine Linen, and
run at least two yards and half in the pound; But the Tear it self will make a
perfect strong, and most fine Holland, and run at least five yards in the pound.

After your Tear is thus dressed, you shall spin it either upon Rock or Wheel,
but the Wheel is the swifter way, and the Rock makes the finest thread; you
shall draw your thread according to the tear, and as long as it is even, it
cannot be too small, but if it be uneven, it will never make a durable cloth;
now for as much as every Huswife is not able to spin in her own house, you
shall make choice of the best Spinners you can hear of, and to them put forth
your Tear, weighing it before it go, and weighing it again after it is spun,
and dry, allowing weight for weight, or an ounce and half for waste at the
most; as for the prices for spinning, they are according to the Natures of the
Country, the fineness of the Tear, and the dearness of provision; some
spinning by the pound, some by the lay, and some by the day, as the bargain
shall be made.

For your health, eat good, wholesome, and strong meats, very well spiced and
dressed, and free from rawness, and use meat nourishing the blood, and drink
sweet and insophisticate Wines, and for digestion, ever before apples, or
cheese, or such trumperies, prefer good and moderate exercise, keep your body
from head to foot warm and dry, lest Toothache and Rheum make ye wish ye had;
beware of Hot-houses this month, lest the pores of your body set open by
violent heat, as violent and piercing colds make their entry, not easily to be
driven or complemented out of their new possessions; and let me here advise
what Physic you mean to take, to finish now till the next March or April,
unless urgent occasion. If the 10. day be cloudy, it denunciates a wet; if dry,
a sharp winter.

The Names of the principal Fairs in England, and Wale^, observed in the Month
of November.
THe 1. day at Bicklesworth, Castlemain, Kellome, Montgomery, Ludloe. The 2. at
Bechingley, Bishopcastle, Elsemere, Kingston Tham. Leek, Lougborough, Maxfield,
Mayfield, York. The 3. at Kaermarthen. The 5. at Welshpool. The 6. at Andover,
Bedford, Brecknock, Hartford, Lesford, Mailing, Marton Holder, Newport pond,
Pambridge, Salforth, Stanley, Trigney, Werlington, Wershod. The 10. at
Aberwingtew, Lento Nottinghanish. Llanibither, Rugby, Shifnall, Wems. The 11.
at Aberkennen, Bretingham, Dever, Folkingham, Marlborough, Monmouth, Newcastle,
Elm. Shaftsbury, Skipton crav, Tream, Withgrigge, York. The 13. at S. Edmonds
Bury, Gilford Sur. The 15. at Llanithinery, Marchinleth, Wellington. The 17. at
Harlow, Hide, Lincoln, Northampton, Spalding. The 19. at Horsham Kent. The 20.
at S. Edmonds Bur. Healih, Ingatestone. The 22. at Pennibout, Swathey, The 23.
at Bangor, Bwelth, Caerlin, Froom, Ludlow, Katescross Sandwith, Tuddington. The
25. at Highamferry. The 28. at Ashborn Peak. The 29. at Lawrest. The 30 at
Amptil, Baldock, Bedford, York, Bewdley, Boston Mart, Bradford, Collingborough,
Cobhrm, Cubley, Enfield, Gargreen, Greenstead, Harle^gh, Kimolton, Maidenhead,
Maiden-Bruck, Narbert, Ocestry, Peterfield, Pecores, Preston, Rochester,
Wakefield, Warrington.

Now are the Swine compel^ed to the Mast,
So much the rather for the greater blast;
They fear not now the Ocean should them choke;
No, they are to be victuall'd at the Oak.
They Are bound for Acorns, that is their Merchandise;
Whatever falls, they still the sooner rise.
I marvel at the wind, the Hog so cries;
It feeds his belly, though it frights his eyes;
The fiercest Tempest brings him fuller food:
It Is an ill wind I see that brings none good.
December 31 Day^is

DECEMBER.
NOw does the Lawyer make an end of his Harvest, and the clyent of his money,
and he that walks the streets shall find dirt on his shoes, except he walk all
in boots. Now Capons and Hens, besides Turkyes, Geese and Ducks, with Bee^e and
Mu^ton, must all dye as a memorial and a sacrifice to the Feast of the sacred,
the great and the sole sacrifice; for in 12 days a multitude of people will
not be fed with a little. The Ass that has borne all the year must now take
a little Rest. The Ox and the Cow, and the Horse and the Mare shall have their
christmasse provant. Now Plumbes and Spice, Sugar and Honey, square it among
Pies and broth; and Gossip I drink to you, and how do you, and you are
heartily welcome, I pray be merry, and I thank you. Now are the Tailors and the
Tyremakers full of work against the Hollidayes, and a journey man cares not a
rush for his Master, though he beg his Plum-pottage all the 12 days. Now or
never must the Music be in tune, for the youth must dance and sing to get them
a heat, while the aged set by the fire; Nature has made it a Law, and reason
finds no contradiction. The fat Ox must dye, and the lean one live till he be
more worthy the slaughter. The Footman now shall have many a foul ^tep; and
the Ostler have work enough about the heels of the horses, while the talkative
Tapstet (if he looks not to his hits) will lie drunk in the Cellar. The Country
maid leaves half her Market, and must be sent again, if she forgets a pair of
cards on christmasse Even. Great is the contention of Holly and Ivy, whether
Master or Dame wears the breeches. The price of meat rises apace, and the
Aparrell of the proud makes the Tailors rich, and as proud as themselves. Dice
and the cards benefit the Butler; and if the cook do not lack wit he will
sweetly lick his fingers. Now Starchers and Laundresses have their hands full
of work, and and periwigs; and paintings will not be a little set by; strange
Stuffs will be well sold, strange tales well told, strange sights much sought,
strange things much bought, and what else as falls out. To conclude, I hold it
the costly purveyer of excess, and the after-breeder of necessity; the
practice of folly, and the purgatory of Reason.

In the month of December put your Sheep and Swine to the Pease reeks, and fat
them for slaughter, or the Market. Now kill your small Porks, and large Bacon^,
lop hedges and trees, saw out your timber for building, and lay it to season;
and if your Land be exceeding stiff, and rise up in an extraordinary furrow,
then in this Month begin to plow up that ground whereon you mean to sow clean
Bean only. Now cover your dainty fruit trees over with Canvase; and hide all
your best flowers with rotten horse-litter from the impetuous tyranny of frosts
and storms. Now draine all your Cornfieldsd, and as occasion shall present it
self, so water and keep moist your Meadows for the utility of the soil.

Now fish for the Carp, the Breame, Pike, Tench, Barbell, Peale, and Salmon;
omitting the rest I shall give you a word of direction for angling for the
Pike, the Barbell, the Breame, the Salmon. The Pike is a fish of great weight,
in so much that you can hardly have a line of hair to hold him; therefore your
best anglers use most commonly a chaulk line, your angle rod also must have no
small top, but be all of one piece and bigness, and the Line made exceeding
fast from slipping, your hoose would be of the strongest wire, white or yellow,
and made double, the points turning two contrary ways, and then armed with
strong wire, a foot at least; his best bait is a little small Roch, Dace or
Minim, the hook being put in at the Tail, and coming out at the Gills, and you
must seldom or never let your b^it lie still in the water, but draw it up and
down, as though the fish did move in the water, and fled from the Pike, for
this will make him more eager and h^sty to bite; and having bit, you must be
sure to tire him well before you venture to take him up. The yellow live Frog
is also an excellent bait for the Pike, for you must understand they naturally
delight not in any dead, or unmoving food.

There is also another way, which is to snickle a Pike, the manner thus, first
find the Pike where she lies, (which about Noon you may easily do) then take
your chaulk-Line with a noose of small wire at the end of it, put it gently
into the water about two feet before the nose of the Pike, then when you feel
it touch the ground, cause one to go behind the Pike, and with a pole to stir
him; then as he shoots meet him with your noose and with a sudden and quick
Jerk throw him upon the Land; in this sport you must be very nimble, ready, and
quick-fighted, for if you give him the lest time he will escape you.

The Barbell or Graveling, which some call the Ember, is a very subtle and
crafty f^sh, you must therefore be careful that your baits be sweet and new,
and when you angle for them, do in all things as you use for the Trout, for
they bite aloft in the Summer, and at the bottom in the Winter; your line must
be extraordinary strong, and your hooks of a three-penny compass, for they are
Fishes of very weighty bodies, and being struck must have liberty to play and
tire themselves, o^ else they will endanger the breaking of your rod, and
therefore your line must be the longest size. The best season to angle for the
Bream is from the latter end of February till September. He is a very lusty
strong Fish also, and therefore your tools must be able, and good; the baits in
which he most delights are the butter-flies, green-flyes, worms of all
sorts, past of bread-crumbs, or the brood of wasps.

Now Lastly, touching the angling for the Salmon, albeit he is a fish which in
truth is unfit for your travel, but because he is too hege and cumbersome; as
also in that he naturally delights to lie in the bottom of great deep
Rivers, and as near as may be in the middle of the channel; yet forasmuch as
many men esteem that best which is got with most difficulty, and trouble: you
shall understand that the baits in which ^e most delights are those that
serve for the Trou^, as paste or flies in the Summer, and red worms, Bobwormes
or Cankers on the Water docks after Michaelmasse; and thus much for Fishing at
this time.

You may also now seasonably become a Fowler, for all fowls whatsoever with
Piece, Nets, or any manner of Engines, for in this Month no Foul is out of
season, and I presume a waterspanniel is now better to keep, then to hang.
Christmasse is come and the Wild Swan, the Teals, and the Mallard are meat for
the Landlords mouth, and the Tenants too if he can get them.

For your health, keep your bodies warm, let your meat be hot of quality,
abstain from physic, and let your Kitchen be your Apotheca^ies Shop, warm
clothing your Nurse, merry company your Keeper, and good hospitallity your
exercise, so God send you a merry Christmasse.

The Names of the principal Fairs in England and Wales, observed in the Month
of December.
THe 5 at Dolgeth, Newton, Pluckley: the 6 at Arundel, Cafed, S. Eeds, Exceter,
Grantham, Hendingham, Hethin, Hormsay, Northwich Chapter Senoc. Kent, Spalamg,
Woodstock: the 7 at Sandhurst: the 8 at Bewmaris, Clitherall, Heltome,
Kaerdigon, Kimar, Leicester, Malpas, Northampton, Whiteland: the 11 at Newport
Pagnel: the 21 at Hornby: the 22 at Llandelavawr: the 29 at Canterbury,
Salisbury.

The Year now like the Hieroglyphick Snake,
His rounding Tail into his mouth does take.
Christmasse is come, make ready the good Cheer:
Apollo will be srollick once a Year:
I speak not here of Englands twelve days madness,
But humble gratitude and hearty gladness.
These but observed, let instruments speak out,
We may be merry, and we ought no doubt.
Christians, it is the birthday of christ our King,
Are we disputing when the Angels sing.
FINIS.

