ENGLAND'S DELIVERANCE From the Northern Presbytery, COMPARED With its
Deliverance from the Roman Papacy: BY PETER STERRY, Once Fellow of Emmanuel
College in Cambridge, now Preacher to the Right Honorable the Council of
State, sitting at WHITE HALL.

Printed at Leith by Evan Tyler, 1652.

To the SUPREME AUTHORITY Of the COMMONWEALTH of ENGLAND, The High Court of
PARLIAMENT.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IT may seem strange, that in the Thanksgiving on this Day I have exalted the
praises of the present season above the head of this Ancient Mercy. If I
deceive not my self, I have not done this to the disadvantage of those old
loving kindnesses, nor without great Examples.

Is not this the beaten way of JESUS CHRIST with his Church, to make succeeding
visits and loves, by being a grave to those that have been already, to become a
Resurrection to them, giving them a more Excellent Being in this Relative State
and Subordination, than they had in their absoluteness? Did John the Baptist
increase his glory by any thing more, than by that sweet readiness to decrease
before JESUS CHRIST? How do the holy Penmen in all their Prophesies, or
Praises, frequently make every present subject, but as a sight to direct their
eye, while their spirits fly to this mark, the Heavenly glory of CHRIST in this
last Appearance, which is now from the midst of its Thunders, Lightning upon
the Earth.

Right Honorable, I hambly entreat your Patience a little further, while I
present you faithfully with my Sense in the Comparison which I make between the
Papacy, and Rigid Presbytery. I shall do this in three words, spoken to three
things; Forms, Persons, Principles.

1. As to Forms. I grant some to be purer than others. I allow the Church-form
of Presbytery, to excel the Papacy, as the fairness of the Moon, does the
darkness of the Night. I allow it to be in the first Rank of the purest
outward Forms, although not the first of that Rank. I believe it the duty of
every Christian to follow after the best Forms. Yet is there a more excellent
way, which is that of Love. My Brethren, our Joseph, our Jesus, charge us not
to fall out on the way, 1. Cor. 12. 31.
though we walk in different paths. We are Brethren, let no outward Forms
divide us one from another, if they divide us not from CHRIST, if they have not
in their own nature an enmity to the natural Image of CHRIST, which is
Civility, Morality; or the Heavenly Image, which is Spirituality: Let us
receive one another into the Glory of GOD, Romans 15 7.
as CHRIST receives us, though that Clothing of the outward Form be not of
the same fashion upon all, nor on some so well shaped, as on others, to the
Proportion of the Body, which is CHRIST The Lord JESUS has his Concubines, his
Queens, his Virgins; Saints in Remoter. Forms, Saints Can. 6. 8
in Higher Forms, Saints unmarried to any Form, who keep themselves single for
the immediate embraces of their Love. But CHRIST'S Dove in all these is One, the
New Creature in CHRIST, the spiritual birth of the Spirit, the only One of her
Mother, that Jerusalem above, which is the City compact, that Band of Peace,
that Unity of Saints, the Holy Ghost.

2. As to Persons; Fathers, and Brethren of the Presbytery! You together with
me, desire after, sit drwn under the shadow feed upon the sweet fruit of the
same Apple Tree, in the Can. 2. 2
midst of the trees of the Forest, though not of the same Arm and Bough of
that Tree. I would not in any thing offend you, who are in the number of the
excellent Ones, in which is all Psa. 16. 3
CHRIST'S Delight on earth. If I grieve you, what shall make me glad? There are
of you, who are ready to answer this government of JESUS CHRIST, as Peter did
CHRIST; Thou know that I love thee. Feed then the sheep, feed the Lambs, in
those fresh Pastures into which He now leads you. You who are of another mind,
appear to me, like good old Zachary: Though an Angel from Heaven witness, that
the things now come to pass, are the very answers to those prayers Luke 1
which your selves put up many years agone: yet you cannot believe, because the
way is not in the ordinary track of your Principles and Expectations. Therefore
are you struck dumb for a season, that you cannot make a good confession of
these Appearances of GOD. But when the Child shall be born, the Glory perfectly
brought forth then your selves shall name it John, which being interpreted, is
Grace; then shall even your tongues be loosed, to praise this Dayspring from
on high, which has visited us; then shall you acknowledge that this was the gate
of heaven, though you were not aware of it.

Now the Lord himself bring it to pass that all you, who in your p^st
dispensations have been fathers to these present discoveries, may suddenly turn
your hearts to your children, lest he come, and for your sakes smite the earth,
even all flesh with a curse.

3. As to Principles. The marriage between our Savior and the Soul is a
marriage of Spirits, a marriage in one spirit. No union with any form makes
this Marriage, or dissolvs it. That which alone stands in enmity to these
Heavenly Espousals is union with a strange spirit. This strange spirit is the
Great Whore Babylon, Mother of fornications. One of her names is Mystery,
because she puts her self into all forms, from the lowest to the highest; from
the most outward to the most inward; from the darksomest among men, to the
lightsomest amongst Angels. This is the great work of a Saint, to watch, to
watch the Spirit of CHRIST, as be makes his removes out of one Appearance into
another; to watch the spirit of Antichrist, as that also shifts its forms.

Right Honorable, For this I have desired in my Preaching, in my Prayers, to
work with GOD, even for the opening of the eyes of men to see, that the same
spirit which lay in the polluted Bed of Papacy, may meet them in the perfumed
Bed of Presbytery; that the fornications and sorceries of this Whore are then
greatest, when they are most Mysterious, that she is able by her sorceries to
bewitch those that have attained to a great degree of spirituality as the
Galatians. To this purpose have I in my Sermon represented the same spirit
which dwells in the Papacy, when it enters into the Purer form of Presbytery, as
fuller of mystery, so fuller of despite, of danger, not to make the form or
persons, but that Principle, that spirit unfit to be cherished by any Person in
any fo^m. The Highest Godliness, and the Highest Wickeanesses are those, which
are most Spiritual. Now, O Christians, you fight not with Flesh and Blood, but
Principalities and Powers, spiritual wickednesses in Heavenly forms. But this
is your comfort, spiritual wickednesses ascend as high as the Heavens, even
into Angelical forms: but spiritual Godliness goes up above all Heavens,
together with CHRIST into the bosom of the Eternal Spirit, from whence it
looks down upon the Angels, and all forms, as ministering to it. In vain is the
snare laid before those Doves, which have these spiritual eyes and wings. In
the number of which, that you may be ever found, is the Prayer of

Right Honorable, Your Honors most faithful Servant in CHRIST, PETER STERRY.

ENGLANDS DELIVERANCE FROM THE Northern Presbytery, Compared with Its
Deliverance from the Roman Papacy.
JEREMIAH chap 16. v. 14, 15. Therefore behold, the days come, says the Lord,
that it shall no more be said. The Lord lives, that brought up the Children of
Israel out of the Land of Egypt.

But, The Lord lives, that brought up the Children of Israel from the land of
the NORTH; and from all the Lands, whither he had driven them: and I will bring
them again into the Land that I gave unto their Fathers.


THe LORD, in the Vers^s before, convinces the Jews of the evil of their
ways, in Doing worse than their Fathers; verse 12. He threatens for this, to
cast them out of their own Land, into a Land which they knew not; verse 13. In
these Verses, which are my Text, that ever-gracious GOD, who in the midst of
Judgment remembers Mercy, and in the midst of Threatenings, delights to drop in
Promises, provideth a Cordial for his People, to carry with them into the
Wilderness, and to preserve them from Fainting in their dispersion. He assures
them, that after He has scattered them, He will gather them together, and
bring them back again. Yea, to sweeten their Sufferings with the Expectation of
a most Glorious Deliverance, He lets them know his purpose of making their
bringing up out of Egypt, which was made so Glorious by many Miracles, and
Mighty Wonders, to have no Glory, in respect to this Glory, of the Bringing
them up out of the NORTH, which should so eminently excel.

Thus you see my Text to be a Promise expressed by way of comparison, between
the Last calling home of the People of GOD out of the NORTH, and their First
coming up out of Egypt; Drowning the very Memory, and mention of this first
mercy, in the great and wide Sea of that last loving kindness.

I shall not spend that Time which I would be thrifty of, in any larger
opening, or further dividing of the Words, but fall presently upon that
Doctrine which I have designed from these words, for the Groundwork to my
present Discourse. The Doctrine is this.

Doct. It is the way of GOD to make his last Mercies to his people better than
the first. Doctrine.


Reas. I shall give you one Argument from the Scriptures to prove it; which
Argument shall be a Demonstration of Reason.
this Truth from the proper Reason of it.

This Argument is made up of three parts, which all three laid together, make
one full proof.

1. Part. The great Design of GOD from the beginning, 1. Part.
has been, and still is, to bring forth JESUS CHRIST the second time into the
midst of men, in that Spiritual and Heavenly Appearance, in which He now
sits at the Right Hand of the Father: Our Savior signifies to his
Disciples this grand Project of the Father. Ioh. 6. verse 62. What, and if ye
shall see the Son of Man ascend up, where he was before? The Weight of the
sense in this Scripture, lies upon those two words, See, Before. It is a
frequent thing for that which is First in Being, Dignity, Design, to be Last in
Discovery. That which GOD has chiefly in Design all along, is the
Manifestation of CHRIST to men at last in that Divine state, in which He was at
the first.

You have the same thing held forth, Ioh. 5. 23. It was said in the verse
before, that All judgment was committed to the Son. The reason of it is given
in this verse; that all men should Honor the Son, as they do the Father.
Behold the Purpose, and counsel of GODS Heart, why he does All, that he does;
why he puts the great, and last judgment into the hands of the Son; namely,
that the Son may appear to All Creatures in One, Spiritual, Eternal Glory with
the Father.

2. Part. All the Works of GOD are in order to this Design, 2. Part.
this Discovery of JESUS CHRIST, Coloss. 1. v. 16. All things are said to be
Created for Christ. In what sense is the whole Creation for Christ? Is it to
make any Real Addition of Blessedness, or Glory to the Person of Christ? This
cannot be. For the Person of Christ was complete in Glory before any thing was
made, that was made. Nay, when our Lord Jesus took flesh, and in our Nature
ascended, was glorified; yet then was there no new Glory put upon Jesus Christ.
For, as the humane nature was assumed into the Personality, so was it into the
Glory of the Son of GOD. It was taken up to subsist in one person, and shine in
one glory with the Divine Nature.

But how then was the World made for Christ? Our Divines answer it by that
Distinction of Glorifying GOD essentially, and manifestatively. We say, that
all the Creatures Glorifying of GOD is no more than a Manifestation of the
Glory of GOD. So GOD in the Creation, in the conduct, and management of the
affairs of the Creature, from the Beginning to the End, aims at this mark to
manifest Jesus Christ at the end of time, in that glorious Appearance with
which He was clothed before all times.

3. Part. This design of GOD is his last end, the end of 3. Part.
all his works. When GOD shall have brought forth th^s Judgment, this
Spiritual Discovery of JESUS CHRIST to perfection, to a full victory over all
fleshly Appearances; then will he cease from all his works, and enter into this
Discovery, as his Rest. When man begins his work, his End lies lowest, and
least appears: but as he goes on, and approaches to the Finishing of his work,
his End rises up, and makes more clear Discoveries of it self. So it is with
GOD, at the beginning of his works, this Design, the Discovery of CHRIST, is
Little, lies low, and hid But, as GOD goes on to work, and draws to a
consummation of all things; this Discovery which was at first as a grain of
Mustard Seed, hidden in the Earth, grows up, and spreads its self. This
Manifestation of CHRIST was at the first Creation, as a small spring only, but
a living one. From the Fall, to the Giving of the Law, th^s Spring drives along
upon the face of the Earth, through all manner of mixtures, a very weak store
and strength of Waters. From thence it begins to make a channel to it self,
and to run along in a fair stream. At the Incarnation, and Ascension of JESUS
CHRIST this Stream enlarged it self into a Broad River. But our LORD shall come
the Second time, then shall this River become a great, and wide Sea, covering
the face of the whole Earth. Then shall the end be, when the first and fleshly
discoveries of Christ shall empty themselves into his last, and Spiritual
Appearance.

Now, if you please to lay together these three parts of the Reason, you will
have from them all in consort, a full Harmony with, and a clear Demonstration
of the Doctrine.

If this be the Design of GOD, to discover Christ in the Spirit; if all GODS
works, and mercies toward the Creature be in order to this Discovery; if this
be the end, and the last of all GODS Ways; then it follows naturally from
hence, that as this discovery grows, so likewise must all GODS Works and
Mercies to his people grow in the same Proportion; the later discoveries
Brighter, the later works Better, and Greater than the former.

There are two Uses, which I intend; and those are two Exhortations.

1. Use. An Exhortation to us to be like GOD, to answer Use 1.
his Blessings with our praises, in the same way and Method. As the pleasant
Colors of the morning have a glorious Burial in the clearer light of the Day:
so is it the way of God to make former Mercies, which are in themselves very
precious, yet to be but as thinner ears, as leaner kine to ensuing Mercies,
and to be devoured of them, as the fuller, the fatter; contrary to that which
was in Pharaohs Dream. Accordingly my Text commands us to make it our way in
our Praises, to wrap up, and overwhel me the memory of precedent favors, with
the more joyful mention of succeeding ones; as in the Tabernacle, boards of
Wood were hid under, and over-laid with Silver, or Gold. As the Moon ascends
toward the midst of heaven, so does the Sea rise, and swell; thus should our
praises rise, as the Mercies of the LORD rise, to overflow their former
Channels, and Banks.

This is the Duty which is enjoined in my Text. It shall no more be said, the
Lord lives, that brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt, but the Lord
lives that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the NORTH. This
is the Duty, which is grounded on my Doctrine; It is the way of the Lord to
make his last Mercies better then his first. If the LORD make former mercies in
comparison with later ones, but as the Footstool to the Throne, but as the
tuning of the Instrument to some more excellent Melody: then is it also fit,
that our praises for former mercies, in comparison with our Praises for later
mercies, should be only as the lifting up of our Feet on the Footstool, in
order to our sitting down upon the Throne; or as the tuning of our voices, to
sing some Pleasant Song of our Beloved.

Right Honorable! God has given us the Former and the Later Rain of his
Loving-k^dnesses. With the Former Rain He preserved us, and cherished us, when
we lay, as seed in the Dust of the Earth. Such a former Rain was our
deliverance from the Papacy, by many signal providence and preservations,
amongst which is this most eminent one of our Preservation from the
Gun-powder-Treason, which we celebrate on this Day. But the LORD has given us
the Later Rain also; by which he has made us to spring up out of the Dust into
a Pleasant Garden; He has made us as a Garden enclosed with the Quick-set
hedge of his Divine Wisdom, and Power, that no Wilde-Boar has been able to
break in upon us; He has watered us with his own Foot, walking up and down in
the midst of us, that our Beds and Plants are green. Let us now say with a loud
voice of Thanksgivings, The Lord lives, who has brought us up from the
Romish-Papaoy, which is Spiritually Egypt, by a mighty Deliverance, and
manifold preservations, as this Glorious one of the immediate prevention of a
dreadful Blow by Gunpowder. But then let us say again with a louder Noise of
praises, that may drown the former voice: The Lord lives, who has brought us
up out of the Scotch Tyranny, and Scotch Presbytery, which came like a Tempest
from the NORTH. As the husband and children of the Wise Matron say to her;
Proverbs 31. verse 29. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest
them all: so may England say now to the LORD; In many mercies, as especially
that of saving us from this bloody Design of the Egyptian Papacy, Thou have
done Graciously, and Wonderfully: but this last mercy, by which thou have saved
us from the Black plots, and Bloody powers of the NORTHERN PRESBYTERY, has
excelled them all.

Right Honorable! The seed of GOD in this Nation has had two Capital Enemies,
the Romish-Papacy; the Scotch-Presbytery. This Nation has had a two fold
Capital Deliverance from these Two Capital Enemies. Now, that we may rightly
savor the sweetness of Both these Deliverances; that we may have a Taste of,
nay feast our selves upon that Good Word in my Doctrine, made Good to us in our
Experiences, namely, the LORDS keeping the Best Wine for the Last; that we may
answer my Text, and my Comparison of Scotch Presbytery and Romish Papacy.
Application, in bringing forth the Best Wine of our praises at the Last; and
for the last mercies; I shall compare these Two Capital Enemies of Yours, each
with other. My way of proceeding in this Comparison shall be first to show
their Agreements: Secondly, those Differences, in which your last Enemy appears
to be the Worse. This will let you see how much your last Mercies are the Best,
and how much your Last Praises ought to be so too, in answer to your Last
Mercies.

Cautions. Right Honorable, and you Beloved, who Cautions.
hear me this Day, I entreat you all to take notice of the Cautions which I
here interpose, before I enter upon this Comparison, that I may separate the
vile among Principles, from the precious or innocent among principles, or
persons. I profess not at all to speak against the form of Presbytery, if
considered in its simplicity, in its virginity; as it is merely a way, and
order, in which Saints have Communion with GOD, and each with other, according
to their present light; as it kisseth the golden Scepter of the Spirit,
submitting and subordinating it self unto the rule of that Spirit, being
desirous of no more, no other power, authority, or esteem, than what that
Spirit shall put upon it, by putting forth it self in it. Much less would I
grieve, or cast contempt upon any little one among my Fathers Children, any
honest, sanctified heart, that walks in that form of Presbytery, with humility
and integrity, believing that so it ought to worship GOD. But that Presbytery,
which I compare with the Papacy, is such, as appropriateth to the Outward Form,
those things which pertain only to the Power of the Spirit: such as by virtue
of an Outward, Church-form, assumes a Spiritual and Civil power to it self;
such as out of the Golden cup of a glorious Profession, makes it self drunk
with the wine of Fornications, with Earthly powers and interests; such as takes
to it self the Iron Mace of fleshly force and fury, to break in pieces at
pleasure Commonwealths, Crowns, Consciences, Estates, and Hearts of men.
Right Honorable, this is that Presbytery, on which those Enemies, whom the LORD
has last of all subdued before you, had founded, and built up that Interest
and Strength, by which they opposed the Glorious outgoings of GOD before you,
and endeavored your Ruin. This is that, which I call the Scotch-Presbytery,
and now compare with the Romish-Papacy.

1. The Comparison is first to be made in those things 1. Agreem.
which I call Agreements between them, and these are Six.

1. Agreement, Both join in setting up the Scriptures, the Word of God
outwardly expressed, as the Letter of that Law, by which all things of
Christianity and Religion are to be judged. So Scotus himself teaches in his
Preface to his Disputes upon the Sentences, that Religion must be grounded upon
a Revelation. In this, not only the Romish-Papist, and Scotch-Presbyter, but
all who pretend with any face to any thing of GOD, or CHRIST, do concur. But
there are two things in a Revelation. There is Lex Revelata: and Lumen
Revelationis, that is, the Law Revealed, and the Light of Revelation. One is
the Subject, or Master: but the other is the Form, the Life, the Essence of a
Revelation. Now these Two Parties meet in this, to magnify the first of these,
the Law Revealed. This they make the foundation of their Throne, the Scepter of
their Government, which as taken singly by it self, is but a breathless
Carcass, or a Dead Letter. Herein a Living Member of JESUS CHRIST is in this
Point distinguished from all other^. He receives; ownes, bows down to the Law
revealed upon this account, because it comes down from Heaven into his heart in
a Light of Divine Revelation

2. Agreement. These two of whom we speak, do Both asse^ a visible Judge on
Earth, upon whom all Particular Persons are to depend for the Determining of
those two Grand Questions; First, what is Scripture; Secondly, what the sense
of that Scripture is. The Romanists say, that this Judge is the Pope, or an
Oecumenicall Council. The Scotch Presbyter is for a National Assembly, or
rather an Oecumenicall Assembly, if the Civil Government would bear it. This
Presbyter condemns the Papist justly, because he suffers not the people to
read the Scriptures in their own Tongue. But who art thon, O man, who
condemnest another, and do thy self the same thing, while thou forbiddest
private persons to read the Scriptures with their own Eyes? Thou confinest them
to Spectacles of the Assemblies making, while thou permittest the Reading, but
prohibitest the Interpreting of the Spriptures according to that sense, which
the Holy Spirit brings forth to every man in his own spirit, if it be not
stumpt for Current by the Spirit of the General Assembly. Why do thou judge
the Papist for exalting un-written Traditions to an Equal Authority with the
Scriptures, when thy way makes the Scripture it self, in the Letter and
Meaning of it, a Tradition of the Elders?

3. Agreement. Both these Sects have a very great Jealousy over the Spirit of
GOD. As the Pharisees said concerning 3. Agreem.
JESUS CHRIST, Joh. 11 48 If we let this man alone, all men will believe on
him, and the Romans shall come, and take away both our place, and Nation: So
say these two, the Romish, and Scotch Principles in the hearts of men: If we
yield to this, to let the Spirit alone, and to suffer all men to believe on the
Holy Ghost, as the only witness and evidence of Divine Truth: if we give way
to this, as sound doctrine, that it is the proper office of the Third Person,
the Spirit, and of him alone, to Apply Truth Authoritatively, as it is of the
second Person to Act, of the first Person to Decree: that it belongs to this
Spirit alone, authoritatively to testify in the spirits of Men, what those
words are which himself has taught, what the meaning of the Spirit is in those
words: if this be once granted, that nothing is to be received, as Divine
Truth, but that which brings an Epistle of Commendations along with it, written
by this finger of the Living GOD upon the Heart, then farewell all Religion;
all manner of Sects, Heresies, Heathenisme will break in upon us, and take away
the very face of a Church from amongst us. It is said of JESUS CHRIST, that He
was numbered among transgressors in his death. Such usage as our Savior himself
found on Earth from Pilate, and the Priests; such does his Spirit find to this
day from the Papacy, and that Presbytery of which we speak. The Holy Ghost, as
he appears and gives forth his Oracles in his Temples, which are his Saints, is
numbered among Whimsies, Fancies, Fanatic Furies, Enthusiasmes, and so is
condemned, is suppressed.

4. Agreement. A watchful Opposition to all Growths 4. Agreem.
of Truth, above the pitch and stature of Opinions commonly received. Nothing
is accounted so dangerous in things pertaining to the Gospel, as Innovation;
although S. Paul command us still, to be transformed in the Renewing of our
Minds, that we may prove what the good and acceptable will of GOD is; and this
to Saints already converted, as a continual duty, in which they are ever to be
exercising themselves, that they may have new minds to day in comparison with
those which they had yesterday, and new minds again tomorrow, in comparison
with their minds to day; yet the same Jesus, yesterday, to day, and for ever.
As in some places of the River Thames, you have Wyers set up quite cross the
River, and basket nets laid in those Wyers, to catch those Lampries that come
swimming up against the stream: so both in Papacy, and in Rigid Presbytery,
all Constitutions, Methods, frames of Doctrine, and Discipline, seem to be as
wyers with nets in them, set cross the whole stream of civil and Religious
conversation, to catch every discovery of Christ, every manifestation of the
Gospel, which comes up against the present Tide, the general Current of
Principles and Positions. They labor, as to hedge in the Wind, to bind up the
sweet influences of the Spirit, they will not suffer it to blow where it lists,
because they know not whence it comes, or whither it goes.

5. Agreement, in Annexing the Spirit to outward Formalities. 5. Agreem.
Like Simon Magus, Both seem to believe, that the Gifts, and Ministry of the
Spirit, may be purchased by the Coin of Education, Parts, Moral honesty,
formal Qualifications, Ceremonious Observations of outward Rites. So is their
way laid, so are all their practices managed, as if by a kind of Simoniacal
Magic, that power which alone can aw or secure us from the devil, were shut up
within the circle of their custemary, and solemn Forms. When the LORD says,
Neither on this Mountain, nor in Jerusalem, but in spirit and truth shall all
men worship the Father: Yea, say they, but spirit and truth dispense themselves
within the Jerusalem of this Church Order, on the Mountain of these rituall
observations, these consecrated forms.

6. Agreement in making Religion a Rise to Civil Pomp 6. Agreem.
and Power. JESUS CHRIST says, My Kingdom is not of this world. But say these
two Factions, Our Kingdom is over this world. We rule in Earthly things, by an
Earthly strength, though not from an Earthly Title. The Heavenly power of the
Spirit is the Scepter in our Hand: but the fleshly power of the Magistrate, is
the sword in the Hand of our Minister, and Guard, which is to be subordinate to
our Scepter. By this means they bring all manner of civil affairs within the
compass of their Cognizance, by virtue of their spiritual judicatories: they
dispose of Governments, Nations, Crowns, by virtue of their Ecclesiastic
censures. As the Pope baited Queen Elizabeth with his Bull, and gave away the
Kingdom of England to the King of Spain; so did the Presbytery in Scotland now
judge, condemn the Present Government set over us by the glorious might of
Divine Power, and give away this Nation to their Scots King.

I have done with the Agreements of these two; I come now to compare them in
their Differences; and that only those, in which the later Enemy appears worse
than the former, that so the former Mercy may be made the sweeter to us, in
being exceeded and swallowed up by this later deliverance, as a stream running
into a greater river.

The Differences between these two Enemies are four.

1. Difference. Our first enemies pleased not GOD, but 1. Differ.
yet were agreeable to men in their ways. Being false to a divine, and
spiritual interest, they are true to principles of humane policy. Being severe
in the imposall of superstitious rites, and those principles which descend
immediately into the practice of such rites; they take, and give a large scope
to the understanding and affections in generous contemplations, in mystical
divinity. Wanting that bread of heaven, that new wine of the Kingdom, the
beauties and sweetnesses of GOD in the Spirit, which should feast the inward
man; they entertain the fancy, and senses, with all objects suitable to them,
with a pretense of a subserviency to devotion, as in the Temple of old.

On the other side, our last enemies please not God, and are contrary to all
men. These contemn the Spirit, and its Impressions upon the heart, when they
are set up for Pillars of fire to go before us in this dark night of flesh, as
Enthusiasmes. At the same time they condemn humane policy, as profane. They
check the delights of sense and fancy, as vain; rejecting also the openings of
the glory of Christ, the mutual enterviews, walks, embraces, kisses between
God and the Soul, in the Spirit, as Whimsicall.

It is necessary for me here to profess, that I have no meaning to justify
the sensualities of the Papacy in its religion, while by pretending these
things as Spiritual inlightnings, Spiritual warmings; they intend them for a
vail upon the Spirit. There is no such way to draw us up to the glory of
Christ, as by his Cross, to which the pleasing, and heightning of the flesh,
for the most part, carries a very great enmity. Therefore do I not desire to
cast any dif-esteem upon a severity toward the outward man, even to the
enslaving of it, to the beating of it black and blew, as Saint Paul used it, so
this be not to the puffing up of the fleshly mind. But my Justification, or
Condemnation of these things is, as they stand in the comparison between these
two parties, and as they may stand upon the root of the same Principle or
Spirit in each party. Upon this account, as Samuel was by Witchcraft raised out
of his grave, to appear before Saul, with his mantle upon him: So both these,
the Romish Papacy, the Scotish-Presbytery, as it has been formerly stated by
me, appear like the Ghost of Iudaisme raised from the dead by that Witch of
Endor, the fl^shly principle dressed up in the form of Christianity. But there
is this difference; The former is the Ghost of Iudaisme clothed with the
Mantle which it wore in its life time, appearing in the same outward pomp,
with the same delicious pleasures of pictures, Music, Perfumes, etc. as of
old. But the later is Judaism undrest, like an apparition in chains, or
Lazarus when he came forth from the grave with the grave clothes bound about
him.

2. Difference. Our Southern enemies are richer: our Northern ones poorer.
Prove. 28. 3. A poor man that oppresses 2. Differ.
the poor, is like a sweeping rain which leaves no food. A Legal Spirit
having not the seed of GOD, which is CHRIST, at the bottom of it is the
poorest, the proudest, the cruellest of all Spirits. Let not this at all
discourage any poor soul, which under a Legal dispensation waits for Christ.
It is spoken only of the proud, poor ones; not of the poor ones oppressed under
a sense of divine wrath, but oppressing with the fury of a carnal rage. These
poor ones, when they prevail, are even to those other poor and meek ones, as a
Ho^sl^ech, as a Barren womb, as the grave, ever devouring, never satisfied. The
Legal Spirit standing in opposition to the Spirit of Christ, is the barrennest
of all wombes, the cruellest grave.

3. Difference. The Scotch Presbytery has the purest form, and in respect to
the outward form, is a good, and 3. Differ.
great degree of reformation from the Papacy, both in respect to discipline and
doctrine, as to the letter. Now who knows not, that the corruption of the best
things is the worst of all corruptions? Naturalists say, that the Marrow of a
man, in which his strength lies, the Brain of a man, in which his wisdom is
seated, by Putrefaction in death, generates often times a Serpent. In like
manner, the exactest Image of that Heavenly Man Jesus Christ, if for want of
the Quickening Spirit it corrupt, converts its highest excellency, the strength
and wisdom of the letter, to the enmity of the serpent against that Spirit,
which is the Heavenly man himself.

The most implacable hatred is in the nearest competition. The falling out of
brethren is as walls and bar^es. The son of the Bondwoman is he, who stirs
up the most frequent, and fiery persecutions against the son of the Freewoman.
It is the son of the Freewoman alone, who darkneth the glory of his Brother
Ishmael, who puts in between him and the inheritance, who carries away the love
of the Father from him. If the spiritual seed were out of the way, the Jew in
the letter, the Legal Professor were the only Saint; neither would there be
any, that could step into Heaven before him. If therefore the spiritual seed
be not sown in the heart of this Jew, he still cries concerning him who is
born after the Spirit; Let us stay him. When the single devil had left the
house in the Parable, he returned to it Matthew. 12. 44.
again, finding it swept and garnished, but empty of that heavenly Man that
should inhabit it, he reenters into it, and takes with him seven devils more.
The Scotch Presbytery is a house, which the evil spirit of Papacy had left, a
house swept clean from the filth of profaneness, garnished with the beautiful
things of the letter, far beyond the Papacy: my Prayer is, that being
un-inhabited by the Lord Jesus, there be not found the more devils in it,
besides the re-entry of the first-divel, as to his inward principles, though in
a more specious form.

4. Difference. The Popish plot by Gunpowder would have taken away our
Governors only, and those, as they 4. Differ.
sat on that old seat, in that old form of government which had framed those
Laws, which had shed the blood of so many Saints by Martyrdom, which had laid
so many bonds upon the Gospel. But this Zeal-Plot, laid more deeply, more
dangerously than the Powder Plot, even in the hearts of our Brethren, which
dwelt in the midst of us; this aimed at the Ruin of Governors, Government,
People, and all, by an Army made up of Highlanders, who never knew Christianity
or Civility; whose rage would have blown up, have torn in pieces all before it
with a greater fury, than that of Gunpowder. All this was intended upon this
Government, as it came forth new washed in the blood of many precious Persons,
who sought it with the loss of their lives; as it was busy in taking away the
lives of those laws, which had shed the blood of the Saints, and in taking off
all bonds from the Gospel, that it might run freely, and be glorified. That
former Treason was against an old power, founded upon old principles,
concerning which (as once before the destruction of Jerusalem a voice was
heard, which was the voice of Angels, (as is supposed) saying, Let us be gone
from hence;) so the voice of Good men, Good Angels, God himself was heard,
saying, Let us be gone. But this later Conspiracy, was against a new power,
built upon new principles, concerning which (if I do not deceive my self, and I
comfortably hope, that I do not deceive my self) I have heard in my spirit the
voice of Jesus Christ, and his Spouse, with the Angels attending, speaking
after this manner one to another: Let us make our abode here. Let us go forth
into these fields, to see how the Fig Tree Cant. 7. 11, 1^
puts forth its green figs, and the vine her tender grapes. Here will we give
one another our loves.

Thus, Right Honorable! you have seen your two enemies compared. You see how
much the later exceeds the former in enmity, opportunity, design. I shall now
compare the manner of your deliverances in two things, and so conclude this Use.

1. In the powder plot, all was ready, brought within a very few hours of
execution, the train laid, the Match lighted: yet all vanished without giving
any blow, or making any noise. In the Scotch plot, long and mighty preparations
were made, a great Army formed, every thing brought to maturity, and ripe for
action; the design it self put furre into motion, like a Granado shot up, and
falling into the very midst of us. Yet these Preparations Armies, Actions,
scatter in a moment, like a Mist. The way of the Papacy, and of the Presbytery
in both these attempts against us, has been, through the Blessing of our God,
like the way of a serpent upon a stone, rising up out of his nest in the Earth,
sliding back into his first darkness, and leaving no track, or impression
behind him.

Secondly, The LORD first delivered us from the Romish Papacy by a Child,
Edward the sixth. But this proved like the Flower, a fading Mercy. When we were
relapsed into Popery, we were again raised out of it by the Hand of a Woman,
Queen Elizabeth. We had been of late retrived, and brought back under the Power
of the same Principles, clothing themselves with the New Garment of
Presbytery, if that our God had not again delivered us by those of the New
Model, who were in scorn, esteemed as Children, in the Eye of flesh; who in
simplicity behaved themselves, Prove. 30. 19.
as Children, to GOD.

Right Honorable! I humbly beseech you, whose Hearts, Heads, Hands, as Saints,
Counselors, Soldiers, the LORD Jesus has made use of to bring great things
to pass; do not (I persuade my self, that you do not) think it your dispa
ragement, but your Glory rather, to be accounted, as children, and women, in
these Mighty Works: as children, who have been led all along in the Hand of
their Father, who have been altogether guided by His Eye; as Women, who have
had a Covering upon your Heads, a veil upon your wisdoms, your worths, that
Jesus Christ alone may be seen as your Head, the Power, of GOD, the Wisdom of
GOD to 1 Cor. 11. 7.
you, the Glory upon you. If this also prove not a fading mercy; as GOD has
founded his Praise, and our Peace; so will he also perfect it in the Mouths, by
the Hands of Babes Psalm. 8. 2.
and Sucklings, such as shall hang wholly upon the Breasts of His Consolations,
and draw in for nourishment, only the sincere and unmixt milk of the Immortal
Word.

But to finish this Use. Right Honorable! Has the LORD made former mercies as
seed, out of which Later Mercies have sprung up as the Ripe fruit? O then, let
our present Praises, and Graces, be to those of Former Seasons, as Ripe fruit
to the seed. Let them not still be in the Earth of a fleshly Manifestation; but
let them come up to a Maturity, a Spirituality. Former mercies stand in the
brightness of our later mercies, as the Moon in the Light of the Sun. They
have no glory by reason of that Glory which excels. If the Holiness, the
Rejoicing, of your Former Thanksgivings have been as the Moon, Legal,
Litterall: let the Holiness, the Joy of your present Thank^givings shine out,
as the Sun, having an Evangelicall, a Spiritual Glory in the face of them.
Does our GOD come forth in New ways to save us, and shall we serve him still
in the Old way? Let us also lay aside the Oldnesse of the Letter, and answer
him again with the Newness of the Spirit. Let us sing to him the New song of
Moses, and the Lamb; now that he pipes to us the New Tunes of more
Transcendent, more spiritual, more Heavenly salvations.

2. Use. A second Exhortation. It is the way of the 2. Use.
LORD to make his Last Mercies better than the Former: The Present Salvations
of our GOD in the midst of us have exceeded all, that ever were to this day.
Let us raise up our expectations, Let us lift up the Eyes of our Spirits unto
Loving kindnesses, which shall be yet much more glorious then these, which are
at this present come down from Heaven upon us in so Glorious a manner. If we
have seen Great things, which we could not have believed, now, that the LORD
has brought us up out of Egypt: what Wonders, what Glory shall our eyes
behold, when the Lord shall bring up his People out of the NORTH.

For the more clear prosecution of this Use, and explication of my intent in
it, I must propound, and answer, Four Questions. First, What is signified by
Egypt, as to the Jews. Secondly, What by the NORTH. Thirdly, what by Egypt to
Christians. Fourthly, What by the NORTH.

1. Question. What is signified by Egypt to the Jews, 1. Question
and what by their being brought up out of it?

Ans. This is plain in the Letter of the Scriptures, and Answer.
needs no answer, to those who have read Moses, and his Book of Exodus.

2. Question. What is meant by the NORTH, as to 2. Question
the children of Israel?

Answer. Babylon stood NORTH to the Holyland, and Answer.
the Return from the Captivity at the end of the seventy years, was a Bringing
up of the People of GOD from the NORTH. But that cannot be the Meaning here,
for Three Reasons.

1. Reas. The Return from Babylon was not with such an 1. Reason
outstretched Arm, with such a Glory of Miracles, of the Divine Presence, it
was not to such a Rest, as the coming up out of Egypt had been.

2. Reas. The Children of Israel were not all brought 2. Reason
back from the NORTH at that time; only Two Tribes, and these but in part.

3. Reason, My Text joins with the bringing up of Israel 3. Reason
from the NORTH, the bringing of them from all places into which they have been
scattered, which was never yet done. These two universalities of the Promise,
for all Israel, and from all places, remain unaccomplished to this day.

When GOD brought up Israel his son out of Egypt, He planted him, as a
vineyard, with a Legal Dispensation, with fleshly Ordinances, a Tabernacle, a
Temple, a Worship, a Presence, a Glory, appertaining to these. But Ieshurun
waxed fat with these fleshly Worships. He kicked the Heel against his Master
that fed him, his Father that brought him up. He set up the Temple above the
LORD of the Temple: he holds up the Ordinances against him, when he came, who
was Greater then the Ordinances, and the End of them all. Then did God thunder
from Heaven against his Holy Things, and consume them with his Lightnings, Then
did he scatter Israel into a Dispersion, a Desolation, where he wanders, abides
shut up, without Priest, or Teraphim, even until now.

When the Nation of the Jews was taken away, Christians in the Letter
immediately succeed into their place. They Romans 11. 17, 18
sit down at a Table of fleshly Ordinances. They also are in*snared by their
Table. Their Hearts grow fat, their Eyes Romans 11. 9.
are closed up with flesh. They see not to the End of the Letter, and therefore
cannot own the Lord, that Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 13. etc.
when He comes to those who are under the Letter, as to his own, Christians
succeeding the Jews in Ordinances, in Idolizings of the Letter, in rejection of
the Lord, the life of the letter, for, the leter's sake, succeed them also in
their desolations, dispersions; and shall at last accompany them in their
return to their everlasting rest. Romans 11. 12.


3. Question. What Egypt signifies in the state of Christianity? 3. Question


Answer, Egypt is Sodom, the Mother of fornications, and Witchcraft.
Antichrist is Egypt, and Sodom Spiritually; Answer. Rev. 11. 8.
as Jesus Christ is Goshen and Canaan, the land of light, of rest. There are
many Antichrists, but two principle ones:

1. The Antichrist to the letter. 2. The Antichrist in the letter to the
Spirit.
1. The Antichrist to the letter. This is like the Samaritans of old, a spirit
of Heathenism, and profaneness 1. Anti-
bringing forth it self into a loose profession of Christianity, that it may
oppose it self to the purity of holiness, according ^o the letter, and
perseeute Jesus Christ in the fleshly mani^estations of himself, This is that
spiritual Egypt, which will not suffer the people of God to go forth three
days ^ourney into the Wilderness, to worship on Mount Sinai, (...) the
outward purity of ordinances, and legal cleansings of ^e flesh.

2. The Antichrist in the letter to the Spirit, through 2. Antichrist.
an annoynting in the flesh with many heavenly gifts, unto the illumination and
sanctification of the flesh, unto tastes of, touches of a Spiritual, a Heavenly
sweetness and power, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.
becomes an enemy to the Heavenly substance, to Jesus Christ, as he is a
Quickening Spirit. This is that Spiritual Egypt, which will not suffer the
people of God to go forth free from Mount Sinai, three days journey further
through the Wilderness, through the death of Christ, to worship on Mount Sion.

This is the Abomination of desolation set up in the Holy Place, or where it
ought not to be, of which JESUS CHRIST Matt. 24. 15. Mark 13. 14.
speaks. It is the ordinary phrase of Scripture to call an Idol, an
Abomination. Now this is the setting up of an Idol, where it ought not to be,
even in the Holy place: The spiritual whore clothes her self with the
ordinances of Christ; she washes and bathes her self in the letter of the
Scriptures, until her flesh shine with the exact purity of an outward
holiness; she perfumes her self with the sweet savours of the ointments of the
spirit, decks her self with the fleshly manifestations of the Heavenly
Bridegroom, as with Jewels. When she has done all this, she shows her self for
the Jerusalem above, the true Mother of all the Saints; she persecutes the
Freewoman out of the world into the Wilderness, that she may with the more
ease and quiet pass for her. The lovers of this whore, cry up the glory of
Christ in the flesh, his ordinances, his outward word his appearances to, his
impressions on the earthly man, for a pretense, that they may cry down Jesus
Christ, as h^ comes in the glory of the Father, as he is the new and he^venly
man.

This is the Highest Abomination, being thus set up in t^ holy Place, in the
Sanctuary it self, to maintain an opp^sition to the invisible glory of the most
Holy Place, whi^ is within the vail.

As this is that highest Abomination, so it brings t^ greatest desolation along
with it. It makes desolate that h^ly Place, those holy things, in which it is
set up: Ordinances, Qual fications, Manifestations, the Flesh of CHRIST, the
letter of the Scriptures; it scatters the flock of CHRIST one from another into
the Wilderness; it brings the death of JESUS CHRIST, as a sign, upon them; it
drives them out into a Cold, Frozen, Barren, Dark, Desolate state, as into the
Corners of the NORTH.

Right Honorable! Twice have those Two Spiritual Egypts, when you have been
carried forth from the midst of them with a mighty Arm, followed you with
Mighty Hosts, to bring you back again into a Land of darkness, and House of
Bondage. Twice has the LORD overwhelmed them in the Red Sea of their own
Blood.

Two several Quarrels have you had with these two Egypts. Your first Quarrel
with the one was for the Purity of the Letter, and Ordinances, against a Spirit
of Profaneness, and Superstition. Your second Quarrel with the other was for
the freedom of the Spirit in his holy, his heavenly Out goings before you, both
as to Religion, and Civil Rule, against the Letter and Ordinances, perversely
opposed to the Spirit, which is the Light, Life, Truth, End of both.

Two several Testimonies has the LORD given on your side against your Enemies
in these two quarrels: as for your Enemies, He has made them as Dust before
the wind, the Angel of the Lord driving them. But these Two times he has
appeared to you, as he did to Solomon; he has spoken 1 King. 11. 9.
Peace to you his chosen ones. And what has the LORD spoken to you, when he
has spoken Peace? even this, that his chosen ones return no more to folly;
that you no more P^
have any thoughts of Going down again into Egypt, lest you go a-whoring from
the living GOD, the Eternal Spirit, and forsakethe Guide of this your Youth.

Right Honorable! Balaam was a Prophet, he was the man, whose eyes were
opened, who saw the visions of GOD: Number 24. 3, 4.
But he prophesied for the hire of a fleshly Interest. This Balaam has assayed
from several places, to curse the Armies Mic. 3 11.
of Israel in the midst of you. But no Enchantment has been against you, while
you have walked as Jacob, a Plain man, in the simplicity of the spirit, though
a supplanter of his brother Edom. There has been no Divination against you,
while as Israel, Princes with GOD, you have wrastled with GOD, and so prevailed
over your Enemies.

Right Honorable! I do now with bowels tenderly Earning, with a heart bleeding
over your precious lives, and this whole Commonwealth, how the Knees of my
spirit to the GOD of Israel for you; I do earnestly warn and entreat every one
of you; that, as this Balaam has not been able to hurt you by his open curses,
so he may not by his close wiles and fair-tongued flatteries, draw you to feast
on the Moabitish Dainties, look on the Moabitish Beauties, bow Revel. 2. 14.
down to the Moabitish Idols of fleshly Excellencies, and enjoyments. I speak
to you, as to wise Men. Why should you fall for your fornications, many
thousands of you by the Plague in this wilderness? 1 Cor. 10. 8. 3. Quest.


3. Question. What the Coming up out of the NORTH means.

Answer. You have a full description of this in the Prophecy Ans. Ezekiel. 1.
of Ezekiel. As the several Prophesies in the Revelation have prefixed to them
several Appearances of Jesus Christ, as the Mark at which (...) Prophecy
aims, and as the Rev. 11. 12. and 4. 2. 12. 1.
Scene, or Face of things, which the predictions in each Prophecy are to usher
into the world: so Ezekiel in the Beginning of his Book presents us with a
vision Dreadfully Glorious, in which JESUS CHRIST is discovered, as he comes
with his people from the NORTH, that this vision may be a Light to all the
following Prophesies.

This first Chapter of Ezekiel has many things to be said of it, which are
hard to be expressed, and much more hard to be understood. But I will not
trouble you with any of those Mysteries, which require senses well exercised on
invisible things. I shall only set before you several particulars, which offer
themselves to every Eye, and fall with ease upon every understanding.

1. The whole Object, which shows it self to the Prophet, is called, the Glory
of the Lord; verse 28. This expression imports as much, as the Court of a King,
where he is in state, in Glory. The Jews call this vision, the Chariot,
alluding to that in the Psalmist, of GOD riding upon the Cherubim, Psalm. 8. 10.
contrary to the figure in the most holy Place where GOD is said to dwell
between the Cherubims in respect to the Ark, 1 Samuel 4. 4. Exodus 25 17.
and the Mercy seat* which was under the Covering of the Wings of those
Angelical Creatures.

2. He who rides in this Chariot is a Man upon a Throne. This Man is our LORD
JESUS in his Heavenly Man, in the Person of a Mediator. The Word Amber is so
interpreted by very learned Divines, as to represent the Godhead Chashmal.
in its Majesty, together with the Humanity, overspread by the Bright Beams of
the Divine Nature. This Man appears also in the full Image of the Ever-Blessed
Trinity. The fire clothing him from the Loins upward, from the Loins downward,
shadows out the Father. The Image it self, the Appearance of a man in the fire,
represents the Son. The Brightness round about, like a Rainbow, typifies the
Holy Ghost breathed forth from the Father, and the Son, the Union of both
circling them in as in Mutual Embraces; verse 26. and 27.

3. This man has a firmament under his Feet, Behold here the Pavement of the
Chariot, if I may so speak. This firmament 2 Cor. 12. 2,
is the third heavens, where Jesus Christ is, where Paradise is, whither Saint
Paul was rapt. These are the Lords own Heavens which the Lord bows, and upon
which He descends, when he comes down, according to the Prophet. Psalm. 14^
This is that Pavement which the Elders of Israel saw under the Feet of the God
of Israel. That was represented Exodus 24. 10.
by Saphyre; so is this here, verse. 26.

4. Four living Creatures stand under this firmament, and draw this Chariot,
verse 26. They sparkled like burnisht brass, verse 7. They were as burning
coals of fire, and as Lamps, verse 13. See here the horses in the coach, which
are the Elect Angels, the second heavens, the holy Powers, and high Principles,
or Principalities, in the secret of the Invisible part of this Creation. These
have their Proper forms, as Angels, verse 4. They have all one common form of a
Man, verse 5. which is the Divine Image of our glorified Savior, in which
everyone of them possesses his own distinct-image, to show them to be the
Angels of Jesus Christ. Such is the Majesty of God riding upon the Cherubims,
as his horses, who have the heavenly image of their glorious Rider himself, as
trappings cover them all over.

5. The wheels to this Chariot are, the visible Part of this Creation, as it is
restored, and made new by Jesus Christ. The word translated wheels, signifies
very properly globes, round globes, such as the round world of these Heavens,
and Earth, which our eyes behold.

6. One Divine life acts this whole piece of Glory, from the Man upon the
Firmament, to the wheels, which stand by the Living Creatures. That fire which
is a Robe of Glory upon the Man, verse 27. That is the spirit of Life, which
goes up and down in the midst of the living Creatures, verse 13. This Spirit of
the Living Creatures is in the wheels also, enlivening, and acting them, ver.
20.

7. This flaming Chariot comes forth from the midst of a whirlwind, and a
great cloud, and a fire, v. 4.

8. This sweeping, Devouring Tempest comes from the NORTH, v. 4.

These are the Particular Notes upon this chapter, which I have collected out
of it unto this End, to found upon these Notes, three Observations.

1. Observation. When the Lord brings his People out of 1 Observat.
the NORTH, he comes in a tempest of a whirlwind, a Great cloud, and of fire.
He comes to bring Desolation upon the Holy city, the Jerusalem which now is.
He comes, Ezekiel. 43. 3.
as a whirlwind, to shake dreadfully the whole Earth. He comes, in a cloud to
bring Darkness, Trouble, Confusion upon the Spirits of all Mankind. He comes
as a fire, to burn upon all flesh, till he have quite consumed it. When He
arises, to raise His Spouse from under the Power of his Death, which is the
scattering of his People among the Nations, and under the rage of Antichrist,
who sits in the sides of the NORTH, driving his people into the wilderness of
the Nations: Isa. 14. 13.
then will our Lord Jesus after this manner take vengeance of all the Nations
among which they have been scattered, and bewildred.

2. Observation. Jesus Christ, as He is the Glory of God, comes riding in the
midst of this whirlwind, cloud, and fire. 2 Observat.
He takes up his Saints also, whose Hearts are upright with the Father, as his
heart is, into His Chariot. They also, though in their flesh they melt away
with the servent heat of this fire; yet in their Spiritual Man they come
riding on upon the Third Heavens together with their King. The Lord my God thus
comes, and all the Saints with thee. While Zach. 14. 5.
a cloud of darkness covers the whole World, you, O ye Brethren of the Great
King, sit in the secret of this Darkness, upon a Th^one of Light; you l^e in
the midst of this cloud upon a Bed of Love, in fellowship with your beloved
Jesus Christ. While the Tempest tears up this Creation from the very Roots of
it; you sit within it, as above it, as ruling it, as flying upon the Wings of
it: you see a new Heaven, and a New earth in the midst of it, as in a womb,
from which they together with your selves are ready to spring forth. Fear not
you, O ye meek ones, when the storm rages most violently, they are the Swift
motions of your Chariot-wheels, which now make haste, that raise this Storm.
Fear not you, when the starry Roof of the Kingdom of this World, shall drop
like melted Lead upon the Heads of the Inhabitants of it; when the Foundations
of it, laid in the Dark parts of the Earth, shall be devoured by fire. While
all this is working, you have the firmamen of the third heavens, the True
Mercy-Seat for a Pavement under your feet.

3. Observation. When Jesus Christ shall have sufficiently 3 Observat.
avenged himself of his Enemies, then shall the Whirlwind, cloud, and fire,
altogether vanish in a moment, as by a Divine Appointment. The old heavens, and
the old earth shall vanish in the midst of this storm. Then shall the Lord
appear on his Chariot, and fill All. The bright Wheels, with their high and
dreadful Rings full of eyes, shall shine out, as the New Earth of this visible
frame, made all of One Precious stone, The Living Creatures, which draw those
wheels; shall sparkle forth, as the New Heavens of the Elect, and Holy Angels,
who are burnished Brass in respect to their Natural, Angelical Glory; but
flaming Ezekiel. 1. v. 7. v. 13. 2.
Lamps, filled with the Oil and fire of the Spirit, in respect to their New
State in the Kingdom of Christ. But above the Heads of these, in that Day,
shall discover themselves the Third heavens, which are that firmament, that
expansion of Divine Glory. These Heavens shall be seen only, as a floor or
Ground for the Throne, the New Jerusalem, the city of the Great King. Then
shall the Heavenly man, and the Glorious Trinity standing each in other, God
and Lamb, appear as the Temple in this heavenly Jerusalem. Rev. 21. 22.
In the midst of this Temple are seen all thy Saints, O GOD. Here they have
their Mansions, as the Priests, and Levits had their Chambers round about in
the Temple of old. Here they live continually with GOD, as Kings, and Priests,
never to go forth more. From hence they extend the Line of their Divine
Priesthood the Scepter of their Everlasting kingdom, all over the New heavens,
and the New Earth. From hence they sow themselves over all things, as a seed;
they grow up out of all things, as the fruit, of joy, glory, and immortality,
O! who is there now among all the Saints, that can forbear to cry; Blow ye
Whirl winds, fly ye clouds, thou fire make haste, and bring my Beloved: come
thou, come quickly Lord Jesus.

As surely as the Lord lives, and has of old brought up the Children of
Israel out of Egypt; so surely will our Lord Jesus thus come, and bring his
Saints with Him, out of the NORTH. But why do I say, that he shall come thus?
Ezekiel says in the last verse of his first chapter, that all this is but the
Likeness of the Appearance of the Glory of God. As much as Earthly similitudes
fall short of heavenly things; as much as fleshly shadows and Types fall short
of Spiritual Substances, and Truths: so much does all the Glory, that can be
now expressed, or thought, fall short of the Glory of the Appearance of our
heavenly Bridegroom. All former glories shall be remembered no more for ever. A
new, a New glory shall fill thine Eyes, thine Ears, thy heart, O thou the
Lambs Bride; even such a Glory, as thine Eyes never saw any Image of, thine
Ears never heard any Tidings of, thine Heart never took in any Degree of,
until that Day.

Right Honorable! I shall not conclude, until I have endeavored to raise
your joys, and your Praises yet higher by setting before you a Double
interest, which (to say no more) you seem to have in This coming of the Lord
Jesus with his people out of the NORTH. One is the interest of this
Commonwealth. The Other is the interest of this Age, and time of the World, in
which you live.

1. Interest. Of this Commonwealth in the coming up of the People of GOD out
of the NORTH. I shall take the 1. Interest.
Boldness here to Propound to you several considerations, which may be, all
put together, the Ground of a Modest Hope to a Sober Christian, that the LORD
JESUS intends that Honor to this Nation, that it shall be said to it first of
all the Nations, concerning the heavenly Bridegroom, that, he was born here;
here he first of all appeared in an Eminent and signal Manner, to bring his
People up out of a fleshly servitude, and Death, into a Spiritual Glory, and
Immortality.

1. Consider. This is one of the Remotest Parts of the 1. Consid.
world to the NORTH, whether the Rule of Jerusalem, and Rome, Christ, and
Antichrist has extended it self. It is Master Brightmans observation in his
Commentary upon the Revelations, that, Among the Seven Churches of Asia,
Pergamut has the NEW name Rev. 2. 17.
the Sun of Righteousness after his withdrawings began to return from that
Church which stood most NORTH, to make a Spring upon the Earth.

2. Consid. I have heard it often observed by Judicious 2. Consid.
Christians, who have traveled over Books, Countries, and Spirits of men, that
no where upon the face of the Earth do there appear to be any Number of hearts
Spiritually Acquainted, Spiritually conversing with our Lord Jesus, in any
Degree of Heavenly Purity, and Power, save in this Poor, small spot of Ground.
This looks, as if Christianity, and Spirituality were driven hither, as to the
Outmost Bound of the Habitable World, here to make a Stand, here to gather
Head, from hence to reinforce it self upon the Nations.

Let me add to this, that the Power of our Dear Saviors Death (so far as ever
I could know or learn) lies with so much Sense of it, with such Gaspings under
it upon no Spirits, which at this Day live in Flesh, as upon the Spirits of
English Christians; though, alas! upon too too few of them. Now our Lord
foretells us, that Where the Carcass is, thither will the Eagles be gathered
together: Matthow 24. 28. Where the most considerable Part of the Body of our
Lord Jesus shall lie, most eminently molded into a fellowship with him in his
most Precious Death: there, upon that flesh will the Heavenly Appearances, the
Divine powers, the Immortal Glories of the Holy Ghost, who is represented by
Seven Spirits, for the variety of His Powers and Appearances, first, and most
Eminently alight, as Eagles upon the Carcass.

3 Consideration. The Dispensations of God in Spiritual 3 Consid.
Privileges have been Peculiar to this Nation in many things, as to a Beloved,
a Firstborn Child; The First King that became Christian, reigned in this
Land. The First Emperor, Lu^ius A. C. 170. Constantine he Great. A. C. 270.
born in Britain of Constantius and Helene, daughter to Coil Duke of Colchester.
by whom Jesus Christ with his Saints came up out of the fires of Heathenish
Persecutions, and appeared upon the Throne, came from hence, was born here.
Wickliffe, that daybreake of Evangel call Light, from whom the First Glympses
of Truth, and Christ appeared to the World, lying in the deepest Night of
Antichristian Darkness, He dawned from this Quarter of the Heavens. He was
borne an Englishman, lived fruitfully, died Peaceably in London. From him did
the Gospel shine forth upon the Bohemians, and so upon that Blessed pair of
Martyrs, Hierom, and Hu^, who prophesied of Luther, the Morning starr. I cannot
pass over in silence, that Darling of Jesus Christ's, Edward the sixth, a
Child, a King, a Saint, all three in one, He, as a forward Plant, though nipt
in the Bud, yet was a Declaration, that Spring and Summer were coming.

But how in these last times have the People of God in the midst of this Land
been, as his Joseph among the Nations? Joseph has been despised by his
brethren, divided from his brethren, as an Ambitious dreame^. Yet Joseph has
been like a fruitful bough by a well, whose branches have run over Genesis 49. v.
22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
the Wall, for the Good Will of him who dwelt in the bush. Joseph is that bush,
which burns with fire, yet has not been consumed. The Archers sorely grieve
him, and shoot at him, and hate him. But his how abides in strength; his arms
are made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. Deuteronomy. 23 v. 13. 14,
15, 16, 17.
From thence shall be the shepherd, the stone of Israel, the blessing upon his
head unto the bounds of the Everlasting hills. His Glory is as the firstling of
his bullock: his horns as the horns of an Unicorne; with them he shall push the
People together to the end of the Earth.

If the blessings on the Tribes be Types of the last days, the days of the
Messiah, I hope, I have not done amiss in transferring the things of Joseph,
as a Figure to the Present Genesis 49. v. 1.
state of the Church in this Land. I formerly showed you, O my fellow members,
whose Lot is fallen in this Age, and Island, your face in the Glass of David's
Story. These two seem to me Parallel figures of your selves. Both were drawn out
of the Pit to be Princes. Both ruled in the midst of Domestic, Foreign
Reproaches, and Ruins. Both were blessed with the Precious things of Heaven,
of Earth, of Sun and Moon, Grace and Nature; Flesh and Spirit. Yet both died in
the Land of Egypt; in a state of Trouble. Both are happily succeeded by the
Fullness of Peace and Glory, David by Solomon: Joseph by Benjamin, brought
forth by the death of his mother, the Jerusalem below: but the Son of the
right hand of his heavenly Fathers righteousness, Power, and Majesty, of whom
Moses sings, The beloved of the Lord shall Deuteronomy. 13. 12.
dwell in safety by him; the Lord shall cover him all the day long; he shall dwell
between his shoulders.

4. Consid. I have received from the Mouth of a Gentleman 4. Consid:
of understanding, and integrity in his Testimony, a Discourse, which himself
had from one of the most Learned among the Jews, at Venice, as I remember:
that; A general Tradition divides the Prophesies of the old Testament into
unfixed; fixed. The fixed are such, as be determined to some certain Place. In
the number of the fixed Prophesies is that of Isaiah, chap. 24. and 13, 14, 15,
16. [When thus it shall be in the midst of the Land, among the People; there
shall be as the shaking of an Olive Tree, as the Gleaning of Grapes, when the
vintage is done. They shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the
Majesty of the Lord, they shall cry aloud from the SEA. Wherefore glorify ye
the Lord in the fires; the Name of the Lord God of Israel in the ISLES of the
Sea. From the UTTERMOST Parts of the Earth, have we heard Songs, Glory to the
Righteous.] The place, said he, on which this Prophecy is fixed by the
constant Reception of the Rabbis, is this I Will of Great Britain.

I cannot but lay to these verses before cited, another verse out of the same
chapter: verse 21. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall
punish the Host of the High Ones, on high: and the Kings of the Earth, on the
earth. Of a truth, he that peruseth this whole chapter, and compares it with
the first of Ezekiel, will find Both to speak of the same season and affair;
with this Difference: Isay is full in Desoribing the storm, Brief in the Glory:
Ezekiel spends one verse only on the storm, all the chapter besides on the
Glory. I appeal to those hearts who have a Spiritual Eye opened in them, how
far they see the Letter in both those chapters, answered by the life of the
Letter acting it self forth on this land: how much they discover of Glory wrapped
up in a storm, and ready to issue forth from it, as lightning from a cloud.

2. Interest, of the Present times in the coming of the 2 Interest.
children of GOD out of the NORTH. I shall here humbly offer to you three
prophetic Scriptures, which seem to be contemporary and jointly to have their
Proper influences on these days.

1. The First Scripture is, Dan. 7. ver. 9, 10. and verse 22, and verse 26. The
End of the Fourth Empire is here described in the vision, and in the
Interpretation.

2. The second Scripture is, Rev. 3. v. 14, etc. The Epistle to the seventh
Church.

3. The last Scripture is, Rev. 16. 10, and 13. The Opening of the fifth, and
sixth Seal.

These three Scriptures manifestly agree in Four things.

1. A Party Judging. 2. A Party Judged. 3. A Kingdom sinking. 4. A Kingdom
springing.
1. A Party Judging. Laodicea, the Name of the seventh Church, made by Master
Brightman a Type of England, is compounded of two words; (...), which signifies
the People of God in Greek, according to the most frequent use of it in the
sacred Writings; (...), which signifies Judgment. Both together represent the
Judgment of the people of God; or the people of God in Judgment.

How is this Laodicea interpreted by the Angels, that pour the fifth vial
upon the Seat of the Beast, the sixth vial upon the River Euphrates, the
Defense of the Great Babylon? These Angels are described, Rev. 15. ver. 6. The
seven Angels came out of the temple, having the seven plagues clothed with
white linen, and having their breasts girded with golden girdles. As the seven
Churches had their several Angels, Rev. 1. v. 1. so have several
Dispensations of God to the Saints, whether they be at once or in Different
seasons. Angels are the Ministers of the Divine dispensations, as they descend
from the Spiritual unto the natural man of a Saint. These seven Angels pouring
forth these vials, do upon this account denote seven dispensations, or
Appearances of JESUS CHRIST coming forth from the secret of the spirit into an
outward manifestation, through the flesh of the Members of Christ. These pour
forth the vials of Wrath upon the children of Wrath, by the pouring forth of
Grace upon their lips; as the LORD consumes the Man of sin by the brightness
of his coming.

But you have this Laodicea, these Angels from the Temple plainly discovered by
Daniel, 7. 9. The Ancient of Days did sit, whose garments was white as snow.
Behold One in the same Raiment with the Angels of the Vials, ver. 22. Until
the Ancient of days came, and judgment was given to the Saints of the most
High, v 26. The judgment shall sit, and THEY shall take away, etc. Behold the
Angels in white! Behold the judgment, and Judges in Laodicea! The Ancient of
Days coming forth, appearing in his Beloved. These are his judgment Seat, his
Judges. This is the sitting of the judgment.

2. A Party judged. The sixth vial falls upon the River Euphrates, which
encompasseth Babylon, mystery, the mother of fornications. Waters hold forth a
Spirit, in which the flesh, or letter stands, lives, and flourishes, as the
Earth in the Waters. A River is a Spirit, either having the power, or putting
on the form of Light, and Purity. Under the same Vial is made mention of the
false Prophet, out of whose mouth, an unclean spirit, yet a spirit of miracles,
goes forth. See the River, which defends the spiritual Egypt, and Sodom.

Is not this false Prophet he, who would seem to be the River of Jordan, making
glad the City of Laodicea with his pleasant stream; when he is as the dead Sea
in the midst of her; who says, I am rich, and want nothing; and knows not,
that he is miserable, poor, blind and naked? This is he, Rev. 3. 14.
who falls in to uphold the Dragon, and the Beast, who summons all the Kings of
the Earth to battle in this common Quarrel against the Saints.

Is not this that very little horn, of which Daniel speaks, Dan. 7. verse. 8.
There came up another little horn: and behold in this horn eyes, like the
eyes of a man, (a show of divine Light, a plain character of the River
Euphrates, the false Prophet) and a mouth speaking great things, that is, I am
rich, and need nothing, This little horn, had a look more stout then his
fellows; verse. 20. He makes war with the Saints; verse. 21. He speaks great
words against the most High (GOD the Father, and our LORD JESUS, as he is in
the most High, the most holy place of Spirit, and Truth above Flesh, above
Types) he wears out the Saints, until this Judgment sits, ver. 25. This is
the party judged.

3. The Kingdom sinking is the Seat, or Throne, as it is in Greek, of the
Beast, filled with Darkness, Revel. 16. verse. 10. The drying up of Euphrates
by the Beams of a spiritual Glory; verse. 12. The Battle of the great Day of
God Almighty against all the Kings of the Earth; v. 14. The spuing of the false
Prophet out of the mouth of Christ; Revel. 3. 16. The Thrones cast down, Dan.
7. verse. 9. The Beast slain for the great words, which the Horn spoke, verse.
11. The taking away of his Dominion, consuming, destroying it unto the end.

4. The Kingdom springing is the everlosting dominion given to the Son of man
by the Ancient of days, Dan. 7. verse. 13, 14. This everlasting Kingdom is
given also to the Saints, who must reign together with their Savior, verse. 27,

Sweetly harmonious with this, is that pleasant melody in the ears of
Laodicea. At the beginning of the Epistle our glorified Jesus is held forth to
be, the beginning (the Head, the Principle) of the creation of God, the New,
and Eternal Dominion: Revel. 3. verse. 14. At the end of the Epistle, He
promises his Saints, that they shall sit with Him in His Throne, as He sits
down with his Father in his Throne. Thus the Ancient of days gives the Kingdom
to the Son of man. The Son of man gives it to his Brethren. All Three reign
each in other, are Thrones, and Kings, each to other.

These are the Kings of the East, for whom way is made by the drying up of
Euphrates, Revel. 16. verse. 12.

These Kings from the East bring into my mind a place of Ezekiel, to which St
John seems to relate, as pointing at the same Time, and Thing. It is chap. 43.
verse. 2, 3. And behold the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the
East and his voice was as the voice of many waters (the Kings of the East,
which come with him) and the Earth shined with his glory. And it was according
to the Vision which I saw, when I came to destroy the City; the vision that I
saw by the River Chebar: verse. 4. The glory of the Lord came into the house by
the way of the gate, whose Prospect is to the East. Ezekiel in his first
chapter saw the glory of the Lord come from the North with a dreadful tempest.
He saw it come to destroy the City. He saw it: remove from the old temple, and
City of fleshly Administrations. Here he sees it come from the East, with a
most blessed Serenity and Sunshine, which clothes the whole Earth: he sees it
enter into the New-built Temple, to take up Its rest there for ever.

Remember, O Christians, to distinguish between these two commings of the LORD
Jesus at the end of days: 1. From the North: 2. From the East.

1. When your Savior comes from the North, he comes upon his chariot, He comes
in the glory of the Father, with all his holy Angels; Thus he comes unto your
inward man. But he comes flying upon the wings of a VVhirle-winde, Ezekiel. 1. 4.
He comes upon wheels of Fires, with a flame of fire issuing forth from him:
Dan. 7. 9. 10. He comes with rebukes and chastenings; Rev. 3. 19. He comes as a
thief in the Night, covering himself with a cloud, and thick darkness; He
comes as a Warrior to the battle of that great day: Revel. 16. v. 14, 15.

This coming from the North is that hour of temptation upon the Whole Earth,
which is threatened in the time of the Sixth Church; Rev. 3. 10. but falls out in
the times of the Seventh Church; the fifth, and Sixth vials.

Woe to you, Ye Glorious Hypocrites, who say, you want nothing, but indeed are
Poor: who wear your Garments loosly about you. My Heart aketh for you. The LORD
comes upon you as a Thief in the Nigh, unawares, unseen, to steal your
Party-colored coverings from you, and dip them in Blood; to uncover your
Nakedness, and lay open your shame to every Eye.

Alas for you, Ye daughters of Jerusalem! You who live under the Sabbath of a
Legal Dispensation; you who are big with child of the Spiritual Seed, but
have not yet Mat. 24. 19.
brought forth That Spirit, which is born of the Spirit; You who have that
Spiritual Seed brought forth in you, but still feed it, as a Babe, with the
Milk of carnal Administrations: you, with whom it is winter, whose Spiritual
sap is sunk down into its Root, while you sleep: My bowels earn and sound
within mefor you, Ye daughters of Jerusalem. How hard will your flight be from
before the whirlwind from the NORTH? how great will your Amazement be, when
your Eyes shall behold the Glory of the LORD to depart from off the Temple of
Outward Administations, on which it has long stood; nay to destroy both this
Temple, and this Jerusalem? As for you, whether will you go for comfort, when
the fiery Wheels, of my Saviors Chariot shall be brought over all your fleshly
Excellencies, and Enjoyments? But be of Good cheer, These throws, this
dissolution of the earthly mother, shall bring forth a heavenly man-child, into
the World, in which she shall live again, and remember her Sorrow no more.

This coming of your GOD from the NORTH, is as Joseph's Rule in the years of
Famine; as David's Reign in Blood. It ushers in Benjamin's Glorious Rest,
Solomon's Temple. It prepares the way for the Kings of the East.

2. I should now speak of the coming from the East, But the time is not yet.

If Master Brightman do not err in placing Laodicea on this Land, I hope I
have not done much amiss in fixing on these times, that Church, the fifth, and
sixth vial, the sitting of the Judgment in Daniel, the coming from the North
in Ezekiel, in my Text: For all these Scriptures seem to me to be manifestly
Parallel, and Contemporary.

Blessed are we, who have lived to see this Coming of the Glory of God from
the NORTH. But blessed and happy are they, who shall live then, when this King
of Kings, with his Race of Kings, shall come from the way of the East to go
into the House of his Rest.

In the mean time, this is thy comfort, O thou Sister-Spouse of the Lamb, He
comes; Behold! he comes to thee in this stormy night, not as a Thief, but a
Guest, a Bridegroom. Behold he stands at thy door, and knocks by all these loud
noises. Open the door, let him in, he will set up his chariot in thine heart,
he will come into thy spirit, he will sup with thee, feast with thee upon this
glory, and Iye with thee all this night.

Object. Perhaps some will say; changes and expectations Object.
were as great in Luthers time, as now. Yet what has the issue of all those
things been but desolation?

Answ. 1. What has the issue of all those things been? Answ. 1.
Desolations on the Earth; but discoveries, increases of light upon the Saints,
even unto this day. Luther had this honor to live to see his Doctrine
received, publicly professed, established by many populous Countries, and
Cities, many great Provinces, and Princes, in Peace, for many years. There was
peace all his days. Immediately after his death, the sa^e or the very next
year, that fire of War brake forth, which has never been well quenched since
that time.

Answ. 2. Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness. He Answ. 2.
prophesied of the Flood 120 years before it came. The like figure unto this
does Luther seem^ to be. He was the Preacher of Justification, only by faith,
by Christ, by the Righteousness of God in Christ. He prophesied of a deludge
of fire, while he often witnessed to the World, that Antichrist was to be
destroyed by the brightness of Christ's coming. This was 1520, or 30 after
Christ. Compute from thence 120 years, the sum will amount to 1640, or 50,
which falls upon the present season.

The Flood came accordingly in the year from the Creation, 1656. How near is
that year 1656 from Christ? Of what Eclipses, what dreadful signs in heaven
above, in earth below, do we hear to come to pass in the years immediately
preceding this?

Tremble, O ye Inhabitants of the Earth, a flood of fire is coming upon all the
World. The windows of heaven are already open, and begin to rain down streams
of fire. The springs of the great deep are broken up, and send forth their
flames,

Ye meek Ones, enter into the Ark which your Savior and you have been long
making ready in your spirits, against this day when the flood should come. What
is this Ark? Is it not the chariot of the Lord? the appearance of the glory of
God, of your beloved Jesus in heavenly state, within you? Go in to this Ark,
the Lord shall shut you in till the storm be past. Go up to this chariot, sit
quietly there by the side of your Savior, till that cloud break up, and show
you in glory.

But it is now time to conclude. Is it so? Is this then the Age? Is this the
Land, in which our Lord Jesus ascends from the NORTH? Does he now call up the
clouds, and winds, to minister to him? Does he now from hence begin, as a
Bridegroom to come forth from his Chamber, as a Giant, or Warrior refresht
with wine, to run his race, unto the ends of the Earth? Speak, ye Virgins* who
are not fallen asleep; Is your Lord on his way? Is this the noise? Are these the
fires, flashes of his chariotwheels.

You, who have eyes exercised on spiritual sights, who watch for the Morning,
tell us; Have you seen your Beloved look forth like the morning, a sweet light
out of a Cant. 6. 9.
black darkness? Fair, as the Moon, in his natural Image, the first
Creation? Pure, as the Sun, with the essential, substantial glory of his
spiritual Image? Terrible, as an Army with Banners? The horses, and wheels of
his chariot are his Army, Angels, Stars, Elements n^w made, fighting for him in
the newness of their courses. Himself in his flaming person above the heads of
these, is the terrible Banner lifted up.

It is so. The Lord is upon his white-horses of divine discoveries. He rides on
prosperously with his Sword girt upon his thigh.

Right Honorable! Princes, Prophets, People, remember now your dyivg Saviors
charge! Take heed of surfeiting on the comforts, or cares of this Life. Watch,
and be sober. As Elijah girt himself, and run along with Ahabs chariot: So gird
up the loins of your mind, run along with the chariot of your King. If through
sloth, or sleep, you be cast behind, if the Bridegroom enter into his
chamber, and the door be shut upon him; you will be left without in utter
darkness, where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. But woe to
those who resist the progress of his outgoings! The wheels of his chariot
shall be brought over these, the feet of his horses shall tread them in pieces,
and dogs devour that which is left of them, as it was with Iesabel.

But you, which have heard the Lord Jesus plainly saying to you; When you were
under the figtree of outward dispensations, and expectations, I saw you: run to
him, call him Master; follow him still, you shall see greater things then
these; you shall see the heavens opened, Angels descending and ascending upon
the heavenly person of Christ discovered, as a ladder joining heaven and earth,
in which ladder every Rowel is a spiritual, a living glory.

FINIS.

