Florus Britannicus; Or, an Exact EPITOME OF THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND, From
WILLIAM the Conqueror to the Twelfth Year of the Reign of his Sacred Majesty
CHARLES the Second, now flourishing.

Illustrated with their perfect Portraictures in exact Copper Plates, very
delightful to the Reader: As also, every King and Queens Elegy, with a
Panegyric under the last Plate, upon his Majesty's happy Return.

By Matthew Stevenson, Gent.

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur Orbis.

LONDON; Printed by M.S. and are to be sold by Thomas Ienner at the South
Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1662.

To the every way accomplished Gentlewoman my ever Honored Cousin. Mrs Grace
Killingbeck, of Baroughby Grange, near Weatherby in Yorkshire; here and
hereafter happiness.
DVring the time (Dearest Cousin) I had the happiness for some years, not long
since, (through your more then generous goodness) to call your house, my Home;
I could not but take notice how much you were addicted to History, out of a
noble desire of acquaintance with former times: insomuch, that the vast bulk of
Mr Fox his Martyrologie, a volume to be Chronicled for its unweildinesse; Sr
Walter Ralegh's History of the World; Purchase his Pilgrimage, a Book Treating
of all the Religions, Laws, and Customs of every Nation under Heaven;
together with several other large and tedious Authors, could not deter your
eager eyes, but into these they would venture, though as into Groves and
Labyrinths (without Ariadne's clew) inextricable; Books that like China dishes,
or the walls of Jericho, are begun in one Century, and scarce gone through
with, in the next; or as it is in curious and long-breathed Romances, or Sr
Philip Sidney's ingeniously insinuating Meanders, the fancy Travels all day in
the paths of expectation, and at night cannot rest on the bed of satisfaction.

In consideration whereof (worthy Cousin) and at present not being able to
serve you with other devoire, I thought good to offer something (though but a
mite) in order to acknowledgment of your innumerable favors, (to wit) this
Epitome of the Annalls of England, being as it were a glance upon the Reigns of
all the Kings, with the two Queens of this Realm, from William the Conqueror,
to the twelfth year of the Reign of his sacred Majesty Charles the Second (God
be thanked) now flourishing; together with the exact and lively Portraicture of
every King and Queen in Copper Plates: As also, their several Elegies in
twelve verses, which indeed contein as it were a summary and Compendium of the
Epitome; all which (not without much pains) I have drawn within the Circle of
your eye, so that at once you may read both Lines and Lineaments, which cannot
but be of great advantage to your memory, without which reading is but like a
man's beholding his face in a glass, and turning his back to forget what manner
of person he was.

To avoid therefore prolixity, both ungrateful to the Reader, and destructive
to the Memory, I have perused and compared many vast and voluminous Authors,
such as were the most authentic and best approved, and out of them have
presented you here Truth, as she ought to be, naked; and by leaving behind
those various dresses, the Wardrobe of her needless ornaments, that her
Authors had set her forth with, I shall render her to you, though not so
glorious, yet more memorable. In a word, I have here presented you with much in
a little, Homers Illiads in a nut-shell; or (if I may say so) the Pater Noster
in a penny, Chronicle in Shorthand: you have the Marrow, the Grain, the
Kernel, let who will take the bones, the husks, and the shells: There is
nothing remarkable, but I touch it so far as the narrow confine of half a
sheet will permit, which is enough to inform and satisfy concerning truth,
and in vain are many words, where one will suffice; for let the Proverb say
what it will, The furthest way about is not the nearest way home: Moreover,
this advantage accrues to our concisenesse, That before you can read the
circumstantialls of one Kings Life in a volumne, you may here run over the
atchievments of them all since the Conquest, and thereof give a landable
account.

But least whilst I thus complement with your patience in illustrating the
advantages of brevity, I forget my self, and let my so much talked of Epitome
(like that little City) run out at the Gates of my Dedication, I will shut up
all, and make this an Oblation to your memory, not your merit, which is so vast
and unfathomed it would swell it self into such a volumne of obliges, that my
whole work would scarce look big enough to become an Epistle to it. To sum up
all your particular goodnesses and my several engagements, were to baffle
Arithmetic with the Sands, and to lay the first stone of a work of eternity;
for I know neither where to begin nor where to end: but as with many,
acknowledgment of former favors is a tacit begging of future; so it is with
me, while I stalk with one courtesy for another, making my gratitude for what
I have, a Preface to what I would have. In plain English, I thank you for your
first kindness, and betray you to a second, which is, That you would pardon
me, in that I have unknown to you presumed to make this Book public under the
honor of your name; which if you shall vouchsafe, I am all gratitude: and
assure your self, when any thing more worthy your judicious view shall issue
from our riper Genius, it is vowed to you by

Your ever grateful Votary and Kinsman. Matthew Stevenson.
From my study in F. Sreet, London, Mar: 12. 1661.


WILLIAM the Conqueror.
EDward the Confessor ere he dyed, promised the Kingdom of England to William
Duke of Normandy after his deceas, in regard he was his Kinsman, and near of
blood to him, howbeit William was a Bastard, begot of one Arlot a Country Maid,
in respect of which, the abused English to this day call light Wenches Harlots,
only adding an aspiration to Arlot.

But Harold the Son of Goodwin Earl of Kent, a bold man, and a good Soldier,
possessed himself by force of the Kingdom, during the Inter Regnum, not
waiting the consent of the Nobility, though his Brother Tosto strove against
him all he could, and waged War with him; But at York Tosto lost his life in a
pitched battle; in the mean while William Duke of Normandy depending on his
right, raised an Army, and came for England to the South Saxons: Harold hearing
of his arrival, though his Soldiers were tired in the late fight, sets up his
Standard against his new Enemy William: Not far from Hastings they fought a
sore Battle, but Fortune turning against the English; Harold driven forward
with a warlike fury, riding into the midst of his Enemies, and fighting
valiantly was slain, and a great number of his men fell with him.

William the Conqueror presently brings his conquering Banners to London, and
is proclaimed King by the people that remained, having got a Kingdom by a
lawful Victory, which (as he said) was given him of God. This King (as
commonly Conquerours do) abolishing forthwith all the Customs of the English
Nation, and most of their Laws; brought in immediately his own Country
Fashions, and commanded that all Causes should be pleaded in French: And
excluding all the English that had boarn Arms against him out of their
Patrimonies, he disposed of all their demeanes and Fields, and the rest of
their Goods among his Soldiers, for a Reward of their Victory; reserving to
himself the direct principallity and homage, held to himself and his Heirs, as
a Tenure from the Crown; so that none but the King should be the right and
true Lord of any thing.

Also he caused a Seal to be made for himself, wherein was engraved, By this
acknowledge William of Normandy to be your Patron; but on the other side was
engraven, By this Seal you must know that the same is King of England.

Having thus subdued the Laity he turns himself to the Clergy, and made an
Edict, that no English Monk should be capable of any secular dignity;
disdaining the facilnesse of Canutus, who was formerly King, who had continued
the honors, entreating the people whom he had subdued; by which Lenity the
Inhabitants growing bold, after his death easily expelled Foreigners, and
redeemed their former Liberty.

Then he appeased the approaching War of the Danes, by giving them money that
he might enjoy it peaceably at any rate: And hence it was that the English were
in no fear at all of the Danes, who formerly so infested them; yet they were
not so free from troubles, but that here and there arose some tumults among the
people, that were hardly suppressed and overcome; but the windy Faction was
easily dispersed.

The greatest matter was the Rebellion of his Son Robert in Normandy, because
it was most against Nature. This Son at the Instigation of Philip King of
France, demanded this Dukedom of his Father as his proper Right; and without
more words enters upon Normandy by force of Arms. It is true, his Father had
promised him this Territory, but the Son was weary of delay, nor would he
longer forbear from the Government he looked for: The King hearing of his Sons
Enterprise, suddenly goes against him with a strong Army; they meet in Battle,
the Son unhorses his Father, and wounds him in the arm; but when he knew his
Fathers Voice, alighting from his horse he raises his Father from the ground,
and kneeling down before him, craved pardon for his boldness, which he
obtained presently, his Father embracing him in his arms: however he seemed
thus to have appeased his Fathers wrath, yet God never suffering such faults to
escape unpunished, he had no good luck ever after.

Having conquered the Rebels partly by Sweetness and partly by Sword, he
endeavors to enlarge his Kingdom, bringing Wales under his Command; and
causing Malcom King of Scots to do him homage, and so adding new Countries, he
(in some measure) rewarded England for the Crown they gave unto him: Yet least
the frowardness of his newly conquered Subjects should grow insolent, he laid
upon them Taxes and Tributes, that differed them little from slaves; seeking by
all means to weed out and keep under hatches the Nobility, and with continual
Battles to wast and wear out the Commonalty. Only the men of Kent held their
old Customs: For the King upon a certain time journeying toward Dover, was
handsomely circumvented by the Inhabitants of Kent, carrying Boughs cut down
from Trees, nor would they suffer him to depart until he had granted them the
enjoyment of their ancient Customs; also he was indulgent to the Londoners to
let them enjoy the privileges they had in the Time of Edward the Confessor;
but he forbad the Nobility from hunting of Deer, reserving those sports for
himself only.

About the end of his Life he placed his two Sons, Robert and Henry, almost in
equal power over Normandy. There happened on a day a quarrel between Henry and
Lewis the Dolphin of France, playing at Tables, which was the cause of great
Contention betwixt the French and the Normans; the Dolphin drawing Robert on
his side, enters Normandy with an Army: William forthwith having his Navy
ready, sails into Normandy, and with no difficulty reducing his Son Robert to
obedience; he marched to Roan that he might find the French men work. When he
was weary with toyiing, being very fat, he made a halt a while: The French
derided him for his fat belly, speaking scoffingly that he was with Child, and
ready to be delivered; when William heard thereof, he answered, If please God I
ever recover of this Childbirth, I will burn a thousand lights to God in token
of my thankfulness; nor was it long before he entered the Territories of
France, and wasted all before him with Fire and Sword. Yet shortly after he
fell sick and dyed at Roan: His followers not only forsook him being dead, but
spoiled him of what he had, and his body unfortunately thrice forsaken, was at
last let down into his own Monument at Cane in Normandy, but not entire.

William the Conqueror Duke of Normandy after he had in Battai^e slain Harald
took upon him the Crown of England He reigned 19 years 11 months (...) at
the age of 74 years And lies buried at Caen in Normandy
William the Conqueror resigns his breath
Unto a greater Conqueror, grim Death:
I do not say when he for England fought,
That any other then his right he sought:
But to the English he no Bowels had,
Whence his own Bowels served him as bad.
With what contempt these troublers of the World,
When breath forsakes into the earth are hurled,
A man may see in him; who scarce could have
'Midst all his Realms and friends, a sorry grave;
As if the very Earth scorned to entombe
The Son of so much slaughter in her Womb.


WILLIAM the Second, King of England.
WIlliam the Conqueror being Deceased, the Crown of England by right of
succession fell to Robert his Eldest Son; but he being in Germany, Lanfrank
then Arch Bishop of Canterbury (who by reason of his great Learning and
singular virtue, was in high and reverend esteem with the people) so prevailed
with the dying Conqueror William the first, that instead of Robert (the true
Heir by Primogeniture) William surnamed Rufus, because of his Ruddy or Red
Complexion (though the younger Brother) was Crowned King of England, Sept: 9.
1087. The Beginning of his Reign was very troublesome and unquiet: For his
Brother Robert took great offense at his attempt to take advantage of his
absence, (honestly employed in his fathers service) to intercept his Crown and
dignity, which in his Conscience belonged justly, and only to him. But not long
after, enraged Robert entered with a very puissant Army of valiant Normans, and
many French, whom Philip their King had waged for his aid, the Confines of
England resolving with his Presence, to regaine what he had lost by his
Absence; abhorring that his Right should be made a prey to any Usurper: But
such, and so flexible was the Dukes disposition (though in boldness, and valor
he were second to none) that he rather inclined himself to a tranquil and
peaceable condition, which was gently craved by his Brother, then (by the
effusion of much blood, which of necessity must have followed) to possess
himself of this Crown: So that in the end, being fairly promised, that in case
he survived, he should succeed: He accepted the grant of three thousand Marks
per Annum from his Brother, and took a friendly leave, and returned safely home
into his own Duchy of Normandy. Presently after this, Malcom King of Scots
denies homage, but William enters his Territories with an Army, and subduing
him, takes Hostages for his future Obedience. The King by these Victories more
strongly footed himself in his Realm of England; and being better assured of
his establishment than heretofore, began to tread in his Fathers steps, and
with like severity and oppression to humble the haughty spirits of the English,
and put a check to their courage: and finding by policy that plenty puffs
up, also, that penury prevents the danger of opposition, by bereaving them of
those requisites that might promote his fear, and their hope: falls to imposing
on them many intolerable taxes, which by his greedy Ministers, he levied with
such despite, and cruelty, that they might well perceive that he meant nothing
more then to cut the nerves and sinews of their strength, making it his grand
design to dash the hopes of their Redemption. Now again, Robert the Kings
Brother once more proclaims War against him, for lack of the Money he
promised him in lieu of the forbearance of his Kingdom of England; and the King
of France taking his part, he took some Towns by force from his Brother which
of right belonged to him: But the King of France (bribed by William) forsook
Robert, so that being deprived of assistance, he compelled him to crave pardon.
In the sixth year of his Reign his prosperity was interrupted by the obstinate
Rebellion of Rees the last King of the Welsh men, who so infested him with
broken Wars, that for many Months together, being urged to fight with Mountains
(to which upon all enforcements they fled) instead of combating with men, he
could find no rest: But such was his Resolution and undaunted Courage, to
withstand the strongest push of all extremities, that in the end he slew their
King, and obtained a glorious Victory, and thereby better secured the
subjection of the Welsh men, then any his predecessors heretofore. But Malcom
finding William embroyled in new troubles, again invades England, and is slain
by Mowbray Earl of Northumberland. Now came the King (after many covetous and
ungrateful oppressions of the English Nobles and Commons, to whom he owed his
rescue from many perils of his Crown and Life) to use the same hard measure to
the Clergy; for such was his impiety, by all possible means to enrich himself,
that he sold for money the greatest promotions in Church and Commonweal; and
did prohibit the Arch Bishop of Canterbury to assemble any Convocation or
Synod, for the well ordering of the Clergy; by means whereof he secretly filled
his Coffers with Treasure. The Bishop complains to Pope Urban, who having newly
excommunicated the Emperor Henry the Fourth (the first Christian Prince that
ever was excommunicated) durst not have too many Irons in the fire at once, not
knowing what would become of the first; forbears his Bull, and sends a Command
to the King to redintegrate with the Bishops, which the King slights,
nevertheless, at last a reconciliation is made. This William was as valiant a
Prince as the World ever had; and a great opposer of the indirect courses of
the Sea of Rome. Many fearful things happened in his Reign, as Earthquakes,
dreadful Lightnings, and Apparitions, blazing Comets in strange Figures, great
Inundations to the destruction of many of his people, and very much Land
overwhelmed with the Sea, never to be recovered; amongst the which Earl Godwins
Lands were drowned, and never to be recovered, and are now called Godwins
Sands. At Finchamstead in Berkshire there was a Well that flowed blood fifteen
days. The signs of his unfortunate end were many, but not regarded.

In the thirteenth year of his Reign, as he hunted in the New Forest (that
his father had pulled down Towns and Churches for) he was slain with an Arrow,
by a French Knight, named Sir Walter Tyrrel, who shot at a Deer, but it
unfortunately glanced on a Tree, and pierced the King into the Body, whereof he
fell down dead, and in a Colliers Car^ was carried to Winchester and there
buried: Not long before, Richard his Nephew, and Son to Duke Robert of Normandy
was there slain.

Thus ended the troublesome, yet Victorious Reign of King William, third Son
to the Conqueror; who being of a wanton Disposition, and neglecting Marriage,
and daily solacing himself among his Whores and Concubines, dyed without any
lawful Issue of his Body: His Stature was Comely, his Limbs firmly compact,
active, strong, and healthy, exceeding Leacherous and Covetous, of high
courage, constant in his Resolutions, scorning Fortune and troubles: Thus he
lived, and thus he dyed, getting much, and suddenly leaving all.

William Rufus King of England and Duke of Normandy He was slain being shot
into the body by misfortune in new Forest in Hamshire, after he had reigned 12
years, and 11 months, at the age of 43 and lies buried at Winchester Anno
1100. R E scul^
William the Father being dead and gone,
William his Son usurps his Brothers Throne:
They call him Rufus; why, you need not study,
Either his hair was red, or countenance r^ddy.
Fortune his Reign continual War alots,
From the Welsh, from his brother, or the Scots.
Still he was Victor, till the fatal Dart
In the new Forest once his the wrong H'art.
Why there he fell in Judgment so severe,
If a Religious House be left? ask there:
The father there invades the Churches hedge,
And the Son suffers for his Sacrilege.


HENRY the First, King of England.
WHen King William the Second dyed, Robert was valiantly warring at the Holy
Land, by means of whose absence, Henry his youngest Brother got a fit
opportunity to sit as King in his Throne, whereunto without any difficulty he
ascended, through the favorable affection of the Nobles and Common people,
whose hearts were the more firmly engaged to him, because he was born in
England after his father was Crowned King; and also because his singular
wisdom, care, learning, mild disposition, and Princely virtues were apparent
demonstrations that his Government would be accompanied with honorable
atchievments, graceful, safe, and profitable both to the Church, and also to
the Commonwealth.

Now the Kingdom he had obtained by fraud, he means to confirm by gentleness,
good deeds, and just punishments: He every where prefers learned men to places
in the Church, and removed such as were unworthy and unlearned from Church
preferment: He mitigates the more severe Laws, and abolishes hard Customs: He
grants the Nobility free leave to hunt, and to enclose Parks for Deer, and free
Warrens for their Conyes, and such like Game; and as Traitors to his virtues,
state and Kingly government, he banished from his Court all Flatterers, and all
niceness in behavior, Luxuriousness and gorgeousness in apparel, and
superfluity in diet: He ordained punishments by death for such as rob by the
high way; and with wonderful travel and industry he reformed the monstrous
pride, avarice, and secure sloth and negligence of the Clergy: He recalled from
banishment Anselm the Archbishop of Canterbury, giving him full power to
assemble Synods and Convocations at his pleasure, for the rectifying of such
things that were amiss in the Church: He piously and freely bestowed on godly
sober grave Divines, all such livings and Ecclesiastical promotions, as his
Brother unjustly detained, by the lewd advice of Reynulph Bishop of Durham,
whom he sent prisoner to the Tower of London, from whence not long after, the
said wicked Bishop escaped and fled into Normandy to Duke Robert, whom he
eagerly persuaded to claim his Crown with his Sword, who thereupon levies a
great Army, which he intended with all expedition to transport into this
Realm; but as King Henry by his former clemencies had rooted himself in the
peoples love; so to assure himself the better of the Scots, he takes Maud the
Sister of King Edgar to be his Wife, who was daughter to Malcom by his Wife
Margaret, who was Sister to Edgar Adeling, who dyed without issue, and Daughter
to King Edward the Son of Edmund Ironside, the victorious and valiant King of
the Saxons. Robert was now arrived in England with a puissant Army, and the day
for Battle appointed, and the Heralds were sent up and down; but at last, as a
thick lowering cloud is sometimes dispersed by a fair shining Sun; so by the
discreet mediation of worthy friends, there was a friendly peace concluded
between the two brothers, on the same terms agreed on in King Rufus days,
whereupon the Norman Lords were much discontented, and returned home with the
Duke. This danger dispelled, Beliamy Earl of Shrewsbury with the Earl of
Mortain and Cornwall rebel, but are soon subdued. But now Henry (who was
hitherto on the defensive part) takes up Arms of his own accord against his
Brother (whether out of some distaste for some scoff his Brother gave him, or
which is more like, stirred up with ambition and avarice to enlarge his
Dominions) and joining with the Norman male-contented Nobles, with little ado
chased the forsaken Duke from place to place, and won from him the Cities of
Roan, Cane, Valoyes, and indeed all Normandy, and presently in great honor and
triumph he returns for England. Robert having thus made trial of his brothers
severity, he resolvs now to make trial of his lenity; whereupon he follows
after his Brother into England, and very submissively deprecates his error, and
begs his pardon: But Henry either offended with the now fresh injury of his
brother; Or affecting the Dukedom of Normandy, departs unkindly from the
perplexed and distressed Duke his Brother; Coily refusing to accept of his
submission, which in all humility by him was prosfered. But Robert being
impatient of that scorn his distress had begot him; returns in all speed into
Normandy, and once more levies an Army, resolving rather to dye manfully
fighting in the Field, then to follow the funerals of his own Honor: but his
brother was prevalent and prevents him with a greater force, suppressing the
mischief in the Birth, but not without blood, bringing his Brother Captive into
England, where for that he (at Natures enticement) practiced his escape, at his
brothers Commandment both his eyes were plucked out, after which he lived as a
miserable and wretched Captive, the space of more then twenty years; at length
he dyed and was buried at Gloucester. This success made Henry magnificent, but
envied, whence arose a foraigne War, which by power and policy he quieted,
granting to William the Dukedom of Normandy upon condition of Homage. But
Charles Earl of Flanders being wickedly slain at Brussels, leaving no other
Heir, William the Son of Robert, who was the next right Heir to it (for that he
was of the Blood of Maud Daughter to Baldwin, and Wife to William the
Conqueror) was elevated to this Dignity; who growing insolent with this
prosperity, endeavors to recover Normandy his Patrimony by his Grandfather,
which he brought to pass with no great difficulty by the assistance of the
French King, but receiving a slight wound in his hand, and suffering it to
rankle, he lost his life and his Patrimony.

Next, the Welsh Rebel, but the end of that War was a prey of Oxen and Sheep
taken by Henry.

He seldom taxed the Land, or never but once for a portion for his Daughter
Maud. He was the first that called a Parliament. In the Year 1020 William his
Son, with his Wife the Duke of Anjou's Daughter, his Sister Maud, the Lady Lucy
a Niece of the Kings, the Earl of Chester, with divers' other Noblemen and
Ladies, and others to the number 160, crossing the Seas from France to England
were all most miserably drowned, not any one saved but a poor Butcher, who like
Job's servant was spared to bring the sad News; the King having no children
left but his Daughter Maud the Empress, who, after the Emperors death, married
Ieffery Plantaginet: With these and other griefs the King languished; at last
eating Lampreys he surfeited and dyed, and was buried in Reading Abbey after he
had reigned 35 years. In this King ended all the issues Male of the Conqueror,
and the Crown of this Realm devolved on his general Heirs.

HENRY the first surnamed Beau-clark King of England and Duke of Normandy: He
reigned 35 years and 4 months died the 2 of December 1185. at the age of 67
years. and lies buried at Reading. 1135. R E. sculpsit
Robert's abroad, still roving for renown,
And now a second time forfeits his Crown;
Which Henry his Brother means to wear,
At the old rate three thousand Marks a year;
Whose Eyes he now puts out incontinent,
Lest he should see his bargain and repent.
He that allows his Brother none now dies,
Surfeiting of a Fish abounds with Eyes.
Crowns no Relation know; they often have stood
Close cemented to Caesar's Head with blood.
Thus to the Crown the third Descent does fail
The Conqueror, and all his Issue Male.


STEPHEN, King of England.
MOnday, December the 26, 1135. being St. Stephen's Day; Stephen Earl of
Mortaign and Bulloyne, Son of Stephen, Earl of Bloys and Champaine, and of
Adela Daughter to William the Conqueror, notwithstanding all his Vows and
public Protestations to Henry the First, to further the Right and Succession
of Maud the Empress, being his Daughter, and of her Children, yet (when the
King was dead) he finding that the Nobility (though sworn as deep and solemnly
as himself was) applied themselves totally to his devotion, he presently shook
off the memory of his former plighted Vows and Engagements whatsoever, and
forthwith usurps the Kingdom, and was Crowned at Westminster by William Corbel
Archbishop of Canterbury, for the which his whole Reign was continually
infested with foreign and domestic troubles. But he was not to learn the
policy of his Progenitors, who having attained sovereignty by unjust and foul
attempts, have endeavored by all fair means to settle their tottering Diadems
upon their doubtful Heads; so did this King by wisdom and policy endeavor
to lay a sure foundation to his estate: And because riches are the strength of
Kings and sinews of War, He therefore to enrich himself, seized upon the great
and vast Treasure of his Uncle, the late deceased King, which he closed not up
in Chests, or in Bags, as idle Archers do their Arrows in Quivers; but with a
munificent hand he bountifully disposed of them among such, as by Arms or by
Counsel he judged most like to stand him instead at his need. Then advancing
the Nobility and remitting Dane-gelt to the Vulgar, and honoring the Clergy,
he won the hearts of all; granting liberty to hunt to the Nobility and Clergy.
Moreover, to win the good Will of strangers, he obtained for his Son Eustace,
Constance the Daughter of Lewis King of France; yet did he not more by this
marriage, than by treasures strengthen himself in the Kingdom, of which he
spent not luxuriously, but to levy Soldiers with, and wage war, which he too
soon had occasion for: Scarce was he Crowned before he was forced to fall to
his Arms; for David King of Scotland striving to assert the interest of Maud
the Empress, proclaimed War against him, and possessed himself of the Towns of
Carlisle and New Castle; but Stephen presently marched against him with a great
Army, and granting Cumberland to David, and the County of Huntington to his
son, he put by a great storm, without any bloodshed at all: Yet
notwithstanding, not long after (in pursuance of Maud his Neeces Quarrel) he
again enters and resists the Northern Parts of this Kingdom with fire and
sword: but in the end he was encountered by Thurston Archbishop of York, who
compelled him, being pursued with unspeakable dangers, to fly into Scotland,
and leave behind him dead upon the ground, more then ten thousand of his Army.
Scarce had he composed domestic Commotions, but he is saluted with an Alarm
from abroad, from Maud the Empress, who accompanied with Robert Earl of
Gloucester, her base brother, landed with an Army in England, and was quickly
strengthened and emboldened in her enterprise, by the wonderful access of many
of the English, and of Raynulph Earl of Chester, with a lusty Crew of bold and
fo^ward Welch-men: Hereupon the King (thinking it neither safe, nor for his
credit to make any demurre or delay) forthwith levied a strong Army, and
marches resolutely against the Empress, and her Forces; who greeted him with
such Music as Warlike Troops are wont: so that a cruel and a bloody battle
for many hours was fought between them, Victory hovering with doubtful wings,
not knowing where to light: But at length the Kings Common Soldiers wearied
with battle, begun to cast about for their own escape, and plainly run away,
and left their King, who with his Nobles and Gentry, scorning to run away,
fought Gallantry, expressing wonderful tokens of their high spirits, and
puissant valor, till in the end the King was taken. The Victory thus falling
to Maud, Stephen is brought before her, and committed to Bristoll Castle; and
she in the mean while possesses the Kingdom, and as Conqueresse the enters
London in Triumph. But Mathilde the Wife of Stephen humbly beseeches the
Empress to let her live a private life with her husband, for she was weary of
the Government. The Londoners also require their ancient Laws they enjoyed
under the Confessor, but the Empress would grant neither: Whereupon Mathilde
not enduring the high ^tomach of the Empress, and detesting ignoble servitude,
calls Eustace her Son with a choice Company of Soldiers out of Kent to London,
who joining with the Londoners that were wonderfully offended that their suit
was denied; also fortifying himself with the Bishop of Winchester, they fall
upon the Army of the Empress, which fled privately to Oxford, and asked not in
vain help of David, King of Scotland, by whose assistance she besieged
Winchester; but the Queen with her Son Eustace falling on her fortress,
overcame the Queen in a pitched Battle, and took Robert Son to the Empress, but
she her self e^caped. A Treaty for Peace followed this Fortune, whereby Robert
on the one hand, and Stephen on the other are set at Liberty. There was another
condition agreed upon, whereupon Stephen now being free besieges the Empress in
Oxford, who escapes through his Army by night aparrelled in White, by reason of
much Snow newly fallen.

In the mean while Ieffery Husband to the Empress dies, and leaves to his Son
Henry the Dukedom of Anjou, and Aquitane, who before had with his Wife Eleanor
the County of Poictiers. This Henry besieged Malmsbury, but in vain. Not long
after, Henry is again invited over by some of his friends, and comes with a
gallant Army, bravely conducted by noble Captains: King Stephen and his Son had
an Army in readiness to encounter them: Great was the confidence on both sides;
somewhat they did, but little. But now happens a thing much to be wondered at;
amongst drawn Swords peace began to show her self; for in this expedition,
Eustace the only Heir of King Stephen, is unfortunately drowned, which overcame
the King with infinite sorrow; but it made a quiet end of this quarrel: For now
the King (wanting an heir to succeed him) was pleased to accept the proffer of
a friendly peace; thereupon he adopted Prince Henry for his son, and heir of
his Crown, gave him many Kingly gifts, and assured him of his unchangeable
love. The Princes and all his followers return into Normandy with all
imaginable Joy; and next year King Stephen dyed when he had reigned nineteen
years lacking one Month: He dyed at Dover, and was buried at Feversham in Kent.

Stephen a Valiant Prince, son to Stephen Earl of Blois, Charters, and
Champaigne: and of Adela daughter to William Conqueror: Usurped the Kingdom
of England, which caused him to b^ vexed with continual wars. He reigned 18
years. 11 months died at the age of 49 years, and lies buried at Feversham,
1154
Stephen next usurps the throne, for when he drew
His Sword, he cut the Gordeon in two.
Valiant he was, but vitiously inclined:
He is too strong a man, Oaths cannot bind.
Maud had the Right, Stephen Power; Princes take
Any advantage when a Crowns at stake.
He made no Laws, he so in Wars did live;
He seemed rather to receive then give.
At last his Son dies; now all storms blow fair
Whilst Stephen adopts his enemy his heir.
What War could not, a happy peace has done,
This has a Kingdom got, and that a Son.


HENRY the Second, King of England.
STephen having now paid his debt to Nature, it remained that his Engagements
also be discharged to his adopted Heir, which in like manner was in a short
time performed, for Henry Duke of Anjou, the Empress Mauds son, according to
agreement succeeded him in the Throne, who with the great applause and general
liking of all men, was rightly Crowned at Westminster by the hands of Theobald
Archbishop of Canterbury: He was also Crowned at Lincoln, and Thirdly at
Worcester; Malcome King of Scots joining with him confederate.

He behaved himself wisely in the beginning of his Reign, making election of
the wisest men he could get for Counselors: he expelled strangers, such as
came in hope of rapine; especially those of Flanders; demolishing the Castles
that the Nobility had built at the Connivance of King Stephen which they had
often abused to sedition. The Laws also that were faulty during the War, he
reduced to their former integrity. The Demeans bestowed by King Stephen on such
as were unworthy, he took away to himself, and so spared his subjects from
Tribute and Taxes, deeming it safer to offend a few then many. Singular was the
zeal this King bare to the furtherance of Justice and equity; for he divided
his Kingdom into six several Circuits; and for the better administration of
Justice, together with the trial of Causes between man and man, and for the
greater ease and comfort of his subjects, he appointed several Judges twice in
every year to ride those Circuits; which course and order is continually
observed to this day. He also resumed into his own hands the Province of
Northumberland, together with the Earldome which David King of Scots, and Henry
his Son had received Giftwise of King Stephen, because they should not further
intermeddle in the interest of his Mother Maud the Empress to the Crown. In the
thirteenth year of his Reign he married Geofrie (one of his younger sons) to
Constance the daughter, and heir apparent to Conaccus Duke of Britain, who dyed
not long after, and left to them that Duchy. He also affied his younger son
Richard unto Adela, one of the Daughters of Lewis the King of France; and
married his Daughter Maud to Henry Duke of Saxony: Much about this time dyed
Maud the Empress, his Mother.

In the Nineteenth year of his Reign, for that the Irish Nation attempted to
deprive him of certain Territories in that Island (left him by his
Predecessors) he sailed thither with a mighty Army, and fought many victorious
Battles against Five Kings, which at that time reigned there, all which he did
subdue, and made subject to himself, and became sole Lord of all that Country,
and annexed that Title unto his Crown; and returned laden with honors into
this Kingdom. If he managed all things wisely hitherto, now does he show as
much weakness and infirmity, making his Son Henry and his Wife Margaret,
daughter to the French King, to be twice solemnly crowned in the presence of
his people (himself the second time for that day leaving the Title of a King,
and serving as a sewer at his Sons Table) whereat his proud Son made no wonder,
but publicly affirmed that his Father was thereby no whit dishonored, for
that he was only the son of an Empress, but he himself was the son both of a
King, and also of a Queen. In the mean time Lewis King of France his father in
Law, fell to upbraid his pusillanimity, that he being entered into the
Government and crowned King, would permit his father to be equal with him in
the Kingdom, contenting himself to be a Titular King only; he easily enflamed
his youthful mind too ready to be set on fire with unlawful desires. This
secret Envy began now to break forth into open hate, and the son constantly
cavilled at every thing the father did, or said; Nor was the sons horrible
ingratitude unknown to the Father; wherefore Messengers were sent to Lewis to
oppress and extinguish those so sad beginnings of discord. But Lewis instead of
doing good offices of reconciliation, laughed at the Ambassadors, asking them
scornfully, why they called him Ma^ter, who had freely delivered up his right
to his son? But these things ended not thus, for many jarrs and quarrels arose
betwixt King Henry the Father and Lewis the French King, which at length were
decided by sharp and bloody Wars: In all which most unnaturally Henry, Geofry
and John, and most undutifully Robert Earl of Leicester, and Hugh Earl of
Chester, together with William then King of Scots, took part with the French
against the King; in all which (notwithstanding) King Henry by noble courage
and princely prowess did still prevail; and upon submission granted pardon to
his sons and all their Accomplices. Yet were his sons after grievously punished
by God* for Henry dyed before his Father, in the prime and flower of his youth;
and John, who after was King, was poisoned by a Monk in Swinstead Abbey in
Lincolnshire: Yet these unnatural Rebellions of his own Children (to whom he
had been so indulgent a father) moved such a passion in his perplexed mind, as
it suddenly struck him into a Fever, extreme dangerous; and hearing that his
son Richard had raised a new broyl against him, he could no longer sustain the
wounds of his spirit, but within a day or two breathed out his last, when he
had reigned almost 25 years, and was buried at Fontenward in Normandy. The
History of this Kings reign approves him to have been wise, learned, just,
politic, and valiant, (save in that over-indulgence to his graceless children)
and what not a little adds to the number and splendor of his commendations,
was, that albeit he were often engaged in business, some of them concerning his
Wars in France, Normandy, Anjou, Ireland, and in other places, and some of them
respecting his Politic Rule, and government at home; yet he never imposed upon
his subjects any extraordinary Tax or payment whatsoever; yet left he unto his
Successor more than 900000 pounds in silver and gold, besides Plate, Jewels,
household stuff, and plentiful provision for the War. And though in most things
prosperity made him happy, yet in three things he was unfortunate: The 1. was
the unnatural disobedience and revolt of the fruit of his own Loins: The 2.
was his unquenchable lust to his inseparable Concubine the beauteous Rosamond,
who being admirably fair, and wantonly conditioned, too much estranged his
affections from Eleanor his renowned Queen, and made his desires subject, nay
slavish to the others wanton Will. The 3. was the irreconcilable dissension
betwixt him and Thomas Becket, the insolent Archbishop of Canterbury. The King
is accused of his death by the Pope, which he denies upon oath; yet the Pope
enjoins him for penance 3. years War in person in the Holy Land, which he
redeemed by erecting 3. houses of Religion; and to go from London to Canterbury
barefooted to visit Beckets shrine, which he did, and suffered himself to be
scourged by every Monk. Thus this King ended all his troubles.

Henry the 2d surnamed Shortmantle King of England, Duke of Normandy, and
Aquitaine, Earl of Poicteres and Anjou Lord of Ireland. He reigned 34 years 9
months. died the 6th. of July 1189 at the age of 61 years, and lies buried at
Fonteverard in Normandy.
He that shall read thy Reign (great Henry) must
Conclude thee truly valiant, wise, and just;
Who from the Treasury of thine own brain,
Did Foreign and Domestic Wars maintain.
Thou never did unusual Tax impose
Upon thy subjects, to subdue thy foes:
Yet did thy Son in ready Coin receive
Nine hundred thousand pounds which thou did leav.
Had thou not Becket, nor thy Siren seen,
Thy Love had never turned Lust; nor Anger spleen.
Thy Son^ with woe had never oppressed thy life;
No Rosamond is like a Royal Wife.


RICHARD the First, King of England.
RIchard the Eldest Son living of Henry the Second (being in Normandy when his
Father dyed) succeeded in his Throne; and (because those countries wanted
settlement, and required a longer time of his presence) above all other things
he was most careful for the enlargement of Queen Eleanor his Mother, who by
her deceased Husband was committed to straight imprisonment, because she
loathed and would not endure his lascivious course of living with his wanton
Paramour Rosamond, but sharply reproved him for the same: And because she was
every way virtuous, discreet and wise, he committed the whole Government of
this Realm in his absence to her care and management: and (because her own
experience had informed her what anguish and sorrow poor helpless Captives did
endure) she set at liberty all such as were imprisoned for ordinary offenses,
or for small debts, which she her self did pay for them; And administered the
Common-weals affairs with wonderful moderation, integrity, and Judgment,
until her Son the King came home, who was with all solemnity and strange
Triumphs anointed and Crowned King of England. The King (imitating the mild and
gentle disposition of his Mother, and commiserating the troubles of such as
were afflicted) freed out of prison all such as were his debtors, or were
enthralled for any transgression which concerned himself, and whom, without
injustice done to others, he might acquit: And through the whole course of his
Government, he so provided, that Justice with mercy might be extended to all.
Many were the honorable and profitable promotions he heaped upon his brother
John, whom he created Earl of Lancaster, giving to him moreover the Provinces
of Nottingham, Devonshire, and Cornwall, and married him to the sole and only
daughter and Heir of the Earl of Gloucester, from whom he received the Lordship
of that Country. Too great favors conferred on subjects make them aspire too
high: Just so was it with the King and his Brother John; for when the King had
poured upon him plentiful showers of his bounty, and had advanced him to
honor and estate above all others, his thoughts mounted above the Moon, and
made him unnaturally and unthankfully to affect the Crown. This King (for his
invincible valor and haughty courage) was esteemed to be most matchless in the
Christian World, so that he was surnamed Cuer de Lion, or Lions heart. His
Fathers Coffers enriched him with great store of Gold and Silver; and such was
his contempt of riches, and bounty to such as either deserved well, or were men
of any noble worth, that he bestowed on them great gifts with such alacrity,
that in short time he unbowelled all his bags, little foreseeing that future
business might require the expense of more then the great plenty which was left
unto him, and that when he wanted he should be driven to hard shifts to relieve
himself. This King was Crowned at Westminster, Sept. 3. 1189. by Baldwin
Archbishop of Canterbury, namely on that day so memorable for an accidental
slaughter of the Jews, whose insolence he abundantly restrained, by giving
License to Weed out that odious kind of men, which for their blasphemies he
hated. No sooner was he crowned, but at the instigation of the Pope he was
engaged with Philip King of France, and Leopald Arch Duke of Austria, and many
other Christian Princes, to win Jerusalem, which he did.

These things concluded (although the Kings profuse bounty and great expenses
had made him bare and needy) yet would he not burden his people with any tax
to supply his wants; but rather chose to raise money out of his own Estate,
which he did by selling Privileges, Demeans, Immunities and Cities, among
which sales he sold Barwick Castle and Rokesborough to the King of Scots, for
ten thousand pounds: and the Lordship and Earldome of Durham to Hugh then
Bishop of that See, for much money: and he did protest, that for the performing
of so great and honorable a Service, he was not unwilling to sell his City of
London it self (if any were able to purchase it) rather then he would be
chargeable unto others.

And thus the King having furnished himself with all provisions necessary for
his Journey; he for the time of his absence entrusted the Kingdom of England
to Hugh Baldulph Bishop of Durham, and to William Prunellus, and William Longo
Scampius Chancellor of the Kingdom, dividing to each his part and Proportion;
he set Robert Earl of Leicester, a man of honesty and integrity, over Normandy
and Aquitane; yet to prevent the ambition of John, he was minded to send him
into Normandy, but his Mother interceding for him, and becoming surety for his
fidelity, he was left in England: Lastly, appoynting Arthur his brother Ieffery
his Son to be his Successor in case he should dye in this Expedition. He
enters upon his Voyage accompanied with many Gallant Lords, Knights, and
Gentlemen, whose Resolutions much increased his hopes of good success.

In the way contrary Winds drive him upon Cyprus, assails and wins it; of which
Philip of France demands a share. Richard denies him, and thence arose a great
feud between the two Kings, which put a great stop to the whole Enterprise.
Richard got great renown; but being forsaken by the French, and the
Burgundians forsaking him, he makes peace with Saladine upon unjust terms,
and returning home is betrayed to Leopaldus, then to the Emperor, is
imprisoned, and with a mighty Ransom redeemed, which afterward lost the
Emperor his Life, and Leopaldus the breaking of his Legs, and lastly the
losing it.

Lastly, after four years he arrives in England, where he met with treasons and
troubles on all sides by the French, by homebred thieves and the Jews which
he suppressed, and marches against the French, and at the siege of a City
received a shot in the Arm, whereof he dyed, and was buried at Fontenward in
Normandy: He Reigned nine years, nine months, and twenty two days.

The right Valiant Prince RICHARD surnamed Coeur-de-lion King of England and
Jerusalem Duke of Normandy and Aquitane, Earl of Poeters and Anuou. Lo: of
Ireland. etc. He died at the age of 43 years Ano 1199. after he had reigned 9
years. 9 months and 22 days and lies buried at Fonteverard in Normandy.
Richard the First no Lion ever fought,
But was called Lion's heart cause he was stout.
From Prison he his Mother did release,
And settled his Dominions in peace:
Then levying men and money, did prepare
All that was needful to the holy War.
He forced King Tuncred buy his peace with Gold,
And twice won Cyprus for Jerusalem sold.
The Turks and Saracens he overthrowes,
Whilst prostrate Palestine to his Prowess bows.
Philip and Leopald their envy bend
Against that valor even the Foes commend.


JOHN, King of England.
NExt, John by blows and bribes usurps his Brothers Crown and Treasury to
maintain his unjust Title; which was the cause the whole Course of this Kings
government was accompanied with continual troubles; and his two persecutors
were Pope Innocent the Third, and Philip the Second, King of France. But the
first Tempest was depending from his Cosen Arthur, whose Kingdom he had not
only taken from him, but also had drawn the Dukedom of Normandy to himself,
leaving to Arthur only the Dukedom of Anjou. But his Mother Constance, finding
her self too weak for the English, flies to the French King, and craves aid of
him, who promised not only to restore all Normandy, but all England to Arthur,
and forthwith received the young man into his Protection: Wherefore Phllip
listing an Army first made good the Duchy of Anjou to Arthur, and then invaded
Normandy. But John sailing into Normandy, upbraids Philip for perfidiousness,
because he had very foully broken the peace he had made with his Brother
Richard; yet for all this they go not to Arms: For while they discourse, and
each defends his Right, they agree on fifty days cessation of Arms; Baldwin
Earl of Flaunders being utterly against it, who therefore forsaking Philip
makes his peace with the English; and takes Counsel by what means (when the
truce was ended) they should wage war with Philip; but when John was free from
care of war, he strikes hands with the French King upon unjust terms. Baldwin
hating his sluggishness, once more joined with the French, and restored the War
of Jerusalem. The English are glad and return home, but are very ill received
by the Nobility, who hated those base Conditions they had made with the French.
But John now free from War turns all his study to Pole his Subjects, and to
follow his pleasure. Also he deprived the Archbishop of York, his brother, of
all his Fortunes for nothing, but because he dehorted him from such injury.
Then going into Normandy he divorced his Wife Avis, and married Isabell,
daughter and heir to the Earl of Engelestne; she was Crowned at Canterbury. B^t
the daily oppression of King John prevailed so far; also his base Luxury (not
without murder and Manslaughter, for he destroyed Matilda a beautiful Maid,
making her to drink Poison, because she would not yield to his entreaty to be
corrupted by him. And William Bruce with his Wife, for speaking somewhat too
freely, he killed with Famine, taking all their estate from them. He demanded
Subsidies, but his Nobles altogether denied him, nor would they follow him in
his Wars until those heavy Imposts laid upon them were taken away: Yet he wen^
afterward into Normandy, and thence to Paris, where he and his Wife (to outward
appearance) were friendly received by King Philip. But Hugh Earl of Marsh, to
whom Isabella the Kings Wife was first betrothed; being angry with the King for
taking his Wife from him, joins with Arthur, and begin a new War; Philip takes
part with them, so jointly those of Tours first, then they of Anjou invade;
they take the Towns of Mirabellum, King John reproves Philip for his falseness,
and begins ^eriously to think upon revenge; and coming upon the Forces of the
enemy suddenly and unlooked for, destroyed them with a great slaughter, taking
those prisoners that could not escape, among whom was Arthur, who shortly after
dyed of hunger in prison; but some say, that endeavoring his escape he was
drowned in the River; but, as it is Vulgarly thought, he dyed of mere sor^ow:
His Sister Eleanor followed him shortly after the same sad way. And thus ended
Arthurs Life, Title, and those Wars. Next Year the French King takes all
Normandy by Force. And now began the Kings other enemy, Pope Innocent the
Third, to vex him more then Philip had done; the occasion is this, Hubert
Archbishop of Canterbury died, and the Monks of St. Augustines in that City
(without the Kings License or knowledge, and about midnight) elected Reynold a
brother of their own to succeed him, and took of him an oath forthwith to
travel to Rome, there to procure his investiture, and to receive his Pall from
the Pope. Tidings hereof coming to the Kings ears, he presently made known his
inward dislike of their rash and unadvised doings; so that (upon his motion,
and to appease his wrath) they elect John Gray then Bishop of Norwich:
Incontinently the King (upon his own charges) dispatches Letters, and
Ambassadors to the Pope, entreating him to ratify the last choice. But the
Pope neglects the Kings Entreaty, and confirms him that was first Elected; at
which the King fretted, and stormed much to see himself so slenderly regarded:
The Monks also (to please the King) refuse to receive their own first election,
because it was made in the night. At last the Pope would (whether the King
would or no) make choice of one Stephen Langton (one of his Creatures) to
succeed in the Archbishopric: The King stoutly keeps him off, and confiscates
all the Lands and Goods of such as partake in the election with Rome, and
forbids all appeals thither. The Pope after a proud letter or two, interdicts
him and all his Kingdom, which he very frankly gives to Philip the French
King; who coming to invade and possess himself of the Popes gift, lost three
hundred of his Ships, and returned home as he came.

Nevertheless, John basely on his knees tenders his Crown for the Popes use,
which his Legate keeps four days; but the Nobility hating his poor spirit,
revolt to the French, whom John not able to resist, flies, and is poisoned by a
Monk in Swinstead Abbey, who drank to him in these words, Wassall my Liege. He
was buried at Worcester, having Reigned seventeen years and odd months.

He left behind him four sons, viz. Henry, who succeeded him; Richard, who was
elected King of the Romans; William of Valentia; and Guido Disnay: And three
Daughters, viz. one married to Frederick the Emperor; the second to William
Marshall Earl of Worcester; and the third to the Earl of Leicester.

The right Valiant Prince RICHARD surnamed Coeur-de-^ion King of England and
Jerusalem. Duke of Normandy and Acuitane, Earl of Poeters and Annou. Lo: of
Ireland. etc. He died at the age of 43 years Ano. 1199. after he had reigned 9
years. 9 months and 22 days and lies buried at Fontevera^d in Normandy.
O what a lushie morsel is a Crown?
That right or wrong Princes will gusle't down,
John to the Throne will over his Nephews neck,
Although his own in the attempt he break.
What followed this Usurper at the Helm?
A three years Curse on him, and his whole Realm.
At last base fears impossibles foresees,
And to the Pope bends his unprincely knees:
In Swinstead Abbey death did him besiege
In Sacramental Mass; Wassall my Liege.
Who pities him a safe estate that scorns,
And wounds his Temples with a Crown of Thorns?


HENRY the Third, King of England.
AFter the Death of King John, Henry his eldest Son (about the age of nine
years) was Crowned King, but not without some controversy of the Nobles; some
of the Nobility falling off to him, who a little before had made a defection,
and swore to King Lewis. Yet Lewis with an Army of twenty thousand men won many
Towns, till at last he came to the Castle at Lincoln, which a certain
Noblewoman did bravely defend, and caused him to stop; and an Army of the
English coming on in the mean time, he was repulsed and conquered, many of the
English Nobility being taken that stood with him, besides the Count of Perch
that stood with him till the last, preferring an honorable Death, before a
dishonorable Life: Yet he did not despair, but sent for more Forces out of
France, which were all almost destroyed in a Fight at Sea. By these misfortunes
he was forced to take Conditions of a hundred and five thousand Franks in
respect of the charge he had been at; he renouncing all right to the Kingdom
of England: And promising faithfully to prevail with his father to restore all
the Provinces in France belonging to the English. The King restored to the
rebellious Nobility all the Lands belonging to them: And Lewis at Dover set
Sail for France, having warred unhappily in another Land. Then a Parliament
was summoned, and Magna Charta ratified, also the Court of Wards was revived,
and a Tax granted the King to Levy an Army under the Conduct of his Brother
Richard, for the recovery of his Rights in France. The Parliament being ended,
the said Tax with great celerity is collected without any the lest grutch or
contradiction; so that the Kings Coffers were replenished with Gold and Silver;
and all requisites were carefully provided, and a gallant Army of courageous
men of War were assembled, and safely transported. With which Richard the Kings
Brother did (almost) wonders, subduing where he found resistance, and seizing
upon Lordships, Forts, Towns, Castles, and other defenced places, quietly and
without blows, no Head being made against him; so that within few Months (such
was his valor and good Fortune) he recovered both those Provinces wholly for
the King, and returned with much honor into England. But the Kings absence
from those Places gave opportunity to the French King to infest them, which he
unfriendly laid hold on, and suddenly led a new Army into Poicters, and easily
made himself Lord thereof. From thence marched to Perigott, and Alverne, and
other places in Guyan, where he did the like. But King Henry sent thither an
other Army under the Conduct of his Brother Richard, Earl of Cornwall, with
which he encountered the French, and fought many sharp Battles, in which for
the most part his Fortune continued prosperous; and all things seemed to
promise him the recovering of whatever (in his absence) had been lost: But in
the height of all these broils a friendly peace was concluded betwixt the two
Kings, and Richard returned safe into England.

This Richard Earl of Cornwall, the Kings Brother, at the suit of the Princes
of Germany, is elected King of the Romans; but not long after being charged
with insolence and oppression, he was put out of the Office, and returns to
England a poor King, that went out a rich Earl.

And now began those mischievous broyls and turmoyls in this Realm, which
(until the Kings death) daily vexed him more and more, and the whole Kingdom
also; for the King lending too ready and pleasing an ear to lewd and evil
Officers about him (whom above all Officers he loved and favored, and by whose
Counsel and advice both himself and his whole Kingdom was ruled and directed)
made little account of his best Subjects Love: And took from them (in diverse
things) such Liberties as by the Laws and Ordinances of this Kingdom they
justly claimed, and ought to have enjoyed. He also pinched his people with many
unnecessary and grievous Taxes, which by those lewd and bold Officers were
levied with much rigor and sharpness, to their great distaste. The King also
took to Wife Eleoner Daughter of Raymond Earl of Province, whereby there grew
no profit to his affairs, but rather suffered great detriment by reason of her
threadbare and beggarly Family; and her poor kindred flocking from all Parts
as Crows to the Prey, which, nevertheless, were highly entertained by the
King, and en^ic^t with money, and placed in Offices of greatest honor and
profit, and the English ^hrust ou^, a^ which ^he Nobles stormed, and the people
every where much murmured.

But whil^^ the King goes about to overthrow his Subjects Rights, which they
labor to preserve; all the Nobili^y being offended at the promotion of
strangers, they enter into a Conspiracy. The King calls a Pa^liament: The
Nobility refuse to be present, unless he would command the Bishop of
Winchester, Peter de Rup^bus and all his Gang to forsake the Court, threatening
withal, that unless satisfaction were made to them they would depose the King,
and drive away all strangers his adherents, and choose another King. In fine
both Sides, King and Barons fall to Arms, and with various success fight
several fierce and cruel Battles; at length at the battle near Lewis, after
the fall of twenty thousand men, The two Kings and the Prince, with many
Knights and Gentlemen of great account, were all taken prisoners by the Barons.

Then a peace is concluded between them; a Parliament being called, the King
confirmed the Government of the twelve Peers, which by Hand and Seal he had
assigned them in a former Parliament at Oxford, called the Mad Parliament; and
Prince Edward who was Hostage for his Father, is set at liberty. But the Prince
not enduring to see his Father thus a titular King, raises a fresh Army; and
about Evesham near Worcester fights the Barons, whom by reason of a mortal
jarre between Leicester and Gloucester, their two Generals he overthrows. Then
the Kings call another Parliament, and repeals and nulls all former Decrees
touching the Authority of the twelve Peers: and thus the King got again the
staff into his own hand, by the virtue and valor of his princely son.

The King much incensed with the Londoners for taking part with the Barons,
could hardly be dissuaded from burning the City; but at last the Prince made
their peace; and after that marches with an Army to the Holy Land, where the
King dies, having reigned fifty six years.

HENRY the III. King of England: Duke of Aquitane. Earl of Poic tiers and
Anjou. Lord of Ireland. He died at the age of 65 years, after he had reigned
56 years and lies intombed at Westminster. 1272.
The groaning Kingdom being rid of John,
Has found his very Image in his Son.
King Henry the Third nine years of Age
Enters a troubled and a doubtful Stage
The Realm he found Rebecca like become
With diverse Nations struggling in her Womb;
All which he cleared at last with promise fair,
With Oaths and Vows which proved nothing but Ai^
He pill'd his subjects so, that at his need
Give him they nothing would, nor could indeed*
He marries then with a mean Family,
And spoils his Realm to lard their Poverty.


EDWARD the First, King of England.
WHen King Henry died, Edward his son and heir was in Palestine, very intent
about the holy war, where he underwent a grievous danger, having received 3
desperate wounds from his adversary with a poisoned weapon: But he was cured by
the wonderful Piety of his Wife, who with her mouth in time sucked out the
venom from his wounds. In his way, being made more certain of his fathers
death, he made great journeyes and traveled in all have into England, where
(with the general applause both of his Nobles, and Common People) he was
crowned King when he was of the age of 35 years. At the beginning of his Reign
he used the Nobility well; but to abate the insolence of the Clergy, he
commanded their wealth to be brought into his Exchequer, and he afflicted them
otherwise, and so drew upon himself their envy. The Welsh rise against him, but
he luckily intercepts Eleoner, Monfort's daughter, espoused to Lluellen their
Prince, upon surrender of whom that storm blew over, and obedience was promised
by the Welsh to King Edward. But within few years, three or four at most,
Lluellen puts an end to his Oath and obedience, for his wife Eleoner being dead
he breaks forth into new Rebellions; also David forgetting the great love of
King Edward to him, falls off to his brother, and so with joint forces they
enter England, and does some mischief to Edward; both of them wonderfully
inflamed by a false prophecy of Merlin, whereby the Crown of Brutus was
promised to Lluellen; but the battle being set, Lluellen was killed by a
private Soldier, and his Head brought to King Edward; his Brother David also
was taken, and had his Head struck off, and with his Brothers it was set upon
the Tower of London, where it remained a long time after, but his four Quarters
were sent to four Principal Cities in England, to be set up for a terror to
all Traitors hereafter: so Edward revenged the Rebellion of the Welsh, and the
death of Alphonsus his first Borne, who was slain in the same battle. In the
eighteenth year of King Edward's Reign, Alexander the King of Scots (not
having any Issue of his body) fell with his horse, and unfortunately brake his
neck: He had three sisters; the eldest of which was married to John Balioll,
Lord of Galloway; the second to Robert le Bruise, Lord of Valley-Andrew; and the
third was married into England to John Hastings, Lord of Abergavenny: amongst
these three (each of them backed with his best friends) sharp bickerings and
civil wars arose, to the destruction of many worthy persons on all sides:
Whilst the matter thus was handled, King Edward promises the Kingdom of
Scotland to Bruise for ever, so he would do him homage for it; but Bruise
refuses it, preferring his Countries Liberty before his own honor. Yet
Balioll yields to those conditions, and so got the Kingdom of Scotland, but
the ill will of all his Countrymen.

Envy against him increased for refusing Justice upon the death of the Earl of
Fife, who was slain; for Baylioll exempted Alberme^h from punishment that slew
him; whereupon Baylioll cited before Edward's Tribunal is forced to plead his
cause; he was angry at this disgrace, and denies Homage to Edward, and
proclaims war, (making a Covenant with the French King.) Hence arose the
cause of a most bloody war between the two Nations, which lasted for three
hundred years, only some feigned cessations passed between.

No less than four times did this victorious King Edward subdue the false and
fraudulent Scots, compelling them with extraordinary tokens of subjection and
humility, to submit themselves to his mercy.

In the mean time a new war breaks forth between King Edward and the French
King Philip the fair, by a controversy between the subjects of either King,
for Kings that envy one another, easily break forth into open Hatred: but
Edward had other grudges against the French, for conniving at the death of his
Cosen Henry the Emperors Son. Edward therefore when a day was appointed him,
has a stipendary to plead his cause before King Philip, he refused to appear;
whereupon a great Army being raised, Philip enters upon the Territories of King
Edward in France by force of Arms; the King of England by the assistance of
neighbor Princes, the Earl of Flanders; the Duke of Brabant, with Adolphus of
Nassaw; the Roman Emperor presently marches against the King of France, but
finding the French divided in two parts and defrauded with the Emperors
delays, when he had held his winters quarters at Gaunt not without the
murmuring of the Citizens, and great want of his soldiers; At the beginning of
the spring, truce being made with the French for three years: the King took
Margaret (the Dukes sister) to wife, (for Eleoner died in the former Expedition
against the Scots) And the daughter of Philip being betrothed to King Edwards
son he retreated for England.

About the same time Doctor Langton, then Bishop of Chester, complained
grievously to the King upon Edward the young Prince, who (by the lewd advice of
Pierce Gaveston, his loose and graceless Companion) brake forcibly into his
Park, and made havoc of his Game; for which the Prince was committed to
Prison, and Gaveston banished for ever.

Lastly, making an incursion into Scotland he is taken with a Disentery and
dies of it, and lies buried at Westminster.

He was very tall, of Countenance somewhat sorrowful, of Chastity like his
Father, but in fortitude far before him; Religious he was and wise.

The noble and Victorious Prince EDWARD the first (surnamed Long-shanks) King
of England, Duke of Aquitaine, Earl of Poictices, and Anjou: Lo: of Ireland
etc: He Conquered Scotland, and brought from thence the Marble Chair He
subdued and overcame llewelyn Prince of Wales, and made his son Edward Prince
Hereof. he died at the age of 68 years. 1307. after he had reigned 34 years 8
months. buried at Westminster.
King Edward, Saraceus, Head, and Sholder sunders;
Where Christ wrought miracles this Prince did wonders.
His wife with such so pious love abounds,
She sucks the venom from his poisoned wounds.
'Twere Treason to their merits to conceal
So great a Valor, and so sweet a zeal.
The haughty Welsh he soon did overrun,
And left them Vassalls to his Princely Son;
And by his sword so weighed down Fortunes scales,
That Englands heir succeeds still Prince of Wales.
He paid the Scots for all their Treacheries,
And 4 times brought them on their humbled knees


EDWARD the Second, King of England.
EDward the Second succeeds his Father in the Throne; who was too unmind^ull of
his ^athers commands in his ^ast Will and Testament, in which he was enjoined,
and solemnly prot^sted to perform three things especially; namely, that he
should carry his fathers Bones along with him till he had conqu^red Scotland;
Secondly, that he should expend thirty thousand pounds in the Holy War; and
Thirdly, that he should never recall Pierce Gaveston, whom for just reasons his
Father had banished for Life. But he never performed any of these; for his
fathers bones he did well enough to let them rest; but for Gaveston he recalled
him, and bestowed on him all the money designed to the Holy War, longing more
to brake his Oath touching him, then to take his Coronation Oath.

The Noble men (who perfectly knew how wickedly this Gaveston was inclined)
perceiving that the King doted on him, and that his affections toward him were
unlimited, being perplexed with inward grief, and foreseeing that his insolence
would be the ruin of the Realm, emboldened themselves to put the King in mind
of his Oath: But as his conscience nothing troubled him for the breach thereof,
so their disliking increased his desires toward Gaveston, and to make him
great, which was the next thing he took in hand: and now none but Gaveston must
rule all in all; frown who would the King cared not, Gaveston must and shall be
great; and therefore first, he is Lorded with the Baronie of Wallingford, and
soon after he is created Earl of Cornwall; and if this was not enough to make
him rich, he is made sole Commander over the Kings Jewels and Treasures; in
which O^fice, so absolute was his power, and so cunning his crafty pate, to
provide in the time of his prosperity for adverse Fortune which might ensue,
that secretly he conveyed beyond the seas a fair Table and Tressells all made
of beaten Gold; and many rich and precious Ornaments, to the great hurt of the
King and damage of this Realm.

He also took much pleasure to feed the Kings fancy with great variety of
delights, and by his example he inured him to excessive banqueting and
drunkenness; and his vile and unchaste all urements, made him careless of the
bed and society of his Religious and Virtuous Queen Isabel the Daughter of the
French King Philip the fair, and Sister to Charles his successor, and trained
him to the adulterous Consortship of wanton curtizans, and shameless Whores.
The Queen (who sorrowed hereat beyond measure) reposed all her means for
redress of those unsufferable wrongs, in her prayers to God, and her modest
wooing for her Kings love: but all endeavors came to nothing; for the beams of
her excellent virtues could not pierce the thick clouds of his vanities;
neither could her pious tears mollify his heart, hardened in too much variety
and plenty of loathsome sins.

The Nobles and those of the Kings Counsel secretly, and several tim^s
informed the King what notice at offense strangers and his own people (even the
Vulgar) at the lewd and vicious courses of Gaveston; and how strangely they
spoke of him, and of his Government, altogether eclipsed by the interposition
of his foul vices betwixt himself and it; but all avail^d nothing with him,
who was resolved rather to lose his Crown than his Companion. Then at the Lords
Petition the King sends him into Ireland, not as a person proscribed, but a
President; at length the Nobles perceiving the Kings heaviness for his
absence, petition his recall in hope of his amendment and to please the King,
but he grows more insolent the^ before.

At last the Barons (hopeless to redress and unable to support so despised a
burden) besi^ge this wicked Gaveston in a strong castle, win it, and cut off
his head. Then the King to vex his Nobility, he entertained into his Society
and Counsels the two Spencers, father and son, men as graceless and odious to
the Nobles and common people as the other was. They advised him to Whores and
Concubines, and to forsake the sweet Company of his modest and virtuous Queen,
which made him a scorn to foreign Princes, and all honest men: yet the King
in spite of his greatest Lords supported the Spencers in all whatever they
took in band. But this evil Government begets him envy and contempt at home
and ene^ies abroad* ^or R^^liruse being re-crowned in Scotland invades England,
four or five days marches with fire and Sword, making havoc of all before
him. But King Edward had behav^d himself so ill a^ home, in over-favouring his
Minions, and altogether neglecting his Nobles, that his ^athers bones could
stand him now in little stead, for no less then three ^imes is he overthr^wne
by the Scots, yea with numbers far inferior to his own, to the shame of this
Realm, famous for the best Soldiers in the World.

At home he became too fortunate, for he overthrows his Barons Army, and
beheads 22. Lords by the advice of these villainous and perfidious Spencers. But
the Queen with the Prince her Son sail beyond Sea, obtains assistance of her
Cousin Sr. John Henault and his friends, returns into England, and joining with
the Nobles and the City of London overthrowes the Kings Forces; and besieging
him and the Spencers in Bristoll Castle, takes it and them, and executes these
miscreants the Spencers, father and Son, and other their Confederates, and
committed the King to Prison, whence he never escaped. Then a Parliament is
called wherein they consulted to depose the King and to Crown his Son; but he
was so piously conscientious, that he would not accept the Crown unless his
father willingly resigned it, which he freely did, being glad they would Crown
his Son in his stead. And not long after he miserably ended his days in Barkly
Castle, by piercing his bowels with a red hot Spit through his fundament; and
at the Age of 43 he was buried at Gloucester. He was tall and comely of
Stature, but of immoderate dotage on his Minions, and given to drunkenness,
which made him too open of his Counsels, too much addicted to lasciviousness,
his own nature being rather corrupted by his vicious Minions, than otherwise.

Edward the 2d. King of England Duke of Aquitaine Earl of Poictou, Anjou, and
Pontieu, Lord of Ireland. He reigned 19. years. 7 moths: and was deposed the
25th of January 1327. and shortly com^^^ted to prison in Barkley Castle, and
there cruelly murdered. (...) the age of 43 years. huried at Gloucester.
Edward the Second does deserve to have
All his Remembrance buried in his grave.
He lead to Scotland many thousand men,
And having seen it e'ne came home again.
Pierce Gaveston enthralled his jale heart
So close, that nothing but the axe could part.
Next come his dearling Spencers to his view;
Rid of one Rakeshame, now he must have two.
Honor and Princely prudence are thrown down,
And Dotage takes her lodging in the Crown.
Cursed be the luckless minute that did bring,
A Minious subject to be Englands King.


EDWARD the Third, King of England.
EDward the Third being fifteen years of Age, was crowned by Reynold
Archbishop of Canterbury, his deposed father being yet alive: In his younger
years he was chiefly directed by the advice and counsel of the Queen, and his
Uncle Edmund of Woodstock, Earl of Kent, and of Sr Roger Mortimer, who to
interesse himself more especially in the Queens favor, traitorously conspired
and procured that murder of the last King, in that horrid and butcherly manner
before spoken of, in the 2. year of this Kings Reign. The Court in those days
was seldom or never without a Viper; for as Gaveston was the forerunner of
the Spencers in ambition, lasciviousness, pride, rapine and confusion: so the
Spencers were the ushers of the Mortimers in intolerable aspiring, avarice and
destruction; the ill laid foundations of all whose greatness was attended by
certain and sudden ruin. There fell out a war with the Scots, in which Edward
got the better: then a Parliament is called, in which the two Spencers and
Stapleton Bishop of ^xeter are attainted of high Treason. Then the King (by the
directions of his Mother and Sr Roger Mortimer) concluded a dishonorable peace
with the Scots, and released to them their homage, fealty, and services to him
due for that Kingdom, and delivered up to them the grand Cha^tar or Instrument
called Ragman, which under the Hands and Seals of their late King and of the
Nobillity of Scotland, testified their tenure and subjection to the Kings of
this Realm, and then he married his Sister Jane unto David the Son and Heir
apparent to Robert le Bruce, the Usurping Scottish King; and created Sr Roger
Mortimer Earl of March, whereat his Nobles were exceedingly discontented: and
such was the new Earls malice and hatred unto the Kings Uncle, the Earl of
Kent, and so powerful was he with the King, by reason of his too much
familiarity with his mother Queen Isabell, that he never desisted from his
wicked and ungodly plottings, till he had bereaved him of his head. But God
permitted not this wretched man to persist long in these mischievous courses;
for within few months after he was accused by the State for horrid and heinous
crimes; for which his wicked Treasons and horrible transgressions he was
condemned to die, in the same manner which he had devised for Sr Hugh Spencer
the younger: and Queen Isabell (being most honorably attended on) was
sequestered into a strong Castle, where she lived more than 30 years after, and
then died. After this the French King requires homage for the Duchy of Guian,
which Edward offers by proxy, but not otherwise: The French cite him again to a
personal appearance; Edward unwilling to controvert with him, sends it him
under the great Seal, whereat his Nobles are much offended, telling him that
the Crown of France in right of his Mother belonged to him, and that therefore
he might justly refuse to do him any homage at all, and deny all fealty
whatever.

Then Edward enters Scotland, and crowns Baylioll King thereof. But now instead
of doi^g homage, King Edward claims the Crown of France in right of inheritance
from his mother Isabell, and in spite of their Salique Law entitles himself
King of France, and quarters the Arms of France with the Arms of England. And
levying much money and all necessary Provision, with a strong Army he fails
into France, winning many Cities, Forts and Castles, so that the English Army
becomes rich with spoils. The French King solemnly swears and p^otests that
King Edward should not return home without a battle between them. But Edward
marches on still winning Gizours, Vernon, St. Germans in lay Mountrell, St.
Cloud, Rely, and the whole country about Roan, point de L'arch, Naples,
N^wlench, Robboi^, Fountain, Poi^, and Vimewer; at last King Philip of France
having certain intelligence that King Edward with his Army was within two
Leagues of Paris, left the City, telling the Parisians that King Ed^ard dared
not to look them in the face; but they believed him not, but were grievously
a^raid; but he turned off to find out the French Army, still Provinces in his
way, for I have not room to particularize. Now to the English glory, the never
to be forgotten B^tt^ll of Cress^, where the French with all the Flower and
prowess of their Realm, with Swords whet with malice, with numbers six to
one, met the English, weakened with a differing Clime, their bodies tired with
tedious marches, wounded with Assaults, their swords broken or blunted with
continual skirmiges: and now is the time to try the difference between French
and English metal. The French begin the battle with a Forlorn (of 15000
Genoways (an Army bigger then the English) but they have their Errant quickly,
and returned with such terror, that in their flying they routed and confounded
their own main battle; yet the French emboldened with multitudes, continued the
Charge with number upon number, but their disorder and confusion was such, they
came but up as so many sacrifices to the hungry swords of the King and his
renowned Son the black but the brave Prince: at last the French fly amain,
and are so eagerly pursued by the English that their souls are too nimble for
their bodies, the greatest part lying breathless on the ground; and in the
chase the two Marshalls of England encountered with a multitude of Bevoys
Reigner, Roan and Anbevile, and slew 7000 of them; and the next day slew and
put to flight a strong Army under the command of the grand Prior of France, who
(not knowing the battle) were coming to aid their King, that run away the day
before, leaving behind him slain in the field 11 of his Princes, 80 Barons,
1200 Knights, and more than 30000 common Soldiers; the French King himself
hardly escaping death by speedy flight. Then marched the King and Prince to
Callice, besieges and takes it, notwithstanding the French King endeavored
with 200000 men to raise the siege, and could not, but went away as he came. At
the battle of Poictiers the Prince did overthrow the French, took their King,
and infinite Nobles, Lords and Knights, and brought them prisoners into
England; so that this King had two Kings at one time prisoners in England. He
reigned 50 years.

The true pourtraicture of EDWARD III. borne at Windsore, of the age of 15
years was crowned at Westminster the 2 of February 1326. he took the tittle
of King of France, as dew unto him both by Civil Law, and order of
succession: being the Nephew and next heir male of K: Charles IIII. his mothers
brother, in regard whereof he quartred the arms of France with Englands. He
reigned 50. years. 5. mo: He died at the manor of Shene in Surrey. Ano. 1377.
buried in Westminster. R.E. Scul^
Edward the Third did at the Throne arrive,
Whilst his deposed Father was alive:
But till hit Father willingly resigned it,
Though Queen and Peers all urged it, he declined it.
Scotland he first subdued, and made it reele
Under the force of his victorious steel.
France asked him Homage, but he told her plain,
Homage was due to him, her Sovereign.
Let her to Cressey, and to Poictiers look,
And Callice, which before Philip's face he took:
And what does more than this his fame evince,
He was the father to the brave BLACK PRINCE.


RICHARD the Second, King of England.
RICHARD the Second (being the Son and Heir of the black Prince, and aged 11
years, and somewhat more) was crowned King of England, in the year of our Lord
one thousand three hundred and seventy seven. The Kingdom was in an Eclipse
the most part of this Kings Reign: his youth with all the frailties incident
thereunto, with bad Governors both of his kingdom and person, were the main
ruins of the King, and almost the Realm: For in the whole course of his
Government he neglected his Nobillity, and taxed his subjects to enable him to
give prodigally to his Sycophants and ill deserving Favorites. He was too too
resolute in his ways, and refused to be reformed, be they never so indirect.
He also despised the sage advice and good directions of his best counselors;
and wholly plotted all his courses by the wicked and graceless projects of his
base and loose companions, whom he raised to more honorable estates than
befitted the meannesse of their Conditions; so that they fell by their own
weight: and he himself (in the end) was enforced to endure the extremity of his
hard fortune. For being first disgraced by his Cousin Henry Bullingbrook Duke
of Lancaster, and Son and Heir to his Uncle John of Gaunt; he was at length by
him (with the general consent of a whole Parliament) deposed from his Crown,
committed to prison, and afterward wickedly murdered, as in this discourse of
his disorderly government more amply shall appear.

In the first year of King Richards Reign, Charles the French King (presuming
much on his minority, and being aided by the Spaniard, landed in the
South-east, and South-west parts of this kingdom, and ransacked and burnt the
Towns of Plymouth, Rye, Dartmouth, Portsmouth, and some other Towns and
Villages coasting upon the Sea; and would have done more mischief, if by the
Kings Uncle, Edmund of Langley, Earl of Cambridge, and by the Earls of
Buckingham and Salisbury they had not been fought with, and beaten to their
Ships.

At the same time one Ramsey a Scot cunningly surprised the Castle of Barwick,
but was soon beaten out again, all the desperadoes being put to death but
himself. Again the French infest the Coasts of England, even unto Graves-end;
whereupon Richard with Poll-money levies an Army, and revenged himself, which
caused after mischief.

And now fell out a Rebellion in England, exceeding hazardous to the whole
kingdom, occasioned by one John Wall, a factious Priest; who perceiving the
meaner and baser sort of people much murmuring and repining at the last Tax,
took an unhappy occasion to move them to sedition, telling them we are all by
nature the children of Adam, born of one and the same condition, and equal
worth; and that the Laws of this kingdom were unjust, to set so great
difference between men, making some Peers and Potentates, and others poor and
penurious. Thus they begun to grow mad and implacable against the Nobillity,
for the basest dregs of men commonly being incapable of honor themselves, are
envious against those that are. Hereupon (together with the hope of pilfering)
arose a formidable tumult, who for their Leader took one Watt Tyler, and for
other chief Officers had Jack Straw, Jack Shepherd, and the seditious Priest
John Wall, stiling themselves the Kings men, and the Servants of the
Commonweal of England. They marched toward London, beating down and rifling
of houses, and all before them. They make all Knights and Gentlemen forsake
their houses, which they burn or rifle at lest; They send also to the King, who
then lay in the Tower, requiring him to come and speak with them. Whereupon the
King purposing to prevent mischief, went to Graves-end, but seeing their rage
and madness, he ^^ared to put himself into their hands, and returned back
again to the Tower of London. Next day came this rabble to Southwark; and
finding the Bridge fortified, and the Gates shut, they resolved to kill all the
people and burn the Borough; but to prevent mischie^, they were let into the
City, who were fain to entertain them with gifts and good words: Then they
rifle the Savoy, and kill all they light on: they robbed all the Inns of
Cour^s, and burnt their Law books, nor spared they the Churches, but
sacrilegiously stole all they could lay hand on. Watt Tyler commands his
Masters head to be carried before him on a Lance* m^erly because he had given
him some small correction when he was his servant. The Rebels send ^o the King,
who goes to Mile-end Green to them, freely pardons them all, and gives them his
Banners for their security; whereupon many forsake Tyler, who with about 20000
marches into Smithfield, resolving to ransack and burn the City. Then the King
courteously persuades them to desist; but Tyler commanded the Esquire (that
bare the sword before the King) to give him his Dagger; but the Esquire told him it
was the Kings Sword, and should not be giv^n to a knave: whereat Tyler swore
e're he would eat or drink the Esquire should lose his head. The King loath to have
the Esquire endangered, bid him give him the Sword; but the Esquire would not; then
stepped in William Wallworth Major of the City and clapped his Dagger to Tilers
heart, commanding him to submit to the King; presently about a thousand armed
Citizens came and routed them. Thus did the storm blow over by Gods goodness
and the Majors Courage; and ever since the City carry the Dagger in their
Escutcheon. Ball and Jack Staw were executed, the rest pardoned. The French
prepare a great army purposing to invade England. King Richard rayseth a mighty
power to conquer Scotland, which designs had no good events. Mischeife and
Misery (having sat long abroad) began now to hatch at home; The insulting
Peers and rebellious people bandy the regal Power into hazard. The Scots enter
England under the Command of Sr. William Dowglasse, and are encountered by the
Noble Lord Henry Hotspur: Dowglasse is slain, and Hotspur taking Ireland
rebels: The King goes against him in person, and the mean while loses his
Kingdom, which with himself and Crown he is forced to surrender to his Cousin
Henry Bullingbrook, Son to John of Gant, Duke of Lancaster, Anno 1400.

The true pourtraicture of Richard the 2. King of England, and France, Lord of
Ireland, and Prince of Chester he reigned 22 years, was deposed and murdered
at Pomfraict Cast: at the age of 33 years. Buried first at Langley. and 14
years after by K. Henry the (...) and their wa^ honorably ^u^erred.
Richard the Second (son to such a Prince
The World has never had his equal since)
Instead of aiming at another Crown,
As did his Father, tamely yields his own.
Has Mars begot Clineas then? O strange!
Sure all the world is molded up of Change:
And to the Waves we may compare them well*
One threatens Heaven, another sinks to Hell.
Such is the State of sublunary things;
Nothing is fixed, no not the Throne of Kings.
Peace out of doubt would be perpetual,
But that our sins, our sins for battles call.


HENRY the Fourth, King of England.
THe Crown of England (Richard the deposed King dying without issue) did
rightfully descend upon Edmund Mortimer Earl of March (the Son and Heir of
Edmund Mortimer, by Philip his Wife, who was the Daughter and Heir of Lionel
Duke of Clarence, the third Son of Edward the Third) Yet his Cousin Henry
Bullingbrook Duke of Hartford, and Son and Heir of John of Gaunt, younger
brother unto the said Lionel, was elected and crowned King, and forthwith he
created his Eldest Son Henry Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of
Chester; and summoned his high Court of Parliament, in which an order was taken
for the safe keeping and honorable attendance and maintaining of Richard the
late King; but his deposing, imprisonment, and all former proceedings against
him, were in the same assembly publicly condemned and reproved by John Bishop
of Carlisle, as hateful unto God, traitorous toward the King, and infamous
among good men: for he averred boldly, that if he were not a good King, yet
more wrong was done to him then ordinarily is done to thieves and murderers;
because they are not (as he was) condemned before they had made their answer to
the Crime objected, before Judges who were indifferent, and pronounced their
Judgment upon good proof. But so soon as he had ended his speech he was
attached by the Earl Marshall, and committed to strait prisonment in the Abbey
of St. Albans: and then (among many other things in the same Parliament done)
the Crown of England was entailed to King Henry and his Heirs for ever. No
sooner was this Parliament ended, but a conspiracy of some of the greatest
Lords, that outwardly made much show of joy for the high dignity and
advancement of King Henry: The Confederates were the Kings Cousin, Edward
Plantaginet Duke of Aumarle, and Heir apparent to Edmund of Langley Duke of
York; Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey, and John Holland his Brother Duke of
Exeter (both which were half Brothers to King Richard) John Montague Earl of
Salisbury, Hugh Spencer Earl of Gloucester, Sr Thomas Blunt, and one Magdalen,
who was sometime a Chamber-waiter to the deposed King, and who both in Stature,
and in Countenance and Behavior was not much unlike him.

The Plot was to take away the Kings Life at solemn jests held at Oxford,
whither the King was invited, and promised there to be present, because he
supposed that triumph was appointed only for his honor and delight. The
Treachery was cunningly contrived by the Conspirators, who by Indentures under
their hands and seals bound themselves each unto other, both for secrecy, and
for the resolute effecting and performing thereof to their utmost power: all
which they solemnly confirmed by their Oaths. The Conspirators all m^t at the
time and place appointed but the Duke of Aumarle; who being at dinner, his
Father perceiving a Lay-bill hang out of his Bosom, took hold of it, and drew
the whole writing out, which being he takes Horse and hasts to the King; but
the Duke his Son b^ing b^avely mounted, and perceiving his imminent danger
posts after, and ge^ting to the King first, confessed the conspiracy, and
obtains his pardon. The King being thus certified of the Treason, turns his
journey to the Tower of London, where he prepares for his defense: He levies a
strong power, and marches against the Traitors: But when the Conspirators
understood that all the Plot was revealed, they attired the said Magdalen in
Royal Rob^s, and caused him to affirm himself King Richard; and with him and
all their Troops (which were very warlike and strong) they resolve to oppose
themselves to the King in the open field. But the King speedily marching
toward them with 20000 men, at the noise of whose approach the Companies under
command of the Conspirators cowardly forsook them, and left them a prey to the
King, who took and executed them in several places; some few escaped, but
over-oppressed with fear and sorrow soon after died.

The French King his Father in Law resolves to redeem him from imprisonment,
but ascertained of his death desists. Yet for all this King Henry still
distrusting the weakness of his usurped Title, and endeavoring to support it
with a more firm foundation, entreats Charles the French King to give in
marriage his Daughter Isabel, sometime King Richards Wife, unto his eldest Son
Henry Prince of Wales: But her Father (observing that marriages betwixt E^gland
and France were seldom fortunate) denied the Kings request, whereupon she was
honorably sent back into France. The Welsh and Scots rebel, and are
overthrown by the Piercies, who take many Noble Prisoners, which the King
demands and is denied.

In the 3. year of his Reign the King demands the Scotch Prisoners of the
Piercyes, but is denied, whereupon unkindnesse arose, and they extended to
join with Glendor. They get the Earl of Stafford, the Archbishop of York, and
a great company of Scots and English to join with Owen Glendor; but before
they proceed to Battle they publish an accusation against the King, consisting
of several Articles: 1. That he usurpt the Crown and murdered the King: 2. He
unjustly detained the Crown from Edm: Mortimer: 3. That without any need he
oppressed the people with grievous Taxes: 4. No justice was to be expected from
him, who contrary to his coronation oath had in sundry Shires forestalled
Elections, and procured Burgeships, and bestowed them on his own creatures:
Lastly, that he would not release his Cousin Mortimer from Prison. For which
Treasons they defied him as a Traitor.

The King with a strong Army fights the Conspirators near Shrewsbury, where the
King wins the day; and the Prince marching against Glendor, is forsaken by his
Welsh, and dies of famine in the woods, where he hid himself. The Duke of
Burgoyne attempts to regain Callic^ in vain. Presently another conspiracy is
plotted, detected, and the Traitors executed. Lastly, the Earl of
Northumberland and Lord Bardolph rebelled, and are taken and beheaded. Thus was
King Henry's Reign a majesticall misery, and a sovereignty of sorrow; so having
reigned 13. years, and 6. months, wanting 5 days, he died, and was royally
buried at Canterbury.

The right noble Prince Henry the 4th. King of England and France: Lord of
Ireland. etc. Who died at the age of 46 years in Anno 1413. after he had
reigned 13 years 6 months and 4 days and lies buried at Canterbury
Was It not enough thy Cousin's Crown to take,
And it a prey to thy ambition make?
But that his Blood, his Royal Blood must be
A Sacrifice too, to thy jealousy.
Henry look back, and in his Tragic Scene,
There thou shall see what all thy troubles mean;
Nor did it, though thou thoughtst it faster stood,
Cemented to thy Temples with his Blood.
You that your Lives, your Souls, what dearest is,
Venture for Thrones, do but consider this;
Princes descend unto the shades beneath,
And pyle their Crowns up at the Gates of Death.


HENRY the Fifth, King of England.
THe King was inaugurated with wonderful applause and desire of the Lords and
Commons; and he not willing to disappoint his subjects of the hope they
conceived of him, gave them a sign of his excellent Government, sending from
him those Ministers of lascivious youth, his former associates. And not willing
his valiant heart should give place to sloth, claims his right in France:
First he sent Heralds, and demanded his Kingdom from King Charles, promising
to marry the Lady Katherine his Daughter; and threatened also, that if he
denied, he would take his patrimony by force: Char^* laughed at his
Ambassadors, whereby he so enraged King Henry, that he musters a migh^y Army,
with about 120. Ships he sailed into France.

First he takes Harefleet, and after many skirmiges with the French fought that
memorable battle at Agencourt, to the eternal honor of the English; which
done, he and all his Army on their knees gave praise to God for their glorious
Victory.

About this time Sigismund the Emperor came into England to Treat of Peace
between the French and English, nor was Henry slow in the business; but when
the French besieged Harefleet, he was so angry that he sent the Duke of Bedford
to raise the siedge, with the Earl of Marsh, Oxford and others, and 200 ships,
and fought a bloody fight in the Haven of Harefleet, with Burbon the French
Admiral, where the English wan the day, sinking 500 of the French ships, and
so relieved the Town. But the Emperor perceiving the perfidiousnesse of the
French, made a firm League with the English against all opposers, and so
returned back into Germany. The French in the mean time hired great ships of
Genoa, and again besiedging the Haven of Harefleet, endeavored to hinder all
provision from coming to the Town: but the Earl of Huntington suddenly
vanquished them. He took the Duke of Burbone a bastard, and so returned
Conqueror for England. Then the King with his Nobility sailed into Normandy,
and took the Fort Tueha, whilst the Earl of Salisbury wan Abervile, which place
the King freely gave to him and his Heirs. Afterward he wan Caen, and for
their obstinacy punished some of the principal with death, and gave the
plunder of the City to his Soldiers. Then he sent the Duke of Clarence to
beleager the Town of Bayon, which he quickly wan; thence he removed to Corfen,
and in three days became Master thereof; then he subdued Argentaniam; after
that Aleucon, Falesia, and returned victor to Caen. In the mean while* the Earl
of Warwick conquered the Castle of Dumfrise; and Clarentius mastered Curton,
and many other Towns. Then the King lays siege to Roan, and forced the
Citizens to submit; which Town being the Chief, was an example for the rest to
follow, so that shortly he wan all Normandy, lost by the carelessnesse of his
Predecessors.

The Duke of Burgundy perceiving all things to succeed to K. Henery's mind,
procured a meeting between him, and the Queen of France (for King Charles her
husband doted) yet there was nothing done. The Queen brought with her, her most
beautiful daughter Katharine, purposely to ensnare the Kings mind with her
allurements; nor was it in vain, for the King no sooner saw her, but he was
wonderfully taken with her elegant beauty: and when they departed doing
nothing, the King charged the Duke of Burgundy to do his best to satisfy his
desires; for unless all he demanded, together with the Lady Kathari^e, were
granted him, he would by force take from the Duke his Dukedom, and from the
King his Kingdom. The French were so frighted with these threats, that they
fell to a new Parlie; but now the Dolphin caused the Duke of Burgundy to be
basely slain presently after, though he begged his life on his knees; and so
the slaughter of the Duke of Orleance, committed before by Burgundy, was
expiated. Nor is peace yet concluded till the French were constrained by
another loss to seek it seriously. A meeting is appointed at Trecas, and there
was Katharine betrothed to Henry, and the right of succession confirmed to him
after the decease of Charles; whereupon all the Nobillity of France swear to be
loyal to him: and so the salique Law is broken. The Dolphin also is cited to
appear before the Marble Table in Paris, and not coming is banished. Henry also
caused money to be coined with the Arms of France and England, which he called
the Sovereign. Then leaving the Duke of Clarence Governor of France and
Normandy, he returned for England with his Queen, whom in February following he
crowned at Westminstor with great solemnity, and much honor. But the Duke of
Clarence making an Expedition against Anjou, and taking great spoils; as he
came back laden with prey, was betrayed by one Andrew Forgusa, a treacherous
Lombard; and although he fought valiantly, yet was he slain by the Duke of
Alenson, with the chief Nobillity, and 2000 English men; the Earl of Somerset,
Suffolk and other Lords are taken Prisoners.

The King to revenge his brothers death, lands in France with a mighty Army,
and freed Chartres from a siedge of the Dolphin, whom he pursues from place to
place, but cannot overtake him, though he take all Towns in his way: So that in
a short time he joined all the Island of France to the rest. In the mean time
the Queen is delivered of a Son at Windsor, named Henry; of whose birth the
King said to the Lord Fitz Hugh his Chamberlain; I Henry born at Monmouth shall
remain but a short time, and gain much: but Henry born at Windsor shall Reign
long, and lose all. About this time the Dolphin besiedges those of Narbon;
Henry goes to their relief: but in his overmuch have takes a feavor, of which
he dies, having dispatched the Duke of Bedford, who not only frees Narbon, but
drives the Dolphin into Aquitane, who in mockery was called King of Aquitane.
While he lay sick he made his Brother the Duke of Bedford Regent of Normandy
and France, and his Brother the Duke of Gloucester he made Governor of
England. He died at 36 years old, reigned 9 years, 5 months and 24 days.

HENRY the v. began his reign, the 20 of March, and was crowned at Westminster
the 9, of April following 1413. He reigned gloriously 9 years, 5 months, he
died in the Castle of Boys Vincent by Paris, the 1. of September. 1422. and
lies intombed in the Abbey of St Peter's at Westminster being of the age of 36
years when he departed this world R. E. sculp
His Royal head no sooner Henry Crowns,
But his debaucht associates he disowns:
He shows them now whereto he does incline,
The God of War, and not the God of Wine.
He claims his right, and sues for Charles his daughter:
Whilst the proud French retort with scorn and laughter.
In short he did their Towns and Towers so batter,
The French soon found it was no laughing matter.
They sue for Peace, and the fair Katharine bring,
Who more then all their weapons wounds the King.
They are espoused, and so conclude the jarrs,
Where Mars and Venus are auspicious Stars.


HENRY the Sixth, King of England.
NOt yet was Henry the sixth nine months old when his father died; yet was he
so fortunate in his beginning, that his youth and Government were worthily
supported by his three Uncles; Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, who when the King
was crowned was made Protector both of his Person and Realm, John Duke of
Bedford, who was established Regent of France; and Thomas Duke of Exeter, who
graced all his actions with much wisdom and great valor. And needful it was
that the new Protector and the Regent should make the utmost trial of their
sufficiencies to the World* for whereas in the end of the Kings Fathers days,
the Nobillity of France incorporated themselves to the English Nation, and
heartily envied the Dolphin; King Charles about this time died, and the
unconstant French men began to play an Irish Game: For on a sudden many of the
hypocritical French, renounced their Duty and Obedience to King Henry, and
utterly neglecting all their Oaths of Allegiance made unto him, revolted to
Charles their new King, endeavoring all that in them lay, totally to extirpate
the English, and root them out of France.

The Protector at home seeing this, supplies the Regent with store of Soldiers,
Silver and Gold. The Regent in the mean while levies a strong Army; and on the
other side Charles the new King was as active to do the like, in so much that
nothing but war tyrannized and tore up the entralls of France: And to begin
these troubles the French King sent the Lord Grandevile against Pont. Melance,
which he surprised, and slew the most part of those he found there, which place
is again retaken by the valor of Thomas M^ntacute, the Noble Earl of
Salisbury, together with the Lord Grandevile, who by solemn Oath promises
faithful and perpetual service to King Henry; but no sooner is this false
French man released, but he revolts. About this time the Regent renews a League
with the Dukes of Burgoyne and Britain, and marries the Lady Anne of Burgoyne,
whereupon Paris revolts, and is reduced. Then the Earl of Salisbury wins a
great victory before Cravant, and is made Vice-regent of France, etc. The
Protector at home for a small matter ransometh James the young King of Scots,
and marries him to the Kings Cousin Germane; but he proved a right Scot false
and treacherous. In the mean while the French gain by fraud what the English
regain by force. In England the Duchess of York is accused of witchcraft by
the proud Cardinal her husbands Brother, and unjustly suffers for it. Now by
the intercession of Christian Princes they began to treat of peace between the
French and the English; peace was not ratified, but a cessation was granted for
eighteen months: In the mean time the Earl of Suffolk, by his own authority
contracted a marriage between King Henry and Margaret, Daughter to the Duke of
Angiers; boasting much of the Ladies beauty and dowry; at last he persuaded the
King, though he had passed his word to the daughter of the Duke of Britain.
This Matrimony contracted gave but small help to the English affairs; when for
commutation great part of Normandy was yielded to the French: and the Duke of
Britain in revenge of his wrong, drove all the English out of Aquitane. Now
the hatred of Sommerset and York, began again to bud; he by fraud and injustice
deposed York from the Authority of Viceroy, and made himself Viceroy in his
place, York being not a little offended at it; for the King did nothing less
then mind his Kingdom. All the authority was between Margaret and the
Marquess of Suffolk; also, by the contrivance of his enemies; the Duke of
Gloucester (called the good Duke) was put out of his place; and unknown to the
King, a Parliament being privily called, they question him for his Life; he was
cast into prison, and the next day (how it is not known) miserably murdered.
In the mean time all goes to wrack by the negligence of Sommerset, all Normandy
in a manner lost and revolted, and all France made good to Charles, except
Callice. Now the King wants his two good Uncles, the Dukes of Bedford and
Gloucester to stand by him. But Sommerset is called to account, found guilty,
and banished for 5 years; but being upon the Seas is beheaded, and his body
left on the shore. The Duke of York, who now should help the English in France,
is fain to go to still the Irish that were up; he quickly pacified them,
whereby he won the peoples hearts, and much augmented his own affairs: thus he
began to end the difference between the White Rose and the Red; and for a
beginning of his own right to the Crown, for he descended from Lionel Duke of
Clarence. King Henry being wholly unfit for the Government, by whose foolish
negligence France and Normandy was lost; the men of Kent vote for John Mortimer
(by Yorks persuasion) and with a well appointed Army they march toward London,
Mortimer being their Commander; between Eltham and Greenwich they stay, and
send up their complaints to the King and Parliament: amongst the rest they
Petition that York, Buckingham and Exeter may be restored to their places, and
the Kings savor: The King sends Forces against the Kentish-men; Mortimer
overthrows the Kings Forces, whereupon the King flies to Killingworth in
Warwickshire; but Mortimer comes to London, and displeasing the City by his
arrogance, they rise upon him, and he is slain, his men forsaking him. The Duke
of York raises an Army to bring Sommerset to a trial, he is defended by the
King; but the Duke raises a greater Army, and now in open field claims the
Crown; and having assembled to him the Earls of Salsbury and Warwick, and
others; Trollop and Blunt fly to the Kings Army, and discover all. The Duke and
Lords are proclaimed Traitors; but the Armies meet near Northampton, the King
is overthrown and taken, but the Queen with the Duke of Sommerset flies. The
Tower of London is delivered to the Lords. A Parliament is called, which
pronounced York heir apparent to the Crown, and Henry to continue the Title of
a King during life, and York to be Protector of King and Kingdom; but the
Queen comes with an Army, York meets her near Wakefield, but in vain expecting
his Son is overthrown and slain: His Son the new and brave Duke of York fights
the Queens Army at Towton, and wins the day and Crown.

HENRY the VI borne at Windsor being of the age of eight Months began his
reign the 31 of August 1422. and crowned King of England at Westminster the 6.
of November. 1429. and of France the 7 of December 1432. he reigned 38 years.
6 months, he died by violence, May 21. aged 52. Ano^ 1471. first buried at
Chertsey Abbey thence removed to Windsore. where he was solemhley interd. R E.
(...)
Mars begets Clineas, Henry a Son
That has lost more then all his Father won;
For he lost Normandy, and France put to it,
England and Ireland, and his Life to boot.
Twice crowned and twice deposed, at last he took
Deaths fatal Errand from Yorks desperate Duke.
He was a Prince (do Rebels what ye will)
Like Archimedes drawing Figures still:
Who (not unlike some Gamesters I have seen)
Winning and losing still the same has been.
He was not Politic in the Worlds control,
But he is wise enough that saves his Soul.


EDWARD the Fourth, King of England.
EDward Duke of York having overthrown the King and Queen, and having
overthrown and executed many of his greatest enemies at Towton field, returned
triumphantly to the City of London, and was proclaimed King of this Realm the
4 of March, 1461. and was crowned the 19. day of June, then next following.

In the beginning of his Reign he removed from all Offices all such as
oppressed the people; and to strengthen his part with powerful and faithful
friends, he creates his two brothers, George Duke of Clarence, and Richard Duke
of Gloucester; and Sr. John Nevell brother to the Earl of Warwick he created
Lord Montacute: and Henry Bourchier (who had married the Lady Elizabeth, Aunt
unto the King, and was brother unto Thomas Bourchier, Archbishop of
Canterbury) was created Earl of Essex; and William Lord Fawc^nbridge was made
Earl of Kent.

The Duke of Sommerset, and Sr. Ralph Percy, with diverse others the Kings
professed enemies, finding no further hope for the house of Lancaster, came
voluntarily in, and submitted to the King, and were received to pardon and
favor: but hearing that the Queen by the assistance of the Scots had raised an
Army, they slank away, and revolted to her, and afterward taken at the battle
of Exham were executed. The Lord Montacute (to whose valor the fortune of that
day was ascribed) is created Marquess Montacute, to whom and others Edward gave
great gifts.

After this Henry is taken in a disguise, and sent to the Tower: Then Warwick
is sent to the Duke of Savoy, and prevails for a Match between Edward and Bona
the Dukes daughter; but Edward in the mean time marries Elizabeth the widow of
Sr. John Gray; at which Warwick vexed calls to his part his two Brothers, and
Clarence the Kings Brother, and the King at Banbury.

The King notwithstanding these evil tidings, marched confidently against
Warwick, and his northern Rebels; but to prevent mischief, many of the
Nobillity endeavored to conclude a peace, so that Letters, and Heralds of
Arms passed from one Army to the other, for both were glad of peace: by means
of this Parlee King Edward became more careless of himself then was fitting:
whereof when the Earl of Warwick was informed, he with some other well
appointed rushed into the Kings Army, slew his watches, and surprised the King
in his bed, and secretly sent him to Midleham Castle in Yorkshire, there to be
safely kept by the Archbishop of York his brother; who (either repenting him
of what he had done against the King, or being won by large promises of great
favor, and good rewards) suffered him with his Guarders to hunt and hawk; by
means whereof he made his escape, and got to London; where between the King and
the Rebels another Parlee was had in Westminster Hall, in which nothing was
done, but objections of good deserts, and unthankful requitals were proudly
and insultingly urged by the Earl of Warwick: in conclusion they departed each
from other in great fury; the King went to Canterbury, and the confederated
Lords to Lincoln: Armies are raised on both sides; they fight, and the King
wins the field. The Lords Clarence and Warwick fly to the King of France, who
honorably entertains them, and aids them with all necessaries for the levying
of another Army, with which they fight, and drive King Edward out of the
Kingdom; who by the help of the Duke of Burgoyne, returns with a small Army
into the City of York, where he is received upon solemn Oath, that he claimed
nothing but the Dukedom of York, and that he would work no Treason against
King Henry (now again re-established in his Throne:) but he presently forfeits
his faith, and raising another great Army beats Warwick, recovers the Crown,
and re-imprisons King Henry, who soon after was murdered by the bloody hands of
Richard Duke of Gloucester. The King having through much trouble obtained
peace, betakes himself to dalliance with Jane Shore, in the mean while his
brother Duke of Clarence is drowned in a Butt of Malmsey. The Scots threaten
War; and Richard Duke of Gloucester is sent against them: a Peace was
procured; and King Edward dyed, having reigned two and twenty years, and is
buried at Windsor.

He was doubtless a brave Prince: however, the clearest day is not without
some clouds; his perjury at York, when he swore to the Citizens he would claim
nothing but that Dukedom, which was his right by inheritance, and that he
would in no sort interrupt King Henry's peace; all which he falsified, which
afterward his innocent Sons sadly suffered for; His lustful Embraces with
Shores wife, got him the envy of his own, who was a chaste and virtuous Lady,
in whom he got a good Wife, though many enemies; and though unfortunate in her
Sons, yet in her Daughter is composed all the fewd of York and Lancaster.

The right noble Prince EDWARD the 4th King of England and France Lord of
Ireland. He reigned 22. years and 5 weeks. Died at the age of 52 years:
buried at Windsor. 1483. R. Elstracke sculpsit
Now sixty years out, York obtains the Crown,
And Lancaster with all his friends puts down;
Betwixt which Houses while the difference stood,
Fell more then fourscore of the Noble Blood;
For which, but think how many thousands bled,
And you will Judge the Roses both were Red.
Warwick advances Edward to the Crown,
And in distaste again he pulls him down
But Edward to the Duke of Burgoine flies,
And with his aid, and his own perjuries
Reerowns himself; for Kingdoms men will dare
A thousand Oaths, and count them solemn Air.


EDWARD the Fifth, King of England.
EDward the Fourth being dead, his Eldest Son Edward succeeded him; but he in
his Reign was under Governors, Anthony Lord Rivers, Thomas Wagham Chamberlain,
and Richard Gray, Knights; who being sent for by the Queens Letters, came in
have to London with the Prince. Then also Richard Duke of Gloucester being at
York, and hearing of the Kings Death came to London with a small Army, and
being mindful to usurp the Kingdom, he overtook the young King Edward on his
way to London, and takes him into his own charge, sending his Tutors Rivers,
Wagham and Gray to Pomfret Castle to be kept safe, all whom by the Practice of
the Lord Hastings, he soon after caused to be put to death: which thing known
at London, the Queen (who well knew the perverse mind of Richard) with her
other son Richard and her daughters, took Sanctuary at Westminster to secure
themselves from Richards violence.

Richard in the mean time came to London with Edward, and went to the Bishop of
London's house to reside; but he not content with Edwards being in his power,
that he might the more safely look to his business, endeavors to get the other
brother out of Sanctuary from his mother the Queen, under a color of
comforting the Kings sorrowful mind; and drawing the Lords to his opinion, he
sent thither amongst others Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, who with fair
speeches mingled with threats, brings the poor innocent Child from his Mothers
arms. When the Archbishop had delivered the child into the Protectors hands
(who with many other Lords attended the Queens answer in the Star Chamber) he
before the whole Assembly took him in his Arms, hugged him, and kissed him
again and again, protesting upon his soul, that no worldly thing (his Majesty
only excepted) was so dear unto him as that young child; when as indeed he
meant nothing more than the destruction of them both: and having brought him to
the King, who was infinitely joyed with his Company, he within few days after
conveyed them with princely Pomp and Attendance through the City of London to
the Tower, under the Pretense of an especial care and Providence, that they
should there remain in safety until the troubles of the Commonwealth were
appeased, and quieted, whereas in truth nothing was out of order but himself,
and his confederacy. When he had thus cooped up the King and his brother, he
draws Buckingham to his Treason, but Hastings could not be won, therefore he
pretended he sought to take away his life, with which he charged him; to which
after a long silence the Lord Hastings as most familiar with him, made answer,
They that so trangress the Law, deserve what punishment the Law can inflict
upon them, and all the Lords ascented thereunto; Then quoth the Protector, That
Sorceress (meaning the Queen) and that Strumpet Shores wife, have conspired
together to take away my life by witchcraft, and that you may be right well
assured it is true, Behold I pray you, and see how their villainy has already
seized on my body, for by it my left arm is already wasted and consumed, and
therewithal he struck up his sleeve, and show them his arm naked; this did he
impudently dare to do, albeit all there present were well assured it was never
otherwise from his mothers womb. Moreover no man was so simple, to believe that
if the Queen had intended such a mischief, she would have consorted with Shores
wife above all other women, she having been her husbands Concubine, besides
this they all knew that the Queen was religious temperate, mild, charitable and
virtuous, and not given to revenge. The Lord Hastings (who after King Edwards
death conversed with Shores Wife, using her as his concubine; and but the same
morning left her in his own bed) being desirous if he could to appease the
Protectors rage to her, and (in some sort) being willing to excuse her, replied
thus, My Lord, If the Queen and she have so done? and therewithal the
Protectors rage waxing intemperate interrupted him thus, Thou Traitor, quoth
he, tellest thou me of Iff's and Ands? I tell thee they have done it; and as he
spoke those words, he clapped his hand rudely upon the Table, at the noise
whereof the whole chamber was suddenly filled with armed men, and one of them
struck down the Lord Stanly with a Holbert, and the Protector himself did
arrest the Lord Hastings and charged him of high Treason in general terms and
forthwith without any proceeding or judgment, caused him to be carried out into
the Green, and his head upon a Logg to be chopped off; and it is noted that
this execution was done on him the same day, and in the same Lawless manner,
that he had commanded to be done to Rivers, Gray and Wagham.

Thus when this impious Protector had murdered those Lords that stood in his
way, he caused Doctor Shaw (a man more learned than virtuous) publicly in a
Sermon at Paul's Cross, to blaze on his honorable birth and Parentage, his
valor, his virtues, and to inveigh against the deceased King for his
lasciviousness with Shores wife, to bastardize all his Children, as born in
adultery; for that King Edward, as he affirmed, was solemnly contracted unto
the Lady Elizabeth Lucie, whom he got with child. He also accused the
Protectors own mother: but Shaw was afterward so ashamed of his flattery, that
for very shame and grief he died soon after. Then he sets Buckingham to deal
with the City, who with many Citizens come to Baynards Castle, where the
Protector was, and chose him for their King, desiring him to take the burden
upon him, which he oft-times refused, but was persuaded at last to take it.

The picture of Edward the 5. who at the age of 13 years was deposed and
cruelly murdered, by the procurement of Richard Duke of Gloucester his
unnatural uncle when he had reigned 2. months and 11. days and obscurely
buried in the Tower 1183.
Edward the Fifth at thirteen years of Age
Is sacrificed unto his Uncles rage;
Whose thirst for honor not be withstood,
Could soarce be slak'd in a whole sea of blood.
Poor pretty blossom, how thy Fate I pity,
Thus to be murdered in thy Royal City;
That in the Tower thy soul should be sent hence,
That ought have been a Tower of thy defense.
How many mourning days did the Queen keep?
When eyes never saw thee could not choose but weep.
Sure this does not with heavens direction suit,
To fell the Tree before we see the fruit.


RICHARD the Third, King of England.
RIchard having gotten the Ensigns of the Kingdom, forthwith Crowns himself
and his Wife Anne, but still fearing the Londoners, he caused James Tyrrel to
stifle the young King and his Brother, which he did, and obscurely buried them
in the Tower. The Childrens death was divulged, Richard not being against it;
and it was wonderful how great amazement seized on the minds of all men, every
one lamented the unhappiness of the Children with much pity; and now they
began to say, what hopes have we of him that spared not his own near kinsmen,
but shed their innocent blood? To say nothing of the Mother and her Daughters,
certainly the immortal God, who will not suffer great sins to go unpunished,
revenged on the innocent children the perjury of their father committed at
York, and the Death of the Duke of Clarence, whom he wickedly suffered to be
murdered. But Buckingham (Richards former friend) now detesting his
wickedness, conspires with the Bishop of Ely, how to restore Henry Earl of
Richmond, to whom of right the Crown belonged, as he was descended of John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, with these joined the Duke of Britain, with whom Henry
then resided.

Richard in the mean time, who had notice of the consultations of Buckingham,
sent for him again and again to come to him, but when he flatly refuses to come
to him, they fall to their Arms on both sides. The Duke presently mustering
some Welsh Forces came to Gloucester to meet Richard that had a mightier Army
with him, but the Soldiers he had procured voluntarily rather then for pay all
forsook him, before he came in sight of the enemy; and having none left with
him but his Lacky (who was forced to fly to shift for himself) he went to his
servant Humfrey Banisters house, who unmindfull of all former favors delivered
him afterward to Richard, who cut off his head, and all the Conspirators
presently ran One one way, Another another way, some to places of refuge, and
some into Britanny to the Earl. Richard in the mean time heard that the Duke
did not only not hurt the Earl, but had resolved to assist him; wherefore he
provides a great Fleet to intercept the Earls Landing here; Henry in the mean
time with forty Ships and five thousand Britains Sails for England, but a
Tempest arose and scattered his Ships; and he almost quit of all his Forces,
was driven on Cornwall, where coming ashore, and seeing a great Army, he was
forced to retire to his Ships; and being very pensive when he heard of
Buckinghams death, void of all Counsel he returned again to Britanny in
France, but by the coming of the Nobillity he took heart once more, and
promised before the Altar to marry Elizabeth King Edwards Daughter, if the
business succeeded according to his mind, and so a fresh Oath of fidelity was
taken by them all. In the mean time Richard did fiercely rage against all such
as followed the Earl, wheresoever he could lay hold on them: Thomas Earl of
Dorset, who fled to him, he banished both by Sea and Land; also he made a
Covenant with the Scotch King, giving his Sister Anne in marriage to his Son.
Richard lays new Traps for Henry by corrupting the Dukes Treasures with money;
but he escapes them, the matter being detected by Bishop Morton: When the fraud
was made known to the Duke, he was so enraged against the Treasurer, that he
caused him for that and other wicked deeds to be hanged.

But Richard to hinder Henry's Marriage with Elizabeth, partly by flattery,
partly by fear, and partly by promises, he prevailed so far with the Queen,
that she should entrust her daughters with him, and should write her Letters to
her son the Marquess of Dorset, that was near the Earl, that without delay he
should return home, and leave the society of the Earl Henry, that all things
were now pacified, and their family in favor with the King. Richard all this
while having gotten the Queens Daughters, that he might totally destroy the
design of Marriage with Henry, resolved himself to marry her his own Brothers
Daughter, his own Wife being yet alive, whom to that end he privately packed
away by poison. In the mean while he tryes all ways he can to make Elizabeth
affect him; he was also resolved to join violence to his prayers, if he could
not otherwise ob^aine her: but he was so much urged with care and foreign
fear, that he had no time for Courtship.

In the in^erim, Stanley had a Command to Muster an Army; but he must not go
forth before he had given to Henry his Son the Lord Strange for a pledge of his
fidelity. A fame was also spread abroad on purpose, that Henry had implored
help of the French in vain, and that there was no fear of his coming, which
made Richard deal somewhat carelessly, and unwarily discharging the Navy he had
to Scour the English Coasts.

Henry was advertised how things stood, and arrived in England with but two
thousan^ Soldiers in pay; presently Rice Thomas and John Savage, two of the
most Potent men i^ Wales, having collected some forces, came to join with
Henry; Pembrook with some other did the like. Stanley though he wished well,
yet for his sons sake delayed his intention, til^ fit opportunity presented it
self. Richard all this time was wonderful sluggish, but when he heard how his
subjects revolted to Henry, he raised what men he could scrape up, and went
against him; he Pitched his Tent in Bosworth field, and both sides make ready;
at last they fall on: but Stanley, who came late, and brought fresh forces,
joined with Henry, whereby he was not a little animated. The King himself after
wonderful tokens of his valor, is slain hand to hand by the Earl, to whom, by
Gods blessing, that day and Crown fell: Richards body all naked and miery, is
found among the dead, and trussed up like a Calf behind a Pursevant, is buried
at Leicester with as much honor as his Nephews in the Tower under the Stairs.

The portraict of RICHARD the 3. King of England and France, Lord of Ireland.
He was slain at Bosworth field the 22th of August 1486. and homelye bured at
the Graye friars Church in Leicester when he had usurped 2 years 2 months and
one day
Monster of men, Thou son of Belial,
Shall not thy Nephews blood for vengeance call?
Shall it think thou with them in silence dye?
No; though their mouths be stopped their blood shall cry;
For which when God shall inquisition make,
Rocks cannot hide thee, nor the Stigean Lake.
Thou that did publish all the World before,
Thy Brother Bastard, and thy Mother Whore.
Thy barbarous hand did take away the Life
Of two great Kings, and thine own dearest Wife.
Two Princes thou and many Peers did murder:
Had Hell broke loose it could have gone scarce further.


HENRY the Seventh, King of England.
HENRY both by right and true valor came to the Kingdom, and was crowned at
Westminster, Anno 1486. the day before the Calends of November: Then caling a
Parliament, he is discharged of the Treason that Richard laid to him: and he
gave honors and rewards to some that were grieved. Then according to his Oath
and Promise he married the fair and virtuous Lady Elizabeth, eldest daughter to
King Edward the Fourth, thereby joining in one the two great Families of
Lancaster and York; betwixt whom for principallity and the Crown, infinite
contentions and mortal wars had formerly consumed and destroyed many thousands
of noble brave and valiant men.

Now that the State of the Kingdom might be confirmed in its happiness, by
the safety of the Kings person, and by other requisites, King Henry (taking
example by the Kings of France) selected a certain number of warlike men, in
all places to attend him, whom he termed the Yeomen of his Crown. He elected
the most Noble, Grave, and wise men of this Kingdom to be of his privy
Counsel, by whose sage directions and advice the Government of this Kingdom
was settled in peace and tranquillity. He bountifully recompensed the Duke of
Britain for all his former love and kindness to him, and also repaid unto him
all such sums of money, as at any time he had disbursed for him, for his
maintenance and relief. The like he did to the French King, and so redeemed his
Hostages, the Lord Marquess Dorset, and Sir John Bourchin, whom he left there.

But while King Henry was thus careful to please all men, and to preserve
peace, a Rebellion is raised in the north by Francis Lord Lovel, Humfrey
Stafford, and Thomas his Brother: but the King with great celerity marches
against them, and their Leaders hearts failing them, they steal from their Army
by night: Lovell was shrouded by Sir Thomas Broughton, and the two Staffords
took Sanctuary; but because no Sanctuary could protect malefactors in case of
high Treason, they were pulled out by violence, and arraigned, condemned, and
Humphrey the elder brother executed, but the other was pardoned by the Kings
favor, it being supposed he did it not out of malice, but was drawn in by his
unpeaceable brother.

But this flame being quenched, a greater is kindled: For a certain Priest
named Symond, erected a mock Prince called Lambert, who joining with the
Duchess of Burgoyne and the Irish, invaded England, but was routed, and being
taken, Lambert was put into the Kings Scullery, who not long after was made
chief Faulconer to the King.

Then was the Kings wife with all honor and princely solemnity crowned Queen:
and Thomas Bourchier Archbishop of Canterbury dying, he is succeeded by John
Morton, Bishop of Ely, who was also made Lord Chancelour of this Kingdom: and
not long after he was dignified with the Hat and Habit of a Cardinal by Pope
Alexander the sixth.

A difference falls between the French and the Britains; the King having been
beholding to both, mediates a peace, but in vain; they fall to Arms, and the
King aids the Duke of Britain with eight thousand men, for maintenance whereof
a Parliament gives the King the tenth penny of all moveable goods and chattels;
but the Duke dyed, and those wars ended.

But this Tax begot a Rebellion, for the rustic swads about York and Durham
would not pay a penny of the Tax; but being numerous, they rifled several
places where they came, and barbarously murdered the Earl of Northumberland,
employed by the King to levy the tax but the King soon routed them, and
executed the Ringleaders of them in several places.

The French King by his gifts corrupts the attendants of the Duke of Britains
Daughter and heir of the Dukedom, and though affianced to the Emperors
Daughter before, yet he returns her to her father, and marries the Young Heir
of Britain, w^o was contracted to the Emperor, making both contracts void, and
nullities by proclamation.

But the Emperor scorning to be thus disgraced, sends to King Henry, and craves
aid; whereupon the King, partly for love he bare to the Emperor, and partly
because he saw the French King was become Lord of Britain, and endeavored to
subject the low Countries also under him, promised his assistance, for support
of which he spared the poor, and got great sums from the Nobles and richer
sort. The King sends a well appointed Army over, under the conduct and command
of the Duke of Bedford and the Earl of Oxford; whom the King in person followed
with a Royal Army; but the French King sues for peace and gave him for his
charges in that expedition, almost two hundred thousand pounds Sterling; so
Henry and his Army returned safe into England, having concluded an honorable
and profitable Peace.

But the Kings ancient enemy the Duchess of Burgoyne, with another upstart
counterfeit, named Perkin Warbeck, whom she pretends to be Richard Duke of
York, Edward the Fourth's Second son: The Burgoyns, Irish, French and Scots
favor him, some out of mischief, others out of mistake, which begets great
troubles to King Henry, but he is taken, imprisoned, and for endeavoring an
escape is executed. The Scots invade England under pretense of aiding Perkin,
he drives them out; and another Tax is levied, which begets a rebellion, which
the King overthrows, and hangs up the Heads of it. Prince Arthur about this
time married Katharine, Daughter to Ferdinand King of Aragon. King Henry's
eldest Daughter marries the King of Scots, James the Fourth; but Prince Arthur
five months after his Marriage died, to his Fathers great grief: about his
latter end he grew covetous, but repented of it. He died soon after, and was
buried at Westminster in his own Chapel: he died at 52. years old, and reigned
23. years.

The most Mighty and Prudent Prince Henry the seventh by the grace of god King
of England France and Ireland etc;
As after a sharp Winter Birds do sing
Encomiums to a Comfortable Spring;
So did this Kingdom entertain with joy,
Great Lancaster, and sung Vive le Roy.
Henry from Britain came, and claimed his due
By Virtue, Valor, and by Title true.
And that he might becalme all stormy weather,
He joined the White Rose and the Red together*
He was a prudent Prince, and governed well,
But that to be too Covetous he fell:
At last he much restored, and gave among
The poor; which mercy canceled all his wrong.


HENRY the Eighth, King of England.
KIng Henry the Eighth being of the age of eighteen years, began to Reign the
two and twentieth day of April, in the year of our Lord God, 1509. And being
dispensed with by the Pope, he married the Lady Katharine, Daughter to
Ferdinando King of Aragon, Aunt to Prince Charles of Castile, who afterward was
Emperor; whenas not long before she had been his brother Prince Arthur's Wife:
by which match much trouble afterward ensued.

In the beginning of his Reign he was very gracious and tender to his people,
in rescuing them from the greedy Jaws of their oppressors, that toward the end
of his Fathers Reign had so vexed and tormented them; and the more freely to
content such as had been justly offended by those extreamities, he caused the
Heads of those two devouring Caterpillars, Empson and Dudley, to be stricken
off at the Tower Hill; and the rest of that rascal rabble were disgracefully
corrected by the Stocks and Pillories, in sundry places of this Realm.

Thus when the King had well bu^ied himself in the settlement of his Kingdom,
for the first two years of his Reign, he was by his wifes father Ferdinando,
King of Aragon, entreated to assist him against the Moors; but by reason of a
cessation of those Jarres, returned out of Spain, having been rudely
entertained, and spent all.

About the same time the King of France invades Italy, making great havoc; but
Henry in favor of the Pope led an Army into France (Maximilian the Emperor
fighting under the English Banner) and took many prisoners, and Towns. In the
mean time the Scots upon the French account infest the North parts of England
with sixty thousand men, but the Earl of Surrey encountered them with six and
twenty thousand, and slew James their King with many Lords and Earls, totally
routing all that vast Army.

Henry returning out of France, Surrey for his good service was created Duke of
Norfolk, and Thomas Wolsey, a man of mean parentage, was made Bishop of
Lincoln, and at last was made a Cardinal. At this time the Pope sent to Henry
a Cap of maintenance, a Sword, and the Title of Defender of the Faith; which
Grace Henry received with Tiltings and great Pomp. Cardinal Wolsey is made
Chancellor of England. Charles the Emperor comes to London and is received with
great honor, and graced with the Order of the Garter. But Behold, Henry who
had lived lovingly with his Wife Katharine 20 years, began now to find a
scruple in his Conscience, whether he might without incest live with his
brothers wife? Judges were chosen to end this question; but Wolsey not having
dealt prudently for Henry, had all his authority taken away, and his estate was
confiscate; but at last other new dignities being granted him, his great loss
was somewhat repaired. Then a Parliament was called, and he was charged with
many faults; among the rest, that he was wont to write I and my King, and had
stamped the Cardinals Hat on the Kings Coin; of which he was convicted, and
again deprived of all honor and Estate: a wonderful example of the
inconstancy of humane affairs: he that but lately ruled all, and the King too
as he pleased, made Laws, swayed Courts of Justice, taxed the people, oppressed
both Clergy and Laity; he is now cast down from the high Pinnacle of honor,
and which is worst, hated by all: afterward sent for to make his personal
answer at Court, he died by the way, it is thought with poison.

In the mean time Henry not abiding the Popes delays, with the advice of
Divines divorceth his Wife Katharine, and marries Anna Boloyne; and being angry
with the Pope for this disoffice, he abollisheth forthwith all his authority
over the Church of England, and takes Oath of the thanks of England and Ireland
to acknowledge himself next under Christ, supreme Head of the Church; for
refusal whereof Sir Thomas More, Lord Chancelour of England, and John Fisher
of Rochester, lost their heads.

Henry now using his own Authority, invades the goods of the Church, and expels
the Monks out of the Monasteries: Nor was he herewith content, but he cuts off
the heads of his second Wife Annae Boloyne, together with her Brother the Lord
Rochfort, on suspicion of incest between them. Then he married Jane Seymer, who
died in childbirth of Edward the sixth. Then he divorced from him Anne of
Cleve newly married; and for her sake he beheaded Thomas Cronewell, who made
that match (this was a man fortunately risen from a mean to a vast estate:)
also, Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, had his head chopped off for privily
marrying Margaret, daughter to the King of Scots, Henry's Niece. Henry now
marries his Fifth Wife, the Lady Katharine Howard, whom he shortly afterward
beheaded for her lasciviousness. At that time Henry was styled King of
Ireland, of which before he was but Lord. About this time the Scotch King dies,
leaving Mary Stewart (a child of eight days old) heir of his Kingdom, whom
Henry endeavors to espouse to his Son Edward; but the Cardinal of St. Andrews
so prevailed, that she was married to the Dolphin; whereat Henry enraged burns
Leith: Then he married his sixth Wife, Katharine, Latimers widow, who was
brought in danger of her Life, but by her prudence and humility escaped. Henry
next makes an expedition into France, and wins Bononia, which was redeemed with
eight hundred thousand Crowns. The Duke of Norfolk, and the Earl of Surrey are
accused of Treason, and the father lost his head. Henry died presently after,
having reigned 38. years, he was buried at Winsor.

The most high and mighty Prince HENRY the VIII by the grace of God King of
England France and Ireland
Henry the Eighth began his Reign so well,
Few Predecessors were his Parallel.
Empson and Dudley he did soon dismiss,
Those Engines of his Fathers Avarice.
A comely Prince he was, but him I fear
The Hangman made too often a Widower.
Many for no desert he would exalt,
And ruin them as quickly for no fault.
He never spared (if you my Author trust)
Man in his wrath, or Woman in his Lust.
And yet his vices did not so prevail,
But that his Virtues still did Even the Scale.


EDWARD the Sixth, King of England.
HENRY the Eighth being deceased, Edward his Son succeeded him in hi^ Throne,
January 28. 1547. He was all the Issue Male of King Henry, who had six Wives,
whereof two were beheaded, two divorced, and Jane Seymer mother to King Edward
dyed in Travel. This King began his Reign in the ninth year of his age: and
the same day that he was publicly proclaimed King in London, he came from
Enfield to the Tower; as (perhaps) for other reasons, so chiefly that according
to the manner of the Kings of England, he might pass in solemn and
magnificent sort from thence to Westminster, where he was to be inaugurated:
The day following, the Lords, to whose care the deceased King had committed his
Son and heir by Will, assemble themselves to consult of the affairs of State;
they all with one consent appoint Edward Seymer Earl of Hertford, the Kings
Uncle, Protector of the Kings person, and Governor of his Majesty's Realms,
until the King came of age, mature enough for to hold the Reins of Government:
hereof public proclamation was made through London and Westminster.

The first Act of this Lord Protector after his investiture was, that he
created the King Knight (who remained then in the Tower) and he rising up, took
the same Sword of the Earl of Hertford, and conferred the same honor upon
Henry Hoblethorne, Lord Major of the City of London. February the 15. the
funerals of King Henry are solemnized in all princely sort, and his Body
entombed in the midst of the Quire of the Cathedral Church of Windsor; and two
days after certain of the Peers are adorned with new Titles of Honor: Seymer
Lord Protector and Earl of Hertford is created Duke of Somerset; William Par
Earl of Essex created Marquess of Northampton; Dudly Viscount Lisle, Lord high
Admiral of England, created Earl of Warwick and high Chamberlain of England;
Sir Thomas Wriothsley Lord Chancellor was created Earl of Southampton; Sir
Thomas Seymer Brother to the Lord Protector was advanced to be Lord Sudley, and
also high Admiral of England (for as much as the Earl of Warwick was contented
to resign.) Sir Richard Rich was made Lord Rich, and Sir William Willoughby
Lord Willoughby of Parham; and Sir Edmund Sheffeild was made Lord Sheffeild of
Butterwike. Now was great provision made for the Kings Coronation, who rode
with great Royalty and splendour through the City of London to Westminster the
^4 of Feb. and the day following was in due form and order inaugurated by
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury. About four years since in a League concluded
between England and Scotland, and upon the discharge of some Scotch Lords,
Prisoners in the Tower of London, a marriage was promised between Edward and
the young Heir of Scotland, which afterward was falsified, and she married to
the French King; whereupon the Duke of Somerse^ with a well provided Army
enters Scotland, and fought the Scots at Musselburgh, and slew of them m^re
than 14000, amongst whom (besides the Lord Lohemore and the Lord Fleming) fell
almo^t all the young Nobillity of Scotland. There were taken in fight Earl
Huntley, Chancellor of Scotland: The Lords Hester, Hobbey and Hamilton, and
1500 more of good account, possessing themselves of many strong Forts and
Castles with abundant spoil; and then betaking themselves homewards they not a
little recreated the minds of the dejected Scots by their departure. While
these things thus fell out in Scotland, there happened great alteration in the
Ecclesiastical State at home, diverse of the Kings Tutors being earnestly bent
to a Reformation of Religion, and especially the Lord Protector himself; and it
was therefore Resolved by the Kings Tutors and Counsel, that whatsoever King
Henry had enacted for the abrogating of the Popes authority, should stand in
full force and authority whereby the English Church became purged of Popery:
And what is very memorable, the same day that Images and Superstition were
thrown out of the Church, news was brought of the great victory achieved upon
the Scots at Musselburgh. The Popishly affected Stephen Gardener and bloody
Bonner are committed to the Tower. About this time fell out an unlucky
difference betwixt the Protector and his Brother, which proved the ruin of
them both, for they both lost their heads. This Year Bishop Ridley preached
before the King, and in his Sermon took occasion to discourse of the necessity
of Alms-deeds, which the King earnestly attending and laying to heart, sent for
the Bishop after Sermon, and entered into private communication with him
(causing him to set down in a chair, and whether he would or not to put on his
hat) about relief: The King to show his wonderful charity appointed several
Hospitalls, to which he gave Lands to the value of 600 pounds per annum, which
had belonged to the Savoy, and 4000 Marks a year in money beside.

About the beginning of the next year, the King fell into lingering sickness,
then into a Hectic Fever, whereof, together with a consumption of the Lungs
he died at length, not without suspicion of poison.

And now Northumberland began to devise how he might gain the Crown of England
to his posterity; he therefore imparts the business to the Duke of Suffolk,
requesting his eldest Daughter Jane to be given in marriage to his son Gilford
Dudley; then he takes upon him to persuade the King, not only to disinherit his
two sisters, but also by Will to constitute his Cousin the Lady Jane Queen
after him, which accordingly, the good King yielded, preferring the true
worship of God before all natural respects. A few days before things were
thus ordered, King Edward not yet 16. years of age, sent forth his blessed soul
at Greenwich (to wit) the sixth day of July, when he had held the Kingdom under
Governors six years, five months, and nineteen days; showing forth even in
that tender age, blossoms of virtue, together with singular piety toward God,
constancy of mind, love of right, and an incredible study of Learning: Not
above three hours before he expired, thinking no body had been by, he uttered
this Prayer:

Lord God, deliver me out of this miserable and wre^ched life, take me among
thy chosen; howbeit, not my will, but thy will be done. Lord, I commit my
spirit to thee: O Lord, thou know how happy it were for me to be with thee:
yet for thy Chosens sake, if it be thy will, send me life and health, that I
may truly serve thee. O my Lord, bless thy people, and save thine inheritance:
O Lord God, save thy chosen people of England: O my Lord God, defend this
Realm from Papistry, and maintain thy true Religion, that I and my people may
praise thy holy Name. Soon after he cried out, I faint, I faint; Lord, have
mercy upon me, and take my spirit, and so yielded up the Ghost.

The high and Mighty Monarch Edward the VI. by the grace of GOD King of Great
Britain France and Ireland Defendor of the Earth etc
To thee, Great King, it was a gain to dye,
Whose death was crowned with immortality;
Nor does he err, whoever takes thee for
Edward the Saint, the Second Confessor.
Thou that in pious Paths so Even have trod,
Art Enoch like translated by thy God.
Who (as thy death does evidently show)
Loved thee too well to leave thee long below:
Whose every act the Universe convinces,
And is a pattern to succeeding Princes.
When thou of Popery did the Temple purge,
Thy Scepter turned into thy Saviors scourge.


MARY, Queen of England.
MARY so soon as she heard of her Brothers death, posted to Framingham Castle
in Suffolk, to whom resorted diverse Lords, who had formerly compacted to
preserve the Romish Religion: Then she sent to the Senate of London, that they
should proclaim her Queen; but the Lords in the name of all the people made
answer, That by the Testament of King Edward Jane was to succeed, and they
asserted that Maryes mother was divorced: whereupon they fly to Arms. The Earl
of Northumberland with a small Army marches against Mary; but as he proceeds
but slowly, Maryes Forces increase mightily; also Edward Hastings, who was set
with six Ships to prevent Maryes escape into France, revolted to her, by which
loss the Lords and Londoners were not a little dismayed, and grew at odds one
with the other; and the Londoners proclaimed Mary Queen; and Northumberland,
when he was certain of his friends falling from him, that he might not run the
hazard alone, calls a Counsel at Cambridge, and himself for want of an Herald
proclaims Mary Queen of England, etc. casting his Cap up in token of joy: But
that did not at all help his Cause, for the Earl of Arundell, who a little
before did not decline to venture his life for Jane, now coming to Cambridge in
Maryes name, takes the Duke and Casts him into Prison, he in vain entreating
for his life. Jane at the Command of the Duke of Suffolk her father, when the
Case was thus altered, lays down the Ensigns of the Kingdom, with much more
cheerfullnesse then ever she took them up. The Queen coming to London met her
Sister Elizabeth with 1000 Horse, and Thomas of Norfolk, Edward Contener,
Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and Somersets Wife, which she received
into Grace, giving them her hand to kiss. Then entering upon the Church
affairs, she abollished those Bishops and Ceremonies that Edward had confirmed,
setting up others in their room, (the people not a little offended at it) and
then she punished severely all those that were enemies to the Church of Rome.

In the interim the Duke of Northumberland, the Earls of Northampton and
Warwick are indicted of high Treason: she spared Northampton, but
Northumberland was beheaded abjuring that Religion he professed before in hope
of pardon; his body was buried by the Duke of Somerset his Capital Enemy,
between Anne of Boloyne and Katharine, who all had suffered the same death. The
rest persisted, and did not renounce the Faith they had professed. Jane
afterward with her husband and his two brethren, Ambrose and Henry, were all
condemned to dye, but Jane was reprieved for a while. Then the Marriage was
contracted between Mary and Philip of Spain, whereat Wyat and others offended
conspire, lead an Army to London, and are overthrown and executed. The Queen
enraged with the boldness of the subjects, began seriously to consider how to
punish the guilty. Gilford husband to Jane was first beheaded; then Jane her
self within the Walls of the Tower, with a wonderful courage, piety, and
Constancy, had her head chopped off: She was a Princess for her learning and
wisdom worthy of immortal praise. It is reported that Morgan, who passed
Sentence upon her, fell mad shortly after, and cried, Take away Lady Jane from
me. Then Suffolk was beheaded, and the same day Wyat the cause of all these
mischiefs; for Jane had been pardoned, had not he raised that furious tumult
and enraged the Queen: those that followed him, some were punished and some
pardoned. Also Elizabeth was cast into prison by the means of Gardener Bishop
of Winchester; without doubt her Life was at Stake, had she not wisely answered
to questions concerning her Faith. They did severely at that time punish all
those that were averse to the Romish Religion, among whom was Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, Ridley Bishop of London, and Hugh Latimer Bishop of
Worcester, these refusing to abjure their Faith were burnt to ashes. The Queens
Marriage with Philip was now solemnized; and Cardinal Poole being sent from
the Pope, all the Errors of the English are purged, and they received under the
Popes tuition. The Fame was at this time that the Queen was with Child, and for
joy Te Deum was sung at Paul's, and she released out of the Tower many
Prisoners, among whom were the Sons of the Duke of Northumberland, who were
condemned to lose their heads: But all this hope vanished, when the Queens
Conception proved to be but a Timpany. The Queen restored to the Church all the
Goods she possessed belonging to the Church; and when she was told that by so
great a bounty the Crown Lands would be much wasted, she replied piously and
prudently, She preferred her souls health, before all the worlds goods. Philip
in the interim went to Brussels to his Father Charles, and obtained of him the
Kingdom of Spain, and his other Dominions before his death; then he returned
to England; then again he went to Callice to wage war with the French, and
staid upon that business above 18. months, the English murmuring, and the
Queen lament^ng his absence.

Thomas Stafford at that time was instigated by the French to make war
against the Queen, and landing with an Army he wan York Castle; but he soon was
conquered, and taken and beheaded at London, and his followers were hanged.

Then the Queen sent Pembroke to assist her husband, and won a great victory
over the French, but drawing too many Forces out of Callis, the Duke of Guise
assaulted and won it, after it had been in the hands of the English two hundred
years; Guina followed it, and so the English were clean thrust out of all
France. The Queen was wonderful grieved for the loss of Callis, which
together with her Dropsy put an end to her life, in the year of our Lord 1558.
the fifth year of her Reign, and the forty third of her Life.

ELISABET D. G. ANG. FRAN. ET. HIB. REGINA. FIDEI CHRISTIANAE PROPVGNA TRIX
ACERRIMA
What means this Popish Fogg the Church to smother?
Where is the Queen should be a nursing Mother?
Edward preceeded thee in the same form,
That a bright Sun foreruns a blustering storm:
For Age and Sex, all at the stake we see;
O burning zeal, and frozen Charity.
If to deny the Tyranny you please,
Behold a Cloud of faithful Witnesses:
No, it were better to bethink with speed,
What Sackcloth such a world of ashes need.
But Madam, were not these your own intents?
How have you suffered in your Instruments?


ELIZABETH, Queen of England.
ELIZABETH Daughter to Henry the Eighth, by Anne Boloyne, succeeded her Sister
Mary, being raised from the Prison to the Throne: By her Coronation the Papal
authority fell again the second time; all the Ceremonies Mary had brought in
she abollished, and reformed all according to rule of her Brother Edward.

Being she was of a flourishing age, and Queen of a flourishing Kingdom, it
could not be but she must be sought to of many lovers: Maximilian the Emperor,
the Kings of Spain and Sweeden, the Archduke of Austria, and the Duke of
Angiers, sent to woe her, but all in vain. First, because the Queen would not
marry; for at her inauguration the Condition was, That she should marry no
Stranger; whereby there was hopes left to the Natives, for so great a match.
The French and Scotch they hoped to prevail much by reason she was a woman,
and of tender years, whereupon they invade and spoil the English Frontiers.
The French King pretending Title to the Crown of England, in right of his Wife
Mary Stewart, allied to Henry the seventh; but at last peace is confirmed
betwixt Elizabeth the Scotch and French, and all the Roman Catholics are
routed out of Scotland. Mary (when Francis was dead) returned for Scotland, and
made a firm agreement with Elizabeth, but envy and ambition soon violated it
and their sister-like concord, to the ruin of Mary at last.

Mary takes to her husband Henry Darley, and after Bothwell, but discontents
and wars arising, she flees to Elizabeth in England, who received her in her
Arms: She was at first liberally entertained; but after moving dissension in
England, being a most bitter enemy to those of the Reformed Religion, she was
kept more narrowly: For eighteen years she was kept in prison; at last she
began to riot in hope of the Kingdom, and to lay snares for the Queens Life;
for which cause at the request of the several Orders of England, she was
beheaded. Also the Duke of Suffolk who privily sought to marry her, suffered
the same punishment. Elizabeth in the mean time assisted those of the Reformed
Religion in France.

Now fell out a war between Philip the Second and the low Countries, in which
Elizabeth assisted the united Provinces. The Queen for this assistance was
hated by the Spaniards, who had before privately laid snares for her life, but
now he breaks forth into open war; for he raised a mighty Fleet from Spain
and other places; it was the greatest Navy for Provision and Men that ever the
Ocean bare, and carried the presumptuous Title of Invincible: It consisted of
one hundred and thirty tall ships of War, in which were nineteen thousand two
hundred and ninety soldiers, eight thousand three and fifty Mariners, two
thousand and eighty Gally-slaves, two thousand six hundred and thirty great
Ordnance; and the 19. of July 1588. they came in sight of England, and were in
hopes to devour it. But by the valor of the English and the Dutch, the Fleet
was partly worsted, partly hindered, but especially by a Tempest that rose
against it, the Spaniard was disappointed of his hopes. They often after fought
by Sea in Portugal and the West Indies, doing and receiving much harm. This
great Tempest being blown over the Queen causes a day of Thanksgiving to be
proclaimed, and rid Triumphantly to London. Notwithstanding all this she had
many troubles, but strangled all in the birth, and England was made the
Receptacle of persecuted and afflicted men, both from France and Holland, by
reason of the Wars there.

In the mean while Sir Francis Drake was sent into the West Indies, and the
Earl of Essex to the Coasts of Spain, when after many Victories achieved by
each, the Spaniards by the mediation of the French seek peace, but the Dutch
hinder it. In the year 1598. Philip King of Spain died in the seventieth year
of his age. He aimed at great matters, but was unfortunate in most of them;
whereupon it came to pass that the three Keys of the Spanish Empire (which
his Father so called, and willed him to keep diligently) to wit, Gulet in
Africa, Flushing in Holland, and Cades in Spain, were neglected; The first
taken in by the Turks, the second by the Confederates of the United Provinces,
the third much impaired in its strength and impoverished by the English: which
his father foreseeing in his Life time admonished to make peace with the
English and Dutch. Anno 1599. died that Reverend and famous Divine Mr. Richard
Hooker, a man moderate, temperate, meek and virtuous, even to the best
imitation, and left behind him a living monument of his real worth, his Book
entitled Ecclesiastical Policy. Then peace was confirmed between the Spaniard
and the French, but the English and the Dutch refused to be comprehended in it,
because they held it disadvantageous to their bu^iness; but making a Covenant
with joint Forces they invade Spain. The Spaniard stirs up the Earl of Tyrone,
who made a great Rebellion in Ireland. Essex was sent thither to subdue the
Rebels, and to make them conformable, but he scurvily neglected an opportunity
of conquering the enemy, and beyond his commission treats with the Rebels
concerning peace: He was therefore called home and commanded to answer for his
fault; by his submission he found the Queens savor: afterward prompted on
either by shame, or his ambition to the Kingdom, he raised an Army and entered
London, and he purposed to have forced the Queen: His Forces ran away from him,
and he was taken prisoner, accused of high Treason, and lost his head for it.
Charles Blunt was sent in his Place, who in diverse fights wonderfully subdued
the enemy, though the Spaniard had sent many supplies to relieve them; in a set
battle he overthrew Tyrone and the Auxiliary Spaniards, and then made
conditions driving them out of Ireland. Tyrone afterward when he had tried all
ways, submitted and humbly entreated the Queens pardon. In the mean time
Richard Levison and William Monson with eight great Ships and some small ones,
went and wasted the Spanish Coasts, and meeting the Spanish Fleet coming from
America with abundance of wealth, set upon them, but was too weak, being
disappointed. After that he mastered a great rich Ship riding at Anchor in
Portugal, and burning some lesser Ships, returned with her to England. At that
time the Jesuits and Seminaries were banished. At last the Queen died Anno
1602, having reigned 44. years and 4. months, and was buried at Westminst.

ELISABET D. G. ANG. FRAN. ET. HIB. REGINA. FIDEI CHRISTIANAE PROPVGNA TRIX
ACERRIMA
Thus died Elizabeth; Did I say she died?
Away my babbling Muso, away, ye ly'd.
She is alive, and ever so shall be;
Could England dote, and lose all memory.
The Neatherlands, yea France and Spain would give
All satisfaction that she still does live,
And shall, until unknown diseases vex
The Universe into an Apoplex.
Of whom this Nation may with comfort say,
An Evening red, foretold a morning gray.
Thus from the Briny Ocean of our tears,
The joyful Venus of our Peace appears.


JAMES, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
THE loss that England sustained by the death o^ Queen Elizabeth, was
abundantly recompensed by her most worthy Successor King ^ames, in the happy
union of the two warlike Kingdoms, England and Scotland. He was inferior to
he^ neither for Religion, nor any thing else; and by new rejoycings he
extinguished that grief the Subjects had conceived for the loss of so dear a
Mother to her Country. He was a King the more happy, because he obtained a
Kingdom by lawful succession, that was no ways embroyled with wars and
tumults* but settled in exceeding great peace. But as the calmest weather is not
secure from clouds; so the affairs of Brittany, though in a condition most
peaceable, were endangered by the malice and conspiracy of some malcontents;
^he Ringleaders were Henry Cobham, and George his Brother, Thomas Gray of
Wilt-shire, Walter Raleigh, and others; their purpose was to kill the King but
newly Crowned, to change Religion to raise Tumults, to let in Foreigners; a
terrible design: but this flame vanished into smoke the principal being either
executed, or condemned to perpetual imprisonment, or had their par^ons granted
to them; but least peace should be disturbed by new wars, he made peace with
the King of Spain, who was a sworn enemy to England; it was solemnly confirmed
by both.

In Northampton and Warwickshire, new tumults arose; first, by Fines, then by
John Reignold that led them, but this faction was soon allayed, and the Authors
thereof severely punished. In the mean time Frederick Count Elector Palatine,
came to London to marry Elizabeth King James his Daughter; the marriage was
solemnized with wonderful pomp, but all these joys were overshadowed with
Clouds of sorrow, for on the sixth day of November, 1612. Prince Henry departed
this life; various reports were spread abroad by the Vulgar, as if indirect
means had been used, but his Physicians gave it under their hands, that he dyed
of a violent malignant Fever. Charles the Kings second Son succeeds him in the
Principallity of Wales. About this time that learned, gallant, and noble spirit
Sir Walter Raleigh after 14 years imprisonment, made addresses to the King, to
give him leave to visit the New found World in America, to which he gave him
liberty, and a Commission under the great Seal to set forth Ships and Men for
that service; his reputation and merit caused many Gentlemen of Quality, to
adventure their persons and estates on the design, many considerable adventures
were performed, though with great difficulty, but especially that of the taking
and burning of St. Thomes; information being sent to Gondimer, who was
Ambassador here in England, he never rested assaulting the King with
importunity for Reparation; Raleigh no sooner came a shore at Plymouth, but he
had secret information, and did endeavor to get from thence in a Bark for
Rochel; but being apprehended by Sir Lewis Stackly, he is brought to London,
and committed to the Tower. Gondimer that looked upon him as a man that had not
only high abilities, but animosity to do his master mischief, being one of
those scourges that Queen Elizabeth had made use of to afflict the Spaniards,
and having gotten him in the Trap, he laid his baits about the King: in October
he was brought to the Kings Bench Bar at Westminster before the Lord chief
Justice, where the records of his arraignment at Winchester were opened, and he
demanded why the judgment should not be put in execution; Raleigh, that
judgment was void by the Kings Commission for his late expedition; the Lord
chief Justice replied, The opinion of the Court was to the contrary, he then
required time to prepare for death, but it was answered, The appointed time was
the next morning; accordingly on that morrow he was beheaded.

Buckingham the great favorite is slain by Felton, for which he was executed.

Queen Anne about this time fell sick and dyed; she was a Queen to be had in
everlasting Memory for her Noble Virtues. The King also fell sick, but by Gods
assistance he recovered.

The Pa^sgrave in the interim, who had married the Lady Elizabeth, by the
prompting on of some of the German Princes, was chosen King of Bohemia. The
Emperor was wonderfully enraged at this Election, and proclaimed war against
him, driving him first out of Bohemia, and afterward out of all Germany, who
in Holland, the common refuge of all wretch^d people, found a bountiful and
safe entertainment. But James that he might help his son in law, made a motion
for a marriage betwixt his son Charles, and the Infanta of Spain.

Charles is sent into Spain through France by Land, where he saw upon his
journey Mary daughter to Henry the fourth; he was received in Spain
magnificently to outward appearance; but a difference falling out betwixt the
Duke of Buckingham, and Count Olivares, the principal Don of the Spanish
Court; the Treaty was drawn out at length; but Charles impatient of delay
returns home* and arrives safe in England, and was afterward married to Mary
whom he had affectionately beheld in France.

What remains to be spoken of King James, is either scarce worth recording, or
dubious in the truth thereof: He dyed at last of a disease of the Spleen,
though there was false reports spread abroad, That he was poisoned, when he had
reigned twenty and two years, in the year, 1625. He was a true Platonic
Prince, a Husband worthy of his Wife, an honest Father to his Children, a good
King to his Subjects; because he was a Prince, he was the most learned, and he
was the best Prince by reason of his learning. In this Kings reign English
Plantations were ^etled in the Indies, Virginia, Bermudaes, and New England; in
which are Commonwealths.

The right high and most mighty Monarch JAMES by the Grace of God King of
great Britain France and Ireland etc. ^efendor of the Faith D Sculp:
They look for peace, and behold war; But we
Did look for war, and have met peace in thee.
The North wind brings no good, it is untrue;
Never brought wind England more good than you
Whose Mothers death may all the world convince,
Revenge could never conquer such a Prince.
What could Great Britain wish but such an heir,
Unites two Realms scarce ever out of war.
Your wisdom, plenty, peace who descants on,
Conclude you even a second Solomon.
Herein (Great Sir) you Solomon surpassed;
That to your God were constant to the last.


CHARLES Is It. King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
CHARLES the first succeeded his Father, being 25 years of Age. The first design
he had was to marry Henrietta Maria Daughter to Henry the fourth of France, as
he had purposed before, who landed in England the 22. of April, and was
received magnificently.

Then a Navy was prepared against the Spaniard (for all friendship was grown
stale between these two Kings, by reason of the breach of the marriage, and the
business of the Palatinate) he joined with the ships of Holland, and sent away
toward Spain; and first assaulting Cades, and not prevailing, they set up sail,
and spoiling all the Spanish Vessels they met, they return for England. Now a
Covenant was made between the English, and the united Provinces, and they
resolved with joint forces to tire out the Spaniard. But Charles whose Exchequer
was emptied by reason of his Spanish voyage, and setting forth his Navy, was
forced to call a Parliament, but they would do nothing till Buckingham had
answered to his charge; they are dissolved, and the King raises money
otherwise, provides a mighty Fleet, and surprises all the Spanish Ships he
lights on. But the French not being spared, a stop and Confiscation is made of
English Vessels in France. The Ministers of the Church of Rome, and those that
came over with the Queen privately, disturb the English affairs; they are
commanded to depart the Land, not without gifts; the French King takes it ill,
and some are recalled. The French not satisfied, forbid all commerce, Charles
the like; envy increases, Lewis oppresses the Rochellers, Charles sends relief
to the besieged, but prevails little; heavy complaints are made against
Buckingham; Charles to stop all farther proceedings against Buckingham, again
dissolves the Parliament. He raises new forces to assist the Rochellers under
the command of Buckingham, but being ready to embark himself, he was stabbed by
Felton an English man, who was taken and hanged for his pains.

A new Parliament is summoned, they deny Tunnage and Poundage. The King
reprints the Common Prayer Book, at which the Scots rebel; he goes against
them with an Army, but returns without any good condition made.

Now the Scots made a nearer agreement among themselves against the King, which
they called their [ Covenant.] The King therefore distressed for want, calls a
Parliament, and asks Subsidies of them, all in vain. The Queen endeavors what
she can with the Pope, but nothing is to be done unless the King would abjure
the reformed Religion; but the King hates the motion, and had rather lose his
Crowns, than accept such hard conditions. Nor was it long ere these Demagogues
brought down a tumultuous rabble of Apprentices, and other base people, to the
Parliament door, crying out Away with the Lieutenant of the Tower, down with
Popish Bishops, out of the house with them. And to weaken his Majesty the more,
or rather to satisfy the insolent tumult, they cast 12 Bishops into prison:
the Earl of Bristoll and his son were sore threatened; and the year before, that
never enough honored Thomas Earl of Strafford lost his head to satisfy this
unreasonable rout; a man he was of an approved judgment and understanding in
State affairs, and of a singular fidelity to his King and Country. William
Laud also, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all England followed him, a
man admirably learned. But now they touched the Kings bowels, for they accuse
the Queens Majesty as one that had caused the troubles in Ireland, and caused
that people (of themselves inconstant enough) to rebel: the King hereupon
accused five of the lower house, and one of the upper House, their names the
Lord Viscount Mandevile, Pim, Hamden, Hasilrig, Hollis and Stroud, clearly
detecting these men of these tumults and dissensions; but the Parliament would
never suffer them to come to trial, but hid them in the City. The Parliament
having brought the business to this, resolve not to give it over; but January
16. 1642. raised a vast multitude of Citizens and others, to the number of
20000. and more, under color to defend the Laws and Liberties. The King hasts
to Hampton Court, commanding his Counselors to follow him, especially Essex
and Holland, who both refuse; wherefore the King with a small company, took his
journey like one that sled, so that for have, being he had no Purveyers to
provide room for him sufficiently, he, his wife and children the first night
were constrained to tumble all in one Bed. The King with some of his friends
takes journey to York, and is honorably received by the Gentry, who proffer
their best assistance; the Parliament takes advantage of his absence, and load
him and his Queen with black and scandalous calumnies to render him odious to
the City, and having his Militia out of his hands, together with the disposing
of all places of trust, they raise a great mass of money upon public faith,
and I know not what State cheats, they fortify all places of strength; they
next send to the King humble Petitions, containing most unreasonable demands,
calling them Privileges of Parliament, giving the King plainly to understand,
if he will not grant what they desire, they will have it by force, and
forthwith raise a formidable Army, under the command of the Earl of Essex: the
King is denied entrance into his Town of Hull by the two Hothams, father and
son, both which afterward their fellow Rebels beheaded on one and the same day,
spightfully executing the son first, least he should have the honor to dye a
Knight. The King seeing his lenity has been but their opportunity, and that
they were now in the field ready to surprise him, sets up his Standard at
Nottingham, levies what forces he could, and betakes himself to the field,
having fortified Oxford his chief Garrison, many Battles are fought with
various success, till that fatal Battle at Naseby, in which the Kings forces
were totally routed, and his very cabinet of private Letters, between himself
and his wife, taken and most barbarously printed and divulged to his Majesty's
honor, and the infamy of the divulgers. For that the King in a disguize yields
up his Person to the Scots, who tray^erously sold him to the English for 200000
l. And the Rump having now what they desired, murder him at his own Gate, Ian.
30. 1648. He lies buried by Henry the Eight at Windfor.

The high and Mighty Monarch CHARLES by the grace of GOD King of Great
Britain France and Ireland Defender of the Faith. etc. Are to be sold by
Thomas Ionne^ atye Royal Exchange.
Thus, Ah thus our dread Sovereign Charles the first,
The best of men was murdered by the worst;
At his own Gate, by his own Subjects too,
What more could barbarous Moors and Scythians do?
False Scots betrayed and sold him, Scots that would
Betray again our Savior Christ for gold.
Thus fell our Laws and Liberties Assertor,
The Churches Champion, and the Peoples Martyr:
To prove him wise, just, learned, only look
Into his most incomparable Book,
Which shall his name from age to age present,
When Brass and Marble need a Monument.


CHARLES IId. King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland.
CHARLES the second, By the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland King, was born the 29. of May, 1630. Never knew May a more hopeful
flower than this that happily sprung from the Roses of York and Lancaster,
joined to the Lillyes of France; a flower to whose composure nature it seems
summoned her divided glories, as Zeuxis did his divided beauties to make up one
Venus. Well was this May thought then most happy, until now we have lived to
see another May; as much more happy as it is to be brought to a Kingdom, than
to be brought to the world; or to be Crowned, than to be Cradled. His Royal
Nativity was attended by a Star, discovered over St. James's at midday,
displaying its modest beams in spite of Sunshine, in the middle of the air
(an Emblem of his future glory) it seems when Vulgar births are passed by every
day unobserved, the whole frame of nature takes notice of Sovereign births, and
Complements them with Stars, Meteors, Thunders, Earthquakes; such honor have
Gods anointed: when he made his own Son King over his holy Hill of Zion, a
star came and waited upon him from the East.

For his Education* His Father (of blessed memory) pitched upon the Reverend
Doctor Duppa, Dean of Christ-Church in Ozon, Lord Bishop of Chichester, and
afterward of Salisbury, who went to him as his other Genius; O ^ow the reverend
Father insinuated himself with his sacred Theorems into his Princely soul, in
short, he arrived at that proficiency was his own honor, and the worlds
admiration, as foreign Tongues, as Italian, French, Spanish, Dutch, etc.
Adversity has been his Schoolmaster, witness all Ambassadors whom he
Elegantly answers in their own Languages.

This every way accomplished Prince (whom this degenerous Land was unworthy of)
was expulsed his Kingdoms by Traitors, whose names are blacker than my Ink,
accursed Assassines, that murdered the Father (than whom a better King England
was never happy under) and would have sent the thrice Noble Son the same way,
but that God preserved him miraculously to be the joy and honor of these long
bleeding Kingdoms once again.

At last after many foreign troubles, the Scots invite the King upon terms,
almost as hard as Exile; which yet the King receives, and is Crowned in
Scotland, but tired out with their Factions, he makes for England with his
friends and Lashly, who at Worcester betrays him, where his Majesty in his own
person performing wonders, yet lost the day, and escaped, leaving all things
behind him a prey to the enemies, who fell upon the Royal plunder so hastily,
as if they thought to find Saul the King among the stuff; but blessed be that
loss that saved our Sovereign. But the King escapes their villainy and
violence, and purposely loosing his company, goes to White-Ladyes, near
Boscobil, where cutting off his hair, and disguising his face with Wallnuts,
and his body with rustic Robes, under the conduct of the Penderells, he passed
the days in obscure Coppices and Woods, where sleeping on the Loyal lap of
Colonel Careless, he took up his Imperial Palace in an Oak, since worthily
called, The Royal Oak, his Providores and Scout-Master general, were the
Penderels, many a weary, dark, and dirty step took his Majesty, and many a
course meal he made. But at last my Lord Wilmet that was designed for Bristow
under protection of Mrs. Lanes Pass for her self and her man, preferred his
Majesty's safety before his own, and ordered it so, that his Majesty rode
before her: Here Colonel Careless humbly took leave of his Majesty, fearing he
might betray him, this being the Country where he was born, and generally
known, who was so satisfied with this, and other his faithful services, that he
was pleased by Letters Pattents under the great Seal of England, to give him by
the name of Carlos, which in Spanish signifies Charles, an honorable Coat of
Arms, bearing an Oak proper, in a Field, Or a Fesse Gules charged with 3 Regal
Crowns of the Second, by the name of Carlos, and for his Crest, a Civit Crown,
with a Sword and Scepter crossed through it Saitier wise, with this Motto,
Subditus fidelis Regis, and Regni salus.

His Majesty rode forward on a dull Mill Horse, and said, It was the dullest
Jade that ere he rode on; and a man may believe him. His Majesty came to Mr.
Whitgraves Place appointed in the Wood, forgetting to take his leave of the
brothers now discharged, called to them and said, My troubles make me forget my
self, I thank you all, and gave them his hand to kiss; forthwith his Majesty is
conveyed to Mrs. Lanes, and taking the opportunity of her Pass, rode before
her to Bristow, but Bristow not serving their turn, he returned and so journed
a while among Loyal Subjects in Sommerset-shire, Wilt-shire, Hamp-shire, until
he came at last to Breghemstone in Sussex, where he took shipping, about the
end of October, 51. and was safely wasted over in spite of Cromwell,
Parliament, Lilly, and Hell, to a Creek in Normandy, whence he went to Di^p,
and there pro^ided himself neces^aries, until he came to his Mother in the
French Court, where he was honorably received.

After this his Majesty abroad, and friends at home, consult his interest, but
to no purpose. At length the Arch-Rebel dies, and his sons wanting his
Matchivilian pate are thru^t out of all; and Lambert following his Leaders
steps, turns out the Rump, which General Monk (not out of love to the Rumpers,
but Loyal policy to serve his Majesty) declares for. Sir George Booth in the
mean time, is defeated by Lambert, which so elevated the Phanatick, that he
leads a great Army against General Monk, who too weak for him in force, is too
hard for him in a Treaty; and his Soldiers, for want of pay, spoiling the
Country: Sir Thomas Fairfax with the Northern Gentry, rise on the backs of
them, and Monk in the front; his Army forsakes him: Monk marches to London and
declares for a free Parliament, which calls in the King, whom the Lord General
Monk with his Army, and all the Nobility meet with almost inexpressible
triumph at Dover, bring with Volleys of Acclamations home, and Crown him at
Westminster.

CHARLES II king of Great Britain France and Ireland Defendor of the Faith
A Panegyric upon King Charles the second.
England awake, see how the Royal beams,
Like Easters sun dance on the wanton streams.
Great Caesar comes, and Phosphor with the morn,
After an Ages night of woe and scorn.
Hail sacred Phaenix, thou that do return
From the spic'd ashes of thy Fathers urn.
Ride on and reckon every day of thine
Auspicious as thy May's twice twenty nine.
He that has never been unfortunate,
Savours not half the sweets of happier fate.
That comfort only is secure and high,
Whose Base is deepest laid in misery.
Per augusta, ad augusta.

The Conclusion.
I Might have told ye that this Realm some call
Britain, from Brutus its original;
Or, that the Romans overthrew it quite
By providence, to make it happier by 't;
Or that the Danes were (was the like e're known?)
By Counsell-keeping Women overthrown;
Or that at other times Kings did agree,
To carve this Realm into an Heptarchie:
All these I Pretermit, and many more,
Beginning with the Norman Conqueror;
Who settled here such Laws all men confess
Are the worlds wonder and our happiness:
It Is true, he did the Church some injury,
And suffered for it in his posterity.
I have, and briefly as I could, set down
Who justly claimed, and who usurpt the Crown*
As likewise that long bloody Civil war,
Betwixt the House of York and Lancaster.
In short, all Princes have their various fate,
This prosperous, and the next unfortunate;
As too too well this Age knows, not long since
We had a good, but an unhappy Prince;
Who like our Savior Christ did never cease
To tell us of the things concerned our Peace.
But Heaven resolved to turn another Leaf,
Least his charms should convert us made us deaf:
And now being punished for our many sins,
Appeased Heaven our Halcyon days begins;
Having in mercy given us a King
To all our sorrows will a period bring;
Whose Grandeur and inestimable worth,
None but an Angel's able to set forth:
Great Charles the second, whose Illustrious Name
Shall ride Triumphant on the wings of fame.
Let England say now, since her joys increase,
Long live King Charles the second, Prince of peace.

