THE ARTICLES Recommended by the ARCHBISHOP of CANTERBVRY To all the Bishops
within his Metropolitan Jurisdiction, the 16th of July, 1688.
SIR,
YEsterday the Archbishop of Canterbury delivered the Articles which I send you
enclosed, to those Bishops who are at present in this place; and ordered Copies
of them to be likewise sent in his Name to the absent Bishops. By the Contents
of them, you will see that the Storm in which he is, does not frighten him from
doing his Duty; but rather awakens him to do it with so much the more vigor:
and indeed, the Zeal that he expresses in these Articles, both against the
Corruptions of the Church of Rome on the one hand, and the unhappy Differences
that are among Protestants on the other, are such Apostolical Things, that all
good Men rejoice to see so great a Prelate at the Head of our Church, who in
this Critical Time has had the Courage to do his Duty in so signal a manner. I
am,

Sir, Yours.
London, July 27, 1688.
Some Heads of things to be more fully insisted upon by the Bishops in their
Addresses to the Clergy and People of their respective Diocesses.
I. THat the Clergy often read over the Forms of their Ordination; and
seriously consider, what Solemn Vows and Professions they made therein to God
and his Church, together with the several Oaths and Subscriptions they have
taken and made upon diverse Occasions.

II. That in Compliance with those and other Obligations, they be Active and
Zealous in all the Parts and Instances of their Duty, and especially strict and
exact in all Holy Conversation, that so they may become Examples to the Flock.

III. To this end, that they be constantly Resident upon their Cures in their
Incumbent Houses; and keep sober Hospitality there according to their Ability.

IV. That they diligently Catechize the Children and Youth of their Parishes
(as the Rubric of the Common Prayer Book, and the 59th Canon enjoin) and so
prepare them to be brought in due time to Confirmation, when there shall be
Opportunity; and that they also at the same time expound the Grounds of
Religion and the Common Christianity, in the Method of the Catechism, for the
Instruction and Benefit of the whole Parish, teaching them what they are to
believe, and what to do, and what to pray for; and particularly often and
earnestly inculcating upon the Importance and Obligation of their Baptismal
Vows.

V. That they perform the Daily Office publicly (with all Decency, Affection
and Gravity) in all Market and other Great Towns, and even in Villages, and
less populous Places, bring People to Public Prayers as frequently as may be;
especially on such Days and at such Times as the Rubric and Canons appointed
on Holy Days, and their Eves, on Ember and Rogation Days, on Wednesdays and
Fridays in each Week, and especially in Advent and Lent.

VI. That they use their utmost Endeavor, both in their Sermons and by Private
Applications, to prevail with such of their Flock as are of competent Age, to
receive frequently the Holy Communion: and to this end, that they administer it
in the greater Towns once in every Month, and even in the lesser too, if
Communicants may be procured, or how-ever as often as they may: and that they
take all due Care, both by Preaching and otherwise, to prepare all for the
worthy receiving of it.

VII. That in their Sermons they teach and inform their People (four times a
Year at the least, as what the Canon require) that all Usurped and Foreign
Jurisdiction is for most Just Causes taken away and abolished in this Realm,
and no manner of Obedience or Subjection due to the same, or to any that
pretend to act by virtue of it: but that the King's Power being in his
Dominions highest under God, they upon all Occasions persuade the People to
Loyalty and Obedience to his Majesty in all things Lawful, and to patient
Submission in the rest; promoting (as far as in them lies) the public Peace
and Quiet of the World.

VIII. That they maintain fair Correspondence (full of the kindest Respects of
all sorts) with the Gentry and Persons of Quality in their Neighborhood, as
being deeply sensible what reasonable Assistance and Countenance this poor
Church has received from them in her Necessities.

IX. That they often exhort all those of our Communion, to continue steadfast to
the end in their most Holy Faith, and constant to their Profession; and to that
end, to take heed of all Seducers, and especially of Popish Emissarics, who are
now in great numbers gone forth amongst them, and more busy and active than
ever. And that they take all occasions to convince our own Flock, that it is not
enough for them to be Members of an Excellent Church, rightly and duly
Reformed, both in Faith and Worship, unless they do also reform and amend their
own Lives, and so order their Conversation in all things as becomes the Gospel
of Christ.

X. And forasmuch as those Romish Emissaries, like the Old Serpent, Insidiantur
Calcaneo, are wont to be most busy and troublesome to our People at the end of
their Lives, laboring to unsettle and perplex them in time of Sickness, and at
the hour of Death; that therefore all who have the Cure of Souls, be more
especially vigilant over them at that dangerous Season; that they stay not till
they be sent for, but enquire out the Sick in their respective Parishes, and
visit them frequently: that they examine them particularly concerning the state
of their Souls, and instruct them in their Duties, and settle them in their
Doubts, and comfort them in their Sorrows and Sufferings, and pray often with
them and for them; and by all the Methods which our Church prescribes, prepare
them for the due and worthy receiving of the Holy Eucharist, the Pledge of their
happy Resurrection: thus with their utmost Diligence, watching over every
sheep within their Fold (especially in that critical Moment) lest those Evening
Wolves devour them.

XI. That they also walk in Wisdom toward those that are not of Our Communion:
and if there be in their Parishes any such, that they neglect not frequently to
confer with them in the Spirit of Meekness, seeking by all good Ways and Means
to gain and win them over to our Communion: More especially that they have a
very tender regard to our Brethren the Protestant Dissenters; that upon
occasion offered, they visit them at their Houses, and receive them kindly at
their own, and treat them fairly wherever they meet them, discoursing calmly
and civilly with them; persuading them (if it may be) to a full Compliance with
our Church, or at least, that whereto we have already attained, we may all walk
by the same Rule, and mind the same thing: And in order hereunto that they take
all Opportunities of assuring and convincing them, that the Bishops of this
Church are really and sincerely irreconcilable Enemies to the Errors,
Superstitious, Idolatries and Tyrannies of the Church of Rome; and that the
very unkind Jealousies, which some have had of us to the contrary, were
altogether groundless.

And in the last place, that they warmly and most affectionately exhort them,
to join with us in daily fervent Prayer to the God of Peace, for an Universal
Blessed Union of all Reformed Churches, both at Home and Abroad, against our
common Enemies, and that all they who do confess the Holy Name of our dear
Lord, and do agree in the Truth of his Holy Word, may also meet in one Holy
Communion, and live in perfect Unity and Godly Love.

FINIS.

