THE SPIRIT CONVINCING OF SIN. OPENED In a Sermon before the Honorable HOUSE
of COMMONS, Assembled in Parliament upon the solemn day of their Monthly
Fast, November. 26. 1645.

By PETER STERRY, sometimes Fellow of Emanuel College in Cambridge. AND NOW
Preacher of the Gospel in LONDON.

Published by Order of the House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew. Simmons, for Henry Overton, and Benjamin Allen, and
are to be sold at their shops in Pope's Head Alley, 1645.

To THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS and BURGESSES OF THE HOUSE of COMMONS Assembled
in PARLIAMENT.
GOD has promised his people to carry them on the Eagles Wing. The only
desire and humble endeavor of your lowest servant in Christ, has been to work
with God in this Sermon; that your Souls, Counsels, Wars, may be carried on
by the Spirit of God; who in the language of the Scriptures is not only the
Dove for Purity and Peace; but also the True Eagle for Wisdom and Power.

Worthy Senators, if you knew this Spirit, you would ask Him of your Savior;
and He would be in you a Fountain of Counsel and Strength springing up to
Everlasting Peace and Glory. But have you not known The Spirit? His sound has
gone forth into all your Ears. All the Scriptures speak of Him as they do of
Jesus Christ.

Daniel was chosen by the King of Assyria to sway the great affairs of that
vast Empire; because the Spirit of the immortal God was found in him.

David was a Statesman, Wiser then his Teachers: David was a Soldier; His
fingers were skilled in fighting, his hands trained up to Victory over Wild
Beasts, Giants, Armies of Men. was not the Spirit the Lamp of God which shone
thus gloriously on David's Court and Camp, which made his Throne so great? Thy
Word, says he, was a Light to my Feet. The Word of God is the Spirit of God,
says St. Paul; The Sword of the Spirit, (...), as relating to (...) not (...),
as relating to (...).
which (Spirit, not Sword) is the Word of God. This made David when he had
sinned, cry: Take not thine Holy Spirit from me. When the Spirit of God once
left Saul, an evil Spirit came upon him, which vex't him, which haunted him to
the loss of his kingdom and life together.

Honorable Fathers of your Countries, I humbly move to know, By what Title you
sit there and rule over us. Is it not as Powers on Earth? But All power on
Earth as well as in Heaven, is given to Jesus Christ. You are Substitutes and
Vicegerents to the Lord Jesus. Look then to Jesus the Beginning and End of
your Authority. God has laid the Government on his Shoulder. What is his
sufficiency for it? The Spirit of the Lord rests on him, and this is, A
Spirit of Counsel and Might in him.

You who sit at the right hand of the Lord Jesus, in this Commonwealth, as the
Lord Jesus sits at the right hand of his Father in that Kingdom, which is over
all: pray, that the same Spirit, which was powered forth on him, may be by him
powered forth on you: So shall you be Messiahs, anointed ones, and Saviors to
this people. Can You be able to rule over any spot of this earth; when Jesus
Christ was not fit for the government of the whole; without the Spirit?

Do you put your whole trust in the promises of God, and expect by them to be
made partakers of every blessing? Do you believe the promises made in the Word
of God? I hope, I may say, at least with as good confidence, as Paul said it to
Agrippa; I know you believe them.

This is the promise: The Spirit shall lead you into all truth. You are now
searching into the deep things of God, which concern Religion; Live in the
Spirit, and the Spirit shall bring all into your mind, and show you the things
of Jesus Christ. It behooves you to know the method of Satan; the stratagems and
dark deeps of the Devil himself, in mysteries of State and Religion. Walk in
the Spirit; he shall lead you into their chambers, as he did Ezekiel; and let
you see what mischiefs they are there contriving in secret.

This is the promise: The Spirit of God and of glory shall rest on his
servants, in their conflicts and sufferings. Sit still in all humble
resignation of your selves, to the working of this Spirit; that he may rest on
you: so shall he manage your counsels, finish your wars; and end all your
sufferings with glory.

I shall conclude my Epistle with an humble Petition to your Honors: an hearty
Prayer for you.

My humble Petition is, that You would ever remember to converse as Doves,
among Doves; with this Dove; He is a tender Spirit, take heed of grieving this
Spirit, where ever he dwells: For by him alone can your hopes be sealed to a
day of full accomplishment.

My hearty Prayer is, that, as you sit debating in Parliament, the appearances
of the Holy Ghost may be among you; as he was with the Apostles, sitting over
them in the form of fiery tongues: that when you fight in the field, the Holy
Ghost may be as a two-edged sword going forth from the mouth of the Lord Jesus
into your enemy's hearts: that you may never see upon the walls of your house,
that handwriting which made Bel-shazzer tremble; Your kingdom is divided; but
in stead of this, that uniting and building Principle; Not by might, nor by
power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord. This is the fervent, constant prayer of

Your Honors humble servant in Christ, Peter Sterry.
A SERMON PREACHED Before the honorable House of COMMONS, November. 26. 1645.
being the public Fast.
JOHN 16. 8. When he shall come, he shall convince the world of sin, etc.
I Will at once open to you the public scope of this place; and the private
sense of my Text, as it lies imbodied in the Context.

Our tenderhearted Savior is now cheering the hearts of his Disciples,
drooping with the sad presages of their dear Master's death.

The Lord Jesus sweetly gives them for a revivall of their fainting spirits, a
gracious promise of his own Spirit.

This Promise is threefold, The Spirit's 1. Personal Coming, 2. Particular
Comforts, 3. Universal Convictions.


Pardon me, if I be somewhat larger in the Explication of these. For this also
will serve my purpose; which is, to set before you the Spirit of the Lord
Jesus; that Spirit, by which we know those things, which Reason cannot reach;
and live, not 1 Cor. 3. 3.
as Men, ((...)) but as 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Partakers of the Divine Nature.

The first Promise is the Personal coming. Pro. 1.
This has two parts. The Person coming. Coming of that Person.


Part 1st. The first part is the Person coming. It appears to be a Person of
whom our Savior speaks, by those demonstrative particles: He: Him. It
appears to be some great One, a Divine Person, by those works, which are to
be done by him: To comfort hearts: To convince a world: To be in stead of
Christ; nay, to be a better Comforter then Christ himself in the flesh.

Commentators, Common-placers, Controversiaries, Schoolmen; all sorts of
Divines in general, choose this place, and such like places in this dying
discourse of our Savior's; for principal proofs of this fundamental point in
Divinity; that, the Blessed Spirit is not only, The Power of the Godhead, but,
A Person in the Godhead. For, say they, Christ speaks of him as of a Person;
He; Him: and as of a Distinct Person in the Trinity, Joh. 14. 16. Another
Comforter. Another besides Jesus Christ.

Now these places with the same force prove it to be the same Person, which was
to come to the Disciples. For Christ speaks of him not simply, but in respect
of his coming.

Part. 2. The second part of this Promise is; The coming of that Person.
Schoolmen call the coming of the Spirit: Novus modus Existendi and Apparendi:
A new way of the Spirit's Being in men, and Appearing to men.

All that I shall say concerning it, amounts to this. The Scriptures very often
represent the Coming of Christ in the flesh, and this Coming of the Spirit in
the same forms of Expression. I have cul'd forth these five: Coming, Sending,
Giving, Dwelling, Appearing.

1st Coming. You read of the Coming of Shiloh, which is Christ: He, to whom.
Genesis 49. 10. My Text tells you of the coming of the Spirit. The Divine and
Humane Nature are, as it were, two terms of reciprocal motion, for these two
glorious Persons.

2d. Sending. The Father sends the Son, Joh. 3. 17. The Son sends the Spirit,
in the verse going before my Text. The Father's Love-token to man, is his own
Son. The Son's Love-token to his spouse, is his own Spirit.

3d. Giving. Christ is the Gift of God to the world, Joh. 3. 16. S. Paul tells
us that the holy Ghost is given to us, Romans 5. 5. In a Gift there is a
conferring of Propriety, and Possession.

4. Dwelling. Joh. 1. 14. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us. 2 Timothy
1. 14. By the holy Ghost which dwells in thee. These two Texts have this
difference. Christ dwells in Flesh, as in a Tabernacle, or Tent, like a Pilgrim
or Soldier. The Spirit dwells in Timothy as at home, in his own house.

5. Appearing. Christ is God manifested in Flesh, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Jesus speaks
of the Spirit to his Apostles, You shall know him, Joh. 14. 17. These two are
distinct Persons in respect of their Appearances, as well as Subsistencies.
(...).

This concurrency of expressions seems to signify that these two Commings of
Christ in the Flesh, and of the Spirit, are True, Real Unions of God with Man;
True, Real Appearances of God to man; in these two Persons of the Trinity, the
Son, the Spirit. But with this threefold difference.

First, the Coming of Christ in the flesh is a Union of two Natures in one
Person. This is that which we call the Hypostaticall Union; where there is a
distinction of Natures without a distinction of Persons or subsistencies. The
Coming of the Spirit is a union between Persons as well as Natures. Here is a
Distinction and a Union both at once, between Natures and Persons jointly.
Compare those two places of Scripture, 1 Cor. 6. 17. He that is joined to the
Lord, is one Spirit. and Romans 8. 16. The Spirit witnesses ^ith our spirits.
The result of these will be; that ^he Spirit of Christ, and of a Christian, are
two spi^its, by distinction of persons, one by Union.

Secondly, the coming of Christ was into the broad street of the same common
nature of man; to be with us; yet so, as to be without us. The coming of the
Spirit is into our particular persons as into the same house with us. See this
Opposition, Gal. 4. chap. 4. verse. He has sent his Son, [made of a woman];
that is, made of the humane nature. Then, verse. 6. He has sent the Spirit of
his Son into our [Hearts]. Christ came into our flesh. The Spirit comes into
our hearts; so as to be both with us, and within us, John 14. chap. 16. verse.
He dwells [with] you, and shall be [in] you.

Thirdly, the coming of Christ in the flesh, was visible to all alike, to the
eye of sense. But the coming of the Spirit is invisible to all the world;
visible only to those who receive him, Joh. c. 14. v. 16. The world sees him
not, but ye shall know him, for he shall be in you. To these he is visible
inwardly, and after a spiritual manner.

This is the first Promise, The Personal coming.

The second Promise is, Prom. 2.
The particular comforts of the Spirit: He shall come as Comforter, says the
verse immediately foregoing my Text.

But can any thing comfort a Spouse that mourns for her beloved One, besides
his own presence? therefore this makes the Spirit, a Comforter indeed; He brings
Christ for a comfort along with him. Christ was to live again in the Spirit, 1
Pet. 3. c. 18. v. He was crucified in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit.
Christ was to appear again to them in the Spirit, and to be for ever with
them, Joh. 15. chap. 26. verse. When the Spirit come, he shall testify of me.
The Spirit was to give them a second Sight of their Husband, in a more true,
divine, lasting way; as he was unvailed of flesh, and in his own heavenly form.

Yea, this Comfort was to be doubled at the coming of the Spirit: For the
Father was to come along with his dear Son, Joh. 14. c. 23. v. I, and the
Father will come unto him, and make our abode with him. But which way would
these Persons of glory come to lodge themselves in the humble Cottage of a
Saints heart? In the Spirit. This Person was to be the Chariot for the other
two. Therefore but two verses after this Promise, Christ explains it by another
Promise, that of the coming of the Comforter: And St. Paul tells us, that we
have access to the Father, by one Spirit, Ephesians. 2. c. 18. v. Thus the Father,
Son, Spirit, and a Saint, dwell all together, and converse: The Father and Son
in the Spirit; the Spirit in our hearts. This is that Unity of the Spirit,
which is the band of Comforts, Ephesians. 4. c. 3. v.

The third Promise is the Universal Convictions of the Spirit. Prom. 3.
Christ and his Disciples were singular in the world; they saw those things
whcih none could see besides themselves: Blessed are your eyes, for they see.
They were as mad men; they filled the world with a noise of things, as present,
real mighty in glory; they spoke every where of a rising Sun, of a wonderful
Light, which made all other lights a deep darkness; when all this while the
whole world of men round about them could discern no other Sun without them,
save that which had shined from the creation until now; no other Light within
them, besides that which their own reason had ever in an ordinary way supplied
them withal. Isaiah prophesied of Christ and his Disciples, Es. 8. chap. 8. v.
I, and the children which thou have given me, are for signs and for wonders.

Would our Savior now leave his Disciples alone in such a world as this?
Therefore he comforts them with this; that his Spirit should come and convince
the world, anoint the eyes of mankind generally, to see the same light of
divine truth with them.

The Text reads it, Reprove, but the word in Greek ((...)) more properly
signifies to convince, as the margin has it.

This Conviction is threefold:

First, of Sin; Because they believe not in me. The Spirit should show the
world this as the Center, where all sin met in one; from whence all sin flows;
their not believing in Christ, their neglect of the Person of Christ.

Secondly, of Righteousness, because I go to my Father, John 6. 62.
By Christ's returning thither, where he was at first; by his going back to the
Father, the Spirit should teach the world; that he alone came forth from the
Father: John 3. 13.
For no one ascends up to Heaven, but the Son of man, who came down from
Heaven. And by this Argument shall the Spirit demonstrate Christ alone to be
the Righteousness of God to man.

Thirdly, of Judgment, because now the Prince of this world is cast out. The
Spirit should read this Lecture upon the world; how, since the fall, the whole
frame, all appearances of things, had been one great enchantment raised and
maintained upon the spirits of men, by the father of lies, the Prince of
darkness; to hide their eyes from the sight of God. But how Jesus Christ had
by his death cast down that old Magician from his Throne and Power; and now the
whole enchantment, the fashion or show of this world was dissolving and
vanishing, till it should appear no more.

Thus large I have been in the opening of the context and Text.

Now, without any further stay, or needless division of my Text; Doctr.
my Doctrine from it is this.

Rightly to convince of sin, is the proper work of the Spirit. Proof.


I shall give you only one place of Scripture to prove it; but that, I hope, a
fit and full one, Zach. 12. 10. I will power out upon them the spirit of grace
and supplications, and they shall see him, whom they have pierced, and mourn
over him.

You have here two successive effusions: one of the Spirit, and another of
Tears.

First, An effusion of Tears; They shall mourn. Mourning expresses true
Repentance in all the four parts of it; conviction, confession, contrition,
conversion. The force of the conviction here, as in my Text, lies in a sight of
Christ pierced; in a sense of unbelief. Not to receive Christ for your Husband
and King, is to Pierce him. To take away His Crown and Your Hearts from him, is
to kill him the worst way. But this is only a Consequent and Secondary effusion.

Secondly, An Effusion of spirit. This is the Antecedent Effusion. The pouring
forth of the Spirit is the cause of pouring forth tears. But who? or what is
this Spirit? He is marked by a double character: A Spirit of grace and
supplication.

First, a Spirit of grace. There is a twofold grace. The grace of
loving-kindnesse in the heart of God. The grace of divine loveliness in the
heart of man. If this latter be here meant, then the Spirit of grace is he,
whom St. Paul calls the holy Spirit, Ephesians. 1. and we generally know by the
name of the Holy Ghost.

But this cannot be the sense: For in the Original, it is chen, not chesed:
Grace, or loving-kindnesse, not graciousnesse, or goodness.

This Spirit of Grace then must be, either the Spirit, the spring of love in
the bosom of the Godhead: or, the Spirit, the diffuser, the discoverer of this
love in the bosom of man. Both these are that One Spirit, the Holy Ghost.
Divines give to the third Person, the name of Love; as they do to the second,
that of Wisdom: And we read from St. Paul's mouth, Romans 5. 5. The love of
God is powered forth in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, which he has given us.
This is the first character.

Second. A spirit of supplication. You have a Commentary upon this character,
Romans 8. chapter 26. verse. The Spirit helps our infirmities, making intercession
for us by groans unexpressible. This is the Spirit which convinces of sin,
the Holy Ghost himself.

Reasons.
The Spirit is truth. Reason 1.
These are the words of the Holy Ghost himself, 1 John 5. c. 6. v. The Spirit
is truth. Truth absolutely, that is, the Highest and fullest truth; the
Principle of all truth: the first truth, and so the last measure of all truth.

Take two Distinctions upon this Reason.

Threre are three Principles of truth. Distin. 1.
.

1. Sense. 2. Reason. 3. Spirit.
1. Princ. Sense, Prove. 20. chapter 12. verse. The seeing eye, and the hearing ear,
God has made them both. God has made the senses, standards and judges of
truth, within their own circuit, in such things, as may be seen or heard; as
appertain to sense.

2. Princ. Reason, Prove. 20. chapter 26. verse. The spirit of man is the candle of
the Lord, searching out the hidden parts of the belly. Though the candle of
Reason excel in light the Glowworms of sense; yet is it but a candle, not the
Sun it self; it makes not day; only shines in the darkness of the night. You
will more clearly see this Spirit of man to be the Principle of Reason, planted
by nature in man; if you compare this expression of Solomon's with that of St.
Paul, which seems to have some glance toward this Proverb, 1 Cor. 2. chapter 11.
verse. No man knows the things of a man, but the spirit of man, which is in
man. The things of a man are all the things of this creation, visible,
invisible; Eccles. 6. 10.
man is the sum of them all; all are subject to man; God has, Eccles. 3. 1^.
set this whole world in the heart of man, to search it out; these are the
hidden things of his belly: And thus far the spirit of man, the candle of
Reason, spreads his beams, to enlighten this world of nature. This the
Scripture calls Man's Day, which is God's and a Saint's night.

3. Princ. The Spirit 1 Cor. 2. c. 11. v. The things of God knows no man, but
the Spirit of God. The Spirit searches out the deep things of God. Divine
truths are the depths of things; the rest are only the surface. No plummet is
strong, no line long enough to sound these depths; save only that of the Spirit.

These three different Principles of truth constitute the three different parts
or states of life:

First, the brute part of the world; it is that which is acted by sense.

Seconly, Reason makes man; or the rational state.

Thirdly, the Spirit is the principle of a Saint Romans 8. 1.
As many as are the sons of God, are led (or acted) by the Spirit of God.

I cannot leave this Distinction between these three Principles of truth,
before I have annexed three Rules.

1. Rule. Every principle of truth is to be confined to its own compass, to
its own object. To seek out spiritual things by the sent and sagacity of
reason; were to plough with an Ox and an Ass. Sensus non fallitur circa
proprium objectum, Sense is not deceived in judging of its own proper object.
If sense and reason make no other report but this; This is the state of things,
according to our principles: this is the appearance of things to us: Sense and
reason may be admitted for true witnesses. But if they will be wise beyond what
is written in their book, and say: This is the only, absolute, true appearance
of things; because this is the appearance which things make to us. Now sense
and reason become blind guides, and will lead you into the ditch: 1 Cor. 2. 12.
Spiritual things are spiritually discerned. By proportion: sensual things are
sensually discerned: rational things are rationally discerned. You cannot
reach the things of reason by the hand of sense, though it be stretched out
like Jeroboam's toward the Prophet. You cannot understand spiritual things
Rationally; that is, upon the grounds of Reason.

2. Ru. Right Appearances of things to one Principle of truth, may be directly
contrary to those which are right Appearances of the same things to another
Principle of truth. The greatest lights of this world, Angels and Invisible
things, are mere darkness to the eye of sense. The light of this life is
darkness in the language of the Scripture. Darkness it self is as the light
before the face of God. 1 Cor. 2. 14. The wisdom of the Spirit is foolishness
to the Natural man. The Apostle distinguishes between two men, (...). and
(...): Man, whose Principle is Rational soul: and Man, whose Principle is the
Spirit. That which is Wisdom to one, is Foolishness to the other.

3. Ru. Lower Principles of Truth cannot comprehend the Higher; but they are
comprehended and judged by these. So Philosophers say, that Reason corrects the
errors of Sense. 1 Cor. 2. 15. The spiritual man judges all things, but he is
judged or discerned by none. ver. 9. Eye has not seen, ear has not heard,
neither can the heart of man receive the things of the Gospel. See here both
Principles of Sense and Reason. The senses are too superficial: the large heart
of Man, the vast spirit of Reason in him is too narrow to take in any thing of
the spirit. But the spirit understands them with all their ways and workings
(...); distinctly and critically.

These three Principles of truth are as three Circles upon the face of the
water; one within another: the lesser are infolded in the greater; but cannot
extend themselves to the wide compass of the greater circle, unless they
break and vanish in themselves, 1 Cor. 3. 18.
that they may become one with it. If any man be wise, let him become a fool
that he may be wise.

The soul shuts the windows of sense when she would have the room filled with
the light of Reason. Reason's self must first be cast cast into a deep sleep
and die, before she can rise again in the brightness of the Spirit. I have
dispatched the first Distinction.

Did. 2d. All three Persons in the Trinity are Truth, but with their several
and distinct Idioms or Characters. The Father is the only True God, Joh. 17.
3. The Son is Truth, Joh. 14. 6. The Spirit is Truth, Joh. 5. 5. But,

1. The Father is Truth in the Root: therefore he is called the Father of
Lights, Jam. 1. 17.

2. The Son is Truth in the Image. He is the Image of the Invisible God,
Coloss. 1. 15.

3. The Spirit is Truth in the Irradiation or Discovery: therefore the Spirit
is the witnessing Truth, 1 John 5. The Spirit is the testifying Truth, Ioh. 15.
26.

Nazianzen delivers the Doctrine of the Trinity to us from that place of
Scripture, Psalm. 36. 9. In thy light shall we see light. 1. The Father is Light
in the Fountain. Thy Light. 2. The Son is Light in the Face or Fullness: See
Light. 3. The Spirit is Light in the Flowing or Emanation of it: In light. The
Father is the Light, from which is all we see: The Son is Light, which we see:
The Spirit, the Light by which we see.

Sin is spiritually discerned. Reason 2.
Privations and Habits; Perfections and Defects, are judged by the same
faculty. The eye discerns light and darkness. Sin is a privation or the
absence of Divine Grace. Holiness is frequently expressed by light; sin by
darkness. Holiness is a spiritual beauty: sin, deformity. Both are perceived
by the same Spirit.

USES.
An Admonition. Use 1.
You have dedicated this day, and many such days, to a holy sorrow. I know
some, I believe many, I hope most of you carry broken hearts in your bosoms
thorough these days. Indeed very nature in you cannot but relent; and reason
it self tremble, to see those things, which your eyes see. Three Kingdoms
stand before you this day, like those three crosses on Mount Golgotha, all
laden with broken and bleeding carcasses. These three does your God take, as
one Text, that he may preach sin to your souls from it, that he may convince
you of sin by it.

Behold, Scotland comes with her thousands of slain men; England with her ten
thousands; Ireland with her millions; besides innumerable multitudes which no
man can reckon up, of families, persons, now undone, now famishing. These come
crying to every one of us, Our bloods be upon your heads, if you weep not for
us before our God this day whilst we bleed and dye. Sure your hearts do break
at the representation of these things; which your selves know to be at this
present far more sad in Fact, then they can be made by any Relation.

You that are the Fathers of your Countries over all this Nation, do you not
often look back upon your several Countries with a tender and dropping eye? Do
you not find as much reason and sweetness as once David did, to sigh and say
within your selves, Lord, we have sinned, we should have kept this people as
their shepherds: but we have procured their woe. Alas! what have these sheep
done?

But now is it not pity that broken hearts should be worthless and useless?
that God should say of our Mourning, as Solomon says of Mirth: what does it?
Yet so it will be, if it be your Reason only, and not the Spirit, which by
your sufferings convinces you of your sins. If your convictions and
contritions be Rational and no more; your groans will be to God as the
unpleasing cry, the howling of wild beasts when they are pinched with famine,
or caught in a toil: He that sacrifices with a heart thus broken, will be as
if he offered a Dog's Heart.

Does it not much concern you to know whether your convictions be from a
Rational or Spiritual Principle? Are you not eager to understand the
difference between these, that you may judge your sorrows? As God shall assist
me, I will assist you in this enquiry, by which you are to examine your selves.

Rational and Spiritual convictions differ in their Perswasives, in their
Principles.

Rational Perswasives in conviction for sin are such as these. Pers. Rat.


First, Self-love. Will you hear the workings of this? One man afflicted and
oppressed, laments after this manner: I have blasted my reputation; wasted my
estate; brought my body into diseases; by my lusts: and now I hang over a pit
of flames by the thin, worn thread of this life; in the same moment that this
thread is cut; I drop in, and am lost for ever. Woe is me! Thus he cries; then
he runs to prayers, Sermons, Fasts, in these he hopes for ease. Another, as he,
lies restless all the night; has these thoughts working like a storm in his
breast. I have expos^d my life to the Censure of the Laws, by Treacheries
against my Country, and my God. If the Preacher's words prove true, and there
be a hell at last; there remains nothing for me, but a fearful expectation of
my share there. In these anguishes this man breathes forth a groan, and cries
to God, to have mercy on him. So Pharaoh, so Ahab were convinced. This is like
weeping with an Onion; the eyes shed tears because they smart.

2. Sparklings of Natural Worth. A generous heart, if it be no more, when it
has done any thing foulely dishonest, or dishonorable; will call aloud for
Seas of Tears; a Laver of Blood to wash it clean.

The Jews in the Wilderness, when once they had refused to fight at God's
command, would purge that blot with their blood, fighting though forbidden,
when they were sure to fall. This is not beyond that Elephant, which reproached
with the offer of another Elephant to draw his burden for him; drew till he
broke his heart, and fell down dead.

3. Natural Religion heightened by temper, education, custom, formalities of
Nation, age, in which we live. The Heathen Romans wounded deeply with the
loss of an Army, or the pestilence; sought relief in reforming their
Religion: The Sibyl's books were searched: Ludi instaurati: solemn shows and
pomps for devotion renewed: Temples set open. Cushions laid; Holy tables,
seats, beds made ready: the Matrons flock't in Troops, filled the Churches,
fell on their faces, with their hair spread and torn; moystening the Marble
pavement with their plentiful tears at the feet of every Idol.

In aftertimes the Heathens among whom the Christians lived, on every sad
accident, exclaimed: The Christians are the cause of this, which join not with
us in the worship of our gods. Appease the gods, by the suppression, or
slaughter of these Christians.

Happy are our times, if some amongst us do not, upon no higher Conviction,
then these of Natural Devotion, call for days of Humiliation, Reformation in
Religion.

But do I condemn these Convictions? No. God commands and commends them from
the example of Brute Creatures: The Ox knows his own; and the Ass his
Masters Crib. But this I say; These are no better things then the Best of
Beasts, the worst of Men have attained unto. These indeed, if they be but
Single, may procure Temporal, Temporary blessings. But if they be not
Subordinate to the Convictions of the Spirit, they can do your souls no good.
You may save the Kingdom by such tears, but alas! what shall be done for Your
souls?

Spiritual Perswasives follow. Perswa. Spir.

First, Sense of Divine Love. Zach. 12. 10.
First, a Spirit of Grace, or Love, is shed upon the Heart; Then tears are
shed. What an eye was that which Christ cast upon Peter, when he went out and
wept bitterly? Was it not an Eye of love? a Melting look? You have seen how a
Sugar-loafe dissolves, and weeps it self away, when it is dipped in wine. So
hearts dissolve, so they melt, dip't in the sweet sense of Divine Love. Who
knows not what a wound, abused love, a wronged Friend makes upon a tender
breast? How then does the dearest love, the sweetest friendship of the great
God wound a soul with the sense of Love and Sin.

Have you not sometimes read that place, and dropped tears upon it? some have
told me, that they have done it often. The place is Es 43. 22. I have not
wearied thee with sacrifices; thou have wearied me with thy sins, O Israel. I
blot out thy transgressions like a Cloud, and remember then no more. Give me
the worst, the hardest Heart in this great Assembly: how soft would it grow on
a sudden, if the Spirit of Christ should whisper to it such words as these are:
Many years have thou lived profanely; many a secret wickedness have thou
practiced, which mine eye has seen. Often I have set my self before thee in
the blood of my Manhood, in the glory of my Godhead, in the love of both my
Natures: Thou have wearied me with thy scornings: -- But thou shall be mine, I
freely forgive all thy sins, as if they never had been committed. Come and see
how much I love thee! how I have ever loved thee! What temper would thy heart
be in when thou should hear these words? Would it not be like unto that, when
Joseph revealed himself to his brethren: Whiles thy Savior falls on thy neck
to kiss thee, thou would fall at his feet unable to speak any word for
weeping.

I appeal to you that feel the love of your God, how it works in the souls of
men: do you not often in sweet pangs cry out? Ah! my God, the sweeter thou art
to me, the more sinful still do I appear to my self. This is a Spiritual
Conviction, a Conviction by Love.

2. Sight of Jesus Christ. They shall see him whom they have pierced, and
mourn over him. As the looking forth of the Sun melts the Snow; so do the
shinings out of Jesus Christ melt the Soul. It Is sweet when a Saint says;
Mine eyes have seen my Savior, and now they power forth tears. A Rainbow, the
Covenant of peace is then form^d, when the Sun shines upon a watery cloud: When
Christ puts forth himself, and scatters his beams upon a mourning cloudy
soul; then follows fair weather: there is peace. This is a spiritual
Conviction, a Conviction by the Beams of Beauty.

3. The greatest sin, the not-beleeving in Jesus Christ. In spiritual
Perswasives the Person of our Savior is the Argument and Conclusion of all
Convictions. A sight of Christ, is that, by which Men are powerfully convinced.
Not-beleeving on Christ, is the grand sin, of which they are convinced.

They shall mourn over him whom* they have pierced. Not to believe on Christ is
to pierce him.

To believe Christ is to see him. So in those Chronicles of Faith, Hebr. 11. c.
27. v. Moses's faith is expressed by his sight: He saw him who was invisible. But
this sight is Inward, Spiritual, Divine: a sight by no ordinery Light. St
Peter describes the state of believing, the sight of faith, 1 Pet. 2. 9. He
has brought us into his (his own (...)) marvelous Light. He that sees Christ,
sees him in a strange, wonderful, in a divine Light, in God's own Light. To
believe, is thus to see Christ, and to live continually by this sight of
Christ; The life I live* is by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. chap. ver.
ult.

Paul was convinced by this sight of Christ; and of this sin, that he had ever
lived on any other sight. Gal. 1. chap. 16. verse. When it pleased the Father to
reveal his Son in me, I consulted not with flesh and blood.

You may see by Paul's Conversion, what his Conviction was. He had consulted
with flesh and blood; that is, with Principles of Reason, with the Spirit of
man; what should he have consulted with? or whom? with the Word, the immortal
Word: with the Wisdom of God; with the discoveries of Jesus Christ in him.

Is this the Sin, you chiefly mourn for this day? By this judge of your
convictions. Do you grieve to think; that the glory of God has shined so long,
so sweetly from the face of Christ; filling all things round about you: while
you have been sitting under the shadow of humane wit and reason, as in the
shadow of death; That so bright a Day has dawned from the Person of the Lord
Jesus; and yet you sit spinning out your Counsels and Course* by the
candlelight of man's spirit, and policy, as in the night? Do your hearts
sigh-forth this sense? Lord, we have sat in counsel concerning the great
affairs of many Kingdoms, Churches, Commonwealths* but not by thy Wisdom; by
the shining forth of thy Son in us. Many Principles of State, Reason, Policy,
have reigned over us; but the sight of thee, O Jesus, in our hearts, has not
ruled us.

When the Spirit convinces of sin; he makes this the great sin and folly;
that the appearances of Christ have not been our Sun and shield. No such shield
is there to defend us from the strifes, contentions, conspiracies of men and
things; as to be hid in the light of our Savior's looks. No such advantage is
there as to gain this Sun, to have the beamings forth of our Husband-king on
our side: How do the glorious dartings of his presence from among us, dazzle the
spirits of our enemies, trouble their order, and make them unable to fight
against us, or hurt us?

When the Spirit convinces of sin, he shows us, that the story of things in
the Wilderness, was a Figure for us under the Gospel, 1 Cor. 10. c. 4. ver.
When the Jews were to pass over the river Jordan, the Ark went before them; so
they passed through dry-shod. When they traveled through the Desert; the
Cloud, the Glory went before them: as that moved, they marched on; when that
rested, they stood still.

Your Ark now is the spiritual presence of Jesus Christ in your hearts; the
Cloud, the Glory now, is the appearance of your Savior, resting upon your
spirits. You have waded through many rivers of blood, have you seen the
discoveries of your Jesus going before you, and followed these? You have made
many Marches, many Rests; has the wel-pleased face of your Jesus, as your
Leading-starre, been still in your eye? Have you marched as this has moved?
Where this has stood still, have you stayed?

The Jews sung of old; What ailed you, ye waters, that ye fled? ye seas, that
ye were driven backwards? The waters saw thee, O God, and fled before thee. If
these things be thus with you, you may go forth, and say in your songs: What
ailed you, ye mighty armies, at Keinton, Newbury, York, Naseby; that ye fled,
and were driven backwards? What ailed you, ye strong treasons, close
conspiracies, that ye trembled, and fell, and your foundations were discovered,
before you could take effect? They saw thee, O Jesus! they saw thee appearing
in the midst of us; so they fled, so they fell before thee.

If things have not been thus with you; behold the sin, over which you are
principally to power out your tears. Behold the sin, which troubles you. Assure
your selves; all your acts in Counsel and Camp will be Null; till the Lord
Jesus be as the shout of a King, in the midst of you. Vain are all our hopes,
sweet dreams of Peace; till our Dear Savior show himself among you, as once
among his Disciples; Saying; Peace be with you; Breathing Peace upon you.

These are the Perswasives, in which Rational and Spiritual convictions for
sin differ; not all, but some few, which I have chosen for you from among the
rest.

Now remains the difference between these Convictions in the Principles
themselves.

Principles.
The Principles themselves are the Spirit of Man or Reason; the Spirit of God.
But I can no more convey a sense of this difference into any soul, that has
not seen these two Lights shining in it self: than I can convey the difference
between Salt and Sugar; to him, who has never tasted Sweet or Sharp. These
things are discerned only by exercise of senses; and are too hard for those,
who have not their own senses exercised in them, as St. Paul speaks, Hebr. 5.
chap. 14. ver. When you shall see the Sea of Truth, the Spirit; then you will
know, that the Great River of Reason was not the Sea.

I can tell you, that as much as the complexion of a face; the color of a
cloth or lace, seen by Moonlight, and Sunshine differ: So, and far more do
the convictions or discoveries by Reason, and the Spirit.

But still this is the difference in the Effects, not in the Principles
themselves. To give you, as I may, some shadowie description of this; I will
commend to your most constant and serious meditations that place, 1 Cor. 15.
chap. 45. v. The first man was a living soul; the last man a quickening
spirit, Verse. 46. The natural is first, and then the spiritual. Verse. 48. As
the earthy, so are they that are earthy; as is the heavenly, so are they that
are heavenly. Verse. 49. As we have born the Image of the earthly man; so shall
we bear the Image of the heavenly.

From these places you may draw these Architectonick, or commanding Conclusions.

1. A Living soul in her full glory, as she was in the first man in
innocence, in Paradise, is not the Principle of the second man, the new birth;
but the All-quickening, the Eternal Spirit.

2. A Living soul, with the highest improvements, raised to the noblest
actings of Wit, Reason, Worth, is natural, not spiritual; the Image of the
first Adam, not the Image of the Lord Jesus.

3. The natural and spiritual man differ as much as earth and heaven;
corruption and immortality; flesh and spirit.

You see the difference between these two sorts of convictions; as I have been
able to set it before you. I will now conclude this Use with an Admonition, as
I begun it.

An earthly Root may bring forth earthly fruit; nothing can reach up to Heaven,
and immortality, but that which first comes from heaven, and that immortal
Spirit. If you see your sins this day, and weep for them, though it be only by
the Owle-light of your own reason, (as the Philosopher himself styles it) you
shall not lose your reward, though you may lose your souls.

But what will it profit you to save three Kingdoms by your sorrows; and in
the mean time to carry in your own bosoms, dying, perishing souls, of which
every single one is more worth than all the world?

It Is dreadful to express; but I will speak it for your sakes. If God should
please to put the choice into my hands; I had much rather, that all these three
Kingdoms should be consumed at once, in this very moment, with fire from
heaven, by an outward destruction; then that any one the meanest, most
miserable soul in them, should perish everlastingly.

Draw then water out of that Well of salvation, the Spirit; and power it forth
before the Lord. If the Spirit be the Spring; your tears will quench both
flames, those that burn outwardly, and inwardly; so you shall at once save
these nations, and your own souls.

A Caution. Use 2.
If it be the work of the Spirit to convince of sin; then it is his work more
especially, to convince of spiritual Duties, and spiritual Truths. Take heed
of measuring divine things by the model of Reason. Take heed of rejecting what
Reason cannot receive. St. Paul gives you a full account of the Jews case and
ruin, in a few words; Romans 10. 3. While they sought after righteousness by
the Law, they fell short; because they were ignorant of the righteousness of
God. Fear, lest you also fall after the same example of unbelief; lest you
fall short of the knowledge of spiritual things; because you seek it by
Reason, and know not the Spirit of God.

It is true; all grant, that some; some say, that all truths which come by
revelation of the Spirit, may also be demonstrated by Reason. But if they be,
they are then no more Divine, but humane truths: They lose their certainty,
beauty, efficacy; they become like the Name of Jesus in the mouth of those
counterfeit Exorcists, which made them not the Devil's Masters, but his scorn.
Spiritual truths discovered by demonstrations of Reason, are like the
Mistress in her Cook-maid's clothes. They differ from themselves in their own
true shape; as those little plump boys with wings, the pictures of Angels in
Churches, differ from the Angels in Heaven. Spiritual things are foolishness
to the natural man, 1 Cor. 2. chap. No visible shape is so lovely, so full of
Majesty, as that of Man: No shape is so deformed, ridiculous, as the
resemblance of man in a beast, in the Ape. So heavenly things lose their
majesty, become weak and contemptible, when they are represented by Reason
only: For they are not the things themselves; but an apish, mimicall imitation
of them.

The Philosopher gives us this rule; that we should seek for suitable
demonstrations in every sort of truths; and not leap from one kind to
another. The Apostle gives us this rule; to compare spiritual things with
spiritual. 1 Cor. 2. 13.
Spiritual Conclusions, with spiritual Principles.

You will reap both pleasure and profit from this Observation; that the true
Protestant differs from all sorts of men and Religions, by making the three
Persons in Trinity, according to their several properties, the foundation of
all truth.

1. He distinguishes himself from the Atheists, by worshipping the Father as
the Fountain of truth.

2. He dissents from Mahumetans, Indians, Infidels, while he sets up Christ in
himself, for the only Image of truth.

3. By seeking and embracing the discovery of truth in the Spirit, he differs
from all sorts of Christians; especially three.

1. The Papists, a Faction of policy. These persuade us to receive the
testimony, not of the Spirit, but of the Church, for a Touchstone of truth: And
this Church is the Popes private Consistory, or General Council. Thus the
Church's Authority, not the Demonstration of the Holy Ghost shall be the light
of Faith to Truth. Thus not content with an Antichrist, they set up their
Consistory, or Council for an Anti-spirit. But we need no visible Judge on
earth, to determine upon our consciences; What is Scripture; what is the sense
of Scripture. We have an invisible Judge and Witness in our own breasts: He
that believes, has the testimony in himself, 1 John 5. chap. 10. v. for he
has the Spirit.

2. The Arminians, a Sect of Moralists, who give the over-perswading power of
the Spirit, to strength of Rhetoric and Reason, inward or outward.

3. A Party of wit and worth: so far as the wit and worth of man can go; if
they would submit the wit and worth of man to the Power and Wisdom of God: The
Socinians; the Principles of Reason, are the pillars of Religion, and truth to
these men. But Reason is a pillar of a Cloud; the Spirit only is the pillar of
Fire, which has light in it. Reason is that Gladius versatilis, that sword in
that hand of the Cherubim, that kept Paradise; a sword that turns every way. It
may keep men from the tree of Life, but can never bring them to it. Our faith
is not in the wisdom of man, but power of God, 1 Cor. 2. chap. 5. verse.

Now, Worthy Senators, give me leave to make my particular addresses to your
selves. You have commanded me to speak before you; how far so ever I find my
self below a sufficiency for it, I must speak; I would not seek to work upon
you by art or cunning, if I had any skill in these things. My earnest desire
is, with all humility and lowliness, to speak the things of God, as a man; on
whom the earliest glimmerings of the Spirit have scarce yet dawned. I have
believed, so I will speak; to you; those things* on which I fasten the
immortality of mine own dear soul.

Pardon me, Honorable Patriots, if I speak twice to you, once as private
Christians, a second time, as public persons and Magistrates.

First, As Private Christians. If the words of a weak, worthless man may have
place in your large hearts, I beseech you to lay up within you, and to ponder
frequently upon this short word which I am now about to speak: Remember,
Remember, not to trust to the strength and wisdom of that Living soul, which
dwells in the Breast of Man. But, Have all your dependence upon that Spirit of
the Immortal God, which comes forth from our Lord Jesus Christ. I speak this
to You, who are Princes of Reason, in whom the Spirit of Man is at a High
pitch: Your Savior died, that he might send you this Spirit: He left you in
his fleshly presence, that you might have this Spirit with you. O wait for him
constantly, till he come: Wait upon him diligently, when he is come.

Saint Hierom thought he ever heard the last Trumpet sounding in his ears.
How well should I think my self rewarded for all the pains of this day, if I
could fix upon your spirits the constant sound of two only Sentences, as two
blasts of the last Trumpet? The Sentences are, Esa. 2. verse. ult.

Cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils; wherein is he to be esteemed
of?

VERSE. 17. The Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. The great God make That
day, This day, to every one of your souls.

Thus much to Private Christians.

Secondly, As Public Persons. Christ tells the Jews:

If any one sin against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him: But if any
one sin against the holy Ghost: it never shall be forgiven him. You will allow
it, if I shall make a little change in these words, and so return them to you.
If a State sin against the Son of Man, it shall he forgiven: But if a State
sin against the holy Ghost, it shall never be forgiven.

Remember Jerusalem, Christ came in the flesh, and was crucified, yet
Jerusalem stood. The Spirit of Christ came in the persons of the Disciples, in
the power of the Gospel, and was cast out; then Jerusalem fell. Divided into
three Factions within, beleaguered with a fourth enemy without; Jerusalem
miserably fell.

O England! London! Remember Jerusalem. You have had the first day of your
Peace, and passed it. Christ has been preached among you; but as in the Flesh;
clouded with carnal rites and ceremonies. Christ has been pierced among us,
that is, not believed on: yet we live, though we bleed. You have had the first
day of your Peace, and passed it. Be careful; Be careful, to know the last
day of your Peace; the coming of the Spirit among you.

You have set me on your Watchtower, and made me your Watchman for the few
sands of these glasses; If you ask me now; Watchman, what of the Night? My
humble answer is: The Nights is almost past, the Day is at hand, if you will
receive the Spirit when he comes: If you shall refuse to hear, you will look
for day; but I fear, I fear, it will be Blackness of Darkness, and
Desolation.

But I bend my Knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus, who has hitherto made
you tender in a very great measure; that he would send the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts; that you may know him, that he may be in you; that all this
people may honor the Spirits as they honor Jesus Christ.

A Vindication of the Spirit from those Who 1. Pretend it to Profaneness. Use
3.
2. Profane it under Pretentes.


1. From those who Pretend the Spirit to Profaneness. Can any think they have
the Spirit of Grace in them, and yet sin, and yet not mourn for sin? Can any
man make that Spirit, whose work is to Convince of sin, a Color for sin? Can
any man paint his foul lusts with the specious name of this holy Spirit, whose
property it is to paint out lusts in their True deformities, their Hellish
shapes?

I read in Ecclesiastic Writers, that in the Primitive times there were those
that deserved the name of Borboristae, or Coenosi: The Dirty Sect: and yet a
Branch of the Gnostiques.

But I might perhaps fear this to be the Malice, or Mistake of some in those
ages; if I did not read in the holy Scriptures of Jude 8.
Filthy-Dreamers.

Spiritual Discoveries are either Waking Sights, or Dreams. Dreams are False
Visions of sleeping men, without connection, full of absurdities,
inconsistencies. It is not strange for a filthy vile Person to have fair
Glorious Dreams. It is monstrous, that Glorious Discourses, Notions and
Apprehensions, should be set upon vile Affections, Actions, and conversations;
as the Head of an Angel upon the body of a Beast. But All is a Dream.

If any man indeed have the Spirit, he has a True Dove in his Breast. The
Dove's eyes are the Emblem of Chastity; The Dove's song is in Groans. Who, so
mourn for sin; who, so moan day and night after their God, as those who live
with this Spirit?

This is the first Part of the Vindication.

Secondly, from those that Profane the Spirit under Pretenses of Fancy,
Profaneness.

1. Under Pretenses of Fancy. Why should Joseph be despised as a Dreamer among
his brethren? Paul as a Babbler among the Athenians? The Spirit as a Fancy, by
men only Rational? That scurrilous Comoedian in his Greek play called the
Frogs, reproached Socrates, as a Worshipper of Clouds, and the Air; because he
neglected their Idols, and conversed with the Invisible-God, So the workings
and Discoveries of the Spirit, often seem to Men of Mighty Reason, Cloudy,
Airy. Yet the Spirit is Truth; the only Solid and Weighty Truth, carrying the
power of God for a demonstration along with it. 1 Cor. 2. 4.


Some learned men bear such a modest respect to Nature, that they affirm it
Probable, Some Beasts may have a Sense more then we have, which we can neither
judge of, or guess at; because we have it not. O! that the most Rational Men,
were so modest toward their Maker; as to suspect, that there may be in him a
Divine Sense, a Spirit of Light, above the Compass and Conjectures of their
Reason; which he may communicate to whom he pleases!

2. Under Pretenses of Profaneness. The Heathens mingled with Christians, of
old charged their secret Meetings with the Beds of Oedipus, unnatural Incests,
the Feasts of Thyestes, monstrous cruelties.

The Late Protestants at large clothed the best men with the name of Puritan,
as with a Cap of Paper; then they painted that Cap with Devils; they loaded
that name with all the foul things of all Sects or Persons; as before them the
Papist did the Protestant.

God grant that the Father of lies may not still live between the Lips of Men
by the same Art of Names; representing the most spiritual men like Christ on
the Cross, under the most carnal Titles of Ambition, Lust, Falsehood.

The Spirit is Holy, so are they that are His. This Spirit cannot encourage to
sin, comfort in sin; for his work is to convince sin.

Believe it, It Is true as Gospel: No man that is led by the law of the Spirit
of Life; can walk contrary to any Law of Nature, Common Honesty, Civil Policy,
or whatsoever is of good Report, Praiseworthy.

If any man walk by any other rule; an evil Spirit has deceived him; only let
not the reproach of such fall upon them, who with humble and panting hearts
call upon the Name of this Holy Spirit.

A Consolation. Use 4.
This Spirit, which convinces of sin, is the Comforter. If you have this day
received his conviction; you shall now go away full of his comforts: with
bosoms full of All comforts of peace and joy in your selves; of peace and
love, one toward another.

Where the Spirit convinces of sin, he communicates all contents in these two
bundles of comforts; Righteousness and Peace.

1. Righteousness. Have you seen your sins by the light of the Spirit? by the
same light you shall see your righteousness. Humble your selves before this
Spirit; let him cover your faces with shame; and he shall cloth your persons
with glory. He shall make you precious in the eyes of your God, honorable in
all the world: Nations round about shall say, This is a wise and righteous
people, for the Spirit of the Eternal God is come down among them.

2. Peace. Naturalists say, A wound is a separation of parts in the whole. How
full are all of wounds? Alas, do we not begin to have wounds upon our breasts,
near our hearts? And still we strive to make that good in Civilitie, which is
true only in Nature; that the best Balsome for a wound is its own blood: We
would make up our divisions, by making them more.

Who now shall restore Peace to our mourners? This Spirit will restore peace to
his mourners. This Dove, though he come groaning, yet he brings an Olive branch
in his mouth. O ye! every one of you in particular, give this Spirit your
single hearts to break in pieces; and he will make them all one heart. How
happy should we live, if God would do this!

If the Lord would power forth his Spirit upon our souls, and melt them; how
sweetly would they run all into one piece, like gold?

Then should Righteousness and Peace kiss each other in these Lands; and
these three kingdoms should mutually kiss and embrace in this union. The
Lambs, England and Scotland, Presbyterians and Independents, shall feed
together in fat pastures. The Lambs and the Lion shall live lovingly, and
converse one with another.

Then shall your Cattle go forth again in Herds and Flocks: Your children in
dances; Your Saints in their assemblies; and the Lord Jesus shall be known for
a God in the midst of them.

Then shall after-ages call this Age, this Parliament; The blessed of the Lord;
and make it your Motto for ever.

Blessed are the Peacemakers in divided Commonwealths.
Blessed are the Peacemakers in divided Consciences.
Thus if the Holy Spirit set a crown of thorns by conviction on your hearts; he
shall crown you with Righteousness and Peace: For; Romans 14. 17.
The Kingdom of God is Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

FINIS.

