THE HISTORY OF THE Babylonish Cabal; OR The Intrigues, Progression,
Opposition, Defeat, and Destruction
Of the Daniel-Catchers; In a POEM.

By Richard Steer.

-- Nec Lex est justior ulla,
Quam Necis Artifices Art perire sua.
Ovid. LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old Bayley. 1682.

TO THE Right Honorable ANTHONY Earl of Shaftesbury, etc.
My Lord,
THere is hardly a kind of Persecution more Irresistible than that of
Dedications. -- No Monarch can defend himself from it, since the Invention of
Printing. By this kind of Visit, a Plebean (whether he Adorns or Disgraces the
Press, it is no matter) can Vault into the view of the Most Exalted Wits, and
Most Renowned of Men.

If Custom be any Excuse for such fashionable Presumptions, I hope your
Lordship will pardon the Boldness I have taken, to shelter this Product of some
Retired hours, under the Protection of your Honorable Name.

Some Sheets of the same nature were not long since presented to your Lordship
in Prose, which Alarmed a Silent Spectators Muse, to Revive that Ingenious
Paraphrase in the Modern Attire of Measure and Cadency; which though unadorned
with those Affected Flights of Fancy, those Heaven-daring Metaphors, that (by
an Antiphrasis) becautifie the Raptures of the PERPETUAL STATE-POET [the
Achitophel-maker;] yet (my Lord) you will find it plain and honest, and
expressive of the Sympathy which some of a Lower Orb, bear to the Contrived
Sufferings of so Illustrious an Innocent as DANIEL was.

But who can Fall when Heaven is the Protector? Or what Machinations can
prosper, when countermin'd by the Divinity? If Men of Mere Wit will needs
wantonly Allegorize SACRED HISTORY, and by Misapplied Parallels, throw Affronts
upon our Great and Loyal Statesmen, then (whether They will, or no,) Men of
Loyalty will borrow Scripture Artillery, and Allegorize it in a sober Attaque,
to Batter down the Babels of such Daniel-Catchers.

That your Lordship may Live Long and Happy, to serve your King and Country, in
spite of all your Enemies, is the Hearty Prayer of

My Lord, Your Most Humble and Most Obedient Servant, R. S.

THE HISTORY Of the Sham-Plot, Defeat, and Destruction
Of the Daniel-Catchers, etc.
BEhold how Rich, how Glorious is the Soul,
Whose Faith is steadfast, and without control?
Faith will the Temples with Great Glory Crown;
Faith is the Hand which Takes the Blessing down;
Faith's the Defensive, and Offensive Shield,
Saves the Possessor, Makes th'Opposer yield.
This Abel, Enoch, Noah, in their days
Made The Infant Earth Illustrious with its Rays.
Abra'am was called the Father of this Grace,
Isaac and Jacob in his steps did trace;
Moses and Samuel have the same pursued,
Who as Bright Stars of the first Magnitude,
Dart down their several Bright Coelstial Rays
Upon the Church, in her more Modern days;
Who all a Glorious Constellation prove,
Patterns of Piety, of Faith and Love.
Can Daniel be forgot? or may he come,
And with his Fellow- Prophets take a Room,
Of Princes, and of Prophets, not the ^east;
Whose Soul with this Eximious Faith possessed,
To stop the Mouths of Lions, Faith is Crowned
Because our Daniel Innocent was found.
His History shall be our present Theme,
And from that Fountain, we will pursue the Stream,
To paraphrase upon the State of things
What Honors were conferred on him by Kings,
His Lise, Imprisonment, and Sufferings,
With that strong Faith which did his Soul Advance,
Working Miraculous Deliverance.
Take but a transient View of him, behold
How his own Book does his own State unfold.
See how the Spirit has displayed the Sense
Of his Original, his Eminence.
He is descended of Illustrious Blood,
His Pedigree was doubtless Great and Good.
The Seed of Princes he appears to be,
Or some Prime Branch of the Nobility;
His Conduct, and his Courage do proclaim
The Greatness of his uncontrouled ^ame;
For his Great Soul so Managed all Affairs,
As he did Antitype those Characters;
Nor in the Series of his Lives whole Story,
Was Daniel found to be Derogatory,
But Ornamental to his Birth and Glory.
And as in Honor, so in Beauty he
Arrives unto an excellent Degree;
His Graceful Presence, Personage, and Face;
Perfection vie with his Interior Grace,
Each representing him Lovely and Rare,
So fairly good, or else so goodly Fair,
By Royal Mandate he is a Chosen one,
Attaining perfect Education,
In all the Chaldean Learning; he is Taught
The Mysteries, and Policies of State,
That he might stand before the King, or be
A Privy Councellor to Monarchy,
A Pollisht Pillar, fixed for the support
Of Royalty, and Grandeur at the Court.
Yet he Religiously avoids Excess,
And frames his mind to be content with less;
The King's delicious Dainties he denies,
And all the Fullness of Court Luxuries;
For Pulse and Water are his only Fare,
Which to Great Men is an Example Rare.
His Humane parts, with Grace Divine are Crowned,
True Wisdom, and Great Knowledge do abound
In him; for he by God was sanctified
To be a Prophet, whereby he untied
The knotty and most intricate of Dreams.
By powerful Insluence of Celestial Beams,
Puzling Enigma's, Visions of the Night,
He their Interpretation brings to Light.
He fitted was for Public Government,
Well qualified for what was Eminent;
All these concurring fitted him to be
Trusted with all Affairs of (...).
The King inspects his Wisdom and great Worth,
His favor then to Honor calls him forth,
Makes him his Lord LIEUTENANT next the Throne
Over the Province of Great Babylon.
More Honor yet the King on him confers,
Creates him Greatest of his Treasurers;
And as the King should say, I cannot see
One of more Worth in all my Monarchy,
Heaps Honor upon Honor, adding more
Over the Magi him Chief Governor.
To make his Royal Favor more complete,
Daniel at Court is fixed Chief Favorite,
And now involved in business for the King.
(Honors and Offices do Troubles bring,
Yet) Daniel will not neglect three times a day,
(As he did use) unto his God to pray.
And while his prayers mount the Throne of Grace,
All worldly Cares do to his Thoughts give place;
O happy Prince! more happy in this thing,
Whose Counselors fear God, obey the King.
Daniel Exalted now to high Renown,
Studies the only Interest of the Crown,
He knew his Lord's great Interest would be,
To'ave Officers of spotless Loyalty;
Men^ of an Equal Spirit with his own.
Were persons fittest to attend a Throne.
This Policy of his appears to be
An Act of unexampled Piety:
Next to his Prince his Loyal care extends,
And shows some signal Favor to his Friends,
Great Comfort to the Church in her Exile,
When Nursing Fathers on their Children smile:
At his Request 'twas done, the effects were so.
For Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego,
Over th'Affairs of ^abylon were sent,
To manage Grand Affairs of Government.
See the Effects of his Industrious Care,
When such Brave Men in public Office are,
Whose publiek Spirits for the public good,
Nebuchadnezzar's Idols have withstood;
To which his Princes, and his ^ords of State,
Pay Homage, whilst yet Inconsiderate.
These Men alone with Faith and Courage filled,
Against their God and Conscience scorn to yield;
They give a check to th'uncontroul'd Decree,
Showing to God and King Fidelity.
That Impious Law, which like a Torrent slows,
(In honor to their God) they dare oppose:
Though to the Face of Enraged Majesty,
Confiding in their God, they dare defy.
The Fullness of a generous Confidence,
In the Great Power of a God Immense,
Lifts their Resigning Souls so much the higher,
Before Idolatry to choose the sire.
This did the Glorious Miracle Increase,
Honor to God, and to Religion Peace,
Adds Credit here, and future Happiness.
So little disadvantage does attend
On such, as on their God and Truth depend.
Such as stand fast to what they do profess,
Wrap themselves up in future Happiness;
Such honor their Profession, and their God,
Whose Faith on Kings unjust Commands have trod;
When in the face of Death, the King of Terrors,
By owning God, convince the World of Errors.
With Constancy and Courage such proclaim
Triumphant Conquests of Eternal Fame.
With what Assurance do such Souls convince?
There Is none Infallible, no not the Prince.
And he in Capitals may Read at large,
Such Men will certainly their Trust discharge,
And well conclude, in such he may confide,
Who from their God refuse to turn aside.
What Service then did Daniel to the Crown?
By lifting such to Places of Renown,
Whose Noble Tempers, and Heroic Souls,
Their Princes Laws, when against God, controuls.
How happy is that Prince, whose Grand Affairs
Are lodged in such Noble Breasts as theirs.
Who rather yield their Lives to Death, than be
Actors of Treason against Sovereignty.
These are no Pimping Sycophants, that win
Court-Favour, by alluring Kings to sin,
No, their Brave Minds Debauches will explode,
And all lewd Pleasures that affront their God.
They Will rather have their Lives before him laid,
Than yield his Interest should be betrayed,
Ere they will dishonor God, or slatter Men,
Or stifle Conscience, they will to Fire or Den,
Which Truth in time makes glorious again,
Thus Richly clothed with Graces, Daniel lives,
Beloved of all those State-Superlatives.
The Eternal Being often does Recite,
Daniel the Prophet is a Favorite;
What greater Honor can on Mortals be,
Than be Beloved of the Deity?
His Prince that Mighty Monarch also loves him,
For he a holy, prudent Statesman proves him,
In whose high Favor he securely dwells,
Wisdom and Piety in him excels.
In the whole Series of this Monarch's Reign,
What Great Esteem his Worthiness did gain,
Nebuchadnezzar's Honor did maintain:
Alas! what is this? what sweet Repose can be,
Within the Arms of Earthly Majesty?
When some at Princes Favors do arrive,
In their Esteem they no where else can live.
Those warm Embraces of a Prince's Love,
Chills their Devotion that it cannot move,
To seek Repose Eternally above.
Not walking in those paths which Daniel trod,
Who thought his greatest Good was nigh his God,
For he consults an Earthly Prince must die,
Therefore seeks Peace with Divine Majesty.
And Piety can no Assurance give,
He shall secure in Princes Favors Live:
The least Affront of Royalty destroys
All hope of comfort in Terrestrial Joys:
Or if by Death a Monarch be removed,
The next Successor hates the Man he loved.
Daniel Divinely may the World convince,
There Is no fixation on an earthly Prince:
When that Great King Nebuchadnezzar's gone,
Daniel forbears Attendance on the Throne.
But for what cause our Prophet did retire,
Whether his God his Service did require;
Or whether King Belshazzar disapproved
Whom his Grandfather had in honor loved;
Or whether Time had Razed out the Fame
Of his Memorials, or obscured his Name;
Or whether by his distance from the Court,
The King had lost the Fame of his Report;
Or for what other cause to me unknown,
He seems a perfect stranger to the Throne,
Until a Hand without an Arm affords
Strange characters both to the King and Lords;
For they carouzing were in fluvious Bouls,
Till the Almighty's Hand their Mirth controuls,
Which did with Terror such Amazement bring
To this so Potent, but now Trembling King.
He straightway did to his Magicians send,
Who instantly on his Commands attend;
But all in vain, for Mortals cannot see
Th'Interpretation of the Heavens Decree.
No other Spirit can the thing declare,
But his, whose Hand did write the Character.
The Aged Queen to the Young King does tell,
Excelling Wisdom does in Daniel dwell;
Send Messengers for him, in him alone
Is found Divine Interpretation:
He Is come, Belshazzar highly does adore him,
Honor and Dignity are laid before him,
Which of no worth he modestly refuses,
The King may give his Gifts to other uses.
Yet will he serve his God and King in this,
To let the King know what God's meaning is.
No Flattery from Daniel's Lips will flow,
But the King shall his Fatal Ruin know,
And who but Daniel dares to tell him so?
The clear Divine All seeing Eye behold,
That he the Scepter was unfit to weild,
When in the Heavenly Balance he was weighed
He was too light, the Scale turned Retrograde.
And though on Earth he was a Monarch Crowned,
Fitter for Tomb than Empire he was found.
Esau his Birth right greedily devours,
So he profanely drinks an Emperors.
No Cups so well could please his Impious mind,
As what for sacred uses were designed:
Upbraiding Heaven, daring to desy
The Infinite All Ruling Deity;
Having forgot the Generation past,
When Is Grandfather with Beasts had his Repast,
Became a grater Brute in brutish sort,
Turning into a Bachanale his Court,
Forgetting he was Mortal, and must dye,
And pass Account with Divine Majesty;
No wonder that the God Omnipotent,
This sudden Summons to Belshazzar sent;
No Variation in this firm Decree;
He who is all Immutability,
Signs with his Hand the King's Mortality.
Yet ere he goes to his Eternal Port,
He will Exalt Good Daniel in his Court,
Thereby to Bribe the Heavens to reprieve,
And to Revoke the Doom, that he may Live.
Daniel a Friend of God's, he did Esteem,
Was Policy to make God Friends with him;
Therefore proclaims him, by his Great Command,
To be the Third Chief Ruler in his Land.
But then alas! what sudden Change, how soon
Low, Earthly Glory is from Mortals gone?
Honor and Riches make them Wings, and fly,
As Streams do lessen when the Fountain's dry.
The King that night is summoned to the dust,
Where his profane Acts do his Glories Rust.
The Prophecy's fulfilled, the King must come
Unto his Judgment, and Eternal Doom.
When next Darius (mounts the Losty Throne,)
The Mede is now King of Great Babylon.
Fame to his Ears Daniel's great worth makes known.
In whom was found so Excellent a Soul,
Whose temperate mind his passions could control.
The Aged King by his Grave Wisdom knows,
This weighty Crown will be too ponderous
For his Gray Head, his Age consults his Ease,
And therefore chooses sixscore Deputies:
And over them he constituteth three,
The Best Beloved of his Monarchy,
To whom all those accountable must be:
And of these Three, although Beloved all,
Daniel's Commission is for Principal.
The Prime and Greatest Minister of State,
And Next Immediate to the Potentate.
His Honors now with Greatest Luster, we
May in the Zenith of his Glories see,
Now Lord High President of great Renown,
Over the Counsels that attend the Crown;
And over the Treasures of Darius State,
His Government is next Immediate.
Nor did the King his Favors thus bestow,
Ere he had Reason for his doing so;
For his serene and well poised Judgment found
Faith, Prudence, Policy in him abound.
A Spirit of so Excellent a frame,
That his deserts laid to his Honors claim.
But he no sooner Mounted is above,
In full possession of his Prince's Love;
No sooner on the wing of Favor flies,
To Lofty Honors vast Transcendencies,
Though never so justly merited, and due,
Black-Envious-Rankard-Spirits will pursue,
With eager mind^ filled with Revengeful hate,
What may eclipse the Greatness of their State,
What between them and Honor (though Beloved
By their Great Sovereign) must be now removed.
What, shall an Alien Lord it over me?
One of the Children of Captivity?
Shall we that are the Natives of the Land,
In our own Country bend to his Command?
Shall he Monopolize our Princes Love,
While we like Clouds below his Glories move?
How can you bear your Princes, Lords and Peers?
Shall Babel's Honors be a Foreigners?
Let us Remove him, he once being gone,
Then our Access is nigher to the Throne.
While many strive for Honor here, how few
Do the Eternal Crown of Life pursue.
Immortal Honor such a Drug is grown,
They Will rather satisfy themselves with none;
For the same Eye which for the one does strive,
Cannot the value of the other give.
Methinks I see their Cabal Counsel crowd
Under the covert of a sooty Cloud,
Shaking their PLOT-CONTRIVING CASE OF BRAINS,
Taking all dext'rous and laborious pains,
Gaping for Breath, whilst others lend an Ear,
And each by turns commences Counselor.
This will not do, says one, the other replies,
How shall we dress him for Our Sacrifice?
Then how they scratch their Heads, and bite their Nails,
When this, and that, and the other Counsel fails.
Are his State Ministrations all so Just?
Can we not find him vary in his Trust?
Let Us his Attendants bribe, for they may see
Something Defective in his Family.
Can it be possible he Erred not? or
May not some words confound the Orator?
May we not artificially expound,
If but a doubtful syllable be found
Drop from his Lip? what e're the occasion be,
Treason is meant against His Majesty.
Thus with malicious undermining Arts,
Their consultation at his Honor darts;
What shall we do? is there no hope to bring
Some guilty Accusation to the King?
Can we not find some colorable Story
Diminutive to Dignity and Glory?
Can we not dive into his Inmost part?
May not some Traitorous Thought lodge in his heart?
Which we might squeez into a Treas'nous sense,
And publicly produce for Evidence;
But is his Soul too, Innocent and clear?
And no hope left for an Endictment here?
Curse of his Faith, his Loyalty, his Trust;
Would he were not, unless he were unjust.
Our Circumspection ought to be our care,
Which while unguarded, does invite a snare;
For with our Greatest Diligence we scarce
Repel those Darts that would our Honors pierce;
Great Personages cannot be too wise
For their Conspiring, Plotting Enemies;
Whose greedy Lusts, their Int 'rest to advance,
Dare swear Men Traitors by their Coumenance.
But to their Honor, let the World admire,
They without Evidence could not conspire;
Let it remain unto posterity,
As a Remarque of HEATHEN PIETY,
These Heathen Conspirators scorn to foul,
With Base Degenerate Perjury, the Soul.
Though their Revenge so fiercely they engage,
Base Subornation must not help their Rage;
They will not Damn their Souls for those they hate,
Foul Perjury mere Heathen boggle at.
Rome does from Hell such Impious Customs fetch,
Which conscientious Heathens scorn to teach,
Such Monstrous Births as these can never come,
But from that Hydra Triple Crown of Rome,
Who issues Dispensations and Commissions,
Grants to the Greatest Villainies Permissions,
Rapine, Rebellion, Treason, Fire and Blood,
Is the Religion of this vip'rous Brood.
Can EIGHTY EIGHT, the accursed POWDER PLOT,
And STROMBOLONIAN LONDON be forgot?
So many Living Monuments appear,
Proves Rome more Impious than the Heathens were.
May Heavens Dread Anger drive this Torrent home,
With all their Fry to Lucifer or Rome.
And may their Plots and Shams confounded be,
Ere they arrive to full Maturity.
Mean time, O Lord, protect the Innocent,
And all Rome's Cursed Black Designs prevent.
To their Cabal let us Return, and there
We find our Plotting Politics despair
Of the Success, in all they have designed,
Nothing defective in him they can finds;
For his Allegiance to his Prince is such,
They cannot Daniel's Reputation touch.
And this Despair makes them consult their Wits,
Since this, nor that, nor the other project hits.
It is proposed, and the Proposal finds
An universal One and All, their Minds
Concur, they at Religion will begin,
To find his holy Duty to be sin;
For his Exact Obedience to his God
Must be the Snare, the Trap, the Net, the Rod,
His dear Devotions, (which though he esteem)
Must be the Cord by which we'll strangle him.
Get the Decree but signed, (the work is done,)
Then let him pray, and End what we Begun,
Pray to the Grave, each Motion of his Breath
In prayer to his God, he prays to death.
Say, is it agreed, My Lords? is this the way?
Nemine Contradicente, bears the sway.
There needs no greater Judgment upon those,
Whose Consultations do the Heavens oppose.
They that against God their close Devices bend,
His Honor is engaged to defend;
They who conspire against Divine Majesty,
In their own Plots shall their own Ruin see;
For he that shoots at Piety and Grace,
Hits God himself directly in the Face;
That Malice which one single Soul does wound,
Would, if it could, the Deity confound.
This new Contrivance hits so rarely well,
The humor of it does so much Excel
All they have done, or thought upon before,
Th'Invention they are ready to adore.
O how they chuckle! how they bless their wits,
For being such Ingenious Counterfeits!
The Rare Intexture of this Plot shuts out
All kind of Room for Jealousy, or Doubt;
It cannot miss, it is so strongely laid,
He must deny his God, or be betrayed;
If he be Just to him, his Life is ours,
This Blessed Invention makes us Conquerours.
Thus the Decree, with general Assent,
Passes the Peers, as Votes in Parliament,
Who with unanimous Results agree,
And for Assent, Address His Majesty.
They by a Law Enact him God on Earth,
And whosoever owns another it is death:
The God of Heaven now must be denied,
And in his Room the King is Dein'd;
To him each Soul must his Devotions pay,
And to no other Deity must pray;
For all Petitions must be spread before him;
They as a God for thirty days adore him,
Allowing God, as School boys for their Plays,
An undivided Month of holy days;
And whosoever dares in thirty days to pray
To any other God, his Life shall pay.
O King Darius, thou art mounted high.
Who says you're Gods? when God says you must die
Those Tributes due to Caesar I will pay,
But who makes man a God? does man betray?
Those Honors and Prerogatives, which be
The proper Rights of Earthly Majesty;
I in obedience to my God will bring
And pay as due unto my Sovereign King.
But those that Kings Exalt to that degree,
As they did Herod by their Flattery,
Are none of Caesar's Friends, for God above
Now for his Honor is obliged to move,
And with his slaming Darts, and Arrows keen,
Lets Mortal Kings know that they are but Men.
Thus that Blasphemous Rout, the Papal Tribe,
My Ink's not black enough for to describe,
How have they Deifi'd their Idol Pope?
(Our Great Lord God) he would more become a Rope.
Darius never consults from whence might spring
The Branches of this new promoted thing,
Blinded with Honor and Ambition, he
Could not Inspect his Nobles Hattery;
The Treacherous Design was hid from him,
He did it perfect Loyalty Esteem,
Some Policy of State that might procure
A Grandeur of his Empire more secure,
That in his Glory he might brighter shine,
And therefore does more easily incline;
Especially since he has but of late,
Mounted the Babylonian Throne of State;
Those proffered Honors he does not withstand,
But the Decree signs with his Royal hand.
This Mortal Monarch, King of Babylon,
Justles the Immortal Being from his Throne;
But his Ambitious, Daring, Rash Design,
Calls from an Angry God, Revenge Divine.
A Rash Result! such may repent too late,
Who answer first, ere they premeditate;
To do, and then consider, is it good,
T'answer a question ere it is understood?
Thus I this senseless fancy understand,
It shall be so; what was it you did demand?
Men may pretend great Politics to be,
But such an Act is far from Policy,
To do, and then to say, what have I done?
Would I had let this Stratagem alone,
Looks like the Fool described by Solomon.
A wise man's Tongue is in his Heart, for he
Ere he resolves, looks what the effect will be
The Plot is laid, Sagacious Daniel sees
This an Intrigue laid by his Enemies,
His piercing Judgment soon informs his mind,
That his Destruction's by their Plots designed,
In that Decree did Daniel plainly Read,
His Execution firmly was Decreed.
Yet it is below his Generous Soul to move
One step from God, his firm Devotions prove,
How little he does dread their Stratagem;
He bids Defiance both to it and them.
He scorns to Live, Death he will rather choose,
And will his Life before his Duty lose.
Ere he will want Communion with his God,
For thirty days, he will pass that Bloody Road
Which they provided for him, their Decree
Must be his way to Immortality:
If the True Ends of Life he cannot have,
It Is not worth Living, better choose the Grave.
Death is the only way to set him free,
The Port that lets in to Eternity,
Where he may commune with his God by prayer;
Daniel resolves to serve him here or there.
No sooner had that Royal Hand and Pen
Signed that Insnaring Law, but these Great Men
Turn all Informers, greedy of their prey,
How to Ensnare, Trapan, Accuse, Betray
The Lord High President, for he alone
Their Object is, he sits too nigh the Throne;
How do they sneak about his house, and creep
Under the windows, and through crannies peep.
Methinks I see how covertly they stand,
Each a Dark Lanthorn in his trembling hand,
Their easy Footsteps, and their watchful Ears,
With their dumb signs, and silent charecters,
That nothing might impede, but that they may
Through their own silence hear the Prophet pray.
O how their hopes do swell, their blood does rise!
When they behold the Casement open flies!
How their hearts leap for Joy, their Souls revive,
In hope this opportunity will thrive!
And he Brave Spirit, scorning to Retire,
Or to obscure the thing which they desire,
Does that on purpose to confirm their Ears,
That they, nor yet their Impious Law he fears:
But his Devotions to his God will pay,
And in Despite of their Decree will pray.
The wings of Faith and Zeal, mount him above
Fear of Darius hate, or hope of Love.
Shall Daniel his Beloved God disown?
Or wear a Mask on his Religion?
No, it is below the Greatness of his Soul,
To stain Religion with an act so foul;
As not to do the thing he does profess,
He from his Principles will not digress;
His holy Resolutions bear the sway,
His God in spite of Mortals he will obey.
No sooner have their piercing Eyes inspection
Of the least Motion toward Genuflection;
When they behold those sacred Joints to bend,
How greedily their Eyes his Motions tend,
How his preparatory Sighs they mind?
What they have sought, now they expect to find.
They diligently hearken, not for zeal,
Their Itching Ears wait but for an Appeal,
That they might hear his voice, so as to prove
It was directed to a God above.
And though the Heavens, (as if the force they felt
At his pathetical Expressions) melt,
A different Effect in them it seals,
Their putrid hearts it hardens or congeals.
Illustrious Prophet, little do we know
What various Passions in thy mind does flow;
Within thy sacred Breasts such thoughts may live,
Nature against Grace, Grace against Nature strive.
Or thou art Extasi'd beyond the cares
Of thy terrestrial, transient, low affairs.
Surely thy Soul slies upwards to its Rest,
Sweet Divine Raptures issue from thy Breast,
Methinks I hear thy heavenly thoughts expressed.
And must I now forsake my God, or pay
My Life to Man, if I my God obey,
Must I on such unhappy terms as these
Forfeit my Life, or God of Life displease?
Shall the confederating Heathens say,
Die Daniel, die, or Heaven disobey?
Must my Devotions hurl me to the Grave?
Must Prayer kill, which is a means to save?
It Is worse than Death to live one day alone,
Without Access to the Celestial Throne;
How then shall I with Thirty Days dispense?
What Is Life, when Means of Life is banished hence?
Must I upon my Lips these Fetters wear?
Must my Affections and my Tongue forbear
To call upon my God? my Hope, my Trust,
No, let me Die e're I do prove unjust.
Rather let Beasts a passage tear, and free
My Captive Soul from its Captivity;
That it may to Eternal Manfions sly,
And take possession of Eternity.
Now let them Rend me from Darius Love,
For that their Heaven is, but mine is above.
My Body is the King's, at his Command,
But my dear Soul is in my Maker's hand;
To the fierce Lions I Will become a prey,
E're I my God's Commands will disobey.
The Heathens shall not glory over me,
Nor yet Rejoice in my Apostasy.
Hold, pause a little Daniel, do not sly
Upon thy winged Zeal at pitch too high?
Are all the sweets of Life of no esteem?
Will not this Daring Act Self-murder seem?
If thou destroy thy Life, which thou may spare?
Will God-incourage a Self-murderer?
Why will thou vainly cast thy self away?
Is It not sufficient in thy thoughts to pray?
The Ceremony's but the outward shell,
Will not Ejaculation do as well?
God is a Spirit, if thy Spirit move,
He thy Devotion will as well approve;
What from thy Soul's most secret Altar flies,
Will be accepted as a Sacrifice;
God the Desires of the Humble meets,
And sighs to him from contrite hearts, are sweet;
Mental Devotion to thy Soul is free,
Which countermines their damned Conspiracy.
Ah! no, these weak Temptations cannot find
Admittance to Appal his Noble Mind:
Daniel to buy his Life, will not sell his God:
But in those paths which he before had trod,
He still will move; his Soul must still have vent;
His Lips must call on the Omnipotent;
He with his Speech his God still glorifies,
Though his Destruction in his Duty lies;
Though he should swiftly pray himself to Air,
He will approach his God in vocal prayer;
He Will rather to the Lions be a prey,
Than to neglect his Duty for a day;
And while his Enemies do strictly watch,
He to his God in prayer does approach;
He never regards his Crafty OBSERVATOR,
But thus Exalts his Voice to his Creator.
The Prayer.
ALmighty and Omnipotent Jehove,
Thou Glorious and Eternal God above,
Whose Habitation is Eternal Light,
My God, in Thee Alone is my delight;
O thou, whose Fullness only does possess
Immensity, and Everlastingness.
Lord, what is Man, the Son of Man, that thou
Thy Glorious Ear to such an one do bow?
O how illustrious is thy Grace when we
Are made the Objects of thy Clemency!
To Thee, O Lord, to Thee Alone I bend,
O let my prayers to thy Throne ascend!
What is Darius, Lord? whom Men advance;
Can he as God, command Deliverance:
Such would Invade the Glory of thy Throne,
Who make their Deity a Mortal one;
A God they do adore, who cannot save
Either himself, or others from the Grave.
Pardon, O pardon their blasphemous Deed.
O let thy Mercies all their Guilt exceed;
Though their Design was principally laid,
My Divine Privileges to Invade;
They would debar me from Access to Thee,
They would eclipse that glorious Liberty,
And draw a Curtain 'twixt my God and me.
Lord, what is life to me, unless I may
(Life of my Soul,) the God of Life obey?
Open the Door of Grace, O Lord, that I
May to the Bosom of thy Favor fly;
O let me praise thee, let my only Aim
Be in my day to glorify thy Name.
Lord, I am in thy hand, grant me thy power,
That over Death I may be Conqueror.
Give me a holy Courage, that I may
Triumph in Death, ere Heaven disobey;
And let my Sacrifice effectual prove,
To tell the world, God only dwells above.
Redeem thy Church, --
-- But then O strange surprise,
With Vulgar Tumults, and exalted cries.
The house with loud Allarms is begirt round,
The horrid Noise his pure Devotions drowned;
The Conspirators with a full mouthed cry,
Bawl, Treason, Treason, against His Majesty.
And with a Guard surprise his prostrate Soul,
Whose thoughts were mounted far above the Pole,
Bring him away, Darius cannot save
Him, from the paunches of a Living Grave;
They without Perjury could safely swear,
He to the God of Heaven made his prayer;
And now their Plot is to perfection brought,
They have obtained the only thing they sought,
For in the snare the Innocent is caught.
And now how briskly do they pass to Court!
Happy is he can give the first Report,
And to Darius Ears Evidence bring,
Of one that prays to God, and not the King.
But with what subtilty do they proceed!
To make more sure what lately was decreed;
They the Transgressor do at first obscure,
To make the Law stronger, or more secure.
For they well knew, the King so well did love him,
Nothing could from his Princely Favor move him.
He would dispense Prerogative, but he
Would set his Best Beloved Daniel free,
If he foresaw what they by Craft obscure.
His Royal Word they once again procure;
That whosoere denies what is Decreed,
The Rav'ning Beasts shall on his Body feed;
This once obtained, these Politics proceed:
One who pretends to Loyalty and Trust,
Proves to your Sacred Majesty unjust.
Your Royal Law, which all ought to obey,
And as a Debt unto your Greatness pay,
Is disesteem'd, slighted, and countermanded,
As though, Dread Lord, you had it not commanded;
One whom to Honor, you have lifted high,
Scorns to obey your Sacred Majesty.
Ungrateful Rebel! Traitor to the Crown,
Which did Exalt him to so high Renown;
His high Disdain on your Decree has trod,
And will not own Darius is a God,
But prays to something which to us does seem
To be at greater Distances from him:
For to the Heavens, and not unto your Throne,
He is Exalted in Devotion.
This vile pernicious Ill Example may,
Entice your Subjects in their minds astray,
After some other God, and so deprive
Darius of his Great Prerogative.
Shall he not Die? shall not the Law proceed?
Has not our God Darius so Decreed?
I cannot change nor alter my Decree,
Bring forth the Traitor instantly to me,
And then produce your Witness; which is he?
This Daniel is the Man, this Captive Slave,
That dares your Great and Royal Law outbrave.
Daniel, dear Daniel, oh, what have I done!
I Issued out my Rash Resolves too soon;
Ah! you in this have Rent from me a Jem,
Of equal value with my Diadem.
My Soul is wounded for this Rash Decree,
Which puts a Period to all Loyalty;
For in his Breast such faithfulness did dwell,
His unexampl'd Love did all excel:
And must I lose him? must he be Removed?
Shall I be dispossessed of what I Loved?
Ah! what Distraction wounds my troubled Breast?
Of what I most esteemed, I Am dispossessed.
Who could imagine that your snare was laid
Against your King, whose Interest is betrayed?
In this vile Act, by which is overthrown
The strongest Pillar that supports my Throne,
My Glorious State will totter when he is gone.
This is so far from Loyalty and Trust,
As it proclaims you hateful and unjust
To me, whom you in scorn a God have made,
By which my only Angel is betrayed.
What shall I say? you're Enemies of Peace,
Who hate what is your Sov'raigns Happiness;
For I in him alone was happy made,
But now too late I find we are both betrayed;
I was a King, would I had been content,
Without Invading the Omnipotent.
But I too late my Errors have surveyed,
Darius and his Daniel is betrayed.
Unhappy Daniel, thy unhappy State
Makes Thee an Object both of Love and Hate;
Thy King his singular Respects does show,
The Nobles hate Thee to thy overthrow.
He, if he could, thy Honors would support.
But they design to Tear Thee from the Court,
And with a voice unanimous they cry,
Deliver Daniel to us, he must Die.
To satisfy the Law, why was it made?
If Kings their own Prerogatives Invade.
The King demurs, unwilling to proceed;
His hand would cancel what he has Decreed.
How willing would His Majesty Reprieve,
Although for once he strained Prerogative.
But since their Plot has had so good success,
They will again impatiently address;
Nor will they be denied of their Demand.
The King himself shall not the Law withstand,
But void of manners sawcily proceed,
To tell the King the Law he once Decreed,
He cannot change, nay shall not, nor is able,
The Medes and Persians Law's unalterable.
And though the King the Kingdom's Laws would null,
We will be satisfied to the full;
Daniel must Die, why does the King contrive
What by that Law is dead, to keep alive?
In vain Darius thy protecting hands
Strive to preserve, what thy own Law commands.
To Dire Destruction, thou in Honor must
Doom thy Indeared Fav^rite to Dust.
The King Commands; but O what Inward Care!
What Grief, what Soul-sick Trouble, what Despair
Approach his Royal Breast! he sighs, he grieves,
He weeps and sobs when he the Sentence gives.
Ah Da-Da- Daniel, whom I Lo-Lo-Love,
Thy De De-Death must th-th-Thee Remove,
The Se-Se-Sentence I cannot deny,
Dear Daniel, thou M-M-M-M-must Die.
And now farewell thou matchless Peer, adieu,
My Brightest Star I never more shall view.
Thou most Illustrious, True and Loyal one;
Thou Greatest Treasure of an Earthly Throne.
Never was King so happily possessed,
Never was any Mortal Monarch Blessed
With such a Faithful Servant, such a Flower,
The only Glory of an Emperor.
But thou art mounting to Eternal Joys.
Beyond the Light, Low, Mean, and Trivial Toys
Of Earthly Honors, where thou shall be Blessed
In Glorious Mansions of Eternal Rest;
Freely could I dis-robe my self of State,
And leave to be an Earthly Magistrate,
To change my self to Spirit, and to sly
With my Dear Daniel to Eternity.
But that I stay behind to sacrifice
Whole Hecatombs of th'Impious Enemies,
To thy unspotted, uncorrupted mind.
They my avowed severe Revenge shall find.
Destruction as a Recompense I Will pay
To those who did thy Innocence betray.
But stay my thoughts, is not that God the same
Who met his Servants in the furious Flame?
My Faith persuades me to a firm belief,
Thy God will show his Power, and send Relief,
And lest thy Enemies the same should fear,
And so consult to send some Murderer,
More cruel than the Ravenous Lions are.
I to prevent any such Black Design,
With my own Signet will the Prison sign;
I Will seal thee up to the protecting hand,
Of thy own God, the God of Sea and Land.
How stately to the Den does Daniel move,
Laden with Trophies of his Prince's Love?
Clothed with the Graces of his God is he,
Armed in holy Armor, Cap a Pe.
He nothing leaves behind him that may seem.
Needful to take to Heaven along with him.
Thoughts of Revenge he does so much desie,
As he can wish his greatest Enemy
An equal share in Glory with his own,
Whose Malice sought his Dire Destruction:
Those who did causlesly his Life betray,
For their Eternal Happiness he will pray.
How like an Isaac is our Daniel come?
Ready to pass from the Altar to the Tomb;
Behold th'unspotted Sacrifice is dressed.
On which the Priestly Lions are to feast;
But to his wonder and amazement finds,
Their Savage Nature vary from their kinds;
What Miracle is here, this fatal Den,
Presents more Favor than Enraged Men.
More Friendship in the Lions Den is shown,
Than in the Royal Court of Babylon.
A Glorious Spirit did his Soul invest,
True Righteousness was fixed in his Breast;
He was begirt with Truth and Innocence:
These were his Arms, or Armor of Defense;
His Adamantine Shield he held so fast,
As made him Lion-proof; they will rather fast,
Nay starve, than taste, or touch such heavenly Food,
And Die with Thirst, ere drink his sacred Blood:
Civil instead of savage they appear;
They crouch, submit, and filled with awe and fear,
They tremble e're attempt in Rage to abuse,
Whom neither God, nor yet the King accuse.
Thus Daniel in his Duty stands before
His God, and God Demands of him no more;
He yields his Life, his Faith to testify,
And rather than be false to God will Die;
Whose life the hand of providence protects,
He shall not Die that thus his life neglects,
But he shall freely keep, what freely he
Offered to give, it shall Restored be;
The heavenly Power's engaged to set him free.
The Royal King in Mourning Robes is dressed,
His Thoughts abandon any kind of Feast;
His Mourning Soul fasts for his Best Beloved,
Which Envy from him had to Death Removed;
All kind of Mirth is banished from the Court,
No Jovial pastimes, no delightful sport,
Can have admittance there; the King's in tears,
Whose Grief creates Remorseness in his Peers;
No work for Fiddlers, Interludes or Plays,
Mourning is hung upon the Poets Bays.
No Singing, Dancing, no delightful Airs
Are heard in Court, but doleful sighs and tears.
The Harp, the Organ, Flagellet and Flute,
The Violin, the Dulcimer and Lute
In silence hang by, in the Music Room,
As Rotten Ragged Scutcheons over a Tomb.
The King now out of tune, nothing can bear,
That is Delightful to the Eye or Ear;
His thoughts present him Daniel's cries and groans,
Whilst Lions Roar his Funeral over his Bones.
But Daniel's Music is to him more sweet,
While they lie crouching prostrate at his Feet;
They so melodiously do snore the Song
Of his Salvation, he can frame his Tongue
To sing with them, and lift his voice on high,
In Hallelujahs to the Deity.
His Joints at every snort they breath can move,
And Dance Coranto's to the God above.
But all this while the King is discontent;
Alas! he cannot yet behold The Event
Of this Dread Tragedy, he thinks at least,
Daniel's imbowel'd in those Savage Beasts;
Therefore his Princely Eyes can take no Rest;
Sleep is a perfect stranger to his Eyes,
Before their Glances Ghastly Daniel lies;
And since his Best Beloved Watchman's gone,
He cannot slumber, but will watch alone.
Ah! his Dear Daniel sleeps in Death, and shall
He who did love him, sleep at's Funeral?
But all this while Daniel securely lies,
Watching amidst his sleeping Enemies,
And is become as a Life Guard of theirs,
Who were designed his Executioners:
Their Ghastly Eyes, and Yawning Mouths are closed,
They sleep secure, the Heavens has them Reposed.
Mean time his pure Ejaculations fly;
His faithful Prayers mount above the Sky.
Behold a Miracle is here expressed,
The Sacrifice does pray, and not the Priest,
He prays they may not make a Midnight Feast.
No sooner did Aurora open the Day.
Driving the Black and Darksom Clouds away;
No sooner were the Sable Curtains drawn,
And Dawning Brightness mounts the Horizon.
But Great Darius Rises from his Bed,
To visit Daniel, if Alive or Dead.
The first approaching Light his steps convey,
A Visit to the Lions Den to pay;
And by his hasty Motion it appears,
He Will satisfy at once his hopes and fears;
His hope that Daniel lives, fills him with Joys,
His fear that he is dead, the same destroys.
Darius's heart is in the Lions Den,
And new he moves to meet his heart again;
How briskly I behold his Royal Feet,
With nimble motion hurry through the street!
His winged thoughts fly swifter than a Dove,
Yet cannot surpass the motion of his Love.
He values not the Complements of State,
Nor minds if his Retinue on him wait;
Nor for his Coach or Chariot will he stay,
Lest it should too much of his time delay;
If he can find his Daniel but alive,
It Is satisfaction in superlative.
Might not Darius have a Faith which came
By its Original from Abraham?
Who against hope, firmly in hope believes,
And strongest Faith the most Assurance gives.
What though the Lions Beasts of Rapine are,
And though by hunger made the eagerer;
And what though human flesh and blood be sweet,
A novel Dish, and not their usual Meat:
It Is possible that Life from Death may spring;
Sure some such Faith as this possess the King.
He cries aloud, his voice the Air does fill,
Ho! Daniel, Daniel, art thou living still?
Hold, hold Darius, cease thy hollow voice,
Lest thou awake the Lions with the noise*
Thy loud Allarms, thy unexpected cries,
May Rouse the savage Beasts to Sacrifice
Thy Dearest Daniel, who among them lies.
If they have fasted all the night from Food,
May they not take their morning draught in blood?
And break their Fasts on that delicious Meat,
Which they last night set up and could not cat?
Brutes can no Reason give for their Delay,
Their savage Nature is for present prey;
They cannot trust, but Run at all that lies
Within the prospect of their greedy Eyes.
Faith is a stranger to their Ravenous Claws,
Sense only cloys, or tires their greedy Jaws;
They think not of hereafter, or before,
But gorge their Guts till they can eat no more,
The King well knew, if Daniel mist their Jaws,
'Twas Providence, not Project was the cause.
The King's unchangeable Affections prove
The greater Confirmation of his Love;
His Princely Favors pass beyond the Grave;
His Faith beyond his Sense, what is lost will save.
Through the Impenetrable Stones he calls,
His Soul wrapped up in sighs, does pierce the walls,
And safely does arrive at Daniel's Ears,
Whose Joy does swell, when he his Master hears.
Daniel, what greater honor can be shown?
Was ever Mottal Man so waited on?
Was ever Prisoner, when condemned by Fate,
Attended with such Majesty and State?
Thy God within, thy King without the Gate,
Waits in his Person, where he stays till he
The happy Prospect of his Daniel see;
And to Return Thanks to those savage Beasts,
For their Accommodations to their Guests;
For they, contrary to their Nature now,
To the Beloved of their Master bow.
Now may you hear this worthy Porentate,
Express his Soul in Accents passionate.
O Daniel! servant to the Living God,
Whose Habitation, Dwelling and Abode,
Is in Eternal, Everlasting Light;
Whose Eyes can penetrate the sable Night,
Is thy God able by his Power to free,
From Death, from Bondage, and Captivity,
Such as depend on his Ability?
Darius Queries, yet is far from doubt.
His Faith confirms what he is come about,
For he affirms, thy God will set thee free,
His Confidence was in the Deity.
Experience past confirms his Faith the more,
That God can do, what he has done before;
He the Effects of Faith does now embrace,
For Living Daniel stands before his face;
Which through the Grates no sooner he esples,
The sudden Vision does his Soul surprise;
As in an Ecstasy of Joy he stands,
And upwards elevates his Princely hands;
Being struck dumb with admiration, hears
His Daniels voice approach his Royal Ears,
In the same style, in the same Loyal sound,
O King for ever live, live ever Crowned
With the Celestial Diadem of Glory.
When thou have perfected thy Earthly Story.
Praises ascend from me to God above,
That he the heart of my dread Lord did move,
Thus to bestow on me his princely Love.
From Prayer he to Preaching does proceed,
Though from his Chapel yet he is not freed.
The King stands in the porch and does not stir,
But is content to be his Auditer:
Into two Branches he his theme does bring,
Leaving the Application to the King;
He first the goodness of his God declares,
Next his own innocence he avers:
And these two points does he unite to prove,
The mighty God does Innocence love,
His Duty he from hence does justify,
Both to Divine and Earthly Majesty.
Such cannot be unfaithful to their King,
Who to their God are just in every thing;
Darius never was satisfied more,
In any Sermon he e're heard before;
The Surly Lions seem to understand,
And watch the motion of his Lip and Hand,
How mute, and how demure they sit and hear,
As if his voice were music to the Ear.
And if his silence so much awed their sense,
How were they charmed with his Eloquence.
Experience works confidence, for he
Can the Beasts Love, and his own safety see,
Well may he trust whom he has found his Friends,
One Mercy on another still depends,
The same deliverance which first set him free,
Makes him still trust in its security;
That which the Lion and the Bear subdue,
Was the same Faith which the Philistine slew,
The Israelites on the other shore that stood,
Were sureties for such as pass the flood:
So the same says, as firmly does engage
Still to preserve, as first to stay the rage
Of the fierce Lions till the Charm be past,
Which clearly quits the Innocent, and Chaste,
Which by his faith is justified at last:
The Sermon being done, the Seals are tore,
And open flies the stony Chapel door:
The Captive issues forth, where soon he spies
His Royal Prince wrapped up in ecstasies:
He Is Heaven struck with Joy and admiration,
His Soul is raped in Divine Contemplation,
He like a Statue stands, fixed and unmoved,
His Royal Eyes gaze on his best beloved,
His ravished thoughts are glutted with excess
Of Heavenly Raptures, which he cannot express.
After some pause, -- deliberately he
Does reassume the thoughts of Majesty,
And thundering forth with terror on his Brow,
Those dreadful mandates which must follow now;
Orders for Execution forth are sent,
In favor of his Lord High President:
Those who have his destruction thus designed,
Must the revenge of great Darius find:
Those who his life have plotted to betray,
Shall their own lives, instead of Daniels pay,
What they would take from him, they down must lay.
This Day's Deliverance is of high Esteem,
When Heaven Beloved Daniel did Redeem;
And now the King Resolves to keep a Feast,
In Memory of his Reprieved Guest;
But the first Course he to the Lions sends,
To make their fasting Appetites amends;
They could not taste the Dish that first was dressed,
Therefore the King supplies 'em with a ^east;
Varieties of Sexes, choice of Meat,
'Cause on a single Dish they cannot eat;
On which, when served, their eager stomachs feed,
They have not patience till the Cloth be spread.
Daniel gave Thanks before, they scorn the fashion,
But fall on boldly without Invitation;
They Are so impatient, that they cannot stay,
But meet each Course while in the middle way;
Ere the Meat comes to Table they devour,
And drink Carouzes to the Emperor,
In the hearts-blood of these Man catching Feinds,
Those vile Trappaners of the King's best Friends;
The crackling of whose Joints their Music is;
They find no sweeter Melody than this;
And having sup't, betake themselves to Rest,
Well satisfied with this Delicious Feast,
Till they awake, and Rouse themselves again,
To overlook the Fragments in the Den;
They ready are for more, if more there be
Found acting Treason against his Majesty.
Thirsting with greedy Appetites for Blood,
As those Men did, who lately were their food.
And it is but Natural, that the Flesh of those
Monsters of Nature, whose Designs oppose
Sov'regnity in Monarchs, and contrive
His Best of Subjects to Intomb alive;
It Is natural I say, that such should be
Incorporate in Inhumanity.
To savage Nature they degenerate,
Savage they are, and in that savage state,
They justly are condemned to savage fate.
No need of Process, Summoning, or Juries;
He who Infallibly both Just and Pure is,
Sits Judge in Court, he who alone surveys
Dark obscure thoughts, untrodden crooked ways
Of sinful Mortals; he who sits on high
Condemns, and who shall dare to justify?
'Twas he those Catifs to destruction hurld,
And by his Miracle convinced the world.
It is a Maxim Politic in State,
And the prime Lesson of a Potentate,
To fix the Crown on his own Temples sure,
And in his Royal Throne to sit secure;
Therefore at first remov's what may impede
The Diadems fixation on his head;
And if Conspiracy hereafter moves
So losty as to strike at what he loves,
Then Policy calls Majesty to rouse,
And his Beloved Subjects Cause espouse:
For such as venture at his Royal Breast,
To rend from thence what he does value best,
Will the next onset ravenously fly
To strike the very Heart of Majesty;
That insolence which dares attempt the one,
Dares undermine, or overthrow the Throne.
The Great Darius will decree o^ more,
But not against the Heavens, as before,
He will be God no longer, but lay down
His Divine Title for a mortal one.
(...)
