ENGLAND'S FAITHFUL REPROVER AND MONITOUR.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, for Richard Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane,
1653.

The Contents.
1. TO the Church of England. 2. To the inferior Ministers of the Gospel. 3.
To the Nobility and Gentry. 4. To the expulsed Members of the University, and
to those now abiding therein. 5. To the Judges, Lawyers, etc. 6. To the City of
London. 7. To the seduced of this Nation, and to as many as have separated
themselves from the Communion of our Church. 8. To the whole body of this
Nation. 9. A Postscript to the Reader.
ENGLAND'S Faithful Reprover AND MONITOUR.
To the Church of England.
ALthough I am not ignorant, that many will hardly allow thee the honor of
this Title in the present disorder and confusion of all things; yet because
thou have a name that thou live and ert dead: Apoc. 13.1.
or supposing that there is yet remaining in thee some little spark or weak
degree of life, notwithstanding the whole head is sick, Isai. 1.5, 6.
and the whole heart faint, and from the sole of the foot even to the head,
there is no soundness in thee, but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores;
let me have liberty to speak unto thee, as to a languishing and dying body;
neither let it seem strange if I power Wine as well as Oil into thy wounds,
seeing that a deep spiritual Lethargy does possess thy organ of sense and
motion; and there is need of a loud and shrill voice to rowse and awaken thee
from sleep. And because thou say, Apoc. 3.17.
I am rich and, increased with goods, and have ne^d of nothing, and know not
that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; I shall
endeavor to represent unto thee as in a glass thy many deformities, blemishes,
and defects, not to shame thee, but to humble thee; not to reproach thy person,
but to reform thy life: Although perchance the shame of the world and the
reproach of men are generally more prevalent with thy children, then the hope
of heaven; or the fear of hell, then the love, or the terror of their Maker.
Wherefore if this my weak and imperfect labor shall be any ways serviceable
for the discovery of thy maladies, and the recovery of thy health, or in any
respect isntrumental to thy spiritual welfare, I have the desired fruit and
reward thereof, and let glory be given unto him, to whom alone it does of right
belong.

It was once the happiness and glory of thy children, that they had Pastors
both learned and faithful, instructors peaceable as well as pure, who adorned
the truth of their Doctrine with the holiness of their conversation, and were
careful to preserve thy unity no less inviolable, then that incorrupt. But
alas, this thy goodness was as the morning cloud, Hos. 6.4.
and as the early dew it went away: And thy glory like that of Ephraim, did
fly away like a bird, from the birth, Hos. 9.11.
and from the womb, and from the conception. For the leaders of thy people soon
caused them to err, and thy chief shepherds sent forth unskilful and blind
guides among them, who knew not the way of their steps, or such who loved to
wander themselves; and by their lewd example drew others aside from the paths
of righteousness and of peace; or those who were sluggish and cared not for
the flock, but for the fleece only, preferring their own bodily ease to the
welfare of their brethrens most precious souls, and the short pleasure of sin
to the lasting comfort of a good conscience: yea how many of thy children did
love to have it so, that there might be like Priest like people? and being
corrupted by long prosperity and peace, or prepossessed with pride, worldly
interest, covetousness and desire of gain, or blinded with passion and
prejudice against their Teachers, or glutted with the common use and plenty of
their spiritual Manna, they could no longer endure sound Doctrine, or those
who taught is as the truth is in Jesus. But after their own lusts, 2 Timothy 4.3.
heaped to themsolves teachers, having itching ears: who well perceiving the
levity and inconstancy of some, the pride and wantonness of others, the leaven
of hypocrisy with the spirit of contradiction and contention in all in thought
it now no time to sleep, but made use of so fair an opportunity and grateful
season of arriving to the haven of their respective desires and hopes.
Wherefore some of them struck sail for their ambition, others for their
covetousness, and not a few for their discontent and malice against the
present government and governors; although it was not possible only, but
probable also, that some at least had a zeal of God in tais strange act of
opposition and gainsaying, but not according to knowledge. As for the rest, the
contempt and reproach which lay on them, whether for their poverty (which is
seldom or never without disgrace in flourishing and prosperous times) or for
the suspicion of being factious and disaffected to the then ruling power, and
unequal administration of justice and law, both in Church and State (the sure
forerunner of national calamities) was no small incentive to set them on with
greediness in those counsels and courses, the sad effects whereof we see and
feel unto this present day.

In the mean while the general pretense and profession of all is, that they
desire and aim at nothing more, yea, at nothing besides, then the true doctrine
and discipline of Christ Jesus, especially the latter. And to this specious
design an open way seemed to be made by the great profaneness and vicious
living of the oppolite party, who while they were zealous for conformity to the
ordinances of men, and thought a main part of Christian duty to depend upon the
observation of them, did allow themselves carnal liberty in violating the
precepts and commandments of God. And this they did as from that inbred
corruption which is common to all men: so likewise from a private spirit of
opposition against the adversaries of their cause.

Thus while some were zealous indeed for the outward and formal discipline of
thy sons, but cold or lukewarm in the profession and maintenance of thy
doctrine, or denying it by their works, though they did confess it with their
lips: other zealous (at least in show) for thy doctrine, but slighting thy
discipline, or zealously bent against it, even to a distemper sometimes of rage
and violence, and the greater part resting quiet in an indifferent or neutrall
disposition and affection toward both, the staves of beauty and of bands, were
soon cut quite asunder and broken in pieces; even the covenant of truth, order,
and peace, with the entire bond of Christian brotherhood; whereby many have
made shipwreck of the faith and of good conscience to the extreme hazard of
their immortal souls. And many more are like to fall daily after the same
example of misbelief, error and Apostasy. For what other fruits may we
exspect from those roots of bitterness which have sprung up amongst us; I mean
the contentions and divisions of thy children which have troubled our peace,
and whereby so many are defiled: Heb. 12.15. Jam. 3.16.
seeing that where envying and strife is, there is confusion and every evil
work? The truth of which has been for a long time exemplified not only in
their strange disorder and chaos-like confusion of all things, but also in
their cruel demeanor and more then barbarous practices one toward another,
no less hateful to God the author of order, unity, and peace, the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort, then pernicious to men created after his
own image and likeness. And however more pretend to holiness now then in
former times, (And this indeed is the very soul of our Christian profession)
few of ordinary prudence and conscience are so weak sighted that they cannot
look through their thin vail or fine web of hypocrisy, and plainly discern
this form of godliness from the power thereof. For albeit they have the voice
of Jacob, and would be thought thereby to have the heart of Jacob also: yet the
roughness of their hands, and their manner of hunting, evidently show, that
there is in them the profaneness and cruelty of Esau, who for one morsel of
meat sold his birthright, and then purposed with himself to redeem it again
with the price of his Brothers blood. Genesis 17.


But what was the cause that they so carefully put on the outward disguise and
mask of holiness? Surely, to omit the great repute which they gained by this
means at a very cheap rate with those of their own opinion and faction, and
those high titles of singularity and spiritual pre-eminence above others in
the world (generally accounted of by them as wicked and reprobate persons,
because not of their society and fellowship) the which they usually received
from their chieftains and leaders as properly belonging to themselves and their
disciples, and those worldly advantages (to say no more) which privately at
least attended on their novell profession: This perchance was not the meanest,
that they might thus check and shame the open profaneness, gross impiety,
irreligion, and sin of their professed adversaries: the which (to speak the
truth) was so eminent oft-times, and notorious in many of them, as might
startle a mere natural conscience to hear or behold it; and cause therein an
abhorrency from their courses (so opposite as well to right reason as to
sanctifying grace) much more in a mind enlightened, though with the smallest
ray of Evangelicall truth. For what could be more strange or hateful unto men,
in whom was any spark remaining either of common Grace, or of moral Virtue;
and who were not wholly possessed with Atheism, and carried on with fullest
bent to Libertinisme and ungodly practice; then to hear those that did profess
themselves to be the followers of Christ, to have communion with him by faith,
and to expect glory from him, scoffing at the purest acts of his worship,
blaspheming or profaning his holy Name by causlesse oaths, fearful
imprecations, direful execrations, and such like speeches, not to be expressed
again without horror and amazement; and not only so, but glorying likewise in
this their abominable wickedness, and in other of like damnable nature,
namely, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4.
in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine and of strong drink, revellings,
wherein they thought it strange, that others ran not with them to the same
excess of riot, speaking evil of them? What Christian eye could behold this,
and not melt with sorrow and indignation against it? What pious heart can think
thereon, and not both detest it, and sigh for it?

In the mean time, how much did this their apparent and over daring impudence
in sin commend and grace the seeming Saint-like conversation of their
adversaries? Many of which, notwithstanding all their glorious profession and
show of godliness, were no better then those Scribes and Pharisees, against
whom our blessed Savior cloth denouounce so many curses for their inward
hypocrasie and iniquity veiled with the specious dress of outward sanctity,
Mat. 23. see especially verse. 27, 28. and Luke 11. where see verse. 39, 44. And
this was sufficiently attested by their spiritual pride, high disdain and
contempt of others never so little differing from them in judgment or in
practice, by their spirit of contradiction, and rebellion against the present
power, whether secular or spiritual; unnatural affection, injustice, and
falsehood in common commerce by their rigor and cruelty shown upon all
occasions to the diffenting Brethren: In a word, by their want of mercy and
barrenness of good works toward the indigent and needy; not to mention the
envy, emulation, strife, and division, with the corrupt fruits and effects
which proceed from these, very rife and ordinary amongst themselves. As for
some who gave them the right hands of fellowship, we cannot without manifest
breach of charity, judge of them otherwise then that they were simple,
harmless, and well meaning men, who being offended (and not without cause) at
the corruption of the times, and scandalous lives of many in the sacred office
of the Ministry, and deluded by the fair speeches, good words, smooth carriage,
plausible pretenses of religious aims and ends, (not warrantable only, but
necessary also) of those who made it their business to cause divisions and
offenses between thy children, were drawn first into a dislike of thy policy,
and afterward to a separation from thee, if not in appearance, yet in heart,
though at last in both, when it was more safe and advantageous then before. And
indeed their strict conformity in other respects to the precepts of the Gospel
with their constancy in suffering for the defense of their cause, did argue as
much to moderate men, and not possessed with prejudicate hatred of their
opinions and persons; for such as these could never be induced to entertain a
good conceit of them, no not in the least measure: but contrariwise judged
their best actions to be counterfeit and false, and thought their greatest
sufferings to proceed from pride and contumacy of spirit, rather then from
blind ignorance of the truth, or from error of conscience: Now as it comes to
pass between those who extremely hate one the other, that they endeavor as
much as in them lies, to be unlike each the other in their manner of life,
outward behavior, garb, and fashion, and every thing for the most part which
is pleasing to the one is displeasing to the other, and oft-times for this
reason only, because his adversary takes delight therein: so it fared in this
case; for what the one party did approve and allow of in their practice, the
other would dislike and condemn upon this weak and causlesse ground; and in
like manner perchance as readily receive and embrace what the other did refuse
and reject, for the same reason, or indeed rather want of reason: For what can
be more irrational, yea senseless and absurd, then for men to esteem or
vilify, love or hate any thing, not according to the worth or unworthiness
thereof, not as it may be useful or hurtful in its own nature to them, but in
opposition to others, without due discretion or judgment had of the matter in
question, or thing, what and how it is or may be in it self, to account it vile
because they have a good opinion or honorable conceit thereof, and for no
other reason to detest and loath it, then for that their enemies fancy or bear
a liking to it? First loving or hating it, and afterward searching out (if
possible) rational motives and arguments, to give a just account of either to
the world. And yet such was the condition of these bitter and eager
adversaries, as may appear by the following instances.

For to begin with the received set form of Prayer and Liturgy (once generally
used in the Assemblies of thy people for the worship and service of their
Maker, though since become through the subtle malice of Satan the main bait of
their furious and lasting contentions) what could have been more profitably
devised for the instruction of the ignorant then this? What more conducing to
order and peace then it in a settled Church? What more inoffensive and harmless
then the rites and ceremonies thereof? What less obnoxious to any just
exception of superstition, error, impertinency, or absurdity? And yet
notwithstanding, the grosser ignorance of the vulgar people is solely or
chiefly imputed unto it by the opposite party, together with the general
profaneness of life, and mere external formality in the acts of piety and
devotion every where conspicuous in the nation. And it has been thought by
some a sufficient ground not of separation only from the unity of thy body; but
of war also between thy members, even unto rapine, spoil, conflagration, and
blood; at least a fair pretense for these and like courses not inferior to
them. Besides this, it is too well known what large accusations have been
brought against it by many, of Idolatry, will worship, contradiction,
tautologie, indecency, inadvertency, redundancy in some, deficiency in other
parts thereof, and what not, which might in any respec: detract from the worth
thereof, or make it contemptible and odious with the people? To omit the taunts
and reproaches, which were usually cast upon the orders and ceremonies thereof,
and the great indignities offered to the persons of them, who according to
their conscience, office, and duty, maintained it by their preaching and
practice. All which being taken into the consideration of prudent, moderate and
peaceable men, were judged by them to be nothing else then the fruits of giddy
passion, or of distemper in judgment and in zeal. And indeed he that shall but
indifferently weigh and examine the reasons and exceptions, which the
dissenting and separating brethren allege against the use of the English
Liturgy, will find them for the most part so invalid and weak, that one strong
argument may be drawn from hence to prove it lawful, because whatsoever has
been hitherto brought by way of reproof to evince the unlawfulness thereof,
has had in it no greater strength of reason and demonstration, very requisite
in a cause so important as this, and in a charge so furious as was made against
it. But however reason and truth were wanting to their cause, the opinion and
confidence of both resting on their side, was so deeply rooted in them, that I
verily believe it would be an hard matter to find any sect either modern or
ancient, who have more obstinately adhered to their principles, or more
vehemently prosecuted their designs then they. As if they had been acted with
a spirit of infallibility, and carried on thereby in these proceedings, when
that of error, contrariety, and spleen against the adverse party, seems to
have been their chief, if not only guide, wherefore they oppose themselves with
might and main against the established order of prayer and diseipline; and to
disgrace and depresse the former, they highly commend, and above measure
extol, and likewise use upon all occasions unpremeditate, or (as some term it)
conceived prayer: (A very forcible engine raised by them against
Church-conformity, and in all likelihood that which has more upheld,
strengthened, and increased their faction then any one means whatsoever)
honoring it with the glorious title of praying by the Spirit, and that by way
of propriety, in opposition to praying with any set form of words composed
beforehand, or framed to our ordinary use. As if the Spirit of God did
immediately suggest unto their minds both the matter and form, sense and words
of these their supplications, but was not assistant to the other, or the other
inconsistent with the grace and help thereof: whereas upon due search into the
Scriptures concerning this point, we shall find this pretended praying by the
Spirit, not to be so much as mentioned therein: and for this cause at the best
but warrantable and lawful for us by the general rule of indifferent things,
the which are left to the judgment of Christian prudence to be done or omitted
by us, as we shall see it most convenient for our selves or for other men, not
of necessary use (as many of them suppose and maintain) seeing that they cannot
produce any express or implicit command for the same out of the written word
of God. For although mention be made there of prayer and supplication in the
Spirit: Ephesians. 6.18.
yet it canbe proved either by that which precedeth, or by that which follows
in the Text, that the Apostle does mean by this form of speech, the same kind
of praying which they so much magnify and contend for. But rather he
understands by prayer in the Spirit, that in which the hearty affection is
joined with the mouths expression, and the desire of the soul is answerable to
the positure and devotion of the body (see Romans 1.9.) or that assistance of the
Spirit whereof he speaks Romans 8.26, 27. Otherwise the Apostle in this place,
and by these words does show what it is to pray always, namely, not to be
continually muttering prayers with our lips, (as some have vainly imagined) but
to be in a perpetual disposition of the heart toward this holy exercise, yea,
and to be assiduous and constant in desire of those things which we want,
without slothful intermission or faith less fainting in case we do not
perceive a sudden grant of our requests; Luke 18.1.
either of which is far different from the former, as appears at the very
first sight thereof: And yet how great advantage have they gotten upon their
adversaries by their facility of utterance and volubility of speech in prayer
without thought (as they profess) and premeditation in the least measure of
what they were to say? Many of which, though learned and eloquent men, either
because they were ill affected to this practice, or for that they did not
exercise their gifts and parts this way, being unwilling, or unable to match
them at this weapon, which they had been taught to handle and wield as they
listed from their tender years; were scorned of them, and traduced to the
ignorant sort as mere natural men, not having the Spirit of God; whereof they
did pretend this to be a sure note and character. Although indeed if we offer
up our prayers unto God from a pure heart with steadfastness of faith and
f^rvency of affection, it matters not, whether we do it in a set form, or by
sudden ejaculation: Provided that we ask things agreeable to the mind and
will of God, entertain no thought in our selves, that the one is better then
the other absolutely considered, or more acceptable in it self with him,
approach with reverence both of body and of soul to the throne of Grace, and
utter words beseeming the Majesty and holiness of him, with whom we have to
do.

And now I shall only take a view of one exception which has been frequently
alleged in my hearing, against the received form of Church prayer (knowing how
much has already been said, and that effectually in defense thereof by men
eminent for learning and piety) and so conclude this point. And it is the very
same which I have formerly mentioned: namely, that by the use of this service
men were generally nursed and brought up in gross ignorance, profaneness, and
formality of Religion. The which exception if it were just or true, who could
doubt, but that the Liturgy was to be exploded out of the congregation as
impious in it self, and therefore unlawful to be used at any hand? But that it
is altogether groundless and false, might be made manifest by several
arguments proving the contrary; one shall suffice for the present, which is
taken from the substance or matter contained therein. For this being either
some part or portion of the word of God, faithfully interpreted according to
the Analogy of Faith and mind of the holy Ghost in all things which concern
our salvation, or what may be deduced from it by rational consequence, or that
which does no way contradict and thwart the precepts thereof, how can it
possibly be a cause or means of ignorance and profaneness to the which it is
so opposite, unless light may produce darkness, heat cold, and good evil?
How then came it to pass that very many who had the continual use and benefit
of this form, were so grossly ignorant of the mysteries of godliness, so
dissolute in their life and so formal in their profession, as they were
throughout this whole nation? Surely not because this was a covert to their
eyes that they could not see the light, or a fly postern gate, opening a way
privily unto sin, or licentiousness (as they falsely do imagine) but from the
corruption of men's hearts, Joh. 3.19.
whereby it is that they love darkness rather then light beeduse their deeds
are evil; and content themselves with a mere show, or slight touch at the
furthest of Religion, as being most agreeable with flesh and blood by reason of
the lightness and easiness which is therein, and the liberty it does indulge
unto those lusts which are most common and predominant in humane nature;
whereas the sincere and practical profession of Christianity does confine and
restrain our unbridled affections, locks up our wandering desires, and ties the
knot hard upon our loose pleasures and delights, obliging us to abstinence and
austerity of life, and therefore does it generally distaste with men, and
universally with all whose hearts are not seasoned with true sanctifying grace,
or (as the Apostle speaks, Heb. Heb. 13.9.
13.9.) established therewith.

Besides it is too well known how little care has been taken by those who had
the oversight of the people to inform them concerning the use and end of their
public devotions, and of those circumstantiall rites pertaining to the same,
or make them understand the sense and signification of those things which were
so often inculcated into their ears by others, or which themselves uttered with
their lips: yea not a few of their teachers were so forsaken of knowledge, and
destitute of exemplary holiness, (notwithstanding their place and function did
require eminency of both) that either they were unable to instruct their charge
aright, or what they taught them carried no weight of reverence or authority
with it, but rather was the less esteemed of by the people for their sakes who
did commend the same unto them, being witnesses of their levity and sin, and of
their continual practice far disserent from their own profession and
doctrine. And yet such was the force of custom with many, joined with
ignorance and indiscretion of the nature of things, that they verily thought
every parcel of the Common Prayer Book, and every ceremony prescribed thereby,
to be of no less then divine institution, and that a slight perfunctory use of
its forms in praying with the other rules and directions of external worship
observed by them, was sufficient to bring them unto heaven without any more
ado.

To this we may add the remiss and slack hand of Ecclesiastical discipline
as another main cause of the general ignorance and profaneness of these
times, which reached no farther for the most part to the inferior Clergy (how
peccant soever otherwise) in the exercise thereof, then in point of
disconformity to Episcopal orders, Provincial or Synodicall constitutions,
touching external government: neither did it call the people to a due account
(if any) of their proficiency in the knowledge of Christ Jesus, or censure them
for non-proficiency therein, yea scarcely for gross and scandalous crimes, if
they were persons known to be well affected toward the present government,
though upon the weakest perchance and worst grounds which can be imagined;
namely, the defects and failings of those who did administer the same.

In like manner the sleeping or not executing of necessary penal statutes upon
offenders against the Law of God, has been a chief cause of open profaneness
in the land: for had these been impartially executed upon every convicted
transgressor, after some care taken to find them out, I am persuaded by this
time we should not have seen many drunkards, or heard many swearers throughout
this whole populous Hand. And indeed I can speak it upon my own knowledge, that
a town of good note in the Western parts of the the Land not far distant from
the Sea, heretofore famed for all manner of riot and disorder, by this course
of late years has been reduced to that order and discipline, that it is a rare
matter to see a man there at any time distempered with wine or with strong
drink, or to hear a rash oath proceed from any man's mouth, no not when there is
most frequent concourse of people thither from all the neighboring parts: so
careful are men to keep the Law, where (as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 2.2.)
Heb. 2.2.
every transgression and disobedience receives a just recompense of reward. So
easy a matter is it for Ministers and Officers, mutually conspiring together
in the same work, to reform a city or town as they list, and proportionably a
whole nation under the chief Magistrate, if he interpose not against it.
Therefore it is reported of Queen Elizabeth, that in her progress visiting the
county of Suffolk, and seeing every Justice of Peace with a Minister next to
his body, said, she had oftentimes demanded of her Council, why her County of
Suffolk was better governed then any other County, but never understood the
reason thereof till now: It must needs be so (said she) where the Word and the
Sword go together. But what may we expect when both these comply not, or jarre
one with another? wherefore had this one course alone been taken for the
suppressing of common and odious sins, there needed not to have been so loud a
cry for a reformation in the midst of thy people; nor so much of thy childrens
blood shed like water round about thy cities, and within the gates, and also on
the furrows of the field, in prosecution of this specious design, which can
hardly be compassed, if at all in any wise, by means so unproportionate as
these to the end for which they are appointed by those who would be master
builders in this work.

Lastly, the great and common neglect of teaching the younger sort, and
educating them in a Catecheticall way of doctrine and instruction, as it
occasioned at first the blind ignorance, open profaneness, and mere formality
in this Nation: so it has still continued and fomented the same unto this
present day. And from hence we shall draw another instance to show the great
force which enmity and opposition do gain in the minds of men to hinder a
mutual consent and joint concurrence together in those ways which tend to
life and godliness. For what could more conduce to the furtherance and
increase of sacred knowledge, to the effectual planting and growth of piety in
the hearts of Christian youth, then this necessary and profitable means of
institution, so much commended by the divine Spirit of God to our imitation and
practice see Genesis 18 19.
? Train up (or chastise) a child in the way he should go, and when he is old
he will not depart from it. Pro. 22 6.
Neither was there wanting the advice of a prudent and learned Prince for the
setting on foot this practice with us, by changing the afternoon Sermons into
this more useful exercise. And yet the Ministers of the opposite party could
never (for ought as I can learn) be induced to entertain a good opinion of it,
at least so far as cordially to embrace the counsel, and submit to the
judgment of their superiors therein, notwithstanding the visible and apparent
benefit thereof, and nothing might be reasonably said against it. And what was
the cause of this? Surely in all probability the ill affection and hatred which
they bore against the Bishops, who did also commend and prefer it to their
inseriour brethren in the Ministry as more needful and profitable for the
people then their claborate and painful preaching (so much magnified by their
Disciples above other Ordinances, and who could not be pleased without a double
portion thereof every Lords day) although (as some object against them) with
too great limitation and restraint, but however, better thus, then not at all.
For (as a chief Ruler well observed of thy children) the omission of this
sundamentall way of instruction, and the custom of notionall teaching (in
which was more plenty of words then of matter) have given occasion to the
Apostasy or falling back of so many from thy Communion, some to Popish
superstition, others to Monasterian confusion, while after many years
groundless and therefore unprofitable institution, they were like rasae
tabulae, or unsealed wax, apt to receive any impression or form of doctrine
whatsoever. The truth whereof has more then enough been confirmed by the
experience of succeeding time: in which we meet every where with aged Infants,
I mean such, who when for the time ought to be teachers, Heb. 5.12.
have need that one teach them again, which be the first principles of the
Oracles of God, and are become such, as have need of milk, and not of strong
meat; who notwithstanding have been constant hearers of Sermons for diverse
years together, some twenty, others forty, and some perchance more, that we may
justly admire and be even astonished at their dullness and stupidity in
learning. Do we not consider how unsuitable this kind of teaching is with the
minds of the rude and unprincipled multitude to make them skillful in the word
of righteousness, it being all one in effect, as if a man should seek to raise
a frame of building where no foundation is laid before, or to nourish an infant
with strong meat in stead of milk which is proper for him, because unable to
bear the other, 1 Cor. 3.2. Heb. 5.14.
as belonging to them that are of full age, even those who by reason of use,
have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil? Wherefore in them
also is fulfilled the Prophecy of Isaiah, which says, By hearing ye shall
hear, Mat. 13.14.
and shall not understand: and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive. For
this cause so many of the Nation at present being children in understanding,
Ephesians. 4.14.
are tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine by the
sleight of men and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive,
fixing on nothing long through the weakness of their judgment to discern what
they hear, and want of reason to maintain what they embrace as truth; although
upon trial we have found some of their deceivers or false teachers like those
2 Pet. 2 Pet. 3.16.
3.16. Unlearned and unstable themselves while they boldly took upon them to
instruct and guide others, wresting the Scriptures both to the destruction of
their Disciples, and of themselves; or like them, of whom the Apostle S. Paul
speaks, 1 Timothy 1.7. 1 Timothy 1.7
Desiring to be teachers of the Gospel (as they then did to be teachers of the
Law) and yet understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. But
indeed their pretense of an immediate calling from God by the motion of his
Spirit to the work of the Ministry, and gathering of Churches here on earth
like that in heaven glorious, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing;
but holy and without blemish; Ephesians 5.27.
together with their strange outward considence and presumptuous ostentation of
themselves in a business of this high nature, far exceeding the measure of
their inward parts or gifts of mind, easily begat in the weaker sighted and
unsettled brethren an answerable opinion or erroncous belief of them, that they
were such in truth as they were in show, or professed themselves to be, who
therefore received them as Angels of God, Gal. 4.14.
even as Christ Jesus: When as they were indeed no other then false Apostles, 2
Cor. 11.13.
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ.
Wherefore many pious and learned Ministers do no doubt, though happily too
late, see their failing in omitting the necessary and beneficial exercise of
catechizing their younger people, and do bewail it in the daily defection which
is made from them to these novell seducers.

But what help and remedy can be found to cure the present, or prevent the
future growth of this almost general contagion? For although some have
attempted now at length to put the same in practice for this very end and
purpose: yet they could not bring it to pass according to their desire, partly
through the pride and arrogance of some, much slighting (and yet as much
wanting) this inferior kind of instruction; partly through the bashfulnesse
and shame of others, conscious to themselves of more ignorance then did become
their riper age, or Christian education; and partly through that laxe and
boundless liberty which these times allow to all men in point of duty and
conscience, whereby every one does gratify his own will and humor in
Religion, holding that in opinion which seems to him best, and doing that in
order hereunto which likes him most; in the mean time rejecting the counsel
and direction of those who were over them in the Lord, and both able and
willing to afford them spiritual help for the furtherance of their faith and
salvation of their souls.

A third instance I shall take from the Anniversary fast of Lent, and other
weekly fasts or days of abstinence from flesh: the original of which I shall
not now dispute, because it has been already sufficiently done by many, the
use I shall briefly examine, yet not the civil (which is manifold perchance,
and much concerning the public good of humane society) but that which is
religious or tending thereunto, and this no farther then may serve my present
purpose, knowing how far men much more learned then my self, and thoroughly
acquainted with this way have traveled therein. The use then of these fasts in
order to devotion, is the chastening of the flesh, or as the Apostle expresses
it, 1 Cor. 9.27.
1 Cor. 9.27. Keeping under the body, and bringing it into subjection, namely,
to the Law of the Spirit, by sobriety and abstinence, as appears from verse.
25. See also 2 Cor. 11.27. verse. 25.
Now that this discipline and exercise of the body is very profitable for the
subduing and mastering of those corrupt lusts, and inordinate motions of
concupiscence which do evermore accompany the pampering of our flesh and
fullness thereof, experience as well as Scripture does manifest unto us. For
where do we find more lasciviousness, wantonness, and uncleanness of
desire: where do we see more levity, and loosnesse of behavior, then in great
houses abounding with wealth and plenty of all things? where there is idleness
and fullness of bread, riotous eating of flesh and drinking of wine, tables
continually overspread with costly dishes, and superfluous varieties of meat,
the choicest dainties which sea or land can afford at the several seasons of
the year, these ministering fuel unto the fire, and as it were oil unto the
flame of sinful lust and indisposing the soul to spiritual watchfulness and
sobriety, as appears from Luke 21.34 On the contrary, they who feed
sparingly, and drink moderately, and in stead of gross diet use that which is
slender, and less cherishes the body, especially at certain seasons, and
sometimes impose upon themselves the harder task of abstinence from meat, or
sasting, are in no wise subject as the former to the desires and motions of
evil coneupiscence, and experimentally find in themselves a better
disposition both of body and of mind to the worship and service of their
Maker. And however we can in no respect commend, or approve of the Fasts of the
Romish Church, as being too short for the time, and serving rather to sharpen
and prepare the appetite for the delicacies of a Feast, then to bridle and
chastise it: for as much as after a slight forbearance of meat, they proceed to
the dainties of a luxurious banquet: (and therefore as I am informed, the
Germane nobility heretofore thought no time more convenient for to visit their
Bishops, then their Fasting days, as affording them better entertainment then
ordinary) yet those Fasts wherein we truly and unfeignedly afflict our souls
before the Lord, are very commendable and useful exercises of piety and
devotion. But notwithstanding thus much and much more may be said in the
defense and commendation of regular and well ordered Fasts, (in which
hypocrisy is not added to superstition, as in the Romish practice, and an
absolute necessity of observation with opinion of merit affixed to them, as in
their doctrine) and in like manner of set times appointed for this use: the
Antiepiscopall party could never be brought to conceit well of Church Fasting
days, much less to have them in esteem, or to keep them as the rest of their
brethren did. But expressed an utter dislike of them upon all occasions, where
they might utter their thoughts with safety; and so far were they from
observing them according to order, that many of them at least would take these
days to choose, for the eating of flesh and for more then usual feeding, in
opposition, no doubt, to the Bishops and their party, who were sometimes very
hot and zealous in pressing the strict observation of the same on the inferior
and middle sort of people; some whereof, and those not a few, had them in the
greater esteem for this reason, because the other did vilify and despise them,
yea therefore ascribed a kind of moral holiness to mere bodily abstinence
from meat without any addition of inward spiritual devotion to it: an opinion
of very dangerous consequence, though unperceived of those with whom it rests.

A fourth instance we shall borrow from the custom of genuflexion or bowing of
the knee to God, in our common supplications and prayers; the which though in
times past observed with awful diligence of those who came into the
Congregation, and of necessary use still in our devotions, when no just cause
does discharge us from it, whereby we may excuse our omission thereof, as being
commended by by God himself, and commanded unto us, by the exemplary practice
of his Saints in all ages, yea, and of Jesus Christ himself, when he lived on
the earth, see Psalm. 95.6, Ps. 95.6, 7.
with 7. (where the reason or argument alleged for the action, is worth our
serious consideration) and Mat. 26.29. Mat. 26.39. Luke 22.41.
with Luke 22.41. has been for a long time intermitted as needless and
superfluous by many of the Antiprelaticall brethren, who can produce no thing
of weight, or which has in it the least show of Scripture ground for it, but
have been led herein as in other things by their own will, or rather
wilfulness in opposition to their adversaries. And whereas men generally used
at their first entrance into the Church to address themselves by private
prayer to the Almighty for preparedness, no doubt, and assistance from him in
his public service, witnessing the inward devotion of their souls by this
humble positure of their bodies: now for the most part they rush into the
Assembly with less reverence then they usually do into the houses of their
familiar friends, at least of those who are in any degree superior to them;
and what is yet more strange, they deride and scoff at others who approach
with religious manners, to the solemn performance of divine worship, and
against common sense would be thought and pretend themselves to be greater
Saints by far then the other in the presence of God, because more irreverent in
their behavior then they at the same time in the sight of men, as if the
religious demeanure of the body on this occasion, were repugnant to the holy
disposition of the mind, and not rather subservient to it, and expressive
thereof; or as though we could not honor the Lord with the former without
superstition in the latter. And however we have great cause to fear it of many,
and they boldly charge as much upon their adverfaries account, that they did
chiefly, if not wholly, place the worship of God in this exterior or bodily
exercise of religion, and therefore think they have sufficient cause to omit or
reject the use thereof: yet this does no more free them from this tie of
outward service, then a greater obligation does exempt us from the performance
of a less, according to that of our blessed Savior in another case, Mat.
23.23.
These things ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. Each
duty claiming from us its due estimation, and our obedience necessary to both,
without preferring the less to the greater, or in honor to the greater,
despising, or laying aside the less. For no commandment of God may be slighted
by us in any case, how small soever; neither may we count the least unworthy of
our observation; see Mat. 5.19. Now as we do plainly perceive from what has
been already said, the causlesse prejudice of this active and violent party
against those who differ from them in judgment and practice concerning the
holy things aforementioned: so we may take notice withal of the high conceit
which they entertain of themselves in relation to the public service of God,
appearing by their forbearing to invocate his name for his grace and assistance
in this weighty business after the received manner in the congregation, and
neglecting those external actions and gestures of the body, whereby alone they
can testify unto men the internal reverence and humility of the soul, as
though they were in a continual preparedness or readiness for the acts of
divine worship, or needed not the same with other men, at least not those means
commonly used by them for this end and purpose, as being improper for men of
their stamp and unbeseeming such as themselves were, who had attained to a
greater measure both of knowledge and of sanctity then the rest of their
brethren, or those whom they accounted of no better then of mere natural and
carnal men. For this cause their Ministers would not (as the custom formerly
had been, and was still observed by those of the contrary part) privately
implore the help and blessing of the Almighty upon themselves and the work
which they were forthwith to begin immediately before their prayers with the
people premised to their Sermons, but commonly at their first entrance into the
Pulpit, without any signal reverence shown either to God, whom they did
represent in that place, or to the Auditory whose care and burden lay upon
their conscience, or sense of the great difficulty and labor of their
employment, sat them down until the Psalm was finished: whereby no doubt as
well as by other omissions of like nature they gave no small occasion to the
people of thinking less honorably both of their persons and of their calling,
then they did in former time, and opened a wide gap to that irreverence and
profaneness which are now every where visible in our Church assemblies.

To this instance I shall add another of like nature from the uncovering of
the head in the congregation at the time of public devotion, and custom not
decent only and reverent in it self even by the light of nature, and well
beseeming the Majesty of God, but warranted also and enjoined by his word, as
appears from 1 Cor. 11. verse. 4. with 7. And how the contrary practice of thy
neighboring sisters may be reconciled with this precept, I am as yet to learn.
As for thine own children, they even glory in their shame, when not as masters,
but as scholars; not as teachers, but as Disciples, they sit covered at their
most solemn holy meetings, without difference of place, degree, age, season, or
of any personal relation whatsoever, as if they might securely and lawfully
slight their superiors in this place, because they give not God his due honor
here, or withdraw that respect from them in the Church, which they yield unto
them every where besides: although we have known some, and those not a few, who
have presumed to sit covered in the presence of God at such a time as this; but
when a great person has come into the Assembly, have honored him with the
uncovering of the head, as though civil respect toward a mortal Prince, were
to be expressed by more evident signs of submission from the outward man, then
religious worship toward the immortal God. Surely it may well amaze an
indifferent person, to consider that the youth who always stands bare in the
shop, as well in his masters absence as presence, and that in token of
subjection, and service, which by virtue of his covenant he owes to his
master, should nevertheless stand and sit covered not only in presence, but
also in conference with his grand Master, or Masters Master which is in heaven?
And is not the case thus here, when the Minister prays or praises God in the
words of the Psalmist, as he frequently does? At which time every one almost is
veiled, who notwithstanding, presently condemn themselves in this very thing
which they allow, forasmuch as they all uncover the head when the same Psalms
are sung by them only changed into Meeter, and that perchance for the worse,
certain it is not for the better, as if the tone or tune could afford just
cause of this variety and difference in respect of outward carriage, and
reverence toward God, or the same attention of the mind, affection and
devotion of the heart, were not due from us to the Lords Word, when the
Minister reads it in our ears, as when we our selves utter it with our lips;
and yet the most precise seem to scruple at the one, but startle not at all at
the other, however the same reason appears for both. Wherefore we cannot
imagine less, then that this covering of the head in the congregation, where
infirmity or sickness does not plead for it, tends to the dishonor of Jesus
Christ, whose servants we profess our selves to be, especially at this time,
and to the contempt of his messenger representing the Office and Person of
Christ before our eyes; surely, this is not to call the holy of the Lord
honorable, as we find it Isa. 58.13. Isa. 58.13.
but to make him a reproach.

A sixth instance we shall take from the Lords day, by some called the Sabbath,
with a good meaning perchance, but not without impropriety of speech, because
not known by this name, either in the primitive times, or in the ages
immediately following, for ought as I can learn; but I shall not contend about
words. That which is observable of the day to our present purpose, is the
different esteem and observation thereof with the two adverse parties, the one
ascribing too much, the other too little unto the same, the one keeping it with
almost Jewish rigor and extremity, the other after a loose and formal manner
at the best; (to omit their unchristian profanation thereof upon several
occasions) and each walking contrary to other in their practice from the spirit
of oppofition, as well as from other principles. For although it be no easy
matter to assure our selves, much less to convince others, that this day is of
divine institution, as the sabbath was among the Jews, and we should be loath
with many to give the strict outward observation of the time pre-eminence above
all other moral duties and acts of Religion, (in which respect as I remember
some have thought a slender trespass or offense thereon worthy to be expiated
by the death of the offender) yet it cannot be doubted again, but that there is
a necessity of separating or setting apart such a day as this, for the honor
and public worship of God, as well in regard of humane wickedness as
weakness; and of their pronenesse to superstition and Atheism, as well as of
their worldly business and employment; the which they would never intermit of
themselves, without the restraint laid upon them, or else wholly bestow the
remaining time upon the service of their own lusts and sinful pleasures.
Wherefore they cannot be excused, who in times past loosed the reins of
discipline to the people yet more (when God knows they were too remiss
already) and permitted them free liberty to spend a part, and that not the
least, of this day in vain sports and pastimes, scarce beseeming a brideale or
marriage feast, much less such a season as this: of which abuse, a Divine of
the Northern parts sent thither by the King to preach the Gospel there, does
greatly, but justly complain in an Epistle to the Bishop of Chester, as that
which did exceedingly hinder the courses of Religion, and frustrate the fruits
of their Ministerial labors; and withal observes, that they who did most
abet and maintain public piping and lascivious dancing on the Lords day, were
the open and professed enemies of our Religion. Of so bad consequence are these
merry sundaies (as a profane person once affectionately called them, saying,
that it was a good time when they did enjoy the former liberty; but for whom, I
cannot tell, except it were for him who is the author of all evil) in which we
sow unto the flesh, and not unto the Spirit; serve our own lusts, and not the
Lords will. Wherefore it is needful that this first day of the week be in due
manner observed by us in all places, especially considering that from the
Apostles time hitherto it has been consecrated by the Church of Christ to this
holy use.

A seventh instance we shall borrow from the Lords Proyer, the which we must
acknowledge for the true and perpetual pattern of our supplications unto the
worlds end. And yet how much has it been of late decryed and vilified by some
not as needless only, but as hurtful also? Who have therefore rejected the
use thereof in public Assemblies, and derided those who took pleasure therein,
and others have laid it aside for fear of displeasing the powerful party,
however they still approve it in their judgment, and have done by their
practice heretofore. Many pretend for the disuse thereof, that the people did
idolize it, and impute a kind of holiness to the bare saying or repeating of
the same: the which, supposing it to be true, can in no wise warrant their
omission of this form, if it be good, much less their preaching or speaking
against it; for if we may condemn every thing as bad in it self, or noxious to
us, because it may or does occasionally prove so through our perverse use or
abuse thereof, what can escape our censure, be the thing never so good? yea
shall we not then very often call evil good, Isai, 5.20.
and good evil, put darkness for light, and light for darkness, bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter? The patience of God we know is abused daily, and
his grace turned into wantonness by wicked and ungodly persons, and yet it
were the height of impiety to think the worse of either for this reason, the
fault solely resting upon man. In like manner every creature of God, which (as
the Apostle witnesses, 1 Timothy 4.4.) is good, 2 Timothy 4.4.
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, is made
subject to our vanity and corruption, and become the idol of our pleasurable,
or of our profitable lusts. How much better were it therefore for the Ministers
in this case to show the people their error or failing in the use of that which
is good, then to possess them with a false opinion and wrong conceit of the
thing it self as evil, and to be avoided of them, the which they use not
dexterously, and as they should. But such is, and ever will be the force of
faction and schism in the heart; of men to make them opposite one to another
in judgment and in practice, without and against all reason whatsoever. The
which also we may further discover in the length and brevity of their prayers,
in the manner and matter of their praying, in the affected difference of tone
and voice, of words or forms of expression, of gesture and behavior in the
acts of solemn worship, and such like, with easy observation.

And so far has their malice proceeded one against another, that neither of
them would by any means admit so much as praying for the adverse party, though
expressly commanded by the precepts of the Gospel, but openly cursed each the
other as desperate enemies of God and of his cause.

And now I shall crave leave to address my words unto thy sons, according to
their several orders and degrees, entreating them all to bear with the rude
plainness of my counsel, and not to be offended at the liberty of my reproof,
being free from malice and bitterness of spirit, from partiality, from guile
and hypocrisy. And first I shall direct my speech to those who were the chief
Rulers of thy people, and acknowledged by many for the same unto this present
day. The time was when no man durst mutter against you, much less reprove you
openly for what you did amiss, the height of your honor, the intimacy of
grace and favor ye had with the Prince and (that which does for the most part
ever accompany so great felicity) an answerable opinion of your own virtue and
worth, would by no means admit of this boldness and presumption in inferior
persons, how well meaning soever, and devoted to the service of your power and
place in the Church of Christ. As for others, there was cause enough perchance,
why ye might except against their reproof, as proceeding from pride, faction,
hatred, or contempt of your persons, and government; tending to the reproach of
your authority and exercise thereof, or directly intended to defame and make
odious both your selves and administration with the people. And as it was no
small crime in these men to kick against your authority, when it was at the
highest pitch: so it would be no less, if not greater in any to spurn at it
now, when it is at the lowest ebb, much more to trample upon it lying as it
were in the dust. For what could savor more of inhumanity and cruelty, then
thus to deal with a professed enemy? Wherefore, far be it from me to insult
upon your fallen dignity, or to use this freedom toward you with any private
sinister respect unto my self. All that I aim at, God knows, is this, with
filial reverence and love to admonish you of what you seemed formerly to be
ignorant, at least not observant according to your Fatherly duty, and for which
we ought now to be humbled, that God may be glorified. And indeed how happy had
it been for your selves, and likewise for the flock of Christ committed to your
charge, if ye had in times past duly laid these things to heart, which I shall
at this present offer to your view, not from any confidence of reason and
knowledge in my self, more then in you, or in any measure equal unto that
which remains with you, but from an assurance that ye were then blinded with
worldly interest, and therefore could not so clearly see, as was needful, your
many failings: or may at this day, since the hand of the Lord has been very
heavy upon you to chasten and try you, and (as we hope) not only for your own
private instruction and benefit, but for the common good of his whole Church
and people also in time to come, who wait with patience upon him who has
promised that all things shall work together for good to them that love him, to
them that are called according to his purpose. And now with what depth of
sorrow ought we to recount your past errors, partly through neglect of duty,
partly through abuse of power? God the wise disposer of all things in the
world, was pleased to set you as so many greater Luminaries in the firmament of
his Church, there to shine forth by the rays of pure Evangelicall doctrine,
and by the glorious example of holiness for the illumination and direction of
his people; you he appointed as grand Instructors and Teachers in the School
of Christ Jesus to inform his Disciples concerning his Law and will, to reform
them (when need did so require) by the rod of his discipline. But were ye
faithful in your trust? did ye diligently instruct the ignorant? severely
punish the disobedient? endeavor to reclaim those who walked disorderly, and
contrary to the Gospel? Did ye reprove all indifferently? censure all
impartially? not respecting or considering the persons, but the crimes of men
delinquent? That ye were violently bent against faction and schism, against
singularity and nonconformity; all confess, a few excepted, who thought
nothing too much, yea nothing enough in this kind, how opposite soever to
Christian mildness, prudence or conscience: But in the mean while by reason
of your connivence, or supinenesse in the Episcopal office, ignorance, and
superstition, every where misled the people; and caused them to wander in
darkness, not knowing whither they went: Profaneness like a rank pernicious
weed overspread the field, and vineyard of the Lord; and as it fares with
plants of different nature and quality growing in the same soil, which
oftentimes thrive the better one for another, because the one sucketh that
moisture and nourishment from the earth, which are improper for, or perchance
destructive to the other: so it came to pass here; for the profane and vicious
lives of those who stood up in defense of your government, occasionally gave
increase and added strength to the opposite factious party, who alleged this
as one main ground of their separation from the church, that those who adhered
to it were for the most part unworthy to have communion with any orderly well
governed Congregation of Believers, because of their loose and scandalous
manner of living, the which for that they could not redress, they did pretend
at least they were bound thus to shun and avoid, as hateful to God and to good
men. Wherefore ye did not carefully separate between the precious and the vile,
but consulting with flesh and blood what ye were to do in this case, thought
in humane policy, to break the power of one party, by strengthening the hands
of the other, or not binding and restraining them with the cords of
Ecclesiastical Discipline. Thus while you opposed profaneness against schism,
or did let that loose at this, or secretly favored and upheld it in hope to
suppress the later by the former; the one grew too strong by the violence of
opposition for your selves, and both for the Church in order to peace and
holiness.

As for your labor in the work of the Ministry, how little it has been for
many years together, it is even a shame to mention, some of you wholly
exempting themselves from this necessary burden of their calling for ease and
pleasure, others supposing it a task and employment too low and inferior for
them, as men entirely addicted to the government of the Church, and of another
sphere far above the laboring Minister; the rest for the most part slightly
or seldom heaving it with their shoulders, and laying it aside presently, as
that which concerned other men, and not themselves any longer then they listed,
or their superours imposed the same upon them. And thus far it had been, or
perchance might have been pardonable with men, had care been taken by you to
see this work duly performed of the Clergy in your several Dioceses, and
Cities of Residence, or to provide able and sit Pastors for the people
throughout your particular Congregations, or parochial charges within the
limits of your jurisdiction. But alas! there were not wanting of you, who did
not only wink at the wilful neglect of their inferior brethren in this main
point of Ministerial duty, but did countenance and savor such as were most
peccant therein, judging them most averse from faction, who were least
conscious of preaching to the people, and fuirest friends to the present
government, who were loose enough (God knows) in respect both of their office
and also of their conversation: whence it came to pass, that very many who
professed themselves for you in the time of trial, were ignorant and dissolute
men, dishonorable to your party, and Indeed to Christian Religion, the which
they did continually profane by their words and works: so unsuteable is humane
policy with Evangelicall simplicity, and unsuccessefull when it is used at any
time to support and uphold the regiment thereof. And in stead of sending forth
meet Laborers into the Lords harvest, fit Pastors into his flock, you
dismissed those who were idle shepherds, loving to slumber, given to sleep,
altogether like your selves, careless of the Lords heritage, either unwilling
if able, or if willing unable, or neither willing nor able, rightly to divide
the Word of Truth, giving them their portion in due season. As for those to
whom God had given both ability and will to preach the Word, ye permitted them
not the free use and exercise of their gifts: but forbade them to teach the
people as often as they saw it convenient or necessary for their edification;
and though ye did at first commend unto them the way of catechizing the
younger sort, as best beseeming their want of years and experience in the word
of righteousness, allowing them some liberty and latitude herein: yet
afterward (I know not upon what grounds, or for what reason) ye so far limited
and restrained the Minister in this pious and profitable practice, that ye did
in a manner take away the key of Knowledge from the people, Luke (...) 52.
or make it useless for them so that they could not enter in thereby.

And herein remarkable is the judgment of the Almighty toward you, in that he
has made some of those unworthy members isntrumental to your downfall, whom
contrary to reason and conscience ye authorized for a work to which God never
called them, promoted to that honor, of which they were incapable, either for
your own gain, or to gratify your Officers and domestic servants, or your
friends and favorites, or for other ends as bad as these, best known unto your
selves; For who have more raised and maintained a party against you, then such
as these? or have been more subservient to the ringleaders of faction then
they? or more diligently scattered abroad the seeds of schism, and opposition
against government in the Church of Christ, of which they have seen plentiful
increase, and have found success of this their labor, if not above their
desire, yet surely beyond their expectation, notwithstanding it be hard to say
whether their indigency of parts, or want of subsistence was the greater, which
no doubt at first made them so pliable as they were to popular will and humor.

But ye will reply, that the Canons of the Church were not strict or straight
enough to debar unworthy persons, especially in point of learning, from the
Office of the Ministry; besides that you admitted none unto the work, but those
who were commended unto you for their sufficiency and ability, in all respects,
for this service by letters Testimonial from the University, or from Ministers
well reputed and reported of in the Diocese from whence they came, or where
they lived, in former time. But who knew not, (and your selves more then any)
how invalid and weak this testimony was, being now reduced to a mere
formality, by the custom and manners of the times, as corrupt in this
particular practice as in any other whatsoever. Again, did ^ye ever apply your
selves to the Supreme Power of the Nation for the rectifying of these Canons,
or at any time sought to reverse or alter them in your solemn Convocations?
Whether ye did thus or no, I cannot well tell, but of this I am assured, that
nothing was reformed afterward in your Ordinations, it being as free, and
indifferent for all who came as ever. And supposing that those testimonies
might probably carry with them some right and credit, were ye therefore to
forbear your own search into the parts and gifts of those men whom they did
commend to your approbation? and not rather to enquire more narrowly into the
Truth, and see how far the commendation did agree with the Person of whom it
was made, or how well it did suit with his learning and life? Considering that
the account hereof was chiefly to rest on you, when the general Day of
reckoning did come before chief Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. 1 Timothy 5.22.


The like excuse some frame for the gross corruptions of your P^erogative
Courts, for commutations, unjust, partial, and unreasonable censures of
excommunication, issuing forth from thence upon offenders, for unlawful (to
say no more) suspension of the meaner and poorer sort from the Ordinances of
Christ Jesus, for non-payment, or rather disability of paying pecuniary mulcts
and fees imposed on them, and without equity exacted of them by your profane
and greedy Officers. They pretend the power of the Chancellor to be distinct
and separate from that of the Bishop in many points of spiritual jurisdiction,
and therefore exempt from it, or uncontrollable by it, however proving illegal
and exorbitant in the proceedings thereof: whether use and custom had thus
determined of the matter or no, I am as yet to seek; but this I take for
certain Truth, that the Chancellors power at the first was in every respect
derived from the Bishop, and afterward wholly depended on his will,
notwithstanding it is otherwise come to pass in following ages by the
negligence or absence of the Bishop from the seat of his Diocese. And in case
they had in process of time, thus incroached upon the Episcopal Sea, it had
been an easy matter for you the Bishops, to have reduced again, and confined
them to their ancient legal bounds upon complaint thereof made unto the Prince,
showing the great necessity and common benefit of such a change, and also in
your Synods, as occasion served, and so have freed the Church from this
iniquity and oppression of men. And surely it may seem strange to any
considerate person, that ye who did so much strain your authority for the
introducing of new ceremonies into the Church of Christ, (savouring of
superstition, and begetting jealousies in men's minds of Popish innovations
intended by you) without prudence or conscience, and used it so rigorously
rously for the enforcing of the old upon many ill-affected to the observation
of them, absolutely requiring conformity to the Church Liturgy in every point
of al men (notwithstanding rebus sie stantibus and profligata Disciplina, some
forms thereof were not applyable to diverse persons) would not extend it to the
utmost measure for the ratifying of those great abuses which had by the
insensible degrees crept in and corrupted the true primitive Discipline, that
every transgressor might have bin censured, according to the desert and scandal
of his crime, without respect had to his person or place in the Commonwealth,
as it is in other reformed Churches of different government from this under
which we live. But Court-employment, State-flattery and sinful complyances with
great Persons, were the main lets, which hindered you from the due discharge of
your Office both in Preaching the Word, and exercising the the Rod of Christ
according to his mind and will, while ye thought in carnal reason such means
as these most effectual for the acquiring and retaining of your greatness,
and despised those which the prudent simplicity of the Gospel did offer and
commend unto you. Wherefore it is no wonder if vice did reign there, where
flattery did abound, and that in the chief Ministers and messengers of Truth,
if injustice and oppression did bear sway, where one and al were taught not
what they should and ought to do according to their duty and conscience
toward God, but what they could or might do by power without control from
man; If men were secure in their sins, where peace was proclaimed, and war to
be denounced against them; where a profane company heard nothing for the most
part decryed in the Pulpit, but faction, from which perchance they were alone
free. And what could be expected from the common people but blind ignorance,
love of pleasures more then of God, greater regard of this world, then of the
world to come, when ye their chief Leaders caused them to err, not only
through your negligence, but also by your example, falling far short of that
integrity and holiness, which was conspicuous in the actions and sufferings of
those, who were not long before you resident in the same places of dignity and
pre-eminence. For although they lived upon earth, they had their conversation
in heaven, and shone as the stars of heaven for brightness, not only in their
life, but in their death also, which was precious in the sight of their
Redeemer. As for you their successors, ye appeared in comparison of them but
dim and earthy lights; and I would to God some of you had not proved false
likewise and deceitful to your brethren, whom ye perverted from the way of
Truth and Peace by your own departing from it, doing quite contrary to what
your selves taught and professed before the people, preaching contempt and
hatred of the world to others, your selves continuing in the mean while fast
friends of the world, exhorting them to become spiritual and as Angels, when
ye were carnal your selves and walked as men, showing them the way to heaven
with hearts and eyes fixed on the earth. For who more immoderate in their ears
for the things of this life then you? who more eager in the pursuit of riches
and honor? more tenacious in withholding good from the owners thereof then
your selves? who were more set upon the usual course of in^iching above
measure, and raising your families on high? If a dignity or office worth the
having, sell within the compass of your Diocese, who was presently judged of you
more worthy to possess and manage it, then a son, or a nephew, or a kinsman,
or an Allye? although they were many times altogether incapable of the honor
and trust to which ye preferred them in the house of God, either because they
wanted ability of parts requisite thereunto, or had not as yet attained to
maturity of years, being not much past their nonage, as we have known some of
them to be, or in all respects undeserving persons. And yet men of age and
experience, eminent also for learning and piety, must stand unveiled before
such as these, to receive directions and commands from them, to whom they were
able and sit to give the same, who through the just judgment of the Almighty
have been since as much and more scorned of the meanest and most abject of
their inferiors, then they did now scorn others, every way their superiors,
but in place only. Now what was this in effect, but to honor your sons above
the Lord, as Eli did; while ye did thus prefer natural affection to spiritual
duty, and the care for a child before the welfare of the Church? Satis vos
vobis attendere and rei vestrae populi vox est, sat is vos strenue ditandis
filiis, dotandis filiabus attendere, tam vero vos hac ex part attentos esse ut
haeredum magna vobis attentio, successorum exigua (and si quae exigua est,
aliqua est) ut prae haeredum attentione, nulla sit successorum. Thus a Prophet
of your own (Lancel. Andr. conc. ad cler.) and in this respect, much more a
Prophet, that he forewarned you so long ago of the present calamity which is
now come upon you in these words. Enim ve o^nisi vos vobis hae part caveatis;
optimae Principis gratia, Proce um favor, Leg^m terror diu vobis eavere non
poter^nt. -- Si doctrina ludibrium est, si vita scandalum, fortasse non momento
uno, non ictu oculi, sed sensim tamen senefcet, evanescet, tendet ad interium
Ordo vester, (...). How far different the Apostles carriage in the work of the
Ministry was from yours (whose successors notwithstanding ye were) let one
speak or themal, and hear ye him. 1 These. 2.3, etc.
Our exhortation was not of deceit, etc. not as pleasing men, etc. For neither
at any time, used we flattering words, etc. nor of men, etc. But we were
gentle, etc. so being affectionately, etc. wherefore God has profaned the
Princes of the sanctuary, (or, holy Princes) and have given Jacob to the curse,
and Israel to reproaches. And what he threatened of old is brought to pass this
day upon you, that they who despise him shall be lightly esteemed. 1 Samuel 2.30.
Hov. 4 6, 7.
And because his people were destroyed for lack of knowledge, ye also rejected
knowledge, the Lord has rejected you, that ye should be no Priests to kim,
seeing ye have forgotten the Law of your God, he also has forgotten your
children. As ye were increased, so ye sinned against him: therefore has he
changed your glory into shame. Job 14.9.
Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he shall know
them? for the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them, but
the transgressors shall fall therein.

To the inferior Ministers of the Gospel.
HOw great in all likelihood had the happiness and glory of the Church been
unto this day, and not the Churches only, but yours also, had ye all spoken
the same thing still as at the first, and that there had been no divisions
amongst you, 1 Cor. 1.10.
but that ye had been perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the
same judgment, according to the Apostolical precept, 1 Cor. 1.10. Mutually
conspiring with one consent to promote the Truth and Peace of the Gospel, by
the purity of doctrine and holiness of example, preferring these to close
worldly interests, and carnal ends of pride, vainglory; strife,
covetousness, and desire of pre-eminence above your brethren, yea what hopes
might we yet conceive of peace and happiness after our hot and bloody
contentions about that which has not been hitherto fully determined what it
is, and the wasting calamities of unnatural war, were there a true affection,
with faithful and univer sall endeavor in you toward the composure of your
own and of popular differences in judgment according to the mind and will of
Christ Jesus? But alas! it is greatly to be feared, the breaches are so wide
that it passes humane industry or skill to make them up again, this being a
work of his wisdom, who knows all things, and of his power, who does all
things, as seems best to his godly will. For that which most hinders this
desired union does still stand in the way; Namely, the unwearied practice of
powerful, subtle, and secret Agents to continue and enlarge your divisions,
even to the utter confusion and desolation of the Church. And would to God your
own disaffection unto peace, error from the Truth, and unequal conversation
in respect of Evangelicall parenesse and perfection, did not too much further
the hellish designs and attempts of these men. For does not the same fire of
distempered zeal still burn in the breasts, and flash sometimes in the mouths
of those who did heretofore set all on a flame? is not your power rather
restrained then your will reformed? and if there be a change, is it not because
of your present condition, not from your inward disposition and affection? Jude
11.
to preserve the fruit of falsehood and the reward of unrighteousness, after
which ye have greedily ran with Balaam, and I pray God ye perish not in the
gainsaying of Core. Can you be so vain as to imagine that the specious
pretenses, and plausible excuses wherewith ye have smoothed the ears of men,
to make way for their good conceit of your bad proceedings, will find like
acceptance with God the searcher of the heart? Surely your turning of things
upside down shall be esteemed in his sight as the potters clay. Is. 29.16. with
15.
Now such as these, as well as others, have risen of your own selves in the
last and worst age of the world, speaking perverse things against the Doctrine,
Discipline, government and Governors of the Church, to draw away Disciples
after them, as it is Act. 20. handling the word of Christ deceitfully; and
forming their Doctrine not according to the impartial rule of Truth, but after
their own fancy, and as it might best suit with the present humor, and passion
of the giddy multitude, preaching, or rather crying up one point of doctrine to
the disparagement of another, Faith to the vilifying of charity and good
works, of repentance and mortification, as though there was no necessity of
these in order to salvation, because not concurring with Faith in the business
of justification: Insomuch as some have been traduced by their followers as
Popishly affected for no other reason, but for that they did inculcate and
press upon the consciences of men in their homilies or Sermons the duties and
works of sanctification, as necessary in our Christian practice both in
respect of Gods command and man's obedience due unto it, and also of the
heavenly reward; notwithstanding nothing can be more consonant thenthis
doctrine to the precepts of Christ Jesus. In like manner they limited the
gracious Act of Divine Predestination, to those of their own sect or faction
only, as if they alone had been the truly called of God, the rest of men no
better then castawayes; for some of their disciples, and those not weakly
principled according to their fashion, have in our hearing accounted of others
who did not adhere to their way, as of carnal, or at the best but mere civil
and moral men, who were perchance partakers of common grace, but aliens from
that which they term Special, and is of a saving virtue. Neither have there
been wanting those who have proceeded yet farther like the false Prophets of
old, and false teachers among the people now under the Gospel foretold by the
Apostle S. Peter, privily bringing in damnable heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1.
even denying the Lord that bought them, and (as it is to be feared) bringing
upon themselves swift destruction: the which because unfit to be mentioned, I
shall pass by at the present, and the rather for that many have already more
then enough enlarged themselves upon this subject.

As for the universality of Redemption, and liberty of humane will to accept or
to reject divine grace offered to the choice thereof, with such like doctrines
agreeable to these, or directly thwarting the same, not to be comprehended
perchance by man's understanding, at least not to be clearly evidenced or proved
unto either opposite party by any deductions of reason from the word of God, so
far as to satisfy all objections, and to reconcile all seeming repugnances of
controverted places, (the which both adversaries hold forth as their
bestweapons whether for defense, or for offense in this fight) what fierce
contentions and hot disputes, to say no more, have some raised about these, as
if Salus ecclesiae did wholly depend upon them, and not rest upon a sure
foundation of evidence and truth; enlarging the power of man's will, or freedom
thereof, to a moral capacity of admitting or resusing grace, tendered unto it
according to its pleasure: while others did as much contract and limit it, or
rather indeed utterly deny it this pretended liberty, as inconsistent with
primigeniall corruption and privation of original righteousness, common to
all who naturally descended from the loins of our first Parents, and being in
truth nothing less then a spiritual death of that living soul which God first
breathed into mortal flesh; one part maintaining the divine decree concerning
man's salvation or damnation to be absolute in God, the other to be conditional
in man, grounded upon prevision of faith and obedience in the elect, of
unbelief and disobedience of the truth in those that are reprobate, and from
hence endeavoring to shake the others confidence and certainty of perseverance
unto the end, the which they did apprehend that apply unto themselves from the
immutability of Gods counsel, purpose, and will. In the mean while, what
shiftings and fallacies have been used of both to hold their ground, and to
evade or elude the force of the adversaries reason, insomuch as some have
taught themselves and others to say in defense of the absolute decree, as just
and equal in it self, contrary to the express word of Christ himself, Mat.
26.24.
Mat. 26.24. that it is better to have a being though in endlosse torments
under the wrath of the Almighty, then not to be at all: a mere speculative
nicety of Metaphysicall heads, and too small a wire whereon to hang the weight
of such a controversy.

But what did the people gain by these mutual combats and fiery skirmishes
between their spiritual leaders? They might happily learn from them to
discourse and argue amiss concerning matters too high for them; to live well
they could not, this being a business of action, not of contemplation; of
real practice, not of verbal dispute: whereas had they both laid aside these
sublimated differences, or discussed them upon occasion with meekness and
sobriety, spending their time and pains in teaching the people those truths of
sacred Scripture which all are bound to know, all to believe and obey upon
necessity in order to salvation, both themselves and they who were instructed
by them, had without all question received much more comfort and benefit, then
they did, or have done, since these superlative mysteries or points of Theology
first gave occasion to the doubtful disputations, afterward agitated between
the learned of both factions.

Of a more inferior nature, but not unlike consequence have your eager
disputes, and furious contestations been concerning the Church-worship, and
outward ceremonies thereof: Some of you crying them up above measure and beyond
reason, in your Sermons to the people; others crying them down as much besides,
and without reason when opportunity served their turn: and both neglecting in
the mean while the more weighty duties of your calling. By which omission and
imprudence, ignorance and faction, secretly crept into the Church, says and a
good conscience became vile and of little or no esteem with men, while every
one thought it religion enough to be zealous for his own party, and quocunque
modo, to honor and advance it, not considering whether the way were
warrantable or no, as it usually comes to pass in designs and actions of this
nature. And however some of you were much reputed of for your frequent and
painful diligence in the work of the Ministry; yet what a pious Bishop of the
first reformation said of Popish preachers in his time, that happy were the
people if such preached seldom: the same may we say of you, unless ye had
more aimed at peace and holiness, then ye did in your ordinary and prolix
orations to the multitude.

And here we may in no wise pass by without observation, the strange levity
and inconstancy, that I may not call it treachery see Zephan. 3.4.
, of many of you, who having just now as it were attested your approbation of
the Churches Doctrine and Discipline, both by orall profession, and also by
manual subscription, (yea, and some highly extolled the same in the
congregation, as perfect and exact in every respect) presently (without the
least account given to the world of this sudden and unexpected change)
condemned both, the one as erroneous in some points, the other as vain and
superstitious; and what may seem yet more strange, became as in a moment
violent persecutors of their fellow Ministers, who out of conscience of their
duty, kept their first faith, and adhered to their former principles. And yet
these are the men who arrogate to themselves a greater measure of knowledge
with sanctity of life above the rest of their brethren, especially those of a
different mind and judgment from them, concerning external rites of divine
worship, wherein they hypocritically and falsely complied with them, till they
had gotten power into their hands to do without control contrary to what they
protested and practiced before. But the merciless cruelty, which they had
shown to their fellow laborers in Gods harvest, and their miserable families
utterly impoverished, or (for ought they know or care) perchance famished by
reason of these bold unjust intruders into their lawful possessions, if there
were nothing else besides, does sufficiently declare (notwithstanding all their
fair pretenses and professions of holiness) that they are inwardly ravening
wolves, Mat. 7.15.
how ever they appear outwardly in sheeps elothing. This having been always
the garb of false Prophets, by soft words and smooth carriage to conceal their
falsehood and wickedness, the more easily to impose upon the ignorant and
undiscerning people. The Lord reform them, that he may forgive them.

But although these men were so clamorous and loud in the Assembly against
their adversaries, and maintained the fight with more then ordinary resolution,
some of you were quiet enough, and indeed more then enough; I mean those
silent, yet not silenc't ministers, whose character we find, Isai. Isai.
56.10, 11.
56.10, 11. For as in other respects there mentioned, they were like unto those
watchmen condemned by the Prophet: so in this as well as in any, that they all
looked to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter, and for the
same end many times as they did, expressed verse. 12. They cared not for the
flock; so they might cloth themselves with the fleece, every Benefice they
had, was unto them a fine cura, for they carelessly deserted their
congregations, and either committed the oversight of them to men altogether
unskilful and unable to instruct them; or if they lighted by chance upon men
more sufficient and fit for this work, who also made conscience of doing their
duty, and discharging their office according to that power wherewith God had
enabled them, labor they might, but scarce eat for their pains; so little
encouragement were they to expect from from these hard taskmasters, who did
bind heavy burdens and grievous to be born, Mat. 23.4.
and lay them on the poor Curates shoulders, but they themselves would not move
them with one of their fingers. And yet not a few of them were ingenious men,
and eminent for learning, that we may well wonder, how they do so much forget
their own education, and so little commiserate and regard men of the same habit
and profession with themselves: but chiefly that they did so much despise God
from whom they received their office and trust, and for which they were so
straightly accountable to him at the last day. For could they think it
reasonable, or in any respect warrantable from his Word, that he who took not
upon him the care of one Parish or Church, should receive the revenues of two,
or more perchance upon occasion, and these far distant each from other? or if
never so near adjoining, seldom visited by the owner, and far removed from his
thought and solicitude for their souls? But the wisest men are not always the
best, neither is learning the mother of grace at any time, and many times
destitute of this blessed corupanion: wherefore God has justly cast you forth
of his inheritance with contempt and scorn from your enemies, and turned it to
others, while divine chastisements are upon you for your ancient sloth,
formerly abused wealth and plenty, and other high offenses against his sacred
Majesty. And oh that ye were as sensible of your sins as ye are of your
unishments. Yea much more grieved for the miscarriage of your life and abuse of
your calling, then for the loss of your estates, for that I am sure does more
concern you then this; and thus to resent your errors is to gain by your
loss, and to bone it by your pain.

I have but a word more to speak unto you, and I shall conclude. It is
concerning your lives: The which I would to God were not so well observed and
known of the people to your prejudice and dishonor, as generally they are
throughout the whole land; for then should I with reverence to your calling,
gladly pass by your failings in silence: But the dimnesse of light cannot be
concealed, Mat. 5.14.
and a city that is set on an hill cannot be hid. Ye every where complain, and
not without cause, that scorn and reproach are cast upon you by the basest of
the people, that men detain your right from you contrary to Law and conscience.
But consider with your selves whether ye have not excessively deserved this
usage from them at the hands of God. For what do they yet see, or have seen
heretofore in many of you worthy of imitation or honor? Have ye lived after
the pattern of your own doctrine, and not rather destroyed by your example,
what ye built up by your teaching? For ye who preached holy contempt of the
world unto others, were your selves lovers of the world ye who exhorted others
to self-denial, and obedience of the Gospel, did your selves lead lives
unbeseeming the Gospel of Christ Jesus; ye that were above others in respect
of your office and place in the Church of God, did ost times live beneath the
meanest of them, who were committed to your charge, being infamous for your
pride of lise, lightness and loosnesse of behavior, excess of wine and
strong drink, and for other crimes dishonorable in the life of the meanest
person professing the Gospel, much more in the conversation of a Pastor. Now
what in all probability could be expected from these courses, but that the
people would at length entertain a low opinion of your selves and calling, yea,
and of Religion it self? as we see it come to pass this day. Forasmuch as they
live after your example, and make no account of your precept, be it never so
well grounded on the word of truth, or powerfully laid home to their conscience
by the passion and eloquence of the speaker: so little regard have men for the
most part to the words of their spiritual leaders, and so much to their works,
especially, when agreeing with that carnal disposition or corruption, which is
predominant in the minds of the major and worst sort of the world. Although
not only the leaders of the people which cause them to err, Isa. 9.16.
but they also that are led of them, shall certainly be destroyed in the end.

These things I write not to shame you, but as my beloved brethren I warn you,
not as an instructor, but as a follow-disciple with you of that one and only
Master Christ Jesus; And, witness the common Father of us all, in meekness
and sincerity of love. Accept therefore I pray you, my plain, but wholesome
counsel, seasonable, though rude advice, affectionate, though not affected
according to the fashion of the times. Be henceforth pure and incorrupt in your
doctrine, speaking not what humane passion may suggest unto you, but what ye
have learned from the word of truth: not crying down the Law (as the manner of
some is) under pretense of advancing the Gospel, as though the Law were
against the Promises of God, and not rather subservient to them, Gal 3.21.
but discreetly handling both accordingly as ye meet either with proud and
obstinate, or with humble and broken hearted sinners, that the gate of mercy
may not seem shut up toward these, nor a way laid open for Libertinisme to
them. Do the work of the Lord neither deceitfully nor negligently, be
unblamable in your life, austere and grave in your conversation, just and
peaceable in your actions and dealings with men, peacemakers and
peace-keepers, moderate and abstemious in the use of bodily refreshments, not
addicted to pleasures, liberal and charitable in ministering to the necessities
of the Saints where ability is present; not covetous or greedy after this
worlds good, when it is wanting, much less when it does abound. Be as far
eminent above the vulgar sort for holiness of life, as ye are already for
dignity of place in the House of God. Be admonished and reclaimed from your
sins by past and present sufferings, lest a worse thing come unto you, and
iniquity prove your ruin. In a word, so live for the time to come, as it
behooves those who are now, if ever, 1 Cor. 4.9.
made a spectacle to the world, and to Angels, and to men; that they whose eyes
are upon you, may no longer think the profession of Christ to consist in a mere
formality or bare show of holiness without the substance thereof, but judge it
(as it is indeed) a matter of greatest difficulty and nearest concernment to
themselves of any thing in the world; That the reproach which is cast upon you
may cease and turn to your adverfaries; that ye may be blessed in the work
whereunto the Lord has called you, not in respect of others only, but of your
selves also; and not complain as one of your brethren not many years ago did
unto his servant at his death, who representing to his master at his earnest
request for comfort from him in the midst of despair, the same consolations,
which according to his office he usually ministered to others in his life time,
that had been in the same condition with himself now ready to breath out the
last: the poor disconsolate man replied, that he well remembered what was
suggested to his mind. But alas! says he, I did not my self then believe
those things to be true which I preached unto others, and therefore cannot now
find any comfort in them, when I most stand in need thereof. Finally, my
brethren, whatsoever things are true, Phil. 4.8.
whatsoever things are honest (or venerable) whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, Rom 15.5, 6.
think on these things. Now the God of patience and consolation, grant you to
be like minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus; That ye may with
one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
To him be glory, Amen.

To the Nobility and Gentry.
I Shall not divide you in my reproof and counsel, however the Law and custom
of your nation has made a wide difference between you, forasmuch as ye both
are the Nobility of the land, though with great inequality of power, place, and
honor in the Commonwealth, especially in former times. But the similitude, or
rather parity of your sins has brought you into a far nearer distance one
from the other, or indeed made you one and the same for guilt and crime, both
in the sight of God, and before men. Wherefore I also shall address my speech
unto you, as to one rank and order of men in the State, yet not as a flattering
Chaplain, or domestic servitour of your greatness, who wait at your tables,
whom necessity, or hope of benefit from you, or else some other by-interest
have taught seemingly at least to admire your persons, and to praise you in
every thing ye speak or do, how mean soever it be, and many times worthy of
sharpest reproof: but as a true and faithful friend, who have no dependence on
your favor, and fear not your frown, commend that truth unto you without
partiality or dissimulation, which does more concern you then the free
enjoyment of your large possessions, were the compass and extent of them
according to your desire, much more vast then now it is. Neither do I assume
unto my self this liberty, because of your present low condition. This I pity
and bewail, being my self perchance by a long series anciently descended from
the best of you, however now a mean and obscure person, but with due respect of
love and reverence to your selves and families. Ye are or should be very
eminent in the body politic, and far above the other members, as in dignity of
place, so likewise of desert: But alas, with grief and shame I mention it,
many, that I may not say the most part of you, have not been so high above them
in respect of your birth, and external honor annexed thereunto, as ye have
been beneath them for real inward worth of goodness and virtue, by which
alone ye can approve your selves unto God, and become truly honorable in the
judgment of men. Ye may happily much pride your selves in the antiquity and
splendour of your families heretofore, in the valor and exploits of your
progenitors: but do these tend to your glory, and not rather to your infamy and
reproach, who have so far degenerated from your ancesters, that ye retain
nothing of them now, but their name with the outward badges or ensigns of their
gentility; besides the sins and vices of their persons, which partly pleasure,
partly profit, and partly ambition, have made as hereditary to your houses, as
the lands which ye do possess. And are not these so many spots of your
nobility, as well as of your Christian profession? I mean your sacrilege,
contempt of religion and of the religious, open profaneness, and scoffing both
at the simplicity of godliness, and at the iniquity of sin, swearing, pride of
life, voluptuousness, excess of riot, unsatiate lust, oppression of your
olients, boundless covetousness, with others of the like nature, the which I
shall not stir at this time. For how many servants and messengers of the Lord,
have with their whole families been reduced by your means to worse extremities
then I am willing to express, and could obtain no relief from you, without
base flattery, and unfaithful compliance with your lewd and sinful courses of
life? a thing every way dishonorable to the calling of a Minister, so near
approaching unto God himself as this does. In the mean while what use ye made
of the Lords portion forced from the right owner thereof, is sufficiently known
to the world. For did ye not like those Amos 6.4, Amos 6.4.
etc. lie upon beds of Ivory, or of such choice and precious matter as this,
and stretch your selves upon your couches (or abound with superfluities) and
eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall?
Did ye not chant to the sound of the violl, drink wine out of bouls, and were
not at all grieved for the afflictions of Joseph? And all this sometimes, of
the most part upon the Churches patrimony? Besides this, which is as bad, yea
much worse; how many poor souls, by this withholding of good from the owners
thereof, have perished in the land through famine and thirst, not a famine of
bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord, which have
been either altogether destitute of a teaching priest, or committed to the
charge of one as ignorant as themselves, to save your purses though with the
loss of their most precious souls, the guilt of which will one day lie more
heavy upon your conscience, then thought is now able to conceive, much less
tongue to express. And although the large and ample revenue; that some of you
enjoyed over and above the lot of Christ, might well have prompted to you a
better mind toward his worship and the Ministers thereof: yet neither this
consideration, nor the improsperity of your families, with those strange
remarkable judgments observed by many from the Almighty upon your houses, have
been in the least measure prevalent with you for repentance and restitution of
what ye have thus gotten or detained from his Church unto this present day.
Neither will prescription or time bear you out in this matter: for Nullum
tempus occurrit Regum Regi; and if the King had this prerogative in times past,
much more does it belong to God for ever.

As for your profaneness and contempt of Divine Worship, besides the apparent
and notorious wickedness of your lives, your coniving at sin, in places of
authority and public Trust, or indeed (secret at least) maintaining and
encouraging thereof in the more loose and vicious sort of people, at the best,
but weak and faint opposition made by you against it, (And in truth with what
face could ye punish or control those enormities in other men, whereof your
selves were more guilty then they in your own conscience?) Besides these I say,
let your irreverent and irreligious carriage in the Church of God at the time
of solemn service on his day attest the truth of this charge, the which
generally was far more vain and light, then did become Saints at any time,
especially in the more immediate presence of the most holy, and indeed then
that, which your selves would expect from your servants, or inseriours in your
private houses, or can with patience endure from them. For what whispering,
smiling, want on passages of gesture, discourse, and other not sit to be named,
did fill up the measure of that hour (and of your own iniquity) which the
Minister did bestow on praying and preaching of the Word? whereas if ye at any
time came into the Congregation, your poor Tenants must intermit their
devotions, and stand up to honor you, though with the dishonor of their
Maker: a respect not to be required of any at such a time as this, no nor to be
received from any if offered, or admitted by any person how great soever,
because displeasing unto him, who is a God jealous of his honor, and will not
give his glory to another. Now had it not been much better for you in respect
of your own souls, the which ye did so foully stain by this ungodly
behavior, and of the souls of your brethren, whom ye did offend and grieve,
or corrupt by your lewd example, and less hateful to the Lord, not to have
been present at all at his Ordinances, then thus grossly to profane them? But
this impious presumption and over daring boldness of sinning and provoking
your Redeemer to his Face, ye took to be the privilege of your birth and
place, and therefore other men were more cautious and sparing herein then your
selves, or made more conscience then you, of what they did at such a time, and
in such a place as this is.

It may seem incredible what I have been informed of a Peer of the Realm, and
yet I cannot distrust the truth thereof, both for the Relatours sake, and for
the relation which is common in and about that place where he lately lived. He
used every Lords Day, when he went with his Family to the Church, to have his
Mastive go before him, with a Marmoset, or some such creature near of kin to
this, upon the Dogs back; a strange Pageant for such a solemnity, what his end
and aim at was in this I shall forbear to censure, because he has already
stood or fallen to his own master. Romans 14.4.


Now touching your unnecessary, rash, frequent and many times false swearing,
by the terrible and fearful name of the great God of Heaven and Earth, and by
his eternal Son Jesus Christ, equal to himself in Majesty and Power (whose
blood and wounds, passion, parts and properties were seldom or never mentioned
by you, but in this sinful way of profanation) and your usual imprecations of
his wrath upon your souls, where no just occasion I am sure, if any at all,
were offered of so deep asseverations and protestations against your selves
before the faithful witness, and impartial Judge of all hearts: what can we
say of it, but that it was the Gentleman's ordinary Rhetoric, the common grace
of his speech, and the supposed Ornament of his discourse; Oaths being with
him pigmenta orationis, wherein he did much glory, and whereof he did make
special use (though bad enough God knows) when matter of dispute, or
elocution did fail him, although he might well consider how that which is
highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God. Luke 15.16.
And oh the pernicious influence of evil example, from superiors upon the
inferior sort! how general has this contagion been in the land? how far has
this canker overspread the body of this Nation? Derived (as we have just cause
to imagine) from you as from the fountain, and so by your dependants and
followers, as by so many corrupt channels, conveyed to the rest of the people.
Insomuch as many at this time, account no more of this needless, but great
transgression of the Divine Law, then they do of any idle word, which
proceeds out of their mouths without thought or premeditation of what they
were to speak.

And here I should take occasion next to reprove you for your pride; I mean
that which does manifest it self to the world by outward garb and fashion of
the times: but that I have just cause to believe, at least am willing to hope
of many of you, that the grievous and sad calamities, which by the just hand of
God have fallen upon your estates and families in these dysastrous times of
war, have in some measure humbled and abased your spirits, and taken off from
the vanity and lightness both of your behavior and apparel: so much is
sorrow better then laughter, Eccles. 7.3.
for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better. And yet alas,
not a few of your degree even to this day, are so far from being truly
sensible of their sufferings, that they seem to be more hardened in their pride
at this present then before, and wax more wanton against the Lord, since his
hand has been upon them for trial and correction, then in former times, like
those of whom we read Isa. 9.9, 10. The Lord pardon and reclaim them from the
error of their ways.

And now I shall proceed to speak of your Epicurean or voluptuous manner of
living, together with your riot and excess, because of their near affinity.
First then, if nothing else could be laid to your charge, then a continual
prosecution of enterchangeable pleasures, or endeavor without ceasing to
gratify sinful concupiscence with whatsoever it desires, or lusts after,
were not this enough to condemn you before the just tribunal of your Maker?
For did he who came to redeem you ever lead such a life as this upon the earth?
or commend it to his Disciples and followers? no surely. For mourning,
mortification, self-denial, taking up, and bearing the cross, or patient
enduring of reproaches and persecutions, (ever attending on the sincere and
zealous profession of the Gospel) tender compassion toward our brethren in
misery, with present relief of their necessities according to our power and
ability. In a word, contempt of this present world, and abhorrency from the
enticing pleasures thereof, are the subject matter of all his Sermons, the pith
of his Doctrine, the marrow of his Divinity. And do ye still think that a
paradise of earthly pleasures is the way to an heavenly paradise of comfort and
delight? or that an heaven of carnal happiness here may in likelihood be a
passage unto an heaven of spiritual and eternal felicity hereafter? The
Israelites of old could not arrive to the land of Canaan, but by the long and
dangerous way through the Wilderness; and the Gospel which does promise us a
Kingdom in the world to come, does withal assure us, Act. 14.22.
that we must through much tribulation enter in to the Kingdom of God. And ye
hope, or rather dream of a Canaan in the way, and another at the journeys end;
ye would fain wear the Crown, and yet not bear the Cross; obtain the victory,
and never enter into the battle, rejoice in the triumph, and not sweat in the
fight. But oh consider I pray you, and lay to heart that curse of your
confidence Luke 16.25.
, and what has often founded in your ears, but never as yet entered into your
hearts, ye especially who every day glut your selves with the choicest dainties
which the Sea or land can afford, feeding your selves without fear, Jude.
drinking without measure or restraint, ye who are mighty to drink wine, Isa.
5.22.
and men of strength to mingle strong drink, Hab. 2.15.
ye that give your neighbor drink and put your bottle to him, and make him
drunken also, that ye may look on their nakedness. Behold your sins in the
truest glass, and tremble to think on the curses which attend them, that ye
may not henceforth drink in foolish imagination the health of others to the
real perdition of your own souls, that your tables may be no longer covered
with vomit, lest the banquet of them that siretch themselves be removed; Amos
6.7.
Lest the cup of the Lords right hand be turned unto you, Hab. 2.17.
and shameful spewing be on your glory. And indeed the Lord has already
brought to pass what he has threatened to do in many of your habitations,
where we may find no small diminution of that luxuriant plenty and abundance
which ye formerly had, but abused to the dishonor of him who gave it, partly
through your riot and excess, whereby ye have viciously and shamefully wasted
those godly estates, which the industrious care and travail of your forefathers
transmitted unto you their unworthy progeny, and sometimes purchased for
themselves and you at much a dearer rate, even with the desperate adventure and
hazard of their precious lives, or through the iniquity of the present times,
whereby God has already in a very great measure scourged you for the
superfluity of naughtiness, the which he saw in you, and will yet punish you
more even to utter extirpation, if ye do not timely meet him in the way of his
judgments, and make your peace with him, by the humble acknowledgement of your
sins and speedy turning from them unto him, who smites you for this cause,
that ye may repent and be healed.

To this we may add, your wantonness or unlawful lust, the true and proper
daughter of riot and excess. In which how far ye have transgressed within the
compass of a few years past, let your own actions and behavior visible
enough God knows, and manifest in this particular witness against you,
besides the testimony of your own conscience; Are not your meetings at the Park
and Garden by the great City known to all the world? To omit your mixed and
loose Dancings, Table-communications, Cup-discourse, and such like, what
means I pray you the effeminate delicacy, attire and garb of the masculine
sex? The fashion, dress, gate, painting and patches of the Female? Does not
the show of their countenance testify against them? although the men also have
of late been so vain as to borrow this uncivil fashion from the women, I mean
the wearing of patches on their faces, which are indeed but so many blemishes
to the reputation of both, and marks of dishonesty, not (as they take them to
be) garnishing spots of comeliness and beauty. And yet with how great care and
expense are some of these procured for you? I am ashamed to mention what has
has been reported to me for a certainty concerning this thing. Oh strange and
unheard of luxury to those who are gone before us! how many empty howels might
charity refresh, how many naked bodies clothe with this waste and altogether
needless cost? As for your Ladies former Ball-conventicles, wherewith they
have been publicly upbraided on the Theater, and your famed compositions in
secret with the lascivious Courts, for liberty and allowance in lust, with your
unsonable banquettings, and novel irritations invented or used by you for this
unclean purpose, let them never be remembered any more, or made known to those
who shall come after; neither list I to stir any farther in this puddle or sink
of corruption. I shall not speak much of your oppressing and racking your poor
Tenants, occasioned, no doubt, many times as well by your luxury and costly
manner of living, as by your covetousness and immoderate desire of enlarging
your possessions: Forasmuch as that does often cast you upon those necessities
which ye cannot relieve but by this unjust way whereunto ye have compelled your
selves by your foregoing sin. Now as ye have by this means generally lost the
good opinion and affection of the people, (according to late and sorrowful
experience thereof toward your persons and proceedings) so have ye highly
provoked the wrath of God against your selves and families, and as much, if not
more, by your unsatiate covetousness; whereby many of you indeed (and who not
in desire?) join house to house, Isai. 5.8.
lay field to field, till there be no place, that ye may be planted alone in
the midst of the earth: Not fearing nor minding the curse of the Almighty,
which he has denounced against you in the next v. by the Prophet,
notwithstanding it has already entered into many of your habitations, for of a
truth, even to this day many houses are desolate, and though great and fair,
without inhabitant. But to what purpose is all this care and much ado? Surely,
to make your families great and mighty upon the earth, to leave your children
vast inheritances of land, and treasure which knows no bottom. But oh that ye
could have a prospect now in your life of two or three generations to come,
would you not then condemn your present folly, and perceive a great deal of
improvidence in this your providence and solicitous care for them? for then
might you see according to the common course of the world, one descended from
you prodigally spending that substance which your diligence and pains
thriftily got for him; another desperately running himself out of all through
carelessness and dissoluteness of living; and now become more miserable in his
want, then the poorest man that breaths, because of that plenty and prosperity
which he enjoyed in times past; a third made a prey to them who are more potent
and powerful then himself, for the rich patrimony which ye have les^ him, and
in the same day perchance discharged from his estate and life together. But
which is most considerable in it self, though least of all thought upon by you,
their wealth through the secret yet just judgment of the Almighty for your
unjust acquiring thereof, like their table, is made a spiritual snare, Rom 11
9.
and a trap, and a stumbling block, and a recompense unto them; for nothing is
more pernicious to the soul then outward prosperity in this world, without
grace to use it aright. And yet notwithstanding this, your inward thought is,
that your houses shall continue for ever, and your dwelling places to all
generations, ye call your lands after your own names, nevertheless man being
in honor abides not, Psa. 49 11.12 13.
he is like the beasts that perish. This your way is your folly, yet your
posterity approve your sayings. And I pray God that may not be your own
portion, which the Prophet foretells should be theirs of whom he speaks, v.
14.
v. 14. after ye are gone from hence and be no more seen.

I have but one word of reproof more, and I am sure it will be unexpected of
you, the Lord grant that it be not unwelcome also; It is concerning your
Domestic Chaplains, whom partly your own pride, partly the evil custom of
the Times has taught you to entertain in no better fashion, then as honorary
servants in your houses; whereby the worthy calling of the Ministry is much
debased from the dignity thereof, and no small contempt drawn upon it from the
vulgar sort of people, especially those that depend upon your greatness, which
are very many. For this is far from receiving a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, or the Messenger of Christ with that honor which is due to Christ, to
place him in the rank of those who continually expect your commands, and are at
your devotion. Besides this, it is a great shame, that men of ingenuous
education, sometimes not inferior to your selves in birth, and scarce ever not
above you in respect of intellectual parts, and indowments of the soul, should
nevertheless be constrained to stand as servitors at your tables, or to sit in
the meanest place belonging thereunto, scarce daring to peep or mutter without
a brow-check or control from their fastidious patrons; and all this to serve
your state, to which also their praying, preaching, and other acts of their
Ministerial Office must submit both for the manner, extent, and other
circumstances pertaining to the action, or else there is no long abode for them
with you. To omit the many scoffs, verbal and real indignities they are fain
ofttimes to put up with patience not only at the hands of children, but of
servants also for quietness sake, if not rather for their present necessity,
unless they purchase respect from them with a good part of that stipend, which
they receive from you. Insomuch as one not unaptly (as the case stands now)
termed a Chaplain in a Noblemans house, a black servingman. Wherefore God has
justly given you up unto contempt and reproach, so that the vilest of men are
become Lords over you, because ye have thought light of his Worship, and the
Ministers thereof, and have made both it and them contemptible in the sight of
others by your example.

Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, 1 Pet. 5.6.
that he may exalt you in due time. Jac. 4.9.
Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep, for the sins of your Fathers the which ye
do inherit as well as their lands, for your own personal sins which are great
and many, for the sins of your families, for the sins of the people, which they
have been bold to commit through your connivance, or after your pattern, for
all, but chiefly and above all for your glorying in sin, which is your shame,
and the reproach of your Maker, the height of impiety and deepest stain of
sinful guilt. And learn henceforth to honor that Religion which ye have
hitherto despised, to be zealous for the truth of God, to reverence and support
the Ministry of Christ, to call the Sabbath a delight, Isa 58.13, 14.
the holy of the Lord honorable, that ye may delight your selves in the Lord,
and he may cause you to ride upon the high places of the earth; To countenance
and encourage all that live according to the Gospel, and not prefer vain and
scurrilous persons before them. Esteem not of men (as your custom is) more by
their outward garb and apparel, then by their inward worth, but respect them
in the first place for this, and show it by your carriage toward them. There is
a sort of men in the world, who for pride, or upon pretense of noble birth;
though of decayed families, or in a remote distance from those that are
flourishing, follow your mode and fashion, the which are the most foolish,
dishonest, and many times the poorest as well in purse as in conditions, that
are in the Nation; do not favor or uphold them in their courses, lest they
prove mischievous to your selves and others. Banish far from you all flattering
Parasites, and those whom ye liberally feed with your meat, because they feed
you with the corrupt air of their vain discourse, or of their false slanderous
reports: Be careful to maintain and execute justice impartially, where you
have authority: Be moderate and abstemious in your pleasures, use them as
condiments of study and labor, as refreshments of life, not make them the
business and end thereof. For is it not a foul shame for a Gentleman or Noble
Person, while he is yet alive, to be so buried in pleasure, and sloth, as to
deserve an Hie situs est? and yet as the Apostle teaches us, 1 Timothy 5.6. Such
a one that lives in pleasure is dead while he lives. And when he is dead, no
better Epitaph upon his monument, then, Fuit, non vixit. Be industrious
therefore and active in your life, that ye may be honorable while ye live, and
also after death. Let your communication be without the impiety of swearing,
and impurity of lust Be humble in your carriage toward all men, remembering the
common original of all, and the grace of God free for all. Be good to your
Tenants as those who labor for your pleasure, sweat for your repose, and daily
disquiet themselves for your ease. Let them not be slaves to you, that you may
become more servile slaves to your own lusts. Be bountiful to the poor and
given to hospitality See 1 Pet. 4.9, 10.
, desiring rather charitably to improve that abundance which ye have, then
covetously to get that which ye have not, and need not to have. Beware of
idleness and vacancy of employment to prevent sin, to escape judgment; For
can you think it reasonable with men, much less with God, that all should
labor for you, and ye alone be idle? The Minister in his study at his Book,
the husbandman in the field at his plough, the tradesman or Artificer in his
shop? especially, while ye defraud the first of his Tithes, oppress the other
in his vent, and despise the last for the meannesse of his calling? Mat. 20.
Did any receive the Lords penny, who did not at all labor in his Vineyard?
much less may they expect it, who in stead of working therein lay it wast or
gather the grapes thereof. Mat. 22.
Give therefore unto God the things that are Gods. For, if ye have not been
faithful in that which is another man's, Luke 16.
who shall give you that which is your own? Lastly, provide your selves of able
and pious Chaplains, and respect them according to their Office and worth; Give
them liberty to admonish you of your duty both in public and in private, to
reprove you with freedom, when you speak or do amiss, use them for the good
of your souls, for the virtuous and godly education of your children, for the
instruction of your Families in what they ought to know and do: not for the
pride or state of your persons, nor yet to gratify your spiritual ease and
sloth. For we are all partial judges of our selves, and therefore need the
continual censure of other men, who are for the most part diligent enough to
discharge their duty and conscience in this particular, where they know they
may be bold without offense. As for those who think themselves too good to do
God service, them will he count not good enough to receive his reward. Thus
shall God establish you upon the earth, and your children after you, make you
truly happy in your life, blessed in your death, and after death blessed for
evermore, Amen.

To the expulsed Members of the University, and to those now abiding therein.
1. To the expulsed Members.
I Do not undertake to reprove or admonish you as one more knowing then your
selves, far be this arrogance and self-conceit from me: but as a friendly
Remembrancer unto you of what ye already know, but mind not, and therefore
know not as ye ought. I speak as unto men corrupted in judgment, and blinded
with passion, whereby ye are unable to see the light that shines about you,
like the Athenians of whom Tully gives this testimony, Cat. Maj.
Athenienses seire quae recta essent, sed facere nolle, or like them in the
Gospel, Mat. 23.3.
which did say and do not: your light of knowledge resembling that, which men
carry with them in a dark lan^horn, when it is upon occasion turned from them,
which served only to enlighten others, so that while they did, or at least
might have walked in your light, your selves went stumbling in the dark. Your
lines (through the merciful Providence of the Almighty) were fallen unto you in
pleasant places, Psalm. 16.6.
yea you had a goodly heritage, as it is Ps. 16.6. But ye soon forgot his great
goodness toward you, and turned the same into wantonness. Therefore did his
wrath wax hot against you, and his hand is heavy upon you, as it is this day.
And though he gave you timely warning before of the approaching evil, ye were
not admonished thereby, that ye might repent, and so meet the Lord in his
judgments for reconciliation and peace. But idleness and fullness of bread,
excess of wine and of strong drink, profaneness and dissolute living, public
and private faction with emulation and strife, perjury and corruption, with
such like practices filled up the measure of your sins before God, until the
time of judgment and recompense was fully come. For how many of you thought an
University life to consist in vacancy from all employment, even that of the
mind as well as that of the body, and in the pleasure of recreation and sport,
to say no worse, abstracted from study and contemplation? I am ashamed to
mention, and would to God it were in my power to conceal the sloth and
Epicurisme of others, who divided their whole life to those natural actions of
eating, drinking, and sleeping, as natural brute beasts made to be taken and
destroyed: 2 Pet. 2 12.
Corrupting themselves in those things which they knew after their manner; Jude
10.
being so many spots and reproaches of learning, and not of Christian only, but
of humane society also. These were the men that scoffed on their Ale and Wine
benches, at the painful industry of their fellow Members, as if it had been a
sin, at least a shame to be studious, arrogating in the mean while to
themselves (that of which God knows they were not guilty) eminency of parts
above their diligent brethren, for which they would be beholding to nature
only, and to their sottish company. But enough and too much of these.

As for faction, how closely did it lurk every where in the Colleges? And yet
how openly did it declare and publish it self in the University? The Arminian
against the Calvinian, and the Calvinian against the Arminian, declaiming
publicly upon all occasions in the pulpit, and as ^ar as the reverence of the
place would give leave, odiously exagita^ing the positions and tenants one of
another; and in the Schools fiercely bandying each against his adversary, and
all striving for mastery, not for truth. In the mean while what libellous
defamations were secretly composed and subtly spread abroad, sometimes by
this, and other whiles by that party, tending to the infamy and disgrace both
of the cause and of the persons that maintained the same. As for the Arminian
faction, it was undoubtedly upheld and encouraged by the superior power,
though under pretense of silencing both, as it did appear by an injunction from
supreme Authority inhibiting these disputes and contentions which had so much
disquieted the peace of this grand seminary of the Church. But the partiality
that was ever shown toward them which did transgress on the higher ground,
the countenance and favor with preferment cast upon them by those who sat at
the stern, together with the rigor and severity used in censuring the opposite
delinquent party, gave sufficient evidence to the world what their meaning was,
who imposed cessation and silence upon the pens and tongues of these eager and
bitter adversaries. For notwithstanding this specious prohibition, that party
which did most pretend to obedience, did say and do as before, without check or
control from their superiors; knowing full well what their mind was
concerning this thing, and finding by experience oft-times, that it did smooth
a by-way for them to the end of their ambitious desires. And here it seems
strange to me, that they who did recede from their former principles and
grounds of doctrine to join with the Arminian faction, became for the most part
more loose in their life, and dissolute in their manners then before; confuting
and destroying their newly received opinion of free will by the licentious
courses of their conversation, which they did assert by argument and discourse
of reason against them which did oppose the same, like men destitute of that
grace, the which they endeavored to weaken in the force and operation thereof
upon the soul of a sinner. And some we have known in times past most zealous
advocates for the Arminian doctrine, since quite fallen away from the reformed
Church to the superstition and idolatry of Rome, being perchance the more
easily induced thereunto by the progress which they had made in the way
before: the causes and motives whereof, one at least has divulged to the world
for the justifying of his Apostasy; as for his intentions, these are known to
God only and to his own conscience, to whom we leave him. For it was a wonder
to hear what virulent speeches were uttered by men of this stamp, against the
first reformers of the Church: Perfecto odio odi Calvinum, was reported to be
the expression of one famed for other parts as well as for those of learning
among you. But I had rather omit then recite: passages of this nature for
diverse reasons, not to be mentioned at this present time.

As for the other faction, their late proceedings have given in sufficient
evidence against them of their treachery and falsehood, and represented a full,
but foul character of their persons to all wise and discerning men, however
many through ignorance, or affection, or self-interest entertain an honorable
conceit of their way and actions unto this day. And now we shall proceed to the
consideration of your perjury, an Academicall surely (if any other) sin, which
though an offense of high nature before God, was common with the major part of
your society, that I may not say generally slighted by all because of the
ordinary and customary practice of men herein. For it was very frequent, and
indeed a matter of course with them to attest upon oath the sufficiency or
ability of any person to receive a graduall promotion in the University, how
illiterate and otherwise unworthy soever he was of that favor. A^scio was
tendered and accepted in his behalf where a credo had been too much, a nescio
was due, or in truth a nego rather. And what a congregationvote for the same
purpose was, I need not to explain. Surely, such men had either a very low
esteem of the religious tie of any oath, or scarce thought these of their
corporation obligatory in point of conscience, but rather ceremonies of mere
formality or custom. Although I have often heard it reported of a very learned
and pious Bishop now with the Lord, that in his confessions to God he usually
craved pardon of him for his University oaths, the which probably he had
readily taken, but slackly performed as well as the rest of his brethren.

Neither did this sin reign in public only, but also in private societies, as
your corrupt Elections did evidently show. In which the fear or favor of great
persons in hope to rise by them, especially of one who could do all in his
time, respect of birth, or love of money, and what besides I list not now to
name; were more prevalent with you, then conscience of oath or duty. Desert
being for the most part laid aside by you, and learning not regarded when it
did enterfeer with the former. And yet how strictly were you bound by your
Collegiate oaths to austerity of life, gravity of carriage, brotherly love and
accord one with another, especially to incorrupt dealing, as in other matters,
so chiefly in relinquishing your places, and electing others into vacant rooms.
The thought whereof (as I have been informed by many) gave courage and
confidence to the governor of a College in Q. Elizabeth's days after
receiving a Mandate from her Majesty to proceed unto an unstatutable election
of one into the house, who was incapable thereof, to call for a pair of
balances, and to lay the Queens letters in one scale, the statute-book in the
other, demanding withal of those who were then present, which of the two
weighed down the other, and replying, that the command of a Prince ought to
give place in any thing where our obedience is due to God before. How far
different your practice has been on like occasions from this worthy example. I
am ashamed to speak, and let one for all testify, who having not long before
an Election, encouraged a young youth of meet capacity for the place in all
respects, and (as I remember) promised him his vote against another competitor,
much inferior to him every way, age only excepted, upon an unexpected receipt
of a letter in the behalf of the latter from a person very opportune for his
advantage, and powerful with the highest, suddenly changed his mind, not
blushing to say, that the former was indeed the more deserving scholar, but he
might not by any means displease them, which had commended the latter to his
choice; although he could not be ignorant what he was bound to do by oath and
conscience in this case. But this was the general carriage of things at that
time, partly through men's own inclinations, and partly through the remiss and
corrupt government of their Praepositi or heads, who for ought as could be
discerned by them, made the least conscience of any, of keeping their oaths,
and acting according to the tenor of them; whether in reference to themselves,
or unto others committed to their charge; for they freely tolerated, or at
least connived at your manners, how vicious soever, and contrary to the local
statutes, that ye might be (as in seems) the more obnoxious to their unjust
will after Court-example in another case. In the mean time suspecting and
hating virtuous and sober men, who conscionably opposed or disliked their
proceedings: which for the generality tended to this, how they might serve
their superiors in what they did command, without disputing the lawfulness or
unlawfulness thereof, and so make way for their own advancement. And therefore
would they sometimes as well by their authority as by their example, draw
others into the snare, and make them guilty with themselves of this grand
delinquency against the Almighty. And indeed they wanted not at any time enough
or more then enough, who stiffly adhered to the factions, and readily followed
their pernicious counsels and courses without contradiction or demur, for their
own vile and base ends. Thus would they both as occasion served, break at
pleasure those religious bonds of conscience (I mean their more then penal
oaths) as Samson did his green withs or new ropes, Judge. 16.
though many times perchance no fewer then these. Now such was the devotion of
these poor creatures to their unworthy masters as well in other respects as in
the former, that they must undergo the heat and burden of the day for them in
their Academicall turns of preaching, and likewise in their country charges on
the weekly solemnities, not far distant from the University. For (whether it
were idleness, or for prelaticall state, or for both these, I cannot tell)
your governors began now generally to neglect, if not to desert, this
necessary work of the ministry, as not pertaining to their office, and though
they were well content to receive the profits of many livings year by year, it
was done without any noise or benefit to the people; Forasmuch as they seldom
or never discharged their duty in one of those samished congregations, for whom
they are to answer and give an exact account to Christ at the last day. The
Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

Not inferior (as I conceive) to your perjury was your falsehood in giving
forth the same Letters testimonial for all men without exception, that
requested the same at your hands: but of far more dangerous consequence to the
Church of Christ, which by this means, no doubt, became worse provided of
pastors in the nation, then any of the reformed Churches throughout the
Christian world. Sed mulus mulum scabit. Wherefore God gave you up as a prey
and spoil to those men whom he did in times past more despise then any living
upon the earth: To merciless enemies, who did confound the innocent with the
guilty in censure and punishment; no ingennity of parts, no eminency of
learning or piety, no true pretense of conscience could serve the turn, and be
admitted to plead for them. Every information was accepted from the false
brethren; any one, how incapable soever, of the faction, was preferred to what
place he best liked. Neither (as I am informed) did one of them noted for his
intemperate zeal, stick to say, that they must not leave one of the old brood
remaining in the University: a speech most inhumane, as well as unchristian,
especially considering the tendency thereof; which was (as time has since made
manifest) to make way for the introducing in their stead a new generation of
creatures not much unlike those of whom we read Mat. Hab. 1.12, 13.
3.7. O Lord thou have ordained them for judgment, and oh mighty God thou have
established them for correction. Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil,
and can not look on iniquity: wherefore look thou upon them that deal
treacherously, and hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is
more righteous then he? Therefore as ye multiplied oaths to sin, so God make
oaths a snare or bait of judgment unto you, that he might cast you forth of
those goodly habitations and possessions which ye enjoyed, but were now become
altogether unworthy any longer to continue in them by reason of your sins,
wherewith you had for many years before provoked the eyes of his glory. And oh
that ye had truly repented of them even at this day I but alas, the excess and
riot of many of you with other crimes do still testify against you, not as yet
relinquished by them in any measure; no nor concealed from the eyes of the
world, though hateful to your adversaries, and opprobrious to your selves:
except necessity does sometimes lay a restraint upon your power, where will is
present and ready at all times.

Learn therefore I pray you, though late, for the Lords sake, for your own
sakes, for the Churches sake, to be more temperate in your lives, more austere
in your behavior, more vigilant and sober in all respects then ye have
hitherto been. And now since that the Almighty has in his providence and
justice scattered you as with a-whirle-winde amongst this and other nations
also, Zech. 7.14.
beware that ye do not publish your own shame and the confusion of your mother
to them, by the lewdness of your example. For what is this but to justify as
much as in you lies the proceedings of your enemies against you? and to stop
the current both of divine and of humane pity toward your calamitous
sufferings? But be seasonably admonished by Gods fatherly rebuke, reformed by
his loving and gentle correction; And let your repentance be as remarkable as
your sin, yourholinesse of life as eminent as your knowledge of the truth, 1
Pet. 1.15.
that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, and
not the ignorance only, but the malice also of your enemies: Then hear the word
of the Lord, Isa. 66.5.
ye that tremble at his word; your brethren that hated you, that cast you out
fornny-names sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified, but he shall appear to your
joy, and they shall be ashamed.

To the new Academicks.
I Shall not question your title at this time to what ye do possess, let your
own awakened conscience judge thereof in this world (because there is no other
Tribunal) and God the supreme Judge of all examine the matter at the last day.
In the mean time they who have suffered by you ought patiently to wait for this
general Assize, at which all causes that have passed man's censure and
determination in this life must receive an after trial and sentence not to be
revoked again. Now it may justly raise the wonder of any indifferent man not
interested with you, nor yet a friend of the other party, to consider what a
low and vile esteem ye have of the ejected members, by whose loss you have
gained, and upon whose ruins you have raised your present flourishing fortune.
Forasmuch as ye account of them no better then of the Canaanites and those
other nations whom the Lord cast forth of old before his chosen people to plant
them in their stead, your selves being (in your own eyes at least) the only
true Israel of God in this whole nation: and thus (as I have been credibly
informed by them which are conversant with you) have ye termed them in your
hasty devotions to the Almighty, yet withal more truly acknowledging, that not
for your own righteousness, but for their wickedness he was pleased to bring
you into houses which neither ye nor any of your families built before you, and
into gardens which neither you nor they planted, to possess them as your own,
and I may add with truth, that many of you came not hither for your learning,
as ye did not for your goodness (their ignorance in this respect; be as
notorious as their guilt in other matters) Let (...) for (...) explained and
prosecuted in that sense by a worshipful Doctor before the learned multitude,
Heb. 5.11.
give in public evidence of what has been spoken in this particular. Now as
touching the former, consider I pray you, how much conceits and speeches of
this nature do savor of the leaven of the Pharisees, Luke 12.1. with 18.9,
etc. with 16.15.
the which is hypocrisy mixed with pride and vainglory: whence we may
perceive the nature and quality of this sin, which oft-times makes so glorious
a show in the eyes of the world, and how odious it is in the sight of our
maker. Besides, let him that stands take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12.
Gal. 6.1.
and he that is spiritual consider himself, lest he also be tempted. But are
ye indeed altogether free from the just imputation of those crimes which you
lay to the charge of your adversaries? 2 Chr. 28.10.
or are there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God? your
levity and pride of apparel (no obscure sign nor fallible testimony of your
vanity and sin) exceeds by far that of your predecessors, and would better
become the place which you so much abhor, I mean the theater or stage, then
the University where ye thus flaunt it out contrary to former statute and
custom of civil and sober men. And here observable is the strange impudence
of the junior sort toward their elders and betters, whom they durst affront
openly by the boldness and imimmodesty of their carriage, whereas in times
past, a junior did scarce presume to look steadfastly upon any that was much his
senior in the house, so far were they from behaving themselves contemptuously
or unseemingly in their presence as now they do: an argumen, no doubt, of
remiss, or of ill-managed government. And for this cause the youth (as I have
been informed) were bold to supplicate the Parliament, that they might be
exempt from the usual respect which was formerly given to their betters in the
College, and still required of them as too much entrenching forsooth upon
their liberty. A Petition (I believe) of which nature the like was never before
framed, and presented to that Assembly. Neither can ye (for ought as I can
hear) acquit your selves of their excess, however secrecy be joined with sin,
and domestic privacy makes the crime less clamorous to the world, though
perchance alike hainou^ before the Almighty. But for mine own part, I cannot
lay this sin to your charge, and well it is if ye are clear in your own
conscience from this bestiall pollution of humane nature.

Ye much boast of your dexterity and frequency both in preaching, and
unpremeditated praying (a novell rarity in that place wherewith it was not
acquainted in times past, or else so closely locked up, that few had the
knowledge thereof). But granting some of you a primacy in the former, I suppose
many of you have cause to blush at the mention of the latter, remembering what
mistakes, impertinencies, tautologies, inconsequencies, to say no worse, have
passed from you in this rash and inconsiderate motion. Although the better
advised and wiser sort among you, to avoid such inconveniences as these, are
thought to present us with composed forms of prayer many times, yet so as they
would have them taken of their Auditors for the issues of sudden meditation;
and indeed the phrase and language of the same intimate as much, being for the
most part more apt and elegant then that which they use in their popular
Sermons. Wherefore one of your faction and of your society heretofore, well
reputed of for his learning with you unto this day, did not many years ago
privately impart his mind concerning this thing to a friend of his well known
unto my self (of whom also I received it) and that to this effect, to wit, That
he had so many forms of prayer lying by him, or else committed to memory by
the enterchangeable use of which (notwithstanding the same for words, or but
little varying upon some special occasion) he was thought by the people
always to pray without premeditation. How warrantable this delusion may be
with men, I cannot tell; but with God surely it cannot pass the note of
hypocrisy and of vainglory: From which the Apostle was so free, that he did
forbear to say the truth in such a case as this tending to his own honor, lest
(says he) any man should think of me above that which he sees me to be, 2
Cor. 12.6.
or that he hears of me.

But be it so as ye would have it, this cannot add either to the efficacy of
your prayers, or to the acceptance of your persons in the presence of the
Almighty: albeit it is to be feared that some of you entertain this conceit
thereof secretly in your hearts, for otherwise they would not condemn, at least
so peremptorily as they do, the use of set forms in other men. Neither can
good and diligent preaching, advantage your souls without answerable living,
though ye never so frequently and fervently cry down in the Assembly, self, and
flesh, and nature, and world, with whatsoever appertains to their several
proprieties. I know full well that ye are good at this in the Pulpit (laying
aside your affectation of new coined words, unusual tone and gesture; the
which some have in part relinquished for very shame) but in your conversation
ye are as other men, especially when ye are called upon by your profession for
contempt of the world in your practice and example. Witness this the leaders
and chieftains who brought and settled you where ye now abide: For as they did
displace at pleasure, all those that did not yield to their demands, so they
wrought themselves into those places made vacant by them which were of greatest
benefit and advantage, at least most opportune for their private ends of
covetousness or ambition. And albeit this might seem a point of wisdom in
them to the eyes of the world, I am sure it was not that wisdom which
descends from above, and which they so much commend by their doctrine to the
conscience of others, but that which is from below, even the wisdom of this
world, Jam. 3.15.
or of the flesh, of which see Jam. 3.15. And yet perchance it was a kind of
imprudence too, in respect of the common cause which they did then maintain:
the which without doubt could not but suffer hereby some diminution of its
former credit and repute with all indifferent men. But it is an hard matter
even for the deepest dissemblers to conceal themselves, and not to put off
their disguise in such concerning cases as these: and therefore having so fair
and singular opportunity of advancing themselves, they accumulate places of
honor and trust: so high was their opinion of their own worth, so immoderate
their desire of worldly wealth and greatness, according to the custom of
their faction who are generally accounted provident ingatherers, and layers up
in store for the future, but niggardly dispensers of what they have and can
well spare to the necessities of their poor brethren, whose mouths seldom
bless you, because their bowels are seldom refreshed by you, but curse you
often because of your frequent incompassion toward them. The Lord forgive both
you and them. Yea, some were known to be penurious and sordid toward
themselves and their families, and so cruel to their own bowels as well as to
other men. Now what good works will follow you after death, according to this
account, I need not speak. For your laudable pains in the work of the ministry
cannot further you in the way of salvation, 1 Cor. 9.27.
without exemplary holiness of life.

And here we may not pass by without just censure, those men who have contrary
to former oaths, entered into others right, and possessed themselves of their
places, violating hereby the statutes of the house, which they had sworn ever
to maintain. One of them eminent for place among you, though not for parts,
being urged upon a certain occasion with the statute of the College by another
who sought his right on this ground, and disputed the case as warrantable and
just from principles of this nature, was not ashamed to reply in defense of the
contrary part, that no oaths could bind the conscience against the
reformation (a strange reformation that cannot be effected without the gross
and palpable perjury either of the reformers themselves, or of them that are to
be be reformed by them) For indeed the licentious manner of living in these
times, even of the best, is not capable of a strict conformity to
Colledgestatutes formerly established; so austere and rigid are they,
especially some of them, and not suting with the long accustomed loosnesse of
our age. Insomuch as it were reformation enough, and (as most men would count)
more then enough, if (Popery and superstition laid aside) men were exacted the
obedience only of those statutes which concern moral duty, and behavior in
common life one toward another. But notwithstanding this man's great zeal for
the reformation, time has since declared to the world, that neither
protestation, league, or covenant could sufficiently bind him for the work
against his preferment, profit, and ease. So little conscience do they show in
time of trial, who most pretend for it in a more calm and quiet season.

As for your Elections, I have not much to witness of them, and yet some have
feelingly complained in my hearing, that desert, whether of learning, or of
other parts, finds as cold a welcome with you (if poorly attended or elad) as
ever it did in times past, and that preferment runs as heretofore in the
corrupt channel of favor and affection; not in that of equity and right. But
for this, happily ye may be excused in part, as being overswayed by them whose
creatures you are; who think it reasonable, that as ye have served your selves
of their power when time was, so you should by way of compensation now serve
their will, and obey their commands; and surely however the case stands, thus
much they do expect and require at your hands, as might appear by several
instances.

But enough of this: I have but one word to say more, and it is by way of
admonition to the ingenuous and well minded among you, who have been carried
away by error of the times (an error discernible by the fewest of men that
live in them) unto those practices, which they would loath and detest if they
saw the true shape of them, (which is ugly and deformed) and were not deluded
by false glasses, and counterfeit representations of them in the disguises of
justice and honesty; but as yet allow, because they are not conscious to
themselves of any malice or evil intention in what they do, that they would
devoutly implore the grace of the Almighty for illumination to see, and
direction to follow those things which make for their peace, lest otherwise
they live and die in their sin; and what will be the sequel thereof, they
cannot be ignorant, who know the truth and terror of God. In the mean time let
them and all take heed how they manage their present fortune, lest they also
become a prey to others, as others have been made a prey to them. For it is to
be seared, that your gaudy prosperity is an eyesore unto them, who have power
over your estates and lives, and will find matter enough of quarrel against
you, if there be not a change of manners, and this wrought with discretion and
speed. Neither will this happily serve the turn to prevent those designs,
which (as we hear) are now on foot to alienate the Colledge-lands from public
use for the maintenance of learning to the propriety of private men, the
dangerous effects whereof both to Church and State, not in this present age
only, but also in the generations to come, I tremble to imagine; (...).

To the Judges, Lawyers, etc.
I Have but little to say to you, being altogether unacquainted with your
profession and your ways. For I never as yet sued any man at the Law, and was
never sued by any for trespass or wrong done unto them, wherefore experience
cannot teach me what to speak of you. Nevertheless there has been a general
complaint of the people in the land for some years past, and as loud as it
durst break forth against the iniquity and oppression of your Courts of
Judicature, as if might, or favor, or money could more prevail in them then
equity or law, neither is it silent unto this day. Whether your sin were
according to the clamor of the people or no, I cannot tell: But of this I am
assured, that God will require much at your hands in the last and general day
of Judgment, there being no men alive, who have more frequent and signal
remembrances of their duty, or alarms of their account before the Almighty then
you, besides the special Obligations of solemn Oaths, and common ties upon
your conscience to do the thing which is lawful and right. Happy is it for
you now, and for the State in which ye live, and much more happy will it be for
you hereafter, if ye lay these things to heart, and practice as you learn and
know Judgment and Truth, on which as on the the basis the Peace and safety of
every Commonwealth do rest, and thrust aside, war, calamity and ruin do
ensue without remedy.

Your proceedings are many times intricate and dark, not to be traced by
popular and ordinary sent. There be many windings and turnings in the Law,
which few can find out, mazes and almost inexplicable labyrinths to those who
are not guided by your clew. But still remember, who stands in the midst of
you, even a God that sees in darkness, to whom the darkness and light are
both alike, secret and hidden things are open and manifest, Heb. 4.13.
Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all
things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom they have to do.
Let therefore the eighty second Psalm be your mirror, wherein to behold what
you are, what ye should be, if amiss, and not upright according to the mind
and will of God. And not hear only, but obey also his commands in the Ministry
of the Word. A time there was, when the sober admonition and milder reproof of
the Preacher would not go down with some of you, but were distasted by your
corrupt palates. And therefore a Minister was warned of his Diocesan, being
then to preach before the Judges, not to touch upon this string, it liked them
not forsooth to hear that which did pertain to their office and duty, or rather
did tacitly check their omission and transgression thereof so often repeated in
their ears. Who were most faulty in this particular, the Judges that did
refuse to be admonished, the Bishop who advised the Minister to gratify them
in their desire, or the Minister if he did obey the will of his superior in
this thing, let God judge. But I presume it was not after this manner every
where, nor with all persons, neither did it (as I suppose) continue thus long.
And God forbid this useful and necessary liberty should be diminished or
restrained in any part thereof. For can men too often hear of that, which they
are to do at all times? and which is of everlasting concernment to them? Be
instructed therefore ye Judges of the earth, Psalm. 2.10, 11.
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Now these are the things
that ye shall do, Zech. 8.16.17.
speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor, execute the judgment of Truth
and Peace in your gates. And let none of you imagine evil in your hearts
against his neighbor, and love no false Oath, for all these are things that I
hate, says the Lord.

To the City of London.
I Am to speak now to a very great body of people, yea the greatest in this
Nation, considering the narrow compass of your abode; and would to God I were
able to speak unto you all at once, by the vocal sound of my mouth, that I
might the better testify the inward affection of my mind toward you, and not
be constrained to bespeak you severally by the whispering language of my pen.
But what voice can be sufficient for the audience of so vast a multitude?
wherefore accept my reproof and counsel as it is tendered unto thee. Thou art
the largest City in this Island for the extent of bounds, the fairest for
magnificence of structure, more populous, rich and mighty by far, then any of
thy other sisters: But according to the usual and unhappy sat of great
Gities, and famous Empories; thou have not more abounded with people then with
sins. And thy sins have not been more pernicious to thy self, then hurtful to
this whole Nation by exeraplary contagion, much like thy plagues in former
times. For thy pride, deceit, hypocrisy, faction, and other spiritual
maladies have breathed forth that poison from thee, the which has transused it
self through the politic Body, leaving no part thereof free from infection and
sickness; thy heresies and schisms have corrupted and divided, or rather torn
in pieces this Church which was once pure in Doctrine, sound in the Faith,
entire in it self, and at peace with all her neighbors. Micah 1.13.
Thou were the beginning of the sin to the daughter of Zion; for the
transgressions of Israel, (England) were found in thee, as it is said of
Lachish: for how lofty is thy pride notwithstanding all thy sufferings unto
this present Day? Isa. 9.9, 10.
yea the pride and stoutnesse of thy heart has been like that of Ephraim, and
the inhabitant of Samaria; increasing in thine affliction, and arising yet
higher from thy fall, forasmuch as thy vain but costly garments instead of
those of widowhood are still upon thee, and thy children are become more
gorgeous in their apparel, and loose in their behavior, then in preceding
times; thy daughters also like those of Sion, Isa. 3.16.
are haughly and walk with stretched forth neeks, and wanton eyes, walking and
mineing as they go. Likewise disfiguring their countenance with spots of
immodesty and impudence, thereby publishing their own shame. Yea thy servants
and handmaids do now challenge the Nobles of the more remote Country for pride
of clothing and bravery of attire; if not outstrip many of them. And what will
ye do in the end thereof?

Now touching thy deceit, let the subtle contrivance of thy shops, or dark
situation of them for the delusion of all eyes that behold the baits of thy
profit and gain, witness against thee and thy children, who generally and with
one consent say concerning evil it is good, put darkness for light, Isa. 5.20.
and bitter for sweet, though never perchance guilty of inverting the practice
as the Jews then were, unless the scene be altered, and in stead of selling to
others, they buy of others those commodities whereof they may make advantage
for the suture; for then as it is Prove. 20.14. they say of every thing, Pro.
20.14.
It is naught it is nuaght, but when they are gone their way then they boast,
Thus they bend their tongues like their bow for lies, Jer. 9.3. or as it is v.
8. Jer. 9.3.
Their tongue is an arrow shot out, it speaks deceit, each one speaks
peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in heart he lays his wait,
verse. 8. Take ye heed therefore every one of his neighbor, and trusi ye not in
any brother, for every brother will utterly supplant. And they will deceive
every one his neighbor, and will not speak the truth, they have taught their
tongues to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity. v. 4.5.
And not content herewith themselves, they also train up others after the same
manner from their tender years, Zophan. cap. 1.9.
who like those in Zephan. cap. 1.9. leap on the threshold, and fill their
masters houses, if not with violence, yet surely with deceit, abusing the
ignorance and credulity of the simple and unexperienced in their fallacious
ways of dealing, to the sinful advantage of those whom they serve and cannot
please without iniquity.

And all this they fairly disguise with the mask of seeming sanctity, in
profession, in word, in gesture, in conversation, in pretenses, promises,
asseverations, Oaths, every way. But more especially and solemnly is this
appearance made on the Lords Day, wherein the dress of their apparel, and the
show of their devotion are both alike: the former above their outward rank and
quality, the later exceeding their inward affection. For what eager concourse
then of all sorts to the Church? what thronging and thrusting for places and
seats approximate to the Preacher? what earnest attention to the Sermon? what
demure carriage all the while is seen in the Assembly? how many diligent
notaries are present to receive, whatsoever droppeth from the Ministers lips?
what sighing may you hear oftentimes, and groaning of the Auditors? what
expressions may we behold almost in every countenance of sorrow and remorse?
what elevation of the eyes to heaven? And yet alas how soon is all this
vanished and forgotten? For after one nights sleep (notwithstanding repetition
in private houses of what was publicly delivered in the Church, and other
acts of duty proper for the season there performed by them) they return with
all greediness to their wonted courses of unjust dealing and unlawful gain,
by lying, falsehood, perjury, deceit, equivocations, mental reservations,
merely Jesuiticall, and almost to as bad a purpose, though not upon so great
necessity. Thus like the Gallant they seem at the Church porch to bid Religion
stay there for them until they come thither again, as often as they depart
from the house of God, or at the most retain but a weak and faint relish
thereof until the day be over past: so little do they practice of what they
learn in their life, all the week after, as if the whole business of
Christianity did consist in nothing else then in hearing, or talking of what we
ought to do, and not in obedience of the Truth.

But they will be ready to say, we have private and constant devotions at home,
as well as those we use in the Lords house, and therefore all our Religion does
not rest on public duty.

I answer, That which they allege in their own defense does make the more
against them, for what is this your daily exercise of devotion, but an
hypocritical profanation of holy duties, when you use it for a pretense only
of Religion, for a show of piety, or rather for a veil of iniquity. Surely such
seigned holinesseas this is as distaste full to the Almighty as open
profaneness: Mat. 23.14.
And indeed no service of God can profit us, or stand us in the least stead,
without justice and mercy toward man, as appears from Prove. 15.8. Isa. 1.15.
and from many places more of holy writ, which plainly tell us that where
innocence and integrity are wanting in the Person, there can be no acceptance
of the Action before God, whatsoever it be for the naure and quality thereof.
In a word, the substance of our Christian Profession consists in obeying the
practical precepts of the Gospel from faith unseigned, 2 Timothy 1.5.
And this to obey is much better then any sacrifice and oblation of prayer or
praise we can offer to the Divine Majesty.

Now concerning the faction of thy children, proceeding from thy pride and
abundance of all things, to which some impute the common sufferings of thy
Nation, it is strange to consider by what slender wiers and subtle motions it
has been conveyed through thy whole corporation; and though it be more then
probable that worldly interest is most predominant in the several opposite
parties, yet every one is taught to open his mouth wide for the cause and truth
of God, and none more then they who most blaspheme his name by their impure
doctrines, which they commend to the world for those of Christ Jesus, though as
contrary to what he spoke as darkness is to light. And because these are the
fruits of faction and schism sometimes, (as it is now apparent with us) as well
as the causes thereof at other times, I wish men all to remember how deep and
sad their accounts will one day be, who have any ways procured these dangerous
maladies to the State and Church, or fomented the same by word or deed. For we
plainly see to what condition both are reduced at this present, and every man
may be so far a Prophet as to soretel yet greater calamities like to come upon
us, except the Almighty does wonderfully appear for us, and that speedily; but
I for bear, neither shall I stir the coals of their lusts, nor strike the
drunkards cup in indignation out of his hand; nor rowse thy delicate Dames from
their bed of pleasure and sloth, whose life is nothing else but sleep and lust,
and putting on of apparel not becoming women professing godliness and costly
fare with ease and sport, 1 Pet. 3.3. with 1 Timothy 2.10.
according to the several varieties of them all. Nor shall I labor to
dissolve the Adamantine hearts of thy creditours into humane pity toward their
poor obnoxious debtors. For have not these been the frequent and faithful
endeavors of thy learned and pious Ministers from time to time for many years
together? Jer. 9.^.
But their habitation was in the midst of deceit, Zech. 7.11.
through deceit they refused to know the Lord; yea thy children refused to
hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should
not hear; Or were like those of whom the Lord complains, and describes to
the Prophet Ezekiel, chap. 33.31, 32. who with their mouth showed much love,
(to the Prophet, and to his message) but their heart (in the mean while) went
after their covetousness, to whom he was as a very lovely song, of one that
has a pleasant voice and can play well on an instrument: for they heard his
words, but they did them not. In like manner thy sons and daughters were only
hearers of the Evangelicall word, but left the doing thereof to others, who
were better affected with the same then they, contenting themselves with this
empty shadow of godliness, that they were continually present to the outward
Ordinance of the word, and did countenance or favor the messengers thereof;
wherefore has the Lord of hosts melted them and tried them, Ier. 9.7.
for how should he otherwise do for the daughters of his people? And oh that
thy children had been admonished and reformed by the corrections of their
heavenly Father! Isa. 59.
But alas! their transgressions are multiplied before the Lord, and their sins
testify against them, for their transgressions are with them, and as for their
iniquities they know them, In transgressing and lying against the Lord, and
departing away from their God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and
uttering from the heart words of falsehood. And judgment is turned away
backward, and justice stands a for off, for truth is fallen in the street,
and equity cannot enter, yea truth fails, and he that departs from evil
makes himself a prey, (or is accounted mad) yea, they proceed from evil to
evil, and they know not me says, the Lord. Shall he not therefore visit for
these things? and though he defer his wrath for a season, expecting with
patience their repentance and conversion unto him, will it not break forth at
the last, to consume his adversaries as in a moment? For while they be folded
together as thorns, Nah. 1.10.
and while they are drunken as drunkards they shall be devoured as stubble
fully dry. Thou have occasioned and seen with merciless hearts and eyes, the
grievous sufferings of thy country, and shall thou go altogether together
unpunished? is thy sin less, yea is it not much more then theirs? have not
thy lamps shined forth most gloriously to thy self and others when they have
sat in darkness? And yet thou have loved darkness rather then light, because
thy works were evil. For thou do represent unto us the wickedness of the
whole Nation, contracted indeed into a lesser volume, but more polished and
refined by the art of thine iniquity, overlayed with the fair gilt of
hypocrisy, but underneath more foul and ugly then that of the people, both in
the sight of God, and of those who know his ways a right. Thus deceit is with
thee more elegant and smooth in expression, but more dangerous and dark in the
mystery, then it is with those of the Country. In like manner other sins go
more fine and trim in their dress here then in the rural Towns or inferior
Cities, but the skin underneath is much blacker, and the shape more deformed
then it is with them: Only impudence is more daring in thy children then in any
of the Nation, who generally are as yet incapable of that immodesty, which is
every where common with thee: And may they never learn more of that from thee,
of which perchance they have too much already.

Now as thou have in thee the sins of those ample and glorious Cities which the
Lord destroyed in times past for their wickedness, but are still set forth for
example of his Divine justice to us that are alive this day, as well as to them
that have gone before us, and to all generations to come: so fear and expect
their judgments, and the more because his mercies of all sorts have been
greater toward thee then them, and thy warnings also of approaching vengeance
more frequent and signal, then theirs; and yet behold their memorial is
perished with them. Psalm. 3.6.
But the Lord shall endure for ever, the same in justice as in mercy to all
men, throughout all ages. Take heed therefore lest with an overflowing flood he
make an utter end of the place thereof, Nah. 1.8, 9.
so that affliction rise not up the second time, Security is the daughter of
sin, but the mother of danger. Prove. 16.18.
Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall. Thou
may happily (as thy elder sisters did before thee) dream of perpetuity, when
desolation is at hand: But oh remember that there is no stability with
iniquity, no safety in sin, no peace to the wicked. Babylon, thou know, that
was heretofore given to pleasures as thou art now, dwelled carelessly as thou
do, said in her heart, as thou perchance speak to thy self, Is. 47.8, 9.
at this time, I am and none else besides me, I shall not sit as a widow,
neither shall I know the loss of children; But these two things came to her,
as the Prophet foretold, in a moment in one day, the loss of children and
widow hood, and both in their perfection, for the multitude of her Sorcerers,
and for the great abundance of her enchantments. v. 13, 14.
Her Astrologers, Star-gazers, and monthly prognosticators, could not stand up
and save her from those things that were to come upon her, but became as
stubble themselves for the power of the flame: neither shall thine be able to
celiver thee, nor their own souls by all their wisdom and knowledge from the
evil which the Lord has determined against thee, verse. 13, 14. Wherefore O
Jerusalem, (London) wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be
saved: how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? There is but one way
left of escape for thee, The Lord show it thee, and direct thy steps therein,
for his sake, who is the way, the truth, Joh. 14.^
and the life. To whom with the Father, and with the blessed Spirit, be
ascribed all honor, glory, might, majesty and dominion now and for evermore.
Amen.

To the seduced of this nation, and to as many as have separated themselves
from the Communion of our Church.
WEre I now to address my speech to an humble though deceived people, I might
the better hope to prevail with them: but I am to deal with men who generally
are proud as well as ignorant, and have added to error in judgment, obstinacy
of will, and a strong presumption of truth; arrogating to themselves immediate
assistance and infallible direction from the divine Spirit in what they
maintain for the undoubted Gospel of Christ Jesus. And who can shake this your
considence? Nevertheless I shall endeavor as powerfully as I can, to convince
you of your selfdeceit and falsehood, and persuade you to another, but sounder
mind, leaving the success to him, with whom all things are possible and easy
to be done: First then let me enquire of you, why ye did so long adhere unto
this Church in times past, and why ye are so soon removed from it as in a
moment? What is the cause of your forrner communion with us, and your sudden
departure from us? Surely the first must needs argue great weakness of
judgment, and want of consideration in you; and how ye can defend the last
from the just imputation of unstablenesse in religion and levity of mind, is
more then I can learn you. If your new pretended Pastors, and (as you deem
them) extraordinary Teachers in respect of their calling, deliver you the same
truths which ye received or might have received from the old, why are they
better accepted with you now then heretofore? or why are they better taken at
the hands of the former then of the latter? Is it for the grace and manner of
delivery, or for their persons who commend the same unto you? If either, or
both of these be the cause of this change; do ye not look on things after the
outward appearance, 2 Cot. 10.7. Joh. 7.24.
and not judge righteous judgment? You will say perchance, that the power of
the Almighty does manifest it self unto them, because though ignorant and
unlearned men they pray and preach with the same facility or with more
dexterity sometimes then men of learning and parts; But can ye show us that God
did ever work a needless miracle, either in revealing his truth, or witnessing
it to the world? Has any man spoke with tongues, or done mighty signs and
wonders by the power of the Spirit of God, since the Gospel was preached to all
See 1 Cor. 14.12.
nations? If ye know such a one produce him without delay, that we may see also
and believe him with you. But this is not likely to come to pass, however (as
I am informed) some have gone about, though in vain, to persuade us the truth
of things as incredible as these to justify their cause.

Besides this, who will take you to be competent judges of those gift; in other
men, whereof ye have so small a portion your selves, or perchance no share at
all? Lastly, the means of knowledge in this nation, have been so plentiful and
common every where for many years together (Blessed be the Lord for this his
unspeakable gift) partly by the teaching, and partly by the writing of the
learned, that it is an easy matter now for men of good natural parts with
ordinary inclustry used in hearing and observing what is taught them by mouth,
or in reading what is published from the press, to gain enough whereby to set
themselves forth with credit and repute of knowledge for a time in the mystery
of preaching (especially, if confident and bold above measure) amongst the
ignorant and vulgar sort, of which note ye are; and to delude your simplicity,
while they boast of things without their measure, that is, of other men's
labors, or in another man's rule and line of things made ready to their hand, ^
Cor. 10.16.
repeat unto you in one place, those Sermons which they have heard before in
another from men called to the work; yet so that you must take them to be
theirs, and as the sudden issues of their invention, not second accounts of
their memory, which they have immediately received from the Lord, and not from
man. Ibid.
But, he that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

Again, if they commend unto you contrary doctrines to those that ye formerly
received, or new and strange of which ye have not heard in times past, be wary
and well advised how you entertain them, lest they feed you with chafe in
stead of wheat, give you a stone for bread, or a serpent in stead of a fish, or
present you with a draught of deadly poison while they promise you a cup of
pure wine. To this end take heed I pray you of their spiritual flattery,
whereby they secretly insinuate into your minds an high, but groundless and
false conceit of knowledge and Saintship; not only above, but also with
exclusion of other men, not agreeing with you in opinion or faction from these
supposed privileges. For besides that this pride of spirit does lay you open
to their sly and dangerous insinuations of heresy, and every false doctrine
whereby they do impose upon your faith, it is an abomination in the sight of
the Almighty, as appears from Luke 18.9, etc. Luke 19.9, etc.
And surely it is almost beyond all belief how far this tympany of spiritual
pride has swollen in many of you: or that they have imagined themselves to be in
a state of perfection above divine ordinances, namely, prayer, preaching,
Sacraments, and if there be any other act of duty pertaining to the worship of
God, notwithstanding the Apostles and Jesus Christ himself, do every where
commend and command the use of these to the Church, not by their precept only,
but by their example also; for how often do we find it testified of the Lord
by those who were from the beginning eyewitnesses and Ministers of the word,
as the Evangelist speaks, Luke Luke 1.
1. that he prayed to the Father when he lived on the earth? See especially,
Luke 6.12. and 22.42. with 44. Is not this then unheard of, and more then
Pharisaical pride in you? Mat. 10.24, 25.
For, the Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord. It
is enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his
Lord. Not unlike this is your assuming to your selves the honorable and
glorious title of Saints, and yet refusing to own the Apostles by this name, as
if their Saintship were questionable, yours certain and without all doubt:
neither can the Popish custom any ways plead for, or excuse this disuse; for,
that they were Saints as well as you, ye durst not deny, why then ye may not
call them Saints, you have nothing to affirm; especially considering that the
holy Ghost does bestow the honor of this appellation upon them, See Ephesians. 3.5.
with 1.1. and 2 Cor. 1.1.
and not upon them only, but upon their disciples also, far inferior to them
in grace and holiness.

And now consider with me I pray you, the perilous consequence of your schism
or separation from the Church, to the renouncing of the ministry and baptism
which ye received first from it. For if our Church be indeed a true Church,
what have ye done less in thus deserting it, then renounced Jesus Christ
himself? as appears from 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. where we plainly see the ground and
foundation of every true Church: and likewise from Luke 10.16. where we
perceive the first original of ministerial power in the Church, and how far
the contempt thereof reaches, even unto God himself. There can be no salvation
then out of the true Church, this alone like Noah's Arc does preserve us by
Baptism from the deluge of divine wrath; 2 Pet. 3.20, 21.
Act. 27.31.
or like the Ship, Act. 27. in which we must abide at any hand, or cannot else
be saved. In like manner none can publicly teach, none can baptize without
commission and authority from Christ the head of the Church, as is manifest
from Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. where we may evidently discern that the Apostles
authority to teach and baptize, verse. 19, 20. is immediately derived from the
supreme power of Christ which the Father gave him by virtue of his office,
verse. 18. Wherefore no man can teach with profit as a Minister, no man can
baptize but a Minister in the Church of God, who has by the Apostles and their
successors received this power of the Lord Jesus, who did not preach himself
before he was sent, Joh. 20.21.
and but for that he was sent.

You see then clearly how much you hazard your most precious souls in forsaking
our Church, if it be a true Church; and in case it be a false one, ye have
neither judgment to discern, nor reason to prove that it is so either for your
own, or other men's satisfaction in this point; and (as I do believe) no man
living upon the face of the whole earth. And indeed to say the truth, your
ignorance and want of due instruction at the first, was the true and main cause
of your seduction and schism: for who have more fallen off from fellowship
with us, then those that were never yet acquainted with the principles of our
faith, and grounds of the doctrine which we profess? And though ye pretend
indeed, that the Antichristian calling, false teaching, and scandalous living
of our Ministers, gave you just cause of separating from us; the former upon
examination would prove loud and lewd slanders of ignorance, or of malice; and
as for the latter, it cannot excuse you in this matter before God, as appears
from a like case, Mat. 23.2, 3. Wherefore God has suffered that curse, 2 Timothy
3.13. to light upon many of your seducers, 2 Timothy 3.13. Chap. 2.16.
and also upon you who are deceived by them, in whom their word does eat as
does a canker. For who has yet given in a full catalogue of all your errors
and heresies? So many and manifold are they, and yet increasing more and more
every day, whereby the truth of God is almost denied in each part and article
thereof, the authority of the Apostles, questioned by some vilified and derided
of others, as I may be bold to speak upon mine own knowledge. For I well
remember, that a certain woman of your faction, in discourse at the table with
my self and others maintaining a point of doctrine not agreeable to the
Analogy of faith, and being urged to the contrary by us with the words of
Christ and of his Apostle St. Peter: replied, that she did regard what Christ
spoke, but as for that which Peter said, she gave no more heed to it, and cared
no more for it, then if it had been spoken by some other man.

As for the Apostasy of some, it is so great and general, that they seem
wholly to degenerate from the profession of Christ Jesus or to Atheism and
utter unbelief of the truth. For who can excuse them that are termed Ranters
from this dreadful imputation, that shall recount the damnable tenants, which
they maintain, and practices wherein they glory; the which to mention or
express were to defile the paper whereon I write? surely these (if any now)
are the men whom God has given over to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28.
to do those things which are not convenient: Wherefore ye that are more sober
minded then your fellows, and not so much forsaken of divine grace as they, be
admonished by their follies to relinquish that profane society to which you
have adjoined your selves through the deceitfulness of error and sin under
the color of truth and holiness, the new but false lights which these ill
guides hold forth unto you, lest as ye do partake in their abominations, so ye
partake with them also of the judgments and punishments which they have
deserved. 2 Cor. 6.15.
For what concord has Christ with Belial? Wherefore come out from among them,
Verse 17, 18.
and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I
will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Now consider what I say, and the Lord give
you understanding in all things. As for the rest who oppose themselves, 2 Timothy
2.25, 26.
God give them also repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, and that they
may recover themselves (awake) out of the snare of the devil, who are taken
captive (alive) by him at his will, Amen.

To the whole Body of this Nation.
HE that does but indifferently observe the manner and course of your lives (O
ye sinful English people) shall generally find you to be such as walk quite
contrary to the light and truth of the Gospel, which ye do profess and have
vowed to maintain. For first ye are either openly profane in your conversation,
not only abstaining but abhorring from the appearance of that which is good, or
put on the rough garment of seeming sanctity and austerity of life, to deceive
the credulous part of the world by this disguise of hypocrisy in a good
opinion of you: the better to accomplish your ambitious or covetous ends. And
therefore to swear rashly without advise or cause is as common with many as
their ordinary speech. The neglect and contempt of Gods worship both public
and private, with the Ministers thereof more notorious then ever, as may appear
by the following instance. For the vulgar country people make it no matter of
conscience on the Lords day to absent themselves from the congregation as often
as they list, upon the least, and without any just pretense whatsoever, and
come thither pas a pas, like their ox, slowly and tardily at the best,
although they will be sure to be at their markets in due season, and therefore
hasten to them with nimble pace and measure; yea, like men affrighted sometimes
or pursued by their enemies, with like motion do they precipitate themselves
or tumultuously depart out of the Church as soon, and frequently before the
Ministers blessing: And during their presence at the Assembly, good God, what
drowsinesse, want of attention, sporting, smiling, wandering of the eyes after
every person that enters in, gazing upon the habit and countenance of those
that are present with themselves, and other irreverent gestures may we perceive
in the auditory? As for those who by their coming, anticipate the time of
divine service, or tarry after it in or near the place thereof: they wholly
mind their worldly business, discoursing of their land, cattle, corn,
bargains of the season, weather, and such like, to omit worse matters, though
these be bad enough, so little do they remember or regard for what end they
came to the Church, what they heard there, and to whom they must one day give
an account for both. And in this particular as well as in many other, the most
professed enemies of our Religion, the Turks will condemn you at the last day,
who at their common devotions, count it no small trespass against the Majesty
and honor of God, so much as to scratch the head, or to use any other indecent
or impertinent gesture, imagining their prayers by this means to become
ineffectuall and fruitless for them before the throne of the Almighty, Bus^equ.
as one long conversant among them has observed. And for this cause they will
usually transgress the bounds of a sabbath days journey in traveling to some
other remote Church, there to serve God as they pretend upon any worldly
occasions, or concerning profane business of commerce and such like, when they
will scarce make a step out of their houses to their own congregation, though
the place or Church be never so near unto them, unless perchance they have an
errand to do there of the same nature with the former. Thus God is served in
pretense, but the world in truth, or in deed; or indeed the Devil, who sets
them a work, though upon their own business.

Now what gross ignorance does every where blind the eyes of this people? For
many, notwithstanding they have been so long accustomed to the hearing of
Sermons, and can yield you an orall confession of their faith, understanding no
more what they say, though in their mother tongue, then their sorefathers did,
of that which they were taught by their Priests, to repeat in a strange and
unknown language; neither can they distinguish between a precept and a prayer,
but usually confound both as one in their orisons and private devotions. Hence
it is that they scarce look higher then to the common providence of God in all
their ways, giving them seasonable weather, and fruitful seasons, with other
common blessings of life, or withholding these from them, when he is displeased
with them for their sins. In the mean time they are altogether senseless of his
saving grace in Christ Jesus: and as they seel not the want, so it is to be
seared that they never obtain the benefit thereof. And indeed they wilfully
close their eyes against the light, either grossly neglecting, or obstinately
refusing to know more then they do, at least so much as they ought. For they
neither respect nor make use of a minister for his gifts, whereby he is able to
instruct them, nor consider the necessity and unspeakable benefit of his office
in order to a better being then this present life, but if he be a man given to
hospitality, no exacter of his tithes, easy and willing to be deceived in
matter of contract and right, they more regard him for this bounty, and
facility of manners, then for all the good he can do them in reference to their
precious souls, like those of whom we read, Joh. 6.26. that followed Christ for
his meat, not for his miracles and doctrine. And therefore men of the other
temper have been very evilly entreated by them in these obnoxious and dangerous
times.

In like manner the Bible is laid aside by the ruder sort, as well in respect
of domestic use as of public practice, and where it is received into their
houses, and read at certain seasons, it is a shame to see how slovenly it is
tossed up and down, and soyled by those places where it is carelessly thrown as
if it were some base utensil of the kitchen, or of some other room belonging to
the house, not a pearl of that price whereat every sober Christian does esteem
it, or at least ought to do. And I would to God this were not a general fault
throughout the Nation, and the Index of a greater; I mean the inward slighting
of that word which we outwardly thus vilify and disgrace: for although I
should be loath to persuade others, or allow in them a superstitious reveverence
toward the Book; such as the Turks use toward their Alcoran (who count it an
horrible crime for any man, though unwittingly, to sit upon it, Busbiq. Ep. 1.
and punish the same with death in a Christian:) yet I cannot but mind you of
that which is comely and agreeable to the nature of the thing, without which we
must needs bewray a kind of irreligion or contempt of that which is holy, and
give occasion of scandal to those who are of different profession from us:
wherefore it is storied of Edward the sixth, that godly young Prince and first
reformer of this Church, that being upon some occasion to look out at a window
in a house where he was, and having a Bible brought to him to stand thereon for
his better convenience of sight, he utterly refused to make use thereof for
this purpose, but devoutly kissing it, in the presence of them that stood by,
he laid it down on the place again: a truly royal example of piety, by which
he showed how great happiness the world might have expected from his future
government, if God had not then judged him too good for an earthly, and counted
him worthy to receive an heavenly kingdom.

Now concerning your demeanure toward the Ministers of the Lord Christ, it may
very well seem very incredible to all men of other professions in the world,
to whom ye give place for love and honor, usually given to such as serve them
in holy things, that I may not say far outstrip and go beyond any of them in
malice and mischief toward your spiritual Guides, especially of late years
since you have had more free and safe opportunity of showing your disaffection
to them, or spleen against them, then in preceding times. It has ever been
your practice received from your forefathers to remove (as much as in you lay)
the ancient Landmark, and to entrench upon the bounds and the inheritance of
the Clergy; and this ye have done by concealment of known rights belonging to
the Ministry by pretended, but false prescription and custom against both
humane and Divine Law, by Defalcation of Tithes, unjust payment or detention of
them, evasions, collusions, and by other ways as bad as these. But now ye
desire a release of this debt, or non-payment thereof, some (as they make show)
for conscience sake, because it is in their account part of the Leviticall Law,
or of the old Jewish bondage from which they are wholly exempt by Christ Jesus,
others for no other end either in show or in truth, then to spare this cost of
Religion, and to lay the gain to their own private treasures. And surely we
have cause to believe that if the common Country people might be freed from
this ungrateful pension, or might Tithes (as they speak) be laid asleep, they
would not much care, if the Ministry also slept with the same; for as they
count the one an extreme burden to their purses, and therefore never yet paid
Tithes with a willing mind: so they feel the other a burden to their
conscience, from which they would be delivered, did not a superior fear limit
and restrain them in this impious desire and ungodly will; For they cannot
endure to see a Minister thrive by their labor, though pining with his own,
and for their sakes in the Lords harvest.

As for the other sort, whose conscience (as they profess) will not permit
them to be Tithers according to the Law by which we are governed, for fear of
subjecting themselves to a Ceremonial rite or duty now abrogated by the
Gospel, it is strange to consider, both how vain their fear is in this case,
because this burden is not imposed on them by virtue of the Mosalcall Law, but
by the civil Power for the maintenance of the Gospel; neither can it be
proved, that it is a part of that shadow, whereof Christ is the Body; and also
how false their pretense is of Christian tenderness in this business, because
the same persons who allege against the Ministers that they receive of the
people, that portion which was properly due to the Leviticall Priesthood, do
at the same time complain that they pay more now to the Minister under the
Gospel, then the Jews did to the Priest under the Law, namely, a fifth for
their tenth part; which if true, the rate is much different now from what it
was then, and they do apparently pluck down with one hand, what they built up
with the other. But the truth is, that which ye both driveat, and all the
people of this once flourishing Island together with them, is how ye may serve
the Lord at the easiest hand. A cheap religion, by which ye may save most, and
thrive best for the world, wherein is least trouble and most gain, does alone
suit with your carnal dispositions and earthly minds, although (as one well
said) he that thinks to save any thing by his Religion but his soul, will
prove a loser in the end. And yet we have known a man in our times below the
rank and quality of a Gentleman, who year by year presented to his Minister a
free will offering of that value, which heretofore would have been accounted a
liberal stipend for a serving Curate, and does now pass for a tolerable
salary in Gentlemen's houses for a Domestic Chaplain, especially where the
Patron is a man of the novel profession Of a far different and worse mind was
that witless and graceless Justice (if I mistake not) of the County of
Buckingham, who was not ashamed to say openly at the meeting of his fellow
Commissioners, that he valued the labor of a Minister no more then he did two
days work of a day-labouring man. But happily there be many more of the same
mind with this young novice, although they have more discretion then to utter
it thus freely as he did; as for the other I must confess, I have not as yet
found a companion for him, and know not where to seek one. And now I shall take
a further view of your wicked practices against those who have faithfully
served you in the Gospel of Christ Jesus.

The time was when your Progenitors made a lamentable complaint (as they term
it) by way of supplication to the High Court of Parliament for a learned
Ministry, A Petition, 1585.
and withal requested that the full maintenance of Tithes, might be again
restored to the Church, with what intention, God knows to whom I leave it.
But the time is come in which you their unhappy posterity delight more in
unlearned then in learned Ministers, and many of you have made humble addresses
to the present power, that ye might be freed from the decimal charge as too
grievous for you to bear, and more then the necessities of the Pastor, or (as
you imagine perchance) the dignity of his calling does require. And however the
rest were close or silent in the matter, it is justly suspected by some, that
it was not so much the love of the Ministry, as fear lest they should be only
poasted off to more rigorous exacters of this payment, not eased of the burden
which deterred them from joining with then former in the same request. But this
happily may seem rather a matter of covetousness for your selves, the of malice
against your Ministers, or indeed a pernicious effect of both; your other
proceedings lowdly publish and proclaim to the world the malice and bitterness
of your spirits against them. For with what eagerness of mind and earnest
endeavor have ye prosecuted the ejection of many a worthy labourer in Gods
harvest out of his lawful possession? And by how slight means have ye set on
foot, yea and accomplished also your mischievous designs? sometimes by slender
and uncertain informations brought against them, otherwhile by frivolous
accusations, and sometime again by false imputations of malignancy, popery,
superstition, and of such like crimes, laid to their charge, from which they
were altogether free, not without the subornation of false witnesses sometimes
to attest the same. And in case new matters of scandal were wanting, whereby
to make them odious to the ruling Power, those which time had almost buried in
oblivion, were revived again by you to the infamy and damage of your Pastors,
as if they were not men compassed about with infirmity, as well as others, or
your selves free from all iniquity, not needing the mercy of him who is the
common Redeemer of you both, and though ye need it, how can ye with confidence
expect it, if that be true as ye find, Jam. 2.13.
Jam. 2.13. For he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no
mercy? For neither your words nor deeds have been such toward them as do
become men that shall be judged by the law of Liberty, Verse. 12.
because ye have used rigor and extremity in them both, not advising in the
least measure with the Law of Christ: For otherwise ye would not have
aggravated after this manner every small matter which might any ways tend to
their prejudice, but rather have passed by such as these, and either concealed
the greatest where there was hope of repentance and amendment, or followed the
same with all meckness and moderation considering the persons whom ye did
pursue, and the sad calamities which were likely to befall them and their
families, if judgment should proceed against them.

And surely it is strange that the painful industry of many years in the work
of the Ministry could not prevail either with you who did partake thereof to
conceal, or with those that were their Judges, and without doubt knew as much,
to pardon one or a few errors of their life upon promise of more strict
conversation for the time to come. Ye did pretend indeed that zeal for the
Truth only, and love of Gods people did set you thus in opposition against the
scandalous Ministers, or those whom ye were pleased to term so: but I fear,
your own conscience will one day tell you plainly (and I pray God not too late)
that private quarrels, personal interests, and self ends carried you all along
in these unwarrantable courses of mischief and persecution; for some of you, to
our knowledge, who have been most forward to thrust forth of the Lords
inheritance them that for many years together had ministered unto you in holy
things, have been the first that fell into dislike of their own new choice,
and refused to give them maintenance according to the Law. So weak and unstable
is your judgment, so sickle your affection, so immoderate your desire of
novelty, so blind your conscience in discerning your own hearts, so squeamish
your minds to receive truth, if it does any wise make against your worldly
advantage, or touch upon your sins, the which though never so grievous and
manifest, Hos 4.4.
no man must strive, or repove another: for thy people are as they that strive
with the Priest.

Neither are ye offended only with the Minister for open, but also for secret
rebukes, yea and for private admonitions and correptions sometimes, be they
never so necessary and gentle withal, as I have seen it by often experience
verified in many; one more especially, a very lewd person indeed, who being
mildly reproved by a Minister in my hearing for some scandalous sin, replied
again; It were better for us if ye Ministers held your peace, because then we
might sin with the less guilt and punishment. To whom then shall I speak and
give warning that they may hear? Behold, Jer. 6.10.
their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken: behold, the word of the
Lord is unto them a reproach: they have no delight in it. Wherefore he that
does not please your humor, or advance your faction, or gratify you in your
beloved corruptions, or sparing you strikes at your adversaries; in a word,
will not be partakers of your sins by connivence or practice, straight ways
grows out of request with you as an unprofitable teacher, or rather one not fit
for your purpose, however he be accomplished in all other respects: and thus he
is by little and little abandoned of you, and another sought out more agreeable
to your fancy, and mind, for a short season, until the date or time of
pleasing you be expired also: Insomuch as one Parish not many miles distant
from the University of Oxford, has been known since these Times of trouble and
distraction to have disliked and changed their Ministers as often, if not more
often then there be seasons in the year, and yet scarce afford maintenance for
a single man to live with them. It is past belief what foolish exceptions they
have had against those men who have upon trial, or other occasions preached
before them; besides many against several Ministers, this they had against one
not unknown to my self (if I am not misinformed) that he preached too long upon
the same Text. I pray God this spiritual delicacy does not presage a
spiritual famine in the end, whereby men may hunger and thirst after that Word
which they despise and loath now because of the plenty and fullness thereof.

And here I may not pass by in silence a common but very dangerous error that
possesses your minds, whereby ye fondly and falsely imagine that the success
of the Ministry does depend upon the personal gifts of the Minister, and not
wholly upon the ordinance of Christ, for which cause ye magnify some above
measure, and despise others in comparison of them, calling the first powerful
Preachers, and not acknowledging the last for such, because not men so well
qualified for the work of the Lord as they. The which conceit (if I mistake
not) is not the least cause of your non-prosiciency by the means of grace. For
how can ye reap benefit from the Ordinance, if ye come not duly prepared to
it? and how can ye come duly prepared to it, if ye have not a just esteem of
it, that ye may answerably submit unto it? For, 1 Cor. 3.7.
neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters: but God that
gives the increase. Let men therefore learn to have greater respect to the
blessing from above, then to the means below; to the grace and gift of God,
then to the abilities and endowments of men in the great busmesse of their
conversion and edification.

Again, ye English people are generally indifferent or luke warm in Religion,
and so ye may enjoy the worlds good, care not what does become of the Truth of
God, the which ye hear indeed, but learn and know not, like those of whom we
read 2 Timothy 3.7. ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the
Truth; or if ye know it, receive it not, neither believing it with your hearts,
nor obeying it in your lives: for although ye all profess faith, and pretend
to it, as the main ground and pillar of your hope in God, yet it is but a bare
profess on and mere ostentation of that which ye have not in truth; a few
excepted, who testify the same by their innocent and holy conversation, Jac
2.26.
without which faith is dead being alone. The rest deceive themselves with the
shadow of faith; namely, a vain and causeless presumption, which they embrace
for the substance; in the mean while giving no evidence thereof to the world,
and hating those that call upon them for the practice of repentance and good
works, yea and persecuting them sometimes, as we have found by experience. But
to slight admonitions of this nature, is almost every man's guilt, however
scarce accounted of as a crime by any. The truth is, ye would fain have, and
some openly declare as much, a religion exempt as well from duty as from
charges and expense, ye would go to heaven, and yet stir not one foot in the
journey, receive the reward of glory, but do no work of grace for it. And
notwithstanding your frequent confessions and protestations of faith in God,
many are yet found among you who give more credit to the sayings of Diviners
and Astrologers, though seldom but false, and ever uncertain, then to the
writings of the Prophets and Evangelists, and more seek unto such as these then
to their Maker in the time of their distress.

Now how far ye are from obeying the precepts of the Gospel, or the commands
of that Lord to whom ye have given up your names, and vowed your selves to be
his faithful servants unto death, let your own works witness against you, and
your conscience judge of you according to this evidence: for, Isa. 9.17.
every ones heart is set upon their covetousness, every one is an hypocrite
and an evil doer, and every mouth speaks villainy. Ye idolize wealth in all
your habitations, set up this stumbling block of your iniquity in your heart,
and before your face for the many which ye have removed out of the way, serving
this mammon of unrighteousness more then the true living God. To gain riches
ye generally speak not what you think, do not what you speak, and neither speak
nor do as ye know and ought. To retain your ill gotten goods, ye dispense with
your selves for swearing what you list, breaking oaths at pleasure, violating
covenants made with God or man; no tie so sacred or solemn, which can hold you
against your profit, or to your present disadvantage. It is your received
principle, that ye may get wealth at any hand for your selves and children, Si
possis recte, si non quocunque modo rem. And your measure is as much as ye can,
by all means possible how base soever. Insomuch as your trades (as they are now
commonly used) seem to be but so many mysteries of iniquity or deceitful baits
for sinful gain. Pro. 21.6.
The getting of treasares by a lying tongue, being a vanity tossed to and fro
of them that seek death. For the restitution of ill gotten goods, whether by
violence, or by deceit, is a thing not thought upon in these days, wherefore
men usually dye in this sin without recognition, much less repenting of what
they have done amiss. Nay, some there be so vain in their conceits, so corrupt
in judgment, and depraved in their will, partly by education, partly by the
custom and manners of the age, that they imagine it no sin at all to defraud
or go beyond their brother in any matter, taking this to be a warrantable
principle in all matter of contract and bargaining with others, that they may
make as much of their goods as they can, without any respect had to the benefit
and advantage of the buyer: a thing most opposite to justice and charity; and
as if this were not enough they glory in their deceit and overreaching one
another, especially of the Clergy and University men, whom all deceive with one
consent, abusing their simplicity and want of experience in the things of this
life, to the damage of them, and to their own unjust profit. In like manner
they do without equity, or measure exact upon strangers wheresoever they come
in the price of all commodities, notwithstanding men of the same country and
religion with themselves, little considering to what exigences men of this
condition may be reduced on the way, and are subject at all times. Others there
be that entertain this opinion or persuasion in their minds, that they may
wrong and deceive as they lift, or as far as they are able, any man who is of a
different judgment or faction from them in religion, whom they call the wicked
and ungodly, and look upon as them that have no right to the creature, by
reason of their unregenerate, and unsanctified estate of life; whereby indeed
they get and lay up treasure for themselves, Luke 12.
but are not rich toward God. Thus do fools make a mocka^sin, Prove. 14.
and it is a sport to them to do mischief. And like the Florentine each one
gets his wealth, by carrying about with him a dogs soul (as he said) to make
no conscience of any thing, so it might be for his gain.

And from whence proceeds this immoderate desire of worldly wealth? Does it
not from hence, that you may consume it upon your lusts? Jac. 4.3.
or heap it up to no use and purpose, but to seed your unsatiable avarice? or
to reserve it for your children (though little wanting it) against the time to
come? This indeed is the vulgar pretense, and common excuse for all that ye do,
whether right or wrong, ye must provide for your children and families, they
that come after you, must not want in any case. And indeed so ye leave them a
temporal inheritance, or a good portion in this life, you care not what may
become of them hereafter in another world: wherefore as well by your precept
and by your example, which is continually before their eyes, ye teach them to
be hypocrites and deceivers like your selves, and applaud them for their
covetous practices, and every course they take, be it good or bad, to preserve
or increase this worlds good, not caring in the mean time, whether they be
godly and virtuously educated, or no; This is the least thing you mind in all
your thoughts for them. Neither will your fond and overweaning affection, many
times suffer you to have them brought up after a sober and austere manner, lest
forsooth they should too much lay it to heart, and pine away with secret
discontent. Now this soft and remiss education of them in your own houses, and
under your own wings, or by such as know and are willing to serve you herein
according to desire, that they may serve themselves of you for their own
advantage, has taught them almost every where to be rebellious against God,
against you their parents, and against their governors also; to despise their
superiors, and betters, and to be impudent in their behavior toward all. And
you either not at all, or else but sparingly reprove them, seldom or never
correct them for these exorbitances: yea, some of you stick not to uphold and
encourage them therein. Thus do ye honor your children above the Lord, as Eli
did 1 Samuel 2.29. 1 Samuel 2.29.
while you transgress his covenant to gratify and please them in their lusts,
and more deny the faith by your sinful caring and carking for them, then they
that do not at all provide for their families, whom notwithstanding the Apostle
does count worse then Infidels, 1 Timothy 5.8. Wherefore ye generally neither get
riches as ye should, nor use them as ye ought, but get them either by violence,
or by deceit; and when you have them, consume them on your lusts: so that ye
are cursed both in the purchase, and in the possession, and your posterity for
your sake to whom is entailed as well the curse as the reward of your
unrighteousness, because of their inseparable union.

To your corrupt ways of getting riches, ye have added one above many as bad
as these of spending what ye have gotten, I mean your excess of wine and of
strong drink. For there is hardly any bargain or contract now which is not
begun and finished at the cup; no meeting, no fellowship in these times without
this evil custom of drinking and swilling: when nature, as well as grace,
prescribes moderation and sobriety in the use of these creatures, ordained for
the necessary comfort of the body, not for the superfluous appetite of the
soul. From whence it is that those Pestes reipublicae, I mean your tippling
house;, are increased to so vast a number every where in the land, and do yet
increase daily, as so many snares spread in the way of those that pass by, and
are about their lawful employments: and the masters of them by their subtilty
and base compliance with every man's humor that spends his money and time with
them, draw more expense from them, and suck more of their labor and substance,
then many honest callings in the nation put together. Neither is this all, but
they usually are the nurseries of idleness, prosanenesse, and all manner of
vicious living; and indeed what can we expect besides such fruits as these,
from that sin which is the mother of all uncleanness, and of whatsoever is
displeasing unto God, or hurtful to man, as the common and sad disasters
occasioned hereby, both to private persons, and to whole samilies do more then
sufficiently witness? and though an instance of the profaneness at such
meetings may seem altogether unnecessary, because nothing more usual then
this: yet I cannot forbear to repeat a speech, which I lately heard from the
mouth of an ungodly companion drinking with his fellows on the Ale-bench, who
said, If all the Devils in hell stood round about me, I would drink my cups.

Oh the sleepiness and deadness of Magistrates! the remissness of government!
the want of care and conscience in the inferior Ministers of justice to
execute their office, and discharge their trust! For otherwise how easily might
many of these houses be suppressed, that without license sell this abusive
commodity? how many more that sell it indeed with license, but suffer all
licentiousness to pass in the use thereof, uncontroled, through concealment
at least, if not encouragement of what is done in contempt both of divine, and
also of humane laws by lewd persons, who make these places their daily or
continual hunt? And both in short time reduced to a much smaller and more
necessary number? Remeraber therefore oh ye Justices of the peace, and you
likewise who receive warrants from them, how much it concerns the welfare of
the nation, and the quietness of your own conscience to enquire after and
rectify these disorders as speedily as you may: let not an omne been be
brought in upon oath at your sessions in stead of an omne male as the custom
has a long time been, and is still in use, or if it be, not find so easy
admission as as it has heretofore done. But what hope of reformation? surely,
If a man walking in the spirit and falshoed do lie, saying, Mic. 2.12.
I will prophecy unto thee of wine and of strong drink, he shall even be the
Prophet of this people. Now though that the Almighty has for many years
together admonished you of these and other your great and heinous sins by the
messengers of his word, and of late severely chastised many of you for them
with his rod, who is there among you that repents of the evil of his doings?
Jer. 8.6, 7, 8.
I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright: no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turned to his course, as the
Horse rusheth into the battle. Yea the Stork in the heaven knows her
appointed times, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and the Swallow observe the
time of their coming, but my people know not the judgment of the Lord. How do
ye say, we are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with us? Nay, do ye not rather
add to the iniquity of your sins? and are ye not become more vile and
abominable in the Lords sight by your lewd practices then before? For behold
your injustice is more exorbitant every where now, then in times past, your
covetousness more close and sharp of appetite, your pride of apparel more
gorgeous; the Hind now exceeding the Farmer that was heretofore, in the
trimnesse and cost of his habit, the Farmer the Yeoman, the Yeoman the
Gentleman, and the Tradesman all these in bravery, every one mounting above his
degree, and going beyond his estate in this sumptuous vanity; your hypocrisy
more profound then ever, your contempt of Gods worship never so open and
apparent as now: so that ye seem generalry to be incorrigible like those in the
Prophet Jer. 5.3. For, though God has stricken you, yet have ye not grieved;
he has consumed you, but ye have refused to receive correction ye have made
your faces harder then a rock, ye have refused to return.

As long indeed as the dissolute plundering party were abroad in the country,
and were a terror and scourge unto you, ye appeared as men mortified and
weaned from the world; but no sooner was the rod laid aside, then ye returned
every one to his former ways, more strongly grasping, and closely emoracing
this world then before; as it comes to pass between friends after a long or
dangerous parting one from the other: like the people of Israel, of whom the
Prophet witnesses, Psalm 78.34, etc. that when God slew them, then they sought
him, and returned and enquired early after him, and they remembered that God was
their Rock, and the high God their Redeemer. Nevertheless, they did flatter
him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues. For their
heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant. So ye
after the same manner did but dissemble in your hearts both with God and with
man in the time of your distress, notwithstanding all the show and profession
you made of repentance and turning unto him, who smote you for your
transgressions. And to say the truth, your hypocrisy is not tranparent only in
the fountain, to him who sees and knows the hidden things of darkness: but
in the streams also which flow from thence, I mean the external actions and
courses of your life, to men who judge according to the appearance and sight.
For he that narrowly considers and examineth without prejudice, the usual
motion and carriage of things in these times, shall find very few, at least
not any considerable number of men in comparison of the rest, who have not
sided with the several unhappy divisions or factions of the nation according
as they were led by private interests of dependence, gain, honor, liberty, and
such like personal advantages, notwithstanding their fair pretenses of
conscience and religion in reference to the cause which they did maintain.
Under the same color do you still as formerly bite and devour one another, as
if that religion which teaches mercy, and enjoyneth the exercise thereof even
toward the worst enemies both of its professors and of it self, could any way
countenance before God, or discerning good men, proceedings of this nature so
contrary to the precepts thereof: and although according to the custom of
hypocrites you pride your selves in this, that you are not so debauched in your
life, and loose in your manners, as those are known to be who are opposite to
you: yet ye cannot quit your selves of that imputation which the Lord does
fasten on the Pharisees and Scribes of his time, namely, that they did strain
at a gnat, Mat. 23.24.
and swallow a camel: for as they then were double diligent (as we say) in
observing what the Law did require in point of ceremony, and circumstance of
divine worship, as also every vain tradition received from their foresathers,
but omitted the weightier matters of the Law, Verse. 23.
judgment, mercy, and faith; forbearing to est with unwashen hands, lest they
should transgress; Chap. 15.2. Luke 11.39.
and yet desiling their conscience with ravening and wickedness; and afterward
with the blood of the Son of God: so ye with whom an innocent ceremony would
not go down, heretofore, and is an abomination unto this day, now can swallow
down all manner of injustice without remorse or distaste thereof in the least
measure, Mat. 23.14.
and devour widows houses, as they did, under the same pretense also of prayer
and devotion.

But some of you place all the duty of a Christian, or Saint in the external
observation of those things that pertain to the worship of God, or in a
professed zeal for the Sabbath (as they term it) and hearing of the word as
opportunity is given them; others in the mortal performance of what the Law
prescribes in point of justice and common honesty: both with like deceit and
danger, setting these two at odds one against the other, which by the will and
commandment of God, are to be inseparably joined together in our Evangelicall
obedience, and cannot be parted without practical apostasy, or manifest for
saking of Saintlike integrity necessary in order to salvation for every man
that will be a disciple and follower of Christ Jesus. Now what more evident
sign of hypocrisy, then such partial respect as this to the Commandments of
the Lord, whereby we pick and choose some, refuse and reject others according to
our own pleasure, or as they best suit with or disagree from our corrupt
affections and sinful lusts.

To which we may add also your non-proficiency under the means of grace: for
never had a nation more plentifully sown among them the incorruptible seed of
the word, that yielded so bad or sparing increase thereof, as ye have done.
Never any yet who know so much, and practice so little as your selves, on whom
greater light have shone, and yet more love and walk in darkness, then you of
this untoward, stubborn, Psalm. 78.8.
and rebellious generation, a generation that set not their heart aright, and
whose spirit is not steadfast with God: Insomuch as it is an aspersion cast upon
you by your adversaries, (and I would to God without ground or just cause) that
our forefathers in this land under their religion, were faster tied by their
bare word and promise, then Protestants at this day by their most solemn
oaths: a charge indeed against us never more verified by our practice, then at
this present time, but little making for them or for their cause, whose leaders
have taught them to err more concerning this thing, then any in the world
besides, framing mischief by a law, or art of dissembling unknown to men in
times past, and to be abominated throughout all ages.

Be ashamed therefore O ye English people, and confounded in your selves
because of all your transgressions. And fear him who has so often turned his
anger away, Ps. 78.38.
and not stirred up all his wrath; Lest he at length cast upon you the
fierceness. V. 49.
of his anger, wrath, and indignation and trouble, and as he has begun, so
accomplish is fury in the the midst of you or behold ye have already seen the
tokens of his displeasure against you, in that he has taken from you those ill
gotten goods by the hand of violence and rapine which ye procured to your
selves at the first by oppression, or by deceit, having given your substance
and your treasures to the spoil without price, and that for all your sins, even
in all your borders. And because you have not believed the Lord speaking unto
you early and late by his spirit in the Ministers of truth and righteousness,
he has in his just judgment sent the spirit of delusion and error among you,
in those that preach unto you without calling and commission from him the
imagination of their own heart, not his word.

Now these with the like proceedings of the righteous Judge against thee in
judgment, are so many gentle forewarnings to thee, O Nation not desired, of
timely repentance and conversion to thy God; but in case of impenitency and
obstinacy against the gracious counsel of his will, certain forerunners of
greater plagues, both upon the bodies, and also upon the souls of thy
children. Fear therefore that if thy vain thoughts still lodge within thee, and
thou haste not to appease the wrath of thy Maker, Zeph. 2.2.
before the Deeree bring forth, before the day pass as the chafe, before the
fierce anger of the Lord come upon you, before the day of the Lords anger come
upon you: Fear, I say, lest your houses shall be turned unto others, Jer. 6.12.
with your fields and wives together, and the whole land be devoured by the
fire of his jealousy. Zeph. 1.18
The Lord has planted you in a good land flowing with milk and honey, like
that of Canaan, but your unthankfulness for his blessings and abuse of them to
sin and provocation of the eyes of his glory, when the measure of iniquity is
already full (as it seems now to be) may soon cause him to cast you forth of
this goodly inheritance, as he did them that were before you; and give it for a
possession unto strangers, whom ye have not known in times past, and whose
language ye cannot understand. The best tenure of your land is the gracious
will of God, and the condition of his will, your obedience. If ye be willing
and obedient, Isa. 2.19 20.
ye shall eat the good of the land; But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be
devoured with the sword: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. And if this
thought may not startle your minds sleeping on the bed of sinful sloth and
carnal security, let that I pray you of a far greater and more destructive
evil awaken you from sleep, the removing of the candlestick out of his place,
after that the star is vanished away, or set in obscure darkness never to rise
again. For ye have a long time turned the grace of your God into wantonness,
and you plainly see that the light begins now to shine much more dim then
formerly, and not at all in many corners of the land, and is there not just
cause to fear, Mat. 21.43
lest that the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation,
bringing forth the fruits thereof? And the rather for that the Lord has not
given you a heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear ( Mic. 9.7.
the rod and who has appointed it) unto this day. verse. 6.10, 11, 12.
For are there (not) yet the treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked, and the seant measure that is abominable? shall I count them pure with
the wicked balances, and with the lag of deceitful writs? For the rich men
thereof are full of violence, and the Inhabitants thereof have spoken lies, and
their tongue is deceitful in their mouth. Jer. 9.3.
And they bend their tongues like their bow for lies, but they are not valtam
for the truth upon the earth: for they proceed from evil to evil, and they
know not me says the Lord, Ch 5.29.
Shall I not visit for these things says the Lord. shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this? Ye are guilty of the sins of Israel, and can
you hope to escape the judgments of Israel? you have seen what heavy
judgments have been executed upon them from time to time by the hand of Divine
Justice, for the same sins which you daily commit, and not upon them alone, but
upon the neighboring Nations round about you, the war, pestilence, and famine,
which wasted and consumed thero, and is there not cause why after so many
warnings by the sad examples of others, you should exspect greater judgments,
or the same in greater measure, then did light upon them? Luke 13.3. Jam 4.8.6,
9, 10.
Surely except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Draw nigh (therefore)
to God, and he will draw nigh to you, cleanse your hands ye sinners, and
purify your hearts ye double minded. Be afflicted and mourn and weep: let
your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness. Humble your
selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up. Believe and obey
those Ministers that most powerfully dehort from sin, and exhort you unto
righteousness, both by their preaching and by their living; and not them,
which decry duty, and secretly persuade you to libertinism and licentiousness
of life, or who flatter you in your sins, bearing you in hand, that ye are
better then you are, or not so bad as some account of you; for though this be
pleasing and plausible, yet God knows, (and you will find so at the last) it
is pernicious doctrine, whereby ye are brought into the snare of the Devil.
Neither rejoice to hear the sins of other men reproved as the costome is, but
truly grieve for them and much more for your own, when they are represented to
your conscience by the Lords Messenger, not storming at his rebuke, or having
indignation at his person, as the manner is, by which means he is often
discouraged in his Office, and you ever hardened in your sins. In a word, let it
be the faithful endeavor of you all, as much as in you lies, to reform your
own lives, and the lives of other men, O ye Ministers of the Lord, O ye
Magistrates of the land, O ye People both small and great, mind this one
needful matter, and no longer dote upon private personal interest with the
neglect of the public, and to the ruin of the whole, prefer not any more the
State to the Church, the world to Christ, gain to godliness, 1 Pet. 1.15.
and earth to heaven But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in
all manner of conversation: suffer him once to rule in your hearts, who has so
often been in your mouths, and of whom ye have made so frequent mention with
your lips, Mat. 7.21.
saying unto him Lord, Lord, but not doing the will of his Father which is in
heaven. Be his servants in deed, and not in word only, his Disciples in truth,
as well as in show and in outward profession, not for what ye may gain here,
but for what ye shall enjoy hereafter. If ye know these things, happy are ye if
ye do them: Now that ye may be able to do them, by him who can do all
things, Phil. 2.13.
and works in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure, The grace of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost
be with you all, Amen.

FINIS.
A Postscript to the Reader.
HE that undertaketh freely to reprove the faults of many, must expect the
various censures of many, and so do I, but fear them not, and trust I have no
cause much to pass by them, my conscience bearing me witness that I have had
a tender respect in what I write to the glory of God, unto truth, and to the
spiritual good of my brethren, 1 Cor. 74.25.
as one that has obiained mercy of the Lord to be saithfull: yet as a man
compassed with infirmity, and subject to many failings, though in the present
business free from malice or desire of revenge, neither do I plead guiltless
my self, while I thus seem to accuse others. Far be this from me, as already it
is. I know and acknowledge my own sins in those of other men, with whom God
knows, I have been in too great a measure guilty of the common errors of the
times, whereby we have mutually drawn down the past and present judgments,
which the Lord has executed, and does still execute upon this sinful nation,
Psalm. 51.3
and my transgression is ever before me. But blessed be his name for that I
have learned by his fatherly rebukes and chastisements, both to loath and to
leave the follies and iniquities of my youth. And oh that I were as free from
the inbred corruption of my heart! But alas, it still cleaves very close unto
me: and I have found it by experience in my self more difficult to struggle
with it, and to strive against it with success, then to bear the cross, or to
suffer reproach and persecution from men for the Name of Christ Jesus. For I am
by nature very prone to impatiency, especially at certain seasons; and this I
look upon as my worst enemy here on earth, against which I pray and fight
continually. As for those that have any way done me wrong either in goods, or
in good name, or any way else besides, Psalm. 59 3.
(not for my transgression, nor for my sin O Lord) I freely forgive them in the
presence of the Almighty, and daily pour forth a supplication for them before
the throne of grace. In the mean while comforting my self in this, 2 Cor. 7.1.
that I have wronged no man, corrupted no man, defrauded no man: and waiting
for the appearance of that day wherein every man's work shall be made manifest,
1 Cor. 3.13.
and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. And surely I might
much more comfortably endure mine own afflictions, did not the thought of
present public calamities, and of those that are likely to follow upon the
head of these, perplex my mind, and add a great weight to the burden of the
former. For God has apparently declared his displeasure against the nation by
altering the natural course of things in the seasons of the year, in our
bodies, and in what not besides these? It is hard to tell whether the like
immoderate drought as of late has ever been known in the land before, the most
aged are silent and wonder at it with cause enough of admiration and
astonishment. Now that both this and our many sicknesses are the sure effects
of Gods wrath and curse upon us, appears from Dent. 28.22.23. Neither may we
hope for better things, but are still to expect worse then these which have
already befallen us, because our sin like that of Judah is written with a pen
of iron, Jer. 17.1.
and with the point of a diamond, it is graven upon the table of our heart. The
Lord take not his peace from us, as he did from them, even loving kindness and
mercies.

Some indeed glory much in the success of the Army hitherto very great and
strange, and promise as much, or rather much more from them for the future, as
also from the Navy. In like manner they count much upon the prudence and
policy of those who sit at the stern, but sin nevertheless unrepented of by
the people, and unreformed by the magistrate does still threaten us with wrath
and vengeance from the Almighty. And what safeguard can a Navy at Sea, though
never so well set forth, or an Army on foot in the land, how numerous and
resolute soever, afford us from the Lord of sea and land? Job 9. 13.
If God will not withdraw his anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him: What
wisdom, understanding, or counsel against him, that disappointeth the devices
of the crafty, Chapter 5.12, 13, 14.
so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise: who takes the wise in
their own craftiness: and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong.
They meet with darkness in the day time, and grope in the noonday as in the
night. Job 9.4.
He is wise in heart and mighty in strength: who has hardened himself against
him, and has prospered? What confidence in any thing before him, who has
cursed all confidence but that which is reposed in him? Chapter 8.13, 14.
So are the paths of all that forget God, and the hypocrites hope shall perish:
whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spiders web, and their
hope as the giving up of the ghost, Chapter 11.20.
or a puff of breath.

He that duly considers the state of things in this land immediately
preceding the several devastations by forain invasion, and shall compare the
same with our present times, may find that correspondency between them, which
will justly make him fear, lest the time of our desolation be at hand also; but
I forbear, and God forbid. I have but one word more to speak unto thee, and it
is by way of request, that if thou be learned, thou will not be offended with
the rudeness of the style, and vulgar plainness of the expression which thou
find in this book, remembering that the major part, whom it does concern, are
either the ignorant, and more simple sort of people, or not so knowing as those
who have diligent education and training up in the schools of Philosophy, or
of more polite literature. And whosoever thou be that do peruse this little
treatise, if by reflection thou chance to see those spots and blemishes in thy
self, of which thou tookest no knowledge before, or in case thou did
perceive them, pass them by unregarded, never seeking to wipe them off from
thee; do not with brutish fury, or childdish indignation break the glass in
pieces for being true unto thee; but rather imitate in this particular him, who
does present and hold the same before thee, that is, reform what is uncomely,
purify what is unclean, rectify what is a miss by the Image or shape, which
it does represent unto thy view: Who so loves instruction, Prove. 12.^.
loves knowledge, but he that hates reproof is brutish. It is an hard matter,
as the case now generally stands with us, either to speak or to hear Truth as
we ought, so great and common is men's prejudice against it. And what Salvian
complained of in his time, may justly give occasion of complaint to us
concerning the present times wherein we live. Tam imbecilla sunt judicia hujus
temporis, ac pene tam nulla, ut qui legunt, non tam considerant quid legant,
quam cujus legant, nec tam dictionis vim atque virtutem, quam dictatoris
cogitent dignitatem. Praefat. ad Salom. Finally, if thou receive any benefit by
what thou read herein, give glory to God, and pray for the Author, as he
prays for thee, and for those who have reviled and despitefully used him
without a cause. Now the Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. 2 Timothy 4.22.
Grace be with you, Amen.

Deo Gloria.
A Catalogue of some Books lately extant and Printed for Richard Royston at the
Angel in Ivie-lane, London.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament by Henry
Hammond D. D. in fol.

The Practical Catechism, with all other English Treatises of Henry Hammond D.
D. in two volumes, in 40.

Dissertationes quator, quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and Primaeva
Antiquitate adstruuntur, contrasententiam D. Blondelli and aliorum. Authore
Henrico Hammond, in 40.

A Letter of Resolution of six Quaere's, in 120.

The names of several Treatises and Sermons written by Jeremy Tailor, D. D.
viz.
1. The Great Exemplar of Sanctity and Holy Life according to the Christian
Institution: described in the History of the Life and Death of the ever blessed
Jesus Christ ^^ Savior of the World.

2. (...), A Course of Sermons for all the Sundaies of the Year; Fitted to the
great Necessities, and for the supplying the wants of Preaching in many parts
of this Nation. Together with a Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity,
Sacredness, and Separation of the Office Mininisterial, in fol.

3. Episcopacy asserted, in 40.

4. The Liberty of Prophesying, in 40.

5. An Apology for authorized and Setforms of Liturgy, in 40.

6. A Discourse of Baptism, its institution and efficacy upon all Beleivers, in
40.

7. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 120.

8. The Rule and Exercises in holy dying, in 120.

9. A short Catechism for institution of young persons in the Christian
Religion, in 120.

Certamen Religiosum, or, a Conference between the late King of England, and
the late Lord Marquis of Worcester concerning Religion, at Ragland Castle;
Together with a vindication of the Protestant Cause, by Chr. Cartwright in 40.

The Psalter of David, with Titles and Collects, according to the matter of
each Psalm, by the Right honorable Chr. Hanon, in 120.

Boanerges and Barnabas, or Judgment and Mercy for wounded and afflicted
souls, in several Soliloquies, by Francis Quarles, in 120.

The Life of Faith in Dead Times, by Chr. Hadson, in 120.

Motives for prayer upon the seven days of the Week, by Sir Richard Baker,
Knight, in 120.

The Guide unto True Blessedness, or a Body of the Doctrine of the Scriptures,
directing man to the saving knowledge of God, by Sam. Crook, in 120.

Six excellent Sermons upon several occasions, preached by Edward Willan Vicar
of Hoxne, in 40.

The Dipper dipped, or the Anabaptists duck'd and plunged over head and ears, by
Daniel Featly, D. D. in 40.

Hermes Theologus, or a Divine Mercury: new descants upon old Records, by The
Wodenote, in 120.

Philosophical Elements concerning Government and Civil society, by Tho. Hobbes
of Malmesbury, in 120.

An Essay upon Statius, or the five first books of Pabl. Papinius Statius his
Thebais, by Tho. Stephens, Schoolmaster in S. Edmonds Bury, in 80.

Nomenclatura brevis Auglo-Latino Graeca in usum Scholae westmonasterionsis,
per F. Gregory, in 80.

Grammatices Graecae Enchiridion in usum Scholae Collegialis Wigorniae, in 80.

A Discourse of holy Love, by Sir George Strode Knight, in 120.

The Saints Honeycomb full of Divine Truths, by Rich. Gove Preacher of Henton
S. George in Somersetshire, in 80.

Devotion digested intoseveral Discourses and Meditations upon the Lords most
holy Prayer: Together with additionall Exercitations upon Baptism, The Lords
Supper, Heresies, Blasphemy, The Greatures, Sin, The souls pantings after God,
The mercies of God, The souls complaint of its absence from God; by Peter
Samwaies, Fellow lately resident in Trinity College, Cambridge, in 120.

Of the Division between the English and Romish Church upon Reformation, by
Hen. Fern D. D. in 130.

Directions for the profitable reading of the Scriptures, by John white M.A. 80.

The Exemplary Lives and memorable Acts of 9. the most worthy women of the
world, 3 Jews, 3 Gentiles, 3 Christians, by Tho. Heywood, in 40.

The Saints Legacies, or a Collection of Promises out of the Word of God, in
120.

Judicium universitatis Oxoniensis de Solemni Lega and Federe, Juramento
Negativo, etc. in 30.

A Treatise concerning Divine providence, very seasonable for all Ages, by Tho.
Morton Bishop of Duresme, in 80.

An account of the Church Catholic where it was before the Reformation, by
Edward Boughen D. D. in 40.

An Advertisement to the Jurymen of England touching Witches, written by the
Author of the Observations upon M. Hobbs Leviathan, in 40.


