THE CLOUDS IN WHICH CHRIST Comes. OPENED In a SERMON before the Honorable
House of COMMONS, assembled in Parliament, upon the Solemn Day of their
Monthly Fast, October. 27. 1647. By PETER STERRY, Sometimes Fellow of Emanuel
College in Cambridge: AND Now Preacher of the Gospel in LONDON.

Published by Order of that House.

LONDON, Printed for R. Dawlman, and are to be sold at the sign of the Crown
and Bible at Dowgate, near Canning street. 1648.

Die Mercurii 27 October. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament: That M. Lisle, do from this
House give thanks to M. Sterry, for the great pains he took in his Sermon
Preached this day at Margarets Westminster, before the House of Commons; and
that he desire him to Print his Sermon, wherein he is to have the like
privilege in printing of it, as others in the like kind usually have had.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Robert Dawlman to Print this Sermon, and no man else.

PETER STERRY.

TO THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Noble Senators,
NOt like Araunah in the Holy Story, as a King in Spiritual Things: but like
the Widow in the Gospel, Poor in the Riches of Christ, and too much a Widow
by the absence of her Heavenly Spouse, my Soul has offered from her Penury to
your Treasury.

Yet, as a Steward, have I endeavored to be Faithful, bringing forth the Best
of my Spirit, for Service, and Food to your Spirits: as the Priests of old gave
the Fat of the Sacrifices to the Flame on the Altar.

As the Royal Preacher sought out Choice Words: so have I sought for the most
Pleasant, most Profitable, most Powerful Discoveries of God, in my Scanty
Store, in the midst of that Thick Ignorance, which covers my Poor Heart.

Now I have laid them at your Feet, where they lie, as Scattered, and Dry
Bones; except the Spirit of our Lord Jesus breath upon them, bring them
together, infuse a Warmth, Power, and Beauty into them, to make them Living
Company for you.

Not able to bring Stately, and Costly Beasts to the Sanctuary; I have made it
my Desire, and Design to present for an Offering before God, and You, a Pair
of Turtle Doves; Simplicity, and Sweetness; or, an Innocent Integrity with an
Humble Meekness.

I hope both are, if not without blemish, because they have alighted on my
Heart: yet of the right-breed of that Dove, which descended from Heaven, and
alighted on the Head of our Lord Jesus.

And now, what is my Expectation? For my own Soul, for my Brethren in the
Flesh, all the Children of Seth, for the rest of my Fellow Creatures, which
groan continually in my Ears? Is not my desire and Sighing before thee, O my
God? Even This; The Descent of the Dove upon them; the Manifestation of the
Spirit in them, the True Iubile, the Divine Liberty of the whole Creation.

All within me testifies of this Spirit to me; All without me proclaims this
Spirit before Me; as the Spring of my Joys; the End of my Faith; the
Glorification of my Person; and not of mine only, but of all those, who are
rooted in this Principle of Life, what ever the Soil of Education, Profession,
or Custom be, in which they are Planted; whatever the Bark of Opinion or
Affection be, in which for the present they are Enclosed.

The most Known Men for Wisdom in all Languages, Learnings, Religions, Ages,
Regions have worshiped, have waited for This Eternal Spirit; The Understanding
of the World, riding forth in a Chariot of Light, upon the Face of all Forms
of Things; The Good Converting All Things into it self; The Unity, or
something above an Unity, To (...), The Supreme Band of Unity, and
Multiplicity.

This Spirit brought forth from it self the Creation, and still sits upon it,
hatching it, till it break the Shell of This Dark Flesh, and spring forth
into its own Life and Image.

The Lord Jesus is this Spirit; who is, before Abraham was, by whom the Worlds
were Made; who is a Spirit, Comprehending, Cherishing, Enclosing, Coming forth
into all the Fleshly Births of Time.

This Jesus came Himself in the Last of Times, into Flesh; was by His Cross
drawn up out of it into Spirit; and now by the same way is drawing up all
Things after Him into the same Spirit.

That your selves, and these Kingdoms may Feel, Obey, Enjoy the Drawings of
this Jesus, the Descents of his Spirit, is the Affectionate Prayer of him, who
is

Your Honors lowest Servant in Christ: PETER STERRY.

Reader, thou art entreated before thou Read, to mend with thy Pen these
Greater faults escaped in Printing.

Page 3. lin. 15. read, the blade, ear, and husk to the Corn. p. 7. l. 22.
r. Rays. p. 18. l. 7. r. slides. and l. 21. r. Air. p. 21. l. 30. r. Sea of
this Creation to sees. p. 23. l. 3. r. were for the most part by flames. p.
29. l. 26. r. Day? p. 39. l. 18. r. in the Course. p. 54. l. 4. r. Things. When

A SERMON Preached at a late Fast, before the Honorable House of COMMONS.
REVEL. 1.7. Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and
they also which pierced him: and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because
of him.


THE CONTEXT.
I Shall make my way through the Context to my Text; so shall we fall more
Clearly and Kindly into it.

Saint John in this Book makes from His Time, a Discovery of Those Things,
which Are, and Are to Be, till the World should Be no more. So the Greek adds
to the second verse this Clause, Both Those things, that Are, and Those things,
which are Ordained to Be, after Them.

The Manner and Matter of this Discovery are Both expressed in the Title and
First words of this Book, The Revelation of Jesus Christ. Divines tell us,
There are Two Glasses, in which All Things are seen, that are seen by a
Prophetic Light, or a Light of Glory: The Person of our Lord Jesus; and The
Trinity. The Scene of this whole Discourse or Discovery, called, The
Revelation; from one end of the Book to the other, lies in the Person of our
Blessed Savior.

This Divine Discourse is cast into the form of an Epistle, conveyed by the
Tongue of an Angel, the Hand of an Evangelist, to the Seven Churches in Asia.

Epist.
This Epistle has Four Parts: 1. A Salutation. 2 A twofold Preface. 3. A
Narration. 4. A Conclusion.


1. Part. Salut.
The Salutation begins with the fourth verse, and ends where my Text begins. It
consists of Prayers and Praises.

Both Parts, Prayer and Praise, have for their Design, a Description of that
Person, which is the Ground and Argument of all that Prophetic story, which
the Epistle represents From, and In Heaven. This Person is our Jesus, not
according to that Fleshly Shape, in which He walked among men, below: but
according to that Spiritual Form, that Divine Figure, in which He sits with
God, and shines forth on Angels, above.

1. Prayer. The First Part in the Salutation is Prayer. This has a Threefold
Description of our Saviors Divine Person: 1. A Distinction of Times in the
Person of Christ. 2. A Distinction of Things. 3. An Union of Times and Things
in Him.


A distinction of Times in Christ. 1. Descrip.
This you may read in the 4. verse, From Him, Which Is, Which Was, and Which
is to Come. The whole Frame of Things is built with a Threefold Partition,
like the Temple, which makes a Threefold Kingdom: 1. That of Nature. 2. That
of the Mediator. 3. That of the Father. These Three Kingdoms have their Full
Revolutions, and Several Periods in that One Majestic Person of our Savior.

1. The Kingdom of Nature lies in the Glory of Christ's Person, as Past. The
first Creation was a kind of Incarnation; for in that, the Image of God was
made Flesh. Jesus Christ was the Seed of the world. God calls him, The Seed of
the Woman, Genesis 3.15. He is the Seed in the Woman, which Sends Her forth, and
Grows up out of Her. The Woman and the World are to Jesus Christ, as the Corn
to the Blade, Ear and Husk. You read, Rev. 1.15. The Feet of Christ were
like unto Fine Brass, as if they were Burning in a Furnace. The Forms of
Nature are the Feet of the Lord Jesus. These are in the Divine Brightness of
his Immortal Person, as in a Flame; Consumed in the Heat of a Greater Glory:
yet still Conspicuous and Transparent through the Light of it. Therefore in this
Kingdom, our Lord reigns with this Title, He That Was.

2. The Kingdom of the Mediator. This is the Union or Marriage of the Two
other Kingdoms, of Nature, and the Father; Time and Eternity. This is, as a
Flourishing Picture, which consists of Light and Shadow, making of Both, One
Beauty. God is the Light, the Creature the Shadow, which here are interwoven,
and shine mutually; The Creature By God, God In the Creature: so Both make but
One Appearance, One Kingdom.

This is the Middle-state of things: Through this, God first Descends into
Nature: Through this, All Things Ascend and return again out of Nature unto God.
Therefore this is called Regnum Mediatorium: This is properly the Kingdom of
Christ, as he is the Mediator: In this our Lord Jesus is according to his
Proper State and Person, known by This name, He That Is.

3. The Kingdom of the Father. Here the Godhead reigns in the Fullness of an
Unmixt, the Freedom of an Unlimited Glory. The Kingdom of Christ is ever in
Motion, till at last it roll it self into this sea, where it Perfectly loses,
and yet more Perfectly then ever, keeps its own Distinct State. This is the
First Description.

2. Descrip.
A Distinction of Things in the Person of Christ: And from the seven Spirits,
which are before His Throne, ver. 4.

If these Spirits were Angels, they would in this place justify and reward the
Papists in their prayers to those Flaming Ministers. God is a Spirit, but He is
One. These then are some Middle-thing, not by Negation, that cannot be; but by
Participation.

Seven is the Perfect number of the Creature comprehending its Labor and its
Rest; its Six Days, and its Sabbath. Seven times Seven is the Great Jubilee,
the Joy of All Things, in which they are Free, and Return to their First State.

God then As He varies himself into all the Distinct Forms of the Creature,
as he carries them on through their Several Changes, till he carry them up to
His own Unchangeable Rest: So He is a Sevenfold Spirit. And this is the
Spiritual Person of our Lord Jesus; Pan's Pipe composed of seven reeds; Seven
being known by learned men for the Marriage-number.

Revel. 5.6. A Lamb stands with seven horns, and seven eyes, which are The
Seven Spirits of God, sent forth into all the earth. This is that Great Spirit
our Lord Jesus, who in the form of a Sevenfold Spirit like a River with seven
heads, lets forth the Godhead and the Creation, one into another.

The Union of all Times and Things in One Person. 3. Descrip.
This is the first part of the fifth verse. This Union is set forth by a
Threefold Expression: 1. The Appearance of all things in Christ. 2. The
Presence of Christ in all. 3. The Power of Christ over all.


1. The Appearance of all things in Christ: Jesus Christ the faithful witness.

Our Lord Jesus in glory is become the Image, and the Light: The Image, in
which Each Thing is seen: The Light, by which that Image appears. So He is both
the Testimony and the Witness. He is the Faithful witness: For He is the
Truth of all things. Every thing is seen in Him, according to its most Right,
most Proper, and Solidest Appearance.

2. The Presence of Christ in all. The firstborn from the dead. v. 5. c. 1.
Our Lord Jesus was in Nature, so He became capable of dying, He sinks himself
out of Nature into The Darkness, which is a Shadow flying round about this
Creation, so He dies. Through this Darkness he shoots forth himself into the
Light of God, which encompasseth all: So He is risen from the dead.

By His Presence in Nature, all things put forth themselves there: For all
subsist in him. Colos. 1.17. By His Death all things die, His Death being the
Universal one, including and bringing forth all Particular deaths. For the
world is crucified by the Cross of Christ. By His Resurrection all things are
raised into the Life of God; as the Soul raises all the parts of the Body,
making to it self so many several Resurrections in them. Thus is Christ the
Firstborn from the Dead. This is He, Present in All Things, Passing through All
States.

3. Power over all: The Prince of the Kings of the earth, c. 1. v. 5. All
Principalities and Powers, visible or invisible, are streams in which Jesus
Christ flows forth from God, pouring forth himself at last into God again.
So have we gone through the Prayer in the Salutation, as it contains a
Threefold Description of our Saviors High and Heavenly Person.

2. Praise. This second part of the Salutation which raises it self, by a
quick sweetness of change, unto Praise, is comprehended in the latter part of
the fifth verse and the sixth. The Praises sing forth the Person of Christ in a
Twofold Description: First Love: Secondly Luster.

1. Love. This Love of our Sweet Savior has a double Preciousnesse in it.

1. The Affection. To him that has loved. v. 5.

2. The Effect. This is Threefold. 1. Our Justification, And has washed us in
his blood. 2. Sanctification, Has made us Priests to God his Father. 3.
Glorification, Has made us Kings.

2. Luster. To him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Glory is the
Reflection of Beauty from every Appearance. Dominion is the Power or Fullness
that comprehends and sends forth each Appearance. This is the Luster of our
Saviors Divine Person. It Is set with the Roots and Rags of all Being. It has
in it self the Power that puts forth any Appearance; the Appearance that is
put forth by any Power, through the whole extent of things, from one end of them
to the other, for ever and ever.

Saint John from these Praises passes as by a divine Rapture of delight and
wonder into the First Preface, 2. Part. Pref.
v. 7. Behold He comes, etc. Let All eyes here look up and gaze, He comes: He
who is, who was, who is to come; He, the Living Creature, and the Wheel of the
whole Creation of God: He comes with Clouds, He comes clothed with so full
appearance of Majesty and Sweetness, as shall melt all hearts, make all eyes
weep tears of Grief and Joy; Grief, that they have seen Him no sooner; Joy,
that they see him now; and seeing him, see all their Griefs and Fears
eternally vanished; all their desires and joys accomplished; all their Sins
against so much Sweetness perfectly forgiven. Thus we are arrived at my Text.

TEXT.
THe Text is a Prophecy of that Divine Trinity, Light, Love, and Joy, which
shall Vnitedly and Universally reign in all hearts and eyes, at the Second
Appearance of this Royal Spouse of Spirits. You will see this Text though it
speak of Wounds, Mourning, Tears, to have a sweet, not sad sense in all these;
if we compare it with that place of the Prophet, from whence these words seem
in great part to be borrowed, Zach. 12.10. I will pour forth a Spirit of Grace
and supplications, etc.

The Text has Four Parts. 1. A Shout. 2. A Show. 3. Spectators. 4. Their
Passions.

1. The Shout, Behold. This is as a Blast of a Trumpet, giving a loud and
cheerful warning of some Glorious Show already begun; it is an Excitation with
a signification of some Eminent and Present thing.

2. The Show. He Comes with Clouds. He comes. This word in Greek signifies a
Present and Continued act, then begun, from that time extending it self to our
days, to the end of Time: He is Coming. He comes with Clouds: I shall leave
these Clouds upon my Text, until I come to my Doctrine, then I shall open them.

3. The Spectators. The whole world is the Theater, or Stage, on which this
Show is presented. All orders of Spirits are the Spectators: Every eye shall
see him: They also that have Pierced him. This clause has a peculiar relation
to the Jews; It Is also a Hint of that Depth in which Divine Love has laid
it is Design, to spring the Highest Sweetness upon the most Horrid Sinners.
It Is a melting Touch, like that, Go, tell his Disciples, and Peter; that he is
risen: Mark, 16.7. Or like that, He appeared first to Mary Magdelen, out of
whom he had cast seven Devils. Mark 16.9.

4. Passion. And they shall mourn over Him. The Sight pierces the Hearts of
the Spectators. As Two Principles: Water and Blood ran mixed from the side of
Christ, so Three sorts of Tears flow mingled down the cheeks of the Beholders
here; Tears of Remorse, Love, and Joy: Tears of Remorse, for having hated
Love, stained Glory, murdered Life it self, upon a Mistake; And all this,
Their Own Love, Glory, Life: Tears of Love toward Beauty and Sweetness, an
Universal Beauty, an Unlimited Sweetness, united in one Jesus, like Light and
Heat in one Beam, and breaking forth from His Face to make a True Day: Tears
of Joy, for that Blessedness which appears extending it self securely to
Eternity, in the Incomprehensible Majesty of our Savior's Person, which has
Immortality, which comprehends Eternity in it self: in which the Quickest
Sight is lost in an Vnfathom'd Light.

Doctrine.
THe words of my Text being thus opened, do again wrap up their full sense in
this Doctrine:

The Eminent Thing of the World, is The Coming of our Lord Jesus into the
world.

This Doctrine empties it Self by these Four Heads.

1. The Coming of Christ. 2. The Clouds in which He Comes. 3. The Clearness
of His Appearance when He is come. 4. The Sweetness Flowing from His Presence.
1. Head.

1. Head.
The Coming of Christ. This is Twofold; The 1st. The 2d. Coming.

1. The First Coming of our Lord Jesus is Carnal. This was then, when he took
Flesh of the Virgin Mary. Now He was made Inferior to Angels, Hebr. 2.9. Now
he was made Flesh, John 1.14. Now he was laid so low, as to be capable of all
the Temp^^tions, the most bitter, the most balefull, that can come from Devils,
or fall on Man; yet without sin: Hebr. 4.14. This First Coming was our
Savior's Humiliation, to Frailty, Guilt, Shame, Horror, Death. The Mystery
now was, The Highest God making Himself the Lowest of Things; Flesh, Dust, The
Deepest Darkness. Thus the First was the Last.

2. The Second Coming of our Savior is Spiritual. It is Spiritual in Two
Respects: 1. His Person. 2. His Appearance.


1. Person. The Person of our Blessed Savior in his Second Coming is
altogether Spiritual and Divine. Such as the Person of our Jesus was at His
Ascension, such is it in His Second Approach to Men. What is that Person in
which our Savior sits at the Top of His Ascent? You shall read, Ephesians. 4.10. He
that Descended is the same, that Ascended far above All Heavens. This Ascent
does not so much import a Change of Place, as of Person and Proportion. When
the Lord Jesus was gone up above these Heavens, which we see, then He was above
all Change of Place. The Heavens, which we do not see; the Invisible Part of
this Creation is fettered with the Chain of Time, but not imprisoned too by a
Confinement or Circumscription of Place. Our Lord ascended, not so much by a
Local Motion, as a Spiritual Mutation, and Exaltation of His Person. As Earth
heightened unto a Flame, changes not its Place only, but Form and Figure: So
the Person of our Savior was raised to a Greatness, a Glory vastly differing
from, and surmounting Any Image, All Images of Things visible or invisible in
this Creation. So it is fitly expressed, Hebr. 7.29. He was made Higher than the
Heavens. He was Heigthned to a Splendor, Enlarged to a Capacity and Compass
above the Brightest, beyond the Widest Heavens.

Thus we see Negatively, what the State of our Savior's Person was, when He
was once Ascended. It was no more Like to any thing in Earth below, or Heaven
above: It was Remote from All Created Forms of Things, Transcending All: Far
above All Heavens.

Our Savior Himself will teach us, what the Positive State of His Person now
was, by his Prayer for it: John 17.5. And now, O Father, glorify me with Thy
Self, with that Glory, which I had with Thee before the World was. Our Lord
prays, (and His Prayer is both a Prophecy, and the Performance begun) that
His Divine Nature may be both the Center and Circle to His Humanity, inwardly
enlivening, outwardly clothing and fashioning it; that his Manhood may be
after his Death, at His Ascension, in that same Image, and Appearance, in which
the Godhead was to it self, before any thing else was.

Saint Paul points out to us that, as Perfect, which our Savior prays for:
Colos. 2.9. In whom the Fullness of the Godhead dwells Bodily. The whole
Manhood of Christ, Body, as well as Soul, was so far enlarged, so far
Spiritualized, as to take in, and hold forth the Godhead Fully. It was
heightened to Both, the Fullness and Form of God.

But, we must take heed, that we do not misunderstand this, and while we
strive to have a Distinct View of our Savior in Glory, confound Him, and our
Selves. To this purpose we must use the help of a Twofold Distinction:

2. Distinct.
The Person of our Savior is exalted to this Glory, not by the Annihilation or
Swallowing up of the Humanity into the Divinity: but by the Union and Communion
of Both Natures in One Person.

Neither does this Glory come upon our Head and Husband, 2. Distinct.
by a Confusion of God and Man, the Creator and the Creature; but by a Free
Compliance of God with Man, a Full Conformity of Man to God, the Creature to
the Creator. The Glorification of the Humanity by the Divinity is no Confusion,
but a Communion; no Annihilation, but a Transfiguration.

Such was the Person of our Savior at His Ascension; Such is He, when again
He Descends upon us, at His Second Coming. So Himself witnesses, Mark 8.38.
When He Comes in the Glory of His Father. The Angel so foretold the God-like
manner of our Savior, Coming the Second Time, Act. 1.11. This same Jesus,
which ye see taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come, as ye have seen Him
go into Heaven. Behold, how your Master ascends, and as he ascends, he puts
off his Earthly Appearance, grows Invisible, and vanishes into the Glory of
God: So, in the same Divine manner, in the same Glory, Invisible to Mortal
Eyes, He shall come again to you. Such, as He is now, at His Entrance into
Heaven; such shall He be at his Re-entrance into the World.

Christ at his First Coming was a God in the form of an Earthly Man, of a
Worm, the Lowest of Men: at his Second Coming He is a Man, a Worm, the
lowest of Men in the Form of God. And now the Last is First.

This is the Spirituality of our Savior's Coming in the First Respect, in His
Person.

2. Appearance. Our Lord comes the Second Time into the World, not so much by
Change of Place, as of Appearance. Ephesians. 1.10. Saint Paul speaks of he Father
and of Christ, That in the Dispensation of the Fullness of Time, he might
gather together in One, All Things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and
which are on Earth, even in Him. The Dispensation of the Fullness of Time, is
the Discovery of Eternity, which gathers up into One undivided State, All
Times, Past, Present, To Come; and is therefore called the Fullness of Time,
which is the Shadow to this Body. This Dispensation began at Christ's
Ascension, and was then perfected in His Person. Now was our Lord fully
Glorified. Now He saw All Things in the Beatificall Vision, in the Godhead,
after a manner, as unchangeable, as God. Nothing passed away, nothing was to
Come. From the Height of Heaven above, to the Depth of the Earth, and the
Creature below, He possesses All Things, in One Glory, even in Himself. To
Him then there is now no more Room for Ascent, or Descent, for Change of Time
or Place. What then is His Second Coming? It Is His Shining forth upon the rest
of the Creatures; that, as He comprehends Himself and All Things in God: So
They may comprehend All Things, and Themselves in Him. Our Savior speaks this
plainly, Mat. 24.27. For as the Lightning comes out of the East, and shines
unto the West, even so shall also the Coming of the Son of Man be.

Saint Paul calls it an Appearance, Colos. 3.4. Your Life is hid with Christ in
God: When Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, then shall we appear with
Him in Glory. The Person of Christ is taken into the Glory of God. This is
invisible, not to it self, nor any thing like it self, but to Eyes of Flesh.
Thus Our Savior is Hid, as God is, by the Greatness of the Glory. In His
Second Coming, He is as the Brightness of the Godhead breaking forth upon
the World; discovering it self, as a New Root of Immortality below the Natural
Root of each Creature; and clothing upon each Appearance with a New Appearance
of Glory. Thus the Coming of Christ is an Enlargement of Himself from the
same Center, yet not to Himself, but others.

So Saint Paul calls this Coming, A Revelation from Heaven, 2 These. 1.7. And
to you, who are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from Heaven. In this sense Saint Peter speaks, Act. 3.20, 21. And He shall
send Jesus Christ, etc. whom the Heavens must receive, till the restitution of
All Things. When our Lord Ascended, He was raised above all Heavens into God;
from thence immediately He goes on shining forth, and dispensing the Glory of
God through the Heavens, the Invisible part of this Creation, Angels and
Spirits of Men. Within this Limit He contains his Beams till the Last Day.
Then He shall Enlarge His Circuit to take in the Visible and Bodily Part of
Things, when They also shall be Restored, and Return into that Glory, and
Divinity, out of which They fell.

There is One Thing more to be observed, before we pass from this Head. The
Second Coming of Christ is Graduall. As the Sun, when it is gone from us to
the utmost Point of Heaven Southward, immediately Returns: So our Savior
began His Coming again into the World at His Ascension, so soon, as He had
reaeh't the furthest Point of Distance from the Creature, in the Heigths of the
Creator. We read Heb. 1.6. And again, when He brings His First-begotten Son
into the World, He says; Let all the Angels of God Worship Him. Thus it is
read in the English Translation. But, as a late Learned Critic has observed,
it runs Thus in the Greek: When He (that is, the Father) brings His
First-begotten Son again into the World, etc. This place thus read,
manifestly joins together the Ascension of our Lord, and His Coming the
Second time into the World. For when was it that Proclamation was made among
the Angels to Worship Jesus Christ? Was it not then, when He Ascended, and sat
down at the Right Hand of God? So it is clearly seen Philip. 2. 9 t 10.
Wherefore God also has Highly exalted Him, and given Him a Name above every
Name; That at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow. So soon as our King is
entered into the Divine Glory, and has there received the Ointment of the
Godhead, immediately He comes forth, and begins to show Himself in a
Progress of Glory through the Creatures, to receive their Fealty and Homage.

Revel. 6.2. The Coronation of Christ, and his Coming forth in a Spiritual
Beauty are conjoined by Saint John, who there begins his Prophetic Story, and
makes this the opening of the First Seal on the Book, I saw, and behold a
White Horse, and He that sat on Him had a Bow, and a Crown was given Him, and
He went forth Conquering and to Conquer. The Book is the Image of God, the
Seven Seals the Natural Forms of Things. The Opening of the Seals by the
Lamb, His Coming forth in the Spirit.

I will finish this Head with that place of Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.45. The First
Man Adam was made a Living Soul: the Last Man was made a Quickening Spirit. Our
Blessed Lord in his Second Appearance comes into the World, as a Soul comes
down into the Body. The Soul comes down upon the Body, clothing it with a
new Shape, Life, and Luster. So Jesus Christ descends upon the World, to
Comprehend, to Act it, to Appear in it, to Gather it up into One Spirit of
Beauty and Immortality, in Himself.

So shall the Heavenly Man sprout forth thorough the Earth, as an Universal
Paradise; sending forth all Earthly Forms, as Revived Plants, by a New Growth,
out of Himself. Then shall All Without the Circle of this Spiritual Person,
this Quickening Spirit be Death and Hell; a Hell for Dogs and Devils; each
foul, false, and fiery Spirit.

I have now passed through the First Head: The Coming of Christ.

2. Head.

The Clouds, 2. Head.
in which Christ comes. These Clouds are of Four Sorts: 1. Darkness. 2.
Tempests. 3. Worldly Changes. 4. Angels.


1. Clouds of Darkness. Clouds are used in This Sense, as the Springs and
Seats of Darkness. So they furnish out and set off the Coming of Christ as
God, into the World. Psalm. 97.2. Clouds and Darkness are round about Him.

A Twofold Darkness surrounds our Saviors Person, as He flides down in a
Glory upon the Earth.

1. From His own Will. 2. From the World.
1. Darkness, From His own Will. David in the 18. Psalm is confessed by All,
to speak of His own Deliverances Literally, but of Christ's Last Coming
Mystically and Prophetically: ver. 11. He made Darkness His Secret Place: His
Pavilion round about Him were Dark Waters, Thick Clouds of the Sky. The Prince
in the Poet wrapped about with a Thick and Dark Air, entered into Carthage,
passed through the Court into the presence of the Queen, there stood in the
midst of them unperceived, while they speak of Him, as absent, Lament him as
lost; till the Fire purified it self into a Clearness. So the Great Prince of
Peace and Spirits, as He comes forth, casts a Cloud about Him; so He comes on
upon us; so He encompasseth us, is still in Motion. Yet still we speak of Him,
as far above and beyond the Starry Sky, and of His Coming, as at a Great
Distance. But, Behold! He is already in the midst of us; He breaks forth on our
Right hand, and on our Left, like a Flame, round about us; and we perceive Him
not.

2. Darkness, From the World. 1 These. 5.2. The Day of the Lord comes as a
Thief in the Night. It Is the interposal of the Earth's shadow between the
Sun and our Eyes, that makes Night. The Devil benights Mankind, by
interposing this shadowie world between their Savior and their Souls. In
this Night he rocks them into a Sleep, by a perpetual Motion of vanities. In
this Sleep he deludes them with Dreams of Reason, Counterfeit Images of Truth.
Now in this Night, Sleep, and Dream the Day of Christ's appearance, appears
not, but as a Fancy or Dotage. All things seem to continue as they were from
the Beginning. Where, say they, is the Promise of His Coming? They discern no
Dawning of it.

All the Powers and Spirits of Darkness hate the Light; and Christ, because He
comes as the Light, to increase and inflame their Darkness. They therefore
Strive to raise Mists upon this Rising Glory, that they may stain it, if they
cannot stop its Course. So the Progress of Christ is to the greatest part of
Men, like the Motion of the Sun in a Winter day, when it is hard to perceive
the Daybreak, or distinguish between Day and Night. This is the First sort of
Clouds, Dark Ones.

2. Clouds of Tempests. Clouds are the Womb in which Tempests are bred, and the
Cradle in which they are rock't. No Painter, no Poet, no Writer Holy or Profane
has any thing any where so Direful, so Tragical, as is the Description of
our Saviors second Coming in the Scriptures. Can you cast your eye on the
eighteenth Psalm and not tremble? when you see there, the Earth Shaking and
Trembling: v. 7. a Fire Devouring v. 8. The Heavens bowing Down-ward: v. 9.
Thick Clouds darkning the Sky; Thunders, Lightnings, Hailstones flying through
the Air; The Foundations of the world below discovered. v. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Thus the Mighry God, our Jesus descends.

Again, Psa: 97. Hills Melting, The Earth Trembling, Lightnings flashing through
the Air, and being its only Light, Dark Clouds environing all: This is the
Scene of Things; This the State in which Christ comes forth.

Behold Habakkuk with quivering Lips, trembling joints, bones mouldring into
dust, when he had only a Prophetic Representation of our Saviors second
Appearance. All the Dreadful things that attended the Presence of God, in
Egypt, at the Red Sea, on Mount Sinai, through the wilderness, are made but
Types, but shadows of this Terrible March of the Captain of the Lords Hosts,
Christ in the Spirit, through all Flesh. Habak. 3.

A wise Jew was wont to say from a Deep foresight of the Blackness of this
Day: The Messiah will come, but Lord let not me live to see His Coming.

The Coming of our Savior in the Spirit, is for the Full Dissolution of all
Flesh. It Is no wonder then if every step he takes, as he comes along, strike
earthquakes, pestilences, wars, desolations through the Earth. This is the
second sort of Clouds, Tempestuous Ones.

3. Clouds of Worldly Changes. The Finest Piece of this Creation, Natural
Flesh of Christ Himself, is called, A Vail, Heb. 10.11. A Living way through the
vail his Flesh. Well may we then call all other Fleshly Things, Vailes and
Clouds, Genesis 1.2. The Creation in its first Principles is Figured out to us, as
a Dark and Deep Sea. Each particular Creature is as a Cloud raised out of this
Sea of Darkness, over-cast with Light and Images. When the Temple was
finished, which was an Earthly Palace shadowing out Heaven, filled with all
Excellencyes, as Pictures of Heavenly Glories; then Solomon says to God, 1
Kin. 8.12. Thou dwell in Thick Darkness: Signifying, that the Brightest
Beauties of Nature are True Clouds.

In the midst of this Darkness our Savior passes on; upon the backs of these
Clouds he comes riding along. Behind the visible Forms of things He hides
Himself, and steals in upon us ere we be aware. All Their Motions are His
Approaches. Mat. 24. The Disciples ask their Master, What should be the signs
of His Coming? He relates by way of Prophecy the whole story of the World,
Public in Nations, Particular in Families, Private in single Persons, From His
death, to that of the whole World: And so He answers their Question, teaching
them, that as all Creatures are the Print of his Feet, so their whole Conduct
is the Motion of His Feet, Their Commotions His Commings on upon them.

As the Whale moves himself under the Waters, the Billows rise and roll, the
Deep boyles like a Pot. Before our Savior's time Lucifer was the Leviathan,
that made the Sea to sees about him, like a Pot of Ointment. Now our Lord
Jesus sports Himself in these Waters. He makes his way under them, and as he
moves, The Deepes of Men's Spirits, Counsels, Commonwealths, boil, the whole
Frame of Things reel and roll themselves into violent Concussions, like Waves
of the Sea.

This is the third sort of Clouds, Rolling Ones.

4. Clouds of Angels, My Text says, Christ comes with Clouds. Saint Paul
says, 2 These. 1.7. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his
Mighty Angels. Our Lord Jesus tells us, Mat. 26.64. Hereafter shall ye see the
Son of Man sitting at the Right Hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of
Heaven. He speaks of the same thing, Mark 8.50. In this Phrase; When He
comes in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels. These Parallel places
make those expressions seem Parallel: Angels, Clouds.

The Prophet discourses of all sorts of Meteors, Psa. 104.3, 4. The upper
Waters, Clouds, Winds, Spirits, or Blasts, Flames of Fire. This is interpreted
expressly of Angels, Heb. 1.7. And of Angels He says, He has made His Angels
Spirits, His Ministers a Flame of Fire. These are the Waters in which the
Chambers of God are; the Clouds which are His Chariot; the Winged Winds, on
which He rides; the Flames, in which He Comes.

Saint Paul joins these Two, Angels and Flames, at the Coming of Christ, 2
These. 1.7, 8. The Lord shall be revealed from Heaven, with His Mighty Angels,
And with Flaming Fire. The Flame of Fire is Heat working it self into Light.
This is the Immediate Image and Instrument of Angels in this visible World,
through this they appear and work. All the Appearances of God under the Law
were by Angels. All the Appearances of Angels were by Flames, or Light. The
Angel went up from Manoah in a Flame: Iud. 30.20. He appeared to Moses in a
Flame: Exodus 3.2. The Angels came down upon the sacrifices in a Flame. The
Lord Jesus shall come in a Flame of Angels.

The Glory of God in Christ, as he comes the second time, breaks forth upon the
Angels. In these He Flames out upon the Bodily Part of Things, as Fire
dissolving them in their own shapes, and resolving and raising them into
Angelical Forms. These are the Heavenly Flames of Glory, in which Saints are
Blessed; the Fire of Hell, in which Evil men are tormented; Angelical Forms.

In this sense Jesus Christ tells us, Luke 17.22. that Lazarus being dead, was
carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom. That Glory of God, which is called
Abraham's Bosom, (a Type of the Fathers Bosom,) was revealed in the Angels,
in them it over-shadowed Lazarus, withdrawing Him out of this Present State,
and gathering Him up unto these Spirits, which are the Fathers of the Earthly
Man.

Accordingly we read, Mark 13.27. He shall send forth His Angels, and gather
His Elect from the Four Winds. This shall be the Resurrectin of the Body, when
this visible Image and life, which was as wind, breathed forth by God from the
Bosom of those Angelical Flames, shall by their opening themselves upon it,
be again taken in to God, in these Spiritual Chambers.

In the same sense Angels are called the Chariots of God: Psa. 68.17. The
Chariots of the Lord are Twenty Thousand, even Thousands of Angels. The second
Coming of Christ is not on Foot, as a Servant: The Image of the First Adam in
a visible shape. It Is as of a Prince in his chariot; The Image of God in the
Angelical Being. Cant. 3.8. Solomon's Chariot had Pillars of silver, Covering of
Purple, Bottom Gold, in the midst, Love, for the Daughters of Jerusalem.
Divine Glory the Foundation, Divine Love the Center in that Foundation; Pillars
of Silver, Angelical Beauties and strengths; the Covering of Purple, the
Glorious Humanity of Christ in Royal State Comprehending all. This is the
Chariot which the Lord Jesus has prepared for His Spouse. This is the Form in
which He rides forth at his second Coming through the Whole Creation, taking up
to Him the Daughters of Jerusalem, both in Soul and Body, at their several
Seasons.

As Angels are the Chariots of Fire, in which the Lord rides forth the second
Time: So are they the Horses of Fire on which He rides. Revel. 6. As the Seals
are opened, A Man comes forth on Horseback, The Man is the Image of God, the
Lord Jesus, who comes forth in every various form, as in a several Dress for
several Designs. The Horse is the Particular Form of Invisible Glory, the
Angel on which He is Mounted.

I will make an end of this Discourse with that Place, Mark 8.1. Where Christ
speaking of his Coming, joins these Two, the Glory of the Father and the Holy
Angels: As the Man on the Horse, He shall come in the Glory of His Father, and
the Holy Angels. In our Savior's Person, as He comes in the Spirit, the Glory
of the Godhead shall be, as a Sea; the Angelical Glories, as Ships on this
Sea: All Forms of Things in this visible State, shall be taken off the Earth
of their own Gross and Dull Principles, into these Mysterious Ships, in which
they shall be carried on still further and further into the Ocean of the
Godhead.

I have now described those Clouds in which Christ comes, which was the second
Head.

3. Head.

The clearness of Christ's Appearance. 3. Head.
Every Eye shall see Him. There is a Twofold Eyes, 1st. The Inward. 2. The
Outward Eye.


1st. The Inward Eye shall see Christ. Saint Paul speaks of this, Ephesians. 1.18.
The Eye of your understanding being Enlightened. The Eye of the understanding
is the Inward Eye. This also is Twofold.

1st. A Natural. 2. A Divine Eye.
The Natural Eye is that of Reason, which is always open in all Men, so far
as they are Men. The Divine Eye is for many years, many ages, quite shut up in
the Soul ever since the Creation, until the Regeneration.

This Eye is a Divine Principle or Faculty of seeing Things; the Supreme Power
of Knowing, as God Knows and is Known. Saint John speaks of this Eye, 1 John,
3.2. When He appears, we shall be like Him, For we shall see Him as He is. The
Proper Light and Object of This Eye is Jesus Christ in the Spirit, as He is the
Brightness and Image of the Godhead.

As a Sun-beame beating with a strong Light upon the Natural Eye; So shall the
Lord Jesus awaken this Eye in Man, by setting Himself in it. And now how
clear, how sweet, how satisfactory must this sight be? It Is a Fit Union of an
Object Suitable to a Proportioned Power or Faculty, that gives Satisfaction and
Certainty. Here the Divine Eye is the Faculty, the Supreme Image is the
Object, the Union is the Spirit of Unity. Each Image, each Eye, each Sight is
not so much as a Dream, Shadow, Glance to This, where the Eye of Heaven, and
the Beauty of Heaven possess each other in One Spirit.

2. The Outward Eye shall see Christ. Now the Inward Powers of the Soul are
unrighteously detained, as by an Imprisonment, or Burial in the Exterior
Senses. But when Christ comes, the Outward Man with His Faculties and Senses
shall be taken in by the Intellectual and Spiritual Man, as the Tabernacle
was into the Temple. So Both shall see the same Glory, by the same Light.

Saint Paul tells us, 1 These. 4.16. The Lord Himself shall descend with a Shout,
with the voice of an Archangel, with the Trump of God. The Lord Jesus shall
fill the Angels with the Discoveries of the Godhead, as Trumpets with a Loud
Blast, or Triumphant Flourish. Through them this Double noise, the Shout of
Divine Appearances, the Voice of Angelical Gloryes, shall come rushing like a
Mighty Wind upon the Dead Saints, and awaken their Bodies into the same
Harmony, as they had done before, their souls. So Both shall be a Treasure of
Divinity in an Angels vessel.

To this agrees that of Jesus Christ: Mark 12.25. They shall be as the Angels
in Heaven: Speaking of the Resurrection, which is the Coming of Christ to the
Body. Then shall our Bodies be in our Souls, as a Less Angel in a Greater.
Christ as He comes transfigures Both into Angelical shapes, so pours forth
Himself into Both, and Both enjoy the Clearness of His Appearance.

4. Head.

The Sweetness that flows from Christ's Appearance. 4. Head.
And all the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn over Him. Sweet Tears upon a
Sweet Subject! Christ, when he shines out, pierces the Hearts of Men with the
Golden-headed Arrow of Love, and Loving Grief, by a Fourfold Discovery.

1st. Of the Eternal Relation between Christ and the Soul. Christ comes and
All the Saints with Thee. Hos. 4.5. When Thou appearest, then thou Discoverest
All His Saints in Thine Hand, in thine Heart, Deuteronomy. 33.3. Thou show thy
self, O King of Saints, as the Everlasting Father, the Father which has sent
forth All Generations from the midst of his own Tender Bowels. This is the
First Discovery.

2. Of the Eternal Affection in Christ to the Soul. Divines say, that the
wounds shall appear in the Glorified. Body of Christ, when He Appears. It Is
true, that he opens His Bosom, and shows those Wounds of Love which he had
there from Eternity; and those Wounds too, which He received on the Cross, as
they are Glorified in His Eternal Love.

3. Of the Emptynesse and Eternal loss of those Things, for which we
undervalued our Savior.

4. Of the excess and Eternity of Glory, which we shall see coming forth upon
us in the Person of Christ.

As at the Discovery of Joseph, He and his Brethren fell upon the Neck of each
other and wept: So will this Discovery in the Appearances of Christ, bring a
sweet Confusion upon the Spirits of Men: Then shall a Man fall at the feet of
His Savior, and weeping say, O my Jesus! Thou art my Father, Brother, Husband,
Self. While there were other Things, I loved other Things more than Thee. Now
they are Everlastingly gone, and have left me alone: Yet now thou ownest me.
See, as thou breakest forth, thou drownest my sins and me in a Flood of Glory
in thy Self. O my Jesus! Thou breakest my Heart.

I have now passed through the Doctrinall Part of the Point, distinguished into
Four Heads.

The Application.
1. For Humiliation. I shall first present you with a Preparative, to the Use,
and then put into your Hands the Use it self.

1. The Preparative. Worthy Patriots, I shall humbly undertake to be a
Remembrancer to your Piety and Prudence in a Twofold Consideration, for a
Preparative.

1. Consid.
The First Consideration is this: It Is now many years since our Fasts and our
Fights have been mutually interwoven. Yet, what Profit have we of the One? what
Peace from the Other? what end of either? Still we fast, still we fight, if not
in Camps, yet more dangerously in Counsels. Our ship is filled with waves,
more still pressing in, ready to sink it: So that we may cry, O God! carest
thou not, that we perish in the midst of all our Prayres, Praises, Fasts, and
Holy Feasts?

Now you are met again to fast and pray: Now put on your Tenderest Bowels of
pity and affection. So look upon this poor Kingdom, which has wrapped up in it
your Countrymen, your Kindred, all your Dearest and sweetest Relations: Nay,
that which to you sure should be, more than all These; the Glory of your God.
See it trembling and hovering between A Heaven of Reformation, all good Angels
and Men striving to raise it up thither, and A Hell of Ruin, the weight of all
Devils, and bad Men hanging upon it, to sink it down thither.

Let this sight melt you, Let it move you to call up all your strength this
once; to cry mightily to God. Who Knows, what this One Day may do to Cross the
fears, to Crown the hopes and toil of many years, if it please the Eternal
Spirit, to blow right and strong upon your Spirits, this One Day.

Six days the Army of Israel compassed Jericho; yet still It stood. On the
seventh Day they compassed it seven Times; at the seventh Time, the Priests
blew with the Trumpets, and the people gave a Mighty shout, and the walls of
Jericho fell down flat to the Ground. This is the First Consideration.

2. Consid.
The second Consideration is this. No tears prevail with God, but such as are
wept over Jesus Christ. All the Tribes of the Earth shall mourn over Him. If
Jesus Christ be not the Flame in our Breast, that melts our Hearts; if He be
not the Object, that draws forth our Tears, though we weep Blood, our Blood
will be, but as Water spilt upon the Ground.

If we grieve, and not in Christ, our Grief is Hypocrisy, or at best but
Formality. If we grieve, and not for Christ, our Grief is Idolatry. What makes
the Discourses of men mutually understood and moving? It Is the union of Men in
One Universal Spirit of Reason. What makes Colors, Sounds understood and
moving, in the Eye or Ear? It Is the union of Sense and Sensible Things, in One
Common Spirit or Principle of Sense.

If you will touch the Heart of God with your Prayers and Sorrows, it must be
by a union between Him and you, in One Universal, Common Person, the Lord
Jesus, God-Man.

Jacob obtained not the Blessing by Prayers and Tears alone. But as He prayed
and wept, He held fast in His Arms the Angel of the Covenant. Then shall the
Day break upon us, and we become as Princes with God, when we pray, and with
our Jesus in our Arms; when we weep upon the Bosom of our Jesus.

If then you have any Sense of the utmost good or ill of this Kingdom, first
your Parent, now your Fosterchild: If you have any Sense of your own Safeties,
your Souls, your immortality, any thing; Send up a strong and secret groan,
which God may hear, and say within you: O! that the Lord Jesus, that
All-quickning Spirit would descend into our Spirits, and become a Spring of
Divine sorrows there! Then should our Tears be as His Blood. O! that the Lord
Jesus the Highest Image of Love and Beauty, the most profaned and persecuted,
would set Himself before our eyes! Then should we know, Why, and How to weep:
then should we weep indeed.

If our Dear Savior would make his Arms our Cross, that we might from thence
offer our Broken Hearts in Sacrifice to the Father; then would our God smell a
sweet Savor of Rest in us, and at length give us Rest in Himself. This is the
second Consideration in the Preparative.

2. The Use. This is A Humiliation from a Threefold Ground.

1. Insensiblenesse in our Spirits of our Savior's Approach. 2.
Unsuitablenesse in our Counsels to the Course of His Coming. 3. Enmity in
our Affections to the Intent of His Coming.
1st. Ground, Insensiblenesse. Is not the Coming of Christ that by which God
designs to make Himself Admired among His Saints? as Saint Paul testifies, 2
These. 1.10. When He shall come to be Glorified in His Saints, and Admired, etc.
Is not this that at which All the Angels of God bow themselves and worship?
Heb. 1.6. When He brings His First-begotten Again into the world, He says,
Let All the Angels of God worship Him. Is not this the Grand Wheel which moves
All, the Centrall Motion, which carries about Persons, Kingdoms, the whole
Creation? Heb. 1.7. When Christ comes the second Time, God says of the Angels,
He has made His Angels Spirits, His Ministers a Flame of Fire. All Angelical
or Elementary Instruments of Motion, are but His Ministers, propagating His
Motions through the world. Can This be thus, and we Ignorant or Insensible of
This Coming of Christ, without the Highest sin against God, the Kingdom,
our own safeties?

Let us then endeavor to apply this use to our selves more properly and
powerfully, by a Threefold Enquiry concerning this first Ground of Humiliation.

1. Enquiry.
Have we seen Jesus Christ as he Comes among the Angels? 1 Timothy 3.16. Saint
Paul tells us now, This is the Greatest Mystery of Godliness: God manifested in
the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels: Behold! Jesus Christ, as
God puts forth Himself in the Form of Flesh, of the Creature, and
over-spreads that Form or Flesh with the Glory and Spirit of the Godhead. Thus
He shines forth already upon the One Half of Things, the Invisible Part: He
already is risen upon the Angels, as Stars, at once gathering them up into
His Divine Light, and riding forth upon their Beams. So each Star now
carries forth a Sun along with it: Each Angel, the Son of man and God.

Saint Paul tells us, Colos. 2.10. that Christ is the Head of All Principality
and Power. Our Lord Jesus clothed with the Glory of His Father, has united
Himself to the Acting Principles, and Ruling Powers of this Creation. Now He
Flames forth through these invisible Fires into all Courts, Camps, or
Counsels, into every Frame of things. Now He flies abroad upon the Backs of
these Cherubims, and the Wings of these Winds into the Breast of each Man, into
the Bosom of each Creature.

We read, Colos. 2.15. Having spoiled Principalities and Powers, He made a
Show of them Openly, Triumphing over Them. See the Lord Jesus binding Evil
Spirits, the Powers of This world in straiter Chains of Darkness, leading
them Captives at the Tail of His Chariot, making them His Slaves, to Serve Him
for Executioners, as the Mutes do the Great Turk; to rain down Snares,
Tempests, Fire and Brimstone on His Enemies.

Have you seen the Lord thus mounted on His Horses of Fire? Like the Sun, like
a Champion coming forth to run His Race from one end of Things to the Other?
Are you come to this Mount Sion, where the Mediator appears with God in the
midst of His innumerable Angels?

If you be Strangers to such Sights, then Mourn. For you are yet at Mount Sinai
in the midst of Clouds and Storms. You are still in a Wilderness full of
Fiery Serpents, where every Step you take may be to a Death. As you Mourn,
Pray: Sweet Jesus Shine; Sweet Jesus Come thou, as the Dayspring from on High
upon us; Change the Appearance, Open to us this New Frame of Angels Glories,
covering the World like Clouds, and thy Glories raised on These.

Have you Seen the Lord Jesus Coming in the Spirits of Men on Earth? This is
the 2. Step of our Savior's Descent from the Bosom of the Father. We are
taught, Luke 17.20, 21. that, The Kingdom of God comes not with Observation.
For the Kingdom of God is within You. The Glory of the Father, in which Christ
Comes, is the Kingdom of God. This is not obvious to Sense or Reason grounded
upon Sense. For it comes not their way, from without. It bubbles up from an
inward Spring, like Life. From within it Enlarges it Self, as Circles from the
Center, the Out-most being Last.

This is the Method, by which our Savior comes Spiritually into the world.
First the Godhead opens it Self upon the Humane Nature of Christ, making that
the First Fruits of the whole Creation. Colos. 1.18. Secondly, the Lord Jesus
with this over-spreading Glory comes down upon the Angels, making them, the
First Fruits of Spirits. The Third Step, which He takes, is through the Angels
into the Souls of Mortal Men. In these He plants Himself, as a Throne Circled
in with the various Beauties of Angels, like the diverse-Coloured Rainbow,
Revel. 4.3. Thus these become the First Fruits of Men, Romans 8.23. The Fourth
Remove is upon the Bodies of the Saints, that they may be the First Fruits of
Bodies. The Last is the Passing of the Lord Jesus from the Bodies of the Saints
into the whole Frame of Visible Things; as a Flame still taking hold of
Neighboring Fuel, Still Catching and Enfolding it self through All Things. By
these Degrees the Lord Descends in Glorious State, and as He Descends,
Transfigures all Things into the Same Glory.

The Coming of Christ is Compared to the Day, 1 These. 5.5. Ye are Children of
the Day. And so 2 Pet. 1.1. Till the Day dawne. The Lord Jesus, as He rises
like a Sun upon the World, first diffuseth Himself through the Sky of the
Angelical Nature: Then falls, as a Glory, upon the Tops of the Mountains, the
Higher Parts of the Earth, the Souls of Men: From thence He slides down into
Plains and Lower Valleies, The Bodily Part of Things.

Unhappy He! That Sees not the Coming of Christ into His own Soul. What is it,
which He Sees not? He Sees not the Sweetness in His Savior's Eyes; A
Forgiving; A Melting; A Molding; A Ravishing Sweetness: A Sweetness, that
freely Forgives the blackest, and most Treacherous Hearts: A Sweetness, that
kindly Melts, the hardest and most untamed Hearts: A Sweetness, that gently
Molds into a Spouse-like frame, the roughest Hearts: A Sweetness, that
ravisheth the most despairing Hearts into an Ecstasy of Supreme, immortal
joys.

Unhappy he, that sees not the coming of Christ into the souls of men! What
is it, which He sees not? He sees not the Tabernacle of God among men; the
Distance lessening between Heaven and Earth; the Glory of the Godhead growing
to a Fuller Tide, and winning upon the World, as the Sea eating in upon the
Land. He cannot discern the Times and their Changes, How, or Why they are; the
Fatality of Persons and Kingdoms, their Periods. For these Flourish and Fall,
as they Fall in with, Fall off from, or Fall foul upon the Coming of Christ.
He is the Cornerstone, 1 Pet. 2.6. Mat. 21.24. Whosoever shall fall on this
stone, shall be broken: on whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to
powder.

Is it Daybreak yet in our souls? Do we see how it grows Lighter and
Lighter in the Souls of Men? If we do not perceive those Streakes and Flakes
of Light, which multiply upon the spirits of men, pointing out the near
Approach of our long-lookt-for Sun; Let us clothe our selves with shame, and
confess, We are Physicians of no value. We have not seen that Beam, which is
in our own Eye, not suffering us to discern Daylight. But as we are Blind,
so let us be Beggars too. And, as that Blind Beggar in the Gospel, let us sit
by the way, in which Christ comes; and as we hear the noise of his passing by,
let us cry aloud, Thou Son of David, King of Spirits, have mercy on us: Lord
Jesus! that we also may receive our sight: that our Fleece may not be dry,
while it raines on the rest of the earth; that our Souls may not be in the
Dark, while Glory flows in upon other Spirits.

3. Enquiry.
Do you see your Savior, as He comes in the Visible Part of Things? Mat.
24.8. The Lord Jesus discoursing of His Coming, having before spoken of
Wars, Famines, Pestilences, Earthquakes; tells us in this Verse: All these
are the Beginning of Sorrows. It Is in Greek, (...), The Beginning of Pangs.
The Commotions and Strife in This visible Frame are the Pangs and Throes, by
which It labors to bring forth Christ in the Spirit.

Psalm. 97.4, 5. You may read the Manner and Discovery of this Approaching
Glory. His Lightnings enlightened the World: The Earth Saw and Trembled. The
Hills melted like Wax, at the Presence of the Lord; at the Presence of the Lord
of the Whole Earth. Nations, Kingdoms, Nature, the Elements feel the Approach
of Jesus Christ, and receive the Impression of His Presence increasing upon
them. How unnatural then are we, if we be insensible of it! how Worthy to be
cast forth from the Nature of Things into the Outermost Darkness!

Seas of Commonwealths and Counsels roll and roar. Mountains of Worldly
Greatness melt away. Rocks of Humane Strength after the firmest Combinations
and Consolidations cleave asunder. Do we not yet perceive the Lord Jesus? The
Earth and Hearts quake. Pestilences are kindled. A Smoke of Obscurity,
Uncertainty and Confusion flies over the Face of Things A Fire Burns. Do we
not yet feel our Savior? His Enlightnings Enlighten the whole Earth.
Extraordinary Passages of Providence, little less than Miracles to confirm
the Presence of Christ in the midst of us: High and Heavenly Truths publishing
themselves, even as the Brightness of His Coming: These frequent Flashings
forth of His Glory, are the Enlightnings, with which He Enlightens the Earth.
Do we not yet See Jesus Christ?

Heb. 1.2. The Holy Ghost begins to speak of the 2d. Coming of Christ, v. 6.
He goes on discoursing of the Same Thing to the 12. Verse. There He says to
Him: As a Vesture, thou shall fold them up, (meaning, Heaven and Earth) and
They shall be Changed. Suppose a Man by Miracle, Borne and Grown up in One
Midnight. Day now begins to come on: This Man to whom All Things were almost
alike before; now perceives Barren Shores, Hanging Cliffes, Devouring Seas on
one Hand; on another, Pleasant Fields, Fair Buildings, a Peaceful Country. As
the Light increases, the Face of these Things still Changes, Presenting Fresh
Horrors, and fuller Beauties. Would not this Man Amazedly Wonder, whence these
Forms of Things should grow round about Him, with such Sodainnesse and Change?
till He looked upward, and Saw the Light of Heaven, as It goes on in it is
Course, visiting the Earth, and thus Changing it as a Garment.

Who is not Amazed to See the Changes that are made in the Garment of This
Earth? One Day we see it, as a Field Flourishing with fair Hopes; another Day,
that Field vanished, and in its Place, as a City on Fire, or a Sea of Blood. He
that now discerns not the Light of Heaven, the Brightness of the Godhead,
which is Christ Coming upon us, and thus Changing us; what manner of Night is
He in? Sure a Night, as Black, as the Shadow of Death.

The Night is a Season for Heaviness. You that See not the Lord Jesus, how He
comes up, upon the Earth, and Invades it with His Troops, as the Prophet
speaks: Habak. 3. Sit down in Heaviness, Sensible of that Night which
Surrounds You. But as you Sit, Watch, as the Watchmen, for the Morning.

This second Coming of Christ, is, as the days of Noah. The Lord Jesus in the
Spirit shall be both Ark and Flood: An Ark to those which are taken into
Christ, (...) them high above all miseries toward Heaven: (...) carrying away
insensible Persons, and Scorners (...) Woe.

This is the First Ground of Humiliation, Insensiblenesse.

Unsuitablenesse in our Counsels to the Course of Christ's Coming. 2. Ground.
The Coming of Christ calls for Two Things.

1st. A Respect to Christ in all our Counsels. 2. A Resignation to Christ for
the Conduct of Those Counsels.
1. A Respect to Christ in Counsel. Ezekiel saw The Glory of God: Ezekiel. 1.
This Glory was the Spiritual Frame of our Saviors Divine Coming upon His
Chariot composed of Living Creatures and Wheels: Angels Spiritualized, Bodies
Angelized. In this vision He saw the State of Jerusalem, and accordingly
forewarned the Jews.

As the shadow went back upon the Dyal of Ahaz, so Hezekiah's life was set back
from Death. The Person of our Lord Jesus is the Dial of Time, as the Godhead
is in the Course of it is Glory advances or withdraws upon this Dial: So it
points out the Rise or Ruin of Persons and Things.

We read, Revel. 1. That God gave to Christ the Revelation of Things by a Light
of Glory, in His own Person; to this end, that He might show to His Servants,
what will quickly Be. Our Lord Jesus is that Word of God, which is to be, the
Man of our Counsels. On Him we are to look, in Him to see, what should be; by
seeing God in His own Forms: what shall be, by seeing God in All Forms of the
Creature.

This is Reason, say the Heathen. A Connection of Things Past, with those which
are Present, a Derivation of Things to come out of Both, for Discovery and
Direction. This is a Dark Shadow of Christ. He is the Reason of a Christian,
who unites and represents by a Perfect Light, all Three States of Things,
calling Himself by this Threefold Name; He that is, He that was, He that is
to Come.

2. A Resignation to Christ for Conduct. This is the second Thing, which Christ
calls for in His second Coming. I am Alpha and Omega says the Lord, He that
is, He that was, He that is to Come, the Almighty, the All-comprehending:
Revel: 1.8. The Spiritual Coming of Christ, is the great Tide of Things; this
way the fullness of the Godhead pours forth it self from Sea to Sea, from the
Beginning to the End of Things, Both in Himself. Happy is He, who puts
Himself into the Current of this stream; swiftly, smoothly, safely shall He be
carried along upon it to His End.

There is Mention of a Wheel, Prove. 20.26. The King shall bring the Wheel upon
the Wicked. Saint James speaks of the Wheel of the Creation: James 3.6. For so
it is in Greek, (...). Our Lord Jesus comes on as the Great Wheel of Things,
reposing in it self, and rolling on with it self, those, who are taken up
unto it: But bringing it self over those which fall out of it, and breaking
them in pieces.

There are two Things which express an unsuitablenesse in our Counsels to
the Coming of Christ.

1st. The Directing our Paths by a Humane Prudence.

2. The Designing an Earthly Power for the Pursuit.

1st. Unsuitablenesse: The Directing our Paths by a Humane Prudence. The
Israelites in the wilderness made a Golden Calfe for their Guide, after the
Example of the Egyptians, who worshipped an Ox for their Chief God. For this
Moses, say they, we know not what is become of Him. What was the success? They
were forced to embitter their Drink with the Powder of this Calfe.

Have any of you been thus tempted, to make the Calf of Humane-Policy your
Counselor, because this is the God of Nations? or to think; We know not what
This Jesus, or His Coming in The Spirit mean? Shall we trust our selves, and
the Kingdom to a name, an ayrie Fancy? If you have been thus tempted, I hope
your own Piety and Prudence will prompt you to grind this Calf to Powder by a
Penitent Contrition, and make it bitter to your Spirits, by a Kindly Remorse.

I humbly commend to you one story at large recorded: 1 Samuel 13. Samuel
promised Saul to come at a Day, He delayed. Saul feared the Philistines coming
upon Him with a Mighty Body; the Dividing of the People from Him: He grows
weary of Samuel's stay, and forces Himself to sacrifice. If you have so
fallen, so forced your selves, for such reasons, to sacrifice, to establish a
worship without the Divine Appearances, because they have been delayed: O
repent and fear, lest Samuel's message to Saul, be to you also: Now is the
Kingdom divided from you, this way, by which you thought to confirm it to you.

Let us at last be Converted, and become as Little children, learning what that
Means, To Obey is better than Sacrifice, and to Hearken, than the fat of Rams.
To Hearken for the Breathings and whispers of the Lord Jesus; to Obey the
Breakings in of the Godhead upon us, is more than All Burnt-offerings, or our
Best Performances.

2. Unsuitablenesse. The Designing an Earthly Power for Pursuit of our
Counsels. When Israel looked round about upon the Interests, Inclinations,
Employments, Sufficiencies of Neighbour-nations: When Israel reflected upon her
own Constitution, Strength, Numbers: Had Israel Peace? When Iehoshaphat joined
his ships with those of the King of Israel, were not His ships broken in
pieces? Thou shall destroy all them, that go a whoring from Thee: It Is good for
me to draw near to the Lord, says the Holy Man: Psalm. 73.50. The Earthly Image
is the Strumpet, Humane Prudence the Eyes of this Harlot, which are as snares;
Humane Power the Hands, which are Nets and Bands. He that is allured and caught
by these, is upon the Brink of a Deep Pit, if not already sinking in it.

Genesis 9.17. Mention is made of a Serpent that biteth the Heels of the Horse, so
that His Rider falls backward. The Policy of Man is a Serpent, Power is the
Horse on which He rides. Take heed of making these your Trust or Triumph. If
you do, your own Policy will bite the Heels of your Power, and disorder that:
Your own Power disordered will cast you to the Ground, and then oppress you
with its own weight.

I pass now from the second Ground of Enmity to the Third.

3. Ground. 3. Ground.


Enmity in our Affections to the Intents of our Savior's Coming. The Intents
of our Savior's Coming are Two: 1st. To Consume the Flesh. 2. To Call us into
the Spirit.


1st. Intent of Christ's Coming; To Consume the Flesh. Revel. 6. When our Jesus
rides foremost upon a White-Horse, he is followed by a Red, Black, Pale Horse,
bringing on War, Famine, Death. These are His Troops, with which He comes up
upon the Nations, and invades the Earth.

In the Progress of this Mighty King, as He goes on Conquering; An Earthquake
shakes All Things, the Sun becomes Black, the Moon as Blood; Stars fall like
untimely figs; Heaven passes away as a Scroll rolled together, v. 12.13.14.
Thus all Fleshly strengths faint, Gloryes fade at the presence of the Lord. The
most Spiritual Appearances of God through Flesh are darkened and dis-appeare:
The brightest of Fleshly Forms, The fairest letter of the Highest Mysteries,
become seeds of War, and sink in blood: Men like Stars, most Eminent for
Height, Luster, Influence, fall thick to the Ground, like untimely figs,
preventing their Maturity by their Ruin: The most Flourishing Commonwealths,
the Fairest Churches, like Heavens, roll themselves into Confusion. Thus Christ
comes in Flaming Fire to all Flesh.

2. Intent of Christ's Coming, is, to Call us into the Spirit. 2 These. 2.1.
Paul speaks of The Coming of Christ, and our Gathering together unto Him. As
the Horses of Fire, and Chariots of Fire came down from Heaven to take Elijah
up into them: So the Lord Jesus descends in the Glory of the Spirit, that He
may raise us above the world, riding with Him on the Circuits of the same
Glory. If I go away, says Christ, I will come again, and take you to be there
where I am.

Every Fleshly thing, is a veil between us and Divinity. All our Conversation
in the Flesh, is an Alienation from God, a Descent toward the Depths of
Darkness below.

The Lord Jesus comes forth in the Spirit, consuming the veil of Flesh, like
Fire. Then we enjoy the same Appearances, perform the same actions in a Divine
Life. While the Spirit is our Element, God comes forth in us in all our Acts:
God comes forth before us in all our Objects.

There is a Twofold Enmity in our affections toward this Twofold Intent of
Christ in His Coming.

1. An Adhesion to the Flesh. 2. An Averseness from the Spirit.
1st. The First Enmity is an Adhesion to the Life of Flesh. Our souls cleave
to the Fleshpots: Our Spirits are drawn down into a land of Bondage, and
detained there, by the Rank scent of Garlike and Onions. We are very unwilling
to travel through a wilderness, though it be unto a Land flowing with Milk and
Honey.

We are like Lot, we know not how to leave this Sodom of the Flesh, till we be
drawn forth by the Hand of Angels. Then we are still like Lot's wife when we
are come forth from the City of this World, casting a longing look back upon it
in the midst of its Flames. But if we be like her in her fault, let us be so
too in the Consequence of it. She was changed into a Pillar of salt. So may we
as in answer to the Type, if we bring forth a Spirit of Remorse and Fire, like
salt, to consume the Fleshly, Corrupting Part; that the Divine Part may be
preserved untainted to Eternity.

2. The second Enmity is an Averseness from the Spirit. Jesus Christ promised
His Disciples the Effusion of the Spirit, at the Disappearance of His Flesh. He
spoke to them of Divine Powers, Lights, Gloryes, Joys, of the Highest Company
and Contents which should come, when His Spirit came. Yet the Disciples were
sad, and as dead men still, when their Savior spoke of His Death. The Spirit
appeared to them a Miserable Comforter and Comfort, when they were no more to
have a gross sight of their Jesus in Flesh. He was as None to them, when He
was to be Only in the Spirit.

When Peter felt Himself born up alone by the working waves, he fears,
faints, and begins to sink, though he have the Call of Christ to carry him on,
and Christ Himself in his Eye to infuse Spirits into him. This is an Example
for us: When we called by God, begin to feel the Foundations of the Earth, and
the Seeming-firme Land of Sense withdrawing from us, when we are now Lanching
forth into the Sea of the Godhead; we no sooner feel our selves left upon the
waters of the Spirit, to be sustained by them, but Immediately we sink our
selves by our fears and unbelief.

Let us then now weep, that we have refused the All-quickning Spirit, which is
our Jesus, as if there were no Life in this Spirit, or no Light in this Life,
as if God were a wilderness, and the Building of God had no Foundation or
Fairness in it. Let us now return weeping and say, We have feared to commit
our loves, hopes, and joys to Thee, O meek, O Mighty Jesus! But all our
Springs are in Thee, those that feed our outward senses, our inward Faculties,
with Streams of Life, Truth, Strength and Pleasures. Thou art our only
Husband, the Image of all Loves, and Loveliness to us, the Best Image of our
selves. Come thou down upon us, appear in thine Invisible gloryes, and make
our souls, ere they are aware, like the Chariots of Aminadab.

Thus I have concluded the First Use for Humiliation.

2. Use.
For Caution. Take heed of making any Opposition against the Coming of the
Lord Jesus.

I shall begin this use with an humble profession, that my desire is to have
every thing which I speak understood, as proceeding from him, who would feign
speak, and live in a Continual sense of the Doubtful Dimnesse of that Light
of Reason, which twinkles in his breast; as also of the want of oil to feed the
Flame of the Spirit to any Height or Constancy. I do therefore only present,
what passes from me, submitting all ever to any Brighter Light in whatsoever
Candle-stick it shine. My care shall be, especially in the subject of this use,
while I am in this Twilight, to avoid Particular Conclusions, and Peremptory
Determinations.

I shall in these Terms set before you these Two Cautions.

1. Take heed how you Judge, or Confine the Coming of Christ. 2. Take heed how
you furiously oppose any thing, that pretends to the Advancement of Christ in
His Coming.
1. Caution. Take heed how you Judge or Confine the Coming of Christ, and that
for Two Reasons.

1. He comes as a Spirit. 2. He comes in the Dark.
1. Reason. Christ comes as a Spirit. Who can foreknow, or set the ways of a
Spirit? who can comprehend a Spirit in any outward Form? Is it not free to
All, and from All? When Christ was risen, he sometimes put on those shapes, in
which he had formerly lived, or died; as to Thomas: Sometimes he clothed
Himself with strange shapes; sometimes unclothed Himself of All. For now He
was raised into the Spirit, in which as in a Divine Wardrobe he comprehended
All shapes, to put Himself forth in them, or to put them under His Feet at
pleasure.

Saint Paul thus reasons: Colos. 2.20. If ye be dead in Christ, why as living
in the Flesh, are ye subject to Ordinances which perish in the using? But this
Reasoning is much more strong: If Christ be Risen from the dead, why do we
subject Him to Ordinances, as if He were still living in the Flesh, or rather,
as if He were not come in ^he Flesh, who is the Lord of All Fleshly Rites?

Forms are sweet Helps, but too severe Lords over our Faith. They may be
Ornaments to our Face and Neck, serving the Beauty of Christ's Appearances to
us, and His union with us. But then they must be of Gold or Precious stone,
taken out of the Mine or Treasury of the Spirit. So worn, they may become the
Heirs at age, the Spirit-born Princes. But if they be of Iron or Brass, laid
upon our Feet and Hands; that is, Gross in Fleshly Darkness, binding up the
Activity and Motion of our Spirits toward God; then are they sad Marks of the
Bond-womans Children.

The Body is esteemed a Prison or Grave to the Soul; because it ties the Soul
up into One Particular Appearance, suffering it not to enlarge it self to any
other, but as they are reflected in This Glass. When the Eternal Spirit is
fast'ned, and proportioned to any One Form of Things, is it not now imprisoned
or buried? It was a seasonable and High Contemplation, that of Solomon at the
Consecration of the Temple: 2 Chronicles. 6.18.
The Heavens, and Heavens of Heavens cannot hold thee, How much less this
House, which I have made? When we Consecrate, or converse with any Ordinance or
Peculiar way of worship; let us then remember, that our Object is the Person of
Jesus Christ, that Wisdom of God, whose way is more untrac'd than the Eagle,
whose extent is wider than the Earth. The Heavens of Heavens cannot take in All
of Him, to Contain or Confine Him; much less any One Ordinance in this world,
or Fleshly Fashion.

It Is in vain to attempt to shut up Christ in any Thing. Though you kill Him,
that you may keep Him safe; though you lay Him in a Grave hewne out of a Rock
in a Garden, a Frame contrived with greatest strength and Beauty; though you
set the Seal of Authority upon it, and a guard about it; yet Christ will rise
with an Earthquake and appear to His Disciples.

2. Reason. Christ Comes in the Dark. The Lord darkens His own Appearances,
who then shall Determine the way of Christ's Coming to us, when He makes it
His Design to obscure it? Why do we Condemn the Discoveries of Christ for
being above our Reach, beyond our Measure and Light, when it is His Plot and
will, to Come in Clouds?

If the Light of the world please, as He breaks forth, to hold the eyes of the
wisest Men, and Holiest Disciples, that they shall not discern Him, though He
walk in the midst of them; Let Us bear our Blindness, and not lay the fault
on Heaven, calling Day, Night; or censuring the Light, for being Dark.

Jesus Christ tells Peter, What I do, thou know not, but thou shall know
hereafter. Ioh. 13.6. Our Savior puts forth Himself to Men in Many
Appearances, of which they are incapable, to lie as seeds in their Spirits, and
perhaps after many years grow into distinct Fruits in their understanding, and
ripe Fruits in their Affections. Then they know that a Prophet has been among
them: That the Highest Appearances of God have been plain before their Eyes,
when they have least imagined it.

The Wiseman that spoke in Parables and Proverbs tells Prove. 25.2. It Is the
Glory of God, to conceal a Thing ( the Word in Hebrew) and of Kings to search
out the matter, (the Word.) God makes it His Design in this World, to bring
forth the Eternal word, the Brightest Image of Himself, so as that we Seeing
Him shall not See Him. But then it pertaines to the Kingdom of Christ, as the
proper Glory of that, to comprehend this Dark World, and make it understood by
it is Light. Take heed then how you judge the Coming of Christ by the Daylight
of this world, seeing it is His Glory to come in the Night.

The Devil too labors to Darken the Coming of Christ. Sweetest and Clearest
Spirits in which the Bridegroom comes forth most Beautifully, are by Him
clogged and clouded with the Disguise of Faction, Sedition, Licentiousness, and
Atheism: as in Paul, and Christ Himself. The most Heavenly Truths, which are,
as the lookings forth of this King of Glory, are by him presented to the World
in the most deformed Appearances of Hellish Blasphemies.

As the Devil has his Arrows which fly in the Dark; so has Christ: His
Coming in the Spirit, is an Arrow, that flies in the Dark at Noonday; Woe be
to him, that stands in its way, it will pierce his Liver. Our Savior speaks it
of Himself: If the Good man knew, at what hour the Thief would come, he would
watch, and not suffer his house to be broke open. If you know the Time and way
in which Christ will certainly come, you might define that, and confine Him.
But now fear to be mistaken, because of that place of Scripture: The stone,
which the Builders refused, is become the Head of the Corner: Psalm. 118.22. The
stone which the Builders refused, is become the Head of the Corner. O ye
Builders! Take heed, what stone ye refuse. O ye Men! Take heed of stumbling at
that Stone which the Builders refuse, lest your Buildings and Selves be broken
upon it, but That grow up into a Building of Glory, which can never be broken
or shaken. Thus much for the First Caution.

2. Caut.
Take heed how you furiously oppose any thing, that pretends to an Appearance
of Christ. Habakkuk speaks of Christ in the Spirit: C. 3. v. 4. His Brightness
was as the Light: Horns were in His Hand, and there was the Hiding of Power.
All the Spiritual Discoverys of Christ are as Hands of Light, by which He puts
forth Himself, and takes hold of the world. The Invisible Spirit, the Presence
of the Godhead in it is Twofold Piercing Principle of Love and Wrath; These are
the Horns in the Hands. Take heed how you resist these Hands, when they are
stretched forth, lest you rush upon the Horns. If you launch forth with fury
upon any stream of Spirits or Opinions, and strike upon the Power of the
Godhead, lying hid like a Rock in those waters; how great will the wrack and
Ruin of your Souls be?

I will close this use with the Story of Balaam. He went forth upon his Ass to
curse the Children of Israel, having first obtained full leave from God for it,
as he thought; His Ass gives back, crusheth his foot against the wall. He is
enraged: Yet if his Ass had gone on, he had bin slain. For an Angel stood with
a Drawn Sword in his way. I intend no particular Application, but only a
general Allusion. Balaam is fleshly Man, that has the visions of God in the
Fleshly Image. The Ass, the External Power of Nature and the Creature, on
which he rides. When you go forth against any, that call themselves Israel, and
think your selves most clearly sent from the mouth or face of God: yet if then
your Ass retreat, fall back, Rush upon the walls of Difficulties; take heed of
putting him on too fiercely: Let it fairly warn you to fear: Perhaps the Power
of Nature and the Creature, sees the Lord Jesus Coming forth, with the Sword
of His Spirit Brandished in his Hand. If it should go on, it might carry you
into an Absolute Ruin. Take heed then of being furious against any thing that
pretends to be an Appearance of Christ.

For Consolation. Use 3.
When first you pleased to call me to this, I thought thus with my self: What
can I say more then has been said? To what end shall I speak? or, Have we any
more Hopes yet in our Breasts? We have bled and wept, wept and bled again for
many years. Still we weep, and some fear lest we bleed again with greater
danger. As Jacob complained of Laban; so is it with us, Our wages, our Hopes
have been changed now these ten times. Our Hopes and our Saviors have devoured
each other, as Pharaoh's Lean Kine did the Fat; yet as They, are still Lean.
What do we cry to a sleeping God, or a God at a great Distance from us, as in a
journey? or Are our Services in the Church, our Sacrifices in the Field no more
to the living God, than the Gashes which Baal's Priests make upon their own
Flesh?

While I was thus discouraged in mine own Spirit, I was refresh't with a
Twofold Comfort, with which I shall now endeavor to comfort you.

1. The Way of Christ is in the Dark. 2. The way of Christ is among the Angels.
1. The Way of Christ is in the Dark. Then may our King be come a good way on
in His Travels of Love and Glory toward us, though we yet discern him not. We
know not how Near he may be to us, how full of Life and Sweetness before us,
ready now to discover Himself, when we are weeping for His Absence, and
complaining that somebody has carried Him away: as Mary complained to Himself
in the likeness of a Gardener.

The Sun in a Mist or Fog steals on upon the World unperceived; at last he
breaks forth, and we wonder to see him so far advanced toward High-noon. So
does our Spiritual Sun still keep his pace behind the Clouds, still mounting
higher and higher. When He shall discover, we shall be amazed to see, that he
has made so great a March in so short a Time: We shall wonder how he has
stolen Himself, and so much of Heaven unawares into the midst of us. Then shall
a man say: How is a Goodly plant of Glory grown up to Heaven out of the Earth,
in one short Night of Trouble?

Jesus Christ is not Slack in His Coming: 2 Pet. 3.9. Christ says: I go to
prepare a place for you. As a Rich Pillar or Stately work is often veiled, till
it be quite finished; and then presented at once in its full beauty: So the
Lord stays from Appearing, that he may make ready a Glory Prepared for us:
when his work is Perfect, then will he disclose it, and we with Admiration
shall acknowledge, that the Lord has not bin slack in His Coming; but has
made a great Approach to Men in a Little space of Time.

When God brought back our Captivity, as Rivers in the South, then were we as
Men that Dreamed: says the Psalmist. When our God shall take off the vail from
that Glory, which He is fashioning in the midst of us; then shall we be as in
a Dream. It will be hard to believe, that such a Changed, so new an Appearance
of Things in so short a time can be Real, and not Imaginary or Fantastic.

Ezekiel. 1.4: Out of the North came a Whirlwind, out of the Whirlwind a Cloud
and Fire, out of the Cloud and Fire, the Color of Amber, out of that Four
living Creatures and Four Wheels, the Chariot in which the Son of Man was
seated on a Throne: v. 26.

Who can tell, what Glory shall from Heaven visit the Earth, when those
Clouds, which now are upon us, shall open themselves? In this Whirlwind,
Clouds, Fire, Jesus Christ with a Train of Gloryes has bin all along
descending, and at last He shall alight amidst us. Then shall the Whirlwind,
Clouds, and Fire be in a Moment dismissed for ever at His Appearance.

2. Comfort. The way of Christ is among the Angels. He comes with His H^ly
Angels. Open then your eyes, and see each good Man, Counsel, Interest with its
Angel, each Angel with His Jesus; a Million of Angels in every One, surrounding
his Person.

Job 38.22. We read of Treasures of Snow and Hail. As Angels are the Chariots
of Christ; so they are His Chambers and Treasuries. In the Sweetest season, God
can on a sudden bring forth from the Bosom of an Angel roaring Tempests, which
lay there ready prepared. When Storms are most violent, God sends forth an
Angel, at whose Appearance a Pleasant serenity shall immediately smile upon the
face of Things, when we are sad, and see nothing abroad but Dark Clouds coming
after the Rain, and Showers of Blood: Yet then our Angels in the midst of us,
those Invisible Chambers, may be heap't full of rich Blessings, which they can
pour forth upon us, more suddenly then we can think it.

Angels are the wombs of the Godhead in this Creation, Job 38.21. When all
outward things seem barren of Hope, those wombs may be Teeming, and Big with
joys for us.

These are the Chariots of Israel, and Horses thereof. In the Head of these is
Jesus Christ, the Captain of the Lords Host. Each of These is an Host, nay a
Legion of Armies, nay a Fountain. For in Scripture they are called (...), The
Principles or Springs of the world.

Let no face of Things dismay us. Is one Army broken? the Angel of the Lord
Jesus is a Fountain of forces, which can pour forth a continued store of fresh
Armies, if you need them? Do we lose our friends, Men of best Wisdom, Courage,
and Integrity taken off the Stage, or off their Excellencies? The Angel that
has the Charge of this, can unexpectedly disclose a new stock of worth, and
Race of Men. Are our Enemies Politic or Potent? yet we may sleep secure. For
the Holy Angels full of Eyes and Wings are planted round about them, as a Guard
upon them. One Angel lies at the bottom of their Hearts, as a Mine, ready to
spring it self upon their Counsels, when they are now ripe. Another Angel
wraps himself about the Foundation of their force, as a Fire, ready at His
appointed Time to devour it and them.

Angels are the unities of Things in the Creature. Though the water of a River
be continually passing away, yet the River is still the same, because it is fed
from One Spring. There is One Angel of our Armies, One of our Counsels, One
for Strength, One for Wisdowe, One for Prosperity, in which Jesus Christ comes
forth among us. Our Counsels may be scattered, our Armies broken; yet we
shall have the same Strength, the same Army: For both are fed from the same
Unity, their proper Angel.

Revel. 1.1. Christ tells Saint John, The Golden Candlesticks are the Churches.
c. 2. v. 5. He threatens the Angel of the Church to remove the Candlestick.
The Candlestick of Gold is the Church in the Spirit, which is ever Entire, ever
Pure. As this Candlestick is drawn into Heaven, so a Company of Men on Earth
lose the Beauty, Unity, and name of a Church. When this Candlestick is again
let down into the Flesh, and set upon the Earth: The Church is the same again
in Integrity and Glory. Thus the Unity, Strength, Interests of Good Men are
comprised in their Angel. This is the Candlestick, in which they always shine.
When their Light seems lost in the greatest storms; it is but the Candlestick,
Removed: Jesus Christ can return that into its place in a Moment, and so
restore your Day.

Jesus Christ sends forth His Angels to gather His Saints from the four Winds,
at the resurrection. When the Body of a Saint crumbles and scatters into Dust;
Every Dust lies gathered up into the Bosom of some Holy Angel. There all the
Single Dusts are comprehended in one Form of a Glorious Body. In This Form the
Angel brings them forth at the Call of Christ: This is the Resurrection of the
Body. This is as true of each Piece of Life and Death in our Persons or
Affairs while yet we are on Earth. When our Happiness, Hopes, and Hearts are
ground into the smallest Dust; They then lie Compact, and complete in their
Angelical Chamber; on a sudden, as at the Blast of an Angels Trumpet, or
Glance of an Angels Eye, can Jesus Christ give our Dead Hopes a Glorious
Resurrection out of their Dust.

Let us then in the midst of our Sorrows sing, The Lord Reigns: Let the Earth
be glad. The Lord Comes. Clouds are upon us, but Angels ride upon those Clouds,
and the Lord Jesus upon those Angels. Open your Eyes, see the King, as He comes
in Glorious State. If Elisha saw Eliah, as he ascended, he was to have the
spirit of his Master doubled upon him. If we see our Savior as He descends in
a Divine Glory; we shall be clothed with His Spirit, and His Mantle: Inward
Beauties, Outward Prosperities, falling fresh from the Person of Christ on us,
as He comes down upon us.

Let us then spread our own Garments, our Earthly Powers, Policies, or
Prosperities, in His way, under His feet. And as He passes along, let us cry
aloud in our songs: Hosanna, Hosanna, Save now: Blessed is He that comes in the
Name of the Lord: Hosanna; Now Save us.

FINIS.

