THE Second Service, OR Office of the Faithful ENLARGED, According to Ancient
Forms.
For a Private Use.
GLory be to God on High, on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he has visited and redeemed his
People; etc. to And thou, O Child.

God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and show us the Light of his
Countenance, and be merciful unto us.

Prevent us, O Lord, in all our Doings with thy most Gracious Favor, and
further us with thy continual Help, that [as by thy 'special Grace preventing
us, thou do put into our Minds Good Desires, so by thy continual Help we may
bring the same to good Effect, and in all our Works begun, continued, and ended
in Thee,] we may glorify thy Holy Name, and finally by thy Mercy [may] obtain
everlasting Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Almighty God, unto whom all Hearts be open, etc.

Then the Offertory, and Prayers for the whole State of Christ's Church,
Invitatory, Ye that do truly and earnestly Repent, etc. the Confession,
Absolution, and Sentences following.

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God the Father, and the
Communication of the Holy Ghost be with you all. Amen.

R. And with thy Spirit.

Lift up your Hearts.
R. We lift them up unto the Lord.
Let us give Thanks unto our Lord God.
R. It is meet and right so to do.
It is very meet, right, and our bounden Duty, that we should [adore, worship,
and glorify Thee, and] at all Times, and in all Places, give [Praise and]
Thanks unto Thee, O Lord, Holy Father, Almighty Everlasting God. Eternal
Independent, Self-sufficient Being, of Infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness;
who have prepared thy Throne in the Heavens, and dwell in the High and Holy
Place; yet the Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens, cannot contain Thee; for thou
fillest Heaven and Earth: Thou coverest thy Self with Light, as with a Garment,
dwelling in the Light, which no Man can approach unto; whose Judgments are
unsearchable, and thy ways past finding out. Thou, O most Glorious Majesty,
thou art LORD alone: For thou have made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens, with all
their Host; the Earth, and all things therein; the Seas, and all that is
therein; and thou preservest them all; and thy Dominion rules over all.

R. The Heavens are Thine, the Earth also is Thine: Thou have founded the whole
World, and all that therein is.

The Host of Heaven worshipeth Thee: A thousand thousand minister unto Thee;
and ten thousand times ten thousand attend upon Thee.

R. And we, poor Mortals, adore thy most Excellent Majesty; and recognize and
revere thy most just and absolute Dominion.

When we consider the Heavens, the Work of thy Fingers, the Moon and the Stars
which thou have ordained, Lord, what is Man, that Thou art mindful of Him! and
the Son of Man, that Thou visitest Him! All Nations (in respect of Thee) are
but as a Drop of a Bucket, and as the small Dust of the Balance; as nothing,
yea less than Nothing and Vanity. What then are we, a little handful of thy
poor Creatures, among so many Millions of our own Kind, besides so many
Myriades of thy more excellent Creatures, which continually attend upon Thee,
and with profound Reverence cover their Faces before Thee, that thou should
have any regard unto us.

R. Who is like unto the Lord our God, who has his Dwelling so high, and yet
humbles himself to behold the things, which are in Heaven and Earth!

But such is thy Providence, which extends to All thy Creatures, even to the
Sparrow upon the House top; and so boundless thy Love and Goodness, that though
the Glory of thy Majesty might justly deterr the Purest of Mortals from any
Address to Thee, thou do not only graciously invite us, but by thy most
Gracious Commands, have made that (or rather reinforced it as) our Duty, which
otherwise, of it self, were a most desirable Favor: And though the Holiness
of thy Majesty might make such sinful Wretches tremble to approach thy
Presence; yet such is thy Clemency, that, for our Encouragement, thou have
provided for us, both a Propitiation for our Sins, and a Mediator for our
Infirmities, in Christ Jesus thy beloved Son, and our blessed Lord and Savior;
in whom, and through whom, thou have most admirably demonstrated, in thy
infinite Wisdom, at once, both thy Justice and Severity against Sin, and thy
Mercy and Clemency to thy poor Creatures, to the Admiration even of thy blessed
Angels.

R. Great and Mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty: Just and True are
thy Ways, thou King of Saints: Who shall not fear Thee, O Lord, and Glorify
thy Name.

In his Name therefore in Grateful Obedience to thy Gracious Commands, and
thankful Acceptance of those thy Gracious Encouragements, we humbly, as we can
present our selves before: Oh that we could do it with that Reverence and
Devotion that is meet! and with all those thy Glorious Creatures in Heaven, and
all thy faithful and devote Servants upon Earth, Adore and Worship thy Supreme
most Glorious Majesty, Acknowledging and Recognizing thy most just and absolute
Dominion over us all.

R. Blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers for ever and ever. Thine, O Lord, is
the Magnificence, and the Power, and the Glory, and the Victory, and the
Majesty: for all that is in Heaven and in Earth is thine: thine is the Kingdom,
O Lord, and thou art exalted as Head over all.

We are all thine by right of Creation:

R. The Heavens are Thine, the Earth also is Thine: Thou have founded the whole
World, and all that therein is.

By right of Sustentation, and Preservation: *

* In Thee we live, and move, and have our Being.

And we the Sinful Sons of Men all thine, also by right of Redemption.

R. Unto Him that loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, to
Him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

And we here present with all the Members of thy visible Church Thine, also by
special Dedication and Consecration; which we for our part do each here again
Ratify and Confirm:

R. We confirm, O Lord, we ratify and confirm it with all our Souls for ever.

Humbly beseeching Thee, in the Name, and for the Sake and Merits of the same
our Lord Jesus Christ, thy Beloved Son, our Blessed Redeemer, whom thou have
proposed to be a Propitiation for us in his Blood, to Pardon all our Sins, and
make us perfectly and completely Thine by thy Holy Spirit of Sanctification;
that He may be in us, and abide with us for ever; may illuminate our Minds to
know Thee, the only true God and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent; and to
apprehend the Excellence of those Glories, which thou have designed us for, and
proposed unto us, such as Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor Heart of Man
conceived, and the Excellence of these Means and Ordinances, which thou have
appointed for us for the Attainment thereof, which thou have hid from the Wise
and Prudent (of the World) but revealest unto Babes,

And therefore with Angels, etc.

Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory and Honor, and Power: for thou have
created all things, and for thy Pleasure they are and were Created.

Worthy is the Lamb, that was slain, to reeive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing:

For thou wast slain, and have redeemed us unto God by thy Blood out of every
Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation.

Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

Almighty God, who have given, etc. The Collect for the Second Sunday after
Easter.

Almighty God, our Heavenly Father, etc. The Prayer of Consecration.

Wherefore, Holy Father, according to his Holy Institution Commemorating that
his bitter, but most precious Death and Passion, and solemnly Representing the
same before thy Divine Majesty, as the great, most Holy, and Only Propitiation
for all our Sins, and the Sins of the whole World; and being mindful also of
his Powerful Resurrection, Glorious Ascension into Heaven, and Blessed Session
at thy right Hand to intercede for us, till he shall come again with great
Power and Glory to judge both the Living and the Dead, and to distribute to
every one according to their Works done in the Flesh; we offer and render unto
thee, by him, our most humble Adoration, highest Praises, and most hearty
Thanks, for thy inestimable Clemency, Goodness and Benignity to us therein; and
thereby demonstrated to Men and Angels: and most humbly and earnestly
Supplicate and Beseech thee, that this our Unbloody, Reasonable, and Spiritual
Sacrifice may be acceptable and well Pleasing unto thee, most Mighty God, by
our Anointed Jesus, who gave himself for us, an Offering, and a Sacrifice, to
thee, for a sweet smelling Savor; that thou will be pleased graciously to
behold the same, and look upon this Token and Memorial of the Covenant, from
thy Glorious Throne in Heaven, and be Propitious to us in the free, and full
Pardon of all our Sins, in a Liberal and Bountiful Collation of thy Rich
Treasure of the Inestimable Graces of thy Holy Spirit upon us, and in a
gracious Audience of the Prayers, which we here offer unto thee: and send down
thy Holy Spirit upon these Proposited Elements, to Sanctify and Bless them,
that to us who partake thereof, this Bread may be made the Precious Body of thy
Christ, and this Wine the Precious Blood of thy Christ, to the Remission of all
our Sins, and to the mighty Confirmation of us in all Grace, and to Eternal
Life.

And here we offer and present unto Thee, O Lord, our selves, our Souls, and
Bodies,, etc. as in that which immediately follows the Lord's Prayer,
beginning, O Lord and Heavenly Father.

And we humbly beseech thee, O Father, the great Creator, and Supreme Lord and
Governor of the whole Universe, and of all therein, to behold with thy Favor
this great Propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, and be Propitious to
the Universal Church diffused over all the Earth, which thy Beloved Son our
Savior has purchased with his own precious Blood; and to the whole Race of
Mankind: Behold with Mercy and Pity all our Misery and Sufferings, through the
Envy, Malice, and Subtility of those Rebels against thee, the Apostate Spirits
of the Kingdom of Darkness: Behold the great Havoc they have made, and
Confusions they have wrought in the World, and even in thy Church, and among
thy People, who are called by thy Name: And let all our Sufferings be united to
the Sufferings of our Savior, and being sanctified by them be accepted by
thee; and all the Malice and Mischiefs of those thine and our inveterate
Enemies be computed, to the filling up of their Measure, that they may be cast
out, and the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior thy Son be set up in full Power
and Glory throughout the whole World.

R. How long, O Lord, Holy and True, do thou not judge and avenge the
Sufferings of thy poor Creatures, upon those Spiritual Wickednesses, thine and
our Enemies, who vex us with their Wiles?

O Lord, raise and restore thy Universal Church to its primitive Purity,
Holiness, Zeal, and Fruitfulness in Good Works; and let the light of thy
Countenance so shine upon it, that from thence it may be reflected into the
Eyes and Hearts of all those who sit in Darkness, that so they may be brought
out of their Darkness into Thy Light, unto Thee the God of Light and Life.

And we humbly beseech Thee, most Gracious and Merciful Father, to look down
and behold in much Mercy and Pity the deplorable State and Condition of this
Church and Nation, [ who have hitherto withstood all the gracious Methods of
thy Holy and manifest Providence, for our Correction and Reformation, without
any Works meet for Repentance, or any due sense of thy Hand and Gracious
Designs therein, or of the Day of our Visitations; but say, We are Rich, and
increased with Goods, and have need of nothing; and know not that we are
wretched and miserable, and poor, (in true Treasure) and blind, and naked,
overspread with Pharisaism, Formality, and Carnal Security, and tainted with
the leaven, not only of the Pharisees, but even of the Sadduces; and in the
very State of thy ancient People the Jews, in the Day of their Visitation: so
that we have great Reason to fear that we have filled up our Measure, and that
the Day of our Calamity, and of thy just Vengeance is near approaching. But
thou art God, and not Man; thou know our Frame, and that we are but Dust; a
God ready to pardon, Gracious and Merciful, slow to anger, and of great
Kindness: yet can we not expect to be wholly unpunished: but we beseech Thee,
correct us in measure; with Judgment, not in thine Anger, least thou bring us
to nothing: And remember, O Lord, that our Sins are in Truth our greatest
Misery; and how much we suffer therein through the secret Energy of our
invisible Enemies: Pour out therefore thy Fury upon them; for they have
devoured and consumed us: but help us O God of our Salvation, for the Glory of
thy Name,] and deliver us, and purge away our Sins for thy Name's Sake. Send
forth a powerful Spirit of Reformation amongst us; and stir up the Hearts and
Spirits of thy faithful Servants to be industrious for the Promotion thereof,
strengthen them thereunto, and bless them therein.

And we humbly beseech thee, O Lord, [ who know how to deliver the Godly out
of Temptations, and to reserve the Unrighteous unto the Day of Judgment to be
punished; if thou after all art provoked to bring a Flood of Calamities and
Destruction upon the World of the Ungodly, and to leave the Outward Worshippers
and Formal Christians to be tordden down by the Gentiles, that thou will
remember all the True Worshippers within the Temple, and before the Altar, who
indeed worship Thee in Spirit and in Truth, whose Souls are made thy Temples,
who honor and adore Thee in the most inward Thoughts of their Hearts, and
sacrifice their Lusts, and vile Affections, and their own Wills to Thee, whose
Faith and Devotion is certainly known unto Thee; that thou will hide them in
the hollow of thy Hand, and under the Shadow of thy Wings; and preserve them,
as a Seed, to partake of that Glory, which shall immediately follow, and come
upon the Church, as soon as the Storm shall be over: and] that thou will be
graciously pleased effectually to make every one of us, and of this Society, to
be, and continue, of that blessed Company, [who worship Thee in Spirit, and in
Truth,] and confirm it, and increase it daily, both in Grace and Number, to the
Honor and Praise of thy Great Name, through Jesus Christ our Blessed Lord and
Savior.

And we humbly beseech Thee, that thou will remember, and be gracious to, those
of us, who are now absent, by reason of any Infirmity, Sickness, or other just
Impediment, and supply their involuntary corporal Absence from us, by the
Presence of thy Spirit with them, and make them Partakers with us of the
Spiritual Benefits of this Holy Ordinance.

And we humbly beseech Thee for our Relations in Blood and Affinity; that thou will be pleased to work and perfect that Holy Work of Regeneration in them,
that we may be all bejoyned and united in that more excellent Relation, in
Spirit, and so become indeed thy Children, and Brethren and Sisters one to
another. Give us all Grace to be vigilant and resolute against the Temptations
and Counsels of Flesh and Blood, and to be fruitful our selves, and mutually
assistant one to another in the Production of the Fruits of the Spirit; and to
understand, observe, and follow the Conduct thereof saithfully and fully.

We beseech Thee also for all our Friends and Benefactors, [and all those who
have sent hither their Oblations to Thee] that thou will reward all their
Kindness to us, or any of us, into their own Bosoms: and as thou make them
Instruments of thy Providence, for our Relief, Benefit, or Comfort; so make us
Instruments of thy Grace and Blessing unto them.

And we beseech Thee, O Lord, to remember all those, who have desired to be
remembered in our Prayers, or for whom our Prayers have been desired, or who do
remember us in theirs. Thou know all the Circumstances of their several
Cases better than either we or they themselves: We beseech thee be Propitious
and favorable to them all, and dispose of all, (both them and their Concerns,)
as may be most for the Honor and Glory of thy Name, the Promotion of thy
Service, and the Weal and Comfort of every one of them.

These things, O most Gracious and Bountiful Lord, and what ever else in thy
Infinite Wisdom thou see any way requisite or necessary for us, or for any
whom we have or ought to have prayed for, we humbly beg and Implore through
this Holy Propitiation now commemorated before thee, in the Name, and for the
Sake and Merits of thy dearly Beloved Son, our Blessed Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus, who has commanded and encouraged us, when we pray, to say unto Thee,

Our Father, who art in Heaven, etc.

We do not presume to come to this thy Table, etc.

After the Communion.

Almighty and Everlasting God, etc.

Glory be to God on high, etc.

May, God arise, and his Enemies be scattered, and all that hate him fly before
him: As Smoke is dissipated in the Air, may they vanish; and as Wax is
dissolved at the Fire, may the Wicked Perish at the Presence of God: But may
the Righteous always be Glad, rejoice in God, yea exceedingly rejoice.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

* To God who did, etc.

Accept us graciously, O Lord, in these our Supplications, Prayers, and
Thanksgivings, and dispose, etc.

O Almighty Lord, and everlasting God, etc.

Lord of all Power and Might, etc. Collect for the 7th. after Trinity.

Almighty God, who have Promised to hear, etc. Incline thy Favor, etc.

The Peace of God, etc.

HYMN I.
RISE, O my Soul, with thy Desires to Heaven,
And with Divinest Contemplation use
Thy Time, where Time's Eternity is given,
And let vain Thoughts, no more thy Thoughts abuse,
But down in silent Darkness let them lie:
So live thy better, let thy worse Thoughts Die.
And thou, my Soul, inspired with Holy Flame,
View, and Review with most regardful Eye
That Holy Cross, whence thy Salvation came,
On which thy Savior and thy Sin did Die:
For in that Sacred Object is much Pleasure;
And in that Savior is my Joy, my Treasure.
To Thee, O JESU, I direct mine Eyes,
To Thee my Hands, to thee my Humble Knees,
To Thee my Heart shall offer Sacrifice,
To Thee my Thoughts, who my Thoughts only sees;
To Thee my Life, my Self, and all I give,
To Thee I die, to Thee alone I live.
O Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord most High,
Coequal, Coeternal DEITY,
Who made us, did redeem, and do Inspire
Our Souls fallen Heat with new Caelestial Fire;
We Bless thee now, and shall eternally,
O Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord most High.
HYMN. II.
O Taste, O taste, O taste and see,
How good, how sweet, thy Lords to thee.
Blessed, O Blessed is the Man,
That firmly holds his Trust in Him:
O Fear the Lord all ye his Saints,
For they who Fear him nothing want:
The Lions lack, and Hunger bear,
But naught want they who do Him Fear:
The Lions lack, and pine for Food;
But who fear Him can want no Good.
HYMN III.
TO God, who did create the World's great Frame;
To God, by whom lost Man's Redemption came;
To God, who Graces sends, God the Holy Ghost;
We now give Praise with all the Heavenly-Host.
Thy early Praises in the Beginning were,
When all the Morning Stars made up the Quire;
Thee, all thy Works, Angels and Men adore,
As we do now, and shall do evermore.
All Glory to the Majesty on high,
The ever Blessed Blessing Trinity.
As in the Beginning was, is now, shall be,
When Time shall pass into Eternity.
FINIS.

