Imprimatur.

Geo: Parish, S. T. P. Reverend'. in Christo Patri Archiepisc'. Ebor'. a sac'.
Domest'.
April, 14. 1663.
THE Church of ROME Not sufficiently defended from her Apostasy, Heresy, and
Schism: As appears By an Answer to certain Quaeries, Printed in a Book
entitled Fiat Lux, and sent transcribed (as it is supposed) from thence by a
Romanist to a Priest of the Church of England.

Whereunto are annexed The Romanist's Reply to the Protestant's Answer, and the
Protestant's Rejoinder to that Reply.

By P.S. D.D.

York, Printed by A. Broad, and are to be sold by R. Lambert at the
Minster-Gates, 1663.

To the Right Honorable, and Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Ld. Bishop
and Count Palatine of Duresme.
Right Reverend, and my much Honored Lord,
WHen I waited on your Lordship, the last Summer, at the time of your
publique-Ordination, I communicated to your Lordship the Papers, that now are
printed in this small Book.

Your Lordship was pleased to give me encouragement to publish them, and
withal to advise me to forbear any future reciprocation of this Saw, which
some count their delight to draw, and retort. I should not have presumed to
communicate these endeavors of mine in a contest so long managed by our
learned Prelates, and other worthy Men of our English Church, but that I
perceive, that our ordinary sort of people have not the opportunity to procure,
nor leisure to peruse Books of larger Volumne; and Reverend Bishop Jewel's
Apology (that might instruct them in the several Questions in debate between
the true, and pretended Catholics, that is, betwixt the Protestants and the
Romanists,) is rarely perused by the people of this Age, though it may possibly
be found in some Churches.

What the Person is that sent me the Quaeries (extant I perceive in the book
called Fiat Lux) and who made the Reply to my Answer, I know not; but I
perceived, that the people might easily be amazed by them, and disposed to
judge the Church of Rome not at all changed from her primitive integrity, and
thereupon the better inclined to desert our Communion.

In the Parish where I live, I perceive the Papists (and there are several
Families there of the Romish-perswasion) generally believe, that we have set up
a new Religion, that we have no Priests amongst us, and consequently no
Sacrament except (perhaps what their women in some cases by allowance do
administer) Baptism.

What effect such opinions do produce, is visible enough, in the spreading of
this error in this place, within a few years bypast.

That we should do our best endeavors to acquaint the people that Rome is not
such as sometimes she was; that England is not a Church bearing date since
Henry the eight's Reign; that our Divines are Priests duly ordained, that we
have no defects in our Discipline, destructive to the being of a sound Church;
and that salvation, may be obtained better amongst us, than in any Church in
the world, is the common duty of all entrusted with the charge of souls.

What I am able to contribute to so good a work, I adventure to show by this
ensuing Discourse; and how Zealous both myself, and all others, ought to be to
have it done, the danger of such, as are misled from our Assemblies, does
abundantly demonstrate.

That by Gods blessing this Skirmish, may confirm some that stand, establish
some that stagger, and raise up some, that are fallen amongst us; I hope the
rather, for that I have been encouraged thereunto by your Lordship; who, being
so well skilled in the excellent structure of our settlement, [which, were our
Discipline advanced to the purity that our Church in the commination
professes, is to be wished for, would fall but little short of the
Primitive-constitution] has always been ready to maintain, that the pretensions
of Rome (so far as she condemns, and dissents from us in the substantial parts
of Religion,) are destitute of a solid foundation.

Your Lordships ability to defend and resolution to suffer for the Cause of our
Church (both at home, and abroad) are so well known, that to speak anything of
either of them is superfluous.

I crave your Lordships candid acceptance of this small work; and withal I
humbly return my thanks, for your Lordships patience in perusing these Papers,
and readiness to impart your Lordships direction and advice in several
particulars, and with my prayers that your Lordship may enjoy that measure of
health and length of life in your Diocese that may enable you to settle it
according to the pious, and grave design of your Articles of Visitation, and
complete your Reparations of those Ruins, that sacrilegious hands have made
upon the Fabriques belonging to your Bishopric (in accomplishing which good
Enterprise I have been an eyewitness, that your Lordship forgetting your
private concerns, spares neither for cost nor pains) I rest

My Lord, Your Lorships humble and much obliged servant Peter Samwaies.

To my worthy friend Walter Lyster Esquire.
Sir,
THough you live among some of the Roman Religion, yet you are better satisfied
with the Constitution of that Church wherein you received your Baptism, than
by the Quaeries that you gave me, to be shaken from the truth of that Catholic
Christianity, which we profess, since the Reformation in England.

When I returned to you the short Answer which you see now made public, it was
received ( you know) with as much scorn and disparagement, as those of the new
Religion (for such I call the present Profession of Rome) use to entertain the
Reasons, that either they understand not, or know not how to answer.

But yet that somewhat might be retorted, I know not what Champion amongst them
(let him answer it to his Superiors, if he did it without their leave) sent
(as you can witness) a Reply closing it with an Appeal to an indifferent Judge.

I have joined issue with him upon his own Terms; and hope that (whatsoever
they may judge, that are engaged never to approve any thing, that shall
convince them to be mistaken, yet) an indifferent Reader will acknowledge (upon
his perusal of our several pleas) that whatsoever Rome was in her primitive
purity and splendour yet when we were forced to withdraw our selves from her
Communion, she had forfeited all just claim to her first excellency, and cannot
be excused from Apostasy, Heresy, and Schism.

If any thing that has been written (upon the occasion of that Challenge which
you brought me) may contribute something to your further confirmation in the
truth espoused already by you, I shall not think my labor lost: but if it
shall conduce also to the better establishment of others, I have reason, as in
the first place to glorify God for making me serviceable in the defense of his
truth; so in the next, to give you thanks for engaging me in this Contest, who
being (perhaps too much) inclined to peace, had not marched into this field,
had I not (as you can witness,) first been challenged. Wishing you all that
felicity, that none of the Sonns of the Church of England shall fail to attain,
that Constantly frame their lives according to her sound and Orthodox doctrine
(and that is no less than the certain salvation of your soul) I rest,

Sir, Your most humble servant P. Samwaies.

ERRATA.
Read, etc. but insert what is thus () marked.

In the Epist: amused page 3. line 6.

(in) p. 10. l. 5. (from) ibid. l. 25. (obstinate) p. 16. l. 24. Latin- p. 17.
l. 8. condemned p. 18. l. 5. unlimited p. 23. l. 21. (of Rome) p. 29. l. 10.
Reply p. 37. l. 7. debeitam in marg. p. 38. spec alia ibid. recesse p. 41. l. 5
(...) ibid. l. 28. ((...)) ibid. reasoning p. 42. l. 9. Bishops p. 45. l. 12.
(the) ib. l. 20. Antecessores i^ mar. p. 48. Jacobasius ib. l. 16. vim in marg.
p. 51. diminish p. 52. l. 1. thought ib. l. 21. (and) in marg. ib. magnopere in
mar. p. 53. cred tum ib. Photius ib. l. 26. (...) ibid. Franofurdiensi i^ m. p.
55 Hinemarus ib. l. 25. Pithaeus p. 56. habita in marg. ib. dele ib.
[Germancru^ and] Apostolici ibid. (a) p. 57. l. 20. Ex. 20.4, 5. p. 58. l. 17
martyrib. in marg. p. 62. Quoniam in m. p. 63. Dominico ib. plebi ib. Chrysostom.
p. 67. l. 8. Nyssen ibid. (...) ib. quia in marg. p. 76. duodececim in mar. p.
78. ((...)) p. 79. l. 17. ancient p. 80. l. 28. (...) in marg. p. 83. (...)
ibid. sometimes p. 84. l. 26 (...) in marg. p. 87. (...) ibid. (...) ibid. (any
jurisdiction) p. 89. lin. 23.
What other Errors of the Press, besides these here noted, the Reader shall
observe he is desired heartily to correct.

The Invalidity of the Church of Rome's Plea against her Apostasy, Heresy, and
Schism, as appears by a Protestants answer to certain QUAERIES, etc.
The Romanist's Quaeries.
IT will not be denied but that the Church of Rome was once a most pure,
excellent, flourishing and Mother Church.

This Church could not cease to be such, but she must fall either by Apostasy,
Heresy, or Schism.

First, Apostasy is not only a renouncing of the faith of Christ, but the very
name and title of Christianity: White defense of his way P. 435.
no man will say that the Church of Rome had ever such a fall, or fell thus.

Secondly, Heresy is an adhaesion to some private and singular opinion, K.
James in his Speech to the Par.
or error in faith, contrary to the general approved Doctrine of the Church.

If the Church of Rome did ever adhaere to any singular or new opinion
disagreeable to the common received doctrine of the Christ a world; Whitaker in
his Answer to Dr. Sanders 2. demon. Reynolds in his 5. Con.
I pray you satisfieme these particulars, viz.

1. By what General Council was she ever condemned? 2. Which of the Fathers
ever writ against her? or, 3. By what Authority was she otherwise reproved?
For it seems to me to be a thing very incongruous, that so great and glorious
a Church should be condemned by every one that has a mind to condemn her.

Thirdly, Schism is a departure of division from the unity of the Church
whereby the bond and communion hel^ with some former Church is broken and
dissolved.

If ever the Church of Rome divided her self by schism from any other Body of
faithful christians, or brake communion, or went forth the society of any
elder Church; I pray you satissie me as to these particulars, 1. Whose Company
did she leave? 2. From what Body did she go forth? 3. Where was the true Church
which she forsook?


For it appears a little strange to me that a Church should be accounted
schismatic, when there cannot be assigned any other church different from
her (which from age to age (since Christ his time) has continued visible) from
whom she departed.

The Protestants Answer.
WE deny not the honor, reputation and glory that was due sometime to the
Roman-Church; she was as other Churches in their integrity and during her
continuance in that condition, we deny her no title of commendation proper for
her. Such was the Church of Jerusalem; of which notwithstanding you may hear
the Lord making this complaint in the holy Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 1.21, 22.
How is the faithful City become an harlot; it was full of judgment,
righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers. Thy silven is become dross,
thy wine mixed with water.

We charge not this whole Church to have forfeited the good opinion the world
had of her, in any one instance of time: for we believe generally of all
Churches, 1 Cor. 3.9.
that they were God's Husbandry, and God's Building, as St. Paul speaks of the
Corinthian-church, and that salvation was to be found in them; but withal we
firmly believe that there were wicked factions in the Church, that embraced and
taught damnable errors; 1 Cor. 15.12.
some we know were among the Corinthians that denied the Resurrection; some
among the Galatians that urged Circumcision: Gal. 6.12.
and if these factions had been so potent as to have excluded from their
communion all that would not have approved their heretical errors, why those
particular Churchs (in respect of such a prevailing party) might not be charged
to have fallen by Apostasy, Heresy, and schism, I see no reason.

When therefore such opinions that were maintained before by particular men,
became the Sanctions and Laws of the Roman-Church; (as the worshipping of
Images, the invocation of Saints and Angels, the Doctrines of justification by
works, Purgatory, halfe-Communion, Co^po^eall-reall presence, merit of good
works, etc.) then the Church of Rome might be said to have fallen by Apostasy,
heresy and Schism.

1. By Apostasy from the purity of that holy Doctrine, which sometimes by her
Bishops and Ministers she taught; for Apostasy does not imply the renouncing of
the Name and Title to Christianity only, nor a departing from the whole
Christian faith, but a withdrawing from the sincerity and soundness of the
profession which men have formerly made: it has a latitude in it, which admits
of degrees, one may apostatize from a portion, as well as from the whole Truth.

2. By heresy also has the Church of Rome fallen, if to depart from the truth
of Christian Religion in points (at least grating upon the foundations, if not
fundamental) and to maintain them pertinaciously, be heresy. How far the
Church of Rome is involved in the guilt of the Bishop of it, concerns them
especially to consider, who contend that he is the Head not of that particular
Church only, but of the whole Catholic Church: but if that Church may be said
to be heretical whose Bishop is guilty of heresy, it will be hard for the
Romish-Church to acquit her self from this charge til she can prove that
Liberius subscribed not to the Arria^ Confession, which St. Hierome in Catalogo
says he did, compelled indeed by Fortunatianus but yet he did it:
Fortunatianus in hoc habetur detestabilis, quod Liberium Romanae urbis
Episcopum, profide ad exilium pergentemprinius sollicitavit, ac fregit and ad
subscriptionem haeresios compuin. Let her vindicate also Anastatius secundus
from Nestorianisme, which is charged upon him by apud Chamier lib: 3. de Canone
cap. 10.
Luitprandus Tieinensis Platina (who says upon the credit of common fame, that
he dyed a strange death, either as Arrius, or by a sudden stroke from the
Divine hand,) Albo floriacensis, and Anastasins Bibliot hecarius. Let her make
an Apology for condemnatus in sexta Synodo.
Honorius, who was condemned by a Council; a better Apology it should be then
that of Saunders, who though Honor^us taught heresy, yet denies the Roman
Church to have erred with him, and adds that though he might confirm heresy
as a man, yet he did it not as a Pope.

3. The Church of Rome is guilty of Schism, in that she does not only depart
from the communion of such Churches as were Orthodox in the judgment of prime
and pure Antiquity, but has forced a departure of all the reformed Churches
from her, except they would communicate with her in her abominations. Schism
is theirs who cause it; when the Orthodox departed from the Arrians, the
Heretics caused the Schism; a forced separation, makes not them that (in
such a case) separate themselves guilty of schism, such rather as teach
doctrines to the Catholic faith repugnant, are Schismatics; and this
imputation lies strong upon the Church of Rome, in forcing the Canons of the
Trent-Councell: if then it be demanded (for the conviction of the Roman-church
to be Schismatic) first, Whose company did she leave: secondly, From what
Body did she go forth: thirdly, Where was the true Church which she forsook.

1. To the first question we reply, that she left the company of the Orthodox
when she obstinately pernsted in her false doctrines.

2. She departed from their Body, not by local separation, but by refusing to
communicate with them that reformed themselves, which particular Churches are
bound to do, when they cannot do it (which were the best course) by a general
Council. This advice God himself gives unto Judah by the Prophet Hosea,
though the ten Tribes should continue obstinate; Though thou Israel play the
Harlot, Hosea 4.15.
yet let not Judoh offend: though there were but two Tribes in the one
Kingdom, and ten in the other, yet (notwithstanding the paucity of the one
Church, and the multitude of the other comparatively,) they were to reform
themselves that were fewer, in case the other should remain in their Idolatry.
3. And if it be thirdly demanded, Where was the true Church which the
Roman-church forsock: we reply first what we said before, that the guilt of
schism may be incurred by forcing others (except they will defile themselves
by joining with those that have espoused dangerous errors in their superstition
and Idolatry) to depart from us: and then secondly, it is conspicuous enough
that she left her self as one may say; I mean that the Lattine-Church
obstinate and peramtory in the perilous opinions of some of her own communion
(when she publicly owned those doctrines, and would no longer endure them that
would not comply with her therein) forsook the rest of her Communion, who
misliked and detested the said errors in heart, before they had (by the
concurrent assistance of Princes and Prelates) opportunity to shake off the
Tyrany of the Bishop of Rome, (whose ancient privilege and Primacy of order
(were that the only quarrel) we would not deny) and when the good Providence
of God gave a fair opportunity, they openly rejected what with grief of heart
they groaned under and tolerated before.

As for that enquiry, 1. By what general Council: (...) Fathers: 3. By what
other Authority has the Church of Rome been condemned, written against or
reproved? We answer, that the present opinions and practice of the Church of
Rome are dondemn'd by General Counsels: the Usurpation of unlimited Power
challenged by the Pope, is censured by the sixth Canon of the famous Council
of Nice; which gives like Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to the Patriarchs of
Alexandria, and Antioch within their respective limits and bounds, as the
Bishop of Rome did exercise within his Precincts: the worshipping of Images,
censured about twenty years before the Council of Nice, by the 36 Canon of the
Council of El^beris; Placuit picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere, etc. It Is
resolved that Pictures should not be in the Church, lest that which is adored
be painted on walls: and whatsoever may be pleaded by the authority of the
second Council of Nice, in the defense of Images, yet it is evident that the
Canons thereof were not universally received; because as soon as the news of
the Acts thereof came to the ears of the Fathers assembled (by Charles the
great, two years afterward) at Frankford, they were rejected, and refuted by
those three hundred Bishops there convened. If it should be demanded, where is
the Council that has condemned Rome since the separation of the Protestants?
it is easy to reply, that the obstinacy of the Pope and his Adhaerents,
obstruct the application of so good a Plaster to the wounds and breakings of
the Church: what fruit is like to come upon such a Convention as the Pope would
agree to, may appear by the transactions of the Trent-Assembly; but the want of
the sentence of a General Council condemning the Church of Rome, is no
security to the Romanists that their Church is a safe Communion to those that
are in it; for dangerous errors and heresies arose in the Church before
Constantine's time, and such as were destructive to them that held them, and
yet they were not condemned by General Counsels; there having been no
convenience for their meeting until the Empire came into the Church.

2. For the Fathers of the first five hundred years, it is evident enough that
they are against the present Church of Rome in all the Controversies disputed
between the Romanists and the Protestants, as might be quickly shown out of
their writings, were it seasonable to take the pains: and then moreover to give
an account to the third Enquiry, where it is demanded By what other authority
has she been reproved? We desire no more ample Authority than the Scriptures
interpreted by the wisdom and constant consent of the Catholic Church.

The Romanists Reply to the Protestants Answer.
Sir,
YOu sent me some Catholic Quaeries with (as you say) Doctor Samwais's
Answer, to which take this brief Reply.

The Paper (which you sent) takes it for granted, and the Dr. denies it not,
that the Church of Rome was once a most pure Church, and proves her continuance
thus;

This Church could not cease to be such, but she must fall either by Apostasy,
Heresy, or Schism: But first, not by apostasy; for Apostasy is not only a
renouncing of the faith of Christ, but the very name and title to christianity,
none will say the church of Rome ever fell thus.

But notwithstanding this the Doctor (by a new definition of apostasy) will
prove she fell thus; for (says he) Apostasy does not imply the renouncing of
the name and title to Christianity only nor a departure from the whole
Christian Faith, but a withdrawing from the sincerity and soundness of the
Profession which we have formerly made. But the Church of Rome has thus
withdrawn, ergo, he proves the minor, because she embraces particular Doctrines
there mentioned which formerly she did not.

Reply. The minor is denied; and the probation concerning particular Doctrines,
as Worshipping of Images, invocation of Saints, etc. is likewise denied,
because assumed without proof: and the definition he gives of Apostasy is
invalid, because it confounds Apostasy with heresy; but the other definition is
good, because it clearly distinguishes them; and if so, then the D^ has not
proved as yet that the Church of Rome has ever fallen by heresy.

This done, the paper proceeds to prove, that secondly the Church of Rome never
fell by heresy: and to effect this, it puts the definition of heresy (see it in
the paper) then it goes o^ thus, If the Church of Rome did eve^ adhere to any
singular or new opinion disagreeable to the common receive^ Doctrine of the
Christian-world, I pray satisfy me in these particulars, viz. 1. By what
general Council was she ever condemned? 2. Which of the Fathers ever w(...)
against her? 3. By what authority was she otherwise reproved? Before we put the
Drs. answers to these particulars, we will take a view how he proves the Church
of Rome to have fallen by heresy thus therefore he argues,

Certain Popes, Bishops of the Church of Rome, as Liberius, Anastasius
secundus, and Honorius, have fallen by heresy ergo, the Church of Rome has
fallen by Heresy.

Reply, The Antecedent begets a new dispute of ihe Popes infallibility ex
Cathedra, which is to be waved, because the paper does not meddle with it: and
I deny the consequence, which he no ways goes about to prove. But since he
cannot prove that the Church of Rome has fallen by heresy; let us see (at
least) what he says to the Quaeries. To the first then, which demands, By what
general Council was she ever condemned? he answers, by the sixth Canon of the
famous Council of Nice, which condemns the usurpation of unlimited power
challenged by the Pope, and gives like Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to the
patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch within their respective limits and bounds,
as the Bishop of Rome did exercise within his Precincts.

Reply. This unlimmited power (challenged by the Pope) is his supremacy,
always held by the Church of Rome and her adhaerents to be of Divine
institution: and therefore only said not proved (in which he is still like
himself) to be an Usurpation.

As for the sixth Canon of the Nicene Council, it is so far from condemning or
limiting the universal jurisdict on justly challenged by the Bishop of Rome as
it clearly asserts it: to evince, this we will cite the words of the Canon,
which the Dr. (least they should discover his bold assertion untrue) omitred
the words are these, Let the ancient custom be kept in Egypt, Lybia, and
Pentapolis; that the Bishop of Alexand(...) have power over all these, because
the Roman-Bishop also has such a custom* these last words, because the Bishop
of Rome, etc. evince the thing to be a^ I have said; for they are the reason
why the Patriarch of Alexandria, is to have that Government, to wit, because
(as the Council says) it is the Bishop of Rome his custom to have it so. If
you say that the Popes custom is not referred to the Government of these
Churches by the Patriarch of Alexandria but to the Government of other Churches
in the West: I reply, that you speak against the Text, because this, not
another thing, but this here spoken off, viz. That the Bishop of Alexandria
have power over these Provinces, this is accustomed, and to whom? to the Bishop
of Rome; it is his custom to have it so, wherefore we like of it well and
confirm it: Out of which it is clear they do not condemn or limit his
Universal jurisdiction, but confirm it. I know the Dr. would have the sense
of the Canon to be this, Let the Bishop of Alexandria govern in the places
specified, because the Bishop of Rome has a custom to govern in other
places, to wit, in the West.

Reply, This is against the fence of the Canon; for those words, because the
Bishop of Rome, etc. are the reason why the Patriarch of Alexandria is to have
that Government, whereas a Bishop's governing Churches in the West, were no
reason why the Bishop of Alexandria particularly should govern the Churches
here mentioned.

As for the Council of Eliberis, it being but a particular one, and the
Quaeries demanding a general one, we need not reply unto it: Nay if it be
looked into, it absolutely makes for the Church of Rome; the words are Placu't
picturas in Ecclesia esse non debere, etc. It Is resolved, that Pictures should
not be in the Church, least that which is adored, be painted on walls. In which
Decree, these words that which is adored, are manifestly against the Doctor;
for they suppose a due reverence constantly given to pictures: and lest that
things reverenced might be abused the Council forbad pictures (in those times
of persecution) to be painted on the Church-walls, for fear the Infidells
should deface them.

Now if you bring the Authority of the second general Council of Nice, (Act
7.) desining that we must exhibit to Pictures (contrary to what Dr. Samwaies
holds) Honorariam adorationens non veram ^at^iam: An honorary adoration, not
true latria, that is, an inferior adoration, but not the supreme due to
Almighty God only. Hethinks to evade, by saying the Canons thereof were not
universally received, because as soon as the news of the Acts came to the ears
of the Fathers assembled at Frankford, they were rejected and refuted, by those
300. Bishops there convened.

Reply. It is barely said, not proved, that the Nicene Canons were not
universally received, but I expect proof: as for the Council of Frankford, it
neither rejects nor refutes the Nicene Canons, but only defines, that vera
latria is not to be given to Images; which the Council of Nice likewise
affirms. If then these two Counsels agree, how could the Dr. truly say, that
the Frankford council rejected the Nicene.

Thus you see, that the Dr. has not at all proved the church of Rome condemned
by any general Council. But since he cannot prove it by Authority, he will by
reason thus.

The want (says he) of the sentence of a general Council condemning the
Church of Rome is no Security to the Romanists, that their Church is ae sure
communion to those that are in it, for dangerous errors and heresies arose in
the Church before Constantine's time, and such as were destructive to those
that held them, and yet they were not condemned by General Counsels, there
having been ^o convenience for their meeting, until the Empire came into the
Church.

Reply.
We grant that the Church both can and has condemned arising heresies before
there was any convenience for a general Council; for the Church either
diffusedly or representatively, that is, either as she is dispersed throughout
the world, and out of council; or as assembled in a general Council, has
power to co^demn arising heresies; and her condemnation of them (either way) is
security enough to her adherents. I grant likewise, that the want of the
sentence of a general Council to condemn us were no security to us, in case
you could show us otherwise condemned by the Catholique-church dispersed
throughout the world: but since you can neither do the one, nor the other, the
Church of Rome and her adherents (that have both for them) are secure enough;
and you (who have both against you) are most insecure: and I say further, that
seeing it has been the custom of the Catholique-church to condemn arising
heresies by general Counsels ever since she has had the convenience of having
them, it is certain, that the Quaerie (by what general Council was she ever
condemned?) is rationally put, and you (being not able to produce one) leave it
unsatisfied.

As to the Quaerie, Which of the Fathers ever writ against her? the Dr.
answers, that it is evident enough, that the Fathers of the first five hundred
years are against the present Church in all controversies disputed between the
Romanists and Protestants.

Reply.
Sir, We expect to see your evidence, but never hope to see it produced.

As to the third, By what Authority was she otherwise reproved? the Dr.
answers, We desire no more ample Authority than the Scriptures interpreted by
the wisdom and constant consent of the Catholic Church.

Reply.
Show that the Scriptures thus (interpreted) do reprove the Church of Rome; for
till you do so, I must needs aver that the Ouaerie is unsatisfied.

Now let us see how the Paper sent to Dr. Samwaies) proves the church of Rome
not to have fallen at any time into Schism; and to do this, it puts the
desinition of Schism: (which see in the Paper:) then it proceeds, If ever the
church of Rome etc. read what is said, till you come to the Quaeries, and
afterward the Quaeries.

This done, let us see how on the contrary the Dr. has proved the church of
Rome guilty of schism: The Church of Rome (says he) etc. has departed from
the communion of the Orthodox Churches.

Reply.
Assign them good Dr. otherwise you only give us words.

He goes on. And has forced a departure, etc.

No good Doctor, you voluntarily left her communion, and so made your selves
Schismatics.

He proceeds. The schism is theirs who cause it. Let that pass.

He holds on. When the Orthodox departed from the Arrians, etc.

Reply.
Strange! the Orthodox departed from the Arrians: this is quite contrary to St.
John, (1 Jo: 2.19.) who speaking of certain heretics, says, Exierunt ex
nobis, they went out of us, or departed from us: which if true, (and certainly
what St. John says is true) and withal that the Orthodox departed from the
Arrians, (as the Dr. says) then it evidently follows, that the Orthodox were
Arrians, that is heretics; and the Arrians (that is heretics) Orthodox: for
according to St. John they are heretics that depart, but according to Dr.
Samwaies, the Orthodox departed from the Arrians, therefore the Orthodox were
heretics: and if so, then the Dr. at unawares has made himself an Arrian,
for I suppose he will say, he is one of the Orthodox.

I wonder again, the Dr. did not see the manifest contradiction he run into,
when he said the Orthodox departed; for the Orthodox are they that do not
depart from the Doctrine anciently received: so that to say, that the Orthodox
departed, is to say, those that did not depart did depart; which is plain
contradiction in terminis.

Now he begins to answer the Quaeries. If then (says he) it be demanded, 1.
Whose company did she leave. 2. From what body did she go forth. 3. Where was
the true Church which she forsook? To the first (he says) we reply, that she
left the company of the Orthodox, when she persisted in her false Doctrines.

Reply.
He does not satisfy the Quaerie at all, for he tells us not what Orthodox
company she left; he only says, she left the company of the Orthodox, because
she persisted in her false doctrines: but this is still to leave the Quaerie
unsatisfied, and (according to his accustomed manner) to assert things without
proof. I confess, if we would grant what he says without proof, he would need
no more, and might lawfully proclaim his victory.

To the second he replies, That she departed from their body (that is, from the
body of the Orthodox) not by local separation, but by refusing to communicate
with them that reformed themselves.

Reply.
You are still like your self, that is, constant in affirming without proof:
as for what you say of local separation it is frivolous to mention it, since
none was urged in the paper: and as for the reformation, we call it
deformation, till you evidence the contrary.

The text brought out of the Prophet Hosea is impertinent, and so deserves no
reply: and as impertinent is the text (which at the beginning of his answer) he
brings out of the Prophet Isaiah concerning the Church of Jerusalem, which only
proves, that there were many in her who were fallen into sin: but what is this
to the church of Romes falling into heresy; for it is one thing to fall into
sin, another to fall into heresy, and we deny not but many of the church of
Rome fall into sin. That instance likewise of the church of Corinth is to as
little purpose objected against us, for it only proves that some (not all) did
err concerning the resurrection. He may if he please (but it is to as little
purpose) argue thus, Other particular Churches (as the Eastern) have fallen
into heresy, therefore the Church of Rome at least may fall, therefore (for
ought we know) has fallen. I deny the consequence; for it was only said to St.
Peter, and his Successors, and the Church of which they were to be Pastors;
Thou art Peter, or as the Syriack has it, Thou art a Rock, and upon this rock
will I build my Church, and the gatos of hell shall not prevail against it.

To the third, Which was the true Church which she forsook? he says, We reply
what we said before, that the guilt of schism may be incurred by forcing others.

Reply.
This is no answer, for you do not tell us, what true church she forsook: and
whereas you mention again her forcing you, I reply as before, that you
voluntarily and wilfully left her; and if you storm at her: because by
spiriruall punishments she seeks to reduce you to your former faith, you do
like Rebels, who voluntarily forsake their allegiance, and afterward storm
at the King who seeks to reduce them to their former alleglance by severe
punishments: and if you will needs have the Church of Rome guilty of schism
for forcing you only in this manner; then how will you acquit the King (that he
be not guilty of rebellion) who forces his Subjects in the same manner? and so
we shall have the King a Rebel, and not his Subjects.

He says likewise, that the Church of Rome has left her self, as one may say.

Reply.
One that will speak contradiction, or not answer the Quaerie, may say so: for
when you say that the Church of Rome has left her self as one may say: either
you must mean, that the whole has left the whole, and this is a flat
contradiction; or else you mean, that she has left her self, because certain
of her Members have left her; but this only shows that they have left her, not
She her self; and so the Quarie is left unsatisfied. Thus have you a brief
Reply to the Drs. Answer; and how solid it is, let others judge.

The Protestants Rejoinder to the Romanists Reply.
Sir,
I Received the Paper, wherein I know not who makes a Reply to that account
which I gave to the Proposalls, which you showed me in the defense of the
present Roman-church. Facile est cuiqua^ videri respondisse qui tacere
noluetic, aut quid est loquacius vanitate? quae ideo no^ potest quod veritas,
quia si voluerit etiam plus potest clamare quam veritas. De Civitat. Dei. lib.
5. c. 27.
St. Augustine said it long since, and we find it true by experience, It is
easy for any man to seem to answer another who is resolved not to hold his
peace; for what is more talkative then vanity? which cannot do what verity can,
because (if it pleases) it can make more noise than verity. The vulgar sort
think, that he that has spoken last, has the best cause; and so perhaps such
of your neighbors that are blinded with the Romish errors, conceive all in my
Answer abundantly satisfied by the Replyer, because he has thought fitting not
to be silent. Though I have as little hope to satisfy those who are resolved
to continue what they are, by my Rejoinder to this Replyer, as I had to
convince them of their mistake in thinking so well of their Romish church, as
the first paper would encourage them to do; yet lest any of the weaker sort
among our selves should think that the Replyer has sufficiently justified the
reasonableness of the first quaries, by's account to what I wrote; or that I
were wanting to my duty in defense of the Truth, I shall give you a short
satisfaction to all the pretensions made by the Replyer for the justification
of Rome from Apostasy, Heresy and Schism.

First, the Replyer thinks himself concerned to civil at my exceptions
against the definition of Apostasy, mentioned in the Quaeries: he will needs
have Apostasy to import as much as is said in the Quaeries, not only a
renouncing of the faith of Christ, but the very name and title to Christianity.
I grant that a total Apostasy does; but the word signifying no more then a
departure, it may be more or less dangerous, according to both the terms of
such a motion, from what truth, and to what error the departure is made.
Apostasia importat retro cessione^ qua^ da^ a Deo, quae quidem diversimode fit
secundu^'diversos modos, quibus homo Deo co^jungitur: primo namque homo Deo
conjungitur per fidem. secundo per debitem, and subjecta^ volu^tate^ ad
obediendu^ praeceptis ejus. tertio per aliqu a speciala ad supercrogationem
pertmentia; sicut per religione^ and clericatura^, vel sacru^ ordine^ remoto
aute^ posteriori remanet prius: sed non co^vertitur. 22ae. q: 12. a: 1.
Aquinas says, that Apostasy denotes some kind of recesse from God, which may
come to pass in sundry sorts, according to the different means whereby aman is
joined unto God: for first'd man is united unto God by faith. 2. By the
submission of his will to the Divine Precepts. 3. By special privilege of
super-eminency, as by holy Orders; and the last being removed, the first
abides; a man may renounce his Orders, and yet not his whole faith: let
therefore the Replyer turn to his St. Thomas, and from him learn to understand
what Apostasy signifies; or if he please, let him consult a better Saint, I
mean Luke the Evangelist, and he shall find him using the word for a particular
word of recesse. When Saint Paul came to Jerusalem, St. James the Bishop of it,
and the Elders said unto him, Acts 21.21.
Thou see brother how many thousands of the Jews there are which believe, and
they are all zealous of the Law; and they are informd of thee, that thou
teach all the Jews which are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses: (...). Do
we think the Jews had heard that St. Paul did forsake all the law of Moses,
judicial, moral, and ceremonial? no, they instance only in circumcision, and
the customs, (which were the ceremonial Law) and yet they thought that this
recession only was sufficient to denominate him a Doctor of Apostasy. Duabus
apostasus exisentibus adbuc potest remanere homo Deo co^junctus per fidem; sed
si a side recesserit, tune omnino a Deo retrocedere videtur. id. ibid.
Aquinas in the place afore-cited affirms, that one may depart from God, by
forsaking the order of his profession, or degree in the Clergy; and also by
perverseness of mind against the Divine precepts; and yet [notwithstanding
these two Apostacies] remain conjoined unto God by faith: but if a man depart
from the faith, [and 1. Tim 4.3.
St. Paul says they do that shall teach to abstain from marriage and forbid
the use of meats, which God has created to be received with thanks giving of
them which believe, and know the truth, and will not this Apostasy concern
such as teach thus?) then he seems to be guilty of a full Apostasy. When
Bellarmine in his Appendix to his book de summo Pontifice, calls Luther an
Apostate; he speaks properly or not? the Replyer (I hope) will not charge the
Cardinal to speak incongruously, and yet all the world knows that Luther
renounced not the name and title of Christianity, neither did the Cardinal
think so.

But grant what indeed no man (not void of common sense) can deny, that there
may be a partial Apostasy; yet the Replyer denies my Minor, (as he calls it)
where I instance in the particular doctrines of worshipping. Images, invocation
of Saints, halfe-commonion, corporeall-reall presence, etc. I because assumed
without proof: and needs there proof, that Rome teaches these doctrines? Let
the Replyer deny them if he please; we shall congratulate his abrenunciation of
such dangerous errors: but as long as we see them taught and practiced by all
the Romish-communion, we need not prove what they deny not, being indeed so
far obliged not to deny it, as they are obliged to profess the Trent-Canons.
To assert a partial apostasy, is not to confound it with heresy; the word
implies a ecesse or departure from what a Church or Person has sometimes
professed, which heresy does not: he that never acknowledged the truth, cannot
apostatize from it; but he that heretically maintains opihions destructive to
the christian faith, may be called an heretic, though he were never Orthodox.
Rome is Apostaticall in all the errors which she now holds against the truth
which she once professed: it is not her mistake only in the truth, but her
dereliction of it, when she affirms men to be justified not by faith alone, but
by works also: for this she believed not, but the contrary, when St. Paul
wrote to her, and taught her the right belief: Rom: 3.28. And when St. Clemens
governed her, as appears by his Epistle to the Corinthians, where he thus
writes, (...). p. 41.

The next thing the Replyer conceives him self concerned in, is to prove that
th^s Enthymem or argument, The Pope have fallen by heresy, therefore the
Church of Rome, is no valid way of reasoning, and withal an extravagant
controversy, leading to a new dispute concerning the Popes infalibility ex
Cathedra: the Replyer here is much mistaken; so if it be demanded, whether the
Church of Rome ever fell by heresy, is it not pertinent to prove that she has
so fallen, if she be concludeed in the faith of her Bishops that have so fallen
else sure it is no sin, not to believe as the Pope believes, except he first
justify his faith to the Christian world by some better authority then his own
Profession Let not therefore this Advocate of the Trent-faith think that he
replies, when he trifles; and that when he says that he denies my
consequence, he has answered my argument: my reason is clear, and I must not
permit him to fly into his obscure corners to shun the evidence of it.

Thus then I argue: is it lawful to dissent from the Pope, or not? if it be
lawful, why are they censured that obey not his decrees? if unlawful, why are
they excused that err not with him, nor are involved in his judgment when he
teaches errors opposite to the Christian faith? may not a Protestant as
lawfully dissent from the Pope as a Papist? but sure the Replyer upon better
consideration will change his mind, and (as Heart did) in his conference with
Reynolds) rather (in despite of all evidence to to the contrary) say the Pope
cannot err, then plead, that though he does, yet the Church is not bound to
obey him: and truly if it be obliged to obey him, how it can stand when he
falls, I see not.

It Is pretended also by the Replyer, that the Church of Rome in ascribing
universal jurisdiction to the Bishop of that See, is not obnoxious to the fixed
Canon of the Council of Nice, and so not condem^ad by a General Council: to
prove this he interprets the Canon with a gloss that I think destroys the
Text. I confess he has: De Roman Pontifice. lib 2. c. 13.
Bellarmine for his Author in this exposition, who having cited four opinions
concerning those words in the Canon, because this is customary to the Bishop of
Rome,) (...). Quia et Episcope Romano parilis (...).
would make the Bishop of Rome the efficient, and not the example of the
Authority granted to the rest of the Patriarchs in this Canon: so that if
Bellarmine please, the words in the Canon, because this is the custom to the
Bishop of Rome, shall import, because it is the Bishop of Romes custom to have
it so, id est, (as the Canon before speaks) that Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis
should be under the Patriarch of Alexandria: because the Pope did use to be so
liberal in his Concessions to that Bishop, as to grant him Authority over
those Provinces. But why must the sense of Ruffinus be rejected, who Lib. 1. C.
6. of his Ecclesiastical History, says, that it was decreed by the Council
in this Canon, that the Bishop of Alexandria should have the Charge of Egypt,
suburbicariarum Ecclesiarum.
as the Bishop of Rome had the charge of the Cities of his Neighborhood? why
must the Authority of Zonaras and Balsamon be despised, who give the same
interpretation of the Canon? The Replyer therefore is very bold, when he says,
that this sense of the Canon which I give, is against the intention of it,
seeing I give no other then what these and many other men of Judgment, and
Learning have given of it before.

Moreover, what a goodly account is given, why this cannot be the Genuine sense
of the Canon? A Bishop governing Churches in the West, (says the Replyer) is
no reason why the Bishop of Alexandria should govern the Churches mentioned in
the Canon. No reason (I Confess) efficient, but yet a Moral reason it might
be, moving the Fathers assembled in the Council to provide for the Unity of
the Church, by like expedient in the East, as they saw it furnished with in the
West. Take the meaning of the Canon in this sense and the discourse has
nothing in it against the Laws of a legitimate Argumentation, which may out of
the Canon thus be framed: The ancient Customs are to be retained? but that the
Patriarch of Alexandria should govern Egypt Lybia, and Pentapolis, is an
Ancient Custom, therefore the Major is manifest from the example of the Bishop
of Rome, who (by the right of custom) kept his Authority over the West: the
minor is evident by experience. The Replyer (I know) likes not the major; for
he says, that the Popes Supremacy was always held by the Church of Rome and
her adhaerents to be of Divine-right; Always held? (...); how did this word
escape him? I appeal to a competent Judge, the Author of the Apostolic
Constitutions (whether Clemens Romanus or no, I dispute not, but I suppose of
authority enough to give his verdict (in point of Fact) for the age wherein he
wrote,) does not he in that form of Supplication (extant lib: 8. cap: 10. of
the Constitutions) sufficiently declare, that the Bishop of of Rome had his
limits as well as other Bishops? (...). Co. s^it. lib. 8. c. 10.
Let us pray (says he) for the Episcopacy of the whole world, and for our
Bishop James of Jerusalem, and his Diocese; and for our Bishap Clement of
Rome, and his Diocese; and for Luod us of Ant^och, and his Diocese. Let the
Replyer he^e obse^ve, that Clemens is not prayed for as Bishop of all the
World, but as a Pastor over his own Limitation.

This might further appear from the usage of the Primitive, Church, the Doctors
whereof would not have so far forgotten the^r duty in acknowledging this
Supremacy, as to do actions that clearly evince, that they conceived no such
thing claimeable by any fair pretentions whatsoever; much less by Divine
institution, if it had been always claimed by the Church of Rome. Would St.
Cyprian have called Pope S^ephen his Brother, [as he does in his Epistle to
Pompeius, wherein he charge him (though I confess unjustly) for favoring
Heretiques] had he esteemed him the Head of the Church in the sense that the
later times understand the word in? would Firmil arus the Bishop of Coesarea,
have spoken so liberally of the same Stephen, and have charged him with Errors,
ignorance, pride, Multa pro locoru and nominum diversitate variantur, neque ta
men propter hoc ab Ecclesiae Catholicae pace atq, unirate discessum est, quod,
Stephanus ausus est facere rumpens a dyer sum nos pace, qua^ semper
antecesseres ejus nobiscu^ amore, and honor mutuo custodierunt. Cypr. Epist.
74.75.
had this persuasion of the Pope's Supremacy been current at that time? would
he have charged him with schism in that Epistle to Cyprian, for denying that
communion and concord with Cyprian, which his Predecessors kept in reciprocal
love, and mutual Honor; (which is not properly said of the respects between
Superiors and Inferiors) had he had any apprehension of such a Head-ship as the
Romanists now challenge to the Pope? no certainly, the Pope was not then
esteemed such as the latter Parasites have styled him, a corporal God in the
world; such doctrine may be learned from Cardinal Jacobasianus, the Canon Law,
and other writings which the Fathers age understood not: none durst then be so
impious as to bespeak (as an Archbishop in his Sermon is said to have done)
the Pope with such words, Dr. Franc. White his Orthodox way justified. p. 58.
All power is given to thee, both in heaven and earth; neither knew the piety
of the primitive Christianity the language of the Ambassador of Panormum in
Sicilly, who kneeling before Pope Martin cried unto him three times together,
Thou which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. Indeed had
they believed him infallible, as some later Writers would persuade the world
the Bishop of Rome is, they might then easily have admitted his Supremacy in
the highest acknowledgment of excellency and honor: but this vain conceit was
a fancy that the good Bishops of Rome never dreamt off, as may appear by
Liberius his Epistato St. Athanafius: for, he requesteth to be farther
confirmed in the Christian faith by the authority of his judgment, that if
what he professed, were Catholic, he might be the more secure by the
knowledge of his consent thereunto. The words are remarkable, extant in the
works of Athanasius printed 1600, ex officina Commeliniana. p. 397. Having
described the Tenor of his faith in the blessed Trinity, in opposition to as
well Sabellius as Arrius, he adds in his Epist: (...).
If thou Brother Athanasius consentest with me in this confession (which is the
true faith in the holy Catholic and Apostolic Church) as in the presence of
Gods judgment, and Christ's, I pray subscribe to it, both that I may be more
certain, whether thou art of the same persuasion with my self, and also that I
may constantly observe thy commands. Indeed this good Bishop of Rome (as we
noted in our first Answer to the Quaeries, and could further prove out of Saint
Athanasius his Epistle to those that lived solitary lives) by sad experience
found himself far enough from Infallibility; when, overcome with the terror
and importunity of the Arrians, he yielded to a subscription to their Heresy.

The Replyer had better have said nothing to the judgment of the Council of
Concilium Elibertinum imagines pingi vetuit, nempe ut idolotriam hoc remedio
exting^erit. sixth. senens. Bib. lib. 5. annot 247.
Eliberis, then what he does; at least he might (with greater advantage to his
Cause) have said that only, which he begins his Reply with, that the Council
being but a provincial Assembly, and not Oecumenicall, the Canons of it did
not conclude foreign Churches: for to pretend that the meaning of the Canon
was to preserve reverence to the picture, is as much as to say, that the
design in taking the late Usurper and the rest of his Accomplices out of
Westminster- Abbey, and hanging up their heads over the Parliament house, was
to advance their dignity. It Was a time of persecution, and pity those precious
advantages of piety should be defaced by the Heathen; so pretends the Replyer:
This he learned perhaps from Binius, or Tunc periculum erat, ne Gentiles
existimarent, nostios adorare lignum and lapides. Sand. apud Bellar. de Imag.
lib. 2. c. 9.
Bellarmine, or Nicholas Saunders quoted by the Cardinal, who is not
peremptory for this Interpretation neither, but first gives another reason,
(viz.) least the Heathens should be scandalized at the Christians, and suppose
that they worshipped stocks and stones, and concludes with this, Periculum crat
in persecutionibus imagines fuissent contumelia affectae a persecutoribus
there was danger lest in time of persecution, the Images should have been
abused by the Persecutors. But well fare yet a little ingenuity at a dead lift;
the Cardinal (overcome with the reason in the Canon) confesses that it, does
not much concur with this Exposition; and therefore he supposes, that it was
rather, left the Walls mouldering away, or coming to ruin, the Saints honor
should be eclipsed by suffering corruption.

But the truth is, neither of these reasons are of much moment to reduce such
Images into the Church, as they banished out of it; for we are still in peril
of giving candall by Pictures, and Image Worship, to the Jew, to the Turk, and
to many Christians: and I think we are not attained yet to such a perfection
of Church-building, but that the walls may fail in the best Temples; and
therefore the reason continuing, why is not the Canon obliging? I suppose
Bellarmine might lay the less weight on this reason, when he cast his eye on
the Admonere placuit fideles ut quantum possint prohibeant ne idola in domibus
suis habeant si vero vini metuunt servoru^, velscripses puros conservent silnon
secetint alieni ab Ecclesia habeantur, Council. Elib. Can. 41.
41 Canon of this very Council, where Images are forbidden to be used in
private houses: there the walls are not only better secured from the rudeness
of Persecutors, but also from the neglect of reparation, whereby public
buildings usually suffer no small decay: And the close of this 41 Canon,
establishes the rejection of all Idols, though the servants in the family
might mutiny for their preservation.

But the authority was but slender, a Provincial Council, and that but of 19
Bishops: Hence the Replyer conceives it not pertinently urged, because the
Quaries demand the censure of a General Council. I know the Cardinal does
upon this account deminish the Authority of the Fathers there assembled, but
yet it plainly hence appears, that (restore the Canon to its genuine sense,
and) it declares the present practice of the Roman-Church not to have been
universally received, nay to have received a check by Men, (though fewer in
number, then have met in following Synods, yet) reverenced for their antiquity,
being assembled 20 years before the General Council at Nice, and therefore to
be had in estimation for their age. And though Baronius in passion had accused
this Council of seeming vicinity to Novatianisme; yet considering that Cum
quae ab illis de ea resunt statuta ab innocentio Rom: Pontifice excutentur,
nemo sit qui accusare praesumat.
Pope Innocent had acquitted them, that met there, he would have none to
presume to accuse them; upon which words Binius concludes, that Baroniues
though, Eam synodum legitima^ esse ab omni ecrote liberam
that this Synod was lawful and free from error?

As for the impertinency of alleging a Provincial, when an Oecummenicall
council was demanded, let not the Replyer forget what the Quaeries propound,
and the answer will be proper enough: for it was not only required: by what
General Council has Rome been condemned; but also by what Authority was she
otherwise reproved? a Provincial Synod has authority, (inferior indeed to
that of a General Council, but yet) ample enough to check the pretenses of
any new Doctrine, that is defended as Catholic; for what has been censured,
(though but by a provincial Assembly) so early in the Church, cannot lay
claim to that known Character of Chatholicisme in Vincentius Lyrinensis; who
admits not that to be such In ipsa Catholica Ecclesia magnovere curandum est,
ut id teneamus quod ubique quod semper, quod ad emnibus reditum est advers:
haeres. c. 3.
which was not taught in all places, at all times, and by all Christians: and
therefore that must needs be destitute of Universality, Antiquity, and Consent,
that was disapproved by the Fathers of the Council of Eliberis; which may be
esteemed the more for Hosius's sake, (a constant man against Idolatry,) who
sat afterward in the first Council of Nice, and was as devout in his
conversation, as his (...). Phot. Ep. p. 3.
name imports (as Phosius observes) keeping his confession undefiled from
Idol-worship: moreover what veneration Pope Innocent's approbation gave this
Assembly, the Replyer (I suppose) will not think that any censure of his can
take away.

The Replyer complains that proof is not made, that the second Nicene
Council was not universally received; what proof more Authentic, then the
Authority of the Synods of Eliberis, and Frankford, alleged by me; I have
given an account of the first already, and for that of Frankford, this puisne
Replyer presumes (I suppose without the Lycense of his Superiors) to say, that
it neither rejects nor refutes the Nicent Canons, but concurrs with the Nicent
Council, that gives (though not Latriam yet) honorariam adorationem, an
honorary adoration to Pictures.

Two things are to be rejoined t^ this reply: 1. That the Replyer's mistaken in
saying that the Frankford Fathers rejected not the Nicene Canon^ concerning
Image Worship: and secondly that the Nicene Canons establishing an Inferior
adoration to be given to pictures, were not Cathelique Sanctions.

As to the First, it is evident, that the Replyer opposes the judgment alwell
of Bellarmine, as of Baronius, when he says, That the Fathers at Frankford
rejected not the Canons of Nice: Let him turn to his Binius, and there he
shall find, that they both were mistaken in thinking that these Councels
clashed, but yet that they thought so. What strength the Reasons of Binius
carry against these two Cardinals, I shall not enquire; Sure I am, that if
Baronius be mistaken in his Opinion in this case, he deserves little credit in
other of his assertions. For he affirms himself so far from doubting of it,
Tantum abest, ne negemus Nicaenam secundam Synodum, eandemque septi(...)
Oecnmenicam dictam damnatam dici in Fran^ of urdienci Concilio, ut etiam
augeamus numerum testium id profitentium, and quidem haud dubiae fidei, aut
autoritatis. Baron. Tom. 9. p. 539 An. Chr. 794. n. 27.
That he solemnly professes, (by undeniable testmonies) to put it beyond all
question, and so he does, as has been lately observed by reverend and learned
Dr. Hammond out of Walafridus, Strabo, Amalarius, Finimarus, A^astatius, and
many others. If these two learned Romanists have not in this case reputation
enough to satisfy the Replyer, I could send him to better witnesses; to the
Annalls (set forth by Pythaus, Synodus habitu in Franconofu^t, in qua haeresis
foeliciana coram Episcopis Germanorum, and Germaniarum, and Gal liarum,
Italorumque praesente magno Principe Carolo, and missis, Adriani Apostolini
Thcophylacto and Stephano Episcopis tertio danata est -- Pseudo- Synodus
Graecorum, pro adorandis imaginibus habita, and falso septima vocata ab
Episcopis da^natur. Chamler de imag: To: 2. lib. 21. c. 14. p. 855.
where it is said, that in the year 594 there was a Synod called at Fra^kford,
where Foelix was condemned, and the Pseudo- Synod of the Greeks (that
established Image Worship, being falsely called the seventh,) is cersured by
the Bishops: So the life of Charles the Great, published by the same Pythaeus:
so Ado, and others G. Cassander in his 29 Epistle to John Molinaeu^ gives him
an ample account of the 4 Books written by the authority and under the name of
Charles the French King (the whole Council of Frankford consenting to the
contents of them) which were sent to the Pope against the decrees of the
Council of Nice: It were the best course for the Replyer to do as the rest of
his Masters do in this dispute, I mean, not to say, that the Assemby of
Frankforde did not oppose the Fathers of Nice; but to under-value the Authority
of that Council, as confronting (without just Authority) the Canons of the
second Nicene, which (they say) was a General, whereas this of Frankford was
but a National Synod.

I come therefore to the second thing that I propounded above, to prove (I
mean) that the Canons of the 2d. Nicene Council were not Catholic Sanctions;
that is, the Canons that give religious worship to images, were not rules of
sound and wholesome doctrine: In this enquiry I question neither the number,
nor the power of such as either called this Assembly, or came to it, though
there lie a great prejudice against Council opposed by not a few of the
Greeks, and by almost all the West: the Council of Ariminum was subscribed by
all the Patriarchs, yea by the Pope himself yet was of no Authority, but of
perpetual infamy, through all ages after in the Church, because it established
Arianisme. What therefore St. Augustine said in his dispute with Maximinus the
Arrian Bishop, when the first Nicene Council might be pleaded for the
Catholics, as the Council of Ariminum was for the Arrians, that may I say in
the present controversy, as to the second Nicene and the Council of Frankford
Nec ego Nicenum, nec tu debes Ariminense tanquam praedicaturus proferre
Concilium: nec ego hujus authoritate, nec tu illius detineris; scripturarum
authoritatibus non quoru^que propriis sed utrique communibus testibus, resi cum
re, causa cum caula, ratio cum ratione concerter. Aug. con. Maxim. Arian.
Episc. lib. 3. p. 733.
neither am I concluded with the Authority of this, nor thou with that; let
matter with matter, cause with cause, reason with reason contest by the
Authority of the Scriptures, which are witnesses proper to neither parties, but
common to both.

If then we appeal to the Scriptures, what more clear then the voice of God on
Mount Sinai, Exo: 28.48. Thou shall not make unto thy self any graven image,
or any thing, that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that
is in the water under the earth: thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor
serve them. etc. This service God reserves to himself, (as we are taught,
Deuteronomy: 6.13.) exclusively to all creatures, as we are informed by Christ's
recitation, and weighty interpretation of the place, Math: 4.10. Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. and Exo: 34.14. (...),
thou shall worship no other God.

The Papists here betake themselves to the distinction of Latria and Dulia:
none but God must be worshipped by the first but the second may be imparted to
Saints and Angels. The Replyer may learn (if he know not) that the chief words
used by the Greek writers in the Scripture (as well the septuagint in the Old,
as the Evangelists and the Apostles in the new Testa^ent) are (...), and that
these words are all used promiscuously, as well for religious and divine, as
for civil worship: even (...) is used for civil worship to man, De: 28.48.
the septuagint read (...), and Acts 20.19. St. Paul is said (...): and the same
St. Paul makes it the unhappiness of the Galathians, that they did sometimes
give Dulia to what were not Gods, (...): whereby we may see that Dulia (if it
be religious worship) ought not to be given to such as partake not of divine
nature; but Divines should not contend about words: the Catholics agree (and
I think the Papists cannot deny it) that the worship of God is distinguished
from the worship of men in this, that the one is religious, and the other
civil: The first an Elicite Act of religion, as the Schools speak: the second
an imperate, flowing from it, as the effect from the cause; both of them
species of Justice, as Lactantius has excellently observed: Primum justicize
officiu^ est conjungi cum Deo, secundum cum homine: sed illud primum religio
dicitur, hoc secundum miscricordia, vel humanitas dicitur. Lactlib. 6. c. 10.
The first Office of Justice is to be joined with God; the second with man:
That first is called Religion, this second Mercy, or Humanity, Well then, admit
the distinction of worship according to the difference first innocently
assigned by St. Augustine into Dulia and Latria; we scruple it not, as long as
those words are granted to be names of worship, differing not only in degree,
but in kind or nature: for (seeing the Honor that we pay unto any Object,
ought to be proportionable to the excellency of that Object) there must of
necessity be the same distance between Divine Worship, and Humane or Civil,
that there is between God and Man: But in truth there is no Proportion between
God and man, and therefore neither ought there to be between Divine and Civil
Worship. Colimus Martyrs eo cultus dilectionis, and societatis quo and in hac
vita coluntur, sancti Homines Dei, quorum Corad talem pro Evangelica veritate
passionem paratum esse sentimus sed illos tanto devotius quanto securius
postincerta o^nia superata quanto etiam fidentiore laud praedicamus jam in
vita faeliciore victores, quam in ista adhuc pugnantes: at illo cultu quae
Grace latria dicitur, latin un^ verbo dici non potest, cum fic quaedam proprie
divinitati debita servitus, nec colimus, nec colendum docemus nisi unu^ Deum.
August. contr. Faust. Manich. Lib. 20. C. 21. (Et mox) long minoris est
peccati ebrium redire a martyribus, quam vel je junum sacrificare martiribus
dixi, non sacrificare Deo in memoriis martyrum, quod frequentissime facimus,
illo duntaxat ritu, quo sibi sacrificari novi Testamenti manifestatione
praecepit, quod pertinet ad illum cultum quae Latria dicitur, and uni Deo
debetur.
St. August: therefore that gave the first rise to the distinction of Latria
from Dulia, did not admit Dulia to be a religious Worship above civil worship,
such as is given to living men, though he acknowledgd it an higher degree of
Dulia, that we give to the dead, then what we give to the living, because we
honor them after their victory, more securely. But the Papists conceive
themselves under the notion of Dulia, priviledg'd to consecrate Altars,
Temples, Chappells to Saints, all which St. August: judged to appertain to
Latria; and speaking of the excess of Christians, that were intemperate in the
celebration of the Festivalls of the Martyrs, he blames the Luxury of such as
were guilty, but yet acknowledges it a crime far less then the Idolatry of
such as with fasting sacrificed, though even to the Martyrs themselves. This
devout Father would have detested the abuse of his own destinction into Latria
and Dulia, and much more abhorred the doctrine of Aquin: p. 3. quest. 25 Art.
3.4.
Aquinas and other modern Romanists, (Who teach that the Image and the Gross
of Christ are to be adored with the same worship that Christ is adored with
himself, id est, with Latria, in its full extent,) had he lived to to see it;
Greg. de Valent. lib. 3. de Idolat. c. 5. apud Reynold. de Idolat. Ecclesiae.
Romans lib. 1. c. 1.
which veneration when Greg. de Valentia observed could not be attributed to a
Creature without Idolatry, he spoke plainly, that some kind of Idolatry was
lawful: The Replyer grants, that the Church of Rome were sufficiently
condemned, (though not by a General Council) if the diffusive body of the
Church did condemn her: and this were easy to demonstrate from the first Ages
of the Church, which owned none of those doctrines, that the Papists at this
day maintain against the Catholics all the world over, out of their own
Communion. Is it not evident by St. Cyprian, 63. Epist. that the people
received the Cup, Quorum quidem vel ignoranter, vel simpliciter in calice
Domino sanctificando and plaebi administrando, non hoc faciunt quod Jesus
Christu^ Dominus and Deus noster sacrificii hujus, Author and Doctor fecit, and
docuit religiosum pariter, and necestarium duxi de hoc ad vos literas facere.
Cipt. Ep. 63. ad Coecilum.
Because some either out of Ignorance or Simplicity do not that in
consecrating the Eucharisticall Cup, and administering it to the people, (mark,
no half communion served the people in that holy Bishops days) which Jesus
Christ our Lord and God, the Author and Teacher of this sacrifice, did and
taught, therefore I accounted it both a matter of religion and necessity to
write to them concerning this business.

And is it not as clear by St. Aug. that the opinion of Trans-substantiation
was not owned in his days, hear him speaking against the corporal eating of
Christ in the Sacrament, (now so shamefully defended by the Romanists) in his
Exposition of the 98. Psalm. for (in treating of Christ's words in the 6. Cap. of
St. John, and the mistake of such as took his Speech, as the Trent-faith now
does) he says, (expounding Christ's words in his own Person that spoke them)
Spiritualiter intelligite quod locutus sum, non hoc Corpus quod videtis,
manducaturi estis, and bibituri illum fanguinem quem fusuri sunt, qui me
crucifigent: Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendavi, spiritualter intellectu^
vivificabit vos, etsi necesse est illnd visibiliter celebrari oportet tamen
invisibiliter intelligi. Aug. in Ps. 98 page 1105. edit froben.
Understand spiritually, that which I have spoken unto you, you are not to eat
the Body which you see, nor to drink that Blood, which they will shed, who will
crucify me: I have commended a certain Sacrament unto you, being spiritually
understood, it will quicken you; though it be necessary, that it be visibly
celebrated; yet it is behovefull, that it be invisibly conceived. Does not St.
Ambrose as plainly teach, that what mutation is wrought by consecration, is
mystical; and not such as the Romanists fancy, gross and corpoporeall? when
speaking of the operative virtue of Christ's words, he says. Si tanta vis est
in sermon Domini lesu, ut inciperent esse quae no^ erant qua^to magis
operatorius est, ut fint quae crant, and in aliud co^mutentur. Ambr. l. 4. de
Sacr. c. 4.
If therefore there be so great efficacy in the speech of the Lord Jesus, that
those things which were not (by virtue thereof) should begin to be; how much
more effectual is it to cause the things that were to be, and yet to be
changed into somewhat else? id est, to continue naturally what they were before
the consecration, and yet also after the consecration (Mystically and
Sacramentally) to become the body and blood of Christ: which place in St.
Ambrose was so distastefull to those of the new faith in the Romish-communion,
that whereas some of them beat their brains in finding away how to make the
Bread, and Wire in the Sacrament like the beast in the Revelation, Revel. 17.8.
that was, and is not and yet is: others (as the late reverend Primate of
Ireland observed in his ans. to the Jesuits challenge, p. 14.) took a ready
course to untye the Gordian knot by paring clean away in their Roman Edition
(followed also in that of Paris Anno 1603.) those words that so much troubled
them, and letting the rest run smoothly after this manner, Quanto magis
operatorius est, ut quae erant, in aliud commutentur.
how much more is the speech of the Lord powerful to make, that those things
which were, should be changed into another thing.

To this purpose also speaks St. Cyprian in the forecited Epistle, Invenimus
calicem mix tu^ suiffe, quem Dominus obtulit, and vinu^ suisse, quod fanguinem
fnum dixit, Cyp. Epist. 65.
we find that the Cup was mixed, [the epistle was wri^ against the Aquarii,
that celebrated the Eucharist with water alone] which the Lord offered and that
it was Wine, which he called his Blood. St. Iraeneus lived not far from the
Apostolic times, and he clearly asserteth the substance of bread to continue
in the Eucharist after the consecration; for thus he writes concerning that
Mystery; Quemadmodum qui est a terra panis, percipiens vocationem Dei jam non
communis panis est, sed Eucharistia ex duabus rebus constans terrena, and
coelesti: sic and corpora nostra spercipientia Eucharistiam, jam non sunt
corruptibilia, spem resurrectionis habentia. Iren: Lib. 4. C. 34.
As the Earthly bread by the institution or command of God, is not now common
bread, but the Eucharist consisting of two things, an Earthly, and an Heavenly,
so our Bodies receiving the Eucharist, are not now corruptible, having hope of
the Resurrection.

When therefore we meet with expression in the Fathers, that seem to imply a
Trans-substantiation, they are nothing, but a Catachresis, an abuse of words,
or hyperbolicall elevations, familiar to all sorts of Writers, and not unusual
among the Ancients, when they speak of the other Sacrament of Baptism, as has
been largely proved by the late learned and Reverend Bishop of Duresme. If
Justin and Iraeneus say of the Eucharist, that it is no longer (after the
consecration) common bread St. Chrissest. and Greg: Nussen say also of
Baptism, Non est aqua communis; it is not common water: and Cyril of
Alexandria expressly uses the word trans-elementated; by the efficacy of the
spirit, the sensible water (...), is changed into another element. It appears
hence, that the Fathers condemned the present judgment of the Roman-Church, as
to the abovenamed controversies between the Catholics of the Reformed
Churches, and the Papists in the Roman separation, who divided themselves from
the Communion of the Primitive profession, before the Protestants departed from
them, or rather were forced and driven from them.

As to my assertion, schism is theirs who cause it; he thinks to say only,
let that pass, a valid confutation! and excepts against my instance, when I
say when the Orthodox departed from the Arrians, the heretics made the
schism^. This is contrary (as he pretends) to 1 Jo: 2.19. who speaking of
certain he retiques, says, exierunt a nobis; which if true, (says he) then
the Orthodox w(...) the Arrtans and Heretics; and t^ Arrians and the
Heretics were Orthodox. (...)! This acute Replyer is able to pierce the eye^
of a Jackdaw as infallibly, as any on^ I ever heard of; as if departure it sel^
did imply a crime without reference to the Society, which a man leaves b^ his
departure: Is departure from the blessed Disciples of Christ, St. Joh^ and the
rest of the holy Apostles all o^ with departure from the impure frate^nity of
profane and ungodly me^ that pervert the truth, and bring in(...) the Church
damnable heresies? Is one and the same thing to depart from Moses and Aaron,
and to withdraw o^ selves from Corah, Dathan, and the r^ of their Accomplices? Is
it not the e^presse admonition of God to his people to come out of Babylon,
Rev: 18.4. St. Paul exhorts us all to such an apostasy, that reclaims us from
out iniquity: Let every one that names the name of Christ depart from
iniquity. (...).
Did Jeremy depart from the wicked Israelites under the guilt of schism? if he
had, God would not have confirmed him in his separation, saying, Let them
return to thee, but return not thou to them, It was not then the sin of the
Orthodox to depart from the Arrians, when if not the whole world (as St.
Hierome speaks) yet the whole face of the visible Church, groaned under that
burden, and admired it self to have become Arrian.

It Is true as Theodoret observes, the Arrians termed the Orthodox the authors
fall division; but how justly, such as ^an judge, may easily discern. When
therefore the Replyer wonders, that the Doctor did not see his contradiction,
in saying, the Orthodox did depart; the Doctor wonders that the Replyer should
not see his own tergiversation, and trifling, in finding a contradiction that
none but himself can espy. That the Drthodox should depart from the true
Church, were a contradiction indeed, because the true Church consists of those
that are such; howbeit that the Orthodox should depart from the Synagogue of
Satan, is as far from being a contradiction, as Rome present is; different from
Rome professing the purity of the Primitive faith, and that is far enough to be
sure.

It Is evident the Replyer had little to say but was forced to cavil, when he
pretends that the Text produced out of Hosea 4.15. was impertinent. For what
could more directly prove our warrant for reforming our selves, then to show,
that it was Gods express command to Judah so to do, when Israel did refuse it.
If Judah was forbidden to go to Bethaven, that is Bethel, the place of
Jeroboams idolatry, why should not England think her self engaged to depart
from Rome, infected with the same crime? An evasion was but necessary, when the
Replyer saw the proceeding of our Church so fairly justified by this Scripture,
and therefore the text (he pretends) concerns not the cause. But if to say that
a text alleged be impertinent, is a sufficient Reply surely to say that such a
Reply signifies nothing, (but the disability of the Replyer to make a better
answer) is a sufficient Rejoinder.

As to the other text out of Isa: 1.21.22, the Replyer supposes that also to
be of little force: because it proves (he says) that the Church of Jerusalem
fell into sin; but what is that to the Church of Romes falling into heresy? And
is not Heresy a sin Sir Replyer? If Jerusalem might, and did fall into sin,
you must show her exemption from that sin, or else why she might not fall as
well into that as other sins, I see no reason. Did not Aaron so far comply with
the idolatry of the Israelites, as to make the Golden-calfe? Let Moncaeus purge
him as he can in his book called Aaron purgatus: Moses (I am sure) charge
him, when he thus bespeaketh him, What did this people unto thee, that thou
have brought so great a sin upon them? Exo: 32.21. and he supposes him to have
offended, when he says, that at that time he prayed for him: Indeed as Moses
affirms, the Lord was very angry with Aaron, to have destroyed him: and he
uses to be angry with no man to his destruction, but for sin. Deuteronomy: 9.20.

Wherefore the Jewish Church might sin, and that not only against the Second
Table of the Law, by moral impurities, but against the first also, by profane
impieties, by worshipping of Images by erroneous miscarriages in the Duties of
Gods worship, which they heretically held to be lawful, as the present Church
of Rome now does, or else they would never have done what was so clearly and
frequently forbidden unto them.

And that Jerusalem, thus fell in the time of the Prophet Isaiah, the Replyer
might have learned from the first words of his Prophecy, for the word of the
Lord came unto him in the time of Ahaz his reign, and Ahaz liking an Alpar at
Damascus sent the pattern of it t^ Urian the Priest, who bu^lt it accordingly
2. Kings 16.10.11. Which was a direct violation of Gods institution* Thus it is
evident, that the High priest himself erred in administering his Office. And
why the Church of Rome may not err, as well as the Church of Jerusalem, a
better reason must be assigned, then this Replyer has given, before we
believe her peculiar privilege.

This Replyer has the confidence to say, that the instance of the Corinthians
erring in the doctrine of the resurrection, is to little purpose, because some,
not all did err in that Church. But he conceals the force of my argueing from
the supposition of the establishment of that error by a prevailing party: for
in case that should have been done by the Bishop of that City, and a prevalent
faction in that Church, it is evident that the Church of Corinth (in respect of
such a combination) might have been said properly enough to have fallen by
heresy.

But grant the worst of other Churches yet Rome is secured: It was said (says
the Replyer) only to Peter and his successors, and the Church, whereof they
were to be Pastors, thou art Peter etc. What was said to Peter, we know; but
what was said to his pretended successors at Rome, and the Church whereof they
were to be Pastors, we know not; St. Matthew teaches us not. Upon this rock I
will build my Church, concerns Rome no more then another particular Church,
especially if St. Peter did found it, and build it up by his doctrine: for
though he suffered Martyrdom at Rome, yet his teaching might have as much
influence on other Churches, as his blood had at Rome.

But super hanc Petram, and any other advantage that the Replyer contends for
out of the Syriack translation, will stand him in little stead to prove the
infallibility of the Church of Rome. For should Christ call Peter a rock and in
allusion to his name, add upon this rock. I will build etc. all this would no
more conclude that the Pope could not err (did he succeed St. Peter by a
better title, then he can make good) then it did secure St. Peter from
diverting Christ from his passion, whilst this confession that he made of
Christ was warm from his mouth, and afterward from denying of Christ with
perjury, when he was under the temptation of fear to be apprehended as a
malefactor, should he have confessed him. Which failings of the blessed
Apostle, we recount not to stain the glory of his memory, but only to show,
that he was not privileged to become an unshaken Rock, such as on whom the
Church might be secured.

Antiquity did not by Christ's expression understand the Person of Peter only,
to be meant when he said, Upon this Rock I will build my Church: but some first
by the name of Roek understood every believer, as Origin. Greg. Nyssen, St.
Ambrose, and Aquinas himself, following Origin, as the learned Exercitat. 15
ad. Annal. Baron. P. 39.
Casaubon observes.

Secondly. Others conceive, that by Rock, our Lord understood the faith of St.
Peter; so (...).
Chrysostom. upon this Rock, id est. the faith of this confession, so Super hanc
confessionis Petram Ecclesiae aedificatio est, and mox. haec sides Ecclesiae
fundamentum est.
Hilary, lib. 6. de Trinit. The building of the Church is upon this Rock of his
confession, and afterward, this faith is the foundation of the Church. and St.
August. most clearly in his 10. Tract^t. on the first Epistle of St. Quid est
super bane Pewam aedificabo ecclesiam meam? super hanc fidem, super id, quod
dictum est, Tu es Christus filius Dei vivi, super hanc Pettam, inquit, sundabo
Ecclesiam meam.
John. What is on this Rock I will build my Church; but upon his faith, upon
that which has been spoaken, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, upon
this Rock (says he) I will build my Church.

Thirdly, Some by Rock understood Peter, but with no Prerogative to his person
above the rest of the Apostles, except of his age, (in which respect, St.
Hierome Cur non Johannes electus est virgo? aetati delatu^ est, qua Petrus
senior erat Hieron. adv: Iovin lib 1.
thinks him to be made the Prolocutor;) and prompenesse of answering Christ's
demands. We deny not that the Fathers ascribe unto Peter this pious heat,
especially observable in him upon several occasions, more then in the rest of
the disciples. Peter (...). Tom. 5. p. 199. edit. savil.
(says St. Chrysostom:) fervid in all things, (or upon all occasions) and full
of freedom in speaking, or rather of charit y then free dome of speech,
whilst others hold their peace, comes to the Master, and says etc. Upon this
account the Ancients give unto Peter a dignity peculiar amongst the rest of the
Apostles, not a princely power over them. (...).
Hence Eusebius, lib. 2. c. 14. calls him for his excellency, the Prolocutor of
all the rest. Thus much and no more did the Fathers grant unto Peter, when the
Latins call him principem, and the Greek's (...), the Prince and leader of the
Apostles. St. Hierom's testimony is evident for this, when he prayseth St. John
so highly, making him the beloved disciple, because he was a virgin, and
Superior to St. Peter, because whereas Peter was an Apostle, and John an
Apostle, the one a married man, the other a virgin; Peter was only an Apostle,
John an Apostle, an Evangelist, and a Prophet. It Is true he objected before,
the preeminence of St. Peter above the rest, but answers the objection by
granting no more to St. Peter, then we acknowledge to be given him by
Antiquity: which was not a Sovereign, Monarchical Authority over them, but a
praesidency among them: Hear St. Hierom's words, lib. 1. adv. Jovin. If Si
virgo non fuit Johannes, cur caeteris Apostolis plus amatus sit? and dicis
super Petrum fundatur ecclesia licet id ipfu^ in alio loco super emnes
Apostolos fiat and cuncti claves regni coelorum accipiant, and ex acquo super
cos Ecclesiae fortitudo solidetur, tamen proptere a inter duodecem unus
eligitur, ut capite constituto schismatis tollatur occasio. Hieron: adv. Iovin.
lib. 1.
St. John were not a virgin, why was he more beloved then the rest? but you say
that the Church was founded on Peter: though that be elsewhere laid on all the
Apostles, and all of them receive the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and
though the strength of the Church be equally grounded on them all, yet not
withstanding one is chosen among the Twelve, that an Head being appointed, the
occasion of schism might be removed. Where, St. Hierome by the name of Head,
meant not to ascribe a Sovereign power to Peter over all the rest; for all St.
Peter's power is comprised in the Keys, and in the building of the Church upon
him; but you see that all the Apostles (in St. Hieroms judgment) receive the
Key's and the Church is built upon them all equally: wherefore, (in Hieroms
opinion) though Peter had a pre-eminency among the Apostles, he had not a
Sovereignty above them.

To conclude, fourthly and lastly, Some of the Fathers by Rock understood
Christ himself. So Tu es Petrus, and super hane Petram, quam confessus es,
super hanc Petram qua^ cognovistidicens, Tu es filius Dei vivi, aedificabo
Ecclesia^ meam 1. super meipsu^ filiu^ Dei vivi aedificabo Ecclesiam mea^.
St. Augustine in his thirteenth Sermon on the words of our Lord. Thou art
Peter and upon this Rock, which thou have confessed; upon this Rock which thou
understoodest, when thou saidest, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God,
will I build my Church: id est, upon my self, the Son of the living God, will
I build my Church: upon me will I build thee, not me upon thee. And this Sense
it is probable that Christ made evident to the Apostles by pointing
demonstratively to himself, when he pronounced the pronoune This, as he may be
supposed to have done, when he said, John, 2.19.
Dissolve this Temple.

Neither do these four several Interpretations differ in the substance of the
sense, but only in the manner of expression; for as if a devout man should say,
God cured me, or the Physician cured me, or Rhubarb cured me; he would by these
several expressions speak after the accustomed manner of speech, retaining
still one meaning, that he was cured by God, as the first efficient, by the
Physician as the second and subordinate, by the Rhubarb as by the instrument;
so the Fathers (as the learned Exercitator. on Baronius notes) when, they say
sometimes, that the Church is built upon Christ, sometimes on Peter, sometimes
on every believer, and upon the faith, or consession of faith made by Peter,
agree very well in the substance of the same sense: though they use several
ways of declaring it. Which is doubtless the reason, why one and the same
Augustine other whiles expounds Christ words after one of the forementioned
senses, and otherwhiles after another; for in his Retractat lib. 1. c. 21. he
says that he had sometimes by Rock understood Peter, but afterward most
frequently Christ, whom Peter confessed: for Christ is the first and chief
efficient cause of the holy and spiritual building of his Church; Peter by his
endeavors whilst he l^ved, and by his doctrine since his death, together with
the rest of the Apostles (though chief among them in the sense of the Ancients,
but not Modern church of Rome) a secondary or subord note efficient: faith the
isntrumental cause of this Glorious Edifice, and the faithful the material,
of the Temple of God.

When therefore this Replyer would play the Critic upon Peter's name in the
Syriack language, which imports a rock, he follows indeed his Masters,
Baronius, and Bellarmine, but to little purpose: Peter non est a Petra Petrus,
sed ipse est Petra.
is not (says Baronius) derived from Petra, a rock, but he himself is a rock.
But what would the Replyer get hereby? first, he would fecretly disparage the
Greek copies of the Gospel?, as if they did not conveniently express the
importance of Christ's words: secondly, directly oppose the Authority of St.
Augustine, Petrus a Petral, quemadmodum a Christo Christianes vocatur. Aug
deverb. Dom. Ser. 13. and lib. Retract. 1. c. 21.
who says, Peter was called from a rock, as a Christian is called from
Christ: and thirdly teach us what small skill he has in the Analogy of Grammar:
for grant Christ and Peter too to be called a Rock: the word rock shall be
praedicated of them both, univocally, equivocally, or denominativel, as the
Logicians speak. The first kind of praedication, cannot be admitted true of
Christ, and Peter, without blasphemy: for if Christ and Peter be named a roek
un vocally, then the same definition must agree to the rock Christ, the Son of
God, and to the rock Simon, son of Jonas. Now Christ is a rock, because he
gives life, comfort, and protection to his Church against all dangers ghostly,
and bodily, which none can do but God: If Simon be such a rock, it follows he
must be God also; which is such a blasphemy, that (I hope) this Replyer
trembles to be guilty off. It follows therefore, that Peter be a rock
equivocally, or by denomination from the true rock: and let him take which
sense he will, the same definition (by the Laws of Logic) shall not be
assigned to Christ, and Simon; because there will be a vast difference between
the Rock Christ, and the rock Simon. By reason of the several Genius's of the
Syriack and Greek tongues (as Causaubon has noted) Simon may in the one
language be called a Rock equivocally, and in the other a rock by denomination;
because in Syriack the name of Peter is written with the same letters, that the
word is, that signifies a rock; ( Cepha denotes both) but in Greek with
others, which is required in denominations, as (...). Simplicius in Categ. apud
Casaub.
Smiplicius has observed out of Aristotle. Whether therefore in Syriack from
Cepha, Peter be also called Cepha, or from the Greek word (...), the difference
will consist only in the form of words, but not in the importance of the sense.
we are not afraid to call Peter a rock, or a foundation the Scripture gives
this Appellation to all the Apostles, Ephe: 2.20. Rev: 21.14. and why should we
deny it unto him, whose name challenges it by particular praerogative? The
question is, in what sense he is so called?

We see evidently by the Testimony of the Fathers, that Antiquity thought him
not a Foundation or Rock, in the sense that the Patrons of the Popes
omnipotency assert; as if the whole Church were bottomed upon him, and his
Successors, and the whole world become his Diocese, as Heart affirmed in his
conference with Reynolds, page 459: neither did they think that by these Titles
given to Peter; the Pope might lay claim, not only to a Primacy of Order
amongst the rest of the Patriarchs, but a Lordly Sovereignty over all Christian
people throughout the whole world. Whereas now it is too manifest, that all
this contention is raised not so much for Peter's honor, as the Popes ambitious
designs, whom it would better become to imitate Peter's true humility, who
would not endure Cornelius a Centurion to lie prostrate before him, Acts 10.26.
then assume his false titles (false I say in respect of the sense now imposed
on them) whereby he may tread on the necks of Princes.

But what though the Pope succeeded St. Peter at Rome, did not a Bishop succeed
him also at Antioch? might not this Successor claim as much privilege at the
one See, as the Roman Usurper does at the other? It Is evident enough, that Peter
had no Successor in the Apostolical dignity, and Contrvers. 2. q. 3. a. 3.
Stapleton teaches that the Apostleship ceased, when the Apostles dyed: and
yet though this were something current doctrine at Rome, Annotat in Cyor.
excus. Romans 1563.
Bellarmine took courage to affirm, that because some have given the name of
Apostleship to the Popes office, therefore the Pope succeeds after a sort in
the Apostleship, viz: in the charge of the whole world: But Eusebius lib. 3. c.
17. mentions St. John (after St. Peter's decease) to have discharged his
Apostolic Office by constituting Churches, and ordaining Bishops, whereas he
assigns no employment to the Bishop of Rome, but the administration of his
own Diocese. Certainly if the first Bishops of Rome had succeeded St. Peter in
such a Superiority, as the Romanists now contend for, not only all other
Bishops, but St. John himself also must have acknowledged the Pope to have been
his Diocesan, which were to submit the supreme dignity of the Apostolic
Authority instituted imediatly by Christ, to the limited jurisdiction of a
particular See; for such was the Bishop of Romes circumscription as we have
shown before out of Clemens his constitutions.

That the purer ages of the Church had no such opinion of the Popes universal
jurisdiction, is manifest by the eight Canon of the famous Council of Ephesus,
framed for the vindicating of the Bishops of Cyprus, their exemption from the
incroachment of the Patriarch of Antioch, who claimed Authority over them in
the consecration of their Metropolitan. For when Reginus Bishop of Constantia,
Zenon Bishop of Curiun, and Euagrius Bishop of Sela, all within the limits of
Cyprus made their complaint, that the Patriarch of Antioch would subject their
Island to himself, attempting to draw to him the power of Ordinations amongst
them, contrary to the ancient Customs, the Canons of the Apostles, and the
decrees of the Nicene Council; upon the hearing of their cause they framed a
Canon, the last of the eight recited by Justellus, wherein they exempt the
Cypriots from the usurpation they complained of, and moreover without the least
reservation o^ privilege to the Bishop of Rome i^ in this behalf, add,
(...), etc.
Let the same course be observed in other Diocesses and in all Provinces every
where, that none of the boly Bishops seize upon another Province, which was not
of old, and from the begi^ni^ng under his power: If any have entered another
Province and have by force subjected it unto himself, let him restore it, that
the Canons of the Fathers be not transgressed, nor the pride of worldly
Authority (under pretense of the Hierarchy) enter into the Church, and by
little and little, before we are aware, we loose that Liberty, which the Lord
Jesus Christ, the deliverer of all men, by his blood has procured. Therefore
it bath pleased the Holy and Oecumenicall Synod, that the rights belonging to
every Province be preserved, inviolated, and the customs which were from the
beginning.

No marvel if some have gone about by sleight of hand to shuffle this Canon
out of the Acts of this Council, and Binius having recited only six Canons of
it, pretend that in the Vatican, and some other Copies there be no more. Indeed
any man observing the latter practices of the Church of Rome, may easily think,
that the Vatican can scarce brook a Cano^n so directly crossing the present
claims of that See. But however he thought meet not to give it the place
proper for it among the Canons, yet I suppose the truth of the case of the
Cyprian Bishops, and the judgment of the Council thereupon were so evident,
that he could not but relate it, and give it the Authority of a Decree of the
said Council, referring his Reader thereuntoin the close of the six Canons set
by him together.

From this Canon the most Reverend Primate of Ireland does duly infer,
Vindic. p. 96.
that since this council does determine, that no Bishop should occupy any
Province, which before that Council and from the beginning had not been under
him, or his Predecessors, and that if any Patriarch Usurped any jurisdiction
over a free Province, he should quit it; and that it may be made to appear,
that the Bishops of Rome from not so much as any time before the celebration of
that Synod, no nor for years after Christ, (much less from the beginning)
exercised over the Brit^nick Churches) therefore Rome can pretend no right over
Brita^nie, without their own consents, nor any further, nor for any longer
time, then they are pleased to oblige themselves.

This privilege of our Brittish-Church, upon the proceedings of the forenamed
Council of Ephesus, will appear the less disputable, from our Antiquity of
receiving the Christian faith: Armachan de primord Eccles Brittan p. 23.
for if Joseph of Arimathea presently after the passion of our Lord (as the
Legates of the English Nation at the Council of Constance contend, pleading it
as a just reason for the super excellency of their Country above France, and
Spain, as having received the faith before them) preached in England the
gospel of Christ before Tiberius's death, and Peter came not to lay the
foundation of the Roman-Church, at that City, ^ay not into Italy, till the
second year of Claudius, the Brittanick-Church in its first original was free
from Rome, and by the authority of the Council of Ephesus ought to continue
so, as having its beginning before there was at Rome either Bishop, or Court, or
ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Moreover the learned Primate does demonstrate the
continuance of the freedom of our Church from Rome, by its adhaesion unto the
Eastern-Churches in the controversy that arose about the celebration of
Easter, and the administration of Baptism. for it is not credible, that the
whole British, and Scottish Church too should even in Augustin's time have
dissented from Rome, if they had been Subject unto the Roman Bishop, as their
lawful Patriarch: see the Primates vindication. p. 100. etc:

When I say, that the guilt of Schism may be incurred by forcing others to
leave us; he reply's (as he uses, when he has nothing to say) that this is no
Answer: to which, I think, I need say no more, but that this is no reply.
Clemens (according to the title of the 4 ch: of his 6 book of Constitut:)
might have taught him, (...).
that he that forsakes the wicked is no Schismatique, but h^ that forsakes
the godly. He will not yield, that we were forced to forsake Rome; But is it
not notoriously evident? They that make Terms of Comunion inconsistant with
the integrity of our Catholic faith, are clearly the Schismatiques? but so
have the Romanists done, as is evident by the Trent Decrees Ergo: Moreover, if
it be Schism (as it is) for a particular church to withdraw her self from
communicating with a sound part of the Catholiquechurch; Rome, as long as she
refuses communion with the Protestants, maintaining no doctrines contrary to
the Catholic faith, nor infringing the fair claims of any of the ancient
Patriarch's must needs be Schismatic. He pretends that we are impatient
under the spiritual punishments of Rome, whilst she seeks to reduce us to our
former faith, and herein we are like Rebels, that storm at their King, that
seeks to reduce them. We are not so fond in espousing opinions, but that we
shall judge it a favor to be undeceived from them, as soon as we shall be
taught, that they are not agreeable to the Catholic faith. Psalm. 141.5.
If the righte^us smite us, it shall be a Kindness, and if they reprove us, it
shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break our head. But till we can be
farther convinced of Rom's Authority over us, we profess our selves not at all
engaged to submit to her unrighteous censures; which the Roplyer may indeed
justly call spiritual punishments, forasmuch as they reach (when the Pope has
power) our very souls and spirits, so far as to expel them from our Bodies by
fire, sword, Gunpowder, and all the instruments of cruelty, that wit and
malice can contrive; they fight against us with arguments borrowed out of the
Butchersshops, rather then the sacred Scriptures, though St. Augustine, Nullis
bonis in Catholica h^c placet. si usque ad mortem in quemquam licet haereticu^
saeviatur. Aug: cont. Cresc. Iram. l. 3. c. 5.
was more mild in the punishment of such, as were truly Heretics, affirming
it to be a thing that liked no good men, that Heretics should be put to
death: and (though he saw good reason to change his opinion, and that the
Imperial Laws were by their severity advantageous unto Christianity, yet) it
was in cases of manifest opposition against the Catholic Church; which the
Papists shall then prove the Protestants to be guilty of, when they shall prove
their own new doctrine to be Catholic, and that will be, when they shall
convince us, that the Church alway's held what for several hundreds of years
it never heard of. That resemblance of a King reducing his Subjects by force,
will never concern us, till the Popes Authority over us be made evident: and
therefore it will be our crime not to be obedient, when it shall be his
Prerogative, to give us Commands.

When I say the Church of Rome has left her self as one may say; he replies,
that none but one that will speak contradictions, or not answer the Quarie can
say so. And why not Sir? is it a contradiction for one, changed from what
sometimes he was, to say Ego non sum ego? was Saul, breathing out threatenings
against the Church, and Paul preaching the faith, which sometimes he destroyed,
one, and the same man? it is true, as to the substance of his person he was; but
as to the temper, and frame of his mind he was not. Was the Bishop of Rome
abhorring the title of Universal Bishop as Gregory did, and the Pope asserting,
Ego sidenter dico, quia quisquis se Vniversalem sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari
desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum praecurrit. Gregor. lib. 6. cp. 194.
defending and claming it, the same Kind of Pope? Was the Church of Rome
preaching the Catholic faith, and the Church of Rome persecuting and
destroying it, one and the same Church? If in respect of many fundamental tru'
ths still retained inviolably, it might be termed so, yet in respect of
additions unto, and detractions from the fundamentalls, certainly it is not?
neither is it any incongruity, much less any contradiction so to call it.
Romam in ipsa Roma desiderare, to seek Rome in Rome it self, is no absurd
speech. We need not (to make good the expression) say, that the whole has left
the whole: it is sufficient (in Grammar, Logic, and Rhetoric too) to say Rome
now, is not Rome, if (in contradiction to the carriage of St. Paul, who upon
his conversion preached the faith, which once he destroyed) it be be proved
sufficiently, that she destroys the faith, which once she preached.

And thus in Sr. conscience of my duty to the Truth, and charity to many, (alas
far too many of our countrymen, still besotted with the errors of the Romish
Church) I have shown how weak, and invalid the Reply was to my first Answer. I
confess it is but a small conquest to overcome so feeble an Adversary, who
has by many of the Champions of our Church been disarmed of these weapons
(wherein he seems to trust) before he marched in them against me. Indeed they
were no Armor of proof, before he wore them, and he has not managed them with
better success then his Predecessors: he has neither cleansed them by his
industry, nor wielded them by any new skill, nor strengthened them by any
additionall force. Let him swell himself into the conceit of one of Romes
Goliah's, and challeng the whole Army of the Protestants profession, (except he
appear in better Arms, then yet he has made us believe he can show himself
in) I see no reason, why any small Slinger of ours, that out of the Brook is
able to choose a few smoothstones (so David van^uished the boasting Philistine)
I mean, out of the fountains of the holy Scriptures, use some of those many
conquering weapons, that are there to be found, should be afraid to encounter
him. but seeing the Replyer is contented to cast himself, and Cause, upon the
judgment of the Reader I here join issue with him, and am very well pleased
to request no other favor from him, that shall seriously consider what I have
said, then what St. Hierome did, when he wrote against John Bishop of
Jerusalem, for defending Origen's errors: these are his words, and they shall
be my conclusion in this Dispute (which I intend not any more to amplify by any
future endeavors, having more necessary employment to spend my time about)
Quaeso Lector, ut memor Tribunalis Domini, and de judicio tuo intelligens re
judicandum, nec mihi necadversario faveas, neve personas loquentium, sed causam
consideres. Hieron: ad Pammaeh.
I beseech thee Reader, remembering the Tribunal of the Lord, and considering
that thou art to be judged for the judgment, that thou shall pass, favor
neither me nor my Adversary, neither respect the Persons, but the cause of the
Speakers.

FINIS.

