Occasions Offspring. OR POEMS UPON Several OCCASIONS:

By Matthew Stevenson.

Mart. Dic mihi quid melius desidiosus agas? LONDON, Printed for John Place and
are to be sold at his shop at Furnivalls Inn Gate in Holborne 1645.

To my best Friend and courteous Cosen Mr. Benjamin Cook all good wishes.
SIR,
YOur candid Interpretations of these conceits severally, has animated me to
a gleaning them up together; and betrayed you to a Dedication, they say, Quae
prosunt singula, multa juvant. Nor is it unusual, for men of my condition, in
this nature, to repend the good nature of their munificent friends However, did
my stars promise me any other requite, This trifling bark (balanced with
scarce any thing but sand and stones) should to the fortune of the doubtful
waves without a Palinure: in hope, either the shores would protect the shallow,
or the deep drown it, out of sight, and time, out of mind. I confess I can
look upon it, no otherwise then a degree of impudence, to obtrude that upon
your patronage which I my self have scarce confidence to own: Nevertheless,
deigne it your accept, since, though you find in it (probably) nothing good,
you may yet assure your self of the good will, and good intents of him, that
resolves to leave nothing unattempted, might any ways render him

Sir, Your most grateful servant, M. STEVENSON.

READER.
I H^ve h^re drawn up, a Poetic party of Pegasean pulfries in the new
Artillary ground of this book, which as they now stand in close order, under
the colors, and command of the Book-bind^r: seem no less unanimous, then
uniform; but upon a little examination, you shall find them Pro and con, round
and royal, and like the Cadmean Upstarts sheathing their weapons in each
others entrails. Many of them I must tell you are Amazonian Archers fighting
under the banner of their winged General; Others under the careless flaggs of
fancy for the merry half Crowns: Aequa Venus Teu^ris, 'allas iniqua fuit.
Others are at their guard, and wall in themselves with the stones of their
obdurate hearts, of whom the Poet says. Et dicam si^i^es p^ctus habere. If you
chance (as I can not hope but you will) either in mine or the Printers
oversight, meet some lame Soldiers, I hope they shall likewise meet your
charity. For the times, being like themselves humoursome, they seem to promise
me some approve; provided the Proverb hold true, Like to like. But what need I
fear to mount that brain sick stage, where even lies and Libells, under the
new fangled notion of news, pass as current as our coin, for my part, I am
not so in love with my own feathers, as in think them worthy a terse care, or
an ingenious eye: Nor do I yet so abdica^e my own ability, but that I judge
my pa^es, as much above your contempt as beneath your envy.

To the Author my very loving Cos. Mr. M. Stevenson.
COs. I confess, and thou know I am one
That never yet had taste of Helicon.
Yet those loose ares that I did lately glean
From the full Harvest of thy fruitful pen,
I here return thee; knowing the so kind
Thou will my love: and not my language mind.
Trust me Cos. this course paper I design
Not as a grace, but soil to set off thine.
For I am certain there is no ear so terse
But will be ravished with thy smoother verse.
But hold, I must thy just applause refrain
For that, Part of my blood runn's in thy vein.
Yet they will pardon this poor God a mercy,
That note how many Poems point at
R. C.

To the inimitable Poet, My honored friend, The AVTHOR.
But must I pen thy praise my noble friend
that were a task would never have an end.
I de have thy golden Poems writ in Gold
Thy names great title in fames list enrold.
Virgill no more shall Prince of Poets be
But thou; He Is but a petty Prince to thee.
I Will to the grove where freshest Laureats grow
And plat a wreath my self to crown thy brow.
H. A.

To my Ingenious friend, the AVTHOR,
ANd must I add my mite Dear Stevenson,
I know thou will accept it, well? it is done.
Faith I cannot tell while I thy lines read ore
Whether I love thee! Or admire the more.
Thy books not fraught with tales of Robin hood,
But lofty fancy, By the Lord it is good:
Thy sweet-lippt Muse most ample test does give,
Of high events, and I say let her Live.
N. B.

To my most esteemed friend, The AVTHOR.
TEll me no more of Withers wild abuses
Thy book a thousand times more wit produces.
Withers shall wither, whilst thy bays are seen
Like Daphnes Chapplet of immortal green:
F. B.

To his very good friend The AVTHOR.
I Have perused thy book in which I find
The perfect portrait of thy noble mind.
I must confess I once was one of those
Did both suspect thy poesy, and prose.
But having read thee too, as well as it
I am thy witness, it was thine own pure wit.
And therefore shall even for thy sake alone
Conclud, Minerva wears a colored gown.
R. D.

In Honorem Authoris.
NOt that I think that thy Aonian wine
Has any need of this poor bush of mine.
But that in some small measure yet I might
Exrpess the love I owe thee, I must writ
And praise thy fluent fancy that atteines
To that with ease, which others cannot with pains
Many of these thy Poems did I see
Drop from thy ready pen Ex tempore.
And fitly called Occasions of spring wast
For the (...) of time flew not more fast:
Did the conceit come even twixt Cup and Lip.
It was thine own occasion could not slip
Whence I Am convinced that poetri's a spirit,
Which except heaven infuse none can inherit.
Thine yea thine T: H.

Occasions Offspring. OR, POEMS, Upon several Occasions.
To Her that loves me.
A Way with fond Hyperbolies,
Subli^ing dust to Deities.
I purpose but to say you are fair,
As Envy must confess you are:
If you were not; you should not h^re
My praise, should knees couch your (desire.
But you are so, which to deny
Can be no less then Heresy.
Doubtless the Qeen of beauty was,
But like your self some peerless Lass*
Till by her Cyprian Zelots she
Mounted the style of deity.
Had you lived then, I really do
Presume you had been a Goddess toe.
For in your features men may fre
The God of Loves artillary
Your curling Tresse, is all the bow
The wanton wars with, here below.
His firelocks too, the world espy,
Presented in your sparkling eye:
Your fame's his Trum pet, and men seek
His Banner in your bashful cheek.
Your pearly rows at every smile,
Like Cadmus Troops stand rank and file.
If then so fair a front appear,
Doubt not, there is somewhat in the rear:
But it is not fit we further look,
Since Nature's pleased to shut the book:
Howere I hope I shall not displease her,
To guess what I see not hid treasure.
Nil non laudabile vidi.
To my Coy Charola.
1.
YOu cannot love; for shame
Come blush your self into a penitent flame:
Does the choice flower resist
Because the fair st^n, enjoy't that lift:
Or the eye-taking fruit,
Plead not yet ripe? away, there needs no suit.
Why women are as truly ours,
To be enjoyed as fruit, or flowers.
But it is our fault
That we exhalt
Them so, that they rebel against our powers
2.
COme, come, yet I affect ye,
If you cannot love again; Let me direct ye
'Tmay be 'cause you are fair,
And levigable as the downy air;
You stand upon it, you will not yield,
But Phoenix-like your self will build.
Do so, and then
Repent again;
When Autumn has possessed your own fair field.
3.
BUt oh behold I woo
Who should command, I beg and glad on it too,
My Charola admires,
Since she is Ice, I so complain of fires.
Had she a flaming Dart,
She would improv't to warm her own cold heart.
Ah me, does not Dame nature stint
Her flame-begetting sparks to flint?
Pray do but feel
The stone-cold steel;
And if you can say there is no fire within't,
4.
But ah my vain complaint!
My Obsequies attend a scornful Saint.
Water by dropping often
Is wont to make the hardest marble soft:
But my moist eyes procure,
No gentleness, but rather make obdure.
But I have done my do, for I
Find all things mere in misery.
And to survive
In vain I strive;
Since I have seen an Angel, I must dye,
5.
How dye? why so, did not
The Queen of Beauty on Adonis dote?
And Paris confident eyes,
Survey the features of three Deities?
Ah but far more divine,
Is my fair Saint then Paris trivial Trine:
Whom while I court, my hopes but rear
A fancied Castle in the Air.
Not unlike those
That do suppose
Their wish effected in a falling Star.
Credo equidem nec vana fides genus esse dearum.
Lovesick Lucilla to her unkind Shepherd.
ANd must I dye? and must I dye for love?
For love, that makes me like the Gods above*
If I must dye, what need these flames? belike
You Will execute me as an Heretic
But Momus teach me a new A. B. C.
If firm, and faithful love be heresy:
If death must be the doom of love; pray what
Shall be the sentence of novercall hate?
If zealous love merit a mortal curse,
Sure hate, a cold devotion merits worse.
Yet how unjust is this? stories relate
Many that died for love, but none for hate.
Is there no Herb that may my greifs remove,
No Antidore against this hot poison Love?
Pity ye Gods, pity my youth, and beauty,
See how each Organ buckles to his duty.
Cannot my prayers; cannot my tears prevail
What, shall ^y sighs, my sobs, my groans all fail?
Where is the Sisters thrift that goes about
To cut my Thread ere it be half drawn out?
Let me but see the twylight of my age,
And then pursue the utmost of your rage:
Why was Lucina present at my birth,
Whilst the propitious Gods promised me mirth?
Why came gl^d Hymen with his Tapour light
To mock me with the hopes of nuptial night?
And why was Venus then ascendent; why
Did all the Graces grace me since I dye?
But while I thus in vain urge my complaint,
I loose my breath, Ah me I fainr, I faint.
Deficiam parvi temporis add moram.
To Abstentia.
1.
I Never was in love,
Nor will be for my part,
I never felt the Archer move;
Alas he has no dart
Or else no eyes to hit my heart.
2.
ANd yet does love I vow,
In this my bosom reign;
^ut I protest it is not with you;
Pardon me, Sir, J tell you plain,
It Is with Diana's Maiden train.
3.
ANd though J lend an ear
When you present your Ditty,
Presume not J affect your gear,
Or you, that would seem witty;
Good faith it is not in love, but pity.
4.
HEnce then poor flatterers,
J am, and will be free:
Like those Celestial Choristers,
I Will hugg my liberty;
It Is that, and only that please me.
Phyllis Funeral.
COme now my Lambs your selves address
Unto your dying Shepheardess.
Your appetites a while adjourn,
And pay your duty to ^y Urne.
In life my flock J followed thee,
In death J prithee follow me.
Come therefore twenty Lambs in black,
In white twice twenty at their back.
Twelve sable Ewes like Widows poor
Shall as my mourners go before
Six Weathers shall my bearours be
Arraid in Negro's Liverie,
As dark as night, and six again,
As white as wool support my train:
With silver tipps let every horn.
Our sad and sol^mne state adorn,
Crescent as Phaebes, let each front,
VVear a fresh Cypress wreath upon it
Let no rude ruslet here be seen,
Nor bloody redd; But flourishing green,
Lamb black, and purest white, These three,
Sum up my perfect Elegy,
The black (my Lambs) does signify
My loss of life: your loss of me.
The white does unto you relate
My innocence: and Virgin state,
The green does to the world proclaim
My life in my immortal fame.
Now let me show ye my intent
In my last Will and Testament.
First I this better part of mine
To the Elizian shades resign
And whence I had it, I bequeath
To the next air my borrowed breath
Fire shall again have what it lent,
And water to her Element,
Shall have recourse. All shall return,
My ashes also to my Urne:
In the next place I here dispense
Unto my Lambs my innocence.
Moreover I assign to them
The grass green Meadow last nights dream
Presented me, My Ramms are they
Shall have my Cornucopia.
Item, I leave my Virgin Zone
Unto the Bud as yet u^ blown,
My Purple Veins resign to you
Sweet Violets their azure hue.
M^ blushes to the Rose I give
My white shall in the Lilly ^ve;
My golden Trelles shall rep^ire
The ruins of lost Maiden hair.
My Globes of light after this li^e
Shall wait on Phoebus and his wife.
My lof^y my Majestic front
I leave to I^ das sublime Mont.
The Cherry, or the Ruby rather
The eincture from my lips shall gather.
This breast opposing the other, puts
Me so in mind of Cupids Buts.
I cannot but to him demise
The place so fit for exercise.
Lastly (such as they wont receive)
Mine arms I to ^mbraces leave:
And now ye know what my last will is,
Farewell my Flock, say farewell Phillis.
Pl^no singultibus ore.
A young Gentleman to his Lady, who looked upon him as too immature.
MADAM,
I Love you, should I not do so,
I were an Anchorit^ and my Breast like Snow:
Yes I do love, and humbly here commence
Affection ushererd in with Reverence.
Deigne but your-lilly hand, No bold desire
Shall wing up my ambition any higher.
Nay if that be too much, let me descry
My rudeness chastised in your scornful eye.
I must confess these early years of mine
May look on, but not love Women nor Wine:
Not love said I? who can but love a face
So winning unless of Deucalions race?
Yet while I love and in my breast enshrine ye
It don't to pity, but contempt incline ye.
Nature will lend my lip a cloak, And than
I may profess, I want not zeal, though man:
My statures small, And Cu^id cannot find
Me yet; Shrubs loose the advantage of the wind:
Yet should I love thus young, I ^ight produce
Such presidents would warrant my excuse;
And yours too, Sapho sum'd up all her joy
In the embrace of a Cicilian boy
The Queen of Greec^ loved Theseus but a Lad,
And Cytharea her Adonis had.
Nay, Love himself that God, is but a Child,
Shall I then be for want of years exiled?
Yea I have heard fair Damsels say, In truth
Of all that love, give me the smooth-chin'd Youth.
True I am young, and thence I dare approve
My non-acquaintance with the slights of love.
You are that woundld me the first and all:
Blame me not then that come at the first ^all.
To Amabunda.
BUt do believe in faith that I
Loved thee? faith (...) liye.
Extinguish therefore thy desire
Ere it becomes unruly fire,
For thy flames work but the same way
With me as the hot Sun on clay.
No thou must take thy heels, and flee,
If thou would have me follow thee.
-- Fugis insequor.
To Suavia.
NOt love you, whom the world confess
The miracle of prettiness?
That were an humor to disguise
My reason, and betray my Eyes:
Noe, noe, without dissimulation
Your beauty is too strong temptation
Had I not found you the rare she,
You Had lived unlov'd, unmoved by me;
I cannot court a common face,
Enricht with only one poor grace,
A forehead handsome, smooth, and high
A lovely Lip, or Chin, or Eye:
But pardon Suavia if I Love
You, In whom all these graces move
Deigne then one gentle smile on me,
Who will your constant Vmbra be,
So long as either I have eyes,
Or you have wherewith to surprise.
Choose Madam then which you think best,
Either hard favor: or soft breast.
Aut sacien mutes, aut ne sis dura nec^^e est.
An Answer to the Song called fair Archybella to whose eyes. etc.
My dearest,
ARchybella's Eyes
Though nere so fair shall not despise
But own thy loyal sacrifice.
2.
Suppose her cruel, And a while
Her frowns like midnight, day exile
It Is noon again, if you but smile.
3.
We like our lodging and protest
So you provide a faithful breast
To vow our self your constant guest.
4.
Nor need you fear since you impart,
Your wounds so fresh, but we have art
And Balsam too, to ease your smart.
5.
Let not a thought that death may give
Molest thee, doubt not thou to live,
If smiles or tears may but reprive.
6.
Dread not my dear so dire a doom
Forbid it heaven the hour should come,
That thou should suffer Martyrdom.
The Answer to Well-well it is true, etc.
1.
WEll, well it is true, That I have loved a fool and it is you:
But since I plainly see
Whilst I in pity lend a smile,
You make me conscious all the while
Of your Idolatry.
I Will henceforth squib your Wildsire flames and scorn
The adoration of an Ass
So foolishly forlorn.
2.
Come, come be wise and dally not with Ladies (charmfull eyes,
The Magazine from whence
Love arms himself, the Stars I say
Are bright and powerful too, but they
Have no such influence.
We set us down in Titans glittering shine,
Reciprocating beam, for beam
Where Stars their heads decline,
3.
Whilst ye like fools to de^fie us pump and dreine your Schools
For an Hyperbody:
Presuming that ye highly please
Our Sex to style us Godde^es,
Alas we know ye lie
We are but flesh and blood though our bright eyes
Surprising your infaruate sense
Ye deem us Deit^es*
BUt since that Fate has drawn me to the trouble of thy prate
I Will not my ^abour loose
For I Will make use of thine own plot
To let thee know I love thee not.
Well, or ill take it, choose,
And therefore I Will go get me a new bar,
To rid my Chamber of such Apes
Such Toys as Suitors are,
5.
GO love your wine, and all your Muses, nine and nine times nine
So you will not love me
For me I love my Dog, my Cat
Nay I would love I care not what
So it may not be thee
Love you your laughing and your quaffing Crew
I love my Country and my King
But hate such fools as you.
The Virgin Canticle to Gerrard.
1.
Avaunt ye false Intruders that my Chamber hant
Good faith I cannot
No nor J will not listen to your love
No more will J though you would give me all your store
Unbolt my door
You do but rocks and senseless marble move
For well, yea too too well J can your perjured story tell
There Is no faith rests
In men's false breasts:
Therefore farewell, farewell.
2.
It Is true, I was so foolish once as to Love you,
But now Irue
I ever yielded unto such an ague.
But yet, I de have you know my friend though I did get
One burning fit
I had another cold enough to plague you.
For I who was all fire, am now congeald into all ice
Whence you may find,
Though I was kind.
I can be merry and wise.
3.
The willow thou think torments me but alas poor fellow
Ask but my Pillow
If it can witness ere a sigh I fetched.
Or that on my bedside as in a dream I sat,
Moaning my fate,
Or out of melancholy my self streacht.
^le warrant thee my boy thou't find all circumstances prove
That maidens too
As well as you
Can with discretion love
4.
And now I do intend to run through Lovers row
As well as you
And taste the sweetness of variety.
For I suppose there is some sweet sweet in it or ye
Would never be
So much addicted to inconstancy.
Therefore I Will set and see the messes usher^ in by scores
And taste of this
And that fine dish
To the hundred and fiftith course.
5.
In vain thou temptst me Paris what, would thou be feign
Forsworn again
Alas I value not thy threadbare Oaths.
Go find some other tame fool for I have no mind
TO embrace the wind
No, nor those vows thou pu^st of with thy clothes
If yet thoudst have me, love thee then I prithee (nere come to me
For I protest
I love thee best
When thou art furthest from me
The Choice.
It Is not thy rubie Lips; nor Rosy Cheeks,
In which my heart a full contentment seeks
It Is not the treasure of thy golden tresses,
Tha^ makes me rich, or challenge my Caresses
Nor yet thy light-dispersing eyes though they,
Be the true Phosphors of the breaking day,
Should I serve beauties obvious to the eye
Pigmaleons statue then would see the vye.
And I might well (if I should cease to range,)
Advantage my affection at the change.
But I have suited at a nobler rate,
Then to court paint; Beauties inanin^ate,
In sum there is nothing outsides can impart,
Has power to make a conquest on my heart.
But ^ love you, whose beauty still I find
But index to the beauty of your mind.
You are the Pearl that highest value win,
Being fair without, and cordial within.
To my Coy and Captious Mistress.
I Will court my shade no more, but flee
From it, and make it follow me:
Nor shall the lo^ty Cedar bough
To the base Bramble, it is too low.
I Will kneel no more to ungrateful Thistles,
Nor listen to each Bird that whistles:
I have for got you, and to day
I did make Ortes of better Hay.
I loved thee once, but now my scorn
Shall triumph over thee forlorn:
I Will wrap my front up in disdain,
Nor shall thou it uncloud again,
No, though one careless smile would save
Thy cast-of carcass from the grave:
Thy tears, and prayers and looking wan
Were but to wash an Indian.
N^y, w^rt thou fair as thou art not,
Thou should not move my breast one jot:
Nor would I love thee one half hour,
Though both the Indies were thy Dower:
Though all the Saints should bless thy face,
Thou get'st not henceforth one embrace:
I hate thine eyes, and rather would
A Basilisk should me behold.
To Pulcheria.
BUt tell me will not Gold move thee?
Art thou mo^e hard than Danae?
VVha^? will these pecrless Pearls, these Gems,
These Rubies reached from Diadenis,
Advance me no step to thy love?
I Will try if trivial toys may move.
'T may be this Lilly or that Rose
VVin her acceptance more then those.
Yes much at one, alas I should
But tempt an Indian with my Gold:
Her locks are the true golden Fl^ec,
Medea showed her love in Greece;
And what from Rubies hope I? tush
Her lips will make the Ruby blush:
Which if a smile should chance to sever,
You strait shall see such Pearls as never
Nature yet boasted, as if she
Had only this one Treasury.
And as for Gems, what sparks can fly
So bright as those shot from her eye?
Lillies alas avail not much,
Her body is all over such:
And what is a Rose? since her Cheeks bea^
A Iuue of Roses all the year.
LOVE Blind or not blind.
1.
WHat makes you think that Love is blind
Since he dwells in the eye:
I rather the contrary find
In all my scrutinie.
For I in love had never been
Had not mine eyes the object seen.
2.
And all the world in this agree
Love is a flaming fire
If then a fire, nay flame it be
What need we more desire,
To prove that Love may have his sight,
From that which renders all things light.
3.
Tell me not that Obfusca was
Born blind, yet loved on trust,
Admit the fable; yet alas
It was not love, but lust.
For she must have it understood,
Though nothing else, her feeling's good.
4.
But you will say where stood his eyes
That chose so course a wench.
As Bab since men meet such a prize
On every common bench:
This will be his retort again,
What Is, one man's meat's an others bane.
5.
Here Is one a horse face courts whose weight
He knows will come in Gold.
And so he have the money straight,
Let her be crooked, old
Splay-foot, blind, beetlebrowd, and lame,
For he has that for which he came,
6.
Turn but your eye and you shall see
Another finger itch,
To be embracing such a she
Is neither fair nor rich.
Ask but his reason and it is this
My mind to me a Kingdom is,
7.
Thus one loves fat an other lean,
This his meat salt, that fresh
This a fat Capon, that a Hen
This man loves fish, that flesh.
Thus all their humors have, and now
Here Is the good woman kissed he^ Cow.
8.
Who bears the fault now but the boy
The wanton boy forsooth
He wish old women use to toy,
And teach them tricks of youth,
Thus from our selves we still remove
Our dotage to the god of Love.
9.
Whom falsely fools call progeny
Of Vulcan god of fire,
If it were so then he must be
Prodromus to his Sire
For out of doubt he LOVE did know,
Ere he came into Cuckholds row.
10.
THen let not hollowed Love bear blame
For humane fantasy:
Love is a pure celestial flame
Heaven and Earths Mercury,
Diffused on Mortals, let us hence
Accuse the Organ, not the influenc^,
11.
CAn any yet be so unwise
To think Love blind that can
Create an Argus hundred eyes,
To guard a Curtesan,
Whom if you see you may espy.
Enthroned in every sparkling eye.
12.
PRay which of you can shoot so right,
As he whom ye call blind;
He sticks his Arrows in the white
Sure then he eyes must find,
Should you a Dart at any throw,
Twere but the blind man hit the Crow.
13.
Yea are surpised with each fair face
With every dimpled Chin,
This comely feature, that sweet grace
Are snares to trap ye in:
What think ye then, not love, I wiss
But ye, are capti oculis.
A longing Lady to her long-staying Lover.
Twice twenty times has Titan run his course
From the oriental, to the VVestern sourse:
Since last I saw you can one parting kiss
Sustain me such an age of night as this:
How I am rackt in thy unkind delay?
Come my sweet Phosphor, come and bring the day*
Sorrow and solitude in this small space
Have figured age on my Hermetick face.
Go happy Paper be my Mercury,
And having kissed his hand bring it to me.
That I may be thy Rival; tell him I
Must see him soon, or in despair I dye.
And if he come not; I shall plainly see
He Is out of town, or out of love with me.
A forsaken Lady to her Apostate.
BUt are those flashes fled? those flames quite gone
Into the ashes of oblivio^?
Where are those Vows, these Heaven-attested oaths,
Sealed on my lips the pledges of our troaths?
What all amort, all banished in a trice,
All our embraces a fools Paradise?
Then farewell says, and friend, next time I find
My self affective He embrace the wind.
A mock song to O stay by me --
STay not by me feinds! but fly me,
For behold I come
All in fury, to conjure ye,
To avoid the room,
O come not then near me: your haggy looks skear me
But down to your cursed cell,
for in hell;
All such sooty sluts dwell.
2.
Out ye Devils, worst of evils,
What do you make here?
Such damned witches, and base bitches:
I nere saw as yee're.
O come not then near me your haggy looks skare me
But down to your cursed cell
for in hell
All such sooty sluts dwell.
3.
Pluto's pusses are the susses
That I here behold
Dressed in tiffanie like Tysiphone,
Snaky locked and old.
O come not then near me, your haggy looks skar me
But down to your cursed cell
For in hell,
All such sooty sluts dwell.
4.
Furies fellows what is hell loose
And ye broke out thus
In your night-gears like the night mares
To meet Incubus.
O come not then near me, your haggy looks skear me
But down to your cursed cell
for in hell
All such sooty sluts dwell.
5.
Out upon ye, I Will none on ye
Down ye damned beneath
Your ill favors and worse savours
Do infect my breath,
O come not then near me, your haggy looks skeare me
But down to your cursed cell for in hell,
All such sooty sluts dwell.
The Furies Answer.
BE content Sir, we are sent Sir
Not to trouble you,
But to sport with and consort with
Our own cuttaild crew.
Let nothing then skear you, for weel I not come near you
But down to our own black cell, for in hell,
We confess we do dwell.
Iam jam tacturas, tartara nigra putes.
A Gentleman to his Mistress that told him he looked asqnint upon her.
ASquint, why no^? am I of Eagles race,
To try mine eyes upon Apollo's face:
Admit I were, yet while I look on thee,
Thy brighter beams force an obliquity.
Eagles should do the same, durst they but try
Their Birth right at the radiance of thine eye.
What is this squinting but my feeble sight,
Reverberated by thy powerful light?
Nay should mine eye right on to thine aspire,
'Twould burning-Glass-like set mine heart on fire.
But say I could, since thou thus sl^ghtest me,
What reason have I to look right on thee?
Come be not you so cross grained to despise
A breast that shows her crosses in her eyes;
Which silently each other thus reprove,
TO have let in cruel and ungrateful love:
So passing fair, I swear upon a book
You are, my eyes upon each other look
As in a maze to see Dame Nature place
All her perfection in your only face.
As Clouds the Creatures of the Sun, so I
The nubilous exhalation of your eye
Approach your presence begging I may be
The Vmb^a unto your serenity.
And could I but my self in the office put,
As Caltha with your beams Id'e open, and shut.
The Flies are buzzing where light Candles are,
And smoke you know always pursues the fair.
Days d' enterchange Embraces with the night,
And darkness, kiss the lovely lips of light.
Why then, thou fairest, art thou so unkind,
To scoff the mole thy beauty made thus blind?
But am I blind do say; Even thence does flow,
This solace, that the God of love is so.
And squint-eyd, then I may glory int.
The sun it self, lights center looks asquint.
To Frank.
What all at once? what nowne self Frank?
Thy bounty over bears its banck.
* Thad been a favor yet beyond,
My wishes, had thou given thy bond,
And sealed it with a faithful kiss,
O here had been enough of bliss.
Or had thou given thy hand in part
As pledge of thy engaged heart;
I had been more then well content
TO have fed my hopes, on the event.
But I am now as others are,
Suspicious of thy prester'd ware.
Thou art too sweet, to tell thee right
Thou overcom'st my appetite.
Hony's not for all pallats meet,
And sugar often makes things too sweet.
Trust me fond Franck, thou art too free
(Free of thy flesh I mean) for me.
Thou comst too fast, I must step back.
And to be short, I fear me no man,
Dares venture to make thee a woman.
In markets maids are common, I
Can have a score for a bulls eye*
You praise your self, and I could wish
But to see her cries stinking fish;
I know not what to think, thy face
Has such an ol^o of brass;
And yet thou should be right, for none
That I ere knew, less fear the stone,
On whom be this inscription set;
Here is both right, and Counterfeit.
But thou say it is no usual Course,
To look ith mouth of a gift horse.
Yet not mans' bounty shall persuade
Me too accept or keep a jade,
Ill favored and, ill quality'd;
Who would on such Conditions ride?
Thou have given thy self to me, do hear
Thou have a shrewd box on the ear
Would thou had rather given me that
Was left ith maltheap by the Car.
Thou should have said, will you accept,
Or else they self to thy self kept.
There Is somewhat more then up and ride,
The banes must go before the bride
And after too, unless she be
Better then I can hope of thee
Thou fly'st away to Church and nether
Bringst guest with thee nor yet a father.
But for the first (saving your jest)
You will your self be the bold guest.
And for a father, what need he,
Since you will your own giver be.
Way this is the new way we take,
Each others word and bargain make.
Sure here is like to be good doing
When rampant royles run thus a wo^oi^g,
Why now or never verify.
Old mother Shiptons prophecy,
Yet thou may get a husband still,
Provided thou do but fulfill.
The last will of thy grand mother,
No more but foe; Remember her:
For my part, me thou could not please,
Though thou could sh -- me ninepences.
Nor could thou move in me delight,
Should thou afford me every night
A fresh and sportfull maidenhead
Their signs should not pollute my bed,
And yet I may chance loath my life
Come then and thou shalr be my wife.
However for your offer Frankey
I were to blame should I not thank ye,
But let me perish in thy Curse
If ever offer liked me worse.
Thou gav'st thy self to me; and
Give thee back to thy self Godbye
Te mihi donasti, te tibi reddo, vale.
An Epithal. On. Mr. B. C. his Nuptials.
1.
WElcome most lovely pair,
Through threats of drowning
In parents frowning;
Now no doubts nor despair
Shall cloud the clearer air
Of nuptial crowning
No counter-plots, no rivalls now suspect,,
Your wishes are ariv'd at their effect.
4.
No woeful Willow now,
Cupid composes,
Chaplets of Roses:
In which the Bridgroomes brow
And his fair Brides also,
Hymen encloses,
Let Suitors in desires hot embers burn,
Your joyful fyres shall into Bone-fires turn.
3.
On thy cheeks beauteous Bride,
More all the graces
In pleasant paces
Blessed he whom fares betide
The Elysium of thy side.
This, this, thy lass is
Sweet Bridegroom, but had Love had eyes to see her:
No doubt but he had been thy rival here.
4.
Sing Io, sing a-maine
Thy tempting treasure,
Out bounds all measure,
Give thy ripe joys full reine,
And Io. sing again,
Victorious Caesar
Beware of surfets though, thy lusty cheer.
Ends not to night, the fair lasts all the year
4.
But you think long I doubt,
And loves complexion,
Prepares erection,
What though ye taste of naught,
All day, but naked thought:
Night's the next section:
Then you shall act, what we but dream, deligh^,
Weed wish ye too (if there were need) good night.
9
Com Bacchus com let us troule
The merry dishes
Brimd with best wishes.
Me thinks I see the soul,
Of mirth in every bowl
Pres^ging blisses.
Your crop's full eared, full ripe, your eye discernes
Plenty; what can we wish yoe more but bearnes
To my lilly white Leda in Commendation of a pale face.
When red enchased in the skies we find.
We strait conclude it is either rain, or wind.
When I a Rubric on thy face epsy,
Faith I expect to see thee storm, or cry.
Let them that dare condemn thy I very brow
Tell me how they could fancy blood and snow.
That monstrous, yea that menstiuous product, who
Could look upon it and not his tears our flow?
Pray tell me where the white, and damask rose'
From the sam stalk both white, and red disclose?
Spaniells and Calves are red and white it is true
If you be red and white, pray what are you?
Would you commend her for her comely snout
That's particolourd like a radish root?
You Would think I mock you should I say you are
Pure red and white as babies in the fair.
If red be such a grace; If red so please
Have me commended to red latices.
Yet the red rose is Cordial. But the white
Is ever most commended for the sight.
From costard-mongers I have understood
Thus much? The red cheecht apple's seldom good.
Red wax is very common, But the white
Is virgins wax, And a good price must buy't,
Pray tell me now, would you be wooed and prayed;
To limb your felt out on a milk white n aid?
Marry com up; so when you are to write,
You may condemn your paper cause it is white:
Here, here is an Elizabeth, will you say what aile
The shillings cause you see the face is pale?
That were a pretty jest, Alas, alas,
If it were cherry checht it would not pass.
Even Vitriall admitts a various hue
Some is pure white, some green, some perfect blew,
And some is red too, But it is then consest
The dross and Ca^ut mortuum of the rest
In Mercury as Ch^nick terms will have it,
The white's sublime, The red precipitate.
Some Tulips* I remember I have seen,
Half red half white, but thy have common been.
Or were they ra^e should they come near my nose
The posie were less welcome, then the pose.
White Robes at Nuptials, show a virgin state,
And why not white checks beautyes candidate.
What would thou think* if thou sho^lds red epsy
Exchequor'd with the white that's in thine eye?
Thoudst say it is bloud-shot, How then is it a grace
That blemishes the best part of thy face?
But why do I thus eagerly allude
To that which all but blind men will conclude?
The s^lver Moon, the glittering train of night,
The (...), Swan, and Venus Doves are white,
But yo^ say Reds a modest tincture, tush,
Her conscience can not bid her countenance blush
VV^en she has done the thing she ought nor do:
Come to her the^ she will blush as red as you.
-- Rubicunda flat, Alba serenat.
The Postscript, To the precedent Poem.
BUt stay ^y whiteing, though I took thy part,
'Twas not to show thy beau^y, but my art.
My conscience tell^ me Red and white best pleases,
White not set off with Red portends diseases:
But Poets pro, and con, salute and slight:
Tell ye the Dove is black, And the Crow white,
I could have writ as much, and given a grace
As ample, to the Calfe with the white face.
Thus have I made thee fair and foul; so truly
Sta^^h be it nere so white, comes of but blewly.
P. atque P.
To Mr. R. D.
SIR,
YOur safe return unto mine ears being come
I could no less then bid you welcome home.
At present I have nothing worth your view,
Only my white faced Leda, but she is new
And fresh attired, If I have dressed her right:
Say but the word, And I have hit the White:
Militat omnis amans, and habet sua Castra Cupido.
LOVE has his tents and lovers soldiers are
Pressed out to serve in an intestine War,
Cupid become a Leader now I find,
The proverb, verified, The blind leads the blind.
-- Caeco carpitur Igne*
To my honored friend. A Gentleman that in a frollick would needs barb me.
1.
But BEN
Let me know when
Thou will return age ^n:
Oh thy departure drew a tear,
Not from the watrie surface of the sphere
No, no it drew it, whist, stay there
Least while such news I send,
I much offend,
My friend,
2.
Indeed
Since it was decreed
Thou should depart with speed
I could not choose, but heavily look
To loose at once my barber, and my Cook:
I will be sworn upon a book
I often thee wanted have
My chin to shave,
Poor knave.
3.
And clip
My upper lip
And make the hairs to skip
For having mended my bad face
Thou good Lawn Bands about ^y neck did place.
And cuft my hands, but now alas
I shall, I am ith mind
No Barber find
so kind.
To William Kemp.
SAturday last faith Will you sent me Sack
By Bacchus scarce was worth the sending back
Be now a trusty foul, and, send me White.
Or Renish, which you will but let't be right
Feel out some cell where Phoebus cannot come
I know Will will send good if Will b'at home
A Gentleman surprised with the sight of a Lady unknown to him, betroathed to
another.
UNhappy happiness, peircing, pleasing sat
By too good fortune made unfortunate,
My blessed, and blasted eyes made me at once
My self an Emp^rour, and a (...) pronounce*
What strange affections on my spirit ceaze?
Whereof the cure is worse then disease.
What heavenly fire is this, torments and joys me
Which if I blow consumes; if quench destroys me?
Take here O take this love-slaine heart of mine
This victim fallne on your victorious shrine,
Only let love since to your pile I come
Honor my sacrifice with martyrdom.
And it is enough, Since I cant overcome ye.
He kille the strokes my fates allot me from ye
Yet on my urne should you one glance contrive
My ashes with the Phoenix might revive,
If not a smile, O yet let pity lend me
A sigh, that may to the next world commend me
Where my then happier eyes may have, the grace
Freely to feast on your Seraphick face.
To my Cozen Coy.
1.
This not for virtues sake that you,
Are wont to keep so much ado,
For we know by experience,
And you by your own conscience.
That wenches will for all their sturres,
Cling in a corner close as burres.
2.
Those things most take men's palares ^ver,
They purchasse fle with most hard endeavor.
And that's the reason that ye maids,
Hold up the rate of maiden-heads.
Which if you were not coy and nice
A lack a day! would bear no price.
3.
Pray do not ye your faces skreen,
To be with double lusser seen.
What is it but to tempt beholders,
Ye show your naked neck, and, shoulders.
Why do you else pach white with black?
But that ye more oath same stuff lack?
4.
Cold-rounded sires, themselves contract,
And are most violent in act.
And I conceive fair maids desires,
Are but such snow-environ'd sires.
And when I see snow on their skin
I judge them then all fire within.
5.
Tell me who will do so mickle
'As she that hants a conventickle.
She is one of Adams race.
That observes no time nor place.
Though in the midst of lent it chance,
She Will take it, if the flesh advance.
6.
And you your self Abstemia
Will sport and play as well as they,
I know you loyter but to be
Embraced by opportunity
And in things forbid delight
To show your self Eves Daughter right.
7.
Tell me no more of Apes in hell
Though the excuse become ye well;
Come pretty soul it is to no boot
You cannot live unless you do it:
For the thing that we talk of pleased
Nay more then that prevents diseases.
8.
Were It not more wisdom to be dumb,
Then word it to be overcome?
Do'nt we in common queans epsy
These your weapons, nay pish, nay fie,
That ere half the fight be done
VVish that they may be over run.
9.
Come come Girl if thou do burn
^ee thou bauk'st not a good turn,
Those bonny lasses wiser are
That know when they are offered fair
Yet if shame bid thee forsake it
Prithee play the maid, say nay and take it,
To my pale Pippin Pallor in ore sedet --
HEr checks are like her blind checks pale
And wan, Her lips are lick her tail,
Her piteous looks may happily move
Compassion in me; never love.
Shall I bow down; or kneel to that
That seems to me in animate?
So while I to my suite addict her,
I pray with Papists to a Picture,
Do ye not see how meager death,
Seems through her Organs to steal bteath
And Succubus has from the dust
Reared her to satiate his lust
Tell m^e pale Phebe don't you climb
Old walls to banquet on the lime?
I know you love such festivalls
Your white-washt checks resemble walls.
Say mother pitous, do you not
For Oatmeal? rob the Porrige-pot
Run you not into privet holes
To break your fast with salt and Coals
I might a thousand knacks repeat,
What could I name but you would cat
In sh^me whereof you blou^ re^^ines
Your checks, And lurks within your veins,
Until it be subpaena'd thence,
By your flagitious conscience.
Nor are you lilly like, but sallow*
And sapie-coutenanc'd like tallow:
For when your dropping nose you handle,
You seem to me to snuff a candle.
And they that keep you reap disgrace,
Whilst men read samine on your face.
Natures, besiegd, And all your pores
Obstructed block up her recourse
Whilst in despair of life you burn,
For a good husband, or good turn..
There must be vent, It Is to noe boot
To talk, you must or dye, or doet.
And should, we but a while delay you,
You Would cry hark hark for life we pray you.
You can no such improvement feel
In allume possets or crude steel.
You know your self there is nothing can,
Be so aperitive as man.
Who in the sweetest sense is said,
To cure you of your maiden head.
Which should you but a while retain,
A pessarie would come in vain.
What need men care then for such wives,
As Marry but to save their lives?
He must as much (that weddeth thee)
Thy doctor; As thy husband be.
Noe, I Will to Bacchus where being come,
The first attendant shows a rome.
The next prersents a glanceing less,
Like Venus in a venice glass.
With that I knock, and as some spirit
I conjur up pur red and white.
My circles a round table. And
In midst thereof does Hymen stand
With a light tapour. when I call,
To celebrate my nuptial.
Here do I a french madam place
And there a sweet-^ipt spanish less
Here all in white a lady dances.
And there in red an other glances.
And least mine eyes want fresh delight,
Here sets Claretta red and whit.
Nor do I complement I ^row,
But tell them plain it is so and so,
Thy struggle not nor are they coy
But I may what I will enjoy.
No there is no coil made for a kiss,
Though melting melting, melting bliss.
No shifting from the freindly cup
But I may freely all take up.
And in each face if I so please,
I le court mine own ^ffigies.
Who would not then on this stage act Narci^^us,
Where lively lips so sweetly say come kiss us?
Mrs. E. G. To her false and faithless servant.
But whence false wretch are these delays,
Did thou not swear,
By all that is dear.
Should lions block up thy assayes,
Thy Pinnace scorned such remoraes.
2.
Most faithless of thy sex farewell:
Art not thou he
That vowed to me
No fates decree not Circian spell,
Should keep thee from my Cittadell?
3.
Yet flatterer thou art fleg'd, and flown
From the warm nest
Of my soft breast,
And like that night thou left's me gone
Ah! who would such a traitor own?
4.
They that dare most, I see dare least
Peter pretends
More then his friends,
But being brought unto the test,
He turns more cravant then the rest.
5.
A feeble hermit razed the fort
Of secrecy
Twixt thee and me,
O shame, Cowards I see resort
To Lov's, though not to Mars his Court.
6.
Think thou the gods that testify
From Heaven above
Thy vows of love,
Will quit thee of thy perjury?
That were, to make themselves like thee.
7.
Well I conclude then nothing else
But love is dead
And faith is fled,
Unto the breasts of in fidells
And there, if any where it dwells.
8.
False and faint heart adieu, nere sue
Nor woo no more,
As here to fore,
For here is all I Will answer you,
False and faint heart adieu adieu.
-- Piget infido consuluisse viro.
His Answer*
ANd why so sharp? in truth (my dear) I must,
Accuse your fury of unkind distrust.
You should observe the end, and only glance,
Not dwell on the emergent circumstance.
Shall I plounge through the abisse of danger, when
I may avoid it; And go right again.
What you mis-construe as some light abuse,
Reason will read a requisite excuse.
What should we but invite the public scorn,
To boast our harvest ere we reap our corn.
The wealthy'st wights petend the weakest store,
And what they hug, conceal, I do no more.
For knowledge will but make us table-talke,
Whilst love delights in shadyest paths to-walk.
Forbear a while my love and then expect
Your patience crowned with blessed, with wished effect.
Those that do otherwise, the world but calls,
Them Posthumous to there own nuptials,
Noe, noe, my heart's but one, though for a space,
I seem to putt on Ianus double face,
In which strange dress I yet, would hope I show
I love thee more then all the world shall know.
To the fair Mrs E. R.
MADAM.
You Are lovely fair, and but I know,
You are not proud, I would not tell you so.
For my part I commend your sweet complexion.
Nither for hope of favor, nor affection.
Only since I have little else to do,
I praise the most praise worthy, And it is you:
Here Is no hard words but in plain english thus,
Y'eare handsme, young, rich, virtuous.
What can be wished for more? where nature places
A heaven of beauty in a he^ven of graces.
But if you be as free as you are fair
All Is nothing, and you are not what you are.
Da dextram miserae and tecum me toll per vndas.
Phillis, Charon. Ph. A Boat, a Boat Charom, come set me over,

Chapter Who calls hells fatal ferriman?

Ph. A Lover.

Chapter And thou shall stay the longer for it I vow,

Ph. You Will not be so unmercifull I ^row.

Chapter Left handed luck light on ye every hour
I me troubled to transport such brands as you are.

Ph. Ney good sweet Charon, com^

Chapter Yes sweeton still,
When I have nothing else to do, I will.

Ph. What?

Chapter Grease my Boat, and patch my shattered sails
And set me down and rest me;

Ph. Jove what ayle'
This froward patch? come prithee to the stath
I am a stranger, come put off thy wrath.

Chapter Hence Cupids brands,

Ph. Not so.

Chapter I Will come no nigher:

Ph. Why?

Chapter For you will set my pitchy Boat on fire,
I fry already with transporting flames
Such as have almost drank up al my streams

Ph. Can thou fear that and see these fresh supplies.
So streaming from the Conduits of mine
Eyes?

Chapter Well well,

Ph. Nay more if Charon shall think good
These Arms as Oars shall wave the stigian flood,
This wast thy Mast: And this dishevelled hair,
I Will into Cables twist;

Chapter Well you speak fair.

Ph. Come then;

Chapter I am at hand, but ere thy foot Board me,
How cam^st thou here timely or not?

Ph. What makes that to my speed? Come waft me over,
And talk of that anon.

Chapter Nay soft, discover
Or thou art at thy furthest; Trust no tri
Nor falsities, But swear by sacred Stix,
Which even the gods call not to lies,
Without the forfeit of their deityes,
And loss of Nectar for a hundred years.
Speak, Phs What is Phillis faulty here appears.

Chapter Thou can not pass.

Ph. The gods forbid O smother
That breath, This death is worse then the other;
I past last night, That I implunged in
For love, and must I dye again for sin?
Is it decreed?

Chapter It is, and signed by fate.

Ph. I Will supplicate the Gods then.

Chapter It Is too late.

Ph. Hard hap, but sawst thou not my Demophon

Chapter I did.

Ph. Where;

Chapter He is to Elysium gone.

Ph. And I left here O Charon prithee either
VVast me to him, or fetch him hither.

Chapter Neither?

Ph. Shall he live happy?

Chapter Yes.

Ph. Then let me come
For he knows I am his Elysium.

Chapter Thou can not wretch:

Ph. Noe? whether shall I then
Betake my self?

Chapter To yond foul foggy fen,

Ph. And what when there?

Chapter Still tide it to and fro,
In deep despair as those self murderers do,
See thou these Troops like Autu^n^s leavy spoil,
What self bemoaning, what u^pittied coil
They keep? But I stern Charo^t have no ears
To hear their plaints; no eyes to see their tears.

Ph. Have I contemned life, neglected Thrace
And my imperial scepter for this place?

Chapter Blame thine own Rathnes to anticipate,
The supreme act of Adamantine fate,

Ph. Has thou no pity lest for Queens.

Chapter No, now
The basest beggar is as great as thou.

Ph. O give me yet a draft of Lethe, that
I may forget the tyranny of fate.

Ca. It cannot be allowed alas thy woes
Begin but now

Ph. When end they then?

Chapter God knows.

Ph. Pity sweet Charon, pity for his sake,
Whose innocence must of my greifs partake
For he and I long since agreed upon
This, He should Phillis be, I Demop^on
Our faithful lips were pledges of this twine
He giving his heart, I returning mine.
It Is I have sinned, And must he bear the blow.
It Is not my heart, but his that suffers now,
O either yield then to my just desire,
Or let me suffer in my self entire,
But if it may be, Celestial pity move,
To spare us both, and lay the fault on Love.

Chapter Weell love shall blind the Gods and pity shall
For once the fair queen be presidentiall.
Or if the Gods will not commiserate,
I Will steal thee over stix in spite of fate

Flectere sinequeo Acheronta movelo.
Miserum me fuisse faelicem! To Mr. H. C.
Had Palynurus, never stear'd so far,
As India, where the earthes choice treasures are.
His wooden Castle. might have split in sunder,
And nere arrived at a nine days wonder:
Had Bellisarrus, and I, never seen,
The faithless face of change's changefull queene'
And to so lof^ie hopes had no admission,
How blessed had we been in our low condition?
Had Athenais not Eudoxia been,
T'had been no wound to be thrown down ag^n;
Had I nere seen you (fairest) then my breast,
Had still been calmie in its haven of rest.
What the eye nere sees, the heart nere grieves? had I
Nere drank at all, then had I nere been dry.
I saw you but, and the wing' archers bow,
Drawn by the attractives of your eyes pei^c'd through.
My heart, so did he from those eyes p^ocure,
His bolt, his bowstringe, and his cynosure.
Unlucky luck, with joy and woe it fills me,
Tarantula like, it makes me laugh, and kills me.
It Is thou have wounded me, and I must meet
My cure in thee, O my sweet, bitter-sweet.
Sic mihi res eadem vulnus opem que tulit.
A. B. To an Irish Gentlewoman that slighted him.
WHat time my blood shall boil so in my Ueines
As I shall need a cooler for my reins,
I Will call on Io. fairer far then you are
Shall ease me of my Cod-peice Calenture;
But if a Priapisme put me hard upon it
I Will keep a Cow: And not an Jrish Ront.
To my noble Cosen Mr. R. C. coming in mourning to be merry with his friends.
ANd why in black? what means this nights arra^
Since ^ am frolic as the day?
Why come thou thus in mourning to thy friend
As if to mind him of his end?
In such sad weeds the unwellcome Raven com:
To croak out our determinated doomes:
Shake of these mystie foggs, that we may know,
How much we to thy visit owe,
Come not as thou hid'st treason in thy shroud,
But lend the sweltring Sun thy cloud.
So shall he set him down and slumber, while
Thou cher'st us with thy smile;
How ill contrived is that company
Where one does laugh, another cry?
This man is clothed in whit, that blew, thou black
Even just like Ieffery. James and Jack.
What will the world conclude when they see thee
In this sleabitten live^ie?
We laugh, you lowre, we singe, your serious state.
Seems to affect the marbles fate,
This discord is unmusicall come, come,
Uncase unmask', and let each room.
Thou glidest through, so radiant appear,
As if the orb of light moved there:
Break out bright Soul, and give our wonder birth
At the Meridian of thy mirth.
Trust meet'were good and rare, but I see plain,
Thou bring'st old fashions up again;
Thy presence was a banquet and thou did,
Present a deaths head in the midst.
So all thy courtesy ru'ns upon cruches,
Like him, makes a good feast, and grutches:
But, prithee, shall I this a visit call?
Suer thou came to my funeral;
Or is it because thy clothes against surfets be, mementoes of mortalitye?
Do come to laugh, And set good cheer to wrack,
And yet bring Lent upon thy back?
Nere fear good Cos-Heres nothing needs,
Such overmonito^y weeds;
We have not to presnt you, what is rare
Only you are welcome to our country; fare;
Good powderd beef, good mutton and good sherrie,
And so, and so, I pray be merry,
With which accept our hearts; we could extend
no more, should a'll the Gods descend.
And if this paper find acceptance too,
Tha^'s more sir then I promised you.
But I had rather be abrupt then tedious,
And therefore thus, and only thus,
You come in mourning, but when you return,
You may leave of, but we must mourn.
A gratus ades To my highly honored cozen Mr B. C. Coming to Norwich.
And art thou come boon Ben? then Norwich say,
Thanks (noble Phosphor) for this wished for day
Then welcome, welcome, be they ever dumb:
That say not now welcome B. C. welcome:
Had I been mute from birth, I now had broke,
All tongue ties, and with dumb borne Atis spoke;
As Jove came down the trifle to discuss,
T'wixt frogs and mice; so camst thou down to us;
Both from above: though, here some difference lies;
He came from heave'ns, thou from earth's paradise.
Ye both desend, being both divinely bright,
To d^zle our inferior Orb wib with light:
The country swaines' cause they alas could spell
No higher title, call thee Collenell;
Some wiser though then others, reaping co^^,
Think thou art Ceres, and resound their horn.
Devoutly beg thy largess, and out vye,
The thunder with the ecch'o of their cry.
But when thou came in at Stephens gate,
Thou gav'st our city cause enough of prate;
O how the people hurry, hurry ran,
To gaze upon thee as If more then man!
What herds of Aproners at every look?
Read on thy robes Norfolks illustrous Duke?
Weavers, like shutles, here, and there pe^p out,
And make no workon't for the revell rout.
Who finding how in vain they strive for room,
Each in a fustian surrey to his loome.
Re^u^nes, And armed with his well tried beam,
Levels his passage through the oposing stream;
You Would laugh to see, how Taylours skipt about,
As mad as dogs to see themselves cut out.
VVishing their needles had no eyes so they,
(Poor thieves) might see their bellyfull to day.
The that her from the top oth' house, seeing all,
Capers as if he cared not for a fall;
But it is too tedious to recite the rest,
They that were part oath Crowd can tell you best.
O how they shrunk into each others arm!
It Was a great mercy, that there was no harm^:
Their bodies twined, and tounges lay never s^ill,
As if the rout had been a twistring mill.
In deed the Mayor, and all the skarlet Donnes,
The bells too, and the thunder thumping Gunnes.
Had been your entertainment; but of late,
It Is superstition and grown out of date,
Nor had I thought to have writ, but your advance.
Constraindmee, Orpheus. plays, and trees must dance
I am created post by my Theme,
Like Memnon's statute by Apollos,. beam.
To the worshipful A. D. his Majesty's Physician Crossing the Seas.
ACcept his sad farewell, Sir, who here sings,
As ^ying Swans do at ^canders springs;
Farewell, Step there; O how the surges rise,
unto a brynit springtide from mine eyes?
As if yet hope were left that these salt flows
Might lend you Sea room, or else drown my woes:
And least you want wherewith to fill your sail,
My sighs swell up themselves into a gale;
If still be-calm'd, may you at least yet find,
The proverb true in this, my Words, are Wind.
Mean time I shall to A^olus repair,
That he would breath you wind enough and fair;
And then, to him commands the wavye Court,
To chyde the Dolphins from their ominous sport;
Next i will entreat the azure-mantled skies,
To let their smiles, be your fair auguries;
And may your thankful patients, beg of heaven
Health for you, Sir, who health to them have given
If among us to rearrive you please,
VVeel say, Phoebus comes from the Antipodes.
If your return though, be denied by fate;
Live Nestors years in Avicenna's state.
And Aesculapius-like confirm the Earth
With faith, that you are of immortal birth;
This boon I beg, Sir, and this only one,
Now, and then, think on your poor Stevenson.
To the City of CRACOVIA.
NOt out of Love, but fear of following evils,
The Moors of India sacrifice to devils;
So we to Norwich did invite Sir Thomas,
Only for this, to get him further from us.
To Mr. R. C. upon The Mourning Ring he sent me.
WHat, shall I laugh, or weep? this present, does
Present me a necessity of both:
How can I choose but smile, when I behold
My lucky stars laden with orient Gold?
But when I see it through black Curtains peeping,
Ah me! I think, etc. fall a weeping,
My passions fight and flow, and it appearrs,
Excess of joy, as well as grief, finds tears;
Whilst I thus rapt Narcissus-like epsy
Sun shine, and showers, play April in mine eye;
See how the Gold be peeps in sable shrouds,
Like Phoebus posting through the raine-swolne clouds;
And well the simile holds, the black present
^is setting, and the Gold his orience.
Here night and day Luna and Sol appear,
A^ if true Aequinox were only here.
Nor should I much mistake the Aequ^page,
To calt the golden, in the iron age:
I may go boast, I on my finger wear
The pythiest Hyeroglyphick of the year:
For I can summer in thy posie read,
And winter to the life in thy deaths head:
Pretty, and precious gift, it shows to me
Both purity, and perpetuity;
For whilst the Gold thy pure love does commend,
The Ring instructs my thanks to know no end.
To -- upon his giving me a Library.
HOw say you now? think you, I do not please
My friend well, to obtain such gifts as these?
VVha^ a whole Library at once? who looks
Upon it, must conclude me in his books.
To a Gentlewoman, that refused. A very rich Suitor, because he was not very
handsome.
Fair Cosen, let me in this case advise,
To quitt your fancy: and give reason eyes:
They that choose apples by their looks, are often
Foild in their hopes, and for their folly scoft.
It Is not the outside makes the man, Alas
A man's a man, had he no Nose on's face.
Your Lapidaries not unoften note,
The ^arest Jewel in a ragged Coat:
This Gentleman whose double duty serves you,
For ought I know, is one that well deserves you.
Forsake your eyes here, and trust to your ear,
He Is sober, steady, staid, and fit to steare
In this tempestuous age: hard hap betides
Such vessels as have green heads for their guides:
But you shall ride amidst proud waves sccute,
He being Pilot, And you Cynosure.
I could both name the parties, and the places,
Had bargains foul enough of the fair faces,
Nor yet is liking always beauties child,
Some have more wit then so to be beguild:
Beauties a blossom, and so quickly fled,
It Is scarce possessed, ere it be vanished:
Strike while the Irons hot Cos. least you find
The Proverb true, occasions bald behind.
To me the man seems passing lovely, Tush,
His beauty's inward, Good w^ne needs no bush
He Is rich enough to make the world his debtor
Love, and lay hold then seldom comes a better.
I had not writ thus much, but that I know
Your parents own it, and advise you so.
Whose directory pleasure but ^ullfill,
And you do well, though you do nere so ill:
Read, and revise these lines, sweet Cos. least you^
Whilst you your self make fast, your self undo.
To a fair Lady.
MADAM;
HArd is the task to write to such as you,
For if I give you but what is half your due,
Such as are unacquainted with your worth;
Are apt to say, I highly set you forth;
Whilst these that know you, must conclude, with me,
Your praise above the strain of flattery.
They that nere saw the glory of the Sun,
Would think the Moon lights only parragon;
So fuch, to whom scarce a good face is known,
Measure your beamfull beauty by their own;
Whilst, saw they but your face, As in amaze
Theyd worship, what they wonder I so praise:
Could you (fair soul) but parcel out your graces,
There were enough t'^nrich a thousand faces
And leave your self such store, as (though your light,
Have made them stars) you would still be Queen of night,
But hold my Muse, my paper is half done
And I have scarce her story yet begun.
But that would ask (to tell you what I think)
A world of paper, and a Sea of Ink.
Of Ink said I? Ink alas! would make that,
A spotted fame, that is immaculate,
No, I will rather never write at all,
Then mention her, who is all-sweet, in gall:
He that the Bow-bell of her praise would ring,
Must pluck a pineon from a Seraphins wing.
And write in Nectar till her fame appears
An anthem to the music of the spheres
But to leave what only my wish effects,
My fancy to what is feasible directs;
I Will rob the Swan of her white quill and then
With the same penknife that I make my pen,
I Will lance my purple veins, and therewith write
Her story, like her self in red, and white.
And when my blood has all forsook my veins,
Let me but be her Martyr for my pains.
To my Mistress.
SO love me ever all ye powers divine;
As I love her, whom hope persuades is mine:
Rich then and happy were I, thus to win
A beauty, Heaven without, and Heaven within,
Had I the world (as Alexanders heir)
Left me, a patrimony high, and fair
Enough yee'd think, yet I for all this store,
Except she whom I love, love me; am poor.
The middle Sister.
FAIREST,
D^me nature seems to make your Sisters stand
As handmaids, that attend on either hand;
To right, or left I turn not, Poets say
The middle is the best, and safest way.
I view the Temples, and I find them three,
But still the middle Temple goes for me:
Your Sisters are like banks on either side,
Whilst you, the Crystal stream, betwixt them glyde;
It Is light at morn, and when the day declines,
But yet, the brightest Sun at midday shines:
Methinks your Sisters stand on either side,
L^ke Bride-maids, you in middle like a Bryde,
Doubtless in you the middle grace I see
O^ this side Faith, on that side Charity;
My fancy seems to dictate to my sense
A Cawsway, twixt two Ditches or its fence.
The smooth and silent floods, in middle flow,
B^^ ^he shores murmur; cause thwaters low.
And now I tell you, but what the world knows
Full well, betwixt two Netles sits a Ros^.
The joviall Journey.
UP Phoebus up, and guild the horizon,
For love, and beauty, are a progress gone.
Stand not to gaze, least thy too curious eye,
A fairer Daph^e, in this Coach espic;
And thou great Prince of winds vouchsafe to us
The gentle gusts of sweet breathed Zepherus:
Come ye auspicious Choristers of the air,
Let these fair Ladies see ye p^omise fair.
Cherp up (sweet Siren of the woods) nere fear
Here is no Tereus, come be merry here.
And if the dust, it self too proudly reares,
Some gentle Cloud rebuke it with its ^eares:
Let the Earths green Plush, and floscular stars out vye
The brighter Orbs, of the first warning sky;
Let every b^ook present so^e pretry toy,
And every hedge be lined with travelers joy,
Grant fates, no inauspicious hare may chance
To cross, ye, through unlucky ignorance;
But as the morning, so the evening may
Answer the beauty (...) a glorious day.
Then Sun, Wind, Birds, Rain, Earth and flowers conspite
A harmony, next the ^elestiall Quire.
And when (...) meet, be your embraces such
As lovers, that each ^inu^s absence grutch.
Whilst ^ll that see, admire your greeting kiss,
As if the body met the soul in bliss.
To my Rival. Presenting my Mrs. Gold upon Her Journey.
How now (my heart of gold) what mean these fleeces?
Have broke thy heart and and given it her in pieces?
Or did thou throw thy gold into her lap,
A ransom for thy ignorant escape?
Would else be in the list of same enrolld,
To court thy love like Jove in shours of gold.
State-policie in faith, they wine the Towers,
That shoot gold bullets at the Governors.
Thou have good reason too, to use this sort,
Of golden battery, to so strong a fort,
Beielve me, this was a well covered bayt,
You hope, she will in loves exchang repay't.
I hope so to, faith it was sauey sport,
Should you not get her portion mortgaged fort.
T'may be you were in fear to loose it, and
Made an assurance office of her hand.
Or did the charmefull sparkles of her eye,
Dant your faint heart int' a delivery?
Go charge the country then, for it was done
I am your witnese beetween sun, and sun:
You that your gold thus to a virgin yield,
Doubtless a bush had robbed you in the field;
How if some theif should steal away her heart,
And of her portion take thy gold in part?
This were a double misery, for then you
Loose both your gold, and your adventure too.
Tmay be you think you have good anchor-holde,
And in her pockets bottom thrust your gold.
Maidens are mutable, be wise, beware,
The wind, and waves, not more unconstant are.
But you have balanced her with gold, least she
Should suffer shipwreck in her levitie:
Faith you abuse your selie and her much more
To give her money; Give it to a whore;
For I must answer for her, she don't carrye,
The needy garb, of one that is mercenarye:
I wonder she would take, But it is an old
Proverb; that none but madfolke refuse gold.
But all the world (should you be now deseited)
Would say, A fool and's money is soon paited
Upon a Porter Catchi^g a Gentlewoman as she past by him.
Last night a Porter, standing by the pie,
At Algate, saw a handsome less com by,
To whom he s^^w with all his speed to court her,
I wonder, for she did not call a porter.
Still he did hugg and in his arms enfold her,
As if he meant to heave her on his shoulder:
He wound her so, a stander by strait swore,
Some gentleman had sent him for a whore.
She called him rogue, and sure she called him right
Yet he, she should not go, swear by his light
Porter said I take he^de, though she be not,
Too heavy, firrah, she may be too hot.
Besides she is of your trade, And free, she bears
As many burdens as you for your ears:
Though with this difference, she bears her pack,
Upon her belly^ you upon your back.
Ye both wear baggs, distinguist the same way,
With Friars she of black, and you of gray;
You have a pad, and she, for ought I saw,
Was like enough to have a pad ith straw:
You have a Cord you do about you cast
She had a cordie robe about her wast:
Both have your aprons. Say you have a frock,
So she li^es that will rhyme to it a smock.
She Is called upon, and calls upon her too
Sometimes a Porter such a knave as you.
But I perceive you well whereto she ply' de
And had the fit come on you now to ^ide:
If not, you are a lasi^ looby right,
To struggle with a burden was so light.
At a Tapsters wedding.
FAith J will tell you now a pr^ttie trick,
This ^apster, gat the wench ^ust in the nick,
She was; stay there! But why should I be loath
To tell the truth? she was, as light as froath:
Hence I perceive, the Proverbs som^^mes crossed,
For she that is light, does not lie uppermost.
She had been broacht a hundred times before,
No matter, he had tapt as many more:
She Is modest though, as I Am an honest man
She blushes, just l^ke any C^dar ^an.
And cause she will be a smi^king (...), she swear
she will snatch the smiles from all the laughing bear,
But here is enough of her, lets kiss the Cup
And if her Husband won^: we^^ step her up.
As for his part, he was so crank, his gear
Out of his Codpeice, flew like bottle bear.
But she hoping the worst did clap her thigh
Close to the -- that nere a d^op went by.
She was a thrifty wench he got from Wopping,
That thought it sin to loose the least tap-droping.
I heard her say my self though he should fill her
Up to the brim, he should not want a Killer:
She told him of his wenching too, and swore
Unless he left it, she would quit his score;
Nor should he ramble up and down the Town
Nor draw through an^ Fasset but her own
Faith if you do, (and out an Oath she lashes)
I Will find you out among your balderdashes)
And if you^ tralops must not be forborne,
I Will break your pots: And make you drink in horn.
But t'end the jest adding one more t'out pass it
See here the Spiggit's marrig^d to the Fasset.
Summer.
SNakes cast their skins, and they are young ag^^
Summers the substance, winter the cast skin:
Summer is Youth in sprightly Aequipag^,
Winter's decrepit crasie, useless Age.
Sol's aureat be^mes so guild the worlds vast stage,
Twere small mistake, to calt the golden age;
Summers all praise, what need it then a Poet
to speak it fair? since who know naught else, know it
I might imbellish summers sweet complexion,
Call Winter death; Summer the resurrection.
And when ^y tale with all ^y art is told,
What will the world conclude my news, but old?
Nor is it more then children use to say,
A sum^ers' evening, is a winters day.
But I Will abruptly off, and what I have,
Begun absurdly, as absurdly leave;
Least I go scale the spheres, and blind with light
Set in a cloud and simply say, Good night:
In praise of winter.
Honor and Age inhabit the same sphere,
Winter is the antiquity of the year:
Grave signiour Hyems, so his hoary pate,
And snowy beard, denounce his aged state.
See but how like a statlye traveller,
Northward he comes; Autumne's his harbinger,
That bids the trees unmask, unueyle their creasts.
That he may read submission on their breasts.
Whilst their green offspring lowly fall, to greet
The potent presence of his stable feet.
The gaudy banks pack up alas! here comes
No midwise April, to unteeme their wombs.
Nay here the showered down waters, stand amazed,
Rivers are Chrystallin'd, Neptun^s hall is glazed,
Spouts have their pendents, paultry thatch receives
Translucent Crystal, And adornes his Eaves.
Iaeda's a fable, but I here presume
To justify, that Jove descends in plume.
And that the stupid Earth may know he comes,
The Heavens send down whole showers of Sugar plums.
Whilst streets are paved with Pearl: Let summer boast
Such pomp, such cates, and all my praise is lost.
But here is not all of winter: you shall (...).
^
How (...) Ae^lian tugge,
But (...) white ^ugge?
We may (...) he can
Enjoyne the (...) a man.
The saucie Dus^ (...), and mire,
Merits no mention, (...) are higher:
S^^mer breeds surf^^^, and infects the bl^ud,
Winter is h^ile again, and makes all good:
Is beauty of est em? then winter can
Boast, he abstergeth Su^mers freckled ^an:
Ladies so spruce to captivate men's sight,
Borrow March winds to make that sprusenesse white.
Winter makes men courageous, who dare
Dance upon Th^tis lap at midsummer.
In Summers days even length, and laziness meet
Winters are short, The Proverbs, short and sweet.
There Is none so bad to be called dog-dayes here,
No no we move not in so base a sphere:
No scorching Sun offends, any man may
With a good faggot make a Summers day.
What entertainment to a winters toast?
What Christmasse, pray, can June or July beast?
Summer alas has no Aeolian breath,
To rescue his perishing souls from death,
Flame-colourd hearth, even ^eady to expire,
Looks pale as ashes, Sol puts out the fire,
Trees strait are lopt then and their verdant locks
Borrowed, to border o^t the Chymnie stocks;
Set out with trunks of trees, stumps, arms and all,
As if the Chymnie were some Hospital:
In winter time the hea^th stands alter wise,
And men with hands erected sacrifice.
Whilst in a round the Priests of Bacchus sing
Ingenious Anthems, to their grape-crownd King:
In winter men at cold meat make a pish,
In Su^mer they are glad of such a dish;
Winter has boyld, and baked, and roast, Ala^!
Su^mer turns men, as men do beasts, to grass.
VVinter makes wars of tease, who would not that
If peace and plenty have no praise, then whnt?
I might enlarge my self, but thus far may,
Suffice to travel on a winters day.
Who likes not this, a gods name let him run
Out of Gods blessings, into the warm sun.
Upon Yorkshire Ale.
1.
POx take your Yorkshire Ale,
It did so firk my ta^le
That that I had like beshit me;
Besides, so damnd a tumor
Postest its divellish humor,
As it had almost split me.
2.
Now hang thee tike of York,
Thou giv'st us neither Cork,
Nor yet convenient wedges;
And know thy wily wort,
Is wont to make us squort
Over a thousand hedges.
3.
That men should sit and fuddle
In such a sink of puddle
And to, and fro so put her;
Just such Ambrosia sucks
A Company of Ducks
Out of a filthy gutter.
4.
For my part I Will get bay't
And in my belly lay't
Having drunk this dirty flood:
What ere my palate feels,
There cannot but be Eels
Where there is so much Mudde.
5.
No marl' such nappie stuff
As falling Band, and Ruff
Throughout the City, haunts it.
When I drink any more,
Then call me such a whore,
As i will call her that launts it.
6.
Doubt less the men are mad
Where water may be had
That soop such nasty gore.
Some called a remedy
Against the stone, but I
Have laid a stone at door.
To humor palats, But for mine alone
Give me your dealing and your drink right down.
Have at thee then (my boy) for a blyth pull,
VVeel wrap our noses up in thy Lambs wool:
And when our Cups advance a lofty h^mme,
We Will hum thee up Io^n of Jerusalem.
The Postscript. To the precedent Poem.
BUt what? your angry, it was not my intent
To slay the Lamb: or hurt the innocent.
VVhist! whist for shame! least people as they pass
Say, Look ye there dwells Ba -- lam and his Ass.
Come Jack be wise and thy self sober keep
And thou shall be mine Host, when they are Sheep
Tell them the reckning twice twelve pence a peece's
J'le warrant thee that thou shall get their fleeces;
And let them then come, and laugh thee to scorn
When thou have turned them out, like sheep new shorn.
In Commendation of Yorkshire Ale.
WOman be nimble, and let us see thy craft,
My early stomach craves a mornings draft;
Bring me that Indian pot whence I may sipp
The Nectar of black Cleopatras lip:
To my right well recko^d host at the Lamb.
MJne host, or shepherd which is fitter title
Since you keep theep, though in the barley pytle;
They say, there is many a well provided ram
Comes to turn of his horn with your sweet Lamb
The fallow Ewes when the Tups are fled,
Set toot, and swear they will drink all weathers dead.
This though, is much complained of, that you keep
An old brown Curre to worry all your sheep.
Nay more, as some report that have been there,
There is a kind of magic in your beer:
And Hocus pocus draws it too, or else
It turns your sheep to foxes first, And then
A game at Noddy, There Is your sheep again:
Sure Circe taught thy Cup this cunning charm
To metamorphose with so little harm.
But stay! you keep a Scriv'ners shop me think
Where pipes for pens, and best bear, serves for Jnk;
Y-have clarks too, and industrious ladds, for some
Run, making of Indentures all the way home.
Else bedding with the Lamb, they rub their eyes
And shake their Ears, and with the lark they rise.
Jle come and see thee faith mine host, perhaps
Bring thee as many guests, as thou have taps.
Then wormwood Succory, Scurvy Grass, and Sage
With Lemon, shall advance in Aequ^page
The marrow of Malt: where the nut brown toast
Smiles in the flowrie Ale, whose mirthfull host
Makes me turn Mariner, and hither sail
To court the confines of this famous Ale.
This noble Ale, this most substantial liquor,
That chears the Stade, and makes the Genious quicker,
Idiots a s^^p board sick, accuse the Seas,
Whilst their own foul stomachs are the disease
So fools pick quarrel with pure cleansing Ale
Because it does Sir reverence wring their ta^k:
Me thinks this Ale, and the old wise agree,
So well, as Hero and her Nurse I see.
Would but good fellows meet, our daily club
Should act the Sisters at the Danaan tub:
But stay, I fear, while I thus idolize
The shrine of Ale, I but enhance the price,
Be therefore this sufficient to be said,
Alive it is Ale, And Aqua vitae, dead.
Upon a hungry gutted Porter.
NO marvel Chapman falls so to the scrap, she first, and best part of his name
is chap:
Which if a man but spell, he easily can
Perceive, more letters go to Chap, then man.
Yet this is all but mirth, although perhaps
He may conceit I take him on the Chaps.
Well if I do, my frolic is to swap
My nimble brain, against his nimble chap.
Yet this by way of leave i will add, a more
In sitting poster never kept a door.
How should he open it? for he never hears
If it be true, The belly has no ears.
E. B. To his noble friend, that gave him a new pair of Boots, and Gloves.
-- Ods foot.
I Never drew on a compleater Boot;
The blushing top makes me top gallant, and
Me thinks I do on beds of Roses stand:
Nay even the very legs do seem to owe
Their orient tincture to the Sons of Bow:
Nor can I think but Iove-Lov'd-Io's hide
Was purchased, to complete this Ocrean pride:
Who having been the thunderers Curtesan,
Blushes to crib it with the Calves of man:
The wax was borrowd from the Lillyes bed,
And the three Sisters span, and cut the thread.
The Boot in the exactest mode does set,
All (in a word) from top to toe is neat.
As for the Shoemaker I can only tell,
For one he never saw, he fits me well.
Your Gloves too make me spruse, as John a Gant
Protest (sweet Sir) you are right Cordevant,
For you have given me Boots, and Gloves to boot
What shall I say? you have bound me, hand and foot.
A. B. to his shoemaker.
Sir look to 't I shall reduce your pride;
Rip up your roguarie and tew your hide.
My weather long shall apt a time for th'n^nce
To strcatch the latchets of your logger sconce.
You were too high ith'instep, I Am afraid,
Your lostinesse will soon be under laid;
Crispine coucht in a shoemakers disguise,
Cause none so base to cheat inquiring eyes.
Yet to sit me should Crispin come to do it,
Crispine, by Jove he came but to my foot.
And do thou wretch to reach this head of mine,
Muster thy brussels as the Porcupin^
Her quills' presumptious trash, I could afford,
To send the challenge to the cutting board;
New vampe your manners; and more modish be,
Least Peter streatch you on a cross graind tree:
Where being once set up, tis'ten to one,
You Will find it harder to come off, then one:
Villian avaunt, henceforth nere lock to have
The lengh of my foot, since you have played the knave.
Noe noe, I view your bill and there I see,
The very place where my shoe pinches me;
But make your market pray of what is past,
Fellow beleve't of me y've had y'our last:
And that the world may see in every line,
I firt thy foot, as thou have fitted mine.
Thus I in fine translate thee, go, extend
Thy base spun thread, to make a Cobblers end.
Upon his giveing a pair of shoes to get the former paper answered.
Silly, and sense less, knocked there heads together,
To sorge a foolish answer, knowing neither.
To whom, nor how, only they would b'lurt forth.
Some thing, that men might see their want of worth.
I Will bray you in my mortar fools, and then,
Make ye a pastime for the worst of men.
Incorparate ye vessels, base absurd,
With Album Graecum, and the Devils turd.
Compound ye up into a pocky pill,
With C. and G. and D. and Sarseperill,
And Sassafras, whilst all that see ye, shall
Say ye are rogues Alexipharmacall.
I hope it shall suffice, when I have brought,
Your bodies into atoms, worse then naught;
Some fishwives kissed your fancies, taught ye prat^
The rabulous dialect of Billings gate.
And yet I liked your tail timber for it,
Came Just in time as I had list to sh --
Sans Ceremonic then end these Jarres,
You and your Poet after kiss mine A --
But did thou think up to reveng to climb?
By a poor mercenary, hacking ryme, Or that thou could thy letherne
purse-strings stretch,
Unto the latitude my brains would reach?
Away, poor fool! when my keen satyrs come,
Off with your hat, and scrape your answer, mumme.
Should thou buy lines, to answer me thou fopp
I Would write, till't cost thee all the shoes ith shop.
Alice Goffe. A poor woman taken stealing soape.
Why how now woman? what is the news? belike
You serve'd the grocer but a slippery trick.
It Was very cheap, nay marry you must thrive,
If we pay ten, and you get under five.
But stay they say the grocer turned his eyes,
And you stole, both the custom, and excise:
And well enough you did, but a rope
The mischeife lies, you should have left the soap.
You made wash way with it, being but a reach,
But have a care, ith end 'tmay cost a streatch.
You know the broverb, it is as true as old,
If the one chance to slip, t'hother, will hold.
Alas you never could have stoll'ne a badder,
Commodity, Soap brings you to the ladder.
You think to have't with a wet finger, but
A cleanly theife had better be a slut.
Come, Come, stay the hoggs leisure pray, I hope
As good as you does wash with Lincoln shrie soap,
If you steal soap to make your clothes so fine,
You le bring your self, as well as them, to th'line.
Yet I confess, it was pity goody Goffe,
Stealing good soap, you came no cleanlyer of.
To my Noble Friend.
THis afternoon your rideing Boots and bands,
Your good gray cloak, and Gloves came to my hands;
The Gloves were trim, the Cloak most purely feels,
The bands, and Boots have tide me neck and heel.
To the same Gentleman desiring my verses upon any price and on his sending me
a new Suit.
PRice? out upont! what price? pray do you think?
A piece of paper, and a little ink?
If you like our poetic merchandise,
Traffic, and your acceptance is the price.
For me I think it even in justice meet,
So long as you find Boots, that we find feet:
Sir in a word, your love returns with ours,
Our suit accepted was, and so is yours.
To a School master. In excuse of his Scholar G. Green.
THis duskie morn the youth was overseen.
Pardon good Sir, in truth the boy is Green.
To my valued friend: A New Years gift.
HAd I but Mydas Chymick tuch,
My new years gift should now be such
Europ should it admire: But I
Talk of Larks in a falling sky;
In stead therefore of hopeless pelf,
Deyne but acceptance, and my self.
Am your oblation, but alas!
How shall this gift for current pass?
Since what I here present unto you,
Being given you long a go^ I owe you;
Since then our gifts prove empty dishes,
Weel furnish them with wholesome wishes:
Our first be this, where ere you come;
May you but view, and overcome;
Weed wish you younger brothers wit,
But that we see y'abound with it.
May she that moves your amorous thirst
Be wounded, and your pris^er first;
And let her unconcealed fires
Foment your temperate desires,
May favoring heaven, lend her no rest
On any Pillow but your breast;
And when glad Hymen's holy twine,
Has clapped her Lilly hand in thine,
Then let thine arms at once enfold
Fair Hellens face, and Danaes Gold:
May all her care, and study be,
To love, and be beloved of thee;
And to eternize mutual favor,
H^avens make her such as thou would have her
I envy, any foes shall make ye,
Be this their curse, A Good year take ye.
ALE.
IS this that Ale to which the Dyers flew
So fast, to wadd their Copper noses blew,
Bidding old stingo Cutthroat bear, adieu?
Then give us Ale.
Is this that jolly juice, those bowling bratts
Soakt in, And on their shoulders set their fatts
With Rains-heads, spite of Rainbowes in their hats?
Then give us Ale.
Is thi^ that Yorkshire stuff did so confound;
And send a way the Weavers shuttle crowned,
That they could neither find nor feel the ground?
Then give us Ale.
Is this that temple, where the weavers lay
To meet the merry Merchants, day by day,
And double Ale their single stuffs away?
Then give us Ale.
Is this that so much talked of Northren hum,
For which both simpletons and s^ges come
Is this that Lantatan -- tanta? so -- but mum.
Then give us Ale.
Is this that Ale that makes you dyers be
So often from home? pray tell me where were ye?
Should all be hanged that from their Colors flee
Then give us Ale.
Is this that same that did so much besot
The toasted Comber, as he quite for got
His own, And now calls for the other pot?
Then give us Ale.
Yea give us Ale, for now I find it true,
That Merchants, Weavers, Combers, Diars too,
And all the world, this liquor turns true blew:
Then give us Ale.
As for your Poet his unfeyned wishes
Are, that the Ocean were such Ale as this is,
That ye, and all true trouts might drink like fishes.
Then give us Ale:
And for ol'd Margerie that Northern minks,
For my part, such Ale as, she brews, she drinks.
A Visit.
LAst Fry day, to my neighbors house J slept,
To s^e what Hospitallity he kept;
Soon I espid his Chimnie like a Maiden
In the green sickness, with her color fading,
Blushlesse, and bleath, only herein they sever:
This a numme Palsy has, and that a Fever:
Neighbor said I, your Chymnies to be let
Why (Sir) quoth he, you see no bill ont yet;
Well then, said I, to put you out of doubt,
I guess so, cause your fire is going out.
To the World.
SOme say Deucalion made the World
Rep^pulous, with stones he hurld
Over his shoulder; On my life
It Is false, He hurld them ore his wife;
And ever since 'thas been the fashion,
So to hurl stones in generation.
O. P. to A. C. that oversold him a Horse to pay him at the day of his
marriage, he being contracted and to marry with in ten days: O. P. not
dreaming of any such matter.
WHy how now Iockie? what upon the Catch?
Had I suspected yours, 'thad been no match.
Look how the Proverbs crossed, you are hastily bent
To marry, yet not you, but I repent.
How have my stars my credulous hopes still crossed?
You ride a cockhorse: I must pay the Post.
Hence I the er^ame of the conceit epsy,
You were though close, as hot upon it as I;
But I had smelt you out, and stopped your course,
Had I had as much forecast as my horse.
What will men say to whom this storys told?
But I and not my horse, am bought and sold.
You have my money, and I hope with it
That I have paid for both your horse, and wit
Whilst it must be of all the world confessed,
On your side a good bargain, mine, good jest.
But don and past, I shall revive no strife,
But take my beast, Sir, as you take your wife.
Whom herein I presume I make my debtor,
You, double paid, must do your work the better:
In brief it is thus, neither better nor worse
You up, and ride, and I must hold your horse.
Whilst I conclude as sad experience teaches,
Not only you, but your horse over-reaches;
But 'twas so close, so slighly brought about,
Neither my horse, nor I could stumble't out.
Yet thus much might be spoken on my side,
Selling your horse, who'd think you meant to ride?
But it was my error to conceive you lackt
A Nag, your wife I hope found one well backed.
I might have looked him in the mouth I see,
Neither your horse, nor you ^re over free:
My bargain, Sir, was bad, and you have done me
Some injury with mine own horse t'out run me,
But yet if your civility extends
To this requirall, we are absolute friends;
Since you are he, whom I did so confide in,
You Will only lend me your old boots to ride in.
Upon the name of the same horse being called Butler.
BUtler! why that sounds draft horse, but I see
That thou can scarce draw thy legs after thee.
But yet thy crafty Master laid a ginn
And thou, and he, made shift to draw me in.
But Troy will tell thee these are things of course,
Synon could do it with a wooden horse.
Pseudo Poeta in a paper of false verses inveying against Tantalia for her
lyeing tales.
SHall I condemn Tantalia, and not you?
Her tales were false, your verses are not true.
Be gentle pray, you seem to have forgot
The proverb, whilst the kill upbraids the pot.
Come, ye are guilty both, of oversight,
Neither your verses, nor her tales are right.
Yea I could show you too as many slips
In your false feet, as in her faltering lip^;
But I excuse ye both, for you perchance
As well as she, did it in ignorance.
Veniam petimus dabimus que.
Upon -- his Picture Prefixed to his Almanac.
WHat base aspect is this? did thou devise
This haggy look, to be thought weather wise?
Gypsies do just the same, they get an ill
And counterfeit complexion, that is their skill.
But thou, as thine own patron did advance
This front; A lie had need of countenance.
Whence, by the by, no wiseman undertakes,
The patronage of any almanacks.
Yet I durst swear, there is, if truth were known
Nothing in thine, but the fools face thine own.
That preface false and foul nor is that yet
Thine own, but like the rest they counterfeit.
But mumm, since I have lately understoode.
That you with the four hundred prophecy good.
Yet thus by way of caution, take heed how,
You tell a lie, And set a face on it too.
To Mr. -- upon his silly Epitaph in print.
But did thou pump this lamentable stuff?
P^trest the lines are pitiful enuffe;
The are somewhat shallow, but if thou would keep her
I mmortall, let the ingraver sink them deeper.
Thou, for the funeral, did thy verses sort,
A^ men do sugar plum's, some long, some short:
^Twas good luck though, they to thearse were pined
Else being lame tha'd sure been left behin'd:
But have a care, least with affront you greet.
The collenell, to send his wife a sheet;
Sure she was rich enough, to leave behind her
Other gate stuff, then thy foul sheet, to wind her.
Did thou intend this sing song to lier honor?
Thoud'st played the Sexton, and thrown dirt upon her.
Thou should have lighted too thy dismal dashes
At the next torch, and cried ashes to ashes:
Then, as her priest, or poet choose you whether,
Thou Would buried same, and body both together.
Had thou soopt sack, it would have brought thy chymes,
In better tune and tought thee loftier ryines.
But ah! thy, muddy fancy shows me clear.
Thou stood'st among the beggars, served with bear.
Thou Would better brook an elegiak jest,
And made an affidavit mortua est,
Ye^' it was well done t'avouch it with thy name,
Least honest men should suffer for thy shame.
Thou say thy belly shakd when thou did writ,
I think so too, the devil a verse was right.
When my ^ll fortune's dead, and I would laugh,
He send for thee to jerke an Epitaph.
Thou would be both a Poet, and Attorney,
Alas thy brains will not serve thee half the journey
Would be a poet and attorney? Hark
What I advise, learn first to be a clark.
But here is enough; he that writ this, he knows,
The muses never dwell in Silly House.
On the Gunpowder treason.
Now, fools! how think ye is there not a God?
Ask but your backs, that smart with your own rod.
When ye prepared this cup, did ye then think,
The d^egs should be the draught your selves must drink?
Doubtless, yee'd not have dig'd so deep a pit,
Had ye but dreamed your selves should hansell it:
Bow black was this eclypse? what meantt ye by it?
A flame, and yet no light; it was hell fire right.
Was ever vulcan matched with such a horn?
But he that sat in heaven laughed ye to scorn.
What at one blow both court and commons? pish
'Twas but a falsify, a Call gula's wish'
Yea but false fire, by heaven the touch hole was,
So stopped the flame could not to the barrel pass.
Blessed be the churches great protector for it!
'Twas ye gave fire, but we gave the report.
Infernal Angels sight with Gabriell,
And heaven it self seems undermined by hell.
But O how vainly the black brood of night.
Martial their mates against the sons of light?
Fear not Bethulin. Holoferenes shall,
Be dead drunk, and by his own fawehin fall.
Goliahs boasts are breathless, merciless Mydian^
Must buckle to the brandisht blade of Gideon.
We need not fear, nor care we though hell knock
Our temple's built on an impregnable rack;
Preserved by providence. Babells bratts may kick
But never move our heaven sixth candle stick,
It Is Rome must ruin Rome, it is not your ginnes,
Are able to ensnare us, but our sins:
Puff till ye pant again, alas! fond foe,
You do but ashes off our alters blow.
And whilst your hell^ hacht plots, your hate reveal
You don't extinguish, but inflame our zeal.
The wind, that shakes the boughs, fastens the root;
And you confirm us, whilst ye go about.
Thus to supplant us; ^ush! ye do but hence,
Endeare us to our God, for new defense.
But would you be revenged? then thus let't be,
Plot so, as he that made the eye, may not see.
To the right honorable the C. of D^RSET, Promising a Gentleman her (...) in
marriage.
MADAM,
THe charmefull language from your lips distilld
My ravished ears with heavenly music filled.
Had I led Love unto your Neeces heart;
And praid him there transsix his keenest dart
His being blind would have left him exempt
From penalty, And charged the whole attempt
On my account, whose boldness durst aspire
(Prometheus like) unto celestial fire.
Twere secriledged, and just such, to bereave
Dia^^ of a Numph, without her leave.
Or steal a star from off his region
Whilst Phebe slept with her Endymion.
I had been fellon to your honors blood
And stolen a cignet from that royal flood.
Had not your grace first given me my book
The golden Scepter of your gracious look.
But now with humble confidence I resort
To this fair stream, having your warrant for it
Only let me beseech your honor that
You Would ratify it with a second date.
Then being armd with this encouragement
My next address is to the Lady bent:
My fortunes balance, on whose only breath'
Depends the sentence of my life, or death.
If such a match felicitate my life,
I Will treat her as ^y Mistress though my wisse.
I Will study what may please her, and contend,
With fate, to make her happy to the end.
As for you gracious madam) deigne me still,
The clear beams of your ladyships good will:
So shall I be assured what I commence.
Shall ripne in such sun light influence:
Mean while no thought shall from my breast arise
But what I dare present as sacrifice.
Thus J return my self to both, whilst she.
Possess my heart; your grace commands my knee.
The weavers Memento mori.
AN honest weaver willing to make suer
His soul and body with arts ligatur.
Betook him to his trade, and having got
The knack on it, knit them on a weavers knot.
But death a crafty merchant found a brack,
And let him plainly see it would hold no tack,
Here Is stuf^e quoth he, alas it will scarce be worth
The looking on, when J have laid it forth.
Where is the fresh gloss, is this the lively red?
You spoke of? tush it is ^aded, fled, and dead.
Alack and well ^ day the weaver said,
How dearly have for this color paid?
And yet it gives you no content, but J.
Poor ^ must let, must leave my work and die.
Ah! me impartial death where thou do come,
Thou either cutst of, or concludst the thrum.
My beam is strong, but strengh will not prevail
Golyah's spear stout as my beam did fail:
My nimble shuttle flitting here, and there,
Presents my life's in stable character:
Mark but how swift it to its exit tendes,
So fleetly fly we all unto our our ends:
It puts but forth, and at its port arives,
So does our death begin even with our lives.
My globe like wheel about its pole is hurld,
Just as the heavens are rapt about the world.
And turning to my filling boy behind me'
His winding pipes, does of my wind pipe mind me.
Jf he stand still J must not work, if the air,
Fill not my pipes my work will soon impair,
A constant motion to my trade belongs,
So nature has her loome, my breast, my lungs*
My blouds' her posting shutle swiftly flies,
Through the strait conduits of my arteries.
My purple veins her warping is, my hair
My tendons find, my nerves her tackling are.
My solid parts, my able bones are some,
Appointed beams, some holdfasts of her loome.
And thus in there own lomes do all men weav^,
And women too from cradle to their grave.
Nor cease we all above a minites breath,
Till we be turned out of work by death.
Thus from those instruments by which Jearnt
My livelihood, to dye I likewise learnt.
I look but on my eyes, And I can read,
In them the separation of my thread.
In laying of my colors, still I found,
The lowest, a memento of the ground.
The fashions teach me since they keep no stay,
The fashion of this world passesaway,
Come then and welcome death I have enough
Of this vain world, Its frail, and druggie stuff.
Can tempt mine eyes no more, come fetch me home
I Will give my life, for death; my loome for lome
To Constantia
Let others ply the oars t'wixt doubts and fears,
For I am past those rocks, those tides of tears.
My sullen star is fallen, warr's past, and I
Laiden with trophies of my victory.
How do I bless my fate that I did meet?
With one so (...), so faithful, and so sweet.
My humble knee bows henceforth to no shrine,
(Though Venus were thy rival) but to thine.
Happy my dearest, happy he may lie,
Under the tropic of thy gracious eye.
Nothing but death shall my firm faith remove,
Nothing but the cold flore shall cool my love.
The G^rdeon knot that could not be untied
By art, did Alexanders sword divide.
Our love knot's faster, nor shall arms, nor arts
Vnlink the chain of our united hearts.
The noon-eyd sun may chance run retrograde,
And as a Daphne follow his own shade.
Heaven may descend to earth, And earth aspire
To Heaven. And water be at peace with fire,
Fishes and fowls may change their elements,
And take a glory in their new contents.
But when I fail, but when I cease to love,
The center shall from its fixed base remove,
When I divid the thread our loves have spun,
The streams shall back upon there fountains run.
This I conclude a possibiltie,
J may forget my name; but never thee.
Ceres cickle; whether art thou gone.
See not our hopes into full harvest grown?
Come boonest ^acchus, come let us have a health,
To our best wishes; love has store of wealth.
View here our vintage, see our blessed increase,
Of swelling grapes that only want the press.
Have Hymen have, for we must find in you,
The end of our desires and verses too.
To Bovino.
You bull it Sir, as if you meant a prize,
With milo at the bovine exercise.
Push for ward^ your good motion Sir, you may,
Increase my landlords cornucopia.
But to speak naked truth they say that you,
Do not run to the bull, but to the cow.
Where you your self in manner of a bull,
Do give Europa her white belly full.
And as it is fit you should having gone halves
In getting, now you help to keep the Calves.
But have a care St. Stephens wide gates are near,
You Will run your self ou^ ere you be aware.
The FLEETS.
MY wishes greet
The English fleet
May no storms toss
The Harp and Cross
Smile gentle fate
Upon our State
Attend all health
This Common wealth.
The Navy of the Dutch
I all good fortunes grutch
Vantrump and his Sea forces
Shall have my daily curses
Upon the Dutch and Dane
VVait their eternal bane:
The Cavalering part
I vallew not a fart.
To adrunken Porter reeling into the Ring to wrestle with a Tailor.
HEy hey pot-valiant Porter, friend, I fear,
That you have somewhat more then you can bear.
You make me laugh to see you face and crack,
You puppie, I could bear you on my back.
Out of the Ring unless you were more stout:
The Tailor swears heel fling, or cut you out.
You stand so waving and so tottering,
As if there were an Earthquake in the Ring.
And eye the Tailor, as you would adore him,
You Are so devout you scarce can stand before him*
Do you not hear him say it shall go hard
But at the first touch he will turn up your yard*
Nor will he use a quarter of his strength
To measure all your quarters out at length.
See but his active stout, and able limb,
Porter I see you will never carry him.
Go wrestle with yond tree you dizzie crown,
More need to hold you up, then hu le you down.
Had you as many legs as any louse
The eyes of A^gus, Hands of Bryarcus,
All would not do it, for like Polypheme,
You would be run down in this drunken dream.
And in the turning of a hand be found
As sure as louse in bosom, on the ground.
Cord first his hands and feet, Then if you can,
Stand toot, and throw the ninth part of a man:
But your athletick art's not worth the trying
Go go a man may see where you have been plying
Brave sport, a Porter, and his fox turned loose
T'encounter with a Tailor and his goose
Thus I perceive it is fatal to us all
After a Justice cup to take a fall.
To a Brewer that promised me a Staggs Tongue, and dissapointed me.
NOw your A. sopick markets Sir, what ^ you will
Your self be Brewer, and make me the fool,
Faith Sir you should not need your word to break
I Am sure your beer wont make a Cat to speak*
Come come let us hat, without a tongue, I vow
That I will never speak good word of you.
Are you so politic to think by failing
Me of my tongue, you do prevent my railing?
Believe it not, Sir, I can cant my wrong
Like injurd Phylomel without a tongue.
Tongues are unruly members but I see
That you can rule yours, where it should befree.
Thus to be fooled, and bafled all a long,
Twould make one speak that had but half a tongue
But I perceive the reason now my friend
Your tongue is fast by the roots ith Chimnyes end.
I must for peace sake, pocket up this wrong
And keep my hands of, because you keep your tongue
The tongues a two edgd sword, and by the cup
Of my contempt, J scarce can put it up
May the Staggs horns be grafted on your head
Till ^ have the Stags tongue you promised.
My fury flames ^ fear J shall ere long
Like Dives need your coo^er for my tongue
For it begins J see to tear, and rend
Just like a woman's tongue that knows no end
Brewer be sure then that you stand aloof
Unless you bring your tongue under my roof
May be you will say, that you have none, but I
Am sure y't one have told me a divillish lie.
Thus am J feign to vindicate my wrong
Jn writing, because I have lost my tongue.
Iam pateris telis vnl^era facta tuis.
To this Brewer sending me half a dozen tongues.
We judge it just that we distend our lungs
In gratitude to you that sent us tongues.
We were a little too long tongued but you
Have made the tongues fit for our mouths Sir, now.
You seem to make us double tongud, for we
Expected but the half of what we see.
Our skill in Physic says the Staggs did die
Of fevers for the tongues were hot and dry,
But we to wash down such conceits, did make
Them swim in best Beer for the Brewers sake.
The beasts that lost them should not be more brute
Then we, if we should offer to be mute.
And where as wanting tongues we could allow
But paper praise, we cry a largess now.
Thanks then thrice bounteous Sir, Twere sin if we
should be tongue-tyde, where your tongues are so free.
To my strange Rival, servant to the Sister of my Mistress engrossing both
his own and mine.
The Sceene JackaNewbery.
You Are but a Jack by Jack a Newbery
To overcharge your self, to injure me
Be not so greedy, you two, and I none?
The time may come you will find enough of one
Neither had been of our desires bereft
Had you but had your right: and I the left,
Take heed you play not Aesops dog whilst you
Cover the substance, and the shadow too.
Trust me I must resent this injury
To ouerdoe your self to undo me
It Is baseness in the abstract greedy sinner,
Having thy belly full to crave my dinner.
But I perceive my talk is to no end,
For thou will burst thy self to starve thy friend.
This folly I have often in children known,
Either two pieces, or they will have none.
And here to the I may it well apply
It Is better fill thy belly, then thy eye.
Traitor and theif thou, strob'd me of my Jewel
But for the act I Would end it in a duel.
And faith I must too, come the worst event
That can it is but six months imprisonment.
And what is that to me since I must be
Her Prisoner even in height of liberty,
Say death ensue my challenge? shall I doubt
To dye for her, I can not live without:
Fail not this after noon then to meet me
Precise at four, at Jack a Newbery
Your weapons what you please; unless my fate
Oppose, i will send you home by Cripple-gate.
To a Gentleman that promised, but failed, to meet meeat an Ale-drapers.
NOw half an hour past six, and more, and fail:
Your friend, a second time? Come give us ale:
Are you all dissappointment, is your frame,
And fabric only such? Go fetch the same.
What! was I borne to wait? upon my soul
You wrong my patience; woman, fetch a Roll.
Your actions are unhandsome, without bail
Or mainprize, you are condemned, go fetch more Ale:
Shall we loose such a morning such fair weather?
Go (faith) even fetch a brace of pots together.
Look, if he come yet; we are sure of these?
Not yet in ^ight? go fetch the Holland Cheese,
What? you don't see him yet; well, we must call
For the other dish of Ale, to wash down all.
March in my black-brow'd pots; until ye stand
Before me, like an Ethiopian band.
Faith, I am now in, go to, try, if ye
Eclipsed beauties, be good leachery.
Come then, and give me lip room, shall I not
Kiss your black lips? why? Ladies kiss ^he pot.
Yes I must kiss, and friends: for it appears
My wrath has made me pull ye by the Ears.
Excuse me, pray, if I my self forgot,
For all the world can tell, I love the pot.
And therefore this does my content beget,
Though I had no luck, I had pot-luck yet.
To another Gentleman, that served me such a trick.
NOt yet, nor yet, and yet the Chymes done going?
Some Beer, and Sugar boy! come, let us be doing;
My expectations big, come fill away,
Hope is an Anchor, Anchors make us stay.
Hamborough like, until the Clock strike few
I mean to drink, videlicet till two;
Nay I Am resolved, if I be alive,
Since I am in, I will not out till five:
Then never grutch at what so e're you hear
I am no waiter, but where there is good cheer.
Sir, I am none of those, that can digest
Hopes false conception; Boy, fetch the best.
Hope is my issue, wherein I Am beguild,
You got it, pray, then answer for the child;
If not, you must, nay (faith) you shall, be witting
To pay the Nurse; And that is just two shilling.
To a Philomuse from whom I received a Paper upon the same Subject and by the
same Post.
WEll my good Cos. what the same fish
That J was frying? faith i would wish
To meet the oftener in my dish:
The proverbs, good wits jump, we both designed
The plot, yet neither knew each others mind.
But did not think it strange to see,
My part borne in thy Symphonie?
Tr ust me I marvelld much at thee,
Nay under Morpheus you complain your Muse,
Mine under Saturn, Not a pin to choose.
Well fare thy pen! recald to light
This plot, that else had slept in night;
(As dark as Faux his Lanthron) might
(Should we neglect such mercy) us include
In as high treason, deep ingratitude.
Ben godamercy for thy sonnet,
Let all Papists descant on it;
Whilst all Protestants veil the Bonnet:
But for this time i will let thy praise alone,
Least having writ too: I bespeak mine own.
At the Florists Feast in Norwich Flora wearing a Crown.
GEntlemen welcome Flora says so too,
For she had had no feast now, but for you;
Once in a year Appollo deigns a smile,
And gravity it self admits a guile;
Mechanics have their meetings, and as often,
As the snake tooth to tail turns, sing a loft.
Bibbers Carowse it to the god of Wine,
And every bird will have his valentine.
But I had saved my labor of the rest,
Had I first said, each Angel has his Feast.
How I have been neglected of late years,
To you, whom I my judges make, appears;
I shall not stand to tell you, since the seeds
Of discord, I am overgrowne with weeds;
And justly verify the jokes of those
Who say, between two nettles sits a rose.
Am not I Queen of Zephyr's family?
And my rich train, the earths embroderie
Are not my daughters the Olympian eyes?
Whose more then terrene luster, stellifies
The muddy face of Ops, courting your view
With colors, such as Ixis never knew.
VVitness the feilds, luxurious in my smile,
Presents the country every day a guile.
But tush! I come not here, to feast your eyes
With simples, such as rustic fopperies:
For what alas! are bottles blew, or white,
Or travelers joy, to citizens delight?
Hence, rustickes, hence ye petty plumes of May,
Though we^lth and beauty of the spring, away;
This feast fars not with you, noe these are they
Shall crown the triumph of fair Floras day:
The lilly and the rose, shall not be seen
Amongst us, though of flowers the King, and Queen.
North. humble violet, These, most lively, we
Can in the garden of your virtues see.
Hence goldy-locks, though hand maid of the sun,
Here Is no room for a pot companion;
Save such whose pots puffed up with richest earth,
Are the lucina's of a nobler birth,
The immortal Amaranth, shall not here be shown
Nor he, who fancied no face but his own:
These are our toys, our trifles, But now, we
Come to uncabinet our treasury.
The lusty and the country gallant too,
As pledges of our loves present we you.
The Spanish, French, and Welsh infantes we
Commend for their unmatcht variety.
The painted Lady, (think it though no taint
Unto her beauty, for it is natures paint)
The rare Diana, not she whom we find
In the wild woods, noe, this is garden kind;
On whom a man may look, and, smiles importune,
Without the danger of a horned fortune.
Next this sweet dame, There Is the Begrovenere,
The lovely Comans, The peerlesse Grampeere,
Speckemakers white, Taunies cumbers cornation
Are flowers which nothing want but admyration.
The murry, mullion, and the Baljudike
It Were plenteous want of wisdom not to like;
The fair Amelia, the Nymph Royal, and
The Turks cap, the adonis, the Le^grand,
The Hugonant, Appelles, and French m^rble,
Are such whose praise, a phylomel should wa^ble.
The Oxford had attended on the crown,
But that to tell you truth he is out of town.
Here Is the gray Hulo though, and white Cornation,
Would challeng more then common commendation.
The Vannocker, the black imperial
And Crystal too, the mirror of them all.
Both Wiggons, low, and lofty, Angelot
The Stranger, the Catewser, and what not?
The Duke of venice presence here you see,
And York the flower of the nobility.
Thus gentlemen has, Flora told her store,
If you can find a wish yet ask for more.
And yet (propitious soul) before you leave her,
She vows to bring you in the Prince's favor.
Had ye but met, when tulops were in town
She then had given you every one a crown.
But did I call the Lilly king of flowers?
Out of all doubt then these are emperors.
If those be stars then these are planets suer,
If these but shine; those simples are obscu^e.
Here Is color upon color, you may seek
A field to ma^ch the graces of one check:
But I shall add no more, save only thus,
That here Comparison is odious.
Ceres, and Bacchus,, promised to be here,
And the best brewer sent us in our bear:
Since thenere neither wants Beer, Wine, nor guest,
Flaggons and flowers shall flow at Floras feast.
Let chearly Cups crown a carowsing day;
A^brose shall broach, ye the Ambrosia.
Your eyes see Flora's heaven and that your ears.
May feast too, hark Apollo moves the spheres.
The Song.
STay! O stay! ye winged hours,
The winds that ransack East, and West,
Have breathd perfumes upon our flowers,
More fragrant then the Phaenix nest:
Then stay! O stay sweet hours! that ye,
May witness that, which time nere see.
Stay a while, thou featherd Syth-man,
And attend the Queen of flowers,
Show thy self for once a blyth man,
Come dispense with a few hours:
Else we our selves will stay a while,
And make our pastime, Time beguile.
This day is deignd to Floras use,
If ye will revell too, to night
Weel press the Grape, to lend ye juice,
Shall make a deluge of delight:
And when ye cant hold up your heads,
Our Garden shall afford ye beds.
An EPITAPH. Upon Oliver O dead drunk.
HEre lies a Lion, and a Lamb,
Sweet, and savage, wild and tame:
Courteous, careless, Poor, and proud,
Man, and no man: Little, and loud:
Childrens May game; fine, for lorne,
Courtie^s consort: Commons scorn:
Kind, and currish, would ye know
Who I mean? it is Oliver O,
That companion base and boon,
Sets and Rises with the Sun:
Thus in brief his exerci^o
He pipes, dances, and he dies,
And when passing we can tell;
For he rings out his own knell.
Upon his second time being dead drunk.
Lo here,
Dead as the bear,
Was drawn last year:
And Coffind up,
In a lost Cup,
Lies, little heart O,
Who like a fart O,
Did now depart O,
It Was ruff,
And with a puff
Out went the snuff.
Alas! how soon
It Is after noon?
This morning he O,
Was company O,
For thee, or me O.
and took
Ahe Spanish smoke,
Into his poke,
As if he meant
Sir, by consent
To tune his pipe O,
But being ripe, O,
Began to type O,
But P -- O,
No more but so;
It Is Oliver O
Lets oversee
This escape for he
The truth to tell O
Till he was mellow,
Was a good fellow;
And shall to morrow morning make's approach
As quick, and lively, as the fresh abroach.
An Epitaph upon a Weaver.
HEre lies a Weaver, whom that Turk
And tyrant, death turned out of work.
Poor fellow he is gone, what though?
He Is out of bonds would I were so.
Alas he sold Chamelion ware,
By which he saved scarce ought but air.
Gone, quoth hee^! pray how should he stay?
Such gain will drive us all away.
Well, it was a sad and sudden change,
And yet to me it is nothing strange*
For trading's dead, and wares will give
No price at all, how should he live?
An Epitaph. Dedicate to the Memory of Dr. Ed. Cook.
UNsluce your Captive floods; what, can ye keep
Your eyes from tears, and see the Marble weep?
Burst out for shame, or if ye find no vent
For grief, yet stay and see the stones relent;
Jf still you can forb^are; weep then to see:
Your stupid hearts more stone, then Niobe.
On goodwife Plain.
Here with out either welt, or guard,
Lies goody Plain in the Church yard:
Fresh in our memoryes, till the next rain,
Setle the earth again, down plain.
On W. G. A great swearer but little liar,
Will, the swearer's dead and gone,
Whether? you may guess anon.
Say he is inheaven J dare not
Jn that sacred place they swear not.
Where then? not in hell, no doubt,
For heed swear the devil ou^,
What must then become of him,
Does he neither sinck nor swim;
Heavens forbid, wel'l judge the best,
And conclude his souls' at rest.
Of his oaths, he did repent him,
And his conscience do'unt torment him.
And he shall (heavens mercy craved)
By Gods blood, and wounds be saved
In memoriam Roberti Dey Pharmacap. Norv.
Arts Parramour is dead, that men may see,
Nature has no^ hold of eternity.
O that my tears were legible that J,
And my sad muse, might weep his elegy:
Norwich, in sorrows weeds attend his urne,
I^ not for his; yet for your own sakes mourn.
Remember citizens, ye used to fly
To sue out your reprives from death, to Die:
Whose salutifierous magazine of arts,
Was your chief Sanctuary against death's darts.
There, feeble nature in a trice might be,
Armed against all disseases Cap ape.
But he Is gone, and in a good old age,
Took his calm Exit of a turbulent stage:
His death as harmless as his birth, from whence
His years were crowned with double innocence;) good
Whilst we, (for so perhaps heavens have thought
Are left, to write our stories in our blood.
Time's sith has wounded him, but he has g^t
Such semper-vivum, as he feels it not.
With faith, hope, charity, and contrition
He made up his Celestial composition.
And with an unctious name he mixed a Roll,
Of Gratia de^ for his wounded soul:
Now his thread yielded to the Sisters knife,
For Aqua-vitae he drinks water of life.
Much might unto his praises spoken be,
And only this one truth; namely that he,
Even Dey, the true Apothecary was,
All that are left, are but synoyma's.
To the perpetual memory of my ever honored Cozen Mr. E. H.
Under this sad marble lies,
Natures pride; and beauties prize:
Such, so sweet her accents were,
As would charm a Sirens ear;
Such her modest mode as she.
Taught the turtle charity.
Jn sum a more veruous wife,
Never sweetend husbands life.
To conclude then, all was she,
Man could wish, or woman be,
Who lies here, like treasure found.
Not above but under ground.
A Legacy to VRBANIA an unworthy City.
City ingrate, nay worse, but I Will include,
All your good nature, in ingratitude.
Welfare your costly swords which now ye wou^d
As feign encrimson in my inocent blood.
As ere ye wished m' Crucifige accept you; ah! you
Hosanna cry, and hosenecha too:
Js it in this; in this, J pray, I wrong ye
To spend my self, and my estate among ye?
Jf weary steps to make your City flourish,
If head, if heart, if Purse employed to nourish
Widows distressed, and orphans be a crime,
Grant heaven no worse offense take up my time,
Bark on black mouthed envy, ye as soon,
Affright me, as the Syrian wolves, the moon:
Nor do J envy those, have sought with cost,
The honorable trouble, J have lost:
Lord fill my heart with thanks, my mouth with praise
My hairs may yet see haleyon days:
God guards me still, though I Have no swords t t'davance,
Though no fine cap, God is my maintenance.
In Hono rem Poetarum.
WHose poor conceit is that
That Poets should be poor?
They talk they know not what,
Alas! they wish no more,
They have Enough in that they see
Content is worth a monarchy.
Do not the sacred Nine,
Come daily to their houses,
And break their fast, and dine,
And sup, and soop carouses?
Who calls them poor then, that are able,
To feast the Muses at their table?
Ye go to Poets, when
Your dearest friends be dead,
They give them life again
Though they be buried:
It Is strange then, Poets should not live
That thus can life to dead men give.
Yea all the world must know,
Save those to truth averse,
The swain was taught to plow,
By Virgills fertile verse.
It Is strange then, he should needy be,
Found out the art of Husbandry.
Riplie was rich I trow,
Whose Poems did enfold
That which men hunt for so,
The art of making Gold:
He had the Phylosophick stone,
Sure he, must then be ric^, or none.
Yea, do not all men say?
Poets dare any thing:
Pray was not noble May
Called brother by a King?
Nor is it more then true report,
Satyrick lines have hanged a sort.
Euridice could tell
That being ravished hence,
Bold Orpheus ransackt hell,
And rescued her from thence.
Yea verses so Magnetic are,
They fetch the Moon down from the sphere.
Nor have they only power,
But gifts of prophecy,
The most celestial dower,
Heavens give mortality.
Sure then they cannot want costly Cates;
Being Oracles and Potentates.
They that have most, still itch
For more, more baggs to stuff,
Whilst they are only rich,
Can see they have enuffe;
How poorly fools of Poets prate?
Come, they are poor, whom God does hate.
Princeps; and Vates non quovis nascitur anno.
Man.
WHat time Jehovah heaven, and earths Cre^tor
Had fully finished the world vast Theater
He brings up Man, and gives the world to see,
His curious art, in their Epitome:
Which but in man, he in no creature would.
They but of Simple, he of Compound mould:
They but of bodies only do consist,
In man a body, and a soul contrist;
His body his base part, earth represents,
His heaven-breathd soul, earth's soul, the elements
The ingredients of the world are water Air,
Earth, fire, such man's ingredients are,
Your leave, And thus the semblance I rehearse,
Between the great and little Universe.
His head's orbicular, like the circular skies,
Whose lamps meet rivalls, in his orient eyes;
And as it is heaven most like, it is heaven most near,
Reason swayes her majestiest seepter there;
That divine guest that makes a man, thence all
The senses borrow their original;
And as their sole and supreme court, repair,
To manifest their virtues in that chair.
Nor may I here forget that comely front,
That so surprises all that look upon, ^t;
Those lovely lineaments, those goodly graces,
Attend the sweets of well proportiond faces;
What wonders nature in his tongue commences,
The instruments of delicious senses?
Which we beyond express oftimes, refresh,
With rapsodies from that small filme of flesh.
How right here is Pan and phoebus? whilst our cares
Are partial twixt our voices, and the spheres:
Some time it is full, and makes his voice as loud,
As thundering roating from the shattered cloud.
But let us go downward with his heirs and see
How it does with the piles of grass agree;
The number well concurres, in each we see
The numerous foot steps of a deity;
Both the effect of moisture; who so seeks
The Rose, or Lilly, they so blow in his cheeks;
Nay what can you present, but he commands,
The lively transhape, from his Protean hands?
His blood is like the streams that to, and fro
Turning, and winding are, the center through:
should I here swell my story, to present
The office of each chord, each ligament,
The Nerves, the tendons, and the Arteries,
My life would be toe short to finish these.
Nay there is no member, but in it I see
A theme of wonder to eternity.
And yet this body we cannot praise enuffe,
Compare it with the soul it is sordid stuff:
There Is not such dfference, t'wixt the sorry case,
And Jewel; t'wixt the mask, and the fair face:
God made man's body after all the rest
Add after that inspired the soul the best:
The body from the earth the dust, ascends,
The incompounded soul from God descends:
It Is not the flessi, but in the soul, that we
Assume the image of the deity.
The body's suject to morality,
The soul part of the living God cannot dye.
Natures appointed time of change revolves,
And it into his elements desolves;
His native heat does to the fire repair,
Water to water breath unto the air.
The bones, and parts that are more solid must
Lie prisners till they render dust to dust;
Mean time the soul, her native station keeps
In heaven, whilst nature in her causes sleeps.
A Guess at HELL. Par nullae figura Gehennae.
ACcursed Topheth! how shall I define,
This dismal dungeon, this sad Cell of thine:
So dark, so duskie, so devoid of light,
How shall I see to draw thy picture right?
What Colors shall I grind? Colors (said I)
Thou art all black, black as Proserpines Eye.
Deep, and declive, beneath the dead Sea is
In a blind hole, this thy all black Abyss.
Thy pitchie Palace, where the chearly Sun
Nere comes, as out of his commission:
Nor lends the Moon so much as one odd night,
To qualify thy darkness, with her light,
Which we but sleep by? No, nor all the year
Does one small star on thy dark front appear.
Thou blackest Moore; ask but thy Danaan train?
Their tub tash tells thee thou art labor in vain
Go ask Ixion else, or him whose stone
Gathers no moss, they all conclude in one.
Thou the true Negro art, and Patentee
Of utter shades, there is no night but thee:
The darkness the Egyptians felt, was but
A type of thine, and but too fairly cut:
Tr^tareous Tullian, how thy tract is trod?
To Baalzeub, knight of the black rod;
Whose haggie hair, curls into snaky torts,
More terrible then poets poor report^:
His ghastly, yea his grisly look, is such
My sense fosakee me, if I think on it much:
His horns, the pitch fork is, where with he turns
Those broyling Sceletons, he ever burns
In flames that never shall be quenched, but hark,
I talk of flames, and yet I call Hell dark!
Flames I confess there are, but black, not bright,
Yea there is fire, and yet no firelight:
Foul feind! thy nose is like a Comet, or
The tail, of some prodigious Meteoi,
Well may it serve thee for thy red hot purr,
Wherewith thou do thy stifling sulphur stir:
Thy sooty Eybrowes, are as black as coals,
Smoakt with thine eyes, that flame like Oven holes
Mean while the Corners where fresh Brimstone lies,
Pretend a yellow Jandyse in thine eyes.
But it is the black, the black (fiend) is thy grief,
But thy disease admits of no relief.
Thy mouth like raging Aetna vomits fire,
The furious flakes of thy unslak't desire,
As much attractive, and as merciless, as
The 7 times hotter headed furnace was.
Thine arms are fiery fetters, that embrace
Those monuments of misery whose sad case
Thou do not p^ttie, though though seem' st a while,
To weep upon them, like the Crocodile.
Have you not heard of smoking Sodom? such
His breath's, But Sodom smoak's not half so much.
His veins are streams of sulphur: His loud lungs
His bellows; And his hideous hands his tongues;
His black, and melancholy blood contains
Worse venom, then ^re lurkt in Centaurs veins.
And by his cloven foot, it is plainly shown,
His Kingdom run's upon Division.
These are his titles. The Vnfathom'd Gulf,
The Roaring Lion. And the Raging Woolfe.
The Wild Beast of the Forest, The Annoyer
Of Christian liberty, The Destroyer.
The Mortal Enemy of all man kind,
By these and such like terms is he defind;
Father of Falsehood, Feeces of the Cup
Of Condemnation who can sum thee up?
Or set thee forth, No hand can ere effect it,
Unless that hand, that captived thee, direct it.
Envye her Ensign on thy front displaies,
And like the Basilisk at distance slayes;
Thy Nose steep as the Alps parts two deep Cells;
On this side, Hatred: That side Malice dwells.
And cause such beauty some preservatives asks,
Shame and Confusion are thy constant masks.
But least my Charkole fail to finish thee,
Thou art the form, of all deformity.
As for thy vassalls, thus begin their evils:
Their entrance strait transformes them into Devils
Their entertainment will be such, as they
Shall flee to death, But death will fly away:
Hard are their haps, so vainly shall implore
A deadly req^iem, at death's deafned door.
The torturous worm, that gnawes their consciences
Does like Prometheus vultur never cease
Curses are all their hymmes: Their parched throats,
Cant Lachrymae in lamentable notes.
Their Ditties, blasphemies, screichin their straine^
Howling their tune, whose burden grief sustaines
With sighs, and sobs, ^gnashing their teeth, they run
Their doleful descant, and division:
Well knew, our Savior, Judas sad estate^
When he pronounced his birth unfortunate:
Alas! these sufferings are insufferable,
Yet must be borne, although they be not able.
Sad is the strength, that is but lent us, to
Sustain the Atlas of a greater woe.
Of fables fond, and foolish, Poets tell,
That Hercules went, and returned from Hell.
Well might he go, but if he ere returned
To tell his rearrivall: I Will be burned.
He that comes to this place, he must discuss
His Exit, with a stouter ^^rberus.
Alcides might, and Orpheus mirth, must fail,
They can not against the gates of Hell prevail.
No hope of breaking out the Dungeons deep,
And the vast wall envyrons it, is steep.
Yet grant it scalable, there is a dreadful Mote,
Nine times surrounds it that will bear no boat:
Son, such a Gulf 'twixt thee, and me, does flo
Thou can not hither, nor we thither go.
Despair, and dye, hope no revocative day,
Since thou art banished into Scythiae.
Ye that drink the worlds Lethe, forget God,
See here his Scorpions, and his flaming rod.
Ye jested with edged tools since Mercyes heel
Was lead: But Justice has a hand of Feel.
Depart says Christ, depart wretch from my sight,
Into the bosom of confused Night.
Hurry him hence: Head long him down beneath,
To the black valley of eternal death.
Think not wretch I command thy Curtains close,
To apt thine eyes to a more sweet repose:
No! Hells hard servic'd Centinells, must keep
Continual watch, and never, never sleep.
Nor be releiv'd: No Circean lullabies,
Shall be of power to charm their damned eyes:
Think now, profanest liver, Do but think,
How thou of this so bitter Cup, wilt drink:
Call in thy thought and but consider well
And tell me now, but what thou think of Hell!
Did thou lie waking on a bed more soft
Then down, plucked from the Ravens plume, how often
Would thou wish morning? lingering for the light
Though bedridden, but a poor Cymmerian night:
Think then how thou will toss thy restless head,
Where everlasting burning is thy bed.
Think then I say of their accursed condition,
Whose misery shall have no intermission:
This is that bitter draft, whose dire dregs be
The limits of these woes, Eternity.
Here I break off, should I prooeed to tell
What thou have lost that were another Hell.
-- En ultima tanti Meta furoris adest.
A glimiring glimpse of Heaven.
HEaven! Lord what is that? Is it that heap of treasure
The worldling hugs so? Or that sweet of pleasure
So Idolizd? Is it that glorious puff
Of Honor, where with men nere swell enuffe:
Or is it beauty, whose Celestial fire,
Blows up that Ae^na of the worlds desire?
Lies it else in Revenge that sweet, sweet case,
Of injuries; Noe, noe, it is none of these.
For wealth, alas! has wings, and all the rest
Are vanity of vanity at best.
What is it then? earths VVide-streatcht Canopie
The glittering surface of the ambient sky?
Is it the Sun? that glorious globe of light
Or his bright consort, Empress of the night.
Noe, none of these, we must ascend a sphear^
Two stories higher, then our eyes, and there
O there this Heaven of heaven is, But first I
Er'e I can tell you, what it is, must dye.
In vain for Heaven I darkling groap about,
I can not see it, until these eyes be out.
Eyes have not seen, nor has man's mortal ear
Heard of the joys, the joys of joys are there.
Nor has it entered into the heart of man,
It Is too angust, ah! it is too small a span
To entertain't, we must perforce decline it,
Heaven were not Heaven, Could flesh, and blood define it.
Grant, O my God, that I not being able
To wade thus deep, make not Heaven seem afable.
But lo! the sacred spirit here, descends
Unto our understanding, and commends
This inexpressive paradise, and even
As it were by reflection shows us Heaven,
Which he a sumptuous City calls, Built on
And by Christ Jesus the true corner stone,
Not made with hands, the City is four square,
East, West, North, South Gates Aequidistant are.
Length, height, breadth, depth, do all conspire to be
The uniforme of perfect Symetrie.
Twelve gates there are of most magnificent state,
Made of twelve Pearls, Of every Pearl a Gate,
And as twelve gates of twelve rich Pearls; so here
Twelve rich foundations, of twelve gemms appear:
The Sardus, Saphir, and the Sardonix,
The Topas, Jasper, and Iacynth are six.
The Berill, Emerald, and Chalcedonite,
Chrysoprasus, Amethis, and Chrysolite;
Make up the four times three, whose sparkling light
Banish all possibility of might.
The stately streets, all along as ye pass,
Are paved with Gold, transparent as pure glass,
Through which, the silver streams of life convey
Their Crystal Currents, whilst in rich array,
On either side this glittering Tagus stand
The trees of life, whose boughs bow to the hand,
There Is neither Sun, nor Moon in that bright sphere,
He that lent them their light himself shines there.
There Is none that watch, nor none that guard relieves,
What need there? since there is neither night, nor thieves.
There Is nothing grieves, no being all amort,
Darkness and Death, are strangers in that Court.
Envy, Backbiting, Malice, and Disgrace,
Sorrow and Sickness, dwell not in that place,
Without are dogs, nothing that is unclean
Has any part, in that Celestial Scene.
But Meekness, Faith, and joy, and Cordial love,
Such are the stars, in that bright orb^ that move.
There they for ever feast their Eyes on thee,
On whom one glance, eternal life would be.
How shall I hope sufficiently t'admire
Those living powers, in thy Celestial quire?
Those thousand thousands that attend upon
The radiant throne, of thy all glorious Son?
Angels, Archangels, Cherubins, and Thrones,
Amazing Seraphins, and Dominions?
Which in thy highest presence always sit,
Enjoying happ'nesse next to infinite.
Any of which descending from his story;
Would exstacy, and kill us with his glory.
Here close your lids my daring eyes, least ye,
Where angels hide their faces, be too free:
Lord how I reach, and roame t'uncurtaine heaven;
Whilst I am even of mine own self bereaven?
O take these fetters! take these clogs from me;
Take these scales from mine eyes, that I may see
Thy tabernacle, Thy Jerusalem;
Well thou heavens Monarch, have prepared for them
That love, and fear thee: Ah me! when shall I
Come and appear before thy Majesty?
Where ere thou be, let me but see thy face;
I Will ask no other heaven, no other place:
If thou descend into the abyss below,
My soul shall wish no other heaven to know:
Where thou art, heaven is: it is not the resort
Of Courtiers: But the King, that makes the Court,
Thus have I taken pains, to show ye that,
Which is, I must confess, I know not what.
M ^^^^^ie
THis afternoon I met the tribe of Gad,
Running through Bedlam as they had been mad
Shufling and shouldring at so strange a rate,
As if they strove to enter the strait gate.
With that seeing the conflux of the train
I could not choose but mak't Turn again Lane,
And down the stream making my arms, my Oars
I rowed to Moore fields, where I found more whores
Gentle, and simple, then a man could meet,
Either in Turn ball, or in Turn up Street.
Satting and Silk, and Peticoats brocado
Marched like an Amazonian armado,
Furious as your French troops, scarce ere a wench
But by her out side, show her inside French.
Some zealous Gitt'zens show their wives, that even
By being Cuckolds, they might go heaven.
It made me laugh to see their sweeping trailes
In spite of Barbars puffes, powder their trailes.
O how the leacherous dust did vaught! and rise
Twixt the cross Chevernes of their foaming thighs.
So light were they, so given to the Tup
What men would not, the very winds took up.
With that said I, now too too well perceive I,
You Are not the tribe of Gad alone, But Levi.
Mean while the trees in such even order grow,
They seemed a second Pater noster row.
They raild in-grasse-plot as a spacious shop
Of Summer weeds for Virgins was set open.
And many gallants came from out the town
Thither, to give their Ladies a green-Gowne.
Here is great wrestling, Boys, and men, and all
And here and there a woman takes a fall;
Venture on which you please, if men you like,
Know then they sail close by the Wind mil strike.
If you from men, to women be departers,
You shall not fail to meet them in the quarters.
And therefore if your purpose that way stand
Go see for them, when you can^t see your hand
And to your work (my friend) it is Country play
Not by the belt but felt, catch that catch may.
Be not discouraged for the duskie night
Be It nere so dark, I Will warrant you a light.
More of Moore-fields if you desire to know,
Faith I have taken my turn: And so must you.
Upon the Sickness, and recovery of a fair and fairly promised LADY.
BUt had thou Death such hopes alive,
Thy suit could ever thrive,
In flattering her
T'her Sepulher,
From her approaching bridal bed,
Ala^lthy hopes are dead.
Dead as thy self
Unwelcome elfe,
But would you feign forestall, forsooth
The sweets of bloomy youth?
Your suit is cold
And you too bold.
Suffice it long time hen^e that thou
Bath in her aged snow,
Could thou her send
To thy dark bed?
Her orient Eye would shoot a ray
Should make thy midnight day;
As though the Snn
Did thither run,
And all his rutilous Jewels set
In that close Cabinet.
Then should mourni^n
See joys morning.
Then palest ashes should revive
And Death be made alive.
Whilst we, blind we,
If we would see.
Must all our light Cymmerian like.
From flintie bosoms strike.
But thanks to Heaven,
Death is bereaven:
The Eclipse is past, and beauties light
Has banished dead of night.
See, see the love.
Of heaven above.
For we have here Gods blessings got
And the warm Sun to boot.
O let us now
Low as earth bow;
And grateful sacrifices give,
To him that here said, let her live.
To a Gentleman desiring me to write a Paper of Verses upon his sitting whilst
the Painter was drawing his Picture.
ANd Poet too? must you your figure see
In silent, and in speaking poesy?
I could admit this double task, in case
You had like Ianus too a double face.
Say, is it your desire? whilst he does take
Your superficial lineaments, I should make
Your virtues image? Is it this you mean?
I must like Momus have a Casement then.
Or fear you men will say you are a creature.
Narcisus like in love with your own feature?
And therefore have the Painter to produce.
A color: And the Poet an excuse:
Come be adv^is'd by me, go to your wife,
He warrant you your Picture to the life.
Here you compose your countenance, And set.
Whilst't may be she is drawing your counterfeit.
Come the true way of lively li^e commanding
Is never done by sitting, But by standing.
Pers. -- Pictoribus atque Poet is Quidlibet audiendi semper fuit aequa
potestas.
To an impudent Scold that perpetually haunts her Husband, and not only abuses
him but what soever Company is with him.
WOman (but may I call the so, and not
Forfeit that little judgment I have got?
Is It not enough y^^re uglie, but beside
Your ill shape you must be ill quality'd?
I had supposed that such a one as you
Whose face a winning feature never knew
A woman (if that appellation may
Be yet allowed) made of the cour^^st clay:
And of a fabric so imperfect as't
Is well concluded nature was in have.
I had supposed I say, that such a brute,
Had cause more then enough to have been mute
At least she should if she had silence broke.
With Balams A^^e but once, and wisely spoke,
But you unlock the thunder of your voice,
And twenty Iron Mills make not more noise.
When you beg in the clamou^ of your prate
You make the rabulous r^^t at Billings-gate.
Mute as their Fish: Were you my wife forsooth,
I should lock up the Barn-doores of your mouth.
Or ferret-like, sow't up, My wife said I?
Some Planet first dispatch me from the s^ie.
I^de ransack beds of clay, and light upon
The Devil in a new fall lne sceleton.
Or what in man, or Hells invention w^^s is
Them think of the, Of thee thou curse of Curses.
O wretch thy Husband, O unfortunate.
I drown mine Eyes in sorrow for his ^ate.
I find in story an enchanted Las^e
All day a Hagge: All night an angel was
His luck poor man is worse, for meeting you
He Is haunted with a Hagge day and night too.
For when abroad in this sad plight he goes
Seeking some corner to unbreast his woes;
You follow him hot foot, and rang^e about
Beating all bushes till you find him out.
And when he once but in your sight appears,
You spend, And with full cry confound his ears,
And ours too, who admire what you intend him
Whether to bait him, or to apprehend him.
Thus like Act^on with affrights hedged round
He flies the fury of his own feirce hound.
We know your language you Tartarian whore
That use to play bo-peep at Tavern door.
Peaking for pimping rascals, and when ere
Y^^ fear discovery, what is my Husband her^:
Thus you obstreperous strumpet, Thus you must
Make your poor Husband cloak for your base lust.
Come, come, the provetb yet did never fail.
They that are quick of tongue, are quick of tail.
And I too plainly see, (though I am loath
To be too public) you are quick of both.
He blast you with cont^mpt if ere you come
To ask for Husband henceforth in my room.
And tear your tongue from roof and roots if ere
I hear again, What is my Husband here.
And to the Company speak a word unmeet
We Will kick you through the Gantlet of our feet.
THE TABLE, Of all the several POEMS contained in this Book.
TO her that loves me page 1 To my Coy Charula 2 Love sick Lucilla to her
unkind shepherd 4 To Abstemid 5 Philiis s^nerall 6 A young Gentleman to his
Lady who locked upon him as too immature 8 To Amabunda 9 To Sua^ia 10 An answer
to the Song called fair Archybe lla to whose eyes etc. 11 The ^^^wer to well
well it is true, etc. 12 The Virgin Centi^le to Gerard 13 The Ch^ice 15 To my c^y
and capti^^s M^stresse 16 To Pulcheria 17 Love blind or not blind ibid. A
longing Lady to her long staying lover 21 A forsaken Lady to her Apostate ibid.
A mock song to O stay by me 22 A Gentleman to his Mistress that told him he
looked as quint upon her 24 To Franck 25 An Epithall upon Mr. B. C. this
Nuptials 28 To my lilly white Leda in commendation of a pale face 30 The
Postscript to the precedent Poem 32 To Mr. R. D. 33 Militat omnis amans, etc.
ibid. To my honored friend a gentleman, that in a frolic would needs barber
me 34 To Will* Kemp. 35 A Gentleman surprised with the sight of a Lady
unknown to him betrothed to an other ibid. To my Cosen Coy 36 To my pale
Pippin 39 Mrs. E. G. to her false and faithles servant 41 His answer 44 To the
fair Mrs. E. R. 45 Ph^ is, Charon ibid. Miserum me fuisse faelicem 49 A. B. to
an Irish Gentlewoman that slighted him 50 To my noble Cosen Mr. R. C. coming in
Mourning to be^ merry with his friends ibid. A^ gratus ades to my highly
honored Cos. Mr. B. C coming to Narwich 52 To the worshipful A. D. his
Majesty's Physician crossing the Seas 54 To the City of Cracovia 55 To Mr. R.
C. upon the mourning Ring he sent me ibid. To a friend that gave me a Library
56 To a Gentlewoman that refused a very rich Suitor, because he was not very
handsome ibid. To a fair Lady 58 To my Mrs. 59 The middle Sister 60 The
Ioviall Iourny 61 To my Riv^ill presenting my Mrs. Gold upon her journey 62
Upon a Porter catching a Gentlewoman as she passes by him 63 A Tapsters
wedding 64 Summer 65 In praise of winter 66 Upon Yorkshire Ale 68 To my right
well reckond host at the Lamb 70 The Postscript to the preceding Poem 71 In
commendation of Yorkshire Ale ibid. Upon a hungry gutted Door keeper E. B. to
his noble friend that gave him a new pair of Boots and Gloves 73 A. B. To his
Shoemaker 74 Upon his getting the former paper answered 75 Upon a woman taken
stealing Soap 76 To my noble friend 77 To the same Gentleman desiring my verses
upon any price and on his sending me a new Suite ibid. To Mr. ^. Lin in excuse
of his tarde Scholar ibid. To my valued friend, a Newyears gift 78 Ale 79 A
visit 80 To the world 81 O. P. to A. C. that oversold him a horse, ibid. Upon
the name of the same horse, being called Buttler 82 Pseudo poeta inveying
against Tantalia etc. 83 Upon his Pictnre prefixed to his Almanac ibid. To Mr.
-- upon his Silly Epitaph in print 84 Upon Gunpouder treason 85 To the
Countess of Dorset 87 The Weavers Memento mori 88 To Constantia 90 To Bovino
91 The Fleets 92 To a drunken Porter reeling into the Ring to Wrestle with a
Tailor 93 To a Brewer that promised me a Stags tongue and dissapointed me 94
To this Brewer sending me half a dosen Staggs Tongues 95 To my strauge Rival
96 To a Gentleman that promised, but failed, to meet me at an Ale-drapers. 97
To an other Gentleman, that served me such a trick 98 To a Philomuse from whom
I received a Paper upon the same Subject and by the same Post. ibid. At the
Florists Feast in Norwich Flora wearing a Crown 99 The Song 102 An Epitaph upon
Oliver O dead drunk 103 Upon his second time being dead drunk ib* An Epitaph
upon a Weaver 104 An Epitaph dedicate to the Memory of Dr. Ed. Cook. ibid. On
goodwife Plain 105 On W. G. A great swearer but little Iyar ibid. In memoriam
Roberti Dey Pharmacap Norv: ibid: To the perpetual memory of my ever honored
Cozen Mrs. E. H. 106 A legacy to Urbania, an unworthy City 107 In honorem
Poetarum 108 Man 109 A guess at Hell: Par nulla figura Gehennae 112 A
glimering glimpse of Heaven 116 Moore fields 119 Upon the sickness, and
recovery of a fair and fairly promised Lady 121 To a Gentleman desiring me to
write a paper of verses upon his sitting whilst the Painter was drawing his
Picture: 122 To an impudent Scold that perpetually haunts her Husband, and not
only abuses him, but what soever Company is with him.
FINIS.

