THE OLD PURITAN Detected and Defeated: OR, A BRIEF TREATISE SHOWING How by the
Artifice of Pulpit-Prayers our Dissenters, at all times, have endeavored to
undermine the Liturgy, of the Reformed CHURCH of ENGLAND.

Together with The Fault and Danger of such Prayers, whether vented Extempore,
or forethought by the Speaker.

By a most Learned and Reverend Divine now with God.

Now I beseech you Brethren -- that ye all speak the same thing, and that there
be no Divisions among you. 1 Cor. 1.10. LONDON: Printed for W. Davis in
Amen-Corner. 1682.

The Publisher to the Reader.
AT this time of day when the Reverend and Learned Clergy of the Church of
England, are so great Ornaments of the Pulpit, and so justly admired for their
performances in Preaching; he that would take upon him to instruct them how to
behave themselves in it, had need be a very wonderful and extraordinary Person
for Learning and Authority; or else he will be thought to charge himself with a
most invidious and vain glorious Task.

But the Author of the following Tract was well known to be such a Person, a
man of great Reverence and Learning, and worthily Designed for a Principal
Governor in this Church, if it had pleased God to spare us so great a Blessing
a little longer. And therefore it should not be thought any great presumption,
to set down His sense of the Clergies Duty: Especially in a matter that does
not touch on the preaching part, but concerns only Discipline, and is neglected
by most (as himself thought it was) through mistake of its bad consequences, or
by Inadvertency of the Law that has enjoined it.

For some years both before and since this Copy came to my hands, I have
observed in many places, and especially about London, a great disuse of the
practice here contended for: And having discoursed with several concerning it,
I must needs say I have not been yet so fortunate, as to meet with any Reasons
sufficient (in my Judgment) to justify the Common practice, or to outweigh my
Author's arguments against it.

I know that the Title of the Canon cited by him, ( viz, 55. primo Jacobi) runs
thus Precationis Forma a Concionatoribus in concionum suarum Ingressu imitanda,
but I am not convinced that the intention of the Canon is fullfil'd when the
matter of it is turned into the proper Form of a Prayer: Because we are hereby
obliged to follow this very Form, which is plainly the Form of Bidding Prayer,
the word being all along precamini, and not precemur. And in the Beginning
it is, populum hortabuntur they shall move or exhort the People to pray, but not
pray with them till the Conclusion: So that the next words I^ hunc aut similem
modum may not be understood of changing the Form of Bidding Prayer into a
formal direct Prayer, but barely to allow a Liberty of altering only the words,
so as may be suitable to any Emergent occasion, or particular Circumstance,
keeping still to this Form in the nature of an Exhortation. Wherefore seeing
it is so praescrib'd by K. Edw. 6th. by Q. Eliz. and here by K. James; and
ratified since by the succeeding Powers a^^ not repealed by any later
Constitutions; I see no reason why it may safely be dispenc't with, unless we
infer from the general usage, that there is in this case a Tacit Consent of the
Church. But I don't find why the Church should be thought to Agree and Consent
privily, to that which she has Decreed otherwise in a public manner. And
however she may Connive, or tolerate, or forbear to punish Offenders; yet this
will in no case acquit them of the guilt. Besides there is the less ground to
Argue upon the Churches Consent, because many Eminent Churchmen that should
share in it, have declared themselves of this Authors opinion and do practice
accordingly.

The Dissenters though they hate nothing (but Monarchy perhaps) more than our
Established Uniformity yet are so fond of any pretense against us; that of late
they have had the hardiness to Tax the Conforming Clergy with the Alsop against
Dr. St. Hickringil, etc.
Breach of it, in matters (as of less moment, and not so ill consequence as
this here treated of, so) much more Difficult, if not impossible, to be
remedied. And I am told, the Popish Faction has taken hold of the very same
occasion to bespatter and revile our Discipline. And farther, I know many
Regular and sound Divines that both use this Form of Bidding Prayer, and no
other, and are also dissatisfied with*such as do not use it: so that such would
do well either to show good reasons why they disuse it, and to make those
Reasons as public as this Paper, Or else to Testify their Conviction by the
use of it. For if my Authors proofs stand firm and unshaken, their contrary
Custom or their great numbers, will not justify them in the other practice. How
long soever they have been in the wrong, it is no shame at last to yield
Obedience to the Truth and to the Law.

But if they make it appear against this Author, that they are in the Right, or
that it is but a matter of mere Indifferency whether we use this or another
Form, it is hoped that the Rest of the Clergy may follow their way for
Uniformity's sake: Or, that whether they do or no; yet neither they, nor the
People may be Scandalized if both ways be proved Lawful.

There is no other Design in the Publication of this paper than to procure a
strict Conformity in the practice of the matter in hand, or a General
satisfaction to such as are Scrupulous about it.

I shall say no more but only give notice that the Authors words are kept
entire in the Body of the Text: The marginal notes being added by the
publisher, to make his meaning clear, and to ease the Reader in perusal of his
Citations by referring directly to their places.

THE GENERAL PROPOSITION, Maintaining, That it is not Lawful for any Person
that has received Holy Orders in the Church of England, to use any Extemporary
or Praemeditated Prayers of his own private Composure either before or after
Sermon in the Church, in the public Worship and service, but only the Liturgy
set forth and allowed.
FIrst, Because it is directly against his own Solemn Promise made to the
Church when he came to be Ordained: v. The Form of Ordination, etc.
And that promise is set under his hand when he subscribed the Three Articles
contained in Canon 36* the Second whereof runs thus Quod ipse in publicis
precibus and Sacramentis administrandis, illam prorsus formam quae in dicto
libro praescribitur and non aliam sit observaturus. Sparrow's Collections, p.
287.
That he will use the Service Book praescribed in Public Prayer, and no other.

Secondly, Because the use of such prayers is directly against an Act of
Parliament (viz.) That v. The Acts of Uniformity and especially That in primo
Eliz. which is still in force as will appear by that in xiv Car. ii, and is
meant by the Author* See also lib. quorundam Canon. ib. p. 238. parag. 2.
For the Uniformity of Common Prayers, which enjoins peremptorily under sharp
punishments, that no man shall use any other open Prayer than is mentioned and
set forth in the said Book.

Thirdly, No man is to presume to exercise any Sacerdotal Office except he be
But in Ordination, the Person to be Ordained is rather called to the contrary,
as is shown above in the first Argument. v. Sparrows Coll. p. 47. and p. 60*
called to it as was Aaron.

Seeing therefore both the Church and State have expressly enjoined us to use no
Public Prayers but the Liturgy [Except his Majesty give special leave, upon
some extraordinary occasion, for the drawing up of Forms, which leave has
ground de jure Communi both Ecclesiastical and Civil] it follows, that neither
Church nor State have given power to any to vent Themselves in such Open
Prayers in the Church; because they Expressly forbid it.

To presume then to use such prayers contains in it a Complication of several
Sins.

First, A sin of Falsehood or the breach of a Solemn Promise, confirmed by
Subscription, to the Church.

Secondly, It is an Act of Disobedience to the Higher Powers; and so it is an
express sin against the Fifth Commandment.

Thirdly, It is an Act of Injury and Usurpation Offered to the Church in
presuming to thrust themselves into a Sacred Office, which such men are not
entrusted with, nor thought fit at all to Execute.

For, Many may be able to discourse unto Men (since if they chance there to
fail in point of Truth or Congruity, the matter is of less Consequence.) But
the Church will trust but Few that shall Lead men when they speak to God,
because there a Falsehood may often prove an Abomination in speech, and an
Incongruity may soon amount to Blasphemy.

I would gladly Demand of any prudent Person, whether he conceives that when
the Church of England was in her greatest Glory she had ever in it 9500
persons, answerable to the 9500 Parishes, that were able to Lead the People in
Prayer? Sad Experience tells us the Contrary, and informs us loudly enough of
their Solaecisms and Blasphemies. And the same Experience tells us that the
Directory helps them not at this Dead Lift: Nay it may often prove the greatest
Impediment, since were some weak men allowed to choose as well their matter as
their words, they might perhaps come off with some tolerable approbation: But
being forced to Confine themselves to matter, which either they well understand
not, or are not so much used to speak on, their Prayers are often times vain and
ridiculous, or (which is worse) Erroneous or Blasphemous.

The Licentiousness of Devotion (that Each Private Priest durst adventure to
Lead others in Public Prayer) breeding great disturbance in the Primitive
Church; brought the Fathers to Decree thus, in the 2 d. Council of Canon. 12.
Milevis (where St. Augustine sat, as appears by the Subscription) that no
Public Prayer should be offered up to God, that had not been approved of in a
Council, or at least Agreed upon by the more discreet sort of men, This is also
repeated in the 70 th Canon of the Council of Africa. And hereunto agrees the 3
d. Conc. Carthag. Can. 23. see also Microl. de Eccles. Observe. c. 4. Orationes
quae ab Ecclesia probatae non sunt* rejiciantur: as 'twas decreed under Carolus
magnus.
[Ne forte aliquid contra Fidem, vel per Ignorantiam vel per minus studium sit
Compositum:] least either through Ignorance or for want of due pains In the
Composers.
the Public Faith might receive hurt through such Prayers.

Now besides other Hurts which the Church of England has received by this
unlawful Course, all may know she has received one remarkable mischief in the
Neglect and Scorn of Her Liturgy.

For, when Cartwright that Puritan Incendiary, saw he wanted Power either to
Extirpate or Alter our Established Book of Common Prayer, He was the First durst
boldly use this Forbidden Knell of Devotion, which he, and those who followed
him, improved to so great an height by Posting over our Liturgy with so much
Carelessness and Scorn, and by giving all the Advantages to those Forms of their
own, [advantages] both of the Voice and of the Eyes and of the Hands; that the
People began ere long to think, that the Reading of the Liturgy was but a
Useless Task imposed by the Church on the Priests: But that they completely
served God if they came in [to the Church] when the Psalms were singing;
because, besides that they praised God, and had the Benefit of a Sermon, they
heard a long Prayer too [And that] set out with all the Devotion and all the
Advantages it could possibly receive from the Art, or from the Natural good
Parts of that Person who composed it. So that he who will needs continue the
use of these Forbidden Prayers in the Pulpit takes the readiest Course (as much
as in him lies) for the rooting out of the Public Liturgy.

Object. It may be said perhaps* that many This is too true, but makes it not a
whit more Lawful.
Churchmen both of great Knowledge, and great Place, have themselves used
these Forms of Praying. And upon that ground, why may not they?

Ans. Truly if to Argue at this rate were Concluding, it might soon free us not
only from the ties of many English Laws, but from the Obligation also of the
Decalogue it self, which without all doubt is broken often enough, not only by
those of the Common Sort, but by men of great Place and Knowledge. But we must
Distinguish between Consuetudo and Corruptela, and so Learn that Vsages taken
up against express written Laws, are Corruptions, but not Justifiable Customs.

I suppose that these men do not at all like the Course that the Independents
now use in Prayer, who permit this Extemporary or Voluntary way not only to the
Priests, but to their Soldiers and to their Mechanics. And I Imagine a main
cause of their mistakes to be, because such an office is intruded on by those
men who have no just Authority to perform it. But then if they would consider
things well, they would easily find that this use of Forbidden Prayer has
Metamorphos'd them into Independents since they have no more Authority to
compose such Forms from the Apostolic Church that Ordained them, than either
that person has, who is now employed to make shoes, or that other Ecclesiastic
whose Formalities are a Belt and a Buff Ierkin.

One thing I shall add more, and it is a short Discourse how the Pulpit Forms
of Prayer were brought into the Church of England.

We must know then, that in the times of Popery the manner Commonly was to use
the Lords Prayer, or else an Ave Maria before Sermon: So that when King Edward
the Sixth came to Compose his Injunctions, He made Choice (as he had very good
Reason of the Lords Prayer for that purpose. But because it was thought fit
that the Kings just Supremacy in Ecclesiastical things should be at least
Weekly published to the People, it was thought Expedient to premise to the
Paternoster, a Form (as his It Is called there the Form of Bidding the
Common Prayers. Sparrow's Collect. p. 10.
Injunction styles it) of Bidding Prayer, wherein the Priest was not to speak
to God, but only to the People, Exhorting them to pray Instantly for such and
such Persons (and things) but He prayed not to God at all, until he closed (his
Exhortation) with the Lords Prayer.

This was likewise confirmed in the The Title is, The Form of Bidding the
Prayers to be used Generally in this uniform so^t. Spar. Collections, p. 85.
Injunctions of Queen Elizabeth, and Expressly called the Form of Bidding Prayer.

And when King James of Blessed Memory turned those Injunctions into Canons his
Law runs [ Canon. 55.] That Ministers Populum Hortabuntur ut secum in precibus,
Concurrat, etc. Sparrows Coll. p. 294.
should move the People to join with them in Prayers ( viz.) in this Form of
Bidding Prayer Ye shall Pray for Christ's Catholic Church etc. concluding
always with the Lords Prayer.

Now, Let any Indifferent man Judge: Are Exhortations proper Forms of Prayer?
Nay let a Discerning person Consider it well, and it will appear that things
there prudently spoken by way of Exhortation and Narration, would prove very
Absurd in Prayer. How fond would it appear to tell the great God of Heaven (and
Earth) of the King's most Excellent Majesty our Sovereign Lord Charles by the
Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith etc. or, as some often do, to tell God of such a Lord, Earl of such a place
and Baron of another, One of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and
his very good Lord and Patron, etc.? And yet when we do but exhort them Or
desire them.
to join their Prayers, such Clauses may not be unfit.

I can scarce think of any other apparent way to defend them From impertinence
in that practice.
.

And yet it is true this Form is there ( viz. Canon 55.) called Precationis
formula -- in Concionum -- ingressu -- ibid.
a Prayer before Sermon: And so it is; because we then say, together with the
Preacher, the Lords Prayer, to those very purposes he Exhorts. And they well
know, who know Divinity, that all kinds of prayer are reducible to that Holy
Form: But it follows not that the Preachers Exhortation is a Prayer: Or that he
then at all speaks to God himself, but (only) to the People. Indeed upon an
occasion Extraordinary Such as this appears to have been in th^design and use
of it.
it is a Prayer of no Ordinary Composition, and therefore called the Form of
Bidding Prayer, both by a Reformed King Edw. 6. and Q. Eliz. ut supra.
and a very glorious Queen; and yet de facto disused by an Itching Puritanical
Humor at first (no doubt) by Cunning and Design, and afterward (as I verily
think) for the most part by mistake of the bad end to which it drove, or by
Inadvertency of the Law. And perhaps Both.
But it is most apparent that such Forbidden Prayers are an Especial means to
Eat out the whole English Liturgy.

FINIS.

