AN ACCOUNT OF SCOTLANDS GRIEVANCES By reason of The D. of Lauderdales
Ministry, Humbly tendered To his sacred Majesty.

TO THE KING
SIR
The following sheets, containing for the most part, the complaints of your
people, against your Commissioner, do so naturally address themselves to
your Matie., that I could not deny them this inscription; some may possibly
endeavor, to render the presumption more criminal, by censuring what is thus
offered, by a concealed hand in a public manner, for a libelling pamphlet: And
truly I am sorry, that the mere iniquity of the objectors, should force
upon it so much of a disloyal resemblance; but sieng that it advances
nothing, which I might not avowedlie present to your Matie., on your throne,
and environed with both your Parlts., nd athere own and Justify, in every
point; I am hopeful, that the truth and importance of what is here honestly
held forth, for your own and your kingdoms good, and not the partiality of any
whose interest it is to have abuses covered, shall incline you to a more
favorable reflection. I must also tell your Matie. that after the endeavors,
that have been used, to inform in the more dutiful methods, what appears less
civil in this (that may be thought too communicative) is nevertheless excused
by a very loyal expediencie; for allbeit your Maties. goodness, be indeed the
great comfort and hope of your people, and their loyalty an impregnable
defense, against all sinistruous suspicions; yet this discovery of some men's
peculiar guilt in these strange doeings, wherein for their own safety, they
have dared to involve your Maties. authority, may both fortify, by a general
concurrence, my weak enterprise, for your Maties. better information, and also
signallie contribute to, the assistance and relief of duty against too many
obvious tentations. However as I am sure, that a success in this essay,
suitable to the sincerity of the affection whence it flows, is the most
dutiful wish that any heart is capable of; so, that your Matie. may be
constantly directed to those counsels and courses, that may render you the
most glorious and blissed of all Princes, is and shall be ever the fervent
prayer of

SIR Your Maties. most humble, most obedient and most affection at subject*

When, in the year 1660., it pleased God to restore his Matie. to these his
kingdoms; with how cordial and universal a Joy this blessing was welcomed by
Scotland, is almost still recent in every ones rememberance: Neither was this
Joy a mere raptour of passion, or its demonstrations confined to transient
expressions; if his Matie. had done all for himself and us, which God did for
both, the real and solid retributions of our acknowledgement could hardly
have been more large. I shall not at present descend to a full enumeration of
instances, the whole tenor of the greatest part of the Acts, past in Parlt in
the years 61. and 62., do make but one entire evidence; yet there are a few
things which do well deserve a more particular observation.

As first, that upon occasion of our former troubles, and as if their cause and
rise had only been from the peoples mutiny, taking advantage of the defects
or neglects of the regal power, that might have prevented it; We did
establish, both by Acts, oaths, and subscriptions, his Maties. prerogative, to
be absolute and incontrollable, in the choice of all Officers of State,
Counselors and Judges, and in and over all matters of peace, war, leagues,
bonds, meetings, conventions and Parliaments, with a distinct exclusion of all
exceptions. It is true, that many did even then think this a streatch beyond
what the frailties of men, and casualities of human affairs, can reasonably
allow, and that it is no less wisdom, to veil the sacred heights of
Sovereigntie under the shreine of an uncontroverted supposall; then to expose
them, by perremptorie determinations, to the cavillings of irresistible
exigencies; and therefore did prefer the moderation of our Ancestors, who
notwithsstanding the frequent occurrence of many more violent provocations, yet
did ever leave these points, in that fair indefinitnesse, which duty does
always construe to an universalitie, without interfeiring with the pretenses
of necessity: But heavens extraordinary favor, did at that time so second
the constancy of our love to a Prince so long wished for, that our great
persuasions of his singular enduements, without any regard to the peevish
cautions of scrupulous prudence, were the only measures of our concessions, and
therefore

2dly, our loyalty did not here subsist, but notwithstanding that the foundest
policy has always judged, the power in the Prince and purse with the people
to be the justest balance of government, yet we, forgetting all preceding
distresses, to testify the abundance of our affection by the rarest
indication whereof our Nation is capable, do frankly add to his Maties.
revennue, above the double of what he formerlie possessed; and do netly grant
him, by a voluntary establishment, more, I am persuaded, then ever his benign
disposition would have exacted, upon an absolute surrender: And indeed this,
our liberal offer, was, at that time, so rightly esteemed the utmost of our
ability, that, amongst other motives mentioned in the Act of Parlt. it is
expresselie set down, That his Majesty had signified his resolution not to
raise any more Sess; and yet how often, since that time, our benevolence has
by Commissioners been drawn forth, beyond our power, upon pretext of his
Maties. occasions; the taxations and assessements that have been imposed on us,
within these few years, do planlie witness, But

3dly, so exuberant were the propensions of our hearts toward his Matie., that,
as if all this subjection professed and liberality offered, had been far
short of duty, we further, by an Act entitled, An humble tender to his sacred
Matie. of the duty and loyalty of his ancient kingdom of Scotland, mancipat
our very liberties and persons to his Maties. devotion and service; and do
thereby in acknowledgment of our duty, make humble and hearty offer to him of
20000. footmen and 2000. horsemen, sufficiently armed, and furnished with
forty days provision, to be in readiness upon his Maties. call, for the
ends there mentioned: And by the same Act the Parlt. does declare, that if his
Matie. should have further use of their service, the kingdom would be ready;
every man betwixt sixty and sixteen, to join and hazard their lives and
fortunes, as they shall be called for by his Matie., for the safety and
preservation of his sacred person, authority, and government.

4thly, That there might be nothing wanting to these ample expressions of our
loyalty, the Parlt. by another Act, in dutiful and humble recognizance of his
Maties. prerogative royal, does declare, that the ordering and disposeall of
Trade with foreign nations, and the laying of restraints and impositions upon
foreign imported commodities, do belong to his Matie. and his successors, as
an undoubted privilege and prerogative of the Crown, and that therefore they
may do therein as they shall judge fit for the good of the kingdom.

5thlie, That it might appear to the world, that we placed the security of all
our interests, more in our confidence of his Maties. goodness, then upon the
firmest provision of the best laws; although the Parlt. 1641. was held by his
Maties. Father of glorious memory present in person, and many Acts were there
passed and superscribed by him, for the settling of our religion, and liberties,
with all the maturitie of judgment, that long and well weighed experience,
many and well managed treaties, and Englands mediation, could furnish; Yet,
because their luster seemed to be a little stained, by the ungrateful
remembrance of some previous contentions, wherein it was our misfortune to have
his late Matie. differing from us, we, at one blow, annull that Par lt., and
without other reason or distinction rescind all its proceedings.

6thly and lastly, That, for to evidence our unparalelled submission, and
resignation unto his Maties. pleasure, and how that, according to the usual
phrase of that time, all that was dearest to us was to him surrendered;
notwithstanding, that the Nation since its first reformation from Poprie, had
almost continually opposed Prelacie, and after having ejected it, with the
severest exclusions, had for many years enjoyed a Church-constitution and
ministry, which at least was highly commendable, for its advanceing of true
knowledge and piety, and in the worst of times did prove the surest bullworke
of Monarchy: Yet, out of mere compliance with his Maties. will, our Par lt.
does consent and the people silentlie acquiesce, to Presbyteries unexspected
overthrow, and Prelacies reestablishment; not that the ruins of what the most
part did esteem to be the labor of their Fathers, and work of God, were at
that time unconcernedlie regarded, or the consequences of this alteration,
which have since ensued, in the least unforseen; but in a word, to a King so
acceptable to us, and to whom we had already given all things, we could refuse
nothing.

These and other arguments, that then occurred, of the sincerity and
satisfaction of our joy, for his Maties. return, being considered, I think
that passage Ps. 126., was not of old more truly said by those concerned,
then we may now directly and without paraphrase transferr it to our selves,
viz That when the Lord turned again our captivity we were like them that dream
then was our mouth filled with laughter and our tongue with singing etc. But
having said eneough of these things, by way of introduction, both for clearing
of some particulars, that will hereafter fall in my way, and also for obviating
any mistake, that can possibly arise, in prejudice of the country, upon the
matters that have been lately agitat among us; I need not use any long
deduction of the intervenient changes, to lead us unto the present posture of
our affairs.

The Earl of Midleton was first honored, with his Maties. Commission, ad did
therein bestirr himself very vigorouslie, but overhastning, and overpryseing
his work, he soon rendered himself obnoxious; so that upon the mutual
jealousies betwixt him and the Duke, then Earl, of Lauderdaill, the Earl of
Midleton, in his passion mistakeing the method of billetting, for that of open
voteing, and in a more justifiable presentment, then righteous judgment,
causing My Lo. Lauderdaill to be sentenced incapable of public trust;
Lauderdaill gets the advantage; and manageing it at Court, by a base
insinuation of Earl Midletons generous disdain of his unworthie practices, in
a short time he prevails to Midletons overthrow, and, as the course less
invidious, obtains his Commission to be transferred to the Earl of Rothesse,
whom he accompanies, from Court to this kingdom, for concludeing thatar Plt.

And in this last Session thereof it was, that the Act and humble tender above
mentioned, was passed with that exorbitant clause, offering the forces
therein condescended on, to be in readiness, as they shall be called for by
his Matie., to march to any part of his Dominions of Scotland, England, or
Ireland, for suppressing of any foreign invasion, intestin trouble, or
insurrection, or for any other service, wherein his Maties. honor, authority,
or greatness may be concerned. Which, though at that time it was looked upon,
by some, as superfluouslie express, and suspiciouslie distinct (a general
offer, being a more aggrieable signification of duty, and a limitation to
Scotland, more proper to a Parliaments prudence) Yet the style and humor of
those times, did easily exempt it from particular notice: But what My Lo.
Lauderdaill, its principal contryver, did thereby intend, time, the best
revealer of secret designs, has since sufficiently discovered.

This Parlt. being dissolved, our new triumphant Church (a quality, which no
Church on earth, did ever evenlie bear) came next upon the stage, and being
fully authorized by the laws lately made, and then also armed with their High
Commission, they go on, in the years 1664. 65. and 66. with their dear and
important conformity, at so christian a rate, that I verily believe, that all
men, except a few of our laborious and indefatigable ghostly fathers, were
perfectly thereby tired out: what prancks were played, tumults excited, and
tragedies acted, in these years, by our reverend Clergy, as if aemulous of
that Presbyterian zeal, which they use so hotly to decry, needs not here be
repeated: My Lo. Lauderdaill himself, though at that time our sole Minister,
was, in appearance, so overcome, and born down by them, to a desperate
indifferency, that, in probability, if the Earl of Tweddell and Sr. Robert
Murray, had not come in for his admonition, and our relief, the land might
have been reduced to the greatest extremities.

But they, having then the honor of his favor, and thereby, access to
represent things in their true state, became the happy instruments of a very
seasonable deliverance, and afterward of a more expedient indulgence; whereby
the Country was very sensibly refreshed, and a great part of its disquiets
composed: And this was the condition of our affairs, when unluckilie, in the
year 1669. My Lo. Lauderdaill, falling into an itch of Grace, and thirsting for
a little of that Glory, whereof he had long swayed the Power, procures a new
Parlt. to be called, and himself thereto named Commissioner: Now, it being
from the date of this Commission, that we may truly calculate the rise of most
of our late mischiefs, it will not be amiss, that, in the first place, I
summarylie runn over the occasion, and continuing of this Par lt. and thereby
make way to their more cohaerent representation; and, it is notoriously known,
that, the pretense made for its assembling, was the notion of an Union betwixt
the two Kingdoms; but the matter being of great moment, our procedure must also
be very flow paced, and therefore, during all the first Session, which
continued from the 19. of Octr. unto the 23. of Decr., all done about it was
only the Parliaments answer to his Maties. letter: But the truth is, the
honor, power, and profit of the place of Kings Commissioner, being once
tasted, did prove by far the more tempting; and therefore the Parlt. must be
continued, for prosecution of the thing, in a second Session, which was
accordingly held, from the 28. of July unto the 22. of Agust 1670, and therein
the Commission for the treaty, is, in little more than an hour, expedited to
such persons, as it should please his Matie to nominate, or rather My Lo.
Lauderdaill to suggest; But, allbeit that, within a very short space
thereafter, this whole project was marred, and its design dissipated like a
vapor; yet our Parlt. and his Graces Commission were still kept current,
until that very happily the war, which he had helped to bring on, gives him
a new color, for a third Session in the Year 1672. and thereby, occasion to
honor us, with a third visit. At the opening of this Session, his Maties
letters are read, intimating the war to be the cause of their meeting; but
withal stuffed, with such hyperbolicall commendations of My Lo. Commissioners
Grace, that I am charitable to think, that neither his presumption would have
served him to move his Matie to such things, nor, even his modesty have
consented, that the like should be said of him, if it had not been a designed
gallantrie for his new amiable Duchess, who, by a novell practice, had her
place prepared, and was there present: and certainly it is to the same reason,
that we must ascribe his breaking up of this Session in the middle, for leading
of her Grace, (...) about the Country, for several weeks; the members of
Parlt., being left to attend their return: and so after the close of this
Session, which did dure from the 12. of June unto the 19. of Septr., he goes
back again to Court, without any mention of a dissolution; which nevertheless
in his particular, happened well: for finding that matters in England begun to
frown, and that in the summer 1673, the clouds thickened exceedingly, even to
the threatening of an inevitable eruption, at the ensueing meeting or their
Parlt.; If Scotland, formerlie the theater of his glory, had not now
presented, as a convenient retreat, he might have been in great perplexity:
and therefore, for a fourth time, down he must come, only the pretense was
not so obvious, yet the war not ended, and the disorders of the Phanaticks,
that have served many a turn, are judged sufficient matter for a letter,
wherein his Matie recommending first the security of the kingdom, and next,
the severe chastisement of nonconforming disorders, concludes with many good
words in behalf of his Grace in the usual manner: but the 12. of Novr. the day
of the meeting of Parlt. being come, after the reading of his Maties. letter,
and a short speech made by the Commissioner, he is greatly surprised, to hear a
discourse of grievances begun by Duke Hamiltoun, and seconded vehemently from
every quarter, so that he had no way to extricate himself; but by a short
adjournment: and thus, from that day to the 9th. of Decr, keeping only five
meetings or Parlt., he, on the one hand, endeavors by redressing the
grievances of the Salt, Brandy and Tobacco, caballing with his few adhaerers,
and insinuating with some of his opposits, to appease matters; and, on the
other, he fights and wrestles, with pretenses of his Maties prerogative, and
abrupt adjournments, to stave off more touching complaints; until, perceiving
all his ground to be lost, he is at length necessitated to deliver himself by
one long adjournment for all, and to wait for a more favorable opportunity,
from the issue of things then in dependence in England: but notwithstanding,
that all things, both at Court, and concerning the English Parlt., have
succeeded to his very wish, and that in this interim, he has omitted nothing
at home or abroad, which might dispose affairs to a more propitious aspect; yet
when the meeting of our Parlt. recurrs, on the 3d. of March, he again, by his
Maties. express command, chooses to adjourn it unto the 14. of Octr. next, to
the unexpressible surprise, and dissatisfaction of both Parlt. and people.

Having thus dispatched the narrative of our Parlt. and its Sessions; for the
better understanding of the causes, that have occasioned our discontents, and
increased them unto the present distemper, it may be remembered, that, after
that the Earl of Midleton was laid aside, the whole mannagement of our
affairs, at Court, was devolved upon My Lo. Laud., as sole Secretary, for this
kingdom, neither can it be accounted an imposing, by any knowing person, to
affirm, that he did no less absolutely exercise it.

His Maties long absence from our Country, and his necessary
unacquaintednesse, by reason thereof, both with persons and the condition of
matters amongst us, do certainly extend, and raise this employment to the
greatest and highest trust: But My Lo. Lauderdaill, according to his noble
self confidence, apprehending more the control of other men's officious
medlings, than the least possibility of his own mistaking, did further improve
the thing, by the particular care and caution that he took, to have himself
his Maties sole Informer as well as his sole Secretary; and therefore, not
only upon the pretense of his Maties prerogative, were our matters, for the
most part, disposed of above, without any previous advice of his Maties
Council in Scotland; but strict notice was also taken of all Scotchmen coming
to Court; and to attempt an address, or access to his Matie., otherwise then
by My Lo. Lauderdaill, was, no less, than the hazard of his implacable
resentment. I need not here mention his supine, or rather designed, neglect of
introduceing Scotchmen to offices about Court; it is obvious to every one, that
even those vacancies, happening by the death of Scotchmen, were there, through
his fault, discontinued from the nation: it was also his study and work, as he
has often publicly boasted, to have the Court Council for Scotch business,
upon pretext that it consisted of Englishmen, disused and suppressed: But as it
is evident, that he did draw to himself the whole significancie of our Nation
in England, meerlie for the augmenting of his own value, so it is no less
clear that he ordered all things amongst us at his own pleasure. Thus, from
himself alone, Privy Counselors are named, Lords of Session and Exchecquer
placed and removed, gifts and pensions granted, Armies levied, and disbanded,
General Officers appointed, this Parlt. called, and all other matters of
importance transacted, as he thought good to advise and direct: And the truth
is, that for several years, the thing was quietly comported with, forasmuch
as, we did not only consider that the present state and circumstances of our
government, did someway oblige us to this condition; but did also find, that so
long as Chancellor Hyde did force My Lo. Lauderdaill to consult, more his
prudence, then his humor, his administration, though too absolute, was yet not
altogether unreasonable: But, this restraint being once removed, and his
ambition left at liberty to swell with his prosperity, what strange and
grievous effects it has since produced, especially after his riseing to be
his Maties Commissioner, the plain history of things, without the persuasions
of any other argument, will best evince; and because that the order observed,
or intended in Parlt., will probably give most satisfaction, it shall also be
the rule of our method.

The first, and great grievance then, mentioned in Parlt., was the monopoly of
the Salt, which being by My Lo. Lauderdaill procured, to the Earl of
Kincaerden his friend, by his Maties gift, allowing the praeemption of Inland
and prohibition Foreign salt, was worth to the interessed more then 4000 lb.
st. yearlie; but not only with twice as great a diminution of his Maties.
revennue, but to the general and heavy distress of the whole country; it
being most certain, that the nation was thereby reduced to those straits, that
in many places, the poor people were necessitated, to send several miles to
the sea, for salt water, to supply their indigence; and in other places were
constrained, to give 18. or 20. shillings st. for the same quantity of salt,
which, before the granting of this Gift, they used to buy for 3 sh. and 6.d. or
4. sh.; so that in effect the clamours of the people were ready to break out
into uproars and tumults. Which grievance is so much the more chargeable upon
My Lo. Lauderdaill, because that when his Maties chief Officers, perceiving
that the first design of this Salt-project could not take, and that the
consequences of this gift would be very hurtful, did by their letter give full
information to the Court of the prejudices and dangers, likely to ensue upon
it, in stead of prevailing, they were rather chid and menaced for being so
officious.

The second grievance was, that of the Brandy-wine, which was thus
occasioned; in the Parlt. 1663. there was an Act made, prohibiting the
importation of strong waters, and so of brandy-vvine; vvhereupon, in the year
1672., My Lo. Lauderdaill obtains for the L. Elphinston, who had married his
Niece, a gift of this prohibition, and of the seizures, that should be made
upon it; but the contrivance was not to render the law effectual, but indeed
to circumvene it; for the Patentees advantage; who, in place of hindering the
import, did give to the Merchants licenses upon composition, at the rate of 15.
or 16. lb. st. per tunn, which would have amounted to at least 30,00. lb. st.
yearlie; and hereby vast quanties were imported, without the payment of
either Custom or Excise, and yet vented again in the Country at excessive
prices.

The third grievance was a gift of 2 d. per pound upon all tobacco imported;
this gift was granted in the year 1673. to Sr. John Nicolson for himself and
some other of My Lo. Lauderdails friends, who were his partakers, whereby they
should have made a considerable benefit, but with the damage of, at least, two
or three thousand pounds st. yearlie to his Maties treasury, and the great
extortion of the people. These were my Lo. Lauderdails wise and faithful
improvements of his Maties. prerogative in the matter of Trade, which he was so
isntrumental to have declared, and indeed are perversions, so palpablie
gross, that comparing events with their causes, a man may find great reason to
doubt whether My Lo. Lauderdaill did not intend these very abuses, as much in
the framing, as in the violating of, these laws: and yet when they came to be
complained of in Parlt., what opposition, and indignation he showed, even to
the straining of his Maties sacred authority, in its most tender and delicate
part, many hundreds can testify; neither can it be alleged that the things
were first moved in Parlt., not for a redress from My Lo: Commissioner, but in
order to A representation desired to have been made to his Matie. Because that,
first they being so enormous, and yet instances only, and not the whole of our
grievances, a representation to the king, was not more necessary for an
adequate remedy, then for future prevention. Next, the matter of the Salt had
been already fully remonstrated to his Matie by his Officers of State, and by
My Lo. Laud. procurement, a sharp rebuke, in stead of a gracious relief, was
all the return, as I have allreadie marked. But lastly, it is most probable by
all circumstances, that if it had not been from the fear, and for the diverting
of this representation, My Lo. Lauderdaill, in place of harkening to a
redress, had, according to the inflexible constancy of his great soul, in the
royal spirit of Pharaoh, and with the brave Politic of Rehoboams young
huffes, answered these turbulent murmurers, you are idle, you are idle, your
yoke is heavy, but I will add thereto.

However necessity, at this time, prevailing, these three burdens are removed,
to the peoples great comfort, and his Majesty's considerable advantage. But
here it is that we are to remark, that the thing wherein his Grace did find
himself mostly concerned, was the proposal made, as I have touched, that his
Matie should be by his Parlt. immediately informed of the true state and
condition of the kingdom; and indeed his Grace was thereby so hotly allaram'd,
that little more liberty of speech was allowed, or order observed; but
immediately his Maties prerogative is pretended, that nothing ought to be moved
in Parlt. except by the Lords of the Articles, that to them complaints and
overtures should be first made, and, if by their vote thrown out, they should
proceed no further, and therefore, not only were all motions offered in plene
Parlt. checked and interrupted with this common answer, to the Articles, but the
Parlt. was certified by his Grace, that if they should all agree to have
grievances otherwise treated, and considered, he would interpose and hinder it
by his great negative.

Now, because, that this pretense of the privilege of the Lords of the
Articles, was justly looked upon by all considering men, as a virtuall
subversion of the power and liberty of Parlts., alike prejudicial, both to
his Matie and the kingdom, it may be observed,

First, that this meeting of the Articles, by its last establishment, consists
of eight Bishops, chosen by the Lords, eight Lords, chosen by the Bishops, and
eight Commissioners of Shires, and eight Burgesses, chosen by the eight
Prelates, and eight Lords, first elected, jointlie to which were added by the
Commissioner the Officers of State.

Secondly, That in the contending for the power of this meeting, it was
asserted, that not only all business must be by the Lords of the Articles,
and by them only, tabled in Parlt., but that, if in the debates upon their
reports any new thing should be started, the Parlt. ought not to take notice of
it, further, then to return the whole matter to the meeting of the Articles, to
be there entertained or supressed at their pleasure.

Thirdly, That it is manifest from all our Records, that the rise and
constitution of this meeting, was at first by the free appointment of our
Parlts., who thought fit to name certain of their number, for framing such
overtures as were offered for the publik good, into Articles to be enacted for
laws according to the ancient form; and therefore, it being at first devised
by the Parlt., as a simple expedient for order and dispatch, it was also, both
inconstant in its being* and variant in its number and method, according as the
Parlt. did see cause.

Fourthly, That as this meeting was in effect the Committee of the Parlt., for
preparing laws; so it is very well known, that there was another, more ancient,
meeting ordained by the Parlt. and called, Domini ad querelas or (if you will)
the Committee of Grievances, which having continued in all times, was only
disused in the 2d. Session of the Parlt. 1661., to the effect that private
affairs, which in the first Session of that Parlt., when our ordinary Courts
were not set down, had taken too great a current that way, might, after their
restitution, return more easily to their proper channels.

Fifthly, That the Act of Parlt. K. I. 6th appointing four of every Estate, to
meet 20. days before the Parlt. to receive all articles and supplications, and
deliver them to the Clerk of Register, to be by him presented, to the persons
of the Estates, to be considered by them, to the effect, that things
reasonable, may be formallie made and presented to the Lords of the Articles,
in the Parlt. time, and frivolous matters rejected; Does no vvays countenance
this exorbitant power of the Lords of the Articles, it being manifest, by the
order therein set down of preparing matters by a previous meeting, and their
subsequent forming, and presenting, by the three Estates, to the Articles, that
the Parlts. power of first receiving, and then committing, matters to that
meeting, was not, at that time, so much as the subject of the question. But,
the only thing intended, was the orderly tableing of things in Parlt. as is
yet further apparent, by what is there subjoined viz. that no Article or
supplication wanting a special title or unsubscribed by the presenter shall be
read or answered in that Convention (to wit of the four of every Estate) or
the Parlt. following the same. Which is a provision, so cleerlie preparatorie,
to the meeting and work of the Lords of the Articles, that it is indeed
strange, how men could have the confidence, to obtrude this Act, even to his
Matie, for proveing their pretended prerogative of the meeting of the Articles
over the Parlt., which, I darre affirm, did never before this time, enter in
the imagination either of King or Parlt. since they were known in this nation.

Sixthly, That in the Parlt. 1663., where My Lo. Laud,s. influence was very
eminent and signal, there was a particular Act made, for settling the
constitution and choising of Lords of the Articles in all time thereafter
whereby it is expresslie provided, that the Lords of the Articles are to
proceed, in the discharge of their trust, in preparing of Laws, Acts, and
overtures, and ordering of all things remitted to them by the Parlt., and in
doing every thing else, etc. Which words remitted to them do, in their obvious
construction, and most received signification among us, very evidentlie
suppose, and hold forth, the power, and use, of proposing to be in the body of
the Parlt., and that the Lords of the Articles are to act upon their
references, as their Committee.

Which arguments, being well perpended, and the unanimous suffrage of reason,
law and sense, that do plainly say, that no Court can or ought to be
cypherized by its own delegates, being thereto added; I think I may, without
difficulty, affirm, that his Grace by attributing to the Articles this
praeeminence, and superintendence over the Parlt., and thereby depriving it of
its just liberty, did directly impugn, and highly derogate from its
authority and dignity; and so became guilty of a greater grievance, then any
of those, which he labored to avoid. Its true he wanted not cogent enough
motives, for what he did; he saw, in the first place, that the meeting of the
Articles, (whereof he supposed, that his former care, with the obsequiousness
of the Bishops, would gain him the plurality) was his only refuge, from the
terror that he became to himself in the apprehension, that otherwise his
actings might come to be truly discovered by a faithful Parlt. to a gracious
Prince: And next, the Parlt. had, out of their exceeding tenderness of duty
to his Matie, testified, in their preceding sessions, so much compliance with
all his humors, as well as deference to his character, that he had fully
assured his ambition of their eternal submission; neither was this assurance a
groundless flattery, for he knew, that he had put the matter to the proof,
upon several occasions, as first, when upon a vacancie falling out in the
meeting of the Articles, the Parlt. did allow him to supply it by his
nomination. 2dly, when contrary to the received custom (and yet without
contradiction) he caused exclude from being present at the meetings of the
Articles, all such members, as were not thereto named, to the effect, as it is
probable, that the body of the Parlt., being less prepared, might the more
implicitlie go along withal their conclusions* and 3dly. when in the 3d.
session of this Parlt., upon an overture made by a member, in the debate about
the sumptuarie act, that the summer session might be taken away, he
passionatelie blustered out, that, for that very presumption the thing should
not be done so long as he was Commissioner, with many other foolish words to
this effect: Yet in all these he was tamelie born with.

But, albeit these things may possibly excuse his being so untractable to free
reasoning, with which he had been so little acquainted; yet it remains still a
matter of just wonder, that, at least, the interest of his Maties authority,
visiblie exposed by such an intolerable stretch, did not oblige him to a
better behavior, in so concerning a contest: For as much as, it is evident,
that if the prudence and loyalty of the Parlt. had not restrained, nothing
else could have retrived the prerogative, from the inconvenience of this hard
dilemma, either of being subjected to a necessary regulation, or of being the
occasion of a seeming breach betwixt the King and his people. But the Parlt.,
being resolved to decline that point, with their utmost circumspection, chused
rather to maintain their possession, by an uneasy exercise, then to assert
their right with the smallest umbrage of offense, not doubting, but that his
Matie would, in due time, determine the controversy to their satisfaction.

And therefore, leaving it, as it stands, I shall again return to my main work,
and prosecute our grievances, in such order as the members of Parlt. found
access to move them in: only, seeing that their endeavors had no better
success, than to provoke his Grace to break up this fourth Session, with a two
months adjournment, I shall here handle them more fully then they were there
spoke to.

The fourth grievance then is, the corruption of our Mint and Coinage, whereof
My L. Hatton the D. of Lauds. brother is General; this complaint was grounded
in the universal clamor of the people; who have found, for these several
years, that the intrinsic value of our silver coin is sensibly diminished,
both in its weight and finenesse, to the nations great damage, and dishonor;
beside it does add to the resentment, that the same L. Hatton having, some
years ago, filled the Country, with a light copper coin, without observing,
either the quantity, or the weight and value prescribed, was nevertheless by
My L. Lauds. means, secured and indemnified: It is also remembered, that the
better to enable him to this depravation of our silver coin, the Dutch dollars,
called the leg dollars, usuallie imported by our merchants, and current
amongst us at 58.d. per piece, were cried down by the D. of Lauds. procurement,
to 56.d. for no better reason known, than that they might be brought in for
bullion, to the mint-house, for his brothers benefit: But though, that all
demanded in Parlt. about this matter was, that there might be an examination of
the coin appointed, and an account given of the bullion, which has been long
neglected; yet the memorial given in for that effect, was not regarded: It is
true that My L. Laud., after the Decr. adjournment of the Parlt., did move his
Matie to write a letter, and thereupon bring the business to a trial, before
the Council; but in a manner so partial, that I profess it is my admiration,
how any man should have a confidence strong enough for such practices. The
subject of our complaint is the stock of our current money, and all appointed
by his Maties letter, is, that there should be a trial made upon the Essay
box, and the pieces therein contained. I shall not say, that the oversight
thereof has been altogether in My L. Hattons own power and trust these years
by past, yet so certain it is, that this box or pixis has been of late so
greatly neglected, that one of My Lo. Commissioners friends, appointed for the
examen, could not forbear to say, that they were met to see whether the
Officers of the Mint were as much fools as they were suspected to be knaves,
but notvv^h^tanding this the trial goes on, and moreover the pieces are not
brough^ to the essay severallie, but the whole (with what mixture of fyner
pieces coined and conveyed in on purpose, to compense the baser, who can tell)
is melted down together in one mass, and thereupon the essay made, and the
report thereof, with some small lignots, sent up to the King; which proving (to
be sure) according to the design of the contryvance, his Matie within these
few days, sends down a second letter to the Council, signifying his
satisfaction, and willing Hatton and the rest of the Officers to be exonerated:
But when this letter is read, it is opposed that the grievance of the Mint had
been tabled in Parlt., where the trial should also be issued, that his Maties
first letter did only order a trial to be made of the essay box, which if
either falsified, or otherwise eluded, could not be a ground of release to the
Mint-Officers, so long as it was manifest, that almost the whole of the current
coin is defective and debased; and lastly, there was offered, a bagg of money
lately received out of the mint Office, sealed with the Officers seals, which
they could not but still acknowledge, and it was desired that there might be a
trial made on the species therein contained. Notwithstanding all which, My L.
Commissioner, and the plurality of the Council, proceed and vote an
exoneration, conform to his Maties last letter. Now is not this a noble way of
redressing grievances, to purge the Author, and leave the thing untouched? nay
to make the greatest aggravation that can be of his failing, viz. the
corrupting or frustrating of the checque, the best ground of his clearing, and
all this contrary to the reclaiming evidence, of almost, as many witnesses, as
there are pieces of his Maties coin minted in Scotland; it being certain that
amongst hundreds that have been tried, very few have been reported to be,
standard.

The fifth, is the filling of our Courts of judicatorie especially our Session
(which is the supreme for administration of justice) with ignorant and
insufficient men: This is a grievance so notorious that I am sorry, that it
leaves me not so much as; the shadow of a complement, in forbearing to name the
persons; Sr. Andrew Ramsey, one of the four lately brought in by My L. Laud.,
being questioned in Parlt. (as we shall hear) did voluntarily demitt in his
Graces hands; and yet I am assured that I neither favor him, nor wrong the
other three, when I give him the preference both as to parts and knowledge. But
the evil does not here subsist; its more afflicting progress is, that in
effect My L. Lauderdails all-swaying power, his brothers headines, and other
men's baseness, have introduced that partiality, both in the Session and other
Courts, that, the very foundations of law and right, are like to be shaken; as
was ready to have been instanced in Parlt., in several late decisions,
prepared for seconding the memorial given in for a trial of this matter: And
this was also the cause of another overture then thought upon, and since moved
to his Matie, viz. that there should be a methodical digestion of our laws, and
that the rules of judgment should be rendered more fixed and certain* but in
place of a remedy, these things were all adjourned with the Parlt., and since
their breaking up, new practices have been used, to make the case more
desperate: For there being, in February last a sentence interlocuture
pronounced by the Lords of Session, in an action betwixt the E. of Dumfermling
and L. Amond, the L. Amond, finding himself thereby grieved, thought good to
protest, and appeal to the King and Parlt: but My L. Commissioner looking on
this as a noveltie (albeit it wanted not presidents, and that even his Graces
Father, who was himself a Lord of the Session did more, in appealing from the
Session to the King only) lays hold on the occasion, and (as its like) as well
to ingratiate with the Lords, as to reach some Lawyers who had displeased him,
the Lords are by him moved to write to the King, complaining of the thing, as
contrary to several Acts of Parlt., and of dangerous consequence; to which an
answer is as quickly returned, signifying his Maties displeasure against it,
and ordering the Lords to enquire, by My L. Amond and his Advocates their
oaths, who were its contryvers: But when the business comes to be examined, My
L. Amond owns the Appeal, and adheres to it in the sense wherein his Advocates,
by a resolution under their hands, had affirmed it to be justifiable, viz.
that, although by Acts of Parlt., there did ly no such appeall from the Lords,
as could stopp their proceedings, or the execution of their sentences; yet
seeing the Parlt. was the absolute sovereign Court of the kingdom, and has
sometimes upon complaint rescinded the Lords their decreets, an appeal by way of
protestation, to relieve the appellant of the prejudice of a constructive
acquiescence, might be lawfully made from the Lords to the King and Parlt. and
that this they conceived themselves bound to assert, lest they should contraveen
the law, that forbids all men, under the pain of treason, to impugn the
supreme authority of the Parlt. But albeit both his Maties Advocate and others
of the Bench gave their opinion, that an appeal in this sense, is not against
law, and none of the rest did or can assert the contrary; Yet My L.
Commissioner still pousseth on, and will have My L. Amonds Advocats to depose
upon oath, about its contryvance, whereupon the Advocates do, on the other
hand, answer as positivlie, that the appeal being owned by My L. Amond, and
offered by them to be justified, there was no more subject of inquisition; that
his Maties letter did suppose the thing to be unlawful, and no man was bound,
in a matter of that consequence, to give oath against himself; that, by an
express law, men should not be required to give oath super inquirendis; and
lastly, that by their oath, as Advocates, they were bound not to reveal the
secrets of their Clients, whereunto the oath demanded seemed to tend. And to
this last point the whole body of the Advocates do Join, and declare their
concurrence. But notwithstanding these answers, the Lords, refusing to transmit
the Advocates reasons, write up a second letter, acquainting the King with
their denial. In which heats and disputes, unnecessarilie drawn on, by My L.
Commissioners straining humors, about the authority both of King, Parlt. and
Lords of Session, and after a second appeal made in the same manner, the Lords,
according to their usual diet, break up until the first of June, whether to
the increasing, or abating the grievance here mentioned, I leave it to others
to Judge, and to time to determine.

The sixth grievance is general gifts of his Maties casualities such as the
general gift of Wards and Marriages to the Earl of Kincaerden, contrary to
express Acts of Parlt., and to his Maties great prejudice, and the vexation or
his subjects: For these casualties, being of an undetermined extent, as
uncertain as the death of Vassals, and ordinarily attended with many
circumstances, whereof his Maties equity and goodness can only best
arbitrate; the reason both of the law, and also of his Maties. and his
subjects their interest, against all such gifts, is abundantly obvious.
Neither is the aggravation, arising from the persons, the procurer, and the
purchaser, less considerable; the D. of Laud, and Earl of Kincaerden are,
both of them, Commissioners of his Maties Treasury, and also extraornarie
Lords of the Session, so that being doubly obliged, by these two great and
honorable trusts, equally to intend his Maties advantage, and the observation
or his laws, their delinquencie in this point, cannot but be accounted a high
misdemeanor; which to excuse, by saying, that, notvvithstanding the gift, no
action has been thereon founded, but all proceedings carried on in his Maties
name, and by his Officers, after the usual form; when in the mean time, My L.
Kincaerden does treat, and compound, and takes up the profits of all sentences,
what is it else save to acknovvlegde a transgression of the sense, in the
manifest circumvention of the words, of the law: Is is true that this gift is
not the first of this nature that has been granted: Immediately after his
Maties return My L. Lauderdaill and others got a gift of all preceding
casualities, and the Earl of Kincaerden, had also a prior gift for three
years, whereof this is only a prorogation, by virtue of all which many
thousands of pounds have been very rigorously exacted: but seeing, there can be
hardly any thing more unreasonable, then to pretend a privilege in evil from
men's forbearance, it is evident that these things, do only render the
grievance exceedingly more grievous.

These three last grievances, having been moved in Parlt., immediately before
its Decr. adjournment, before I pass to other things that were not moved, I
shall briefly narrate two other passages, that were thought also to influence
it. The first shall be of one Mr. Paterson Dean or Edinburgh; this man, after
the first conflict in Parlt. about a representation, to be made to his Matie.,
preaching before the Commissioner, was pleased to tell his auditors, that
sometimes God for the sins of a people would raise up a fawning Absalom to
flatter, and kiss them, and to steal away their hearts, by bemoaning their
grievances, and saying that their matters were good and right, but there was no
man deputed of the King to hear them, until at length a Sheba the son of
Bichri, should arise to sound the trumpet of rebellion and say, We have no part
in David, etc. with many more words to this purpose; which discourse, by all its
circumstances, carrying an intolerable reflection upon some members of Parlt.,
and that so obviouslie, that notwithstanding that Mr. Paterson did swear, that
he thereby intended no particular person, yet, unless they had been inspired,
it was impossible not to think them designed; there is thereupon a complaint
exhibited, craving that Mr. Paterson might be called to account for such
seditious speeches; This the Commissioner would at first have waved, and then,
finding that it was like to be warmlie pressed, he agrees, that the examination
be committed to the Lords of the Clergy, but although a competent time was
given them, and their report often demanded, yet it was still declined and
delayed without any issue.

The second shall be about Sr. Andrew Ramsey, This man having been Proveist of
Edinburgh under Oliver, and complied with him to the height of being Knighted,
and thereafter getting himself reknighted and reentred Proveist by the E. of
Midletons favor, upon his disgrace, very quickly strikes in with My L. Laud.,
with whom and the tradesmen of Edinburgh, he by his long-practised arts, of
flattery, and briberie, did so mightily prevail, that after having been ten
years Proveist, and in that time domineered over the City, and enriched
himself by their rents and moneys at his pleasure, he dreamed of nothing
less, then a perpetual dictatorship: What kind deallings, during these years,
were betwixt My Lo. Laud. and him is sufficientle known, the office of Proveist
which never had before either fee or salarie, yet now by My L. Laud, s.
procurement in behalf of his favourit, has a pension of 200. lb. st. yearlie,
annexed to it. 2dly. the Militia, being established, the Proveist is made
Collonell, and his son Major, of Edinburgh regiment, and with a 100. lb. st. to
the Major of yearlie salarie. 3dly. Sr. Andrew having, neither for a just
price, nor by the fairest means, got a title to a bare insignificant rock in
the sea, called, the Bass, and to a public debt, both belonging to the L. of
Wachton; My L. Lauder., to gratify Sr. Andrew, moves the King, upon the
pretense of this public debt, and that the Bass was a place of strength (like
to a castle in the moon) and of great importance, (the only nest of Solengeese
in these parts) to buy the rock from Sr. Andrew, at the rate of 4000. lb. st.,
and then obtains the command and profits of it, amounting to more then a 100.
lb. st. yearlie, to be bestowed upon himself. But, besides this, there was
also here an open reciprocation on Sr. Andrews part; for it having pleased his
Matie, about the same time, to perpetuate to the Town of Edinburgh a gift,
which they had enjoyed for some years by temporary grants, Sr. Andrew takes
this occasion to express his gratitude to his Patron, and representing to the
town, how much My L. Laud. had befriended them in that matter, he persuades
them to acknowledge it, with a benevolence of 5000. lb. st. 4thly. My Lo. Laud.
procures Sr. Andrew, to be made first a privy Counselor, then a Commissioner
of the Exchequer, and last of all a Lord. of the Session, allthough the best
breeding that ever he had, for these employments, was that of his being once a
merchant.

But here, ill-natured envy maliciously disdaining these ridiculous
preferments, and taking the advantage of Sr. Andrews manifold maleversation,
incites first the murmurings of the Citizens, and then at Michaelmess 1672, the
opposition of some of their Council, against his continuance in office:
Nevertheless Sr. Andrew, albeit with extreme wrestling, gets through for that
time, and to prevent the recurring of the like difficulty, thinks fit to
inform My L. Laud., that some factious persons had stirred up tumults, to
disturb his election, and thereupon his Maties letters are directed to the
privy Council, ordering them to examine the matter, and report: When the
privy Council received these letters, the most part were not a little
surprised, to see a command from Court, to enquire about a tumult, alleged to
have been made, in the place of their residence, whereof they had not before
heard; yet in obedience, albeit there was as good as nothing found, the report
was made, which all men judged would be the close of that affair: But Sr.
Andrew being resolved, notwithstanding that the body of the City was
generally set against him, to carry also the next election, the better to
prepare for it, obtains by My. L. Laud. a letter from the King, in Septr. last
to the Town-Councell of Edinburgh, resuming the story of the tumult, and
thereupon ordaining Mr. Roughheed their Clerk to be removed from his office, as
being thereto accessorie, concluding that his Matie would supersede to determine
as to others, until he should be informed of their behavior in the ensuing
election: I shall not mention all the little insolences, wherewith Sr Andrew
did execute these orders against that Gentleman; the thing considerable is,
that all that heard of this letter, and how that thereby, contrary to law, the
right of the Clerks office, was arbitrarilie taken from him, without being
heard, and the Town-Councell also indirectlie overawed in the freedom of their
electing, did look upon the impetrating thereof, as a most dangerous precedent,
threatening every man's property and liberty, and therefore, not only was the
Clerk encouraged to raise an action declaratorie of his right and for
repossession, but My L. Laud. preceiving, that the general resentment was
justly levelled against himself, as the principal author of this high
attempt, he again by a second act, imposing no less upon his Maties goodness,
then by the former he had abused his justice, moves his Matie to write a second
letter, ordering Mr Roughheed to be restored, without the least
acknowledgement, to a place, from which, not 10. weeks before, he had been, by
the same method, removed as a seditious incendiarie: These then and several
other of Sr Andrews high misdemeanors, having deservedly occasioned a
complaint to be exhibited against him in Parlt., the Commissioner, observing
well what might be its consequence, and yet unwilling openly to undertake his
defense and patrocinie, consents that the matter be referred to the Lords of
the Articles, and there again obtains that the trial of the things charged,
should be remitted to the ordinary Courts: But the Parlt. knowing as well as
his Grace that those exorbitancies, that flow from the abuse of favor, are
commonly colored with such conveyances, as plain and positive laws, (to which
these Courts are tied,) do rarely suspect and so very seldom provide against;
do therefore still insist that the Lords of the Articles would bring in their
report; whereupon My Lo. Commissioner, understanding better then any man Sr
Andrews guilt and his own accession, as a fit expedient, both to appease the
people, and to decline so concerning an accusation; upon the Sabbath, wheedles
Sr Andrew unto a voluntary dimission of all his places and employments, and
upon the Tuesday thereafter adjourns the Parlt. and how he has since
endeavored to represent him, both here and at Court, as if he alone were
chargeable with all his offenses is abundantly known.

I have been the more ample in this narration, because that, with all reverence
to his Matie, (whom I know to be infinitlie removed from all communication in
My Lo. Lauds. naughty practices) and proportions also being observed, and the
parallels duly commenced from the Year 1662., I do indeed take Sr Andrew
Ramsey with reference to My L. Laud. and the City of Edinburgh, to be a very
exact model of Lauderdaill himself, in order to his Matie and all Scotland,
and therefore the more ingratfull is his confidence that under such a pressing
conviction, should not relieve his Matie and the Kingdom, in compleeting the
similitude by a spontaneous dimission.

Having thus gone thorough these motions made in Parlt. about the Mint, Lords
of Session, general gifts, Dean Paterson and Sr Andrew Ramsey I now proceed to
these other grievances, which, allbeit not allowed to be brought in, were
notwithstanding intended by several members, and, in probability, would have
been the principal points in the representation which was overtured, to be
made to his Matie.

The seventh grievance then is the accumulation of eminent offices upon single
persons: I shall not here reflect upon the sufficiency or insufficiency of
any, I heartily wish that all men were as careful to cover, as I am willing
to conceal their weakness; but the plain ground of complaint is, that My L.
Laud. has procured to himself, and the L. Hatton his brother, and to the
Earls of Athol and Kincaerden, his particular friends, not only the most
considerable, but also the far greater part, of the more important charges of
the kingdom, to the visible weakening of the government, and to the detriment
of his Maties service; thus the D. of Laud. himself, is

First, President of his Maties Council.

2dly sole Secretary.

3dly one of the Commissioners of the Treasury:

4thly Captain of the Castle of Edinburgh.

5thly Captain of the Bass.

6thly Agent at Court for the Borroughs.

7thly one of the four extraordinary Lords of the Session: and 8thly (for who
knows how long it may continue) his Maties high Commissioner and all that it
imports.

The L. Hatton is 1st. Treasurer depute.

2dly General of the Mint.

3dly one of the Lords of Session.

The E. of Athole is 1st. Lord privy Seal.

2dly Lord Justice General.

3dly Captain of the Kings Guard.

4thly one of the four extraordinary Lords of the Session.

The E. of Kincaerden is one of the Commissioners of the Treasury.

2dly Vice Admiral of Scotland.

And 3dly one of the four extraordinary Lords of Session. Principal offices
are the stays, as it were, of a State, and their distinction is, not so much
determined by their objects, as by the proportionable capacities that most of
them do require; beside, as in the multitude of Counselors there is safety,
so in the multitude of Officers there is strength, and their right
distribution, does not more encourage virtue and reward merit, then it settles
the administration of the kingdom by a just balance, and thereby becomes
equally advantageous, for the peoples good, and the Princes security: But
humor and ambition do puff at such creeping politics. My Lo. Laud. has
also introduced the abuse of gifts of the reversions or survivances of places
to children and boys, and such are the gifts to My L. Hatton and his son of the
Mint-office, to Sr. Charles Erskin and his son of the Lions Office, and
several others of that nature; by which continuance of offices, that, at most,
used to be conferred ad vitam, his Matie, is deprived of that excellent part of
his treasure, which, with no expense, rewards virtue best, and is indeed the
only fond of the most obliging gratifications.

The eighth grievance is the mal-administration and profusion of his Maties
revennue: The clearing of this head, in its full extent, would require a more
prolix and accurate computation, than is proper for my present work; but that I
may give it its necessary evidence and also discover, more fully, the fruits
and effects at My L. Lauds. ministry, I shall only here set down, in
general, first what sums of money he and his three friends have got in
donatives: and 2dly. what sums they receive yearlie by their places and
pensions, as has been made appear on several occasions by a particular
condescendence. My L. Laud. then, has got in donatives within these few years
no less then 26900. lb. st. and may be reckoned to have yearlie since the year
1669. that he was appointed Commissioner, 16350. lb. st.

My L. Hatton has got in donatives to the value of 15300. lb. st. and has
moreover yearlie 1196. lb. st., beside he has the profits of the Mint and
bullion, which last did render in Kings James his time 1000. marks Scots
weeklie amounting yearlie to 2500. lb. st.

The E. of Athole got lately by fines 1500. lb. st. and possesses yearlie
1450. lb. st.

The E. of Kincaerdens gettings by reason of the nature of his gifts and
places, cannot be so easily computed, but that they must be very considerable,
by his general gift of Wards and Marriages, which he has had above these
three years, may be evidentlie gathered, from the benefit that he has made, by
some of those particular obventions, which have been compounded for by him, at,
or above, the rate of a 1000. lb. how much then may be reckoned, by all that
fall over the whole Kingdom? he got also the gift of a ship wrackt in
Schetland. As for his yearlie incomes, beside his pension as one of the
Commissioners of the Treasury, he has also all the perquisits of the
Admiralitie, and yet over and above should have had by the gift of the Salt, at
least, 2000. lb. yearlie. Now whether these be not excessive largesses, to such
persons, for such services, and in the more honest then opulent Kingdom of
Scotland is easy to be judged: I grant I have included in the total of My L.
Lauds. yearlie sums, the pension of 500. lb. st., which he procured, out of
our Exchecquer, to his Duchess, when she was only Countess of Dysert, and
not his married wife; but I suppose that their then circumstances being
considered, the error will be excused, with less pain, then it would have been
for me, to make the distinction. I need not here subjoin how that, beside these
abovementioned sums, almost all pensions and gifts have been bestowed, these
years bypast, according to his Graces pleasure; his power in our affairs being
in effect an omnipotency, this part of it is not to be doubted, only it is to
be regrated, that in all these excessive givings, so little respect has been
had to those, who have merited most of his Matie, both by their actings and
sufferings. But the thing, that I esteem more worthy to be noticed, is that
although since his Maties restitution, his revenue in Scotland has been much
above the double of what it was before, and though his casualties have been
exacted with abundance of diligence, and great and vast sums otherwise levied
by fynes, taxations, and assessements, without the least burden, either of
moneys exported for his Maties use, or of foreign war; yet, through a strange
misgovernment, has all been wasted, and consumed, at home, without any visible
improvement, for the public good, or so much as the provision of one freggat,
for the defense of our coast, or convoy of our merchants, in these times of
war.

The 9th. grievance and fountain of all the rest is My L. Lauds. excessive
greatness, far above what, either the Kingdom, or himself can bear; I have
already observed, how that before he was Commissioner, he had, by reason of
his being our sole Secretary and Court-Minister, the absolute rule and dispose
of all our concerns; an interposition ungrateful enough, to a people, so
affectionatlie, dutiful to his Matie. I have also marked, with what a severe
jealousy, he debarred all Scotchmen, from any access or opportunity, so much
as to speak to his Matie, otherwise then he pleased; a practice no less
disserviceable to his Matie, then disobliging to free fellow subjects; I might
in the 3d. place add, that, as his Maties necessary absence has occasioned to
us the unhappiness of My L. Lauds. domination, so his Graces absence also, for
the most part, at Court, does further subject us to a more base, and
disingenuous dependence, upon his ceatures and favorites, nay oftentimes, even
upon his servants, with whom it is well known, that men did ordinarily
transact, for the obtaining and expeding of gifts and signatures, and that it
was, especially by his Graces servants, that personal protections to debtors,
were most abusivlie impetrat: But seeing the greatest part of what I have said,
has been, to set forth the miserable issues of Lauderdails obscuring and
eclipsing grandour, I shall in this place, only note, how by his exaltation to
be his Maties Commissioner, this noxious exhalation came as it were to be
consolidat into that malign meteor which has reduced us unto the afflicted and
disconsolat estate in which we do at present languish. I need not repeet, that
it was for the attaining to this high, and unaccountable power, that he devised
the calling of this Parlt., upon the pretext of an Union, no less groundless
in its project, then vain in its success; nor shall I resume, by what means,
and for what empty reasons, the Parlt. has hitherto been kept current: That
the office of Commissioner is a thing, altogether extraordinary, and only
warranted by the particular occasion, and special effect for which he is
ordained, is a point so certain, that to affirm the contrary, would be no
less, then a treasonable attempt, to subvert the very foundations of this free
Monarchy; when in former times Commissions of this sort, were granted (which
yet we do not find to have been in use until after King James his goeing to
England) both the Commissions and the Parlt. used to be terminated in one
session; the first that adventured, upon the innovation of adjourning Parlts.
for a long time and, continuing his Commission in the intervall, was the E. of
Midleton; and yet, notwithstanding of all the high strainings, that were then
in fashion, and that the Earls work, could hardly be sooner compleeted, this
same Lauderdaill did, so far resent it, as to make Midletons drawing out of
his Commission (though for little more then two years) an article of his
accusation. But now that My L. Laud. has himself got into the power, he has
presumed to protract it, now more then four years and a half, with so little
appearance of any necessity, that on the contrair, we plainly see, how that
he has, both hindered the Parlts. proceedings, and endeavored to frustrate
all its late meetings: which, as it is a manifest violenting of the ancient,
and natural constitution of our government; so the unnecessarie continuance,
and arbitrarie and frequent long adjournments of this Parlt.; has contributed
exceedingly to the increase of our burdens, and distresses. But the truth is,
that such has been his deportment in this eminent trust, that it is now become
his best security; and what at first his ambition did proudly contrive, his
conscience of guilt does now oblige him, no less tenaciouslie, to maintain: so
that our remedy and relief in this our desolate and abandoned condition,
remains only with God, and his Matie, in the return of their favor.

From which consideration, as much as for the obviating of misinformation, it
pleased the D. of Hamiltoun, and Earl of Tweddel, with some other Gentlemen,
after the adjournment of the Parlt. in Decr last, to go for Court, with the
inexpressible good-liking of the whole Country, who from their faithful
representation to his Matie, did confidentlie expect, an entire deliverance.
But My L. Laud., that he might show himself, no less cross to, then he was
averse from, such a loyal enterprise, omitts no obstruction, that he could lay
in the way; and first, by a pitiful fellow in Berwick, whom he had before
corrupted to spy and intercept all free correspondence, he causes seize,
detain prisoner, and search Sr William Carnegie a member of Parlt., in his
passage through that Town to London. 2dly. having, by the same hand, got some
packets intercepted, he very ungentilly transmitts them to Court, and without
respect to the violation done to the common intercourse and good understanding
of the two nations, or regard to that tenderness, which most men do retain
for their Countries honor, he obtains for his Intelligencer his Maties.
approbation, and a reward of 50. lb. st. out of our exchequer. 3dly. by the
same means, and in the same place, he endeavors to affront D. Hamiltoun and
his company, in their passage, by a suspicious questioning of their
attendents, and refusing them the conveniencie of a nights lodging, which, how
far it was contrary to the generositie of the Governor, then absent, and the
civilitie of the Citizens, they since fully evidenced by that noble reception,
which they gave the Duke in his return. And lastly, My L. Laud. imposes so
far, upon his Maties good nature, as to move him to discountenance a
Gentleman, sent before by D. Hammiltoun, under a groundless pretext suggested
by Lauderdaill, that he had been one of Olivers Sequestrators, contrary to
that prudent and benign part of the act of Indemnitie, prohibiting the
remembrance of all odious names, whereof his Matie has been always most tender.

But notwithstanding all these rubbs, and many other discouragements, D.
Hammiltoun and E. Tweddell being arrived at Court, do there very freely and
faithfully acquitt themselves, in a full and particular account of all things,
relating to his Matie or the Countries interest; I need not here stand, to give
the story by retail; it is like that the impressions were various, but in a
word the result was the same, with the period which we have heard, was putt
to all the good votes and resolves of the English Parlt; hovvever having had
the good fortune to hear accidentally of a letter, and afterward to see its
double, which, I am credibly informed, was delivered unto his Matie, much
about the time that our Lords were there, I have thought good, here, to set
down, for public satisfaction, its just transcript. The address of the
letter was, To the King, and its date and tenor as follovveth.

Edinburgh. Jan. 27. 1674. SIR,
Let the obscurity of the person, with the zeal of his affection, excuse the
manner, and maker of this address; I protest, as in the presence of God, that
it is without the privitie, or knowledge of either party, and nothing less,
then the important concern of your service, and the Countries peace, could have
constrained to it.

I need not lay before your Matie, the many abuses that Scotland has of late
suffered, The universal and most pinching grievance of the S^lt, with these of
the Brandie and Tobacco are confessed, and redressed: Neither are these that
remain, less manifest, to wit, ignorant and insufficient Judges, a light and
base coin, general gifts of Wards and Marriages, general gifts of the pains
of penal statutes, the accumulation of eminent offices upon single persons,
and these also such as are of small merit, gifts of the reversions or
survivances of offices, invas^ons upon property and liberty by the
impetration of private letters, unnecessarie, long and frequent adjournments of
Parlts, the continuing of a Commissioner in the intervalls of Sessions of
Parlt., the mismannagement and profusion of your Maties revenue, and lastly,
the excessive greatness of a State Minister to the exclusion of all others
from free access and application to your Matie, with the many evils that do
thence proceed.

SIR, These pressures are, so heavy in themselves, and have been and are so
afflicting and disquieting to your poor people, that I am confident, were it
possible for you to reflect upon them, without observing by whom they have been
procured, your Maties Justice would not sooner prompt you to the remedy, than
to a strict enquiry and animadversion against their authors, yea move you, even
in the first place, to call out, with Ahasuerus upon like occasion, Who is he
and where is he that durst presume in his heart to do so? But seeing that your
Matie, in your unparalleled goodness, does seem rather to incline to a
gracious relief with a healing composure of all differences, than to notice
past misdemeanors, I shall only in all humility presume to say, that
whatever may be your royal clemency, yet certainly the causers of these
wrongs cannot be the fit instruments of an effectual and satisfying redress.

Your Matie is not unacquainted with the untoward and cross proceedings of the
last Session of Parlt: If your Commissioner was so uneasy, and disobliging, in
his interruptings, and adjournings, when nothing was craved, but the remedy of
such things, which both your Maties service, and your peoples cries, did
instantly demand, can it be exspected, that in the things that remain (so much
the more grievous, and unjustifiable, that he and a few of his friends are
mostlie therein interested) he will be more complacent? Nay Sir, it is evident
as the light, that all the repugnancie, that he has hitherto showed, with his
high pretendings, and stretchings of your Maties prerogative in the institution
of the Lords of the Articles, beyond what the nature and dignity of Parlts
will bear, has plainly been to prevent the progress of your Parlt. to this
trial. The just and necessary motions for examining his Brothers coin, and
the Lords of Session, whereof the weakest are his friends, did provoke him to
an abrupt adjournment; since that time what arts have been used, and what
methods practiced, for gaining particular persons, and strengthening of the
party, is too well known to all, to be unknown to your Matie: He has indeed
thought good to anticipate the Parlt. in the matter of the Mint, but in a way
so partial, and elusorie, that whether your Matie, your Parlt, or your people
be thereby most injured, is hard to be determined. So that, upon the whole
matter, considering, that things in controversy do purelie respect your
peoples good; and, on the one hand, are prosecuted, with the most legal
intentions of such, who have allways been faithful to your interest; and yet,
on the other part, are still opposed, with obstinate partiality, and
untractable humors; It is beyond all question, that the ensueing Sessions, if
holden by the same Commissioner, will necessarily be attended with the former,
if not greater heats and disorders. I can not also forbear to tell your Matie.,
that hitherto your people are persuaded, that in all their sufferings, your
Matie has been more abused, and imposed upon than they, themselves; how
expedient then it is, that this persuasion should still continue, and that
these incident errors of government should be at least gently expiated, by
fixing them upon the true authors, your Matie., who has allways valued
yourselfe so much upon your peoples affections, can only best judge; seeing
therefore that your people have been oppressed, by a malversation not more
irritating in its effects, than in the obstinacy wherewith it is defended, and
that they exspect relief from your royal goodness, with an assurance not to
be disappointed, without a very surprising confusion, and lastly, seeing
nothing is desired, or intended in order to the D. of Lauderdaill, to which he
himself ought not, both in duty, and prudence most readily to agree; let
these in all humility solicit your Maties transcendent bounty, to consider
the following proposalls, which are not more easy in themselves, then they
will prove most effectual, at once, to dissipate all evil appearances, and
restore to this your ancient Kingdom, that serene peace, which will make our
affection and duty again to flourish, in most significant acknowledgements.

1 First That a new Commissioner be named, and appointed to hold the next
Session, and conclude the Parlt.

2 That the D. of Laud. be confirmed in his places of President of the
Council, and one of the Commissioners of the Treasury, and have your Maties
indemnitie ratified in Parlt. for all things past.

3 That there be two Secretaries named, and appointed to reside at Court, per
vices, for your Maties impartial information in all affairs.

4 That the other eminent offices, be duly distribute and conferred upon
deserving persons.

5 That the Commissioners of your Maties Treasury, with such as you shall be
pleased to add to them, be appointed to consider the revennue, and its charge,
with the best means for its regulation, and improvement and to report.

6 That men, knowing in the law, and otherwise well qualified, be named to the
vacancies that are, or may be, in the Session through the removal of such, as
the Parlt., on trial, shall find to be insufficient.

7 That necessary instructions be given to your Maties Commissioner, for the
due redress of all other grievances, and also for quieting and removing
dissatisfactions, in matters ecclesiastic.

8 That there be past in Parlt. an act of oblivion and indemnitie for the
establishing of the minds of all your good subjects.

SIR, These things, which may be almost, as soon done, as said, will
infalliblie prove the high advancement of your service, and firm setlement of
this Kingdom; to which I hope that an excess of favor, to any one single
person, shall never preponderat. Sure I am, were it possible, that your Matie
could be but for one day an unseen observer, amongst us, of the present posture
of things, and disposition of persons, you could not, without wonder, think,
how that any pretending to loyalty, should have obstructed these, or such like
remedies as are here proposed: I might also here offer to your Maties more
serious thoughts, a passage recorded 2 Samuel 19.5.6.7. and recommended by the
suitableness of some of its circumstances, to the present case; but since I am
far from thinking, that the D. of Laud. is to your Matie as Absalom to David,
or that the discontents with us are so dangerous or threatening, as is there
intimated; and seeing I do as little know, how to seperat Ioabs military and
rude passion, from his dutiful and Zealous affection, I trust that God shall
by more gentle and sweet influences, incline your Matie to arise and speak
comfortablie to your servants.


The words of the passage, hinted at in the close of this letter, are these And
Joab came into the house to the King and said thou have shamed this day the
faces of all thy servants, which, this day, have saved thy life, and the lives
of thy sons, and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and the lives
of thy concubines, in that tbou love thine enemies, and hate thy friends:
for thou have declared, this day, that thou reguardest, neither Princes, nor
servants; for, this day, I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and all we had
died, this day, then it had pleased the well; now therefore arise, go forth
and speak comfortablie unto thy servants: for, I swear by the Lord, if thou
go not forth, there will not tarry one with thee this night; and that will be
worse unto thee, then all the evil that befell thee from thy youth until now.

But albeit, that all mareriall in this letter, was pressed by these Noblemen,
and many other things represented that might have tended to the good of the
Kingdom, such as a digestion of our laws and rules of judgment, formerlie
mentioned, a release of all arriers of Taxation and Sesse preceding the year
1665, a discharge of the annuitie of tithes, and a settling of the order of
Parlt. according to known rules and presidents; And lastly that nothing was
omitted that might give a satisfieng evidence in every point, yet My L. Lauds.
suggestions and influences do more prevaill, and D. Hammiltoun is dismissed
with fair words: However it being promised that the Parlt. should sit at its
day and grievances be redressed and also a period putt to My Lo. Lauds.
Commission, My L. Hammiltoun haistens homeward, with extraordinary
difficulty, in respect both of the rigor of the season and the infirmity of
his health, to attend its diet on the 3d. of March, which was the very next day
to that of his arriveall: But in stead of a session so much exspected, by the
people and all the members of Parlt. (who had now waited about four months and
were better conveened then at any time before) all, do meet with the
disappointiment of a blunt adjournment, unto the 14. of Octr. next, and
accordingly the Parlt. is adjourned.

After these our more formed and general grievances, I might here subjoin,
some smaller notices, relateing to My L. Lauds. way and behavior, not
impertinent to the things that we have allreadie heard, such as, first, his
arrogant undervalue of Parlts., discovered by that expression to his Matie.
against the E. of Midletons services, Sir, if you had sent down a dog with your
commission about his neck to your Scotch Parlt, he would have done all that E.
Midleton has done. 2dly. his insolent treating of some members, in this
present Parlt., as when he commanded one Mr William Moor summarilie to prison,
because, I think, he desired that after the order of the English Parlt. Acts
might be, at least, thrice read, before they were voted, or somewhat to this
purpose; and in his course style asked another, for having in his modesty
said, We for I, what Sir are there any myce in your arse? 3dly. his
contemptuous slighting of D. Hammiltoun, and most of the ancient nobility of
greatest interest and consideration in the Kingdom, whom he did not so much as
allow to be named to be of the number, of the Commissioners chosen for the
Treaty of the Union betwixt the two Kingdoms. 4thly. his strange inconstancy,
in his friendships acted meerlie by his humor or advantage, as witness his
dealings with the Earls of Rothes, Tweddell and Argyle, Sr Robert Murray, D.
of Ormond, E. Shaftsberry and others, whom according to occasion he has, both
caressed with open flattery, and rejected with proud prejudice. 5thly. his
regardlesse neglect of the countries interest, to gratify indigent or covetous
persons of his dependence, by procuring for them gifts of the pains of penal
statutes, as to Sr John Moncriefe a gift of the pains of nonconforming within
the Shires of Perth and Fyfe. To.... Scot of Ardrosse and Major Borthwick, a
gift upon the Maltmen and Brewers; and to the same Major Borthwick another
vexatious gift, called ordinarily of peck and bole. 6thly. his profane
complement to the Archbishop of St Andrews, coming one day to visit him, Come
in, My Lord, sit down here at my right hand until I make all your enemies your
footstool. 7thly. his dull and malicious Iestings, against his old practices,
and acquaintances, as when one day at his table, he said, he could pray as well
as any Nonconformist, and so begunn a long complaint to God of
covenant breaking and other sins to their derision; and when at other times he
has insulted over them in their appearances, before the Council, by a
reproachful remembrance of bypast courses, so that some of them have applied
to him the old remarque omnis Apostata suae sectae osor: But it is not to these
only that he confines this humor, he makes it serve also in other
occurrences, as when it was said about grievances, that they ought not only to
be redressed, but prevented for the future, he answered with much noise, that
this was like an overture of the Commission of the Kirk, etc. as if in effect
his fancy were lesed with the remains of his old hypocrisy. But passing these
things, that may savor of a design of personal reflection, which is truly
far from me, it may be to better purpose to suspend a little the closure of
this relation, in two more important remarques.

The first is, that in the first session of this Parlt, and for its first Act,
his Maties Supremacy was enacted, whereby it is declared not only that his
Matie has the supreme authority over all persons and in all causes within
this Kingdom, and that by virtue thereof, the ordering of the external
government, and policy of the Church, does properly belong to him; but that
his Matie, and his Successors may setle, enact and emitt such constitutions,
acts, and orders, concerning all ecclesiastical persons, meetings and Matters
(a word infinitlie extensive, comprehending the all of Religion) as they in
their royal wisdom shall think fit. It is true that this was unanimouslie
consented to by the Parlt., and it is as well known, that all that the Parlt.
had in view, was the establishing of his Maties power and authority, for the
better confirmation of a little indulgence, then lately granted to some
Nonconforming Ministers, and the more effectual checqueing of the loyal
Clergies murmurings, who pretended to a Negative in these affairs. But that the
D. of Laud. had quite another design, in the passing of this Act, even the
raising of his own credit and consideration at Court, and the aggrandizing of
himself, by an accession to that power, whereof he then had, and still has
the sway, did quickly discover it self, in its first application, directed
against the Archbishop of Glasgow; for My L. Laud. having conceived an
irreconcilable grudge against this gentleman, mostlie, because he had on some
occasions addressed himself to the King, otherwise then by him, the poor
Bishop is menaced, to have articles exhibited against him, before the Privy
Council, and thereupon is constrained, to dimitt; but this is not the sole
Act, wherein My L. Laud. has proposed to himself the same aim: I have
already showed, how that the Act. 1663; entitled an Humble Tender, etc. and
offering 22. thousand men to his Maties service, was especially of Lauds.
framing, and it is very well known, how at Court he has often since that time
valued himself very highly, upon it: But now being Commissioner, his
industrious advancement of what at first, was, only more generally agreed to,
does exhibit a more satisfying discovery, and therefore we see, with what
care, in the very next Act to that of Supremacy, he goes about to setle the
Militia, not as a simple Countrey-conceit, for the better training of men to
the use of Arms; but upon the more martial basis, and for those more noble
ends of the former Act, and humble tender. I will not, for all this, say, that
at that time he had in prospect, the great things whereof he has since been
suspected, yet I make no doubt, but, that even then, he looked upon the
Supremacy and the Militia, so settled, and, in a manner, both in his own hand,
as being the Kings Commissioner, as two brave leading cards, wherewith such a
Court-gamester as he, in the many chances, and changes, that do there happen,
might sometime or other come to do mighty feats. I love not to heighten, let be
to creat, jealousies, nor have I any faculty in the search of hidden and dark
counsels; and therefore do very unwillinglie take up, or assent to, vulgar
reports of My L. Lauds. after-engagements, in arbitrarie and popish projects:
Nevertheless, such indications, as runn into a man's eyes, can hardly be
dissembled. It may then, be remembered; that, when in the summer 1672, the
Cabal at Court was in its ascendent, and Laud. got to be on the top of it, and
that matters in England were come to a very manifest crisis; My L. Laud. about
the same time goes for Scotland, and there procures a new Act of Militia to be
made, statuting that all persons, who should be therein enrolled, should be
entirely reserved for that employment, and that both Officers, and soldiers
should take the oath of Allegiance (which with us includes also the
Supremacy,) and is, I suppose, a sacramentum militare without a president)
and by another Act he obtains, to be imposed a twelve months assessement, to
ly for a stock of money for for their provision, and that upon this express
narrative viz. That as the Kingdom of Scotland will cheerfullie hazard their
lives, and fortunes, in the war against the Dutch, or any other cause wherein
his Maties safety, honor, or interest may be concerned: So in order
thereunto, they have so settled the Militia, as the forces of the Kingdom, may
be in readiness, when ever his Matie shall be pleased for these ends to make
use of them. Which things in Scotland and England being laid together, and the
strange twistings of the Supremacy that makes so large a surrender of matters
of Religion, with these Acts of Militia and Maintenance, declaring a readiness
for any expedition, etc. being well weighed; I think, it may warrantablie be
affirmed, that if there was any extraordinary design at that time in agitation,
My L. Lauds. hand, in probability, was deepest in it. Neither can the Parlts.
concurrence, in consenting to these Acts, be pleaded for his excuse: For as
much as it is certain, that their pure and single intent was, a dutiful
expression of their loyalty, for which they have always judged, that no words
capable of a fair signification, could ever be too significant. I need not
adduce their unacquaintednesse with secret transactions for their purgation; he
that can imagine, that Scotland would have consented, to that heavy
assessement, out of any other motive, then their absolute and implicit
affection to his Matie, let be in any thoughts of favoring Popery, is widelie
mistaken, both of our riches and religion: And therefore it may well be
concluded, that as the ill favored aspect, of the Act and Humble Tender etc.
and Acts of Militia ensueing on it, toward England, with their ill contrived
alternative, or for any other service wherein his Maties honor, authority, or
greatness may be concerned, were at first the dictates of Lauderdails vanity,
and have often since been the boastings of his ambition; so they do plainly
enough evince, his black accession to those other mysteries, whereof he has
elsewhere been accused.

The 2d. remarque shall be, concerning My L. Lauds. administration in Church
affairs. It is not necessary to remember how that E. Midleton in his Parlt.
thought fit, to correct the rigor of Presbytery, by the heights of Prelacie,
and what a severe vengeance of conformity, the Bishops did thereafter execute,
upon the whole Country, for their former compliance with, and retained
affection to their brethren of that ministry: O when shall Princes know,
wherein the true power, and peaceablenesse of the Gospel does lie; and deliver
themselves and their people, from the pedantrie, and hypocrisy of all
Church-pretenders! However the extreme distress, whereinto these Episcopal
persecutions had brought the Country, did in the year 1669 (as I have before
related,) move the compassion of some more moderate persons, to obtain for it
the case of that small indulgence, that was then granted, for the better
establishment whereof, it was supposed (as I have said) that the supremacy was
thereafter in Parlt. enacted. But that the Country might the better relish
this favor, and know how to discern his Maties, from his Commissioners Grace,
it pleased My L. Laud. that in the year 1670., conformity should be again
commanded, and pressed by new Acts of Parlt, and those, in my opinion, of a
greater severitie, then the highest points in Christianity could have allowed:
For by the fifth Act of that Session (as also by the 17. Act of the 3. Session)
it is statuted, that no Non-conform-Minister, not licensed by the Council, or
other person, not authorized by the Bishop, shall (so much as) pray to God in
any meeting, except in their own houses, and to those of their own families,
and such as shall be present not exceeding the number of four, and that all
accessorie to the contrary, shall be guilty of keeping conventicles, and
punished with the pains there specified, the Article of the Apostolic Creed I
beleve the communion of Saints notwithstanding. 2dly. by the same Act, it is
declared, that whosoever without license or authority a foresaid, shall preach
or pray at any field-meeting, or in any house, where there be more persons,
then the house contains, so as some of them be without doors (who may be only
two or three, and posted there by malice) or who shall convocate these
meetings, shall be punished with death, and confiscation of their goods, and
the Seizers of such persons, are not only indemnifed for any slaughter that
shall be committed, in the apprehending, but also assured of 500. merks Scots
of reward, for each person by them seized and secured; so mortal a thing is
this field-conventicling, the Mess and all its idolatry has nothing in it so
deadly. 3dly. by the 6th. Act of that Session, there are considerable
pecuniall pains ordained against disorderly baptismes, such as those are
reckoned to be that are performed by outed Ministers not licensed, or by any
other then the parish Minister, without his certificate, or, in case he be
absent, the certificate of one of the neighboring Ministers. 4thly. by the
7th. Act, it is appointed, that all his Maties subjects of the reformed
religion (for Papists, that are without, God Judges) shall attend divine
worship, in their own Churches, under the pecuniall pains there mentioned
toties quoties etc. and in case any landed man, shall withdraw for the space of
a year, notwithstanding their being therefore fully fined, they are to be
presented to his Maties Council, who are authorized to require of them a bond
not to rise in arms against his Matie, or his Commissioner (as if a man could
not be so far dissatisfied with a pitiful Country Curat, but he must also be
suspected for disaffection to his Matie) which if they refuse, or delay, they
are to be imprisoned, or banished, and both their single and life-rent escheat
does immediately fall to his Matie. And lastly by the 2d. Act of that same
Session, it is statuted and ordained that all persons, thereto called by the
Council, or others having his Maties Authority, are obliged in conscience
(very fair) and duty, to declare and depose upon oath, their knowledge of any
crime, and particularly of any conventicles, and of the circumstances, of the
persons present, and things done therein; may not then any one be brought from
the streets, and urged to become, upon oath, informer, accuser or witness upon
all, that he ever saw or heard in his life, against himself, his friend,
father and all men else; or if he shall be so perverselie wicked, or disloyal,
as to refuse or delay, he is to be punished by fyneing, close imprisonment, or
banishment by sending him to the Indies, or elsewhere at the Councels pleasure;
sure I am the Spanish Inquisition has no broader warrant. And yet
notwithstanding all these, My L. Laud: by a new act of the 3. Session of this
Parlt* procures the execution of the abovementioned Acts against conventiclers
and withdrawers from public worship to be enjoined to all Sheriffs and
Magistrates, with an express provision that they should render an account
yearlie of their diligence under the pain of 500. merks Scots.

But all these great efforts, of My L. Lauds. zeal against Phanaticks, proveing
by far less successful, then that little specimen of his Maties. clemency,
whereunto Lauderdaill, had been by others inclined, and it having pleased his
Matie., in the year 1672. to gratify his Protestant subjects in England, with
his royal goodness, he thinks meet at the same time to extend it, of new, to
Scotland; and therefore gives to his Commissioner, then amongst us, all
necessary instructions, for compleeting this work: But his Grace being now
quite freed, from all those good influences wherewith sometime he had been
acted, by a very uncourteous, and rude application, sadly marres his Maties.
kindness, and frustrats its best end; for as much, as in place of that
gracious relief, which, no doubt, was intended by his Matie., for all his
nonconforming good subjectts, whether ministers, or people, he plainly turns
this new Indulgence, into an universal confinement, of the whole non-conform
Ministers, unto some Parishes in a corner of the Country, leaving the rest as
dry or wett, as the ground, about Gideons fleece, and that, with such a
scornful inconvenience (besides some other scrupling conditions that were also
imposed) that to several small parishes, having not above a thousand
communicants, and 900. or a 1000. merks Scots, of stipend, he causes to be
appointed, three or four ministers, contrair to all Just proportions, and only
with the ridiculous equality, of as little cure as little sallarie. Neither is
he content to have thus cantonized those that were licensed, but even they that
had none of his Maties. favor, must yet be made partakers of his Graces
mercy, and therefore, it is further ordered, that all other non-conform
ministers not licensed, should either conform, in the places of their
dwelling, or else, before a certain day, repair to and reside in the Parishes
whereunto ministers licensed are appointed: I shall not say, that his Grace did
thus restrain and clogg this Indulgence, because that the Council, upon a
letter which he had before sent them down, from his Matie., to know if Papists
might also have some tollerance, returned their advice that, they thought it
neither necessary, nor expedient; but it is obvious enough, that if Papists
had been made partakers of this intended favor, it must of necessity have
been shaped out, and molded, by some more easy regulation. And yet, as if by
this concession, there had been accumulated upon the Phanaticks, a bounty to
which nothing could be added, it is declared in the conclusion of the Councels
Act, that they were not to look for any further enlargement, but that the laws
for conformity were to be strictly executed, against all contraveeners; but
the truth is, there was another motive, for this certification; his Grace knew
very well, that not only the generality of that scrupling party over
Scotland, were little obliged, by their being, in a manner, excepted from this
his Maties. Grace, which often makes men, that before were unconcerned, to
become more curious; but that some of them, who were now deprived of the
liberty which at first was allowed to them, were thereby much irritat: And
therefore he, in time, provides this color for the executions that might again
ensue. And truly, if I were to form conjectures of men's designs, on the
measures, that visiblie appear to have been taken, in this sorry contryvance,
I verily think, that all the specious commendations, wherewith it was
magnified, would scarcely, make me forbear to say, that its restrictednesse
and uneasinesse, seem rather to have been intended for the marring, then any
thing else, for the promoveing of its success. It is sufficiently manifest to
all ingenuous men, that, the non-conformists, for all their scruples, are not
only sincerely, and securely loyal, but in effect, fully as gentle and
tractable, as can rationallie be exspected, from those principles, wherewith
the Indulgence it self imports a dispense* Besides if dispersion and the
removing of the grounds of complaints be (as no doubt they are) the most
effectual means, to quiet such opinionative distempers, what could have been
more promiseing, then to have disposed upon the small handful of outed
ministers, that remain, either by returning them all freely, to their own
churches, or leaving them to setle, as fair invitations should have determined.
But alas, who sies not the strange consequences, that would have ensued; if all
wild beasts were once tamed, hunters and their sport would be utterlie spoiled,
and a quiet and satisfied Kingdom, secured from almost the possibility, of
foreign invasion, would need no more any standing forces, far less a
standing Commissioner; and how should this poor country, after so many
vexations, have endured so great a loss. But that his Graces well
disposednesse, in affairs of this kind, may be the better understood, there is
one instance of it, that I can not here omit and it is thus; A little before
this Indulgence was granted, there were two country gentlemen, Hay of
Ballhoussie and Drummond of Meggins, brought in question, for this flagitious
impertinencie of conventicling; the quality of their guilt was, that the
first, had, indeed, had private meetings in his own house, but the second was
only charged, with his wife and daughters transgression: However, his Grace
having thought good, immediately upon the delation, to make over their fynes,
unto his favourit the E. of Athole, and the gentlemen forseing, that to make
the gratification suitable, there was no less, then the utmost rigor to be
exspected; they judged it best, to abandon their own defense, for a friendly
transaction, and therefore, casting themselves on the Earls discretion, they
aggrie with him in writeing, the one to pay him 600. lb. st., and the other
400. lb. st.; but when they appear before the Council, My L. Laud., not
content with what Athole had done, very arbitrarlie and exorbitantlie, procures
the sentence to be augmented, against the first, to a 1000. lb. st. and against
the other to 500. lb. st. whether more generouslie, toward his friend, who had
got before, all that he had demanded, or more justly toward the gentlemen,
who relying upon the aggriement, had prepared no other defense, let the world
judge. I might also add another example of his Graces moderation, in causing
the Countess of Wigtoun, a widow Lady, and otherwise clothed with all the
favorable circumstances, that could be desired, to appear in person, before
the Council, to answer for private meetings in her own house, and to be fined
in the sum of 5000. merks Scots, thereby showing an impartialitie not to be
biased with any courtesy. But to return to our purpose, I need not mention
particulars, for confirming of what I have said, of the errors committed, in
shapeing out this Indulgence: Its misadventure, as to the composeing of
matters, whereunto it pretended, has afforded, both to his Maties Council,
and to the Ministers licensed, too much unpleasent exercise, in citations,
examinations, and reiterat orders, to leave it in the least doubtful. The
thing, more worth our noticeing, is to consider, how fortunatlie the event did
fall out, to justify my suspicion; I touched, in the beginning, what an
opportune pretext, when all others failed, these nonconforming disorders did
furnish to his Grace, for his last comeing amongst us: But because the letter,
that he thereupon purchased from his Matie to his Parlt., does not more hold
forth, its true Author, in its unsuitablenesse to his Maties excellent
goodness, then exhibit to the world the truest character of My L. Lauds.
goodness and sincerity in all these affairs, in lines of his own drawing; I
shall here set down at length, some passages of it: But one of the principal
reasons of the keeping this session of Parlt, is to the end effectual courses,
may be laid down, for curbing and punishing, the insolent field-conventicles,
and other seditious practices, which have since your last session too much
abounded: You are our witnesses, what indulgences we have given, and with what
lenity, we have used, such dissenters, as would be peaceable, and how much our
favors, have been abused. You have made many good laws, but still they have
failed in the execution against the contemners of the law; we must now once for
all lay down such solid and effectual courses, as the whole Kingdom may see,
that we and you are both in earnest, and that if fairness will not, force must
compel the refractorie to be peaceable, and obey the law. We have had frequent
experience of your affection to our service upon several occasions, and
therefore we are confident, you will eminentlie do your duty in this which
does so much concern, our authority and your own peace and quietness: We
leave the ways and means to your own wisdom, and we exspect, you will lay down
such solid grounds and take such effectual ways, as may put an end, to these
disorders and evidence to the world that our ancient Kingdom of Scotland, is at
quiet and united to us. We have instructed our Commissioner fully in this etc.
and he can well inform you of our constant affection to, and care of, all the
concerns, of that our Kingdom, which consideration at this time, has made us
dispense with him here when his service was so useful to us etc. and therefore
you shall give him entire trust, as we have hitherto done in all things.

The text is plain and needs no comment; I shall not say, with some
Phanaticks, that if the Lord had not unexspectedlie beat down to the earth,
this persecutour with his letters, breathing out such threatenings, and
slaughter, our land might have again been turned, into a field of blood and
confusion: Nor will I positivelie affirm, that these minatorie strains, were
purposelie intended, for to overavv the nation, to a more complyant submission,
to the introduction of a Service-booke, which, it is well known, was both
designed and prepared, and should have been the great business, of his Grace
his last comeing down: But certainly, whoever compares, the expressions of
this letter, with all their circumstances, viz. his Maties benign clemency to
all innocent dissenters, the Kingdoms unquestionable quiet, from all their
disturbances, its great and almost sole distemper from My L. Lauds. own
oppressions, the visible necessity that forced him, at that time, to take
sanctuary amongst us, and lastly the forebearance and insinuation, that he
has since used, tovvard the non-conformists, to ease himself of a part, at
least, of that universal odium, which he finds to be against him; must
inevitably break forth in admiration, at this unmeasured boldness, of
abuseing his Maties name and authority, to so many extravagancies. These have
been his vvayes in the Church, so like, in every step, to his actings in the
State, that they neither could have any better success, nor can receive a
milder censure. But now his Grace, having rode out this storm of grievances,
delivered himself from Parlts, and defeat all his enemies, in order to his
return to Court, resolves (as it is probable) to give the Kingdom a proof,
both of his own free and unconstrained benevolence, and also of his great
power and interest with his Matie, and therefore, there is a letter produced,
from the King to his Council, bearing, that his Maties affection for us, makes
him ready to embrace all occasions, whereby he may witness his zeal, to do
all things, which may be for our advantage, and ease; and that being informed,
by his Commissioner, of some things which have been, and still are, troublesome,
and burdensome to us, he has thought fit, in his royal bounty, and by his
royal authority, to declare, his royal pleasure for the discharging of all
impositions, due before his restoration, all rests of the taxation granted by
the Parlt 1633., all arrears of the annuitie of tithes, preceding the year
1660., and all fynes imposed by his Maties first Parlt, excepting always from
all these, all sums of money allreadie paid, or for which bond is given
preceding the date of the letter: And lastly his Matie does grant, a general
pardon and discharge, of all arbitrarie and pecuniall pains, incurred before
the date of the letter, extending even to those against Conventicles,
withdrawing from ordinances, disorderly baptismes and marriages, excepting
nevertheless, all capital crimes, and sentences of banishment, imprisonment,
or confynement. Upon this letter, there being a proclamation voted and formed
by the Council, it was the next day made, with the solemnities of the
Magistrates in their robes, the citizens in arms, ringing of bells, shooting of
guns, public feasting, bonefires, and all other ceremonies, that were used, in
the most extraordinary occasions of joy: I shall not insist on the peoples
wonder, at the vain pomp, of these circumstances, who could findenothing
suitable in the subject; nor on the criticizings of the more malign sort, who
regreting, that his Maties affection and zeal for our good, should rather have
been directed, by My L. Lauds., scant and partial suggestions then by the full
and faithful advice of his Parlt., observed first, that the exception in the
discharge, of the rests of impositions, taxations and fynes, was infinitlie
broader, then the release it self, the country having, now for 13. years,
been so vexed and harassed, for these things, that there is nothing left to be
discharged, safe a few desperate, and irrecoverable remains. 2dly. that a
general pardon and discharge of arbitrarie and pecuniall pains, is an
ordinary grace, customarie to be granted in most Parlts., with such a latitude
as they think fit to give it. 3dly. that the extension of this pardon, even to
Conventicles etc. can have no emphasis, unless we suppose, conventicling and
non-conconforming, to be worse then Sabbath-breaking, profane swearing,
drinking, whoring, userie, extortion, and the like. 4thly. that the exception
of banishments, imprisonments and confynments, wherein a few Phanatick
ministers are mostlie concerned, appears to be an unseasonable reserve of a
peevish rigor: and 5thly. that the style of the proclamation viz. We with
advice foresaid, do hereby statute and enact, and accordingly discharge, to
our subjects, all rests and assessements etc. is not only forced but more
Parliamentarie then proper for such edicts.

But the thing, we rather remarque is, that just and important exception, moved
against this letter and proclamation, by D. Hammiltoun and others in Council,
viz. that D. Hammiltoun, having an undoubted right to the taxation 1633., by a
contract betwixt his late Matie. and James then Duke of Hammiltoun, and also by
a commission from his now Matie, for security and repayment to him of a
considerable sum of money, the same could not be taken away in this summarie
way, without lawful hearing; upon which exception D. Hammiltoun (as he
declared) did not insist, for the value of the thing, but for obviating so
dangerous a preparative, to every man's right and property; this discharge was
overtur'd both by himself, and others, during the sitting of the Parlt., and
if it had been prosecuted, that way, all men's interests, might have been
considered, and also the country more effectually secured: But after
rejecting of that method, to have made choice of this, was an introduceing of
presidents, of an evil aspect: And yet albeit it was resolved by the best
Lawyers, in a writeing under their hands, that Duke Hammiltouns right was
unquestionable, that the King in such cases utitur jure privati, and that by
the fundamental law of the Land, no man's right could be taken away summarlie
by letter and proclamation (which plea was also confirmed by the suffrage of
the Judges there present) nevertheless it was with extreme heat, and pain,
that My L. Laud* could be induced to consent to the reserving of D. Hammiltouns
right, as we find it to be done, in the Proclamation. I have before mentioned,
the letter impetrat, from his Matie against Mr Rougheed Town Clerk of
Edinburgh, and the offense which generally it gave, because of the invasion of
property and liberty, thereby threatened; but now, that My L. Laud, should
have again, and thus openly, and avowedlie, relapsed into so pernicious an
error, it does manifestly evince, a design of arbitrarinesse, beyond the
excuses of either folly or fatalitie.

And yet after this, and all his other high and strange misdemeanors, which I
have hitherto related, My L. Laud* had the confidence, to present to the
Council, a letter of answer, to be subscribed by them, and sent up to the
King, wherein thanks, are not only returned for his Maties gracious letter of
release, but also for his readiness showed by his Commissioner, to have
rectified all our grievances, that were orderly represented: I will not here
take notice of the dissents, entered by a considerable part of the Council,
against such a groundless and imposeing practice; as his Grace would delude
the common people, by bells and bonefires, and other empty and ridiculous
shows, does he also think, that men of understanding, will suffer their eyes
to be put out; is it not enough, that he has tyrrannised over us, with so
much pride and oppression, but that he must morever offer violence to our
senses, and not only obstruct our prayers and cries, to his Matie for his
compassion and help, but even endeavor to elicit flattering approbations, and
applauses for palliating and supporting these gross malversations; for which
nevertheless, it is beyond peradventure, that so soon as he shall be arrived
at Court, he will think fit to secure himself, as he has already done, for
his far inferior transgressions in England, by his Maties remission and pardon?

Certainly the free consideration of these things, might stir up, and raise
every ingenuous spirit, to the highest measure of indignation, did not his
Maties concern, and engagement therein, far more povverfullie incline, to a
dutiful regrete; who can observe, without an astonishing grief, this
Kingdom, lately so overjoyed, for his Maties restoration, and overflovving in
all the possible expressions of the most loyal acknovvledgements, now sunk
into the saddest depths, of mourning, and darkened, by reason of the vvitholding
of the rays of his Maties gracious countenance, with clouds of jealousies,
which no man is vvilling to entertain, or yet able to dissipat: And who can
think, without a most sensible affliction, that his Maties most excellent
understanding and most benign disposition, in all other occasions, should in
these matters of the highest consequence, be so oddelie possessed, with such a
strange aversion, to hearken to, a most loyal Parlt. and to be advised by his
most affectionat subjects: And lastly who can see, (without a confusion, and
riseing of passions, not to be expressed,) the D. of Laud., a person, so
insignificant for the advance of his Maties service, and, of late, become so
extravagant and unacceptable, even in his private deportment and ordinary
conversation with ^ll men; yet, in these public and great affairs wherein he
has so vvyldlie miscarried to preponderat, in his Maties esteem, to the
universal outcry of two nations, the unprejudicat complaint of two Parlts.,
and the visible disturbing, if not breaking, of the peace and quiet of two
Kingdoms; I shall not offer at the arts, charms or enchantments* whereby these
vvonderfull things, may be brought to pass it is but too too manifest, that
where My L. Laud., did sometime stand in the most undutifull difference, and
seeminglie irreconcilable distance, he has of late, since the beginning, of
the last Dutch war; and the ariseing of the jealousies, which did commence
with it, procured to himself, so firm a friendship, and so sure a support,
that the more that these jealousies, and their dissatisfactions, have
increased, the more has this favor been confirmed, and intended. But why
should I grope in these suspicious conjectures, wherein all good men, do
rather desire, to find themselves deceived, then further cleared: Let us rather
vvish, that his Maties eyes may be opened, and his heart turned toward this,
his ancient Kingdom, and in the mean time be established, in this most fixed
assurance, that notvvithstanding of all the colors, pretensions, and
insinuations, that My L. Laud. can employ, for the advancing of his particular
interest, and ambitious humors, against the public good of the nation, and
for the bearing down of its best subjects, yet the longed for issue, is as
certain as that reason is reason and (...) men.

FINIS.
READER
I must desire thou would pass over an omission of the Printer in the 3d.
sheet, which is the letter C. wherein the pages are misplaced; and in thy
reading follow the last word of each page and the number; what other escapes of
misplaceing of letters, as in the dedication l. 11. nd* athere, for and there
and such like, as I know they can not mar the sense, so I hope they shall not
incurr thy censure.


