THE Bishop of Worcester's ANSWER TO Mr. Locke's Second Letter; Wherein his
NOTION of IDEAS Is proved to be Inconsistent with it self, And with the
ARTICLES OF THE CHRISTIAN FAITH.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCVIII.

THE Bishop of Worcester's ANSWER TO Mr. Locke's Second Letter, etc.
SIR,
I Was not a little surpised at the length of your Second Letter, considering
the shortness of the Answer contained in it: But it put me in mind of the
Springs of Modena mentioned by Ramazzini, which rise up with such a plenty of
Water upon opening a Passage, that the Undertaker is afraid of being
overwhelmed by it. I see how dangerous it is to give occasion to a Person of
such a fruitful Invention to write; for Letters become Books, and small Books
will soon rise to great Volumes, if no way be found to give a Check to such an
Ebullition of Thoughts, as some Men find within themselves. I was apt to think
the best way were, to let Nature spend it self; and although those who write
out of their own Thoughts do it with as much Ease and Pleasure as a Spider
spins his Web; yet the World soon grows weary of Controversies, especially when
they are about Personal Matters: Which made me wonder that one who understands
the World so well, should spend above fifty Pages of a Letter in renewing and
enlarging a Complaint wholly concerning himself. Suppose I had born a little
too hard upon you in joining your Words and another Intentions together; had
it not been an easy and effectual way of clearing your self, to have declared
to the World, that you owned the Doctrine of the Trinity, as it has been
Received in the Christian Church, and is by ours in the Creeds and Articles of
Religion? This had stopped the Mouths of the Clamorous, and had removed the
Suspicions of the Doubtful, and would have given full Satisfaction to all
reasonable Men. But when you so carefully avoid doing this, all other Arts and
Evasions do but leave the Matter more suspicious among the most Intelligent and
Impartial Readers. This I mention, not that you need be afraid of the
Inquisition, or that I intend to charge you with Heresy in denying the
Trinity; but my present Design is to show, That your Mind is so entangled and
set fast by your Notion of Ideas, that you know not what to make of the
Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation; because you can have no Idea of One
Nature and three Persons, nor of two Natures and one Person; as will fully
appear afterward. And therefore, out of regard to Public Service, in order to
the preventing a growing Mischief, I shall endeavor to lay open the ill
Consequences of your Way of Ideas with respect to the Articles of the Christian
Faith.

But I shall wave all unnecessary Repetitions, and come immediately to the
Matter of your Complaint as it is renewed in this Second Letter, which I shall
briefly answer, before I proceed to that which I chiefly design. Your
Complaint, you say, 2d. Letter* p. 2.
was, That you were brought into a Controversy wherein you had never meddled,
nor knew how you came to be concerned in. I told you, It was because the Person
who opposed the Mysteries of Christianity went upon your Grounds, Answ. to
first Letter, p. 46.
and made use of your Words; although I declared withal, that they were used
to other purposes than you intended them; and I confessed, that the reason why
I quoted your Words so much, was, because I found your Notion as to Certainty
by Ideas, was the main Foundation on which the Author of Christianity not
Mysterious went; and that he had nothing that looked like Reason, if that
Principle were removed; which made me so much endeavor to show, that it would
not hold, and so I supposed the reason why I so often mentioned your Words, was
no longer a Riddle to you. These Passages you set down in your Second Letter; 2
d. Letter, p. 48.
but you say, all this seems to you to do nothing toward the clearing of this
matter. p. 49.
Whether it does or not, I am content to leave it to any indifferent Reader;
and there it must rest at last, although you should write Volumes about it.

But for what cause do you continue so unsatisfied? p. 50.
You tell us, It is, that the Author mentioned, went upon this Ground, That
clear and distinct Ideas are necessary to Certainty, but that is not your
Notion as to Certainty by Ideas; which is, That Certainty consists in the
Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, such as we have, whether
they be in all their Parts perfectly clear and distinct or no: And you say,
that you have no Notions of Certainty more than this one.

This is no more than what you had said before in your former Letter, First
Letter, p. 57.
and I took particular notice of it, and gave three several Answers to it,
which I shall here lay together and defend, because you seem to think I had not
answered it.

(1.) That those who offer at clear and distinct Ideas bid much fairer for
Certainty than you do (according to this Answer) and speak more agreeably to
your Original Grounds of Certainty. p. 80.
For it is a very wonderful thing in point of Reason, for you to pretend to
Certainty by Ideas, and not allow those Ideas to be clear and distinct? You
say, the Certainty lies in the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of
Ideas: How can I clearly perceive the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, if I
have not clear and distinct Ideas? For how is it possible for a Man's Mind to
know whether they agree or disagree, if there be some parts of those Ideas, we
have only general and confused Ideas of? And therefore I had great reason to
say, that if Certainty be placed in Ideas we must have clear and distinct
Ideas. You may as well say, a Man may be certain of the Agreement and
Disagreement of Colors in a confused or uncertain Light. For so much as the
Idea fails of Clearness and Distinctness, so much it fails of that Evidence
which it is necessary to judge by. Wherever there is Obscurity, Confusion or
Imperfection in the Ideas, there must be so much Uncertainty in the Perception
of the Agreement or Disagreement of them. And to pretend to Certainty by Ideas
without pretending to clear and distinct Ideas, is to judge without Evidence,
and to determine a thing to be certainly true, when we cannot know whether it
be so or not; for how can you be sure that your Ideas agree with the Reality of
things (wherein you place the Certainty of Knowledge) if there be no such Ideas
of those things, that you can perceive their true Nature, and their difference
from all others? For therein you will not deny that the Notion of clear and
distinct Ideas consists.

But you say more than once or twice, Letter II. ^. ^, 9, 10.12, 14, 15, 16,
23, 38, 39, 41, 47, 50, 56, 61, 107, 114.
or ten times, That I blame those who place Certainty in clear and distinct
Ideas, but you do it not, and yet I bring you in among them; which is the thing
you so much complain of. I will give you a full Answer to this Complaint. I do
not deny, but the first occasion of my Charge was the Supposition that clear
and distinct Ideas were necessary in order to any Certainty in our Minds, and
that the only way to attain this Certainty was by comparing these Ideas
together: But to prove this, your Words were produced, and your Principles of
Certainty laid down, and none else; and I could not imagine that you could
place Certainty in the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, and yet not suppose
those Ideas to be clear and distinct. But finding your self joined in such
Company which you did not desire to be seen in, you rather chose to distinguish
your self from them, by denying clear and distinct Ideas to be necessary to
Certainty. But it must be here observed, that our Debate about Certainty by
Ideas is not about any other Certainty, but about Certainty of Knowledge with
regard to some Proposition, whose Ideas are to be compared as to their
Agreement and Disagreement. For your Words are, Essay, B. 4. chapter 6. Sect. 3.
Certainty of Knowledge is to perceive the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas
as expressed in any Proposition. This we usually call knowing or being certain
of the truth of any Proposition. First Letter, p. 57.
So that a Proposition whose Ideas are to be compared as to their Agreement or
Disagreement, is the proper Object of this Certainty. And therefore this
Certainty is to be distinguished,

1. From a Certainty by Sense; or that by which we come to know the Existence
of External Objects. B. 4. chapter 11. Sect. 1.
For you say, That the Knowledge of the Existence of any other thing we can
have only by Sensation. For there being no necessary Connection of Real
Existence with any Idea a Man has in his Memory; no particular Man can know
the Existence of any other Being, but only when by actual operating upon him it
makes it self perceived by him. But that this is quite another Certainty from
that of Ideas, appears from these following words of yours; For the having the
Idea of any thing in our Mind, no more proves the Existence of that thing than
the Picture of a Man evidences his being in the World, or the Visions of a
Dream make thereby a true History. Therefore this is a very different Certainty
from that of Ideas.

2. From a Certainty by Reason; When from the Existence of some things evident
to Sense, we infer the Existence of another thing not evident to Sense: As to
take your own words in your former Letter. Letter p. 57.
As to the Existence of bodily Substances, I know by my Senses, that something
extended, solid and figured does exist; for my Senses are the utmost Evidence
and Certainty I have of the Existence of extended, solid, figured things. These
Modes being then known to exist by our Senses, the Existence of them (which I
cannot conceive can subsist without something to support them) makes me see the
Connection of those Ideas with a Support, or as it is called, Subject of
Inhesion, and so consequently the Connection of that Support, which cannot be
nothing, with Existence.

Granting all this, yet it by no means proves that we can have a Certainty in
the way of Ideas, where the Ideas themselves by which we have the Certainty are
obscure and confused; but that supposing the Ideas we have by our Senses to be
true, we may from them infer the Existence of something of which we have only
an obscure and confused Idea; which is the Case of bodily Substances. Of which
I grant you may come to a certain Knowledge, but not a Certainty by Ideas, but
by a Consequence of Reason deduced from the Ideas we have by our Senses. And
this can never prove that we may have a Certainty by Ideas, where the Ideas
themselves are not clear and distinct: For there is a great difference between
having a Certainty by reason, of a thing whose Idea is confused and obscure,
and having that Certainty by obscure and confused Ideas. For in this Case the
Idea of Substance is obscure: but the way of Certainty is by a clear Deduction
of Reason from the Ideas we have by our Senses.

3. From a Certainty by Remembrance; By which I mean the remaining Impression
on the Mind of an Original Certainty by Demonstration. As to use your own
Instance; B. 4. chapter 2. Sect. 15.
A Man has found by Mathematical Evidence, that the three Angles of a Triangle
are equal to two Right Angles; The Perception of this at the time of the
Demonstration was clear and distinct; but afterward, the Method of
Demonstration may have slipped out of his Mind, yet he retains a Certainty of the
thing by virtue of that Demonstration; but this is not a clear Perception, as
you would have it, where the Ideas are confused; but it is an obscure
Remembrance of the grounds of that Certainty which he once had; and has never
seen any Reason since, why he should call it in Question.

These things then being put out of the Question, which belong not to it; the
Question truly stated is, whether we can attain to any Certainty of Knowledge
as to the Truth of a Proposition in the way of Ideas, where the Ideas
themselves by which we come to that Certainty be not clear and distinct?

Another thing to be observed is, that Des Carts who first started this way of
Certainty by Ideas, thought it a ridiculous thing in any to pretend to it,
unless their Ideas were clear and distinct. He says, Princip. l. 1. n. 44, etc.
That when we assent without clear Perception, we are either deceived, or fall
into Truth by chance, but we do often err when we think we have clear
Perception, and have not. But to a certain Judgment, it is necessary that our
Perception be not only clear but distinct: that is, when the thing not only
lies open to our view, but we see it on all sides, and so can distinguish it
from all other things. You agree with him in placing Certainty in Ideas, but
you differ from him in that which alone made his Opinion reasonable, viz. That
these Ideas be clear and distinct. If it were possible for us to come to clear
and distinct Ideas of the things we pretend to be certain of, it were a just
Pretense to Certainty in that way; but since we cannot come at them, we must be
content with such Measures of Knowledge as we are capable of. But for you to
talk so much of Certainty by Ideas, and yet to allow Obscurity and Imperfection
in those Ideas, is like a purblind Man who would pretend to judge exactly of
the differences of Colors in the Twilight, because another pretended to do it
at Noonday: Or like one, who would undertake to show certainly the Agreement
or Disagreement of two Men at a distance from him, in their Habit, Features,
and Stature, and yet at the same time confess that he could not clearly
distinguish one from the other. So that if I did think you spoke more
consistently to your Hypothesis, than you say now that you did, I hope you will
forgive me that Wrong, if at least it be a Wrong to you; for after all, there
are several Passages in your Essay, which suppose clear Ideas necessary to
Certainty.

For in one Place you say, B. 4. chapter 18. Sect. 8.
That the mind not being certain of the Truth of that it does not evidently
know. What is this but to make clear Ideas necessary to Certainty?

In another, B. 4. chapter 4. Sect. 8.
yet more plainly, That which is requisite to make our Knowledge certain is the
Clearness of our Ideas.

In a third Place you say; B. 4. chapter 12. Sect. 14.
For it being evident that our Knowledge cannot exceed our Ideas; where They
are either imperfect, confused or obscure, we cannot expect to have certain,
perfect or clear Knowledge.

In a fourth; B. 4. chapter 2. Sect. 15.
But obscure and confused Ideas can never produce any clear and certain
Knowledge, because as far as any Ideas are confused or obscure, the mind can
never perceive clearly whether they agree or disagree. What can be more
express? And yet you have complained of me in near twenty Places of your second
Letter for charging this upon you. By this the World will judge of the Justice
of your Complaints, and the Consistency of your Notion of Ideas.

(2.) I answered, Answ. to Let 1. p. 36.
That it is very possible the Author of Christianity not mysterious, might
mistake or misapply your Notions, but there is too much reason to believe he
thought them the same, and we have no reason to be sorry that he has given you
this occasion for the explaining your meaning, and for the Vindication of your
self in the matters you apprehend he had charged you with.

Let. 2. p. 36.
Here you enter upon a fresh Complaint, and say* This can be no Reason why you
should be joined with a Man that had misapplied your Notions; and that no Man
has so much mistaken and misapplied your Notions as my self, and therefore you
ought rather to be joined with me. But is this fair and ingenuous dealing, to
represent this matter so, as if I had joined you together, because he had
misunderstood and misapplied your Notions? Can you think me a Man of so little
Sense to make that the Reason of it? No, Sir, it was because he assigned no
other Grounds but yours, and that in your own Words, however now you would
divert the meaning of them another way. And although I was willing to allow you
all reasonable Occasions for your own Vindication, as appears by my Words; yet
I was sensible enough, that you had given too just an Occasion to apply them in
that manner, as appears by the next Page. Answer to Letter 1. p. 37.
But because these words follow some I had quoted out of your Postscript, you
fall into a nice Piece of Criticism about them, Letter 2. p. 45.
which, you say, in Grammatical Construction, must refer to the Words of the
Postscript; but any one that reads without a design to cavil, would easily
interpret them of your Words and Notions about which the Debate was; and not of
the Postscript which comes in but as a Parenthesis. This looks like Chicaning
in Controversy; which no Man, who knows his Cause is good, ever falls into.

But if, you say, by an unintelligible new Way of Construction the word Them be
applied to any Passages in your Book: What then? Why then, whoever they are, P.
^6*
you intend to complain of them too. But the Words just before tell you who
they are, viz. The Enemies of the Christian Faith. And is this all that you
intend, only to complain of them for making you a Party in the Controversy
against the Trinity? But whether you have not made your self too much a Party
in it, will appear, before we have done.

I had with great Kindness, as I thought, taken notice of a Passage in your
Postscript: in which I was glad to find that in general, you owned the
Mysteries of the Christian Faith, and the Scripture to be the Foundation and
Rule of it: From whence I inferred, that I could not believe you intended to
give any Advantage to the Enemies of the Christian Faith. P. 41.
This Passage, you say, you were surprised to find in a Paragraph designed to
give you satisfaction. There are some Persons I find very hard to be satisfied.
For I speak of my satisfaction in this Passage, and that I was glad you agreed
so far with me, although you could not come up in all things to what I could
wish. But what Reason have you to express so much dissatisfaction at these
Words? P. 43, 44.
You call it an extraordinary sort of Complement; and that they seem to
intimate as though I took you for a Heathen before.

How like a cavilling Exception is this? Do not we know that in the Debate
about the Mysteries of Faith our Adversaries are no Heathens; but they deny any
Mysteries: I was glad to find that you owned them; and resolved your Faith into
the Scripture as the Foundation of it. Did not this look more like a good
Opinion of you as to these matters, than any Inclination to suspect you for a
Heathen?

But you say, P. 4^.
It must not be taken for granted, that those who do not write or appear in
Print in Controversies of Religion do not own the Christian Faith, and the
Scriptures as the Rule of it. I was far enough from any such Apprehension; but
the Case is quite otherwise, with those who are not sparing of writing about
Articles of Faith, and among them take great Care to avoid some which have been
always esteemed fundamental Articles by the Christian Church. And I think it
was no want of Humanity or Christian Charity in me, that I was so glad to find
you own the Mysteries of the Christian Faith in general: which shows at least,
that you cannot object against any Articles of Faith, because they contain
something mysterious in them.

But I said, That in all things your Answer does not come fully up to what I
could wish. And I think I gave sufficient Proof of it, as to your Idea of
Substance, the Nature of Ideas, the Materiality of the Soul, the disparaging
some Arguments to prove the Existence of God, the Tendency of your Principles;
and the Ground of Certainty, etc. Which are put off to another Letter, except
the last, which is therefore now to be examined.

(3.) The third Answer I gave was, That your own Grounds of Certainty, Answer
to Letter 1. p. 38.
tend to Skepticism; and that in an Age wherein the Mysteries of Faith are too
much exposed by the Promoters of Skepticism and Infidelity, it is a thing of
dangerous Consequence to start such new Methods of Certainty, as are apt to
leave Men's minds more doubtful than before. Letter 2. p. 46.
These words, you say, contain a farther Accusation of your Book, which shall
be considered in its due Place. But this is the proper Place of considering it.
For I said, That hereby you have given too just occasion to the Enemies of the
Christian Faith, to make use of your Words and Notions, as was evidently proved
from your own Concessions. And if this be so, however I was willing to have had
you explained your self to the general Satisfaction; yet since you decline it,
I do insist upon it, that you cannot clear your self from laying that
Foundation, which the Author of Christianity not mysterious built upon. For
your Ground of Certainty is the Agreement or Disagreement of the Ideas, as
expressed in any Proposition. Which are your own Words. From hence I urged,
That let the Proposition come to us any way, either by Humane or Divine
Authority, if our Certainty depend upon this, we can be no more certain, than
we have clear Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas contained in
it. And from hence the Author of Christianity not mysterious thought he had
Reason to reject all Mysteries of Faith which are contained in Propositions,
upon your Grounds of Certainty. By this it evidently appears, that although I
was willing to allow you all fair ways of interpreting your own Sense; yet I by
no means thought that your Words were wholly misunderstood or misapplied by
that Author: but rather that he saw into the true Consequence of them, as they
lie in you Book. And what Answer do you give to this? Not a word in the proper
Place for it. But afterward (for I would omit nothing that may seem to help
your Cause) you offer something toward an Answer. For there you distinguish
the Certainty of Faith, Letter 2 p. 95.
and the Certainty of Knowledge, and you humbly conceive the Certainty of
Faith, if I think fit to call it so, has nothing to do with the Certainty of
Knowledge; and to talk of the Certainty of Faith seems all one to you as to
talk of the Knowledge of Believing, a way of speaking not easy for you to
understand. So that if I shake never so much the Certainty of Knowledge, it
does not at all concern the Assurance of Faith, that is quite distinct from it,
neither stands nor falls with Knowledge. Faith stands by it self and upon
Grounds of its own, nor can be removed from them and placed on those of
Knowledge. Their Grounds are so far from being the same, or having any thing,
that when it is brought to Certainty, Faith is destroyed, it is Knowledge then
and Faith no longer. So that, whether you are, or are not mistaken in the
placing Certainty in the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas,
Faith still stands upon its own Basis, which is not at all altered by it; and
every Article of that has just the same unmoved Foundation, and the very same
Credibility that it had before. This is the Substance of what you say about
this Matter, and is the most considerable Passage in your Book toward clearing
this Matter.

But I was aware of this, Answer to Letter 1. p 83.
as appears by these Words; Is Faith an unreasonable Act? Is it not an Assent
to a Proposition? Then, if all Certainty in Acts of Reason be derived from the
perceiving the Agreement or Disagreement of the Ideas contained in it; either
there can be no Certainty in the reasonable Act of Faith, or the Grounds of
Certainty must be laid some other Way.

But this is a Matter of too great Weight and Consequence to be easily past
over, because the main strength of your Defense lies in it, and therefore I
shall more strictly examine what you say; and set this Point of the Certainty
of Faith in as good a Light as I can, and show the Inconsistency of your Notion
of Ideas, with the Articles of the Christian Faith. To talk of the Certainty of
Faith, say you, seems all one to you as to talk of the Knowledge of Believing;
a way of speaking not easy for you to understand.

But how comes the Certainty of Faith to become so hard a Point with you? Have
not all Mankind, who have talked of Matters of Faith, allowed a Certainty of
Faith as well as a Certainty of Knowledge, although upon different Grounds? In
your former Letter you told us, that if we knew the Original of Words, we
should be much helped to the Ideas they were first applied to and made to stand
for. Now what is there in the Original of the word Certainty which makes it
incapable of being applied to Faith? I had thought that our Word was taken from
the Latin; and that among the Romans it was opposed to doubting, Nil tam certum
quam quod de dubio certum.

And therefore where the Mind upon examination of the Grounds of Assent saw no
Reason for doubting, it might properly be said to be certain: If it sees no
Cause to doubt from the Evidence of the Thing it self, or the clear Deduction
of Consequences, that is Certainty of Knowledge; but where it sees no Reason to
doubt from the Authority of him that speaks, that is Certainty of Believing;
and the greater the Authority of him that speaks, the less Reason there is to
doubt, and therefore the greater Certainty of Faith. And this I think is very
easy to be understood, and so have the Generality of Mankind thought to this
Day. But it seems our old Words must not now pass in the current Sense; but
then it is fit they be called in, and new stamped, that we may have none but New
milled Words to talk with; but in common Justice, a competent Time ought to be
allowed for it, that none be surprised; and in the mean time they ought to pass
in their current Sense; and that is all the Favor I desire in this Matter. But
I am utterly against any Private Mints of Words; and think those Persons assume
too much Authority to themselves, who will not suffer common Words to pass in
their general Acceptance; but will set such Bounds and Limits to the Sense of
them, as suit best with their own Speculations.

But is not this all one as to talk of the Knowledge of Believing? For what
Reason? Knowledge and Faith are too distinct things, the one relates to
Evidence, and the other to Testimony; but Certainty is common to them both,
unless you think it impossible to be certain upon any Testimony whatsoever.
Postscript p. 3.
You tell us in your Postscript (which I hope may be brought hither without
Offense) that it is a shame among Christians to raise such a Doubt of this,
Whether an infinitely powerful and wise Being be veracious or no. Then I
suppose the Veracity of God is a certain and undoubted Principle; and if there
be sufficient Means to assure us of Divine Revelation (as I doubt not but you
yield there are) what should hinder one, that believes upon such Grounds as are
sufficient to convince him, from attaining to a Certainty of Faith? But you
take Certainty as belonging only to Knowledge. So do the Papists, as belonging
only to Infallibility, and say there can be no Certainty of Faith, where there
is not an Infallible Proponent; but neither you nor they are to impose upon the
Understandings of Mankind, who know how to distinguish the Grounds of Certainty
both from Knowledge and Infallibility. You allow such a thing as Assurance of
Faith; P. 96.
and why not Certainty as well as Assurance? I know no reason, but that you
have appropriated Certainty to the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement
of Ideas in any Proposition; and now you find this will not hold as to Articles
of Faith; and therefore you will allow no Certainty of Faith; which I think is
not for the Advantage of your Cause.

But you go on and tell us, That if this Way of Certainty by Ideas does not
hold, yet it cannot affect Matters of Faith which stand immovable upon other
Grounds; Faith in your own words stands still upon its own Basis; and every
Article of it has just the same unmoved Foundation, and the very same
Credibility that it had before. This will appear to be an extraordinary Answer,
when we have thoroughly examined it. Here we see Faith is taken not with respect
to the general Grounds of Certainty, but to the particular Articles of Faith,
i. e. the Propositions contained in that Revelation which we embrace on the
Account of its Divine Authority; now these Propositions are of several Kinds.

1. Some that are more clearly expressed therein, but such as might be attained
to by the Light of Reason without Revelation. And such are the fundamental
Principles of natural Religion, viz. The Being of God and Providence, and the
Rewards and Punishments of a future State. These Mankind may attain to a
Certainty in, without Revelation, or else there can be no such thing as natural
Religion in the World; but these things are more fully and plainly revealed in
the Scriptures. Let us now suppose a Person by natural Reason to attain to a
Certainty, as to the Being of God and Immortality of the Soul; and he proceeds
upon your general Grounds of Certainty, from the Agreement or Disagreement of
Ideas; and so from the Ideas of God and the Soul, he is made certain of those
two Points before mentioned. But let us again suppose that such a Person upon a
farther Examination of your Method of Proceeding finds, that the Way of Ideas
in these Cases will not do; for no Idea proves the Existence of the thing
without it self, P. 131.
no more than the Picture of a Man proves his Being, or the Visions of a Dream
make a true History, (which are your own Expressions.) And for the Soul he
cannot be certain, but that Matter may think, (as you affirm) and then what
becomes of the Soul's Immateriality (and consequently Immortality) from its
Operations? But for all this, say you, his Assurance of Faith remains firm on
its own Basis. Now I appeal to any Man of Sense, whether the finding the
Uncertainty of his own Principles which he went upon in Point of Reason, does
not weaken the Credibility of these fundamental Articles when they are
considered purely as Matters of Faith? For before, there was a natural
Credibility in them on the Account of Reason; but by going on wrong Grounds of
Certainty, all that is lost; and instead of being certain he is more doubtful
than ever. And if the Evidence of Faith falls so much short of that of Reason,
it must needs have less Effect upon Men's Minds, when the subserviency of Reason
is taken away; as it must be when the Grounds of Certainty by Reason are
vanished. Is it at all probable, that he who finds his Reason deceive him in
such Fundamental Points should have his Faith stand firm and unmovable on the
account of Revelation? For in Matters of Revelation, there must be some
Antecedent Principles supposed before we can believe any thing on the Account
of it.

And the first is, that there is a God; but this was the very thing he found
himself at a loss in by his way of Certainty by Ideas; and how can his Faith
stand firm as to Divine Revelation, when he is made Uncertain by his own Way,
whether there be a God or no? Besides, to suppose Divine Revelation, we must be
certain that there is a Principle above Matter and Motion in the World; but
here we find, that upon the Principles of Certainty by Ideas he cannot be
certain of this; because he does not know but Matter may think; and
consequently, all Revelation may be nothing but the Effects of an Exalted
Fancy, or the Heats of a disordered Imagination, as Spinoza affirmed. Again,
before there can be any such thing as Assurance of Faith upon Divine
Revelation, there must be a Certainty as to Sense and Tradition; for there can
be no Revelation pretended now without immediate Inspiration; and the Basis of
our Faith is a Revelation contained in an Ancient Book, whereof the Parts were
delivered at distant Times, but conveyed down to us by an Universal Tradition.
But now, what if your Grounds of Certainty can give us no Assurance as to these
things? I do not mean, that they cannot demonstrate Matters of Fact, which it
were most unreasonable to expect; but that these Grounds of Certainty make all
things uncertain; p. 131.
for I think I have proved, that this way of Ideas cannot give a satisfactory
Account as to the Existence of the plainest Objects of Sense; because Reason
cannot perceive the Connection between the Objects and the Ideas. How then can
we arrive to any Certainty in perceiving those Objects by their Ideas? And I
was in the right, when I said this Way tended to Skepticism; and I do not think
that consistent with the Assurance of Faith.

But this is an Imputation you take very ill, Let. II. p. 170.
and say, that I have brought no Argument for it, but only that my great
Prejudice against this Way of Certainty is, that it leads to Skepticism. (
Sceptism is the New Milled Word.) This is very strange, when that Expression is
only the Introduction to the Arguments from p. 125 to 132, to which no Answer
at all is given. And so I leave it.

There are other Propositions or Articles of Faith which wholly depend on the
Sense of Words contained in the Scripture, 2.
and we are to enquire, whether the Assurance of Faith, as you call it, be
consistent with the overthrowing your Grounds of Certainty; i. e. whether those
who embrace the Articles of Faith in the Way of Ideas, can retain their
Certainty of those Articles when these Ideas are quitted. And this alone will
be a plain Demonstration in the Case, that the Certainty of Faith cannot stand
with such Men, if this way of Certainty by Ideas be destroyed. And by this
which I am now to make out, let any one judge how true your Words are like to
prove, when you say, Let the Grounds of Knowledge or Certainty be resolved into
what they please, it touches not your Faith; the Foundation of that stands as
sure as before, and cannot be at all shaken by it. Of this we shall judge by
some important Articles of Christian Faith according to your Ideas.

The first shall be that of the Resurrection of the Dead. The Reason of
believing the Resurrection of the same Body upon your Grounds is from the Idea
of Identity; which I take to be this from your own words. Essay, B. 2. chapter 27.
n. 3.
1. That the Identity of living Creatures depends not on a Mass of the same
Particles, but on something else; for in them the variation of great Parcels of
Matter alters not the Identity; for which you instance in the growth of an Oak
and a Horse. n. 6.
2. That the Identity of a Man consists in nothing but a Participation of the
same continued Life by constantly fleeting Particles of Matter, in Succession
vitally united to the same Organized Body. n. 9.
3. That Personal Identity, i. e. the sameness of a Rational Being lies in
Self-consciousness, and in that alone, whether it be annexed only to one
Individual Substance, or can be continued in a Succession of several
Substances. n. 11.
4. That those who place Thought in a purely material, animal Constitution,
void of Spirit, do place Personal Identity in something else that Identity of
Substance, as Animal Identity is preserved in Identity of Life and not of
Substance. n. 16.
5. That it matters not to this point of being the same self, whether this
present self be made up of the same or other Substances. n. 18.
6. That in this Personal Identity of Self-consciousness is founded all the
Right and Justice of Reward and Punishment, Happiness and Misery, being that
for which every one is concerned for himself, not mattering what becomes of any
Substance not joined to, or affected with that Consciousness. n. 26.
7. That the Sentence at the Day of Judgment will be justified by the
Consciousness all Persons shall have that they themselves in what Bodies soever
they appear, or what Substances soever that Consciousness adheres to, are the
same that committed those Actions and deserve that Punishment for them. This I
suppose to be a true and just Account of your Sense of this Matter; and so the
Article of the Resurrection is Resolved into your Idea of Personal Identity.
And the Question between us now is, Whether your Certainty of this Matter from
your Idea have no influence on the Belief of this Article of Faith? For the
main of your Defense lies upon this Point, Whether your Method of Certainty by
Ideas, does at all shake, or in the least concern the Assurance of Faith? which
you absolutely deny, Letter 2. p. 96.
and affirm, That Faith stands upon its own Basis, and is not at all altered by
your Method of Certainty; and every Article of that has just the same unmoved
Foundation, and the very same Credibility that it had before. Now I take this
Article of the Resurrection of the Dead to be an Article of Faith, and we are
to consider, whether if your Method of Certainty by Ideas do hold in this
Matter, it continues as firm, and in the same Credibility it had before? I
shall not urge you with the Sense of our own or other Christian Churches in
this Point of the Sameness of the Body in the Resurrection of the Dead, But I
shall continue my self to the Scripture as the Foundation and Rule of our
Faith; and the main Point is, Whether according to that, it be not necessary
for the same Substance which was united to the Body to be raised up at the last
Day? I do not say the same individual Particles of Matter which were united at
the Point of Death; for there must be a great Alteration in them in a lingering
Disease, as if a Fat Man falls into a Consumption: I do not say, the same
Particles which the Sinner had at the very time of commission of his Sins; for
then a long Sinner must have a vast Body, considering the continual spending of
Particles by Perspiration; but that which I suppose is employed in it is, that
it must be the same Material Substance which was vitally united to the Soul
here. You mention the Hypothesis of those, who place Thought in a purely
Material Animal Constitution void of Spirit: but you agree, n. 25.
that the more probable Opinion is, that this Consciousness is annexed to the
Affection of one Individual Immaterial Substance. It is very well that it is
allowed to be the more probable Opinion; but it seems without any Certainty as
to the Truth of it. For you have told us, what the Effect of Probability is,
Essay, E. 4. chapter 15. Sect. 1.
viz. That it is enough to induce the Mind to judge the Proposition true or
false rather than the contrary; and that it is conversant about things whereof
we have no Certainty, Sect. 4.
but only some Inducements to receive it for true. Thence I cannot but observe,
that we have no Certainty upon your Grounds, that Self-consciousness depends
upon an individual immaterial Substance, and consequently that a Material
Substance may, according to your Principles, have Self-consciousness in it; at
least, that you are not certain of the contrary. Now I pray consider, whether
this does not a little affect the whole Article of the Resurrection? For, if it
may be only a Material Substance in us that thinks, then this Substance, which
consists in the Life of an Organized Body, must cease by Death; for how can
that, which consisted in Life, be preserved afterward? And if the Personal
Identity consists in a Self-consciousness depending on such a Substance as
cannot be preserved without an Organized Body, then there is no Subsistence of
it separate from the Body, and the Resurrection must be giving a new Life. To
whom? To a Material Substance which wholly lost its Personal Identity by Death.
So that here can be no Personal Identity at all; unless you say the very same
Life which was long since at an end can be Reproduced. Which I suppose you will
not assert.

But let us take the more probable Opinion; which I think certain, viz. That
Self-consciousness depends upon an Immaterial Principle in us; and then the
Question is, How far the Scripture determines the sameness of the Body at the
Resurrection, i. e. of that Material Substance, which was vitally united with
that Immaterial Substance in this Life. The Doctrine delivered by our Savior
is, John 5.28, 29.
that All that are in the Graves shall hear his voice; and shall come forth;
they that have done good unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done
evil to the Resurrection of Damnation. What is the meaning of all that are in
their Graves? Does this relate to any other Substance than that which was
united to the Soul in Life? Can a different Substance be said to be in the
Graves and to come out of them? Is it not material, as you say, whether the
present Self be made up of the same or other Substances? If it be not so to
your Idea of Identity, it is as to the Sense of our Savior's Words: unless you
can make it out, that a Substance which never was in the Grave may come out of
it. But it may be said, That if these Words be taken strictly they confine the
Resurrection to those Particles of Matter only which were in the Grave; if not,
then they may extend to another Substance. I answer, that by comparing this
with other places we find that the Words are to be understood of the Substance
of that Body to which the Soul was united; and not to those Individual
Particles. 2 Cor. 5.10.
So St. Paul, For we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad. Can these words be understood of any other
Material Substance, but that Body in which these things were done? How could it
be said, if any other Substance be joined to the Soul at the Resurrection, as
its Body, that they were the things done in or by the Body? Curcellaeus his
Copy reads it, (...); the Complutensian (...), and several of the Fathers so
took it; either way, it must relate to that which was the real Body in which
the Person lived and acted, whether Good or Evil. And St. Paul's Dispute about
the manner of raising the Body might soon have been ended, if there were no
necessity of the same Body. 1 Cor. 15.16.
If there be no Resurrection of the Dead, then is not Christ raised. It seems
then, other Bodies are to be raised as his was; and can there be any doubt
whether his Body were the same material Substance which was united to his Soul
before? And the Apostle lays so much weight upon it, that he says, 17.
if Christ be not raised your Faith is vain; does he mean, if there were not
the same personal Identity, as to the Soul of Christ and the Matter united to
it after the Resurrection? That cannot be his meaning, for then there would
have been no necessity of Christ's own Body being raised; which he asserts and
proves by undoubted Witnesses. Were they Witnesses only of some material
Substance then united to his Soul? 6.
He says, He was seen of five hundred Brethren at once. What He was this? 4.
It was Christ that died. Yes, the Person of Christ; but personal Identity does
not require the same Substance, but the same Consciousness; and so if Christ
were conscious to himself in another Substance, there was no necessity of the
same Body. And so truly from the seeing the Person of Christ they could not
prove it was the same Individual Body. John 20.25.
But Thomas said, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the Nails, and
put my Finger into the print of the Nails, and thrust my Hand into his side, I
will not believe. The doing whereof convinced him it was the same Individual
Body; but there will be no such proof at the great Day. And there is no Reason
there should, since the Resurrection of Christ was a sufficient proof of God's
Power to raise the Dead, and the Dissimilitude of Circumstances can be no
Argument against it, since the Power and Wisdom of God are concerned in it.

But the Apostle insists upon the Resurrection of Christ, not merely as an
Argument of the Possibility of ours, but of the Certainty of it; because he
rose as the first Fruits; 1 Cor. 15.20, 23.
Christ the first Fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. St.
Paul was aware of the Objections in Men's Minds about the Resurrection of the
same Body; and it is of great Consequence as to this Article, to show upon what
Grounds he proceeds. 35.
But some Man will say, How are the Dead raised up, and with what Body do they
come? First he shows, that the seminal Parts of Plants are wonderfully improved
by the ordinary Providence of God in the manner of their Vegetation. 36, 37, 38.
They sow bare Grain of Wheat, or of some other Grain, but God gives it a
Body, as it has pleased him, and to every Seed his own Body. Here is an
Identity of the Material Substance supposed; (...), that proper Body which
belongs to it; every Seed having that Body in little, which is afterward so
much enlarged; and in Grain the Seed is corrupted before its Germination; but
it has its proper Organical Parts, which make it the same Body with that which
it grows up to. For although Grain be not divided into Lobes as other Seeds
are, yet it has been found, by the most Accurate Observations, that upon
separating the Membranes these Seminal Parts are discerned in them; which
afterward grow up to that Body which we call Corn. St. Paul indeed says, that
we sow not that Body that shall be; but he speaks not of the Identity but the
Perfection of it. And although there be such a difference from the Grain it
self, when it comes up to be perfect Corn with Root, Stalk, Blade and Ear, that
it may be said to outward Appearance not to be the same Body, yet with regard
to the Seminal and Organical Parts, it is as much the same as a Man grown up is
the same with the Embryo in the Womb. And although many Arguments may be used
to prove, that a Man is not the same, because Life which depends upon the
course of the Blood and the manner of Respiration and Nutrition is so different
in both states, yet that Man would be thought Ridiculous that should seriously
affirm, that it was not the same Man. Sect. 4.
And you grant, that the variation of great parcels of Matter in Plants, alters
not the Identity: and that the Organization of the Parts in one coherent Body
partaking of one common Life makes the Identity of a Plant; so that in things
capable of any sort of Life, the Identity is consistent with a continued
succession of Parts; and so the Wheat grown up is the same Body with the Grain
that was sown. And thus the Alteration of the Parts of the Body at the
Resurrection is consistent with its Identity, if its Organization and Life be
the same; and this is a Real Identity of the Body which depends not upon
Consciousness. From whence it follows, that to make the same Body, no more is
required but restoring Life to the Organized Parts of it. And you grant
likewise, Sect. 6.
That the Identity of the same Man consists in a Participation of the same
continued Life by constantly fleeting Particles of Matter in Succession vitally
united to the same Organized Body. So that there is no difficulty as to the
sameness of the Body, if Life were continued; and if by Divine Power Life be
restored to that Material Substance which was before united, by a Reunion of
the Soul to it, there is no Reason to deny the Identity of the Body. Not from
the Consciousness of the Soul, but from that Life which is the Result of the
Union of Soul and Body. But St. Paul still supposes that it must be that
Material Substance to which the Soul was before united. 42.
For says he, It is sown in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption: It is
sown in Dishonor, 43.
it is raised in Glory; It is sown in Weakness, it is raised in Power; It is
sown a Natural Body, 44.
it is raised a Spiritual Body. Can such a Material Substance which was never
united to the Body be said to be sown in Corruption, and Weakness, and
Dishonor? Either therefore he must speak of the same Body, or his meaning
cannot be comprehended. For what does all this relate to a Conscious Principle?
The Apostle speaks plainly of that Body which was once quickened and afterward
falls to Corruption; and is to be restored with more noble Qualities. 53, 5^.
For this Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on
Immortality. I do not see how he could more expressly affirm the Identity of
this Corruptible Body, with that after the Resurrection, and that without any
Respect to the Principle of Self-consciousness; and so if the Scripture be the
sole Foundation of our Faith, this is an Article of it, and so it has been
always understood by the Christian Church. And your Idea of Personal Identity
is inconsistent with it; for it makes the same Body which was here united to
the Soul not to be necessary to the Doctrine of the Resurrection, but any
Material Substance being united to the same Principle of Consciousness makes
the same Body. The Dispute is not, how far Personal Identity in it self may
consist in the very same Material Substance; for we allow the Notion of
Personal Identity to belong to the same Man under several changes of Matter;
but whether it does not depend upon a Vital Union between the Soul and Body and
the Life which is consequent upon it; and therefore in the Resurrection the
same Material Substance must be reunited; or else it cannot be called a
Resurrection, but a Renovation; i. e. it may be a New Life, but not a raising
the Body from the Dead.

2. The next Articles of Faith which your Notion of Ideas is inconsistent with,
are no less than those of the Trinity, and of the Incarnation of our Savior.
The former by the first Article of our Church is expressed by three Persons in
the Unity of the Divine Nature: the latter is said Art. 2. to be by the Union
of the Divine and Humane Nature in one Person. Let us now see whether your
Ideas of Nature and Person can consist with these. But before I come to that I
must endeavor to set this Matter right, as to the Dispute about the Notion of
Nature and Person, which you have endeavored with all your Art, to perplex and
confound, and have brought in several Interlocutors to make it look more like
an Entertainment. Of which afterward: The Original Question was, whether we
could come to any Certainty about the Distinction of Nature and Person in the
Way of Ideas; and my business was to prove that we could not, because we had no
simple Ideas by Sensation or Reflection, Essay B. 2. c. 1. Sect. 5.
without which you affirm that our Understanding seems to you not to have the
least Glimmering of Ideas: and that we have nothing in our Minds which did not
come in one of these two Ways.

These are your own Words. Vindication of the Trinity, p. 252. etc.
And then I undertook to show, that it was not possible for us to have any
simple Ideas of Nature and Person by Sensation or Reflection: and that whether
we considered Nature as taken for Essential Properties, or for that Substance
wherein that Property lies: whether we consider it in distinct Individuals or
abstractly; still my Design was to show that in your Way of Ideas, you could
come to no Certainty about them. P. 260.
And as to Person I showed, that the Distinction of Individuals is not founded
merely on what occurs to our Senses, but upon a different manner of
Subsistence, which is in one Individual, and is not communicable to another.
And as to this I said, that we may find within our selves an intelligent
Substance by inward Perception; but whether that make a Person or not, must be
understood some other way; for if the mere intelligent Substance make a Person,
then there cannot be the Union of two such Natures, but there must be two
Persons. Which is repugnant to the Article of the Incarnation of our Savior.

That this was the true State of the Question will appear to any one that will
vouchsafe to look into it. But what said you in your first Letter in Answer to
it?

As to Nature you say, Letter 1. p. 165.
That it is a Collection of several Ideas combined into one complex, abstract
Idea, which when they are found united in any Individual existing, though
joined in that Existence with several other Ideas, that individual or
particular Being is truly said to have the Nature of a Man, or the Nature of a
Man to be in him; forasmuch as these simple Ideas are found united in him,
which answer the ^omplex, abstract Idea, to which the specific Name is given
by any one: which abstract specific Idea, he keeps the same when he applies
the specific Name standing for it to distinct Individuals.

And as to Person, P. 216
in the way of Ideas, you say, that the Word Person in it self signifies
nothing, and so no Idea belonging to it, nothing can be said to be the true
Idea of it. But as soon as the common Use of any Language has appropriated it
to any Idea, then that is the true Idea of a Person, and so of Nature.

Against this I objected in my Answer to that Letter, Answer to Letter 1* p.
103.
that if these Terms really signify nothing in themselves, but are only
abstract and complex Ideas, which the common Use of Language has appropriated
to be the signs of two Ideas; then it is plain that they are only Notions of
the Mind, as all abstracted and complex Ideas are; and so one Nature and three
Persons can be no more. Letter 2. p. 109.


To this you answer in your second Letter, That your Notion of the Terms Nature
and Person is, that they are two sounds that naturally signify not one thing
more than another, nor in themselves signify any thing at all, but have the
signification which they have barely by Imposition. Whoever imagined that Words
signify any otherwise than by Imposition?

But the Question is, whether these be mere Words and Names, or not? Or whether
there be not a real Foundation in things for such a Distinction between Nature
and Person? Of which I gave this evident Proof, that if it were not the same
Nature in different Individuals, every Individual must make a different Kind.

And what Answer do you give to this plain Reason? Nothing particular that I
can find. But in the general you say, that all that you can find that I except
against in your Notion of Nature and Person is nothing but this, P. 100.
viz. that these are two sounds which in themselves signify nothing. And is
this all indeed? Did not I tell you in these Words, (which I am forced to
repeat on this occasion, although I am very unwilling to fill Pages with
Repetitions.) The Question now between us comes to this, Answer to Letter 1. p.
107.
whether the common Nature or Essence of things lies only in an abstract Idea,
or a general Name, and the real Essence consists only in particular Beings from
which that Nature is abstracted? The Question is not whether in forming the
Notion of common Nature, the Mind does not abstract from the Circumstances of
particular Beings; but it is whether there be not an Antecedent Foundation in
the Nature of things, upon which we form this abstract Idea? For if there be,
then it cannot be called an Universal Name only; or a mere sign of an Idea,
which we have formed from putting many simple Ideas together, which Name
belongs to all of such a sort, as have those simple Ideas united together.

In these Words, which you cannot deny to be in the place mentioned, I thought
I had stated the Case fairly between us. And why do you not return an Answer to
them? But instead of that you only mention another Passage more liable to
cavilling, where I say, That upon your Notions of Nature and Person, I do not
see how it is possible to defend the Doctrine of the Trinity. P. 103.
For if these Terms really signify nothing in themselves, but are only
abstract and complex Ideas, which the common Use of Language has appropriated
to be the sign of two Ideas; then it is plain that they are only Notions of the
Mind, as all abstract and complex Ideas are; and so one Nature and three
Persons can be no more.

Upon this you charge me with affirming that of you which you never said, viz.
that these Terms are only abstract or complex Ideas: Letter 2. p. 112.
but your Words are, Taking therefore Nature and Person for the sign of two
Ideas they are put to stand for: Letter 1. p. 27.
and by enumerating all the simple Ideas, that are contained in the complex
Idea, that each of them is made to stand for, we shall immediately see the
whole difference that is between them.

These are your own Words. Now from thence it appears, that Nature and Person
are Terms which are the signs of two Ideas by your own Confession: but you
never made these, or any other Terms to be Ideas: and you should be ashamed of
such Iargon.

But have not you said in your Essay, Essay B. 4. c. 6. Sect. 1.
that it is a very common Practice for Names to be made use of instead of the
Ideas themselves, especially if the Ideas be very complex. Nature and Person
you grant to be complex Ideas; and these Terms you confess are appropriated to
be the signs of two Ideas: Therefore here is an Ambiguity in the Use of these
Words, for they are complex Ideas themselves, and they are made the signs of
them; and so the Words of the Sentence are capable of both those Senses.

For it is true, according to you, that these Terms, Nature and Person, really
signify nothing in themselves, but are only complex and abstract Ideas; and
those Terms are appropriated to be the signs of two Ideas. So that Nature and
Person are both Ideas themselves, and those Terms are the Signs of two Ideas:
and the Sense had not been liable to Exception, if And had been inserted; For
if these Terms really signify nothing in themselves, but are only abstract and
complex Ideas; And which the common Use had appropriated to be the Signs of two
Ideas, etc. But whether this be properly expressed or not, according to your
Sense of Ideas, the Weight of the Controversy depends not at all upon it; but
whether Nature and Person can be any other but abstract Ideas, according to
your own plain Expressions; and if they are so, they are no more than Notions
of the Mind, and then the Consequence must hold, that One Nature and three
Persons can be no more. Upon which I said, I did not see how it was possible to
defend the Doctrine of the Trinity, (and I now add of the Incarnation) which
was the thing I undertook to make out.

Letter 2. p. 113.
But you very freely say, whether I rightly deduce from it this Consequence,
viz. And so one Nature and three Persons can be no more; is what you neither
know not are concerned to examine. Which I think is an Expression could hardly
drop from a Person, who did know how to declare his Belief of three Persons in
the Unity of the Divine Nature. But you pretend these are none of your Notions
of Nature and Person, nor indeed any thing you can understand. But it is plain,
that this Consequence follows from your own Notions of Nature and Person; as
they are set down expressly by your self in the former Letter.

P. 109.
You tell me, I made this Inference a little in haste! Whether a Man write in
haste or not, the World will judge by what appears, and not by what he or any
other says. And I think it will appear, that I did not make this Inference in
haste, but from a deliberate Consideration of your Notion of the Ideas of
Nature and Person. P. 109.
But by those Terms signifying nothing in themselves, you say, that you meant,
that they are two sounds that naturally signify not one thing more than
another, nor in themselves signify any thing at all, but have the
signification which they have barely by Imposition. And was this truly all that
you meant by it? And do you think that Peter, and James, and John signify any
thing by Nature? Are not all Words made significative by Imposition? But is
there no difference in the signification of Words as they stand for signs of
Things? If they be Words for particular Substances, then you grant, that there
is something really existing which is meant by those Words; but if they relate
only to the Conceptions of the Mind, then they signify them and no more. And
the Question is, which of these two you meant by those Words Nature and Person?
And you plainly affirm both of them to be complex Ideas, which are made only by
an Act of the Mind, and therefore your meaning can be no otherwise understood.

You presume, that upon more leisurely thoughts, both my self and the rest of
Mankind will concur with you. I never affected Singularity, and am ready to
comply with the rest of Mankind in any reasonable thing. P. 110.
But you say, that this Notion of Nature and Person, That they are two Words
that signify only by Imposition, is what will hold in the common Sense of
Mankind. No doubt of it: But I must again and again tell you, that is not the
Point in Question, but whether they are only abstract and complex Ideas, which
have no other Being but in the Mind. And to this you answer not a Word. I do
not in the least think as you suggest, that it is necessary to the Defense of
the Trinity, P. 111.
that these two Articulate sounds should have Natural significations, and that
unless they are used in those significations, it were impossible to defend the
Doctrine of the Trinity. But I do affirm, that those who make Nature and Person
to be only abstract and complex Ideas; can neither defend nor reasonably
believe it. P. 112.
And this is making no extraordinary Supposition necessary to the Belief or
Defense of it; but only that which in the common Sense of Mankind is necessary
to it. For, if you have expressed your own Mind in your former Letter; that
must guide us in your Notion of Nature and Person, where you undertook to
explain them. For if Nature and Person be abstract, and complex Ideas, as you
say, and such are only Acts of the Mind, I do not see how it is possible for
you to reconcile these Notions with the Articles of the Trinity and Incarnation.

I do not go about to accuse you of denying these Doctrines; I hope you do not.
But I impute all this Hesitancy, and doubting only to your Notions of Ideas;
which you had been so long forming in your Mind, that as it often happens in
such Cases, one darling favorite Notion proves too hard for some Points of far
greater Consequence, when they are found inconsistent with it. And because you
had first fixed your Notion of Ideas, and taken much Pains about them, you
thought all other things were to be entertained as they appeared consistent
with them. But you could not but find, that the Articles of three Persons, and
one Nature; and two Natures, and one Person, were not reconcilable with your
Ideas of Nature and Person; which is that they are complex Ideas, which depend
upon the Act of the Mind; for this were to make the two Natures in Christ to be
only two complex Ideas. For if Nature, as you say, be a Collection of several
Ideas combined into one complex, abstract Idea; then two Natures can be nothing
else but two such Collections, or two abstracted and complex Ideas. It may be
said, that when you make Nature an abstracted and complex Idea, you speak of a
specific Idea, but the Humane Nature in Christ was a particular Substance, and
this you assert to be a real thing, and not to depend on the Act of the Mind.

But this does not clear the Matter. For in your former Letter you said, that
all the Ideas we have of particular distinct Substances, Letter 1. p. 32.
are nothing but several Combinations of simple Ideas: which in Corporeal
Substances are sensible Qualities, in Incorporeal are Operations of the Mind.
The utmost then which the Idea of Humane Nature in Christ comes to is, that
there were in him the sensible Qualities and Intellectual Operations of a Man,
with an unknown Substance to support them: which belongs not to the simple
Ideas, but is supposed by them. This is all I can make of your way of Ideas:
and so the Incarnation of Christ is the assuming the sensible Qualities, and
intellectual Operations of a Man, to which a Substratum does belong: but is no
Part of the simple Ideas. So that we can have no Idea at all of the Humane
Nature of Christ; but only an Inference, that since those are but Accidents,
there must be a Substratum to support them; and consequently there was a
particular Substance in him made up of Mind and Body. But if this had come in
the Way of Ideas, yet it cannot make out the Humane Nature of Christ. For if it
were in him no otherwise than in other Men, then the Mystery of the Incarnation
is quite gone, and Christ is to be considered but like other Men; which does
not answer to what the Scripture says of the Word's being made Flesh, and that
God was manifest in the Flesh. There must be therefore something beyond the
mere Humane Nature in him; and either it must be only some Divine Operation
upon, and with it, and that is no Substance; or if it be a Substance, it must
either cohabit with it, or else be united to it. If it only co-habits, then
there are two Persons dwelling together in one Body, and the Actions of one
cannot be attributed to the other; If there be a real Union between them, so as
the Acts belong to one Person; then there must be such a Manner of Existence in
the Humane Nature of Christ, which is different from it in other Persons. For
in all others, the Acts belong to the Humane Person; but if it were so in
Christ, then the Divine Acts of Christ must flow from the Humane Nature as the
Principle of them; which is to confound the Divine and Humane Nature, and
Operations together; If they come from the Divine Person, then the Humane
Nature must have another kind of Subsistence, than it has in others, or else
there must be two Persons; Essay l. 2. chapter 27. Sect. 26.
and Person being as you say, a Forensick Term, there must be two different
Capacities of Rewards and Punishments; which is so absurd an Opinion as I think
no one will assert.

If there be then but one Person and two Natures, how can you possibly
reconcile this to your Way of Ideas? Person, say you, Letter 1. p. 216.
in it self signifies nothing; but as soon as the common use of any Language
has appropriated it to any Idea, then that is the true Idea of a Person, i. e.
Men may call a Person what they please, for there is nothing but common use
required to it: They may call a Horse, or a Tree, or a Stone a Person if they
think fit; but since the common use of Language has appropriated it to an
Intelligent Being, that is, a Person.

And so you tell us, Essay, l. 2. chapter 27. Sect. 9.
That Person stands for a Thinking Intelligent Being that has Reason and
Reflection, and can consider it self as it self, the same thinking Being in
different times and place. How comes Person to stand for this and nothing else?
From whence comes Self-consciousness in different times and places to make up
this Idea of a Person? Whether it be true or false, I am not now to enquire,
but how it comes into this Idea of a Person? Has the common use of our
Language appropriated it to this Sense? If not, this seems to be a mere
Arbitrary Idea; and may as well be denied as affirmed. And what a fine pass are
we come to in the Way of Ideas, if a mere Arbitrary Idea must be taken into the
only true Method of Certainty? But of that afterward. We now proceed in the
Way of Ideas as you give it us. But if this be the true Idea of a Person, then
there can be no Union of two Natures in one Person: For if an Intelligent
Conscious Being be the Idea of a Person; and the Divine and Human Nature be
Intelligent Conscious Beings, then the Doctrine of the Union of two Natures and
one Person is quite sunk, for here must be two Persons in this Way of Ideas.
Again, if this be the Idea of a Person, then where there are three Persons,
there must be three distinct Intelligent Beings; and so there cannot be three
Persons in the same individual Essence. And thus both these Doctrines of the
Trinity and Incarnation are past recovery gone, if this Way of Ideas hold. So
great a difference there is, between forming Ideas first, and then judging of
Revelation by them; and the believing of Revelation on its proper Grounds, and
interpreting the Sense of it by the due Measures of Reason. You may pretend
what you please, that you hold the Assurance of Faith, and the Certainty by
Ideas to go upon very different Grounds; but when a Proposition is offered you
out of Scripture to be believed, and you doubt about the Sense of it, Is not
Recourse to be made to your Ideas? As, in the present Case, whether there can
be three Persons in one Nature, or two Natures and one Person; what Resolution
can you come to upon your Principles, but in the Way of Ideas? You may possibly
say, That where Ideas are clear and distinct, there you are to judge of
Revelation by them; and this is what you assert in your Essay, Essay, B. 4. chapter
18. Sect. 5.
That in Propositions whose Certainty is built on clear and perfect Ideas and
evident Deductions of Reason, there no Proposition can be received for Divine
Revelation which contradicts them; from hence you conclude it impossible for
the same Body to be in two Places at once. And yet there is a Person who has
lately told the World, Evangel. Medici Art. 14. p. 170.
that there is one certain secret Way how by Divine Power, the same Body, but
not the same Person, may be in very distant Places at once; but he is advised
to keep it up as a Secret; which was good friendly Advice: But till it be
discovered there is no judging of it. Here I observe, that you require clear
and distinct Ideas; and yet we find, if a Man's Word may be taken, these clear
and distinct Ideas do not prove the thing impossible. But what is to be said
when the Ideas are not clear and distinct? You say, Your Method of Certainty is
by the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas, where they are not in all their
Parts perfectly clear and distinct. And this is your Secret about Certainty;
which I think had been better kept up too: For I pray, in the Case now before
us, Are your Ideas of Nature and Person clear and distinct or not? if they are,
then it is plain from your own Doctrine, that if Revelation be pretended, you
are to reject it. How then comes the Certainty of Faith to be preserved firm
and immovable, although the Grounds of Certainty be disputed? But suppose they
are not clear and distinct? What is to be done in a Matter of Revelation
contrary to your Ideas? Are you to submit to the Revelation or not? Chapter 18.
Sect. 10.
Whatever God has Revealed is most certainly true, no doubt can be made of it.
This is the proper Object of Faith; but whether it be a Divine Revelation or
no, you say, Reason must judge. Yes, Reason proceeding upon clear and distinct
Ideas. But suppose you have Ideas sufficient for Certainty in your Way, but not
clear and distinct; what is to be done then? In things that are above Reason,
you say, when they are Revealed, they are proper Matters of Faith. What is here
being above Reason? Either above the Discovery of Reason* as the Fall of
Angels, the Resurrection of the Body, etc. and about these, you say, Reason
has nothing to do. (What not if there be an Idea of Identity as to the Body?)
Or such as are above the Comprehension of Reason when discovered. And they are
either such as we have no Natural Ideas of; and then you grant, that they are
pure Matters of Faith; or they are such, as you have certain Ideas of, but not
clear and distinct. Now here lies the pinching Difficulty, as to your Way of
Ideas. Sect. 8.
You say indeed, That Revelation must carry it against mere Probabilities to
the contrary; because the Mind not being certain of the Truth of that it does
not evidently know, but is only probably convinced of, is bound to give up its
Assent to such a Testimony, which it is satisfied comes from one who cannot err
and will not deceive. I pray observe your own Words, you here positively say,
That the Mind not being certain of the Truth of that it does not evidently
know: So that it is plain here, that you place Certainty only in Evident
Knowledge, or in clear and distinct Ideas; and yet your great Complaint of Me
was, that I charged this upon you, and now I find it in your own Words (which I
observed before.) But let us allow you all you desire, viz. That there may be
Certainty by Ideas, where they are not clear and distinct: and let us now
suppose that you are to judge of a Proposition delivered as a Matter of Faith,
where you have a Certainty by Reason from your Ideas, such as they are: Can you
assent to this as a Matter of Faith, when you are already certain by your Ideas
of the contrary? How is this possible? Can you believe that to be true, which
you are certain is not true? Suppose it be that there are two Natures in one
Person; the Question is, Whether you can Assent to this as a Matter of Faith?
If you had said, there had been only Probabilities on the other side, I grant
that you then say, Revelation is to prevail; but when you say you have
Certainty by Ideas to the contrary, I do not see how it is possible for you to
Assent to a Matter of Faith as true, when you are certain from your Ideas that
it is not true: For how can you Believe against Certainty? The Evidence is not
so great as when the Ideas are clear and distinct, but the Bar against Assent
is as strong; because the Mind is actually determined by Certainty. And so your
Notion of Certainty by Ideas must overthrow the Credibility of a Matter of
Faith in all such Propositions which are offered to be believed on the account
of Divine Revelation.

I shall now sum up the Force of what I have said about this Matter.

Your Answer is, That your Method of Certainty by Ideas, shakes not at all, nor
in the least concerns the Assurance of Faith* Against this I have pleaded. (1.)
That your Method of Certainty shakes the Belief of Revelation in general. (2.)
That it shakes the Belief of Particular Propositions or Articles of Faith,
which depend upon the Sense of Words contained in Scripture. Because you do not
say, that we are to believe all that we find there expressed; but in case we
have any clear and distinct Ideas which limit the Sense another way than the
words seem to carry it, we are to judge that to be the true Sense. But in case
our Ideas are not clear and distinct, yet you affirm as your proper Doctrine,
That we may come to Certainty by Ideas, although not in all Respects perfectly
clear and distinct. From whence I infer, That where you have attained to a
Certainty by your imperfect Ideas, you must judge of a Matter of Faith, by
those Ideas, and consequently, if the Union of two Natures and one Person, or
three Persons in one Nature be repugnant to your Ideas (as I have showed that
they are) you must by virtue of your own Principles reject these from being
Matters of Faith. And thus I hope I have proved what I undertook, viz. That
your Notion of Certainty by Ideas is inconsistent with these Articles of the
Christian Faith.

But you have this Comfort left, that you are not the first Person who has run
himself into insuperable Difficulties as to Matters of Faith, by this way of
Ideas. For Des Carts himself did so in a remarkable manner: He was a Person of
a great Reach and Capacity, and spent many Thoughts in laying the Foundations
of Certainty from Ideas, both as to Incorporeal and Corporeal Substances; and
yet was miserably foiled as to both of them. His Demonstrations from his Ideas
in his Metaphysical Meditations, did not meet with the Entertainment he
promised himself from the Inquisitive part of Mankind; for his Objective
Reality from his Idea gave no Satisfaction; and his other Argument was thought
to have no Force, unless it were taken off from the Idea and placed upon the
Necessity of Existence in the Nature of the Thing. As to Corporeal Substances,
his fundamental mistake was in a wrong Idea of Matter, which he made to be the
same with Extension; and upon this he built his Systeme of Nature. But against
this first false step many things were objected by his Adversaries, as may be
seen by the late Disputes in France about his Principles; they objected, that
his Notion or Idea of Matter made it necessary, and impossible for God to
Annihilate it; and his Defenders are driven to such shifts as to God's Will and
Power, that an indifferent Person might thereby see how dangerous it is to take
up with Ideas as to the Ground of Certainty, although neither himself nor his
Followers pretend to place it in any thing but clear and distinct Ideas. But
when they came to reconcile their Ideas with Matters of Faith, they were so
plunged, that they could see no way to get through their Difficulties. Censur.
Philos. Carts. c. 8. Sect. 3. n. 4.
For as Monsieur Huet observes, Although Des Carts professes great submission
to Divine Revelation, yet when it came to the Trial, he judged his Opinions
could not be repugnant to it, because he was certain of the Truth of them;
which shows, that he judged of Revelation by his Rules of Certainty, and
whatever he pretended, he did not take his Measures of Truth from Revelation. A
late Defender of Des Carts in answer to this, produces the Words used by him
in his Principles, wherein he owns, That in case of Divine Revelation if God
declares any thing concerning himself or others which exceed our Capacity, as
the Mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation, he would not refuse to believe
them, although he could not clearly understand them.

This Monsieur Huet denies not, viz. That he made such a general Profession of
Submission to Revelation and owning the Mysteries of Faith; but, says he, when
it comes to particular Points, then Ideas are to be the Standard by which we
are to judge of Revelation. Monsieur Regis in his Reply says, That Matters of
Faith and Philosophical Truths are of different kinds; and that there can be no
Contrariety but between things of the same kind. Which makes him run into that
great Absurdity, that although in a Philosophical Sense God cannot do things
repugnant to Reason, yet in the Way of Faith he may; and all this to preserve
the Certainty by Ideas, when nothing can be more repugnant to all kinds of
Certainty than such a Supposition. But another great Admirer of Des Carts,
Philosophia Scripturae Interpres, c. 5. n. 56.
thinks this way unreasonable; But Des Carts, he says, has shown the right
Method of Certainty by clear and distinct Ideas, and therefore he calls it no
less than a Divine Certainty; c. 8.
and he adds, that Truth cannot be contrary to it self; and he laughs at the
Distinction of Philosophical and Theological Truths; or the two ways of
Certainty by Knowledge and Faith: For, Truth is always one and the same, and
changes not its Countenance: and if Truth be an Agreement of Words with Things,
how can the same Words agree in one Book and differ in another? for the same
God is the Author of Truth wherever it is: and therefore he calls it, A most
absurd Opinion of those who say, that God who is immutable should teach that as
Truth in Philosophy, which is false in Divinity. But I return to you.

You seem to be not a little concerned, that I say, That as you have stated
your Notion of Ideas it may be of dangerous Consequence to that Article of the
Christian Faith which I had endeavored to defend. Such an Accusation, you say,
brought into any Court in England, would be thought to show a great Inclination
to have the Accused be suspected rather than any Evidence of being guilty of
any thing; and so would immediately be dismissed without hearing any Plea to
it. But you must give me leave to say, that you have quite mistaken my Design,
which was not to accuse you, but to show my own Dissatisfaction, as to the Way
you had taken to clear your self. I hoped you would have said so much for your
own Vindication, as would have satisfied the World, that your Notion of Ideas
was far from any Tendency that way to which it was carried by him who made use
of your Expressions: But, instead of that you explained it in such a manner as
made it far more suspicious that he had not perverted your meaning. And that
made me to say, That as you had stated it, it may be of dangerous Consequence.
It may be, p. 58.
say you, this is no Evidence, but only an Inclination to accuse you. So far
from it, that it showed an Inclination to favor you, when I only said it may
be; for now you see, that I think it is of such dangerous Consequence, and I
must think so till you have cleared it better.

But the Notion of Ideas as you have stated it, relates to your whole Book: Why
should you carry it farther than I intended it? The stating of it I mentioned
was in your first Letter; where you told us what you meant by Nature and
Person. p. 60.
But you have found out two Particulars wherein it may be of dangerous
Consequence, first in making so much use of the word Ideas, and your placing
Certainty in Ideas. As to the Term of Ideas, I have no Objection to the use of
the word it self; provided it be used in a common Sense, and no Weight be laid
upon it more than it can bear; for I am for no new affected Terms which are apt
to carry Men's Minds out of the way; they are like Ignes fatui, which seem to
give Light, but lead those that follow them into Bogs: Like Fontanges, which
seem to set Peoples Heads that wear them higher, but their Understandings are
just what they were before. I always disliked the Stoical Improvements by New
Words, or giving New Senses to Old ones. But I told you, I should never have
mentioned this Way of Ideas, but for the ill use I found made of them: and you
might have enjoyed the Satisfaction you had in them long enough, unless I had
found them employed in doing Mischief. p. 63.
Which, as you humbly conceive amounts to thus much and no more; that I fear
Ideas; i. e. the Term Ideas may some time or other be of dangerous Consequence.
Can you possibly think this was my Meaning? I know of no Antipathy I have to
the Term Ideas; nor do I understand any Mischief that lies in the bare use of
the Term. If it gives you any Satisfaction I pray make what use you please of
it, so you do not set it up in your Way of Ideas for a new Method of Certainty;
nor weaken Men's Belief as to Matters of Faith by it. These were my Prejudices
against your Ideas, and they are increased by your Defenses; for I can find
nothing that has any force to remove them.

You tell me, my Quarrel must be with the Term Ideas as of dangerous
Consequence: But why so? It was the Way of Certainty by Ideas which I insisted
upon, and the new Terms as employed to that purpose. I confess, I say, The
World had been strangely amuzed with Ideas of late, and we have been told, what
strange things might be done by the help of Ideas, i. e. as to Matter of
Certainty. But you tell me more than once, that I own, p. 65, 79.
That these come only to be common Notions of things, which I have no Aversion
from. This is a way of turning things upon Me, which I could not expect from
You. For those Words are brought in by me on this Occasion, you had said, that
you see no such Opposition, but that Ideas and sound Reason may stand together,
i. e. Reason rightly managing those Ideas, so as to produce Evidence by them.
Upon this, I used these Words. But what need all this great Noise about Ideas
and Certainty; true and real Certainty by Ideas, if after all it comes only to
this, that our Ideas only represent such things, from whence we bring Arguments
to prove the Truth of things? But the World has been strangely amused, etc.
Judge now how fair and ingenuous this Answer is. That which I bring in as a
Consequence of your Assertion, you make to be my own Sense as to your Notion of
Ideas: when I all along distinguish the Way of Reason, by deducing one thing
from another, from your Way of Certainty, in the Agreement and Disagreement of
Ideas; and I therefore mention it as an Argument of your own departing from
your beloved Notion of Ideas. I never said any thing against Reason rightly
managing Ideas, so as to produce Evidence by them. I was glad you came so far
toward my own Apprehension as to the Use of Ideas, and I declare soon after
That if you mean no more by your Certainty from Ideas, but a Certainty from
Reason, I was not so unreasonable a Man to disagree with you. From p. 63. to p.
73.
And yet you spend many Pages to justify your Use of the Term Ideas: which is
all lost upon me. For in short, it is not your Way of Ideas, but your Way of
Certainty by Ideas, which I was unsatisfied about, and am so much the more by
the Method you have taken to defend your self. And this was the thing I found
fault with, as you could not but see; but you found it much easier to run into
a long Discourse, to no purpose, about the Use of the Word Ideas. How far your
Use of the Term is new I will not dispute with you; be it new or old the thing
you do pretend to by your Ideas is that which I disliked, and am forced to do
so still; for you give me no manner of satisfaction about it, as will appear by
the Examination of what you say, about the new Method of Certainty, which is
the matter in Question: p. 87.
You desire to know whether there be any other or older Method of Certainty?
That is not the Point, but whether yours be any at all? Which I deny. If there
be no Older, you say, the World is obliged to you for this New one: Very true,
if it were what it pretends. p. 88.
But you tell me, I ought to set the World right in a thing of that great
Concernment, and to overthrow yours, and thereby prevent the dangerous
Consequence of your unseasonable starting this new Method of Certainty. I did
never pretend to inform the World of new Methods, and therefore am not bound to
go any farther than to that I found fault with, which was your new Method; and
although I thought I had said enough before, to show how far it was from what
it pretended; yet because you call me to it in such a manner, I shall endeavor
more freely to represent to you the Vnsatisfactoriness and Inconsistency of it.
For it is still to me a strange thing, that you should talk so much of a new
Method of Certainty by Ideas; and yet allow, as you do, such a Want of Ideas,
so much Imperfection in them, and such a want of Connection between our Ideas,
and the things themselves. One would think, that he that owned these things
rather designed to prove there could be no Certainty by Ideas. And when I had
objected these things in the Conclusion of my former Answer, you do not deny
them; and all the Return you make is, that it is better to have some way of
Certainty (though it will not lead us to it in every thing) than no way at all.
p. 171, 172.
As though the Dispute between us had been, Whether any Certainty be not better
than none. No doubt any true Certainty is desirable, but it is, as I have often
said, of ill Consequence to set up such a Method of Certainty, as if it hold,
will overthrow our Faith, and if it does not, must deceive all those that
follow it. And it is the Certainty of Faith which I defend against your
pretended Certainty of Knowledge. But to let you see what Ground I had to be
unsatisfied with it, I shall now wave all the Instances of Ideas I insisted on
before, as to Substances and sensible Qualities; and I shall single out one
remarkable Idea, by which the Uncertainty of your way of Ideas will be fully
discovered. And that is the Idea of Space; upon which a famous Systeme of
Natural Philosophy has been built, and as upon a clear and distinct Idea; and
yet you will by no means allow it to be so; and think you have a clear Idea to
the contrary; although those who will not allow it to be true cannot deny it to
be consistent with it self, and that the Ideas in it have an Agreement with one
another.

As to Space, Essay, B. 2. chapter 13. Sect. 2.
you say, that we have it both by Sight and Touch, which inform us of the
Distance between Bodies: which in several Respects may be called Distance,
Capacity and Extension; and so Extension, you say, is an Idea belonging to Body
only, but Space may, as is evident, be considered without it. But here now
arises a great difficulty to me in the way of Certainty by Ideas: viz. that
some very thinking Men in this way of Ideas, have looked on the Idea of Space,
and extended Matter to be the same; for say they, it appears to us from clear
Ideas, that Body and Extension are the same thing, and therefore if there be
Extension in Space there must be Body. But, you say, Sect. 12.
those that do so, either change the signification of Words, and so render it a
doubtful Idea, or they confound very different Ideas with one another, and so
can never come to Certainty by the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas. But you
conclude, Sect. 14.
that the clear and distinct Idea of simple Space distinguishes it plainly and
sufficiently from Body. Here we see you pretend to a clear and distinct Idea.
But it falls out very unluckily for the Way of Ideas, that the first starter of
this Way of Certainty is as positive, Princip. p. 11. n. 16.
that the Idea of Space and extended Body are the same. So that here we have
clear and distinct Ideas both Ways. And is not this an admirable Method of
Certainty, when in one of the plainest Ideas which depend upon our Senses, the
greatest Defenders of Ideas differ so fundamentally. What can other Men hope
for in this Way of Ideas, if such Men can agree no better in one of the most
evident to our Senses? But then we must consider, who has the better Reason?
This is not Certainty by Ideas, but by Reason upon them, which is another
thing: Let us go to Reason. Is that Reason built only on some intermediate
Idea, which makes it clear? I find intermediate Ideas on both sides, and urged
with equal Assurance. Des Carts says, that from Extension we rightly conclude
a Body to be a Substance; because it is a Repugnancy that there should be an
Extension of Nothing; and therefore, if there be Extension in Space there must
be Body. And he proves it from the Idea of Body; for, if we cast off all such
things as are not necessary to Body, as Hardness, Color, Gravity, Heat, and
Cold, and all other Qualities, we shall find nothing to remain but Extension,
and therefore nothing but Extension is in the Idea of Body, which being
likewise in Space the Idea of Body and Space are the same. But say you on the
other side, Essay, l. 2. chapter 13. Sect. 12.
I appeal to every Man's own Thoughts, whether the Idea of Space be not as
distinct from that of Solidity, as it is from the Idea of a scarlet Color.
It Is true, that Solidity cannot exist without Extension; but this hinders not
but they are distinct Ideas. One appeals to Thoughts, and the other to Reason:
Had Des Carts no Thoughts? Yet his Reason convinced him, that whatever
Thoughts he had, he must be persuaded by Reason, which was the true Idea. You
say, that is a clear and distinct Idea that a Man's thoughts dictate to him to
be so. No, says Des Carts, that only is the true Idea, which a Man comes to
by the Exercise of his Reason; and he looked upon those others as mere Ideas of
Imagination, and not Rational Ideas. So that here we have another Work to do,
and that no easy one, which is to distinguish the Ideas of Imagination from
those of Reason: and what way have you laid down to prevent so great a Mistake?
Of what Rules have you to judge, how far Imagination is to be allowed in the
Matter of Ideas? For in all Objects of Sense the Impression is made upon the
Imagination; which is the Seat of Ideas, that come in by Sensation. now here
lies a very considerable Difficulty, how far Reason is to judge of these Ideas
or Imagination? For if all our simple Ideas of things without us come in by
Sensation, then one would think those Ideas are to be allowed which come in
that Way; and so the Impressions of Fancy are to be the Standard and Rule of
Certainty, which I think you will not affirm. But what Rule then have you when,
and where, and how far, you are to correct the erroneous Ideas of Imagination?

I cannot deny but you were sensible of the Difficulty from the Ideas of
Imagination, and thus you propose it. B. 4. chapter 4. Sect. 1.
To what purpose is all this stir? Knowledge, say you, is only the Perception
of the Agreement or Disagreement of our own Ideas, but who knows what those
Ideas may be? Is there any thing so extravagant as the Imagination of Men's
Brains? Where is the Head that has no Chimaera's in it? Or if there be a sober
and wise Man, what difference will there be by your Rules between his
Knowledge, and that of the most extravagant Fancy in the World: They both have
their Ideas, and perceive their Agreement and Disagreement one with another.
Let us now consider the Answer you give to it, and by that we shall better
judge of your Way of Certainty.

Your general Answer is, Sect. 2,
that if our Knowledge of our Ideas terminate in our Fancies, our Assurance
would go no farther than that of Dreams, or the Visions of a heated Fancy. But
our Knowledge is real, only so far, as there is a Conformity between our Ideas,
and the Reality of Things.

All this is undoubtedly true. But you say, How shall the mind, when it
perceives nothing but its own Ideas, know that they agree with Things
themselves?

There indeed lies the Difficulty, but how do you remove it?

There are two sorts of Ideas, you say, we may be sure, agree with things.

And these are worth the knowing.

1. The first are simple Ideas, Sect. 4*
which since the mind can by no means make to it self, must necessarily be the
Product of Things operating on the Mind in a natural Way. and producing therein
those Perceptions which by the Wisdom and Will of our Maker they are adapted
to. From whence it follows, that simple Ideas are not Fictions of our Minds.

All that can be proved from hence is no more, but that the Objects of our
Senses do make those Impressions upon them, that from them we may be certain
there are such things without us, which produce those Impressions. And this is
all you mean when you say, that you are certain these Ideas are no Fictions of
our Brains. But let us apply this to the present Case. Our Senses truly inform
us of a Distance between Bodies; and so far we are certain of an Idea of Space,
but the Question about the Idea of Space goes farther; viz. Whether the Idea of
Space imply something or nothing? How can nothing be extended? If it be
something extended it must be Body; and so Space and Body are the same.

And so your simple Ideas give no manner of satisfaction in this Matter.

Sect. 5.
2. All our complex Ideas, except those of Substances, you say, being Archetypes
of the Mind's own making, not referred to the Existence of any thing, cannot
want any Conformity necessary to real Knowledge; for that which is not designed
to represent any thing but it self, can never be capable of a wrong
Representation, nor mislead us from the true Apprehension of any thing by its
dislikeness to it.

Where are we now? What in the Way to Certainty still? Methinks it seems to be
too intricate and winding to be that plain Way. What is meant by these
Archetypes in the Mind which cannot deceive us? I confess here are such things
said in order to Certainty, which are above my Understanding, if taken with
respect to Things; as how we cannot but be infallibly certain, that all the
Knowledge we attain concerning these Ideas is real, and reaches things
themselves, and yet they are Archetypes of the Mind's own making, not intended
to be the Copies of any thing, nor referred to the Existence of any thing. How
can the Certainty by these Ideas reach the things themselves, if they are
Archetypes of the Mind, not referred to the Existence of any thing? But I
suppose all this is meant of Mathematical Truths, and so reaches not the Case,
which is concerning the Certainty of our Knowledge of things that really exist.

Sect. 11.
3. You say, there is another sort of complex Ideas, which being referred to
Archetypes without us may differ from them, and so our Knowledge about them may
come short of being real. Now these were the things we desired to be made
certain in; and to find out such Rules as would make our Knowledge real. But
for all that I can see, the hopes of any Criterion is quite lost, as to the
Point in Question: How shall the mind when it perceives nothing but its own
Ideas, know that they agree with the things themselves?

For upon these Grounds we can have no Certainty as to simple Ideas, but only
as to the Power of making Impressions on our Senses; but as to complex Ideas as
of Substances, our Knowledge about them may come short of being real, i. e. we
cannot arrive to Certainty about them in the way of Ideas; because, they may
differ from the Archetypes without us. And you confess, Sect. 12.
that our Ideas are not very exact Copies, and yet are the Subjects of real,
(as far as we have any) Knowledge of them; which will not be found to reach
very far. But to make it real concerning Substances, the Ideas must be taken
from the real Existence of things. And if our complex Ideas may deceive us as
to the things from whence they are supposed to be taken, what an Account of
Certainty in the way of Ideas is here? And yet you conclude this Chapter in
that Triumphant manner; I think I have shown wherein it is that Certainty, real
Certainty consists, which whatever it was to others was to me heretofore one of
those Desiderata's, which I found great want of: And for all that I can see may
do so still. For here is nothing said to distinguish the strong Impressions of
Fancy from the Appearances of things, from that Certainty of Knowledge which
comes from the things themselves. For, a confident Opiniator will talk with
greater Assurance of the Agreement and Disagreement of things with his Ideas;
than a Man of far greater Judgment and more Modesty. And you have given us no
Rules to make a difference between Opinion and rational Certainty; especially
when the Ideas of Fancy are found to agree with one another.

But I shall go a step farther to show, that the Agreement of Ideas is no
Ground of Certainty, and that from a Supposition relating to the present Case.

We have seen how possible it is for an ingenious Person skilled in the
Phenomenon of Nature to contrive such an Hypothesis, that one Part may agree
with another, so as that no discernible Inconsistency may be found in it, and
yet all this may be built on such a Foundation, as cannot be consistent with
your Certainty by Ideas; nay, such as you are certain cannot be true.

The Hypothesis, I mean, is that of Des Carts; for allowing him his Laws of
Motion, and his three Elements, the Phenomenon of Nature, or the Ideas of it
agree with one another, and yet all this is built upon Space being the same
with Body; and consequently, that there can be no Vacuum: upon which his Laws
of Motion, and his Solution of the Phenomenon is all built. And therefore, when
a learned Man of our own objected that to him, and thought it of no great
Consequence to his Philosophy; he replied with some smartness, Des Carts
Epist. ^ 1. Ep. 87, 88.
that he was mistaken, for he took it for one of the most certain Principles of
his Philosophy. What Certainty then can there be in Ideas, when so absurd a
Principle as that shall be looked on by so great a Man, as so certain a thing
in the Way of Ideas, as to build his whole System of Natural Philosophy upon
it? And his followers to this day stiffly defend it, who are otherwise ingenious
Men.

Nothing now remains to be answered in your second Letter, but what relates to
the Defense of what I had said in my Book concerning Nature and Person. For I
cannot but observe, that instead of clearing some pressing Difficulties in my
Answer to your former Letter, you run back to my Book, and begin a new Critique
upon that Part of it; and take in the help of some ingenious Persons of your
Acquaintance, to whom I must show so much Civility as to take notice of their
Objections. Which I shall the rather do, because the Doctrine of the Trinity is
expressed in the first Article of our Religion by one Nature and three Persons,
and so it has been understood by the Christian Church long before. And it is
the Sense of the Christian Church which I am bound to defend, and no particular
Opinions of my own.

You tell me, p. ^17
that there has not been one of your Acquaintance who owned that he understood
my Meaning; but confessed that the farther he looked into what I had said, the
more he was at a loss about Nature and Person. But I hope I am not to answer
for other Men's want of Understanding in these Matters: which requires greater
Application of Mind, than most Men are willing to allow themselves about them.
But I am to judge no otherwise of their Sense and Capacity, than as you have
represented them.

p. 118.
One said I began with giving two significations of the word Nature; One of
them, as it stood for Properties; and this he understood; but the other wherein
Nature was taken for the thing it self, wherein those Properties were, he said
he did not understand. But he said he was not very well acquainted with Greek,
and Aristotle was brought to explain and settle the Sense of Nature.

But why did not this Gentleman in the first Place consider what it was I
undertook to show, which was, that we had an Idea of Nature, which came not in
by our Senses; and in the very next words I said, That Nature and Substance are
of an equal Extent; and so, that which is the Subject of Powers and Properties
is the Nature, whether it be meant of bodily or spiritual Substances. And
although by Sensation and Reflection we know the Powers and Properties of
things; yet it is by Reason we are satisfied there must be such a Nature or
Substance, because it is impossible that they should subsist by themselves.

Methinks if the Gentleman were so much at a loss as you represent him, you
should have helped him out by your relative Ideas: For hard things go down much
better with some Men's minds in the Way of Ideas, (which is a sort of gilding
the Pills) and I doubt not but you could have satisfied him, that the
Understanding may by virtue of a relative Idea be very well satisfied of the
Being of Nature, as well as Substance, when I declared that I took them to be
of equal Extent; as they were the Subject of Powers and Properties. But he
says, that this he understood not, p. 120.
because Nature extended to things that were not Substances. Did I not say,
that Nature was sometimes taken only for Properties, but that there must be
another Sense proved, because there must be a Subject wherein these Properties
are, and in that respect, I said, that Nature and Substance were of equal
Extent. But he does not understand the Deduction; Aristotle takes Nature for a
corporeal Substance, therefore Nature and Substance are of an equal Extent.
What a hard Fate does that Man lie under, that falls into the hands of a severe
Critic! He must have a care of his But, and For, and Them, and It; For the
least Ambiguity in any of these will fill up Pages in an Answer, and make a
Book look considerable for the Bulk of it. And what must a Man do, who is to
answer to all such Objections about the Use of Particles? But let any
indifferent Reader judge, how I am used in this Place. My words are Sometimes
Nature is taken for the Thing it self in which those Properties are; and so
Aristotle took Nature for a Corporeal Substance, which had the Principles of
Motion in it self; but Nature and Substance are of an equal Extent. Does not
any Man of Common Sense see, that I oppose this to Aristotle's Sense of Nature
for a Corporeal Substance? He confines it to that only; I say, That it is of
equal Extent with Substance whether Bodily or Spiritual: and those very words
follow after. If you had really such a Conversation with a Gentleman, I am
sorry for him; and I think you did not deal so like a Gentleman by him, to
expose him thus to the World.

But I perceive he is a Philosopher too; for he proves, p. 119.
That Aristotle 's Notion of Nature for a Corporeal Substance will not hold.
Did I ever say that it would? I am far enough from thinking, that a Corporeal
Substance has a Principle of Motion from it self; but might not I mention
Aristotle's taking Nature for a Substance, although I presently add, his Sense
was too short and narrow, because Nature and Substance were of equal extent?
But did not his Notion of Nature imply that it was a Principle of Motion in it
self? Whatever Aristotle thought, the Notion of Nature does not depend upon a
Principle of Motion from it self; but it was considered, not as in it self as
the Cause, but in it self as the Subject. And that Philosophical Gentleman
might be pleased to consider, that Aristotle did not make Motion to arise from
Matter, but asserted it to come from a first Mover, and said, That those
Philosophers talked like Men not well in their Wits, who attributed Motion to
Matter of it self; as I could easily prove, if it were needful. And methinks
you should not have been such a Stranger to Aristotle, to let your Acquaintance
run into such Blunders, and then to print them for them.

But the Gentleman is farther plunged and knows not how to get out. p. 121.
He cannot for his Life understand Nature to be Substance and Substance to be
Nature? Where lies the Difficulty? Is the Repugnancy, in the Words, or in the
Sense? Not in the Words or Sense either in Greek or Latin. For the Greek, (if I
may have leave to mention that Language in this Case) those who have been very
well acquainted with the force of Words therein, have made Nature of the same
importance with Substance. So Hesychius renders it by (...), Substance; but I
shall not bring the Testimony of Critics but of Philosophers. And Aristotle
may be allowed to understand his own Language, Arist. Metaph. l. 5. c. 4.
he says positively, (...); every Substance is called Nature, and the Reason
he gives for it is, (...), because Nature is a Substance. It may be said, That
Aristotle said this, because he took Nature for such a Substance as had the
Power of Motion in it self; I do not deny, but he looked on that as the proper
Acception of Nature; but from hence it follows, that whatever Substance had
such a Principle of Motion in it self was truly and properly Nature; not as
exclusive of a Superior Principle of Motion, but as having an internal
self-moving Principle. And herein Aristotle differed from some modern
Philosophers, who make all Motion to come from the Impulse of another Body, and
to be a mere Mode of Matter continued from one Body to another. I confess
Aristotle was of another Opinion from those Gentlemen, and looked on Motion as
an Effect of an inward Principle; and not merely of an External Impulse: but
whether Aristotle were mistaken herein is not the Question; and it is possible
he was not; however, it plainly appears, that Substance with a Power of Motion
in it self, and Nature, had the same Sense; and none of those who have been the
most severe Critics upon Aristotle have disputed, that I remember, against
this Sense of Nature in him. P. Rami Schol. Metaph l. 9. c. 4.
One of them finds this fault, that it was but a Repetition of what he had said
in his Physics; Physic. Ausc. l. 2. c. 1.
where he does likewise treat of the Sense of Nature. And there he takes it for
such a Substance which has the Principle of Motion and Rest within it self and
by it self; which he opposes to artificial things, as a Bed or a Garment. And
as much as this Definition has been run down by some Men, if we set aside some
affected Obscurity in his Philosophical Writings, there is no such Absurdity in
it; when he explains himself not to understand it of mere Local Motion, or
change of Place, but of all Alterations incident to Bodies. So that Nature in
his Sense, was a Substance endued with a Principle of Life and Action. And all
those things which did partake of Nature in this Sense, he said, were
Substances; (...). For Nature is always a Subject and in a Subject; i. e. the
Substance it self is Nature, and that which is in it is according to Nature.
And this Sense of Aristotle Plutarch relies upon, Plut. de Plac. Phil. l. 1. c.
1.
as the true Notion of Nature which he says is the Principle of Motion and
Rest; because the beginning and ending of things depend upon it: But Plutarch
by no means approves of those Men's Opinion who made Nature to be an Original
Self-moving Principle; c. 3.
For, says he, Matter of it self cannot move without an Efficient Cause, no
more than any Metal can frame it self into a particular Form without an
Artificer. From whence we see that Aristotle's Notion of Nature was very
consistent with an Efficient Cause of Nature. But your Gentleman says, Letter
II. p. 119.
That to those who admit not Matter and Motion to be Eternal, no Nature in that
Sense will be left, since Nature is said to be a Corporeal Substance which has
the Principles of Motion in it self, and such a sort of Corporeal Substance
those Men have no Notion of at all, and consequently none of Nature, which is
such a Corporeal Substance. But if Aristotle did not suppose Matter to move it
self, without an Efficient Cause, (as certainly he did not) then all this falls
to the Ground, and his Notion of Nature for a Substantial Principle of Life and
Action may remain good.

But it may be said, That this was one of his singular Notions, and that no
other Philosophers took it so. Which is so far from being true, that a great
Enemy of Aristotle's confesses, Fr. Patrit. Discuss. Peripat. T. II. l. 2. p.
207.
That the Name of Nature among the Writers before him extended to all kinds of
Beings, and not only to Individual but to Specific Natures.

Aristotle's fault lay in applying Nature only to Corporeal Substances; and
whatever was above them he looked on as above Nature; but the Pythagoreans and
Platonists took Nature to extend to Spiritual as well as Bodily Substances.
Which appears by Timaeus Locrus his Book of Nature; in the beginning whereof he
divides Things into two kinds, Intellectual and Corporeal; and the former,
whose Nature was more excellent, he derives immediately from the best
Principle, viz. God himself.

But to make this plainer, we are to consider, that there were four Opinions,
among the Old Philosophers about Nature. Some held Nature to be the same with
Matter, and attributed the Beginning of all things to that alone; such were the
followers of Anaximander and Democritus. Others rejected this Doctrine as
absurd and impious, and held a Divine Being above Matter, which gave the
beginning to Motion and framed the World, and they asserted Spiritual as well
as Corporeal Natures, and these were the followers of Pythagoras and
Anaxagoras. Others asserted the Beginning of Motion and of the World from a
first Cause; but confined the Sense of Nature to the Course of things
established in this Visible World by an Universal Providence at first. And this
was the Notion of Aristotle and his followers to the time of Strato who
attributed all to mere Nature. Lastly, there were some who made Nature to be
the first Principle which formed all things; which sometimes they called God,
and sometimes Nature, as is obvious in all the Writings of the Stoics; Vis
illum Naturam vocare? non peccabis; says Seneca: Not Quaest. l. 2. c. 45.
and in another place, Quid aliud est Natura, quam Deus and divina Ratio? De
benef. l. 4. c. 7, 8.
and again, Nec Deus sine Natura est, nec Natura sine Deo, sed idem est
utrumque, which he elsewhere calls, De Cons. ad Helv. c. 8.
Incorporalis Ratio ingentium operum Artifex. With which Balbus in Cicero
agrees, Cic. de Not. l. 2.
when he defines Nature from Zeno, to be an Intelligent Fire that produces all
things. For what he calls Ignem artificiosum ad gignendum, etc. Laertius calls
(...) (...); and it is called in Cicero, Natura Artifex, Consultrix and
Provida, etc. which can agree to nothing but a Spiritual Substance; and when he
explains what Nature is, he says, That Epicurus called all by the Name of
Nature; and divided it into Matter and Vacuity and the Accidents of both: but
we (says he of the Stoics) by Nature understand no Inanimate Things which
have no Principle within to unite them, as Earth and Stones; but a living
Substance, as an Animal, in which is no Chance, but Order and Contrivance. And
so Plato said, Plato in Phileb.
That Nature ordered all things with Reason and Understanding. By which he
understood the Divide Being. If we come lower down among the Philosophers, we
shall find Nature taken for a Principle of Life. Sext. Empir. l. 8. c. 2.
So Sextus Empiricus distinguishes the Union of Matter in Stones and Wood from
that which is in Plants, p. 324.
and this he calls Nature, which is the lowest degree of it; for afterward, he
speaks of Rational and Intellectual Natures, and places God in the head of
them. Anton. l. 6. sect. 14.
Antoninus distinguishes Nature in Plants from a heap of the Particles of
Matter in Wood and Stone. l. 10. Sect. 2.
But in another place he distinguishes that which is mere Nature in Man, viz.
what he has in common with Plants, from the Nature of an Animal in him; and
that again from the Nature of a Rational Creature in him. Here indeed he speaks
of the Properties of those Natures; but he still supposes, that where they are
separate, they are founded in distinct Substances.

So that I hope, if the Philosophers of old, of all kinds did understand the
Sense of Nature and Substance, the Gentleman may not continue in such a
peremptory Humor of saying, That for his Life he cannot understand Nature to
be Substance, nor Substance to be Nature. For they all agreed in this, however
they differed in their Opinions of Nature.

But I have something farther to add concerning the Sense of the Christian
Church in this Matter; which I think is by no means to be despised.

It is observed by Damascen, Damasc. Dial. c. 32.
that some of the Philosophers made this difference between (...) and (...);
that the former was taken for simple Essence, but the latter for Essence with a
Specifical Difference; but that the Christian Writers took both of them for
that which was common to more than one, as an Angel, a Man, a Horse, etc. So
St. Chrysostom calls Angels (...), Chrysostom. Hom. 22. in Genesis
and (...), and Theodoret (...), Theod. in Genesis Qu. 2.
St. Basil (...); but they all agree, Basil. in Hex. Or. 1.
that Incorporeal and Invisible Substances are real Natures. And the Reason
Damascen gives is, That they have both the same Original (and you know that it
is a good way to find out the true Idea) for as (...) is from (...), so (...)
is from (...), both which are the same. So that if Real Existence belong to
Substance, and Nature has its Name from thence too, then Substance and Nature
must be of the same Importance. And this Notion of Nature they do not take up
merely from the Etymology of the Word, but from the Sense of it in Scripture;
as when St. Paul says, They worshipped those which by Nature are no Gods; Gal.
4.8.
(...) (...), as the Alexandrian Copy has it more clearly; i. e. which are not
really and substantially Gods. They had the Names of Gods, and the Divine
Properties were attributed to them; but because they had not the Divine
Essence, they are said not to be Gods by Nature. And what Sense would this
Gentleman make of the Apostle's words, who cannot for his Life understand that
Nature is the same with Substance? He must understand this only of the
Properties which belong to God. But these Properties must be somewhere, and so
a Substance must be supposed as the Subject of them; and what Reason can there
be to exclude that which is the Subject of those Properties? For there must be
a Divine Being, as well as Properties; and that Being must have Essential
Properties belonging to it; and what imaginable Reason can there be, why that
should not be called the Divine Nature? And if it be, then Substance and Nature
are the same. I might easily pursue this farther, but I design to bring things
into as little a compass as I can.

But it may be there is something in our own Language which hinders Nature from
being taken for a Substance; and for this I appeal to a late Ingenious and
Honorable Person and Philosopher of our own; I mean Mr. Boil, Mr. Boil of
the Notion of Nature, p. 27.
who has written a Philosophical Enquiry into the Notion of Nature; and he
tells us of the various Acceptations of it. (1.) For the Author of Nature. (2.)
For the Essence of a Thing. (3.) For what comes to Men by Birth; as a Man is
Noble by Nature. (4.) For an Internal Principle of Motion: as that a Stone is
carried downwards by Nature. (5.) For the established course of things; as that
Nature makes the Night to succeed the Day. (6.) For an Aggregate of Powers
belonging to a Living Body; as that Nature is strong or weak. (7.) For the
System of the Universe; as when we say of a Chimaera, there is no such thing in
Nature. (8.) For a Semi-Deity; which is the Notion he opposes. But we may
observe, that he allows God and all the real Beings of the Universe to have
Nature belonging to them; and he says, P. 35.
The Word Essence is of great Affinity to it, if not of an adequate Import. But
the Real Essence of a thing is a Substance; and therefore Nature and Substance
are of the like Importance.

The next thing fit to be considered is, How far your Certainty by Ideas and
the Certainty by Reason differ from each other.

The occasion of this Debate stands thus.

I had said in my Book, Discourse of the Trinity, p. 25.
That I granted, that by Sensation and Reflection we come to know the Powers
and Properties of things; but our Reason is satisfied, that there must be
something beyond these, because it is impossible that they should subsist by
themselves. So that the Nature of things properly belongs to our Reason and not
to mere Ideas.

In answer to this you said, That you can find no Opposition between Ideas and
Reason; but Ideas are the Objects of the Understanding, and Understanding is
one of the Faculties employed about them.

To which I replied, No doubt of it. But you might easily see, that by Reason I
understood Principles of Reason, allowed by Mankind; which I think are very
different from Ideas. But I perceive Reason in this Sense is a thing you have
no Idea of, or one as obscure as that of Substance.

If there be any thing which seems too sharp and reflecting in the Manner of
Expression, I do not go about to defend it; but the worst of it is, That your
Idea of Reason is as obscure as that of Substance. And whether there were not a
just Occasion for it, the Reader must judge when the Faculty was put for the
Principles of Reason. Could any Man judge otherwise, but that you had a very
obscure Idea of Reason, who could mistake the Understanding for it?

P. 124.
But Reason, you say, taken for the Faculty is as different from Ideas in your
Apprehension. But what is that to the Point in Dispute, whether the Notion of
Nature be to be taken from Ideas or from Reason? You say, the Understanding is
employed about them. And what then? I showed that the Nature of things belongs
to Reason and not to bare Ideas; because Ideas come in by Sensation and
Reflection; by which we come to know the Powers and Properties of things; but
we cannot come to know the Notion of Nature as the Subject of them, but by this
Reason that we are convinced they cannot subsist of themselves. And is this no
more than to say, the Understanding is employed about Ideas? But now you answer
farther, That if Reason be taken for the Faculty or the Principles of Reason
allowed by Mankind, Reason and Ideas may consist together. This leads me to the
Examination of that which may be of some use, viz. To show the Difference of
your Method of Certainty by Ideas, and the Method of Certainty by Reason.

And the Way of Certainty by Reason lies in two things; 1. The Certainty of
Principles. 2. The Certainty of Deductions.


As to the former, the Gentleman your Defender in your Book says, That in your
Essay, Ibid.
in more places than one, you have spoken, and that pretty largely of
Self-evident Propositions and Maxims; so that if I have ever read them, I
cannot doubt, but you have Ideas of those common Principles of Reason.

Book 4 ch 7. Sect. ^^.
What Ideas you have of them must appear from your Book. And I do there find a
Chapter of Self-evident Propositions and Maxims; which I cannot but think
extraordinary for the Design of it; which is thus summed up in the Conclusion,
viz. That it was to show, That these Maxims, as they are of little use where we
have clear and distinct Ideas, so they are of dangerous use, where our Ideas
are not clear and distinct. And is not this a fair way to convince me that your
Way of Ideas is very consistent with the Certainty of Reason; when the Way of
Reason has been always supposed to proceed upon General Principles; and you
assert them to be Useless and Dangerous.

Sect. 4.
Your first Design you say is to prove, that the Consideration of these General
Maxims can add nothing to the Evidence or Certainty of Knowledge; which
overthrows all that which has been accounted Science and Demonstration, and
must lay the Foundation of Skepticism. Because our true Grounds of Certainty
depend upon some general Principle of Reason. To make this plain, I shall put a
Case grounded upon your Words, which are, Book 4. chapter 7. Sect. 17.
that you have discoursed with very rational Men, who have actually denied that
they are Men. These Words, I. S. understands as spoken of themselves, Solid
Philos. asserted Preface, Sect. 16. Reflex. 19. p. 378.
and charges them with very ill Consequences; but I think they are capable of
another meaning: However, let us put the Case that Men did in earnest question,
whether they were Men or not; and then I do not see, if you set aside general
Maxims, how you can convince them that they are Men. For, the way I look on as
most apt to prevail upon such extraordinary Skeptical Men, is by general Maxims
and Principles of Reason. As in the first place, that Nothing can have no
Properties; which I take to be the Fundamental Principle of Certainty, as to
real Beings. For, all our inward Perceptions are only of some Acts or
Properties, as of Thinking, Doubting, Reasoning, etc. and if a Man proceeds so
far as to question every thing, in order to the discovering the true Ground of
Certainty, he cannot be satisfied with finding out only some Modes of Being;
but that which he aims at is, satisfaction as to his real Existence.

But this wholly depends upon the Truth and Certainty of this Fundamental
Maxim; That Nothing can have no Operations; and therefore, whatever thinks, or
doubts, or reasons, must certainly be. And since by another Fundamental Maxim,
it is impossible for the same Thing to be and not to be; he cannot entertain
any possible doubt of his own Existence.

It may be said, that this reaches only to bare Existence, and not to the Being
Men. I answer, that for the Certainty as to that, there are other general
Maxims of necessary Use; As, That all different sorts of Beings are
distinguished by Essential Properties; That the Essential Properties of a Man
are to Reason, Discourse, etc. That these Properties cannot subsist by
themselves without a real Substance: And therefore, where these Properties are
found, those who have them must be real and substantial Men.

You may possibly say, Book 4. chapter 9. Sect. 3.
that these Maxims are useless, because you affirm that nothing can be more
evident to us, than our own Existence; and that we have an internal infallible
Perception that we are.

But I answer, that these Maxims do not at all appear to be useless, because
the Certainty we enquire after is a Certainty of Reason, and not of bare
Perception. And if it be a Certainty of Reason, some Ground of Reason must be
assigned for it: but all that the Perception reaches to, are those Acts
mentioned by you. I think, I reason, I feel pleasure and pain: but the Question
goes farther as to the Subject of those Acts, and the Nature of that Subject,
whether it be a Man or not.

Now here lies the main Difficulty, whether without the help of these
Principles you can prove to any that doubt, that they are Men? And I shall now
show, that in your Way of Ideas you cannot. For, (1) You suppose that we must
have a clear distinct Idea of that which we are certain of in the Way of Ideas.
(2) You deny that we have any such clear and distinct Idea of Man.


1. You suppose, that we must have a clear and distinct Idea of that we are
certain of. For in your Chapter of Maxims, Book 4. chapter 7. Sect. 4.
you say, that every one knows the Ideas that he has, and that distinctly and
unconfusedly one from another. Which always being so (I pray mark that, and
judge whether you do not make clear and distinct Ideas necessary to Certainty)
he can never be in doubt when any Idea is in his mind, that it is there, and is
that Idea it is, and that two distinct Ideas when they are in his mind are
there, and are not one and the same Idea: From whence you infer the Necessity
of Certainty, when the Ideas are clear and distinct. This is so plain and
clear, that I wonder how you came to forget it, and to think that I did you
wrong when I charged you with holding clear and distinct Ideas necessary to
Certainty. But of that in the Beginning of this Discourse.

2. But let us now examine your Idea of Man, whether that be clear and distinct
or not; and if not, then according to your Principles very rational Men cannot
be certain that they are Men. For if they have no Way of Certainty but by
Ideas, and you allow no clear and distinct Idea of Man, then they can come to
no Certainty; and I hope you will not deny them to be very rational Men, if
they follow the Way of Ideas.

First, Book 4* chapter 7. Sect. 16.
you show, that there can be no Demonstration in the Way of Principles what Man
is.

Secondly, Sect. 17.
that there are very different Ideas of Man, some, you say, make the Idea of a
Man without a Soul; as Children do. Others add Laughter and rational Discourse,
and these may demonstrate by general Principles that Idiots and Infants are no
Men by this Maxim, that it is impossible for the same thing to be, and not to
be; and you have discoursed with very rational Men, who have actually denied
that they are Men.

Others take in the Idea of Body in general, Sect. 18.
and the Powers of Language and Reason, and leave out shape; and so a Man may
be a Four-footed Creature, or in whatever Body or Shape he found Speech and
Reason joined, that was a Man.

But where is the clear and distinct Idea of a Man all this while? We can have
no Certainty by Principles, you say, and you offer none in the Way of Ideas;
for the Ideas are very confused, imperfect and repugnant to each other; and so
in this new Method of Certainty by Ideas, we cannot be so much as certain that
we are Men.

But is it possible to suppose, that a rational Man should talk of Certainty by
Ideas, and not be able to fix the Idea of a Man? One would have thought this
had been only an Omission in this place out of pure Zeal against Principles;
but certainly in other places this Idea of a Man must be made clear and
distinct. So far from it, that in other places, you industriously set your self
to disprove the common Idea of a Man. Book 3. chapter 6. Sect. 26.
It could not possibly be, say you, that the abstract Idea to which the Name
Man is given, should be different in several Men, if it were of Natures making;
and that to one it should be animal rationale; to another animal implume bipes
latis unguibus. From whence it is plain, that you allow no clear and distinct
Idea of Man; and you endeavor to expose the sacred Definition, as you call it,
of animal rationale; which was never exposed by any Man without Cause. But you
conclude, Sect. 17*
That we are far from knowing certainly what Man is; though perhaps it will be
judged great Ignorance to doubt about it. And yet you think you may say, That
the certain Boundaries of that Species are so far from being determined, and
the precise Number of simple Ideas, which make that nominal Essence so far from
being settled and perfectly known, that very material Doubts may still arise
about it. So that I begin to think I. S. was in the right, when he made you
say, That you had discoursed with very rational Men who denied themselves to be
Men. But this is a little too hard to deny themselves to be Men. If it had been
only, who doubted whether they were Men or not; you could not deny them to be
very rational Men, because they went upon your Grounds, that we can have no
Certainty either by Principles, or by any clear and distinct Ideas, what a Man
is.

Thus I have showed how inconsistent your way of Ideas is with true Certainty;
and of what Use and Necessity these general Principles of Reason are.

I now come to the Certainty of Reason in making Deductions. And here I shall
briefly lay down the Grounds of Certainty, which the Ancient Philosophers went
upon, and then compare your way of Ideas with them.

Aristot. Metaph. l. 5.
Aristotle observes, that Socrates first brought in Definitions and Inductions
in order to Certainty; and went no farther. Plato allowed no Certainty, but
only Opinion, as to External Objects; but he said* that Certainty depended upon
abstract and separate Ideas, which were always the same. This he took, Answer
to the first Let. p. 32.
(as I observed in my former Letter) from the Pythagoreans, only changing
Numbers into Ideas. For by Numbers, they understood first Principles, not gross
and material; but immaterial and eternal, Iambl. in Nicom. p. 5.
as Iamblichus says; and therefore Moderatus Gaditanus, one of the most
understanding Men among them says, the Pythagoreans brought in Numbers, Porph
vit. Pythag.
(...), for a more decent Way of Instruction, following the Practice of
Geometricians, who make use of Figures to represent things to the Mind; and
therefore their Doctrine of Numbers was the Philosophy of Principles, or the
general Grounds of Certainty; but this was so abstruse and so little
understood, that it soon lost its Reputation, as Porphyry observes, or was
mixed with Plantonism; and therefore Photinus joins the Pythagorean and
Platonic Principles together. But Aristotle was a great Enemy to these
abstracted Speculations, and therefore set himself so much on all occasions
against Ideas and Numbers, especially in his Metaphysics. Metaphys. l. 7. c.
15, 16. l. 12* c. 4, 5.
But instead thereof, he endeavored to bring down Certainty to material
Things, and to real Beings. In order to this, he saw it necessary to avoid
Confusion, by explaining doubtful Terms, and by ranking things under several
Heads, which he called Categories; wherein all things are reduced to Substance,
and Accidents belonging to them; to which he joins some general Discourses
about the right Apprehension of things simply considered. But it is observable,
that in all the Categories from Archytas the Pythagorean downwards, (who first
placed them in that Order,) Substance was first ranked, as the most proper Idea
of the Mind, and all Accidents or Modes were considered with respect to that.
And the French Cartesians in their Logic, place Substance as the first Object
of their Ideas: and do not leave us a relative Idea, to be supposed only,
because Accidents cannot subsist without a Subject. Then follows the Way of
understanding the Truth and Falsehood of Propositions; after which, he pursues
the Way of Reasoning, or inferring one thing from another, which he calls
Syllogizing, wherein he professes to go upon this common Principle of Reason,
That what things do agree in a third must agree among themselves. But being not
content with the ordinary Dialectical Way, which proceeded upon the Concessions
of the Party, he attempted to bring in true Demonstration. To which he supposes
general Axioms necessary, and Definitions, and Postulata: and he distinguishes
between a necessary Conclusion, and a Demonstration; for the former may arise
from the manner of reasoning; but a Demonstration supposes a necessary Cause,
and that the Propositions are such as that the Conclusion necessarily follows
from them. So that Demonstration according to him must be of an inseparable
Property, and by the most immediate and necessary Cause. How far Aristotle's
Notion of Demonstration can be applied to Physical matters is not my business
to enquire; it being only to show what his Method of Certainty was.

But besides Aristotle, the Stoics took upon them to lay down the true Method
of Certainty; and they went another Way to work about it, viz. (1.) By finding
out the Criterion of Truth and Falsehood. (2.) By examining the Consequences and
Deductions of Reason.

As to things which had some Degree of Evidence to Sense or Reason, they made
the Criterion necessary, but for those which had not, but must be proved, the
Examination of that Proof was necessary in order to Certainty.

The Criterion was agreed to be (...), the Measure whereby we are to judge of
things. But as in the Use of Balances for Weight, there must be one to hold
them, and the Balances themselves, and the Position of them; and as in the
judging of a Line, whether straight or crooked, there must be the Artificer,
the Rule and the Application of it; so in judging of Truth and Falsehood, there
must be the Faculty of Understanding as the Artificer, Sense and Reason as the
Rule; and the inward Ideas of the Mind, which answered to the Position of the
Balances, or the Application of the Rule. Now that which they placed their
Notion of Certainty in, was that inward and comprehensive Idea, which was
called by them (...). If it were a weak Assent, they called it Opinion; for
they made the Assent voluntary, notwithstanding the Criterion; but if it were a
firm and immovable Assent, that they called Knowledge and Certainty.

But besides these comprehensive Ideas they did allow of common Notions,
Arrian. l. 1. c. 22. l. 3. c 26. Simplic. in Epict. c. 33.
which they called (...), or Anticipations: of which Arrian speaks; and
Simplicius says, they are those wherein all are agreed, and are planted in us
by right Reason, and confirmed by Time and Observation.

As to the other Part, they took great pains about the true signification of
Words, the rank and order of Things, the nature and kind of Propositions, and
the difference of Signs, whereof some were Monitory, and others Demonstrative.
And the proving a thing uncertain, by something granted to be certain, was that
which they called Demonstration. According to the Principles of the Eleatick
School, the most simple and natural Way of reasoning was supposed to be by
drawing Consequences upon Suppositions, and the Way the Stoics took to judge
of reasoning, was by judging what approached nearest to the first Principles of
reasoning; such as that every thing we talk about either must be or not be; and
in such disjunct Propositions, one Part or other must be taken, and then a
Train of Consequences follows.

And Plutarch, no friend to the Stoics, thinks this faculty of drawing
Consequences, lays the best Foundation for Demonstration. For the Principle of
it, Plut. de Ei Delph. Simplic. in Epict. c. 58.
he says, is the (...), the connex Way of reasoning; that is as Simplicius
explains it, when two things are so joined together as antecedent and
consequent, that by Position of the Antecedent, the Consequent follows, and by
taking away the Consequent, the Antecedent is removed. Thus I have, in as few
Words, as I could, laid together those old Methods of Certainty, which have
obtained greatest Reputation in the World.

But your Way of Certainty by Ideas is so wholly New, that here we have no
general Principles; no Criterion, no Antecedents and Consequents; no
Syllogistical Methods of Demonstration; and yet we are told of a better Way of
Certainty to be attained, merely by the help of Ideas. But how comes there to
be such a Way of Certainty by Ideas, and yet the Ideas themselves are so
uncertain and obscure? I confess, that the more I look into it, the farther it
appears to be from a Way of Certainty to me. Essay, B. 4. chapter 12. Sect. 14.
For in your Chapter of the Improvement of Knowledge, you have these Words; for
it being evident that our Knowledge cannot exceed our Ideas, where they are
imperfect, confused or obscure, we cannot expect to have certain, perfect, or
clear Knowledge. And yet how often do you confess, that our Ideas are
imperfect, confused, and obscure? How then is it possible to attain to any
Certainty by them? And notwithstanding these plain Words, you assert it over
and over in your second Letter, as appears in the Beginning, that you do not
place Certainty in clear and distinct Ideas, (as I observed in the Beginning.)
How can these things consist? Can Certainty be had with imperfect and obscure
Ideas, and yet no Certainty be had by them? I cannot blame you for finding
fault with common Principles of Reason, if both Parts of a Contradiction may be
true: But I forbear. However I cannot but join other Words of yours to show how
resolved you were to be inconsistent with your self: Book 4. chapter 2. Sect. 15.
But obscure and confused Ideas can never produce any clear or distinct
Knowledge; because as far as any Ideas are confused or obscure, so far the Mind
can never perceive clearly, whether thy agree or disagree.

And yet in the same Place, you say, that our Knowledge consisting in the
Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of any two Ideas, its clearness or
obscurity consists in the Clearness or Obscurity of that Perception, and not in
the Clearness or Obscurity of the Ideas themselves. How is it possible for us
to have a clear Perception of the Agreement of Ideas, if the Ideas themselves
be not clear and distinct?

If the Mind can never perceive clearly, the Agreement or Disagreement of
obscure and confused Ideas, how can its Knowledge lie in the Perception of that
which is not to be perceived?

This is a thing which I cannot make consistent.

But besides, I have another Charge upon your Way of Certainty, viz. that you
have no Criterion to distinguish false and doubtful Ideas from true and
certain; how then can any Man be secure that he is not imposed upon in this Way
of Ideas?

The Academicks went too far in the Way to Skepticism, but they differed from
the Scepticks in two Things. 1. They asserted, that there was no absolute
Certainty to be had, which the Scepticks would not. 2. They held a far greater
Probability in some things than others, and that Men were bound to follow the
greatest Probability in what concerned their own Welfare: but the Scepticks
said, that they would do as others did, or follow Inclination, and the Laws of
their Country, but they held no Opinion in their Minds, as they said.

The Academicks went much upon Ideas, or Representations of things to their
Minds, but they did not proceed upon every Idea, but they examined and weighed
all the Circumstances belonging to it, before they allowed it to prevail upon
them to give an Assent as to a greater Probability. Carneades, one of the
subtilest of them, Sext. Empiric. advers. Mathem. l. 7.
as appears by Sextus Empiricus, distinguished a threefold Idea.

1. (...) a probable Idea; which the Academicks called (...). For, said he,
neither that which appears false of it self; nor that which is true, but does
not appear so, can persuade a Man's Mind. And of those things which do appear
to be true, some have a very slender Appearance, others have a mighty strong
one, and therein he placed his Criterion.

2. (...), an undistracted Idea; i. e. when no Circumstances disturb or shake
the first Impression, so as to make us question the Truth of it; which Sextus
Empiricus calls (...), a Concurrence of Ideas and none disagreeing, and yet he
would not allow this to be a Ground of certainty but only of Probability.

3. (...), a well examined Idea, by the best Reason a Man has and the greatest
Application of Mind. And this was the Foundation of the highest Probability a
Man's Mind could reach to. Now to apply this to your Case; You tell us of a Way
of Certainty by Ideas, and never offer any such Method for Examining them, as
the Academicks required for their Probability. As for instance, Your first Idea
which you go upon, Essay, B. 2. chapter 4.
is that of Solidity, which, you say, of all others seems the most intimately
connected with and essential to Body: And therefore must be of great Moment.
Sect. 5.
Solidity, you say, consists in Repletion and Resistance; and by this Idea of
Solidity the Extension of Body, you say, is distinguished from that of Space;
so that of pure Space and Solidity you have clear and distinct Ideas. Now here
in the Way of Certainty I have two Questions to ask. 1. How this Idea comes to
be clear and distinct to you, when others who go in the same Way of Ideas have
quite another Idea of it, and think they have as plain and distinct an Idea
that the Extension of Space and Body are the Same? Now, what Criterion is there
to come to any Certainty in this Matter? I see none so much as offered, but
only that they seem to you to be clear and distinct, but to others the
contrary. So that here we are at a loss as to any Certainty in the Way of
Ideas. And the blind Man who fansied the Idea of Scarlet to be like the sound
of a Trumpet, could hardly be convinced of his Error in the Way of Ideas. This
you mention to show the different Ideas men may fall into; which I think is
enough to show that they have no Way to Certainty in themselves, if it be
possible for Men, even for Philosophical and Rational Men, to fall into such
contrary Ideas about the same thing; and both sides think their Ideas clear and
distinct. 2. But I have another Question to propose; viz. Whether by this Idea
of Solidity we may come to know what it is? This is a very reasonable Question
in the Way of Certainty, which is to lead us to the certain knowledge of
Things. I pray therefore tell me from your Idea, what it is, and wherein it
consists? The Question you suppose might be very well asked; and you give a
most satisfactory Answer to it. Sect. 6.
If any ask me what this Solidity is, I send him to his Senses to inform him. I
had thought by the Design of your Book you would have sent him to his Ideas for
Certainty; and are we sent back again from our Ideas to our Senses? What do
these Ideas signify then? But you say farther; That if this be not a
sufficient Explication of Solidity, you promise to tell him what it is, when he
tells you, what Thinking is, or explains to you what Extension and Motion are.
Are we not now in the true Way of Certainty; when such things as these are
given over, of which we have the clearest Evidence by Sensation and Reflection?
For here you make it as impossible to come to certain, clear and distinct
Notions of these things, as to discourse into a blind Man the Ideas of Light
and Colors. Is not this a rare way of Certainty?

Thus I have showed that you have no Security against false and uncertain
Ideas, no Criterion to judge them by; no Light into the Nature of Things by
them, as will farther appear by what you say of the Ideas of sensible
Qualities. To discover, Book II. chapter 8. Sect. 7.
say you, the Nature of our Ideas the better, and to discourse of them
intelligibly, it will be convenient to distinguish them, as they are Ideas or
Perceptions in our Minds; and as they are Modifications of Matter in the Bodies
that cause such Perceptions in us: that so we may not think (as perhaps is
usually done) that they are exactly the Images and Resemblances of something
inherent in the Subject: most of those of Sensation being in the Mind no more
the likeness of something existing without us, than the Names that stand for
them are the likeness of our Ideas, which yet upon hearing they are apt to
excite in us. Now here again our Ideas deceive us, in the Way of Certainty. We
desire to know something of the Nature of those Objects of which we have the
Ideas in our Minds, because these we are told, will bring us to a Certainty of
Knowledge. Of what? Of what we feel? No certainly, but of that which causes
these inward Perceptions. Can we then by these Ideas know the Nature of things
without us? No, you say we cannot; for most of those of Sensation are no more
the likeness of something without us, than Names are for things which they
stand for. So that these Ideas are really nothing but Names, if they be not
Representations of Things; and if they be not, how can we understand Things by
them; and if we cannot, what Certainty is attainable by them?

But I will do you no wrong; and therefore I must consider what you say about
Demonstration: For it cannot be denied that you own the thing, although you
deny it to be ex proecognitis and proeconcessis, B. IV. ch 2. Sect. 8.
and say, it is a mistake that they are supposed to be the Foundations of all
our Knowledge and Reasonings. We must therefore Examine your Way of
Demonstration without Principles.

Certainty, Sect. 12.
you say, depends so wholly on Intuition, that in Demonstrative Knowledge, this
Intuition is necessary in all the Connection of the Intermediate Ideas, without
which we cannot attain Knowledge or Certainty. By Intuition you mean
Self-Evidence. For you say, in this the Mind is at no pains of proving or
examining, but perceives the Truth as the Eye does Light only by being directed
toward it. For hence you must suppose Self Evidence to be in the Ideas of your
Mind; and that every Intermediate Idea which you take to demonstrate any thing
by, must have a Self-Evident Connection with the other Idea: which is such a way
of Demonstration, as the old Philosophers never thought of. For upon this
Ground every Demonstration carries its own Light with it; and can no more be
questioned, than whether two and two make four; and I would be glad to see any
Demonstration (not about Figures and Numbers) of this kind, which I think is
not to be expected in the Way of Ideas. But because in this lies the chief
Point as to a Way of Certainty by Ideas, I shall more carefully examine the
Grounds you proceed upon, and show them to be very Insufficient for the purpose
you intend them.

Your principal Ground is from Mathematical Demonstrations, and your Examples
are brought from them. But his is quite a different Case from yours. For you
grant, that those Ideas on which Mathematical Demonstrations proceed, are
wholly in the Mind, and do not relate to the Existence of Things; but our
Debate goes upon a Certainty of the Knowledge of Things as really existing; so
that, although we should grant all that you say, about the Intuition of Ideas
in Mathematical Demonstrations, yet it comes not at all to your Business,
unless you can prove that we have as clear and distinct Ideas of Beings, as we
have of Numbers and Figures. And yet herein you are not consistent with your
self; for you design to prove Demonstrations without General Principles; and
yet every one knows, that General Principles are supposed in Mathematics, and
that Person would be thought Ridiculous, who should go about to prove, that
General Principles are of little, or of dangerous use in Mathematical
Demonstrations. And so in Morality, which you place among the Sciences capable
of Demonstration; you confess, B. IV. chapter 3. Sect. 18.
That the Way of Demonstration therein is from Principles, as those of the
Mathematics, by necessary Consequences. This is a very intelligible Way of
Demonstration: But how then comes it to pass, that in the Way of Certainty by
Ideas as to other Points of Knowledge, Chapter 7. Sect. 10.
you deny general Maxims to be the Foundation we are to proceed upon? And the
Method you lay down, Sect. 9.
is this, that Ideas of particular things are first in the mind, which are
first received and distinguished, and so Knowledge got by them; but general
Ideas are Fictions and Contrivances of the Mind, Sect. 10.
which carry Difficulty with them; but that it is true of our particular
distinct Ideas, that they are all known by their Native evidence, are wholly
independent, receive no Light, nor are capable of Proof one from another; much
less the more particular from the more general, or the more simple from the
more compounded, the more simple and less Abstract being the most familiar, and
the easier and earlier apprehended. But which ever be the clearest Ideas, the
Evidence and Certainty of all such Propositions is in this, that a Man sees the
same Idea to be the same Idea, and infallibly perceives two different Ideas to
be two different Ideas. For when a Man has in his Understanding the Ideas of
One and of Two, the Idea of Yellow and of Blue, he cannot but certainly know,
that this Idea of One is the Idea of One, and not the Idea of Two; and that the
Idea of Yellow is the Idea of Yellow, and not of Blue. For a Man cannot
confound the Ideas in his Mind, which he has distinct; that would be to have
them confused and distinct at the same time, which is a Contradiction: and to
have none distinct is to have no use of our Faculties, to have no knowledge at
all. And therefore, what Idea soever is affirmed of it self; or whatsoever two
entire distinct Ideas are denied one of another, the Mind cannot but assent to
such a Proposition, as infallibly true, as soon as it understands the Terms
without Hesitation, or need of Proof, or regarding those made in more general
Terms, and called Maxims. These are your own Words, which I have set down at
large, that you may not complain that I misrepresent your Sense. And if I
understand the force of them, you take off the Way of Demonstration from
general Principles and Consequences deduced from them, and place it in the
Self-evidence of Ideas.

But that it is impossible to come to a Demonstration about real Beings, in
this Way of Intuition of Ideas, I shall now make appear from your self, which
will farther discover the Inconsistency of your Notion of Ideas.

And the Reasons I go upon are these; 1. That you confess, that some of the
most obvious Ideas are far from being Self-evident. 2. That there may be
contradictory Opinions about some Ideas, which you account most clear and
distinct. 3. That granting the Ideas to be true, there is no Self-evidence of
the Connection of them, which is necessary to make a Demonstration.


1. That some of the most obvious Ideas, are far from being Self-evident by
your own Confession. Among these you cannot deny those of Matter and Motion, of
Time and Duration, and of Light, to be very considerable. But I shall prove
from your self, that we can have no Intuition of these things, which are so
obvious to us; and consequently can have no Self-evident Ideas of them.

As to the Idea of Matter: That you tell us, Book 3. chapter 10. Sect. 15.
consists in a solid Substance every where the same; and a Body is a solid
extended figured Substance.

Now there are two things concerning Matter, which I would be glad to come to a
certain Knowledge of. And those are,

1. The Manner of Cohesion of the Parts of Matter, concerning which you have
these Words. Book 2. chapter 23. Sect. 24.
For since no Body is no farther, nor otherwise extended, than by the Union and
Cohesion of its solid Parts, we shall very ill comprehend the Extension of
Body, without understanding, wherein consists the Union and Cohesion of its
Parts, which seems to me as incomprehensible as the Manner of Thinking, and how
it is performed. I would have any one intelligibly explain to me, Sect. 25.
how the Parts of Gold or Brass (that but now in fusion were as loose from one
another, as the Particles of Water, or the Sands of an Hourglass) come in a
few Moments to be so united, and adhere so strongly one to another, that the
utmost force of Men's Arms cannot separate them. A considering Man will I
suppose be here at a loss, to satisfy his own or another Man's Understanding.
And can you then imagine that we have Intuition into the Idea of Matter? Or
that it is possible to come to a Demonstration about it by the help of any
intervening Idea? The Idea of Solidity, or firm Cohesion of Parts cannot be
said to come from the Idea of Matter it self, for then there could be no such
thing as fluid Matter. Whence then comes the distinction between these Ideas of
solid and fluid Matter? That there is such a Cohesion of the solid Parts of
Matter is evident: now what other Ideas do you compare and connect with this to
make it evident, how this Solidity and Matter came to have this Agreement with
each other?

Is it by the Density or Compactedness of the Matter in a little Compass? But
that is as hard to give an account of; viz. how some Parts of Matter come to
take up so much less Room, and to stick closer than others. Is it by bare Rest
of the Parts? But how comes the Resistance of solid Bodies to come only from
Rest? Is it from the Pressure of the Ambient Air? No you say, Book 2. chapter 23.
Sect. 24.
that in Truth the Pressure of an ambient Fluid how great soever, can be no
intelligible Cause of the Cohesion of the solid Parts of Matter. So that we are
not to look for any thing like a Demonstration of the Cohesion of the Parts of
Matter.

2. And as little are we to expect it, as to the Divisibility of it; which was
the other thing I hoped to find demonstrated in the Way of Ideas. For you tell
us, Chapter 23. Sect. 31.
that the Notion of Body is cumbred with some Difficulties which are very hard,
and perhaps impossible to be explained, or understood by us. And among these
you particularly instance in the Divisibility of Matter; which you say, whether
we grant or deny it to be in infinitum, it involves us in Consequences,
impossible to be explicated or made consistent. Consequences that carry greater
Difficulty, and more apparent Absurdity than any thing can follow from the
Notion of an immaterial knowing Substance. So that I think it is vain to expect
a Demonstration in the Way of Ideas as to this Matter.

The next is that of Motion. Concerning which you tell us, that the Definition
of the Schools is exquisite Iargon: Book 3. chapter 4. Sect. 8. Sect. 9.
That of the Atomists is but putting one Synonymous Word for another; viz. that
Motion is a Passage from one Place to another: for Passage may as well be
defined a Motion from one Place to another. And the Cartesian Definition, that
it is the successive Application of the Parts of the Superficies of one Body to
those of another, will not prove a much better Definition of Motion when well
examined. And what is there so evident as Motion? So that if our Ideas fail us
in so plain a Case, what help can we hope from them in things more abstruse and
remote from our Senses?

As to Time and Duration, you say, that the Answer of a great Man (to one who
asked what Time was, Book 2. chapter 14. Sect. 2.
Si non rogas, intelligo, which amounts to this, the more I set my self to
consider it, the less I understand it) might perhaps persuade one, that Time,
which reveals all other things, is it self not to be discovered. This shows,
that there is no Self-evident Idea of Time. But here you offer to furnish us
with as clear and distinct Ideas, as of many other which are thought much less
obscure. However, then it is plain, that we have not the Knowledge by
Intuition, but by rational Deduction. For you proceed from the Idea of
Succession, Sect. 32.
to that of Duration; by observing a Distance in the Parts of Succession; and
then from observing Periodical Motions, we get Ideas of the Measures of
Duration, as Minutes, Hours, Days, Years, etc. From hence we proceed to imagine
Duration not yet come; and such to which we can always add; from which comes
the Idea of Eternity: and by considering any Part of Duration with Periodical
Measures, we come to the Idea of what we call Time in general. So that the Idea
of Time in general is so far from being known by Intuition, that many Steps are
to be taken in order to it; and some such as one would hardly have thought of.
As how the Idea of Succession should arise from a Train of Ideas in our Minds:
Sect. 4.
You say it is, because we have no Perception of Duration, but by considering
the Train of Ideas, that take their Turns in our Understandings.

What think you of those People that failed not in reckoning the Succession of
Time right for many Years together by Knots, and Notches on Sticks, and
Figures, without ever so much as thinking of Ideas, or any thing like them? But
besides, such Arbitrary Measures of Time, what need any Recourse to Ideas, when
the Returns of Days and Months and Years by the Planetary Motions, are so easy
and so universal? If a Man has no Perception of Duration when he sleeps, yet
the Time runs on, and Nights have as much their share in Succession as Days
have. And although, you say, it seems very clear to you, that Men derive their
Ideas of Duration from their Reflection on the Train of the Ideas they observe
to succeed one another, yet I think the contrary so clear, that Men may have a
clear Idea of Succession without it, that I rather wonder how you came to think
of this Way. But it is sufficient to my purpose, that you could never know this
Idea of Time by Self-evidence.

The last I shall mention is Light, and one would think, if any Idea be
Self-evident, it should be that. But let us see what you say about it; you
explode the Peripatetick Definition of it as unintelligible; Book 3. chapter 4.
Sect. 10.
and the Cartesian you allow to be but little better. For when they make it to
be a Number of little Globules striking briskly on the bottom of the Eye, you
say, to a Man that understands it not before, these Words would make the Idea
of Light no more known to him, than if one should tell him, that Light was
nothing but a Company of little Tennis-balls, which Fairies all day long struck
with Rackets against some Men's Foreheads while they pass by others. And is
this a Self-evident Idea of Light? Thus we have seen what Account your self
have given of these Self-evident Ideas, which are the ground Work of
Demonstration.

2. But suppose an Idea happen to be thought by some to be clear and distinct,
and others should think the contrary to be so, what hopes of Demonstration by
clear and distinct Ideas then? As suppose a Man entertain Des Carts his Idea
of Space, as the same with Body, or extended Matter, which he affirms to be
clear and distinct; the Consequence from hence is, as your self confess, Book
4. chapter 7. Sect. 12.
that he may from thence demonstrate that there can be no Vacuum: but again,
let us suppose another to have a clear and distinct Idea of Space from Body,
this Man, you say, may demonstrate as easily that there may be a Vacuum, or
Space without a Body, as Des Carts demonstrated the Contrary. Say you so?
What! Demonstrations on both sides, and in the Way of Ideas too? This is
extraordinary indeed. But if we may be allowed the Use of common Principles, we
may be sure, that both Parts of a Contradiction cannot be true, and therefore
there must be a fundamental Mistake some where. You say, it is in wrong
Application of that general Maxim, What is, is. But there is no fault in the
Principle, which is the true meaning of the other; that it is impossible for
the same thing to be and not to be, which undoubtedly holds true; but it is in
supposing the Reality of the thing to be according to what you call a clear and
distinct Idea. So that the general Principles of Reason stand firm and good;
but your Self-evidence of clear and distinct Ideas is such a Principle, we see,
as serves for Demonstrations of both Parts of a Contradiction.

3. But granting the Ideas to be true, yet when their Connection is not
Self-evident, then an intermediate Idea must complete the Demonstration. But
how does it appear that this middle Idea is Self-evidently connected with them?
Book 4. chapter 2. Sect. 7.
For you say, if that intermediate Idea be not known by Intuition, that must
need a Proof; and so there can be no Demonstration. Which I am very apt to
believe in this Way of Ideas; unless these Ideas get more light by being put
between two others. This will best appear by a remarkable Instance already
mentioned, viz. in the Ideas of Space and Body; the Question supposed is,
whether they be the same or not; some we see affirm it, and others deny it. So
that here we must use an intermediate Idea, and that is of Motion, and we are
to consider whether this has a Self-evident Connection, with the other Ideas?
The Motion of Bodies, you say, Essay, B. 2. chapter 13. Sect. 22.
that are in our view and neighborhood, seems to you plainly to evince a
Vacuum. But how? Is it by Intuition or Self-evidence? No, you do not pretend to
it. But by Reason: Because there must be a void Space equal to the Bulk of that
Body, which moves within the Bounds of such a Superficies. And if there be a
Space without Body there must be a Vacuum. But Gassendus attempted to prove
Motion impossible, if there were no Vacuum: For every Body must go into the
Place of another, and so in insinitum; which he said was ridiculous and
impossible.

The Cartesians answered, that the Motion was Circular. Gassendus urged, that
still it was impossible: For suppose A the first Body, and X the last; A cannot
move, unless X can be moved: but X cannot move, because the Place is filled
with A.

The Cartesians say, this proves nothing, because in the same instant, that X
goes into the Places of A, that gives way. Joh. Bapt. Morini Dissert. de Atomis
and vacuo, p. 14.
Ioh. Bapt. Morinus (Professor of the Mathematics at Paris, at the same time
with Gassendus) answers to Gassendus his Argument, that the Separation of two
Bodies and Succession are at the same time; and so there can be no Vacuum.

Bernier defends Gassendus his Argument, Bernier Favilla Ridiculi Muris, p. 99.
and says, that no Motion can begin without a Vacuum; but other Philosophers
and Mathematicians as stiffly deny it. And is it possible to imagine, that there
should be a Self-evident Connection of Ideas in this Case?

But what has Reason now to do in this Way of Intuition? Yes, say you, Reason
is to discover the Agreement or Disagreement of Ideas. Sect. 2.
But this is nothing but an employing the Faculty of Reason in such a manner:
And so in the Beginning of your Chapter of Reason, Chapter 17. Sect. ^^
you tell us, that it is sometimes taken for true and clear Principles, and
sometimes for clear and fair Deductions from those Principles; but you take it
for a saculty in Man. But why, in a Chapter of Reason, are the other two Senses
neglected? We might have expected here full Satisfaction as to the Principles
of Reason as distinct from the faculty, but you wholly avoid it; Sect. 2.
and only show how it is used in finding out the certain Connection of Ideas in
Demonstration; and the probable Connection in other things. So that the
Difference lies between us, as to this Matter of Reason, in these two things.

(1.) You affirm, that general Principles and Maxims of Reason are of little,
or no Use; I say that they are of very great use, and the only proper
Foundations of Certainty. (2.) You say, that Demonstration is by Way of
Intuition of Ideas, and that Reason is only the faculty employed in discovering
and comparing Ideas with themselves, or with others intervening; and that this
is the only Way of Certainty.
I affirm, and have proved, that there can be no Demonstration by Intuition of
Ideas; but that all the Certainty we can attain to, is from general Principles
of Reason, and necessary Deductions made from them.

But before I conclude this Discourse, I must observe that you prove that
Demonstration must be by Intuition, in an extraordinary Manner, from the sense
of the Word. For you say, it is called Demonstration, Essay, B. 4. chapter 2. Sect.
3.
it being shown to the Understanding, and the Mind made see, that it is so. I
have told you formerly, how very uncertain a Way of Arguing it is, which is
taken from the Original signification of Words; and if it would hold in this
Case, it would be most proper for Ocular Demonstrations, or by the Finger. But
in the Philosophical sense of the Word, Demonstration was never taken for
Intuition, or the knowing of a thing by its Self-evidence. But you assert the
Necessity of intuitive Knowledge, Sect. 7, 8.
in every Step of a Demonstration. Whereas, Aristot. Metaph. l. 4. c. 4.
Aristotle says, things that are Self-evident cannot be demonstrated; and that
it is Weakness and Folly not to know what things are capable of Demonstration,
and what not.

It seems there were some Philosophers, who would have first Principles
demonstrated; This, says Aristotle cannot be done without running in
infinitum, which is absurd. Whence it is plain, that Demonstration was supposed
to lie in some antecedent Proof; and where any thing was Self-evident it was
absurd to look for it: So that the Way of Intuition and Demonstration, were
thought inconsistent. For what a Man sees by its own Light, he needs no Proof
of. But you say, that in a Demonstration the intervenient Ideas are called
Proofs; Sect. 3.
and where by the help of these the Agreement or Disagreement is plainly
perceived, that is Demonstration: Sect. 7.
And that in every step there is an intuitive Knowledge of the Agreement or
Disagreement it seeks with the next intermediate Idea, which it uses as a
Proof; for, if it were not so, that would need a Proof. So that according to
your Method of Demonstration, that which is used as a Proof must need no Proof,
but must be known by immediate Intuition. Of which kind of Demonstration, I
would fain see any one instance in the Knowledge of Things, and not in
abstracted and mathematical Demonstrations. For it may be, it has been the
occasion of some great Mistakes in the Philosophy of this Age, that ingenious
and mathematical Men have labored so much to accommodate the Principles of
that Science to the Nature of material Things; of which we have a remarkable
Instance in the System of Des Carts. And supposing we could come to a
Certainty about the Nature and Tendency of Bodies here within our Reach, (I
mean with respect to the Earth) I do not know, how far the greatest
Mathematician can proceed in making Demonstrations as to the Nature and
Tendency of those Bodies which are so much out of our Reach, as the Heavenly
Bodies are, both in themselves and with respect to one another. For, if the
Phenomenon depend upon a force given them by the Great and Wise Creator, how
can we know in what Manner or Degree that force is given to Bodies at such a
wonderful Distance from us, as the fixed Stars are? For, if God can alter the
Laws of Motion in another System, as it is not denied; how can we be
Mathematically certain, that the Laws of Motion in Bodies, so much above us,
are the very same that we find them here? I do not by any means take off from
the laudable Endeavors of those who have gone about to reduce natural
Speculations to mathematical Certainty: but I mention it to show, that it is a
very easy way for thinking Men to deceive themselves, in talking so much of
demonstrative Certainty about natural Things, when all their Instances are
brought from Mathematical Demonstrations. Aristotle, Arist. de Part. Anim. l.
1. c. 1.
whom I cannot despise so much as some do (I do not say for want of reading
him) has a Discourse on purpose in the Beginning of his Books of Animals, in
what way natural Things are to be handled; and he says, there are two ways. 1.
By way of Science. 2. By way of Instruction, which must be suitable to the
Nature of the things. So that in natural History he says, there must be
certain bounds set for Enquiry, without proceeding to strict Demonstration.
And, says he, the Manner of Demonstration as to natural Things, is different
from what it is in speculative or mathematical Things. In another Place he
laments the want of Experiments as to natural History, (although he made far
more than any before him, and was better able to do it by the plentiful
Assistance of Philip and Alexander, while he lived at Court) and he looks on
that as the best way of satisfying our Reason about such things; ^^ Genesis A^^^^
l. 3. c. 10.
and our Reasons, says he, are then good, when they agree with the Phenomenon.

And he was so far from thinking he had made Demonstrations in Physics, that
in one Place he says, De Meteor. l. 1. c. 7.
that in things not evident to Sense, he thought it sufficient to show the
Possibility of it; and therefore he ought not to be run down for his Modesty;
however his physical Notions fall far short of Demonstrations.

In his Morals, Moral. Magn. l. 1. c. 1.
he says, all Principles must be suitable to the Nature of the Science; for it
would be absurd for a Man to go about to prove the three Angles of a Triangle,
equal to two right Angles; and take this for his Principle, That the Soul is
immortal. For the Proof must be proper and connected with it. And from hence he
excludes Plato's Idea, from being a Principle in Morals.

In his Eudemia, Eudem. l 1. c. 6.
the Way of Proceeding in Morals, he says, is by Reasons, Testimonies, and
Examples; and he looks on it as great want of Judgment for Men not to consider
what Reasons are proper for every Science. So that according to him, Morality
is not incapable of Demonstration; so it be upon Moral Principles: For that he
lays down in the Beginning of his Ethics, and afterward that the same
Exactness is not to be required in all sorts of Reasoning: Ethic ad Nicom l. 1.
c. 1, 7. l. 2. c. 2.
but that it ought to be suitable to the Matter it is about. (...).

If therefore the Principles in Morality be clear and proper, and the
Deductions be plain and natural, I do not see, but that it is as capable of
Demonstration as any other Science; if Men were as willing to be convinced in
Morals, as they are in Mathematics. And therein I fully agree with you: But
the Way of Demonstration by Ideas will not do, either there or any where else.
I mean by this intuitive Knowledge in every Step of the Demonstration: when the
intervening Ideas are far from being capable of this intuitive Certainty.

And as to your Argument from the Notation of the Word, it is certain, that
after the Philosophical Use of it, it signified no more among some
Philosophers, than the Conclusion of an Argument; whereby we are brought from
something we did perceive, to somethiug we did not.

Not by Way of Intuition, but by a Deduction of Reason. Itaque Argumenti
Conclusio quae est Graece (...) ita definitur; Ratio quae ex rebus perceptis ad
id quod non percipiebatur adducit. Cicero in Lucullo, c. 8.

(...), Plato in Phaedro. V. Dialect. Ciceron. Adam Bu^sii, l. 6. c. 10.


And Plato makes use of the Word Demonstration in his Phoedrus, for such a
Reason which wise Men would believe, and others would not. But there could be
no intuitive Certainty in such a Demonstration.

I have been longer a clearing this Matter than I thought I should have been;
but it is the main Point as to Certainty by Ideas, and what remains will admit
of an easier Dispatch. I now return to the Difference between Nature and
Person; and I shall only single out what is material and pertinent; and now
leave the interlocutory Gentlemen to maintain their Conversation by themselves.

I had said in my Vindication,

That Nature may be considered two Ways. (1.) As it is in distinct Individuals.
(2.) Abstractly without respect to individual Persons.

(1.) As it is in distinct Individuals, as the Nature of a Man is equally in
Peter, James and John, and this is the common Nature with a particular
Subsistence belonging to each of them. For the Nature of Man, as in Peter, is
distinct from the same Nature, as it is in James and John; otherwise they would
be but one Person, as well as have the same Nature.

Which to my understanding is plain and clear Reason. And if so, then here we
have an Identity of Nature, and a Distinction of Persons in the same Nature.

But to this you object these three Things: P. 127.
(1.) That you cannot put together one and the same, and distinct; and
consequently there is no Foundation for the Distinction of Nature and Person.
P. 131, 132.134.138, etc.
(2.) That what I say about common Nature, and particular Subsistence and
Individuals, is wholly unintelligible to you and your Friends. P. 154.
(3.) That to speak truly and precisely of this Matter, as in reality it is,
there is no such thing as one common Nature in several Individuals; for all
that is Truth in them is particular, and can be nothing but particular. But the
meaning is, that every particular individual Man or Horse, etc. has such a
Nature or Constitution as agrees, and is conformable to that Idea which that
general Name stands for.


This is the Substance of what I can gather out of your Discourse in several
Pages, but as to the general Reflections I pass them over, having no other
Design, but to set Truth in as good a Light as I can. And if I have the
Misfortune not to be understood, I cannot help it; I wish it were in my Power
to help other Men's Capacities as well as to help my own.

But you say, P. 144.
the Notionists and Ideists, (as they are called) seem to have their
apprehensive Faculties very differently turned? I do not think, that there is
any different Turn in their Faculties; but there may be a very wrong Turn in
the Method of Reasoning in those, who go in this Way of Ideas, from what there
is in those who pursue the general Principles of Reason, and from thence draw
particular Conclusions.

If any Man takes it for granted, that your Way of Ideas is the only Way to
Certainty (and he must take it for granted, if he will believe it) then I
cannot see how he can apprehend one and the same common Nature in different
Persons or Individuals, because all his Ideas are taken from Particulars; and
therefore a common Nature is no more but one common Name; and every Individual
is considered as ranked under those Names. But herein lies the fundamental
Mistake, that you presume that we are not to judge of things by the general
Principles of Reason, but by particular Ideas. For if Men set aside this new
Way of Judging only by these Ideas; things would appear in another Light to
them: But I find it is to very little purpose to argue with such Men, who are
resolved to stick to this Way of Ideas; For they can apprehend nothing but just
in their own Way. And let us say what we will, it is jargon, and unintelligible
to them; although very rational Men have said the same things that we do, and
have been thought by the rest of Mankind to have spoken intelligibly. But now
it seems nothing is intelligible, but what suits with this new Way of Ideas,
however repugnant it be to the common Principles of Reason; which must be the
Standard to Mankind, whatever becomes of this Way of Ideas.

And therefore in this Debate, I shall proceed upon these Principles of Reason,
which have been received among Mankind; and from them I hope to make it appear,
that the Difference of Nature and Person is not imaginary and fictitious, but
grounded upon the real Nature of things.

The Principles of Reason, which I go upon are these; 1. That Nothing has no
Properties. 2. That all Properties being only Modes or Accidents must have a
real Subject to subsist in. 3. That Properties essentially different, must
subsist in different Essences. 4. That where there is an Agreement in essential
Properties and a Difference in Individual, there must be both an Identity and
Diversity in several Respects.


Now upon these Principles I build my Assertion, that there is one real and
common Nature or Essence in Mankind, and a Difference of Persons in the several
Individuals. For, that there are such essential Properties in Mankind which are
not in Brutes, I suppose you will not deny. Now these essential Properties must
subsist somewhere; For Nothing can have no Properties, and these Properties
cannot subsist (where Individuals are multiplied) in any one Individual: For
that is to exclude all the rest from the essential Properties which belong to
them; and if they have them in common, there must be some common Subject
wherein they subsist, and that can be nothing but the common Essence of
Mankind. For the Essence of Brutes or Plants have them not; and therefore these
Essences must be really different from one another.

But because Individuals of the same kind, have something to distinguish, as
well as to unite them, therefore there must be a different Subsistence in every
Individual: and so one and the same, and yet distinct, may very easily and
intelligibly consist together.

But you say, P. 131.
I have not told you what Nature is; I think my Discourse sufficiently showed
it, if you had a mind to understand it; for you could not but see that I meant
the Subject of the essential Properties, whether you call it Nature, Substance,
or Essence. Your Objection about Nature and Substance being of equal Extent, I
hope, I have sufficiently removed in the foregoing Discourse.

You tell me, P. 132.
that it is more than you know, that the Nature of a Man is equal in Peter,
James and John. I am sorry for it. For I thought you had Ideas of particular
Substances. But they may be Drills or Horses for any thing you know. I am again
sorry, that you know particular Men no better; but that for ought you know,
they may be Drills or Horses.

But you know a Horse that was called Peter, P. 133.
and you do not know but the Master of the same Team might call other of his
Horses, James and John. Suppose all this. And could you not in the Way of Ideas
distinguish them from those of your Acquaintance who had the same Names? I
confess, this tempts me to think that Ideists (as you call them) have a
particular Turn of their understandings about these Matters. For I cannot but
think, that those who were not very rational Men, might understand the
Difference between Men and Horses; without being told, that although Horses
might be called by their Names; yet that these were real Men, and their
Constitution and Nature was conformable to that Idea, which the general Name
Man stands for. But this is no more than to say, that he that has the Nature of
a Man is a Man, or what has the Nature of a Drill is a Drill; and what has the
Nature of a Horse is a Horse; whether it be called Peter, or not called Peter.
If this were really the Discourse of your Friends in private Conversation, you
have been very obliging to them to publish it to the World: For Mankind are not
so stupid, as not to know a Man from a Horse or a Drill, but only by the
Specific Name of Man. You may have a Horse called Peter if you please, and
another James, and a third John; but for all that, there is no one that has
the Understanding of a Man, but will be able without your Specific Names to
tell the Difference of your Horse Peter from your Man Peter; and call them by
what Names you please the Difference will not depend upon them, but upon the
Essential Properties which belong to them; and so it will be owned by all that
have not this New turn of their Understandings. But I plainly see, that a new
Notion when it has got deep into a Man's Head does give a strange Turn to his
Understanding; so that he cannot see that, which every one else can, that has
not the same Tincture upon his Mind. And I remember an Observation of yours, B.
II. ch 11. Sect. 13.
How dangerous it is to a Man's Reason to fix his Fancy long upon one sort of
Thoughts. These Ideas are a very odd sort of Spectacles to our Understandings,
if they make them see and understand less, than People of very, ordinary
Capacities do. For even the Man who had the Horse with the Name Peter, and
might have others by the Names of James and John, would not a little wonder at
a grave Philosopher that should seriously say to him; You see, Friend, that
your Horses have the Names of Men, how do you know but that they are Men? Know,
says the Countryman, I hope you are wiser than to ask me such a Question? Or
what do you take me for, if I cannot tell the Difference of Men from Horses
whatever Names they have. Do not tell me of your Specific Names, and
Conformity to your Ideas, I know well enough the Difference between my Horse
Peter and my Man Peter without such Gibberish. My Man Peter and I can sit and
chop Logic together, about our Country Affairs, and he can Write and Read, and
he is a very sharp Fellow at a Bargain; but my Horse Peter can do none of these
things, and I never could find any thing like Reason in him, and do you think I
do not know the Difference between a Man and a Beast? I pursue this no farther
lest the Countryman should be too rude to the Gentlemen, with whom you had
this Learned Conversation, about the Difference of Men, and Horses, and Drills.

But you or your Friend, or both, p. 114.
are very hard set again about a Common Nature with a particular Subsistence
proper to each Person. For such is your Misfortune, you say, p. 121.
that for your Life you cannot find it out. This is a hard Case; before, for
your Life you could not understand Nature and Substance to be the same; and now
again, for your Life you cannot find out this. Where lies the monstrous
Difficulty of it? You say, You repeated, and this twenty times to your self;
and your weak Understanding always Rejolts. At what? My Words are, Nature may
be considered, as it is in distinct Individuals, as the Nature of Man is
equally in Peter, James and John. And this is the common Nature with a
particular Subsistence proper to each of them.

You say, p. 135.
That the Nature of Man in Peter is the Nature of a Man, if Peter be supposed
to be a Man, but if it be the Name of a Horse, your Knowledge vanishes. Cannot
you, for your Life, know the Difference between a Man and a Horse, by their
Essential Properties, whatever their Names be? If so, there is a greater turn
of Men's Understandings, than I imagined. But again say you, Let it be
impossible to give that Name to a Horse (who ever said or thought so?) yet you
cannot understand these Words, the common Nature of a Man is in Peter; for
whatsoever is in Peter exists in Peter; and whatever exists in Peter is
particular; but the common Nature of Man is the general Nature of Man, or else
you understand not what is meant by Common Nature; and it confounds your
Understanding to make a General a Particular.

To this I answer, That the Common Nature of Man may be taken two ways. In the
way of Ideas, and in the way of Reason. In your way of Ideas it is not at all
to be wondered at, that you cannot understand such a Common Nature, as I spoke
of, which subsists in several Persons, because you say, You can have no Ideas
of Real Substances but such as are Particular; all others are only Abstract
Ideas, and made only by the Act of the Mind. But I say, That in the Way of
Reason you may come to a better understanding of this Matter. Which is by
considering the Nature of Beings, and the Causes of the Differences amongst the
several kinds of them. I had told you before, Answ to Let. l. p. 110.
in my Answer to your first Letter, that we are to consider Beings as God has
ordered them in their several Sorts and Ranks, and that he has distinguished
them by Essential Properties from each other, as appears by Mankind, and
Brutes, and Plants: And that although the Individuals of the several kinds
agree in Essential Properties, yet there is a real Difference between them in
several Accidents that belong to them, as to Time, Place, Qualities, Relations,
etc. Now that wherein they agree is the Common Nature; and that wherein they
differ, is the Particular Subsistence. And if this be so hard to be understood,
why was it not answered here in the proper place for it? is not that a Real
Nature that is the Subject of Real Properties? Is not that Nature really in all
those who have the same Essential Properties? And therefore the Common Nature
of Man must exist in Peter, because he is a Man, and so in James and John: and
yet every one of these is so distinguished from the other, that we may justly
say he has a Particular Subsistence with that Common Nature. And this is no
making a General a Particular; but distinguishing one from the other, which is
a Distinction so easy and necessary, that I cannot but wonder at those who
say, that for their Lives they cannot find it out.

I had said, For the Nature of Man as in Peter, is distinct from that same
Nature, as it is in James and John, otherwise they would be but One Person as
well as One Nature. And what Reply is made to this? p. 137.
You cannot understand what this is a Proof of. It is plain that I meant it of
a Particular Subsistence; and if you cannot for your Life understand such easy
things, how can I for my Life help it? Read the Words over again which are
before them, and join them together. And this is the Common Nature with a
Particular Subsistence proper to each of them; for the Nature of Man as in
Peter is distinct from that same Nature as it is in James and John. But I am
really ashamed to be put to explain such things; I hope Ideas do not give
another Turn to Common Sense. p. 138.
But you say, That otherwise they could not be three Persons, is to prove it by
a Proposition unintelligible to you, because you do not yet apprehend what a
Person is. Of that in its proper place. These Words of mine follow, And this
Distinction of Persons in them, is discerned both by our Senses as to their
different Accidents, and by our Reason because they have a separate Existence,
not coming into it at once and in the same manner. And is this unintelligible
too? p. 140.
You say, It will hold as well for three Physical Atoms, which are three
distinct Individuals, and have three distinct Natures in them, as certainly as
three distinct Men. But are three Atoms as much three Persons as three Men? But
you cannot discern the distinction by our Senses as to their Accidents, nor by
your Reason as to separate Existence, because God might create them at once.
Therefore we cannot distinguish three Humane Persons that way? In this
Reasoning in the Way of Ideas? Or in any Way?

Suppose we put the Common Nature of an Animal for the Common Nature of Man. p.
141.
What follows? Therefore three Animals are three distinct Persons, as well as
three Men? I thought there was some cause for your Disliking the Common
Principles and Methods of Reasoning. I am forced to give but short touches at
such things, which I cannot answer more largely, without being thought to make
Marks of Distinction.

Come we now therefore to the Second Sense of Nature, as it is taken abstractly
without Respect to Individual Persons; and then I said, it makes an entire
Notion of it self. For however the same Nature may be in different Individuals,
yet the Nature in it self remains one and the same; which appears from this
evident Reason, that otherwise every Individual must make a different kind.

Is this to be understood any better? No. An entire Notion of it self is an
Expression never met with before. p. 144.
An entire Idea of it self had been very plain and easy; but this is not to
talk with Men in their own Dialect. But if we put it so, the Difficulty
remains. What Difficulty? It then makes no more an entire Notion than the
Nature of Peter. Is it not the same Nature considered as common to all
Individuals, distinct from that Nature as in Peter? I wish among all the Ways
of enlarging Knowledge, you could think of some new Way of conveying Notions
into Men's Minds, for I find your Way of Ideas will never do it. For you cannot
be brought one step beyond the first Cast of Ideas. And you will not allow,
that which I give for an Evident Reason, p. 146.
to prove any thing toward clear Apprehensions of one Common Nature. But if
Nature be one and the same in different Individuals, then there must be one
Common Nature, which makes an entire Notion of it self: If it be not one and
the same, then every Individual must make a Distinct Kind? Can any thing be
more evident? But you give one common Answer; p. 147.
I understand not any thing that is meant in this whole Paragraph, as to the
right Apprehension of one Common Nature. And so I am very well content to leave
it to the Reader's Understanding.

And now I come at last to the Idea of a Person. And here I am glad to find
something you do understand: Which is great News. p. 149.
This, say you, I understand very well, that supposing Peter, James and John to
be all three Men, and Man being a Name for one Kind of Animals, they are all of
the same Kind. Do you mean that they have the same common Essence, or have only
the same common Name? If you mean the former, there must be a common Nature; if
only the latter, that cannot make them of the same Kind. For Kind signifies
nothing but a mere Name without it. If it be asked you, whether Men and Drills
be of the same Kind or not? Could you give no other Answer, but that the
Specific Name Man stands for one sort, and the Specific Name Drill for the
other; and therefore they are not of the same Kind? Are those Names arbitrary,
or are they founded on real and distinct Properties? If they be arbitrary, they
have no other Difference, but what a Dictionary gives them. If they are founded
on real and distinct Properties, then there must be a real Difference of Kinds
founded in Nature; which is as much as I desire. But to go on. You understand
too very well, that Peter is not James, and James is not John, but that there
is a Difference in these Individuals. You understand also, that they may be
distinguished from each other by our Senses, as to different Features and
Distance of Place, etc. But what follows, you say, You do not understand, viz.
that supposing there were no such external Difference, yet there is a
Difference between them as Individuals of the same Nature. For all that this
comes to, as far as you can understand, is that the Ground of the Distinction
between several Individuals in the same common Nature is that they are several
Individuals in the same common Nature. P. 152.
You understand, it seems, that they are several Individuals, that Peter is not
James, and James is not John; and the Question is, what this Distinction is
founded upon? Whether upon our observing the Difference of Features, Distance
of Place, etc. or on some antecedent Ground? I affirm, that there is a Ground
of the Distinction of Individuals antecedent to such accidental Differences as
are liable to our Observation by our Senses.

And the Ground I go upon is this, that the true Reason of Identity in Man is
the vital Union of Soul and Body: And since every Man has a different Soul
united to different Particles of Matter, there must be a real Distinction
between them, without any respect to what is accidental to them. For, if Peter
have a Soul and Body different from James, and James from John, they must have
different Principles of Individuation, without any respect to Features or
Place, etc.

P. 149.
You say, You cannot suppose a Contradiction, viz. that there is no difference
of Place between them. But that is not the Point, whether when we consider them
with respect to Place, there can be such a thing as Identity of Place to two
different Bodies? But whether we cannot consider two several Individuals of
Mankind without particular Regard to Place? Which I say, we may, and for this
Reason; because Relation to Place, is an external Difference, but the real
Distinction of Individuals does not relate to any Accident of the Body; because
the Individual consists of the Union of Soul and Body; and you cannot judge of
the Existence of the Soul by the Place of the Body. You say, that when we see
any thing to be in any place in any instant of Time, Essay, B. 2. chapter 27. Sect.
1.
we are sure (be it what it will) that it is that very thing, and not another
which at that Time exists in another Place, how like and undistinguishing
soever it may be in all other Respects. And in this consists Identity. But I
think the Identity of Man depends neither upon the Notion of Place for his
Body; nor upon the Soul considered by it self, but upon both these, as actually
united and making one Person. Which to me seems so clear and intelligible, that
I can imagine no Objection against it. I am certain, you produce none.

My next Words are, And here lies the true Idea of a Person, which arises from
that Manner of Subsistence, which is in one Individual, and is not communicable
to another.

In your Answer to this, I pass over the trifling Exceptions, P. 155.
about the Dissyllable Person, and the true Idea and Signification of the
articulate Sound; and about here and herein, etc. being resolved to keep to
what appears material. And the only thing of that kind is, P. 156.
that according to my Sense of Person, it will as well agree to Bucephalus as
to Alexander; and the Difference will be as great, between Bucephalus and
Podargus, as between Alexander and Hector, all being several Individuals in the
same common Nature: but for your Part you cannot understand that Bucephalus and
Podargus are Persons in the true signification of the Word Person in the
English Tongue. And whoever desired you should? For I expressly say, that a
Person is a complete intelligent Substance, with a peculiar Manner of
Subsistence. And again, For a Person relates to something which does
distinguish it from another intelligent Substance in the same Nature. So that
it is impossible to apply my Notion of Person to any irrational Creatures,
although they be Bucephalus and Podargus: And I think a Man must strain hard to
make such Objections, so directly against that Idea of a Person which I set
down. And it is very easy to understand the Difference between a Distinction
of Individuals as such, and of intelligent Individuals, and that Manner of
Subsistence in them, which makes them distinct Persons.

P. 159.
But you say, that I affirm, that an individual intelligent Substance is rather
supposed to the making of a Person, than the proper Definition of it; and yet
afterward I make it to be the Definition of a Person, that it is a complete
intelligent Substance.

To this I answer, That in the former Place I give an Account of the Reason of
Personality, which I say lies in the Manner of Subsistence, and not in the
intelligent individual Substance; which is rather supposed to the making of a
Person: For that which critically distinguishes the Person is the Reason of
Personality; but when we come to give a common Definition of it, there is no
such Necessity of insisting upon the Reason of the Difference, but upon the
common Acception of it Person. And upon that Account I call it a complete
intelligent Substance, because, although the Soul be so in it self; yet we take
Person with Relation to Soul and Body united together. And so the Identity of
Person must take in both, not only here, but at the Resurrection.

And thus I have gone through all that I could find, that seemed material in
the Dialogue between you and your Friends as to this Subject, and I assure you,
I have omitted nothing which I apprehended had any Appearance of Difficulty in
it. And I find not the least Reason to be unsatisfied in the Account I had
given of the Difference of Nature and Person: but I still think that it does
tend very much to the right Apprehension of the Doctrine of the Trinity; as I
hope does farther appear by the foregoing Discourse.

And now to come to a Conclusion of this whole Debate. (For I intend not to
draw this Saw any longer: having done as much as I think sitting for my self to
do.)

I saw no Necessity of writing again for my own Vindication as to your first
Charge, which I was contended to leave to the Reader's Judgment. But in the
Conclusion of my former Answer, I had said, That as you had stated your Notion
of Ideas, it may be of dangerous Consequence to that Article of the Christian
Faith, which I endeavored to defend. P. 57.
This you call a new Charge against your Book; and you complain, that I do not
specify the Particulars, 59.
wherein I apprehend it may be of such dangerous Consequence; and you blame me
for this saying, 84.
without showing that it is so: 85.
and that all the Reason I give is, that it is made use of by ill Men to do
mischief: 57.
that when I say, it may be, it shows only an Inclination to accuse, 84
and proves nothing: 85.
that Danger may be apprehended where no Danger is; that if any thing must be
laid aside, because it may be ill used, you do not know what will be innocent
enough to be kept: and lastly, that the Imputation of a Tendency to Skepticism,
17^.
and to the overthrowing any Article of the Christian Faith are no small
Charge; 171.
and that you cannot see any Argument I have brought, that your Notion of Ideas
tends to Skepticism. These things laid together, made me think it necessary to
do that which I was unwilling (...) do, till you had driven me to it; which was
to show, the Reasons I had, why I looked on your Notion of Ideas, and of
Certainty by them, as inconsistent with it self, and with some important
Articles of the Christian Faith.

What I have now done, I thought it my Duty to do, not with respect to my self,
but to some of the Mysteries of our Faith; which I do not charge you with
opposing, but with laying such Foundations as do tend to the Overthrow of them;
of which we have had too much Experience already; and may have more, if your
Way of Certainty by Ideas should obtain. Which I cannot think it will among
such as are capable, and willing, to judge impartially. I have now done with
this Matter: And as some may think it the first Part of Wisdom not to begin in
such Disputes (and I am of their Mind if they did not touch the Christian
Faith) so they cannot but judge it the next (as I do) to know when to make an
End.

I am, Sir, Your faithful Friend, and Servant, Ed. Wigorn.
Sept. 22. 1697.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 22. line 16. after thing, insert common. P. 103 Margin, r. p. 253. P.
115. l. 14. r. Plotinus. P. 130. l. 26. r. this. P. 175. l. 11. blot out it.

Books written by the Right Reverend Father in God, Edw. L. Bishop of
Worcester, and sold by H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Church-Yuard.
A Rational account of the Grounds of the Protestant Religion; being a
Vindication of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference,
etc. from the pretended Answer of T. C. 2d. Edit. Fol. Origines Britannicae, or
the Antiquities of the British Churches, with a Preface concerning some
pretended Antiquities relating to Britain, in Vindication of the Bishop of St.
Asaph. Folio. Irenicum, A Weapon-Slave for the Churches Wounds. Quarto.
Origines Sacrae, Or a Rational account of the Grounds of Christian Faith, as to
the Truth and Divine Authority of the Script* and the matters therein
contained. 4 to. A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of
Rome, and the hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it. Octavo. An Answer to
several late Treatises occasioned by a Book entitled, A Discourse concerning
the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the hazard of Salvation in
the Communion of it; Part I. Octavo. A Second Discourse in Vindication of the
Protestant Grounds of Faith, against the pretense of Infallibility in the Roman
Church, in Answer to the Guide in Controversy, by R H Protestancy without
Principles, and Reason and Religion; or the certain Rule of Faith, by E W. with
a particular enquiry into the Miracles of the Roman Church Octavo. An Answer to
Mr. Cressy's Epistle apologetical to a Person of Honor, touching his
Vindication of Dr* Stillingfleet. Octavo. A Defense of the Discourse concerning
the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, in answer to a Book entitled,
Catholics no Idolaters: Octavo. Several Conferences between a Roman Priest* a
Fanatic Chaplain, and a Divine of the Church of England; being a full Answer
to the late Dialogues of T G Octavo. A Discourse concerning Bonds of
Resignation of Benefices in point of Law and Conscience, in Octavo. A Discourse
concerning the Illegality of the Ecclesiastical Commission, in Answer to the
Vindication and Defense of it: wherein the true notion of the Legal Supremacy
is cleared; and an Account is given of the Nature, Original and Mischief of the
Dispensing Power. The Unreasonableness of Separation, or an Impartial account
of the History, Nature and Pleas of the present Separation from the Communion
of the Chapter of England. Quarto The Grand Question concerning the Bishops Right
to vote in Parliament in Cases Capital stated and argued, from the
Parliament-Rolls and the History of former times; with an Enquiry into their
Peerage, and the Three Estates in Parliament. Octavo. A Discourse concerning
the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction; or the true Reasons of his Sufferings;
with an Answer to the Socinian Objections. To which is added, A Sermon
concerning the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, Preached April 7. 1691. With a
Preface concerning the true state of the Controversy about Christ's
Satisfaction. The second Edition. 8 vo. Twelve Sermons preached upon several
Occasions Vol. I. Octavo. Ten Sermons preached upon several Occasions. Vol II.
Octavo. A Third Volume will be shortly published. A Discourse in Vindication of
the Doctrine of the Trinity: with an Answer to the late Socinian Objections
against it, from Scripture, Antiquity and Reason And a Preface concerning the
different Explications of the Trinity, and the Tendency of the present Socinian
Controversy. The second Edition, Octavo. The Bishop of Worcester's Answer to
Mr. Lock's Letter concerning some Passages relating to his Essay of Humane
Understanding, mentioned in the late Discourse in Vindication of the Trinity.
With a Postscript in Answer to some Reflections made on that Treatise in a late
Socinian Pamphlet. The Bishop of Worcester's Charge to the Clergy of his
Diocese in his Primary Visitation begun at Worcester, September 11. 1690. 4 to.
The Effigies of the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward Lord Bishop of
Worcester, Engraven on a Copper-plate by Robert White. Price 6 d. The Rule of
Faith: Or an Answer to the Treatise of Mr. I. S. entitled, Sure-footing, etc.
by John Tillotson, D. D. to which is adjoined, a Reply to Mr. I. S's third
Appendix, etc. by Edward Stillingfleet D. D. A Letter to Mr. G. giving a true
Account of a late Conference at the D. of P's. A Second Letter to Mr. G. in
answer to two Letters lately published concerning the Conference at the D. of P
s.
Veteres Vindicati: In an Expostulary Letter to Mr. Sclater of Putney, upon his
Consensus Veterum, etc. wherein the absurdity of his Method, and the weakness
of his Reasons are shown; His false Aspersions upon the Church of England are
wiped off, and her Faith concerning the Eucharist proved to be that of the
Primitive Church: Together with Animadversions on Dean Boileu's French
Translation of, and Remarks upon Bertram. An Answer to the Compiler of Nubes
Testium: Wherein is shown, That Antiquity (in relation to the Points in
Controversy set down by him) did not for the first five hundred Years Believe,
Teach and Practice as the Church of Rome does at present Believe, Teach and
Practice; Together with a Vindication of Veteres Vindicati from the late weak
and disingenuous Attempts of the Author of Transubstantiation Defended, by the
Author of the Answer to Mr. Sclater of Putney. A Letter to Father Lewis Sabran
Jesuit, in answer to his Letter to a Peer of the Church of England; wherein the
Postscript to the Answer to the Nubes Testium is Vindicated, and Father
Sabran's Mistakes farther discoverd. A second Letter to Father Lewis Sabran
Jesuit, in answer to his Reply. A Vindication of the Principles of the Author
of the Answer to the Compiler of Nubes Testium in answer to a late pretended
Letter from a Dissenter to the Divines of the Church of England. A Discourse
concerning the Nature and Grounds of the Certainty of Faith, in answer to I. S.
his Catholic Letters. The Council of Trent Examined and Disproved by Catholic
Tradition, in the main Points in Controversy between Us and the Church of
Rome* with a particular Account of the Times and Occasions of Introducing them.
Part. I. To which a Preface is prefixed concerning the True Sense of the
Council of Trent, and the Notion of Transubstantiation. An Historical
Examination of the Authority of General Councils, showing the False Dealing
that has been used in the publishing of them; and the Difference amongst the
Papists themselves about their Number. The Second Edition Corrected. 4 to. The
Folly and Unreasonableness of Atheism demonstrated from the Advantage and
Pleasure of a Religious Life: The Faculties of Human Souls: The Structure of
Animate Bodies, and the Origin and Frame of the World; in Eight Sermons:
Preached at the Lecture, Founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire in the
first Year, 1692. By Richard Bentley, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary, and
Library Keeper to His Majesty. Of Revelation, and the Messiah: A Sermon
preached at the public Commencement at Cambridge, July the 5th. 1696. By
Richard Bentley, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary, and Library Keeper to His Majesty.
The Restoring of Fallen Brethren; containing the Substance of two Sermons on
Gal VI. 1, 2 Preached at the performance of public Penance, by certain
Criminals, on the Lord's Day, usually called Mid-Lent-Sunday, 1696. in the
Parish Church of Old-Swinford in Worcestershire: By Simon Ford, D. D and
Rector there; with a Preface, by the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward Lord
Bishop of Worcester. The New-years-gift complete, in six Parts, composed of
Prayers and Meditations for every Day in the week, with Devotions for the
Sacrament, Lent, and other Occasions. The first Part may be had by it self
Books written by the late Reverend Anthony Horneck, D. D. Preacher at the
Savoy.
THE Great Law of Consideration; or a Discourse, wherein the Nature,
Usefulness, and absolute Necessity of Consideration, in order to a truly
Serious, and Religious Life, is laid open, in 8 vo. The Happy Ascetick; or the
Best Exercise; together with Prayers suitable to each Exercise: To which is
added, a Letter to a Person of Quality, concerning the Holy Lives of the
Primitive Christians, in 8 vo. Delight and Judgment Represented, in a
Discourse, concerning the Great Day of Judgment; and its Power to damp and
embitter Sensual Delights, Sports, and Recreations, in 8 vo. The Exercise of
Prayer; or, a Help to Devotion: containing Prayers and Devotions for several
Occasions. The Antiquities of Nottingham-shire, Extracted out of Records,
Original Evidences, Leiger-Books, and other Manuscripts, and Authentic
Authorities; beautified with Maps, Prospects, and Portraictures: By Robert
Thoroton Dr. of Physic, Folio.
Some School-Books Sold by Henry Mortlok, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
HOratius, Interpretatione and Notis illustravit Ludovicus Des-Prez, in usum
Delphini. Huic Editioni accessere vita Horatii cum Dacerii Chronologia
Horatiana, and praefatio de Satyra Romana, 8vo. L. Annaeus Florus, in usum
Delphini, 8vo. Leusdeni Compendium Graecum Novi Testamenti, in 8vo. Quinta
Editio. Janua Linguarum Trilinguis, sive Johannis Amos Comenii Janua Linguarum,
8vo. Graecae Grammatices Rudimenta in usum Scholae Westmonasteriensis Busby's
Apolodorus, in usum Scholae Westmonast. Nomenclatura Brevis Reformata, in usum
Scholae Westmonasteriensis. An English Introduction to the Latin Tongue, for
the use of the Lower Forms in Westminster School. Graeca Epigrammata, in usum
Scholae West. Martialis Epigram. in usum Scholae West. Juneval in usum Scholae
Westmonasteriensis. A General Examination of the Common Greek Grammar,
according to Dr. Busby's Method, chiefly intended for grounding young Beginners
in the Greek Tongue, in the Free School in Newark upon Trent. A short
Exposition of the Catechism of the Church of England, with the Church Catechism
it self, and order of Confirmation in English and Latin, the Latin revised and
much amended, by Edw. Boughen, D.D. fitted for the use of Schools. An
Explanation of the Additional Rules for the Genders of Nouns in the Oxford
Grammar, by way of Question and Answer: by John Twells Master of the
Free School in Newark, very proper to be bound up with the Oxford Grammar. With
variety of other School-Books.

