Dr. Stillingfleet's ANSWER TO J. S's Catholic Letters.

Imprimatur, Liber cui Titulus, A Discourse Concerning the Nature and Grounds
of the Cerrainty of Faith, etc.

Jan. 5. 1687. H. Maurice, Rmo in Christo, P. D. Wilhelmo Archiep.
Cantuariensi, a Sacris.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Nature and Grounds OF THE CERTAINTY OF FAITH, IN
ANSWER To J. S. his Catholic Letters.

By EDW. STILLINGFLEET, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCLXXXVIII.

THE CONTENTS
THe Title of Catholic Letters Examined Page 1 How J. S. comes to be concerned
in this Debate 3 His Doctrine denied to be Catholic by the Sorbon Doctors and
others 5 His Self-Contradiction about it in seven Particulars 7 The State of
the present Controversy about the Certainty of Faith 15 How it is altered by
J. S. 25 Of the Certainty of Particular Points of Faith 27 The Grounds of the
Certainty of Faith laid down by the General Consent of the School-Divines 31 J.
S's main Argument against our Certainty of Faith Answered and Retorted 34 An
Evident Proof of the Certainty of Faith without Infallibility 37 The Notion of
a Rule of Faith Explained 38 The Sense of Tradition may be mistaken as well as
Scripture 43 The Instances of it defended 44 The Second Argument, about
Fallible Certainty, Answered. 49 The Third, about our Rule of Faith, being
common to all Heresies, Answered 50 The Fourth, about making our Private
Judgment our Rule, Answered 53 The Fifth, about Judgment of Discretion
Considered and Answered 54 How far the Scripture is a Rule to our People 55
What Certainty they have as to things necessary to Salvation 61 What Judgment
of Discretion allowed by him 62 That it does not serve only to find an
Infallible Authority proved at large 64 His severe Conclusion of his Third
Letter Answered 69 The Answer to the Argument summed up 71 The Sixth Argument
about the Apostles not using a Written Rule in their Preaching, Answered 73 The
Seventh, about Points necessary to Salvation, Answered 74 The Similitude of the
Purse defended 76 Scripture owned to be a Rule of Faith (though not complete)
by the Divines of the Church of Rome 78 And that all Points simply necessary
are therein contained 81 J. S. his Concession that all Points are not necessary
to all Persons 83 Some Men's Uncertainty overthrows not the Certainty of Others
85 The Eighth Argument about the Certainty of the Letter of Scripture 86 J. S.
overthrows it, by allowing it to be corrected by the Sense of the Faithful 87
The Grounds of our Certainty laid down 89 Of Human and Divine Faith 91 The Last
Argument, about the Number of Canonical Books, Answered 92 No Books of the New
Testament lost 93 How the Canon was entire in the First Ages 95 Of the
Universal Consent of all Christian Churches 97 The Demonstration for Oral
Tradition laid down 100 The Instance of the Greek Church not Answered 101 The
Argument it self considered 104 A clear and distinct Answer given to it, and
its notorious Fallacy laid open 105 How Errors might come into the Church 109
The late Instance of Molinos produced 109, 110 Many other Causes of Errors
besides Forgetfulness and Malice set down ibid. The Charge of Pelagianism
defended against J. S. 113 Of the Council of Trents Proceeding on Tradition 115
The Proof that it did not, referred to another Discourse 116
ERRATA.
PAge 16. line 9. for as Mr. G. read as Mr. S. p. 32. Marg. for 9.6. times, r.
q. for 19.9. r. 1, 2. q. ibid. Marg. l. 9. for the 2 d. 13. r. A. 10. p. 62. l.
23. r. and how far, and. p. 105. l. 15. blot out not before really, l. 16. add
not after are.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the NATURE and GROUNDS OF THE CERTAINTY OF FAITH, etc.
WHEN I published my Two Letters to Mr. G. I had good Reason to expect an
Answer from him, who began the Controversy. But it seems he had better Reason
to forbear (and it is not hard to guess at it) and I am turned over to one, who
pretends to write Catholic Letters against me. I have a great and just
Reverence for some Catholic Epistles, and believe them written by an
Infallible Spirit; but for these Catholic Letters, though their whole design
be Infallibility, yet I cannot find so much as a fair Probability in them. But
why must these be called Catholic Letters? Are they written by some Catholic
Bishop, to give an Account of his Faith, according to the Custom of the Ancient
Church? Is it, that the Doctrine contained in them is undoubtedly Catholic? So
far from it, that I shall make it appear, that no one Church of the Christian
World ever owned it. But, suppose, it had been the Doctrine of the Roman
Church, how could this make them Catholic Letters, unless so great a Logician
had first proved, that a Part may assume the Denomination of the whole? But
then, why not, Roman Catholic Letters according to the new Style? There was a
Reason for this. J. S. has not forgotten, how hardly he had lately escaped
Censure at Rome, for the Principles contained in them; and therefore though he
hopes they may pass for Catholic here, yet he durst not join Roman to
Catholic in the Title of his Letters.

But how comes J. S. to be concerned in this Controversy with Mr. G.? The
Account he gives of it in the beginning of his First Letter is very pleasant.
He says, He accepted a Commission from Mr. G. to hold his Cards, while he is
not in Circumstances to play out his Game himself. I will not examine Mr. G's.
Circumstances, nor the Game he plays at; but methinks, this is no very decent
way of expressing the undertaking a Debate about Matters of Faith and
Salvation. But in Truth, he makes the business of Infallibility, as he handles
it, to be a Matter of Sport and Diversion; notwithstanding all his Grimaces and
Tragical Expressions about it. It is hard to be severe upon a Metaphor; but,
suppose it be allowed; yet I wonder, of all Men, he should pitch upon J. S. to
hold his Cards for him, who had played his own so ill, and so much to the
dissatisfaction of the leading Men of his own Church. Yet he now appears as
brisk and confident, as if he were some New Gamester; although he produces his
old sullied Cards, (a little wiped) over again; and seems to have forgotten the
Answer to his Sure Footing, and the Account he still owes to the World for it.
I know not, how far it agrees with the Laws of Ecclesiastical Chivalry, for
one, who has not defended himself, to appear a Champion for another,
especially in the same Cause; but there is no great Reason to apprehend he
should do much for another, who has done next to nothing for himself.

The main Subject of the Debate is, about the Nature and Grounds of the
Certainty of Faith; and the Method I think most natural and effectual to
proceed in, is,

I. To show how unfit J. S. of all Men, is to undertake this Cause.

II. To settle the true State of the Controversy between us.

III. To examine the Reasons he produces against our Grounds of Certainty.

IV. To lay open the weakness of his Arguments, on behalf of the Infallibility
of Oral and Practical Tradition.

I. As to J. S. his appearing in this Cause again, we are to consider, that in
his Catholic Letters, he frequently owns Faith vindicated, Reason against
Raillery, and Error nonplust; and even Sure Footing it self. But I shall now
show, that he disowned the main Principles in those Books, when he was in great
danger of being Censured at Rome for them; and therefore is not to be allowed
to produce them again. The Account of this Matter will give great Light into
the state of the present Controversy, and is therefore necessary to be
premised to it.

Out of those Books of J. S. a considerable Person in the Church of Rome,
selected three Propositions about the Grounds of his Infallible Certainty,
which were these;

Faith vindicated, page 13.
I. That he who is obliged to profess Faith propositions true, must see the
Connection between their Terms, and consequently, that they cannot be
unconnected, or false.

Faith vindicated, page 41.
II. If the two Terms be not seen to be connected, these Propositions may, nay
ought to be denied by the Respondent, whose Office and Right it is to grant
nothing but what is evident, lest he ensnare himself.

Error Nonplust, page 135.
III. It Is requisite and necessary, that the Assent of Faith in diverse
particular Believers be formally Infallible, or that those Persons be
infallibly certain by evident Reasons, that the Authority or Rule of Faith they
rely on, cannot herein deceive them. Else great Wits, and acute Reflecters,
whose piercing Understandings require convictive Grounds for their Faith, would
remain for ever unsatisfied: nor would the wisest Christians sincerely and
heartily assent to, nor with honesty profess the Truth of their Faith, nor
could any prove it true, or establish rational doubters in it, or convert Men
of exact knowledge to it, or convince Heretics, calling the Truth of it in
question. Nor could Governors and leading Persons with any Conscience or Credit
propose and preach the Truth of Faith to the Generality.

These Propositions were tendered to two Doctors of the Sorbon, who declared,
Haeres. Blakloan. p. 37, 38.
The First could not be explained in a Catholic Sense; and therefore very
unfit for Catholic Letters. For if (say they) a Person sees the Connection
between the Terms, it would be Science, and not Faith; it is enough to see them
not to be contradictory, or that the Connection is not repugnant to Reason.
Divine Faith is above, not contrary to Reason.

As to the Second, they agreed, That neither could that be explained in a
Catholic Sense, because it is destructive of Faith, and a Proposition ought
not, cannot be denied, although the Respondent has not Evidence of the Terms
of which it consists; when he otherwise knows the Church (which Faith [not
Demonstration] teaches to be Infallible in Matters of Faith) to propose as a
Truth revealed by God.

To the Third, they say, That it cannot be explained in a Catholic Sense:
Because it is sufficient that the Church be believed by Faith to be Infallible,
and it is not requisite that the Infallibility of the Church be proved by
evident Reason.

See here the main Design of his Catholic Letters declared to be no Catholic
Doctrine; which is to prove that there must be Infallible Certainty by
Conclusive Evidence of the Churches Infallibility. And if this be not Catholic
Doctrine, I am infallibly certain his Letters are far from being Catholic in
their Sense.

One of these Doctors writes to the A. B. of D. That the Natural Sense of the
Propositions could not be Catholic; and that all Bishops were bound to
suppress this Doctrine, lest it did mischief to the Flock of Christ. P. 39.
And that the A. B. of Paris would revoke his License, if the Author did not
retract them, as he hoped he would. What? Retract the Substance of his
Catholic Letters! Is this possible? And yet again publish the same Doctrine as
Catholic! This is indeed very surprising. But so it was. For the A. B. of D.
averrs, That J. S. confessed the Propositions to be Heretical, P. 39.
yea very Heretical; but he said, they were not taken in his sense; which the
other said, was a ridiculous Plea. He granted, that J. S. might contradict
himself, P. 40.
but there was no color for saying the Propositions were not taken in their
true sense. P. 42.
And Mr. S. being required by the A. B. of Paris to Anathematize these
Propositions, and to subscribe to the Censure that they could not be explained
in a Catholic Sense; P. 44.
he did it. And yet the sense of them is maintained by him in his Catholic
Letters. Is not such a Man fit to hold the Cards for Mr. G.? who makes the same
Doctrine to be Heretical and Catholic, as his Circumstances require. And in
his own Language, he goes backwards and forwards, Third Letter, p. 65.
blows and sups, declares for and against the same Principles.

This Doctrine of J. S. was complained of at Rome, and a Congregation of
Cardinals was appointed to Examine it, Append. ad Haeres. Blakloan.
and they sent their Instructions about it to the Popes Nuncio at Paris, where
J. S. then was. And therein they took notice, that in his Vindication sent to
them, he detested that Doctrine as Heretical, viz. that the Evidence of the
Connection of Predicate and Subject, and the Evidence of the Rule of Faith by
which the Believer may be infallibly certain he cannot be deceived, is
necessary in order to Faith. I desire the Reader to mark this Declaration which
J. S. sent to Rome, and to compare it with the Doctrine of his Catholic
Letters: But of that hereafter.

But it is worth our while to show with what a double Face I. S. appeared in
his Vindication and Complaint, sent to Rome, and in his Books which he
published here. And by that, the Reader may judge of the Catholic Sincerity of
the Writer of these Letters.

I. About the Faith he designs to demonstrate.
Faith Vindicated, Preface.
I declare then, that my chief End in this Treatise, is to settle Christian
Faith, or to demonstrate, that it must be truly or absolutely certain, and that
my applying it now and then to my Opposers, is only a Secondary Intention, and
merely Occasional.

Querimonia advers. Lominum. p. 49.
He says, He speaks not of Faith in itself, but as it is controverted among us.

The same he affirms p. 145, 146. that he meddles not with Faith, but with
respect to his Adversaries; or as it is disputed between Catholics and those
he calls Heretics, p. 148.

If it were his design to settle Christian Faith, and to make it truly and
absolutely certain, and only secondarily applying it to his Opposers; how is it
possible that at the same time, he should not meddle with Faith in itself, but
merely with respect to his Opposers? Is not this a brave Undertaker, to make
Faith infallibly certain, who so evidently contradicts himself as to his own
design? But it seems, to us he must pretend to make Faith certain in itself;
but at Rome, he meant no more by it, but only to perplex and confound us. As
though his Demonstrations were only intended for a sort of Metaphysical Traps
to catch Heretics with. But we are glad to see by his own Confession, that
Faith in itself is not made absolutely Certain by them.

II. About the Objects of Faith, and the Evidence of them.
Reason against Raillery, page 55.
The strangest and wisest Souls are unapt to assent but upon Evidence: Hence,
unless such Men see Proofs absolutely concluding those Points true, they are
unapt to be drawn to yield to them, and embrace them as certain Truths --
Nothing can rationally subdue the Faculty of suspending, in such Men at least,
but True Evidence had from the Object working this clear sight in them, either
by itself, or by Effects or Causes necessarily connected with it. Other
Evidences I know none.

Faith Vindicated, p. 12, 13.
The Truth of Propositions of Faith consists in the Connection of those Notions
which make the Subject and Predicate. Whoever therefore sees not the Connection
between those Notions in the Principle of Faith, sees not the Truth of any of
those Propositions -- It follows, that he who is obliged to profess
Faith-Propositions true, must see the Connection between those Terms.

In his Declaration sent to Rome, p. 11, 13. he not only expressed his Assent
to these Propositions, but That the contrary to them were False, Destructive of
Faith, and Heretical, viz.

I. That the Objects of Faith are not to be evident or demonstrable by Natural
Reasons in order to believing them.

II. That in order to the believing such Objects of Faith, conveyed down to us,
either by Scripture or Tradition, it is not necessary to know evidently the
Connection of Predicate and Subject, but it is sufficient if they be proposed by
the Catholic Church.

Now let any Man try how he can reconcile these things; (1) Nothing can subdue
rationally the Faculty of suspending but true Evidence had from the Object; and
yet it is destructive to Faith, and Heretical to say; that the Objects of Faith
are demonstrable by natural Reasons, in order to believing them. Is not true
Evidence from the Object a natural Reason in order to believing? (2) He that
sees not the Connection between Predicate and Subject, sees not the Truth of
Faith-propositions; and he who is obliged to profess them, must see it; and
yet, in order to believing Objects of Faith, it is not necessary to see it, nay
it is Heretical to assert it.

III. About Infallible Assent.
Reason against Raillery, p. 113.
It Is most evident therefore and demonstrable, that there is no Certainty, but
where there is Infallibility; and that we can never be said to be truly certain
of any thing, till, all Circumstances considered, we see ourselves out of
possibility of being deceived hic and nunc in that very thing.

In his Declaration, p. 11, 13. he owns this Proposition to be True, and the
contrary to be Heretical, viz.

That it is not necessary, in order to believing the Objects of Faith, that he
that believes, should know evidently his Assent to be Supernatural and
Infallible.

But if there can be no Certainty of Faith, till we see ourselves out of
possibility of being deceived, I should think it very hard to say it was
Heretical to assert it was necessary for him that believes to know his Assent
to be Infallible. For what difference is there between knowing we cannot be
deceived in our Assent, and that it is Infallible? But here he will hope to
escape, by joining Supernatural to Infallible; and so he overreached the
Cardinals by putting those together; for his is nothing but a pure Natural
Infallibility.

IV. About the Mediums of Faith used by him.
Sure footing, p. 172.
He rejects Extrinsecal Mediums as insufficient, and requires Intrinsecal.

Faith Vindicated, Preface, at the end.

He owns his Discourses to be built on Intrinsecal Mediums.

Error Nonplust, p. 169.
He requires clear Evidence from the Object, to ground a firm Assent.

Page. 170, 171.
He makes it necessary to true Certainty, that it be taken from the Thing or
Object. And true Certainty (he says) is built on the Things being as it is,
and nothing can ever be truly known to be otherwise than it is.

In his Subscription to the Instructions from Rome, p. 12. he denies that he
spoke of Intrinsecal Requisites to Faith; but only of Extrinsecal. And this he
goes about to prove against his own plain Words, in his Declaration, Sect. 3.
page 34, etc.

How can Intrinsecal Mediums, and Evidence from the Object, be only Extrinsecal
Pre-requisites?

V. About Human and Divine Faith.
Faith Vindicated, p. 73.
Divine Faith ought to have a far greater degree of Firmness in it, than any
Human Faith whatsoever: Wherefore since Human Faith can rise to that degree of
stability -- Divine Faith being Supernatural, ought to be more firmly grounded;
and consequently more highly impossible to be false.

Error Nonplust, p. 143.
He speaks expressly of Divine Faith.

In his Vindication, p. 97. He says, It is Evident that he spoke of Faith,
formally as Human, and not as formally Divine.

What Evidence can there be like a Man's plain Words? Is not that Divine Faith
which he goes about to demonstrate the Infallible Certainty of? It seems we are
all this while to seek for the Certainty of Faith formally Divine; and all this
mighty Noise about the Necessity of Infallibility, reaches no farther than a
Faith formally Human. And yet J. S. affirms that he undertook to prove the
impossibility of Falsehood in Divine and Supernatural Faith. And so it seems
Divine and Supernatural Faith must derive its Infallible Certainty from a mere
Natural Infallibility. Or if it be but Human Faith he means, then he falls
short of what he promised, which was to show the Infallible Certainty of Divine
Faith. And thus the Trap-Maker is caught himself.

VI. About particular Points of Faith.
Error Nonplust, p. 161.
I thought he had meant Certainty of the Points of his Faith. What we are then
in Reason to expect from Dr. St. is, that he would bring us Grounds for the
Certainty of his Faith, as to determinate Points, viz. Christ's Godhead, a
Trinity, etc.

Reason against Raillery, p. 167.
Seeing then Christians are bound to profess their Faith true, as to those
Points of a Trinity, for Example, or Incarnation, etc. it follows, that it must
be affirmed and held that a Trinity or Incarnation absolutely is, and
consequently, that it is impossible not to be.

Declaration, p. 50.

He peremptorily asserts (and challenges his Adversaries to show the contrary)
that he produced not one Argument to prove any Points of Doctrine to be Divine,
or Supernatural; but only, that such a Doctrine was delivered by Christ or his
Apostles. And this he frequently insists upon, and is the main of his Defense.

But why then does he urge us to produce our Grounds of Certainty as to
particular Points, if himself does not? If he pretends no more than to prove
them in general, why may not we be allowed to do the same? He that calls upon
others to do it, in such an insulting manner, is presumed to do it himself, and
if he does not, he only banters and abuses his Reader. And after all this
mighty pretense to Demonstration and Infallibility, the whole Dispute comes to
this, whether Men may attain to greater Certainty of Christ's Doctrine by Oral
and Practical Traditions than we can do by Scripture, Reason and Tradition? But
this is against his words, where he says, Seeing then Christians are bound to
profess their Faith true, as to those Points of a Trinity, for Example, or
Incarnation, etc. it follows, that it must be affirmed and held that a Trinity
or Incarnation absolutely is, and consequently, that it is impossible not to be.

VII. About Moral Certainty.
His whole Book called Faith vindicated was written against it. And in the
Preface to it, p. 3. he opposes absolute Certainty to Moral; and he says,
those who have it not, have no true Faith.

Page 17.
True Faith by reason of its immovable Grounds, can bear an asserting the
absolute Impossibility of its falsehood. And without this, he makes Faith
absurd, preternatural and irrational.

Page 34.
Moral Certainty is in reality uncertainty; and the highest degree of Moral
Certainty is the lowest degree of Uncertainty, truly so called.

The same he asserts, page 36, 86, 93.

Error Nonplust. page 195.
Fallible Certainty destroys all Efficacy, all Defense, and even Essence of
Faith.

When I read in Lominus, page 43. that I. S. in his Vindication pleaded, that
he required no more than Moral Evidence for the Assent and Profession of Faith,
I could hardly believe him; and therefore I was earnest to see what he would
say in Answer to this; but even there, page 23. he owns it, and says expressly,
That Moral Evidence is absolutely sufficient to Faith: But withal he says,
There is more than Moral Evidence in Tradition.

Let now any indifferent Person compare those Assertions together: If Moral
Certainty be Uncertainty, and destroy the Essence of Faith, how can it be
absolutely sufficient to Faith? But besides the Contradiction; he has by this
one Assertion overthrown the whole Design of his Catholic Letters. For, if
true Faith may be had without Infallible Certainty, what need any such
contending about it? For the Ground of the Dispute is about such Faith as is
necessary to Salvation; and if true Faith, as J. S. grants, which is necessary
to Salvation, may be had without their pretended Infallibility; there is no
Color left for pressing Persons of our Communion to forsake our Church,
because we cannot have Infallible Certainty of Faith, when themselves grant
that we may be saved without it. And what Sincerity is to be expected from such
a Man, who makes such outcries upon us, for want of Infallible Certainty for
Faith, when himself Confesses, that Moral Certainty is sufficient to Faith?
what ever becomes of Moral Certainty, I love Moral Honesty; and I cannot see
how it is consistent with it, to make such mighty pretenses to the Necessity of
Infallible Certainty for Faith, even in his Catholic Letters (which seems to
be the chief Design of them,) when himself had declared to the Cardinals at
Rome, that less than that is sufficient for true Faith. But the secret of it
is, he knows well enough, there is no such Necessity for Infallible Certainty;
and when it will bring him off, he can own it; but among us Heretics, they
must bluster and make a mighty noise about it; because it startles weak and
injudicious People; and they find nothing so apt to terrify and confound them
like Infallibility; which like a Flash of Lightning does not help them to see
better, but strikes them down with Horror and Astonishment.

And here I might fairly stop and send the Reader to J. S. for an effectual
Answer to his own Letters; or at least to show; how very unfit he was after
such going forward, and backwards in this matter, to undertake this Cause.

2. But lest I should seem to decline any thing which may seem material, I
shall now proceed to state the Controversy, as it lies between Mr. S. and me.
For, what concerns another Person, I shall leave it to himself, as not standing
in need of any Assistance from me.

The Occasion of the Conference was set down by Mr. M. to have been, That Mr.
G. affirmed in some Companies, that no Protestant could show any Ground of
Absolute Certainty for their Faith; and that Mr. S. had promised him, that if I
were not able to manifest the contrary, he would forsake our Communion.

So that Mr. G. was the Aggressor by laying this charge upon us, That we could
show no Ground of Absolute Certainty for our Faith. And therefore when in the
Conference I assigned the Scripture for the Ground and Rule of our Faith, and
universal Tradition for the Proof of the Books of Scripture, I had Reason in my
Expostulatory Letter to Mr. G., to desire of him to show, That we have no
absolute Certainty of the Rule of our Faith, viz. the Scripture, although we
have a larger and firmer Tradition for it, than you can have for the Points in
difference between us.

This plainly relates to the Conference, wherein Scripture was owned to be our
Rule, and Universal Tradition, the Evidence on which we receive the Books. And
to any Man of Sense, this is not Shifting and Tricking off the Proof to Mr. G.
as Mr. G. often calls it; First Letter, page 4.5, 6.
but it is a plain and evident Proof of our Certainty upon their own Grounds.
For, if Tradition be such a Ground of Absolute Certainty, as they assert, and
we have a larger and firmer Tradition for Scripture, than they can produce for
the Points of Faith in difference between us; then it is evident we must have,
upon their own Principles, a Ground of Absolute Certainty for our Faith; which
was the main Point of the Conference.

If he will Answer the Argument, he must either deny that we have Universal
Tradition for the Books of Scripture, or that Universal Tradition is a Ground
for the Absolute Certainty of Faith? Either of these ways he had said something
to the purpose; but he found this way of Reasoning too hot for him; and
therefore, he calls it Shifting and Tricking off the Proof to Mr. G. and so
falls into a Tragical Declamation against my not proving, and making a Secret
of the Ground of our Certainty; as if a Man intended to make a Secret of a
Horse he had lost, when he published his Marks in the Gazett. Here is the
Ground of our Certainty laid down in that very place, where he says, I shift
off the Proof to Mr. G. but alas for him! He cannot see any thing like a Proof,
unless it be served up, with all its due formalities of Major, Minor and
Conclusion. Must I be forced to tell him, as the Painters did by ill Pictures,
This is a Horse, and this a Wolf? This is an Argument, and this an Answer? It
is a hard Case if a Man cannot understand Reason, unless like Scaliger's Jests
against Cardan, there be something in the Margin to direct where they are to be
found. All Men of Sense understand the force of an Argument, though it be not
dressed up after the way of the Schools; and to tie Men up to those Methods of
Reasoning in our Age in Books of Controversy, is like Trammelling a Horse,
when he is to go a Journey; it might do well to teach him to pace, but it would
be ridiculous, when he is upon Service.

Upon this he runs out into a very Eloquent piece of Trifling, making sad Moans
and Complaints with many Exaggerations, and great variety of Phrases, As if I
offered no kind of Certainty to Men's Souls, but only that I bid those that
doubt prove the contrary; and so brings notable parallels of Peter's having
twenty pounds in his Purse, because Paul cannot prove he has it not; or his
having the more Title to an Estate, because an Adversary may have the ill luck
to be Nonsuited. I know not how Mr. G. will take these things; for they do not
seem much to his Advantage. If I were as he, I would never trust him to play my
Cards more; for what means this insinuation of Nonsuiting, etc? But Mr. S. is
plainly mistaken, for the force of it does not depend upon his bare Nonsuiting;
but upon the Goodness of the Deeds, and the Strength of the Evidence, which
himself relied upon, and appear much stronger for us than for him.

It is not Paul's not proving, but Peter's producing the twenty pounds, and
laying it before him, which is the Argument to prove he has it. Suppose he did
not produce it in Specie, but showed good Security for it, such as Paul could
not deny, had he not reason to believe he was owner of it? There being so
little color in the Reasoning Part, I pass over the Declamatory, as fitter for
the School at the Savoy, than a Writer of Controversies.

But here comes in, among his Flowers, a very notable Point of Divinity. Truth
is therefore Truth, because it is built on Intrinsecal Grounds which prove it
to be such; and not on private Men's Abilities, or their saying this or that.
This latter is undoubtedly true, and is universally believed, since the School
of Pythagoras was broken up: Wherefore till those Grounds be produced, it
cannot be with Reason held Truth. This is great; and becoming the Scientifical
I. S. But will he hold to this? Will he own it to the Cardinals of the
Inquisition? I find a certain Gentleman with the very fame Letters, J. S.
writing two whole Sections, wherein he denies that ever he meddled with
Intrinsic Mediums, Declaratio J. S. circa Doctrinam in suis libris contentam;
exhibita Sacrae Congregationi Eccles. and R. D D. Cardinalium -- General.
Inquisitorum. Duaci. 1677.
or that it was possible that he should. But P. T. was then living, and
followed him close at Rome; now that fright is over, out come Intrinsic Grounds
again; and no Man can hold any thing as Truth, till those Grounds be produced.
Suppose a Man assents to the Doctrine of Faith, as True and Divine on merely
Extrinsecal Grounds, or Motives of Credibility; has this Man true Faith or
not? Is he bound to hold and profess it to be true, though he does not see the
Intrinsecal Grounds which prove Truth to be Truth? Does that Man sin, who
professes to believe a thing to be true, though he does not see the Intrinsic
Grounds for it? What kind of sin is it, Mortal, or Venial? How far may a Man
safely deny that which he cannot with Reason hold to be true? How many thousand
Martyrs Lives, might this Doctrine have saved in the Primitive Times? How might
the poor Innocent Christians have pleaded for themselves; That they could see
no Intrinsic Grounds, which made Truth to be Truth; and they understood from a
deep Divine, that till those Grounds be produced, it cannot with Reason be held
Truth; and if it cannot with Reason be held, it may surely in our very hard
Circumstances, with Reason, be denied, or at least concealed and dissembled.
There seems to be more danger in professing the Faith without it; than in not
owning it, being not able to produce Intrinsic Grounds for it. And these are
far above our reach and capacity; and if it cannot with Reason be held Truth
without it, it seems very unreasonable to require us to dye for it.

What says J. S. to the Case of the Jews, who heard our Saviors Doctrine, and
saw his Miracles, did they sin in their Infidelity or not? It will be very hard
for him prove, that they saw Intrinsic Grounds for what they were required to
believe; and yet our Savior charges them with very great Sin in their
Infidelity. John 15.22.
I hope Mr. S. will not answer me, about these things, as he did some in the
Conference at Paris, with, Tace, Tace, interrumpis and confundis me. Haeres.
Blokloan. page 315, 316, 317.
This very Instance of the Jews was then brought against him by Dr. G. and he
said, That only those Jews sinned, who had clear Evidence that Christ's Miracles
were true and Supernatural. But A. B. of D. then urged, Page 318.
That if they had such Evidence, they could not have inward Unbelief, nor call
in Question the Truth or Divinity of Christ and his Miracles. To which J. S.
replied, Tace, nolo tibi Respondere. I hope he is better provided of an Answer
now, and that he will show, wherein the sin of the Jews lay, who did not
profess Christ's Doctrine to be true, because they could not produce any
Intrinsic Grounds for the Truth of it.

But to return to our first Controversy, About the Certainty of Faith to be
proved by us. Page 6.
He tells me, that I know well enough, that to prove Protestants have no
Absolute Certainty of their Faith is no hard Task even for a weak Man; I know,
he says, that any Man may find it confessed to his hands by Protestants; and
in the Margin he cites, Dr. Tillotsons Rule of Faith, page 117, 118. I wonder
at Mr. S's. Courage, that he dares mention that Book, to which he has so many
years been indebted for an Answer, and what he has offered toward it in Faith
Vindicated, and Reason against Raillery, he has again retracted as to the main
Principles of them, for fear of a Censure at Rome; and which he advanced out of
opposition to those of that Book which he quotes here. So that J. S. by
disowning those Principles of his, has justified Dr. T. and has overthrown
the Absolute Certainty of his own Faith. For I have already proved from his own
words, That he owns Moral Evidence to be absolutely sufficient for Faith; and
yet this is the very thing from whence he proves that Protestants have
confessed that they have no Absolute Certainty of their Faith.

But if this Matter were to be decided by the Confession of Parties, what
thinks he of those of the Church of Rome, who have charged his Doctrine about
Infallible Certainty, Haeres. Blackloan. p. 33.153, etc. 323.
with downright Heresy and Impiety, and that it leads to Atheism and
Infidelity, and overthrows the Christian Faith? This we are told is the sense
of all the Learned and Orthodox Men of your Church. Haec nova propositio fidem
Christianam destruit impellitque ad Scepticismum and Atheismum. Haeres. Blaklo.
p. 66.

Mecum omnes viri Docti and Orthodoxi sentiunt, per tua principia vastum ad
Atheismum and Heresin hiatum aperiri. Haeres. Blackloan, p. 200.


Let the Reader judge what J. S. has gotten by the Confession of Parties.

I hope now we shall come to the State of the Question; for he charges me with
perverting it: The First Question (he says) at the Conference, was, Whether
Protestants are absolutely Certain, that they hold now the same Tenets in Faith
and all that our Savior taught to his Apostles. And my Answer, he says, was,
They are.

By his favor, my Answer was not in those words, but that we are absolutely
certain that we now hold all the same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and
his Apostles. And for a certain Reason, I desire my own Words may express my
Mind; for I do not find Oral Tradition Infallible; and where Words are varied,
the Sense may be so too.

But he observes, that I trick it off again, as he calls it, (I suppose it is
Gamesters Language,) from the Point of Absolute Certainty of Faith, to Absolute
Certainty of the Rule of Faith, viz. the Scripture; but our Savior and
Protestants believe more than that the Book so called, is Scripture. Is
Certainty of this more, and Certainty of this Book, all one? Here is then an
enquiry after one thing, plainly turned off to another. It seems Mr. G. is
quite gone for a Gamester; for he discerned no Tricking in this matter, nor can
I. It is very true, we do believe More, than that the Book so called is
Scripture; for we believe All the Matters of Faith contained in that Book. And
what then? If by his More, he means Articles of Faith not contained in
Scripture; then I tell him plainly, we believe no More. And therefore when Mr.
G. put his next Question, as he thought very pertinently, By what Certain Rule
do you hold it? My Answer was, By the Divine Revelation contained in the
Writings of the New Testament: Whereby I excluded his More, if it be not
contained in Scripture. But if by More, he means our Assent to the Points of
Faith contained in Scripture, I shall give a full Answer to it afterward. Then
he asked, By what Certain Rule do you know that the New Testament, which we now
have, does contain all the Divine Revelations of Christ and his Apostles? And
if he puts such Questions concerning the Rule, What Tricking was it in me, to
give a direct Answer to them? How did I turn off the Enquiry from one thing to
another, when I only Answered the Questions he proposed? This is not playing
Mr. G 's Cards, but condemning him for playing unskilfully; and desiring to
begin a new Game; for Mr. G. had a bad hand, and managed it very ill.

But what would J. S. have done? The thing to be made manifest by the
Conference, was, the Absolute Certainty of Protestant Faith. And so it was; for
Protestant Faith is to believe all that is contained in Scripture, and no more.
Mr. G. did indeed ask some Questions about your Certainty of your Rule; and I
gave him direct Answers. Where is the Tricking in all this? But I wisely cut
off the Course of the Questions before they had questioned away the Certainty
of Faith. So far otherwise, that I let them alone, till they plainly run away
from the business of Certainty to another Question; and then Mr. T. cut them
off, by declaring himself satisfied; and asking How they could prove the Church
of Rome to be Infallible?

But now we are to see how much better the Cards might have been played. And
now, look ye Gentlemen, the Man of Skill begins the Game. After the Certainty
of Scripture from Tradition was admitted, there was no Refusing to admit that
Tradition causes Certainty, and makes Faith as certain as Scripture. See the
difference of these two Gamesters at Tradition! But what if I should yield him,
that I will not refuse to give my Assent to any Point of Faith, which comes
down to us from the Apostles Times with as large and as firm a Tradition as the
Scripture? Then (says he) it would have proved something difficult to satisfy
even a willing Man, that the Faith is certain which is opposed to a Faith come
down by Tradition. Something difficult! Nay very much so, without doubt. But
this is fairly to suppose, that you have as Universal a Tradition for your
Tridentine Faith, as we have for the Scripture; but this I utterly deny; and I
hope in another Treatise to show, I have not done it without Reason. Let the
Matter of Tradition itself, as a Rule of Faith, be one of these Points. If
there were a Constant Universal Tradition in the Christian Church from the
Apostolical Times, that there were Matters of Faith necessary to Salvation not
contained in Scripture, I grant that it would be difficult, to prove it to be a
Matter of Faith that Scripture alone is our Rule of Faith. But that is the
mighty Advantage of our Cause, that we have both Scripture and Tradition for
us; and that no Catholic Tradition can be produced against us, in any one
Point of the Additional Creed of Pius IV. which is the Design I have
undertaken, of which I shall suddenly publish the First Part; and if God gives
me Life and Health, I hope to go through the Rest. Well; but in the mean time,
Absolute Certainty of Scripture was not the Point of the Conference. Can J. S.
tell better than the Managers? His meaning is, it ought not to have been. Nor
is it the Point of Concern. This is strange. Not the Point of Concern to those
that own it to be the Word of God, and the only Rule of Faith! It is of
Infinite Concern to us; if it be not to you, I pity you for it.

Besides that, it is agreed on all hands, Men are saved by Believing and
Practicing what Christ taught, not barely by believing Scripture is Scripture.
This is no New Speculation; But what follows from it? Therefore we ought to
believe Christ's Doctrine contained in Scripture, and obey his Commands; and do
I give the least Intimation against this? But, the Question was about our Rule
of Faith, and that I still think is the Scripture; and whatever is contained
therein, is to be believed on that Account. But Salvation is the thing that
imports us in these Disputes, and 'twere well if nothing else were minded by
Disputers. And so think I too. I desire no more to end our Controversies, than
to make Salvation our End, and the Scripture our Rule. But how can Salvation be
the thing that imports us in these Disputes, if Men cannot with Reason hold any
thing true, unless they can produce the Intrinsecal Grounds which prove it to
be so? Does Mr. S. in earnest think, that none are saved but Metaphysical
Speculators, that perch upon the specific Nature of Things, and dig into the
Intrinsecal Grounds of Truth? If this be his Opinion, How few can be saved! But
if Salvation be the End, the Means must be suitable to the Capacity of Mankind;
and I do not think, the Intrinsecal Grounds of Truth are so.

But aftey all, he says, that I stifle any further talk of the Certainty of
Protestent Faith. How can that be, when I own no Protestant Faith but what is
contained in Scripture, or may be deduced from it; according to the Sixth
Article of our Church. I am not conscious to myself of any Art in the matter,
which he charges me with; and he says, I avoid what cannot be performed. What
is that? To make out that Protestants are absolutely certain that they now hold
all the same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and his Apostles. If all that
Doctrine be contained in Scripture, and they hold the Scripture by Grounds of
Absolute Certainty, then Protestants must be certain that they hold all the
same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and his Apostles.

Afterward Mr. S. starts something that comes nearer to the business; which
is, that Certainty of Faith and Certainty of Scripture, are two things: For
those who have as much Certainty of Scripture as we, may have not only an
Uncertain but a Wrong Faith; and therefore I am concerned to show, not only
that Protestants have Certainty of their Rule, but of the Faith which they
pretend to have from that Rule: That which I am now upon, is to settle the true
State of the Controversy about the Certainty of Faith. In the Conference, my
first Answer was, that, We are absolutely Certain that we now hold all the same
Doctrine, that was taught by Christ and his Apostles. And when the Question was
asked, By what Certain Rule do we hold it? I answered, By the Divine Revelation
contained in the Writings of the New Testament. So that the Certainty of
Scripture was that which I was obliged to answer to. Now comes J. S. and he
finds fault with Mr. G's management; because he asked Questions about the
Certainty of the Rule; whereas he ought to have gone another Way to work. So
that now Mr. G. is given up, and a New Controversy is begun upon other
Grounds; and the Words which I used with Respect to the Rule, are applied to
particular Doctrines. He says, The Certainty of Scripture was not the Point
for which the Conference was. How comes he to know better than Mr. G. unless he
directed the Point, and Mr. G. mistook and lost it in the Management? But I am
now bound to manifest, that Protestants have Absolute Certainty, not only of
the Scripture, as the Rule, but of the Faith they have from that Rule, or else
to own that I cannot. It seems Mr. G's good Nature betrayed him, when he asked
Questions about the Rule of Faith; and so the main Point was lost. Yet methinks
it was not mere good Nature in Mr. G. For, when we are asked, about the Grounds
and Certainty of our Faith, how is it possible we should answer more
pertinently, than to assign the Rule of our Faith? And we declare it to be the
Scripture, by which we judge what we are to believe, and what not. And
therefore if any ask us of the Matter of our Faith, we must answer, It is
whatever God has revealed in the Scripture which is our Rule. If they ask us,
How we come to know these Books to be written by such Persons, we say, It is by
the Universal Tradition of the Christian Churches. If they ask us, Why we
believe the Doctrine contained in those Books, then our Answer is, From the
Divine Testimonies, which make us certain that it came from God. And thus we
answer both to that which is called, the Material and Formal Object of Faith;
and if we are absolutely Certain of these, we must be so of our Faith. If we
ask a Jew about the Certainty of his Faith, he says, he is Certain of it,
because all his Faith is contained in the Books of Moses, and he is well
assured they were written by Divine Inspiration. If we ask a Mohammedan, of his
Faith, his Answer is, That his Faith is contained in the Alcoran; and by
proving that, he proves the Certainty of his Faith; and if that be disproved,
the Certainty of it is overthrown. Those who resolve their Faith into a Written
Rule, must go thither, when Questions are asked them about the Certainty of
their Faith. For, if I believe every thing in it, and nothing but what is in
it, there lies my Faith, and the Certainty of it depends upon the Certainty of
my Rule. But I must show the Certainty of the Faith of Protestants, as it is
pretended to be taken from the Rule. Not certainly, when the Question is asked
about the entire Object of our Faith, or when we are to show how we hold all
the same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and his Apostles; for the word All
makes it necessary for us to Assign our Rule wherein that All is contained. If
he ask us of the Certainty of any particular Point of our Faith, then we are to
make it out, that this is contained in our Rule; and our Certainty is according
to the Evidence we are able to produce for it.

For the Case is not the same, as to particular Points of Faith, with that of
the General Grounds of the Certainty of Faith. A Jew firmly believes all that
is contained in the Books of Moses, and with the highest Degree of Certainty;
but whether the Resurrection can be proved certainly from those Books, is a
particular Point; and he may have Absolute Certainty of all contained in those
Books, though he may not have it, as to such a Particular Point. And when we
come to Particular Points, their Case is not only different from the General
Rule of Faith, but such Points are very different both among themselves, and as
to the Certainty of them.

For, (1) There are some Points of Faith, which were necessary to be Revealed,
because they were necessary to be Believed, in order to our Salvation by Jesus
Christ. For as Mr. S. says, Salvation is the thing of greatest Importance; and
therefore on Supposition, that it is to be by Jesus Christ, the Nature of the
thing requires, that we have a firm and established Faith in him. And of these
Points of Faith, the Church has given a Summary in the Creeds which were
proposed to those who were to be Baptized; and not only St. Augustine, but
Aquinas says, these were taken out of Scripture; 2.2. a 9. ad 1.
and the Certainty of them to us, does depend not upon the Authority of the
Church proposing them; but the Evidence of Scripture for them, which is very
much confirmed to us by the Concurrent Testimony of the Christian Church in all
Ages, from the Apostles times, i. e. as to the main Articles; for that there
was a great variety, as to others, is evident to any one who will compare the
Ancient Creeds, as I have lately showed. And these main Articles are those
which Aquinas calls the prima Credibilia; which are therefore revealed, because
necessary to be believed by all that hope for Salvation by Jesus Christ.

II. There are other Points of Faith, which are only necessary to be believed,
because they are so clearly revealed; As that Cajaphas was High Priest when
Christ suffered; that there were two Malefactors who suffered with him; that he
was buried in Joseph of Arimathea's Sepulcher; no Man who believes the
Scripture can doubt of these things; and yet we do not make these Points of
Faith in themselves necessary, because they have no immediate Reference to
Salvation, which might have been as effectually carried on, if there had been
another High Priest, or Christ had lain in another Sepulcher. But in these
Points there is an absolute Certainty from the unquestionable Evidence of their
being contained in Scripture.

III. There are doctrinal points not necessary to Salvation, about which some
may attain to a greater Degree of Certainty than others. And the same Measure
is not required of all; Because Men's Capacities are not equal, if they do use
equal Diligence; and all are not obliged to the same Degrees of Diligence that
some are. As to the Points necessary to Salvation, God is not wanting by his
Grace to make them known to Men of honest and sincere Minds. And this is no
peculiar Doctrine of mine, as J. S. would insinuate, but it has been the
constant Doctrine of their most Learned and Judicious School-Divines; as is
evident from what they speak of the Donum Intellectus, Sed circa ea quae sunt
de Necessitate Salutis, sufficienter instruuntur a Spiritu Sancto. 2.2.9.8. a.
4. ad 1.

Donum intellectus nunquam se subtrahit sanctis circa ea quae sunt necessaria
ad salutem, sed circa alia interdum se subtrahit. ib. ad. 3.

A. 3. dicendum quod Lumen Fidei facit videre ea quae creduntur -- ita per
habitum Fidei inclinatur men's hominis ad assentiendum his quae convenient
certae Fidei and non aliis. 2.2.9.1. a. 4. ad 3.

Per lumen Fidei divinitus infusum homini homo assentit his quae sunt Fidei,
non autem contrariis; and ideo nihil periculi vel damnationis inest his qui
sunt in Christo Jesu, ab ipso illuminati per fidem. 2.2.9.2. a. 3. ad 2.


and the Lumen Fidei, which secure Men from Error in what concerns their
Salvation. If he has therefore such an Inveterate Spleen against this
Doctrine, let him attaque the greatest Divines of the Church of Rome, who have
in terms asserted the same, which I have done. And I would fain see J. S.
demonstrating against Aquinas, and all his followers, That there is no such
Security from Error in Points necessary to Salvation, where ever God bestows
true Grace. As to Points not necessary to Salvation, I do not affirm, there is
any such Ground of Absolute Certainty, as to particular Persons, who are only
concerned as to their own Salvation. And that was the Reason of my Answer to
the fourth Question. The Universal Testimony of the Christian Church,
concerning the Book of Scripture, and the Doctrine contained therein is a
sufficient Ground to make us certain of all Matters necessary to our Salvation.
But of this more afterward. It is sufficient here to observe, that even in the
Church of Rome, there are Points of Doctrine, which are not de Fide, and
consequently the Certainty of Faith is not required to them. And then it is
most unreasonable to require the Absolute Certainty of Faith in those things
which we deny to be Points of Faith. It is, as if we should ask them what
Absolute Certainty of Faith they have, as to the Immaculate Conception and
Assumption of the B. Virgin, or the Popes Infallibility, they would tell us,
these are no Points of Faith with them, and therefore it is unreasonable to ask
after the Absolute Certainty of Faith, where there is no Faith pretended. The
same we say, in the like Case, It is very absurd to demand of us the Absolute
Certainty of our Faith in such things, wherein we never pretend to a Certainty
of Faith; but of common Sense and Reason proceeding according to the Rule of
Scripture. As, if Men impose false and absurd Doctrines upon us, as
Transubstantiation; etc. we insist upon the Common Right of Mankind, not to be
required to believe Contradictions; and the Right of Christians, not to
believe, what has neither Scripture, nor Reason, nor Tradition for it. And
these are the Grounds on which we reject the Additional Creed of Pius the
Fourth. We make them no Points of Faith at all; and if others do make them so,
we desire to be excused, because it is as certain to us they are not so, as we
can be of Negatives: And farther than this we go not in such Points; and if
this be what he means by Protestant Faith, he has my Answer.

IV. The General Reason of the Certainty of Faith in Particular Persons is not
from Conclusive Evidence as to the Points of Faith, but from some higher Cause.
And this Mr. S. ought to know has been the constant Doctrine of the Schools
ever since Divinity has been brought into them. I except only one Franciscus
de Marchia, who required conclusive Evidence to the Certainty of Faith, but he
is disputed against by Gregorius Ariminensis; Greg. Ariminens. D. 1. A. 4. Q. 1.
and he says, His Doctrine was condemned by the Faculty of Paris; and Gregory
de Valentia, Greg. de Valentia. Tom. 3. Disp. 1. Q. 1. Part. 4.
speaks of him with great Contempt for holding so absurd a Doctrine.

The Certainty of Faith is declared by the Ancient Schoolmen to be above
Opinion, and below Science: by which they understood, the Intrinsic Grounds on
which Truth is built; which Mr. S. makes necessary to the Profession of it.

Hugo de Sancto Victore, says, Hugo de Sancto Victore Sumsent. l. 1. c. 1.

De Sacram. l. 1. p. 11. c. 2.4.

Rich. de Sancto Victor. Declar. Part. 1. p. 373.


That the highest Certainty of Faith is owing to a Pious and pure Disposition
of the Mind, and an immediate Divine Influence.

Petrus Pictaviensis, Petr. Pictaviens. Sentent. Part. 3. c. 21.
That it lies not in Evidence, but Adherence.

Guliel. Parisiensis, proves Conclusive Evidence repugnant to Faith, Gul.
Parisiens. de Fide. c. 1.
in a long Discourse.

Gul. Antissiodorensis, Gul. Antissiodor Sum. in Praef. and l. 3. Tit. Q. 2.
thinks rational Evidence good to support and defend the Faith, and to prepare
men for it; But that the Certainty of it lies not in Speculation, but in an
Adherence of the Mind to the Prime Verity.

Alex. Alensis, says likewise, Alex. Alens. Part. 1. Q. 2. M. 3. A. 4.

Part. 3. Q. 68. M. 2. A. 2.


its Certainty does not lie in Speculation, but in inward Affection and
Adherence; there is, he says, an inferior sort of Acquisite Faith which
relies on Reasons and Testimonies; but this, he says, is merely Natural and
Preparatory to Divine Faith.

Bonaventure says, Bonavent. l. 3. D. 23. Q. 4.
the Certainty of Adherence is beyond that of Speculation, because a Martyr may
have doubts, and yet die for his Faith.

Thomas Aquinas thinks, those that go about to bring Demonstrations for Faith,
Aquin. 1.9.46. a 2. in C. 19.9.32. A. 1. in. B. 2.2.9.2. a. 1. ad 1.9.1. a. 4.
ad 3.9.2. a. 3.9.5. a. 4. C^
expose it to the Scorn and Reproach of Infidels; and he resolves the inward
Certainty of Faith into Divine Illumination; when the Objection was put, That
Matters of Faith could not be resolved into first Principles. Which Mr. S. has
so long and so vainly pretended to.

Henricus Gandavensis says, There is a Certainty of Adherence in the habit of
Faith; Henr. Gandav. Sum. Art. 7. Q. 2. N. 6, 7, 8.

Art. 9. Q. 3. N. 13.13. Q. 1. N. 4, 5.


and that the Evidence of Credibility falls much short of that of Science; and
he makes Scripture the Rule, whereby we are to judge of the Doctrine of the
present Church, and of all Ages succeeding the Apostles.

Scotus distinguishes between Acquisite and Human Faith, and Divine or Infused
Faith; Scot. in Sentent. L. 3. Q. 23. N. 14, 15.
but he denies any Infallibility to belong to the former.

Durand. Prolog. Q. 1. N. 43, 46. L. 3. Did. 24. Q. 3. N. 8, 9.
Durandus denies Faith to be consistent with Conclusive Evidence; and that the
Motives of Credibility affords such Evidence, because that necessitates Assent.
And it is observable, that he resolves Faith not into the Testimony of the
present, but of the Apostolical Church.

I need produce no more, to show what a Stranger Mr. S. is to the Doctrine of
his own Church; or else what an obstinate Opposer he is of it. But this is
sufficient to show what Grounds of the Certainty of Faith are allowed by the
Chief Divines of the Church of Rome, and how very different they are from those
of the Catholic Letters. To sum up briefly therefore the State of this
Controversy about the Certainty of our Faith;

I. I assert, That we are Absolutely Certain of the Formal Object of our Faith,
viz. that whatever God reveals, is True, and to be professed by us, though we
do not see the Intrinsic Grounds of it.

II. We are Absolutely Certain of the Infallible Rule of our Faith; and that
All the necessary Points of Faith, in order to the Salvation of Mankind, are
therein contained-

III. The General Certainty of Divine Faith in true Believers, according to
their own Divines, does not depend upon Conclusive Evidence, or Intrinsic
Grounds, but an inward Perception caused by Divine Grace.

IV. Particular Points of Faith are more or less Certain, according to the
Evidence of their Deduction from Scripture as the Rule of Faith.

V. Where any Propositions are imposed as Points of Faith, which others deny,
those who impose, are bound to prove the Certainty of them as such, and not
those who reject them.

And this is our Case as to the Points in Difference between us and those of
the Church of Rome: We do not make the Negatives any Points of our Faith, any
further than as the Scripture is our Rule, and we cannot be bound consequently
to receive any thing as a Point of Faith, but what is contained in it, or
deduced from it. But the Church of Rome requiring us to receive them as Points
of Faith, is bound to prove the Certainty of them as such.

Having thus endeavored to set this Controversy about the Certainty of Faith
in its true Light, I now proceed to consider what Mr. S. does object against
it. And I shall conceal nothing that looks like an Argument. His Raillery I
despise, and his Impertinencies I shall pass over.

I. That which looks most like an Argument, is, what he has set out by way of
Propositions in his First Letter.

1. God has left us some way to know what surely Christ and his Apostles
taught.

2. Therefore this way must be such, that they who take it, shall arrive by it
at the End it was intended for; i. e. know surely what Christ and his Apostles
taught.

3. Scriptures Letter interpretable by Private Judgments, is not that way; for
we experience Presbyterians and Socinians (for Example) both take that way, yet
differ in such high Fundamentals, as the Trinity and the Godhead of Christ.

4. Therefore Scriptures Letter interpretable by Private Judgments, is not the
way left by God to know surely what Christ and his Apostles taught, or surely
to arrive at Right Faith.

5. Therefore they who take only that way, cannot by it arrive surely at right
Faith, since it is impossible to arrive at the End, without the means or way
that leads to it.

Upon setting down this, Mr. S being sensible he had played his best Cards,
cannot help a little expressing the Satisfaction he had in the Goodness of his
Game. I do not (says he) expect any Answer to this Discourse, as short as it
is, and as plain, and as nearly as it touches your Copyhold. Alas for me, that
am fallen into the hands of such a Gamester! But I am resolved to disappoint
him, and to give him a clear and full Answer to this show of Reasoning. And
that shall be, by making it appear,

I. That it proceeds upon False Suppositions.

II. That it destroys any Rule of Faith, even his own admired Oral and
Practical Tradition.

I. That it proceeds upon False Suppositions. As.

1. That no Certainty can be attained where there is no Infallibility. For if
Men may arrive at Certainty where there is a general Possibility of Deception,
all this seeming Demonstration comes to nothing. And yet this is a thing all
Mankind are agreed in, who allow any such thing as Certainty; and the contrary
Opinion was (which Mr. S. little thinks) the very Foundation of Seepticism;
viz. That there could be no Certainty, unless Men could find out such an
Infallible Mark of Truth, which could not agree to what was False; as he might
have learned in Cicero's Lucullus, without sending him to Pyrrho's Scholars.
And till Zeno and his Disciples pretended to find out this, Skepticism gained
little Ground; but when they yielded to that Principle, That no Certainty was
to be had without it, then a mighty Advantage was given them, which they
improved accordingly. But the more Judicious Philosophers were forced to quit
the Stoics Infallible Mark, and to proceed upon such Evidence of Perception,
and Sense, and Ratiocination, as might in things not Self-evident form an
Assent which excludes all reasonable Doubt of the contrary. But still those who
pretended to Infallibility, were the most deceived. As Epicurus thought there
could be no Certainty in Sense, unless it were made Infallible; and from hence
he ran into that gross Absurdity, that the Sun was really no bigger than he
seemed to be to our Senses. For, he went just upon Mr. S. his Principles, If
there be a possibility of Deception, there can be no True Certainty; and to
make good this Hypothesis, the Sun must be no bigger than a Bonfire. But the
Wiser Philosophers took in the Assistance of Reason, which, though not
Infallible, might give such Evidence, as afforded Certainty, where it fell
short of Demonstration. As in Physical and Moral things. I grant, that some of
those who talked most and best of Demonstration, fell wonderfully short of it,
when they came to apply Notions to Things; and the Demonstrations they made
were to little or no purpose, in the promoting of Knowledge, as, that Man is a
Rational Creature, etc. But their Physical Speculations are very far from it;
yet this does not hinder but that a Certainty is attainable as to the Nature of
Things. And in Morals, they knew and confessed there could be no Demonstration
in them; yet they professed a true Certainty they had as to the Nature of
Happiness, and the real Differences of Virtue and Vice: They owned some Moral
Principles to be Absolutely Certain, as that Good is to be chosen, and Evil to
be avoided, etc. but in particular Cases, they made use of the best Reason they
had, to prove some things Good, and others Evil. And although they could not
proceed with equal Certainty in all Virtues and Vices; yet in some they had
clear Evidence, and in others they made use of the best means to give
Satisfaction to themselves and others.

Thus it is in Matters of Faith, there are some things Absolutely Certain, as,
that God cannot deceive us; that the Scripture is our Rule of Faith; but then,
whether such Points be contained in that Rule and be of Divine Revelation, is
not Self-evident; and therefore these must be deduced by all the best Methods
of Reasoning from a written Rule; and when Persons have examined the Scripture
with all the Care and Diligence, which one who would arrive at Certainty thinks
himself obliged to, then I do affirm, that such a Man may attain to a true
Certainty and Satisfaction of Mind about it. And that true Certainty is
attainable without Infallibility, I shall prove by an undeniable Instance (if
an Instance willl be allowed; and I hope I shall make it appear as reasonable
for me to produce Instances as himself,) and that is, concerning a Point of
Faith of the greatest Importance, viz. That Jesus Christ was the true Messiah
foretold by the Prophets. The Proof of this depended on the Interpretation of
Scripture; and there could be no Infallible Interpreter relied upon in this
Case. As to Christ himself, although he really was so, yet we suppose the
Question to be about him, whether he were an Infallible Teacher or not; and
therefore we must not suppose the thing to be proved. As to the Public
Interpretation, which Mr. S. makes his Infallible Rule, if that were to be
relied upon, then a Jew was bound not to believe Christ to be the true Messiah,
because the Public Interpretation was against him; and the Traditional Sense
of the Prophecies was against him, being for a Temporal Prince; I now demand of
Mr. S. whether the Jews were capable of Certainty in this Point or not? If not,
then the Jews were excused in their Infidelity: If they were, then true
Certainty may be had without an Infallible Guide, although the Public
Interpretation and Tradition be against it. And if it may be had in so
difficult a Case, which depended on the Sense of obscure Prophecies; much more
certainly under the clear Revelation of the Gospel; wherein all Necessary
Points are laid down with so much clearness, that the Fault must be more in
Men's Wills than their Understandings, if they do not apprehend them.

2. The Second false Supposition is, That a Rule of Faith must be a Mechanical
Rule, and not a Rational; i. e. It must be like a Carpenters Rule, that has
all its Dimensions fixed, and ready to be applied to Material things; but in
matters of Understanding no such Rule is to be expected. The Philosophers who
disputed so much about Certainty, would have laughed at any man who had applied
a Material Rule to Intellectual things; yet this is Mr. S's great Example: I
take my Ruler, Second Letter, p. 25.
says he, and draw a Line by it; does the streightness or crookedness of this
Line depend upon my Understanding? By no means. But is there any such
Intellectual Rule as this? There have been great Disputes in the World, among
Men of Wit and Subtilty, about the Certainty of Human Knowledge; Whether any
Infallible Criterion could be found to discern Truth and Falsehood? But they
never imagined any such thing as an Intellectual Ruler to draw Lines by; but
that there were certain Differences of Truth and Falsehood, which men might find
out, but not without Diligence and Application of their Minds to it. And
notwithstanding the Characters of Truth and Falsehood were in themselves
Certain, yet it was very possible for Men to mistake about them; not only for
want of Judgment, but of Diligence and Impartiality: So we say here as to a
Rule of Faith; we do not suppose it to be a Material Rule; i. e. If a Man take
the Letter of Scripture, and apply it to any Opinions, he must presently know
whether they be true or false; but it is a Rational and Intellectual Rule,
which is absolutely Certain in it self; and whatever agrees to it is True, and
whatever does not is false: But still there may be mistakes in the
Understanding and Applying it; and therefore Care, and Diligence, and
Impartiality, are required; by which some may attain to that Certainty, which
others miss off. As in the Points he mentions of the Presbyterians and
Socinians differing about such high Fundamentals, as the Trinity and Godhead of
Christ.

1. Why Presbyterians and Socinians, I beseech him? There is a notable
Insinuation in this, as though we of the Church of England were Socinians in
those Points; and none but Papists and Presbyterians were Orthodox in them. But
this is an Insinuation which has as much Folly as Malice in it; since our
solemn and express Declarations, are to the contrary: And he may as well call
us Papists as Socinians, since our Writings are as plainly against one, as the
other. What our Sense as to these Matters is, he may find in the Dialogues of
the Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation compared; not long since
Published by a Divine of the Church of England. But to pass this over, 2.
Suppose the Difference between us and the Socinians, What then? Both take the
same way of Scriptures Letter Interpretable by private Judgments, and yet
differ in these Fundamental Points. And what follows? That the Scripture is no
Certain Rule? By no means. But that the Socinians may err, and certainly do in
misinterpreting this Rule. But how can it be a certain Rule, if men that use it
may err in using it? How can Reason be certain in any thing, if Men following
Reason may mistake? How can Arithmetic be a certain way of computation, if Men
following the Rules of Arithmetic, may mistake in casting up a sum? Does any
Man question the Certainty of the Rule, for Men's blundering in their Accounts?
yet this is his way of Reasoning. And I will put it just with his Propositions.

I. Arithmetic prescribes a Certain way by Addition and Substraction for us to
find out any Sum.

II. Therefore it must be such that they who take it, shall arrive by it, at
the exact Sum.

III. But two Men who have made use of the same way, differ at least a hundred
in casting up the Sum.

IV. Therefore Arithmetic does not prescribe a certain way to attain at a
Certain Sum.

V. Therefore they who take only that way, cannot by it arrive at the Certain
Sum.

Is not this clear and evident Demonstration? But those who consider a little
better than Mr. S. has done, will distinguish between the rule and the
application of it. The Rule of Arithmetic may be nevertheless Certain,
although those who want Skill, or Care and Diligence, may mistake in casting up
a particular Account.

The same we say here, Scripture is a Certain Rule in all Fundamental Points,
to such as have Capacity and Use, due Care and Diligence in finding them. But
we do not deny, but Men through Prejudice, Weakness, want of Attention,
Authority of False Teachers, Impatience of thoroughly examining things, and not
using proper Helps may run into gross Errors; such as these about the Trinity
and Incarnation; but still the Rule is Certain to those who use it aright,
although it be very possible for Men through their own Faults to mistake about
it.

And this is no way disagreeing to the infinite Wisdom of God, who deals with
us as with Rational Creatures; and has put Faculties into us, that we might
use them in order to the Certainty of our Faith. And such Moral Qualifications
are required in the New Testament, in order to the Discerning the Doctrine of
it, as Humility of Mind, Purity of Heart, Prayer to God, Sincere Endeavor to
do the Will of God; that it would be very repugnant to the Design of it, to
suppose that the Letter of Scripture alone would give a Man immediate and
certain Directions in all Matters of Doctrine being applied to it. Therefore an
easy Answer is to be given to Mr. S's. great Difficulty, viz. How the Sense
drawn from the Letter can any more fail to be true, than the Line drawn by the
Rule to be straight. For, we say, that the Sense truly drawn from the Scripture
can never fail to be true; but we do not say, that every Man must draw the True
Sense from the Scripture; for, although the Scripture be an Infallible Rule,
yet unless every Man that makes use of it be Infallible, he may mistake in the
Application of it. And this to me is so clear, that to make an Infallible Rule
in his Sense, he must make every Person that uses it Infallible, or else he may
err in the Application of it: But the Right Way, says Mr. S. will certainly
bring a Man to his Journeys End, Second Letter, page 6.
and the way must needs be a wrong way if it do it not. The Right way will
certainly bring them to their Journeys end, if they continue in it; but here we
must consider what is meant by the Journeys End. If by it be understood their
Salvation, then we say, that those who do their utmost endeavors to keep in
that way, shall not fail of their Journeys End. But if by it be understood the
Certain Truth or Falsehood of every Opinion tried by the Scripture, then I
answer, that although the Sense of Scripture be infallibly true, yet it was not
designed as an Infallible Way for us to know the Truth and Falsehood of all
particular Opinions by. For, as Mr. S. well observes, Salvation is that which
chiefly imports us; and it was for that End the Doctrine of Christ is made
known to us, and it is an Infallible Way to it, if Men continue therein; but
for judging the Truth or Falsehood of Opinions without respect to Salvation as
the End, it was not intended as an Infallible Way to every one that makes use
of it; and therefore it is easy for Men to mistake in judging by it of things
it was not designed for. As if a Man designed to observe all the old Roman
Cities and Stations here, and were told the old Roman Way would be a Certain
Way to lead him to them, with the help of the Roman Itinerary, if that Man
objects, that this will not do, for he cannot find out all the Modern Towns and
Villages by this Means, is it not a just and reasonable Answer to say, that is
a most Certain way, which leads a Man to that which it was designed for; and
the Roman way was only intended for Roman Foundations, but it is very
unreasonable to find fault with it, because it does not lead you to all Modern
Towns and Villages. So say I here; the Scripture was designed by Divine Wisdom
to make us Wise to Salvation, and thither it will infallibly lead us, if we
keep to it; but if besides this we would know by it such things as are not
necessary to Salvation, we blame it for that, which was not in the Original
Intention and Design of it. For, when we make use of it to be our Rule of
Judgment, merely as to Truth and Falsehood of things not necessary to Salvation;
it is not because it was designed for that End; but because it is of Divine
Revelation, and so is the surest Standard of Divine Truth; and we are sure
there is no other Rule for us to judge besides. From whence we may and ought to
reject any Points of Faith imposed upon us, which are neither contained in
Scripture, nor can be proved from it. And so it is our positive Rule of Faith,
as to all Necessary Articles; and our Negative Rule as to all pretended Points
of Faith, which are not proved from thence.

II. I answer, that this Method of Mr. S. will overthrow the Possibility of any
Rule of Faith; because none can be assigned, which it is not possible for Men
to misapprehend, and to mistake about it. Let us at present suppose Mr. S. to
substitute his Rule of Faith in stead of Scripture, viz. Oral and Practical
Tradition. Why may not Men mistake the Sense of Tradition, as well as the Sense
of Scripture? Is Tradition more Infallible in it self? Is it delivered by
Persons more Infallible? Does it make those to whom it is delivered Infallible?
Why then, may not those who deliver it, and those who receive it, both be
mistaken about it?

This I had mentioned in my second Letter, that it was very possible to mistake
the Sense and Meaning of Tradition; Second Letter to Mr. G. page 7.
and I instanced in that of Christ's being the Son of God; where the
Traditionary Words may be kept and yet an Heretical Sense may be contained
under them. Mr. S. answers, Third Catholic Letter, page 6.
That the Sense of the Words and all the rest of Christ's Doctrine is conveyed
down by Tradition. This is bravely said, if it could be made out; and would
presently put an End to all Disputes. For if all the Doctrine of Christ be
derived down to us in such a manner, that we cannot mistake the Sense of it, we
must be all agreed, whether we will or not. For, how can we disagree, if we
cannot mistake the Sense of Tradition? Not while we hold to Tradition. Then it
seems it is possible not to hold to Tradition; and if so, we have found a
terrible flaw in Human Nature, that will let in Errors in abundance, viz. that
it may grossly err about the Rule of Faith; yea, so far as to Renounce it. But
how is this possible, if the Sense of Tradition be infallibly conveyed? For is
not Traditions being the Rule of Faith any part of it? We must in Reason
suppose this: And if we do so, how can Persons Renounce its being the Rule,
while they cannot but believe its being the Rule? If Men may mistake about
Traditions being the Rule of Faith; why may we not suppose, they may as well
mistake about any Points conveyed by it? For the greatest Security lying in the
Rule, there must be more Care taken about that, than about the Points conveyed
by it.

But let us see how he proves that Men cannot mistake the Sense of Tradition in
Particular Points: The force of what he says, is, That Men were always Men,
and Christians were always Christians; and Mr. S. is always Mr. S. pretending
Demonstration, when there is nothing like it. If Men were always Men, they were
always apt to be deceived; and unless Christians by being such are Infallible,
they are liable to Mistakes. But the highest means to convey the Sense of Words
are to be found in Tradition. I am quite of another Opinion; I think it the
most uncertain way in the World; and the Corruption of the first Ages of the
World are an Evident Proof of it; when there were all possible Advantages of
Tradition, and yet the Principles of Natural Religion were strangely corrupted,
although they were plain, easy, few, of the highest Importance, and Men lived
so long to inculcate them into the Minds of their Children. If therefore,
notwithstanding Tradition, the World might then degenerate into Polytheism and
Idolatry; what absurdity is it to suppose, that notwithstanding Tradition, the
Christian Doctrine might be corrupted likewise?

But Mr. S. alleges not only Words but Actions, to determine the Sense of
them; as, that Christ is the Son of God; by Praying to him, and giving Divine
Reverence to Christ without stinting them, or making them scruple, lest they
give too much, or commit Idolatry by giving that to a Creature, which is due
only to God. And does not this Practice, beyond all possibility of Mistake,
insinuate into them, that he is equally to be adored with God the Father, or
Coequal to him, and so not a Creature, but Very God of Very God?

I Answer,

I. Would not the very same Reasoning have made the coming in of Idolatry
impossible? For, that there was but one True God, was evident from all Acts of
Worship, being given only to Him, as the proper Object of it: How then could
Men so foully mistake, as to give proper Divine Worship to any Creature, there
being an infinite Distance between God and his Creatures, which every Child
could not but know by a constant Tradition from Adam.

II. How was it possible that External Acts of Worship should so infallibly
prove Christ to be true God, if all External Acts of Worship be of an Equivocal
Nature, and receive their Determination from the inward Sense of the Mind? Did
not the Arians use the same External Acts of Worship with others, with respect
to Christ? Where did they ever separate from the Christian Assemblies, on the
account of the Worship given to Christ? If not, how was it possible from thence
to prove Christ not to be a Creature? So that this is very far from putting the
Point of the Divinity of Christ beyond the possibility of Mistake. Especially,
when Solemn Invocation, which is one of the most natural Parts of Divine
Worship, came to be allowed to mere Creatures. All the difference that can be
assigned then, must be from Men's Words and Professions, and not from their
External Actions.

III. The same Divine Reverence was given to Christ in the Apostolical Times,
and the utmost Care used to instruct People in the True Doctrine of Christ; and
yet then we find that Persons did Err in the Sense of that Proposition, That
Christ is the Son of God. For, even then, the Ebionites and Cerinthians
understood it, not in Respect of Nature, but Adoption; and so did the
Artemonites and Samosatenians afterward. And how can that be proved impossible
to be done, which we show was actually done? Men did notoriously mistake the
Sense of Christ's being the Son of God, when it was received by Tradition; and
yet Mr. S. pretends it cannot be mistaken, if it be so received.

Third Letter, p. 14.
Mr. S. still urges, That Faith has Sense in it; and it is inconsistent with
the Nature of Mankind, not to hold some Sense or other, and with the Nature of
Christians, not to instruct their Children in that Sense. And I think Words
written have as much Sense in them as Words spoken, and less liable to
Mistakes; there being no such mixtures of the Infirmities of Men in a Written
Rule, as in Oral Tradition. But Instances are unlucky things to be brought
against Demonstrations, and such is that of the Cerinthians and Artemonites,
who pleaded Tradition for their Sense; and yet they were Men, and pretended to
deliver the true Doctrine of Christ to their Disciples.

I alleged another Instance, how the Sense of Tradition might be mistaken; and
that was about a Real Presence in the Eucharist, which might be understood in
very different Senses. No, says Mr. S. That cannot be; for, Faith works on our
devout Affections, which must either oblige us to pay an infinite Veneration to
a Creature, if Christ's real Body (and consequently God) be not there, or if
Christ be not God, which is the greatest deviation from true Religion that is
possible; or else to be highly irreverent, and to want the most efficacious
Motive that can be imagined to excite and elevate our Devotions, if he be
there, or Christ be indeed God. Truly Mr. S's way of Writing is the most
effectual means I know to make me Question whether written Words be a good way
to convey a Certain Sense to our Minds. For, I cannot understand, how Faiths
working on our devout Affections, should oblige us, either to pay an infinite
Veneration to a Creature, or else to be highly Irreverent. For, supposing I
believe Christ's Body not to be really in the Eucharist, but yet that Christ
himself is God, I think my self bound to show the utmost Reverence to Christ as
God, even in the Act of Receiving the Eucharist: And I am of Opinion, that the
just Apprehension of the Divine Majesty, is as apt to excite and elevate our
Devotion, as the believing the Body of Christ to be there really present. But
it is observable, what Mr. S. here grants, that if Christ's Body be not there,
they are guilty of paying an Infinite Veneration to a Creature, which is the
greatest deviation from true Religion that is possible. And upon my Word then
they had need have better Assurance, than what he offers, to prove Christ's
real Body to be there. For, if as great Reverence may be paid to Christ in
Heaven, as if he were in the Elements, I cannot see how the Posture of
Adoration can any ways determine the Sense of Tradition in this Matter.

And thus Mr. S. has left the Sense of Tradition as uncertain, as he pretends
that of Scripture to be; and if his Argument will hold against the One being
the Rule of Faith, it will do as great a Kindness for the Other also. Thus I
have fully answered his main Argument, against Scriptures being a Rule of
Faith, which he has been so free with me, as to tell me I cannot Answer; First
Letter, p. 32.
and he and I must now leave it to the Reader's Judgment.

The sum of it is,

I. We distinguish Necessary Points of Faith, from Matters of Speculation.

II. We distinguish Certainty of Faith in order to Salvation, and Certainty of
Opinion in Matters of Controversy.

III. We distinguish the Certainty of the Rule, from the Certainty of the
Application of that Rule*

And then my Answer lies in these things;

I. That the Scripture is a certain Rule of Faith as to all Points necessary to
Salvation, to all such as make use of it as such, and do not through their own
fault make a wrong Application thereof.

II. That the Scripture was not designed for a Certain Rule as to Unnecessary
Opinions; and therefore Men's not arriving at a Certainty in them, does not
hinder its being a Rule of Faith.

III. That Scripture being our Rule of Faith, we are bound to reject all
pretended Articles of Faith, which cannot with Certainty be proved from the
Sense of Scripture. And so the Proof of Certainty lies upon those who affirm
such Articles of Faith, and not upon us who deny them.

This Argument is Mr. S's Goliath, and now it is no wonder if his lesser Men at
Arms soon quit the Field. But I must take some notice of them, lest they be
magnified, by being slighted.

His next Argument is, That I contradict myself: I hope I have in the beginning
made him unwilling to repeat such a Charge against me, till he has cleared
himself. But wherein is it? In another place, he says, I deny any Absolute
Certainty as to Tradition attesting the Books of Scripture; which in the
Conference I asserted. I have looked in the Place he refers to, and there I
find nothing like it. I deny the Necessity of any Infallible Society of Men,
either to Attest or Explain the Scripture. Where, by an Infallible Society of
Men, I mean such as have a Divine Assistance to that purpose: And what is this
to the Absolute Certainty we have of the Books of Scripture by Universal
Tradition? But he urges it further, If this Society be not Infallible, then it
is Fallible; and if it be Fallible, then we cannot be more than fallibly
Certain, and so we can have no absolute Certainty from a Fallible Testimony.
This is the whole force of what he says. To which I Answer,

I. I understand no such thing as Infallibility in Mankind, but by immediate
Divine Assistance, I grant, that the Holy Spirit may, where he pleases,
preserve the Minds of Men from any possibility of mistake, as to those things,
wherein it does inlighten them; but set aside this, there is no such thing as
Infallibility; the utmost is a rational Certainty built on clear and convincing
Motives. Where the Motives are merely probable, there may be Opinion, but no
Certainty; where the Evidence is thought so strong as to determine Assent,
there is a Certainty as to the Mind; as when we commonly say, we are certain of
such things, we mean no more, than that we firmly believe them; but when the
Evidence is the highest, which in point of Reason the thing is capable of, then
there is that which I call Absolute Certainty; i. e. such as depends not merely
on the Assent of the Mind; but the Evidence which justifies that Assent.

II If by being fallibly Certain, he means any Suspicion, that notwithstanding
such Evidence in all its Circumstances, I may be deceived, then I utterly deny
it; for otherwise I could not be absolutely Certain; but if he means only, that
there is no Divine Infallibility (and I know no other) then I own that there is
still human Fallibility consistent with this Absolute Certainty. But Mr. S.
will have Absolute Certainty to be Infallible: If nothing will satisfy him,
but Human (i. e. fallible) Infallibility, much good may it do him, but I much
rather choose proper Terms, which I know the certain meaning of, than improper,
though they make a far greater Noise. I do own an Absolute Certainty in some
Acts of the Mind by inward Perception, as that I think, I doubt, and that I am;
I do own an Absolute Certainty as to common Objects of Sense; and as to some
Deductions of Reason; I do own an Absolute Certainty as to some Matters of
Fact, by a Concurrence of Circumstances; but for all that, I do not account
Human Nature Infallible, nor this an Infallible Certainty, unless it be taken
in another Sense than Divines take it in. For even the Divines of the Church of
Rome as well as Ours make a difference between a Human and Acquisite Certainty,
and that which is Divine and Infallible. And if Mr. S. by Divine means Human,
and by Infallible no more than Certain, he must not think he has gained any
great matter, when he has made use of Words in an improper and unusual Sense.

First Letter, p. 25.
III. His next Argument is, That our Rule of Faith is common to all the Heresies
in the World, which pretend Scripture, as well as we. This is just the Old
Skeptical Argument against Certainty; if there be any such thing as Certainty,
you must assign such a Criterion which is not common to Truth and Falsehood; but
if you cannot assign any such Mark of Truth, which may not as well agree to
what is False, then there is no such thing as Certainty to be had. In Matters
of this nature, the Proof must not lie in generals, but we must come to
particulars, to show the Grounds of our Certainty, viz. as to the Trinity, and
Incarnation of Christ, and then if we cannot show why we believe those Points,
and reject the opposite Heresies, as Arianism, Sabellianism, Eutychianism, etc.
then we are to be blamed for want of Certainty in these Points, but not before.
But this, he says, is to make Light and Darkness very consistent, and Christ
and Belial very good Friends. It seems then, there is no difference to be found
by the Rule of Scripture, between the Doctrine of Christ and the Devil. Is this
in Truth your avowed Principle? Do you in earnest believe the Scripture to be
such a Chaos, where there is no difference of Light and Darkness, and that
nothing but Confusion can be found in it; And we cannot tell by it, whether we
are to Worship God or the Devil? If Mr. S. grants, that there is enough in
Scripture to distinguish these two; then it is a Rule so far, as to put a
difference between Light and Darkness, between Christ and Belial; and so these
Expressions must be disowned as little less than Blasphemous, for all his
pitiful Defense of them in his Second Letter; which is, Second Letter, p. 73,
74.
That he never said that Christ and Belial could be reconciled, or advanced any
Position that implied it. But he said, That to make Scripture our Rule, is to
make Light and Darkness consistent, and Christ and Belial very good Friends.
And is not this Blasphemy against Scripture? and implies, that if we go by that
Rule only, they may be very good Friends. How can this be, unless he asserts
that by Scripture alone, we can find no certain difference between Light and
Darkness, between Christ and Belial? Let Mr. S. Answer to this, and not think
to escape with such a poor Evasion. If he owns the Scripture a Certain Rule as
to the difference of Christ and Belial, and Light and Darkness, then we have
gained thus much, that in some Matters of very great Moment, the Scripture is a
very sufficient Rule and Ground of Certainty, as to all Points between Us and
Infidels. And if it be so, as to these Points, then why not as well as to other
Points consequent upon these? If Christ be the Eternal Son of God in opposition
to Heathen Deities, and we can know him by Scripture to be so, then we may as
well know him to be the Eternal Son of God in opposition to Arians and
Socinians. If against the Heathens we can prove from Scripture, that the Word
was made Flesh, Why will not this as well hold against Nestorians and
Eutychians? And so the Scripture becomes a very sufficient Rule to distinguish
Light and Darkness in such Points among Christians too. For, is it ever the
less fit to be a Rule, because both Parties own it? But they differ about the
Sense of it, and therefore Controversies can never be ended by it. If
Church History deceive us not, the greatest Controversies were ended by it,
before General Councils were heard of; and more than have been since. Many of
those we read of in the First Ages were quite laid asleep, Theod. Haeret. Fab.
l. 2, 3.
as Theodoret observes; but since Church Authority interposed, in the most
Reasonable manner, some Differences have been perpetuated, as appears by the
Nestorian and Eutychian Controversies. I do not blame the Authority of
Councils, proceeding as they then did by the Rule of Scriptures, but the Event
showed, that the most probable Means, are sometimes very ineffectual for ending
Controversies. And those which Men think will most effectually Suppress
Heresies, do often give a New Life and Spirit to them. So vain are the
Imaginations of Men about putting an End to Controversies, till they do come to
a Certainty about the true Sense of Scripture. It is possible to stop Men's
Mouths by Force and Power, but nothing brings Men to a true Satisfaction, but
inward Conviction as to the true Sense of Scripture; and there can be no
rational Certainty as to these Points without it. If Controversies be not
ended, let us not blame the Wisdom of Providence; for God does not always
appoint the Means most effectual in our Judgment, but such as are most suitable
to his own Design. And we see Reason enough to blame the Folly and weakness,
the Prejudice and Partiality, the Wilfulness and Obstinacy of Mankind; and till
Human Nature be brought to a better Temper, we may despair of seeing any End of
Controversies. Men may Dispute, and for all that I know, will do to the Worlds
End, about the Method to put an End to Disputes. For, the Controversies about
Certainty and Fatality have been always the Matters of Debate, among disputing
Men, under several Names and Hypotheses, and are like so to be to the general
Conflagration.

IV. He says, First Letter, p. 26.
Scripture is not our distinguishing Rule of Faith, but our own particular
Judgments about Scripture; for that which distinguishes my Rule from that of
the most abominable Heresies, can only be my own Judgment upon the Letter of
Scripture, and wriggle which way I will, there it will, and must end at last. I
wish Mr. S. had been a little better conversant in the old Disputes about
Certainty; for it would have saved me the trouble of answering some impertinent
Objections; such as this before us. For they would have been thought mean
Logicians, who could not put a difference between the Rule of Judgment, and the
Judgment which a Man made according to the Rule. Suppose the Question were
about Sense, whether that were a certain Rule, or not, to judge by; and
Epicurus should affirm it, and say he so firmly believed it, that he judged the
Sun to be no bigger than he seemed to his Senses; would not he have been
thought ridiculous, who should have said, this Fancy of Epicurus was his Rule?
The Rule he went by was in it self certain; but he made a wrong Judgment upon
it; but that was not his Rule. So it is here. We declare the Scripture to be
our only certain and standing Rule, whereby we are to judge in Matters of
Faith; and we understand it as well as we can, and form our Judgments by it;
but does it hence follow, that our Judgment is our Rule? We may be deceived in
our Judgments, but our Rule is Infallible; we may differ in our Judgments, but
our Rule is one and the same. And how is it possible for those who differ in
Judgment, to have the same Rule, if our Rule and our Judgments be the same? For
then their Rules must be as different as their Judgments. I know not what
Modern Logic Mr. S. learnt; but I am sure he learnt not this way of Reasoning
from the Ancient Philosophers, who discoursed about the Criterion after another
manner than our great pretender to Logic does.

First Letter, p. 26.
V. He objects, That our People do not make Scripture the Rule of their Faith,
not one in a Million relying upon it; and therefore this pretense of mine, he
says, books like a mere Jest; and he cannot persuade himself, that I am in
earnest, while I advance such a Paradox. What does J. S. mean, to call one of
the Articles of our Church, a Jest and a Paradox? For the Words of our Sixth
Article, are, Holy Scripture contains all things necessary to Salvation: so
that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be proved thereby, is not to be
required of any Man, that it should be believed as an Article of Faith, or be
thought requisite or necessary to Salvation.

Does J. S. now take this for a Paradox among us? I assure him, I love not to
make Jests about Scripture, nor matters of Faith and Salvation. But wherein
does this Jest lie? Why, forsooth, I make the People to make Scripture their
Rule, and not one in a Million thinks of relying on it. Have they then any
other Rule of Faith, which they rely upon? What is it, I pray? Is it the
Churches Infallibility? No. Is it Pius the Fourth's Creed? No truly, while they
are Children, Page 27.
they believe Tradition. Now, I think, J. S. has hit it. Tradition is indeed a
Rule of Faith for Children; who are very apt simply to believe their Fathers
and Teachers. But suppose, they come to years of Discretion, what Rule of Faith
have they then? Have they a Judgment of Discretion then? No; this is another
Jest. For he supposes all our People to be a dull sort of Animals, that
understand nothing of Scripture or Faith themselves, (I wonder then, that they
make no more Converts among them) but trust their Parson for all; For, Boves
arabant and Asinae pascebantur juxta eos; therefore the People have no Judgment
of Discretion; 2.2.9.4.2.6.
I hope J. S. knows whose Jest or rather Argument that was. Whatever he
insinuates, as to our People, I have Reason to believe far better of them; and
that all those who mind their Salvation do seriously read, and consider the
Holy Scriptures, as the Rule of their Faith. But if in Matters of Opinion, or
in doubtful or obscure Places, they make use of the Skill, and Assistance of
their Teachers, wherein are they to blame? The Scripture is still their Rule,
but the help of their Teachers is for the better understanding it. And cannot
our Logician distinguish between the Rule of Faith, and the Helps to understand
it? Suppose now a Mother or a Nurse should quit honest Tradition, Page ^^.
as J. S. here calls it; and be so ill inclined, as to teach Children to spell,
and to read in the New Testament, and by that means they come by degrees to
understand the Doctrine which Christ preached, and the Miracles which he
wrought, and from thence to believe in Christ, and to obey his Commands, I
desire to know, into what these Persons do Resolve their Faith. Is it indeed
into those who taught them to read? or into the New Testament, as the Ground of
their Faith? When they have been all along told, that the Scripture alone is
the Word of God; and whatever they are to believe, it is because it is
contained therein. And so, by whatever means they come to understand the
Scripture, it is that alone they take for the Rule and Foundation of their
Faith. If a Man were resolved to observe Hippocrates his Rules; but finds
himself incapable of understanding him, and therefore desires a Physicians
Help; I would fain know, whether he relies upon the Skill of his Interpreter,
or the Authority of Hippocrates? It is possible his Interpreter may in some
doubtful and obscure Places have mistaken Hippocrates his Meaning; but however,
the Reason of his keeping to the Rules is not upon the Account of the
Interpreter, but of Hippocrates. But suppose a College of Physicians interpret
Hippocrates otherwise, is he bound then to believe his own Interpreter against
the Sense of the College? I answer, If a College of Physicians should translate
Bread for Cheese; or by Phlebotomy should declare was meant cutting of
Arteries, or of a Man's Throat, let them presume to be never so Infallible, I
would trust any single Interpreter, with the help of Lexicons and Common Sense
against them all; but especially, if I can produce Galen, and the old
Physicians, who understood Hippocrates best, on my side. This is our Case, as
to the People, about disputable Points; we do not set up our own Authority
against a Church pretending to be Infallible; we never require them to trust
wholly to our Judgments; but we give them our best Assistance, and call in the
old Interpreters of the Church; and we desire them to use their own Reason and
Judgment with Divine Assistance for settling their Minds.

If People be negligent and careless, and will not take necessary pains to
inform themselves, which Mr. S. suggests, we are not bound to give an Account
of those, who do not observe our Directions. And I never yet knew the Negligent
and Careless brought into a Dispute of Religion; for in this Case, we must
suppose People to act according to the Principles of the Religion they own;
otherwise their Examples signify no more against our Doctrine, than Debauchery
does against the Rules of Hippocrates.

But suppose, says Mr. S. Page 29.
that one of my own Flock should tell me, that I have erred in interpreting
Scripture, he desires to know, what I would say to him. This is a very easy
Question, and soon answered. I would endeavor to Convince him as well as I
could. And is that all? And what would J. S. do more? Would he tell him he was
Infallible? I think not; but only as honest Tradition makes him so, and how far
that goes toward it, I shall examine afterward.

Well; but suppose John Biddle against the Minister of his Parish, and the
whole Church of England to boot, understands Scripture to be plainly against a
Trinity and Christ's Divinity.

And it is but fair for me to suppose him, maintaining his Heresy against J.
S. and let any one judge whether of us be more likely to Convince him. He owns
the Scripture, and confesses if we can prove our Doctrine from thence, he will
yield; but he laughs at Oral Tradition, and thinks it a Jest for any one to
prove such a Doctrine by it. And truly, if it were not for the Proofs from
Scripture, I do much Question, whether any Argument from mere Tradition could
ever confute such a one as John Biddle. But when we offer such Proofs, as are
acknowledged to be sufficient in themselves, we take the only proper way to
give him Reasonable Satisfaction. Suppose he will not be convinced. Who can
help that? Christ himself met with Wilful and Obstinate Unbelievers. And was
this any disparagement to his Doctrine? God himself has never promised to cure
those who shut their Eyes against the Light.

Page 29.
Shall the Believing Church then have the Liberty to interpret Scripture
against the Teaching Church? Who ever asserted any such thing? We only say,
that the People are to understand the Grounds of their Faith; and to judge by
the best Helps they can, what Doctrine is agreeable to Scripture, and to
embrace what is so, and to reject what is not: But among those Helps we take
in, not barely the personal Assistance of their own Guide, but the Evidence he
brings, as to the Sense of the Teaching Church, in the best and purest Ages.

It is very strange, that after this, it should presently follow, Page 29.
It Is evident hence, that Tradition of our Fathers and Teachers, and not
Scriptures Letter, is indeed our Rule; and by it we interpret Scripture. If
this be so evident, then how is it possible, we should set up the Ecclesia
Credens against the Ecclesia Docens; as he charged us just before. If Tradition
be our Rule, and we interpret Scripture by it, what fault then are we guilty
of, if Tradition be such an Infallible Rule? But, methinks, this Hence looks a
little Illogically upon the Premises; and if this be his Conclusive Evidence,
he must excuse me as to the making it a Ground of my Faith.

But he allows, That we set up Scripture as our Rule, when we Dispute against
them; but when that is done, we set up our own Authority over the People, and
do not allow them that Privilege against us, which we take against the Church
of Rome. This is all the strength of what I can make out of that Paragraph. For
if all Writing were like his, it would be the best Argument for Oral Tradition;
his Sense is so intricate, and his Conclusions so remote from his Premises.
Just before he said, It Is evident hence that we follow Tradition. And
presently, It Is as evident we do not follow it, and set up our own Authority
against it. We do interpret Scripture by Tradition; and yet immediately, we set
up Scripture against Tradition. We plead for the Peoples Right to a Judgment of
Discretion; and yet we do not allow them a Judgment of Discretion. What
invisible links has Oral Tradition to connect things, that seem so far asunder?

But however it be expressed or connected, his meaning is, That we only set up
Scripture against the Church of Rome, and then set up our own Authority over
the People. This is not possible, if we do allow them a Judgment of Discretion;
and this is one of the things he so much charges upon me; and says, He never
read any Protestant that puts Matters more into private hands than I do; Page
29.
and yet in the very next Page, he says, I deny the People the same Privilege
against Pastoral Authority. How can I deny them such a Privilege, if I put
Matters into their hands above any other Protestant? I do not know, that I do
in the least differ from the sixth Article of our Church; nor do I take off
from the due Authority of Bishops and Pastors of Churches. But all our Dispute
is, about this Judgment of Discretion, whether it be allowable to People, and
how far.

In his Third Letter he resumes this Argument, and thither I follow him, Third
Letter, p. 92.
that I may lay things together into some Method. The words he cavils at, are,
If we have the Consent of all Christian Churches against the only pretended
Infallible Judge, we have their Consent likewise, that every Man is to judge
for his own Salvation. What hurt is there in this? It seems then nothing will
content us now but Infallibility. Was there ever such an awkard Man at
Reasoning? It follows indeed, that either there must be an Infallible Judge, or
every Man must judge for himself. Do I then allow no Authority to
Church-Governors, that do not pretend to Infallibility? Yes, very much, while
they do not pretend to Impose on our Faith, by a pretense to Infallibility. But
what Occasion do I give for this, when I say only, That every Man must judge
for his own Salvation; and yet he had the Conscience to leave this out in
repeating my Sense, but two lines after. May not you mistake or pervert to Day,
what you heard Yesterday, when I find you mistaking or perverting my Sense, but
at two lines distance? And then run on in a long Discourse, as though you had
taken the true Sense of my Words. Is not this a fit Person to play out Mr. G 's
Game, who shuffles in so strange a manner, and so openly plays false Cards?
Where did I ever dispute against Church Authority in due proposing Matters of
Faith, provided that every Man is to judge for his own Salvation? But I have,
he says, an aching Tooth at the Churches intermeddling in Matters of Faith. p.
93.
From whence does this appear? This must either arise from great Ignorance, as
to the Right of Judging every Man has as to his own Salvation; or from a
Malicious Design, to expose me to all Church-Governors; but I pity his
Ignorance, and despise his Malice. What pleasant Entertainment does he make
with the Sober Enquirer? It Is pity (says he) but he had a blew Apron on, and a
Tub to Hold-forth in; as a Sober Enquirer may possibly find some Pretenders to
Infallibility have done in their Time. But what is the meaning of all this ado
about a Sober Enquirer? I had said many years ago, That the Scriptures being
owned, as containing in them the whole Will of God so plainly revealed, that no
Sober Enquirer can miss of what is necessary for Salvation, there can be no
Necessity supposed of an Infallible Society of Men either to Attest or Explain
these Writings among Christians, any more than there was for some Ages before
Christ, of such a Body of Men among the Jews, to Attest or Explain to them the
Writings of Moses and the Prophets. And where lies the Heresy or Danger of
this Doctrine? If I said that no Sober Enquirer can miss of things necessary to
Salvation in Scripture, it is no more than St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine,
Aquinas, and other Schoolmen, had said before me; and Were they for blew
Aprons and Tubs to Hold forth in? Nay, to show how unskilful J. S. is in the
Writers of his own Church, (if they do own him) even Bellarmin himself grants
as much as I say. For being to Answer that Place Jam. 1.5. If any Man lack
Wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives liberally, etc. he Answers, Bell. de
verbo Dei, l. 3. c. 6. sect. Respondeo.
This is to be understood of Sapientia necessaria ad Salutem; so then a Sober
Enquirer praying to God to give him Wisdom, shall not want that which is
Necessary to his Salvation. And he quotes several Passages of St. Augustine to
prove, that Prayer obtains nothing Infallibly but that which is necessary or
useful to the Salvation of him that prays. If this be then obtained Infallibly,
then we see an Infallible Ground of Certainty, as to what is Necessary or
Useful to Salvation. Bellarmin indeed says, that a Gift of Interpretation is
not to be had by Prayer; and, Do I ever say it is? Did I ever give the least
Countenance to Enthusiastic Pretenders, or to the Breakers of the Laws and
Orders of our Established Church? What means then these spiteful Insinuations?
Does the Man hope to raise Himself by exposing Me? Or to be caressed by F.P.
and F. W. by the brave attempt of throwing Dirt so plainly in my Face? Which
will never stick, being so unskilfully thrown, either to my Prejudice, or his
Advantage.

But this Matter about the Peoples Judgment of Discretion, must not be thus
passed over. For, he resumes it at the End of his Third Letter, and thought it
a good relishing bit to conclude with. And toward the very end, he begins to
state the Controversy, this true Logician having forgotten it before, or
reserved it for a Disert at the last.

Third Letter, p. 99^
To come closer (says he) and take a more distinct view of this Judgment of
Discretion. It was even time to come closer in the 99th. p. of the Third
Letter. Alas for Mr. G.! he is like to have a hopeful Game of it, when his
Substitute talks at this rate at the very end of the Game. But let us see what
feats he will do now he comes closer. Now he will acquaint me, how far he
allows it, and far and how in what he rejects it. This is well; but why no
sooner? He was at' another Game before, viz. two or three throws at the Sober
Enquirer, and having knocked him down with his blew Apron and Tub, he now comes
to T. G's Cards again. And let us see how well he plays them. First, He grants,
That every Man is to judge for his own Salvation; i. e. he yields what the
Sober Enquirer aimed at, and now methinks he desires the blew Apron and Tub, to
Hold-forth himself. Secondly, He says, All Mankind are agreed in it. It seems
then the Fanatics are true Catholics in Mr. S's Opinion. Thirdly, He yields,
That every Man is to judge of the best way to Salvation, and of all the
Controversies between Them and Us. Now the Tub is turned to a Chair, and the
Holder-forth become a Judge of Controversies. Nay, he goes so far as to say,
the contrary Tenet is ridiculous, as what is most; nay, that it is sottishness
to hold it; and to deprive Mankind of this Privilege of judging thus, is to
debar him of the Light and Use of his Reason, when it is most useful for him.
Is not all this very obliging? But where now lies the difference? Why, truly,
if his Discretion leads him to the Infallible Rule of Tradition, all is well;
but if not, it is no longer Discretion. What? has he been Judge of all the
Controversies between Us already, and is he to seek for his Rule still? What
Discretion had he all that time, to judge without a Rule! What a Judge of
Controversies have we found at last? Methinks the Sober Enquirer far exceeds
him in point of common Discretion; for he never pretended to judge without a
Rule, much less all the Controversies between Us. But this discreet Judge of
all Controversies first determins all the Points; and when he has done this,
he finds out his Rule. Of all the Judges of Controversies that have been yet
talked of, commend me to this set up by J. S. For, how is it possible for him
to judge amiss, who had no Rule to judge by?

You see (says he) how we allow them the Use of their Reason and Judgment of
Discretion, p. 102.
till it brings them to find a certain Authority, and when they have once found
that, the same Judgment of Discretion which showed them that Authority was
Absolutely Certain, obliges them to trust it, when it tells them what is
Christ's Faith, without using their private Judgments any longer about the
particular Points themselves thus ascertained to them, but submitting to it. To
which I Answer,

I. The same reason which enabled Men to find out this Infallible Guide, or
Certain Authority will help them to judge concerning this Authority, and the
Matters proposed by it. For, either he has a Rule to find out this Authority,
or he has none; if he has a Rule, it must be either Scripture, or pure
Natural Reason. If Scripture, that only affords Fallible Certainty, he says
over and over, and so a Man can never come certainly to this Authority. And if
the Foundation be uncertain, what can the Rule do? But Mr. S. does not pretend
Scripture, but Reason, for his Infallible Rule. Then I demand, whether Reason
does afford an Infallible Ground of Certainty, as to this Certain Authority or
not? If it does, we are yet but Fallibly Certain; if it does not, then what
need this Certain Authority; for in the Opinion of all Reasonable Men, certain
Reason is better than certain Authority. And he cannot deny the Certainty of
Reason, who builds the Certainty of Authority upon it.

II. Suppose the particular Points proposed by this Certain Authority be
repugnant to that Certainty of Reason, by which I am required to believe it: As
suppose this Authority tells me, I am no longer to rely upon my Reason, but
barely to submit, although the Matter proposed be never so much against it;
What is to be done in this Case? I am to believe this Certain Authority on the
Account of Reason, and that requires me to believe such things as overthrow the
Certainty of Reason; How is it possible for me to rely on this Certain
Authority on the Certainty of Reason, when that Authority tells me, there is no
Certainty in Reason?

III. Must I believe Reason to be Certain just so far and no further? But who
sets the bounds? Has God Almighty done it? When and where? I may and ought to
use my Reason in searching after this Certain Authority, and judge all
Controversies in order to the finding it out; all this is allowed; but as soon
as ever this Certain Authority is discovered, then Goodnight Reason; I have now
no more Use for you. But who bid you be so ungrateful to that Certain Reason,
which conducted you so far? It is very possible it may be as Useful still, why
then do you turn Reason off so unkindly after so good Service?

IV. Are all People capable of this Certain Reason, or not? It requires, it
seems, a great deal of Logic to prove this Certain Authority, or this
Infallible Guide by Reason; and I am one of those that think it can never be
done: Suppose then, some of us duller People can never comprehend the force of
this Reason, which is to lead us to an Infallible Guide, What is like to become
of us Incapable People? Are we all to be damned for Dunces and Blockheads? No,
not so neither: This is really some Comfort. For then it is to be hoped we may
go to Heaven without finding out this Certain Authority; and then we may have
True Faith without it. This is still better and better. And then I pray what
need have I to find out this Certain Authority at all, if I may have True Faith
and be Saved without it?

V. I have greater Certainty by Reason of the Certain Authority of Scripture,
than you can have of the Certain Authority of Tradition. Here is Reason on both
sides, and Authority on both sides; but I say there is no Comparison between
either the Reason or the Authority. The Reason to believe the Scripture, is so
incomparably beyond the Reason to believe Oral Tradition. And the Authority of
Scripture has so much greater Force on the Consciences of Men, that it is very
extraordinary among those who own Scripture to be the Word of God, to find them
compared in Point of Authority. For, we must deal plainly in this Matter; the
Scripture we look on as the Rule of our Faith, because it is the Word of God.
If you do not own it to be so, but resolve all into Tradition, we know what you
are; but if you do own the Scripture to be of Divine Revelation, how can you
pretend to set up any Certain Authority in Comparison with it?

VI. If this Certain Authority be only to lead us into the Certain Sense of
Scripture, then it must be either into the Sense of plain Places, or of
difficult and obscure: If of plain Places, then it is to kindle a Torch to
behold the Sun; if of obscure Places, then who has appointed this Certain
Authority to Explain them? Who is to appoint such a Certain Authority in the
Church, to Explain his Word, but God Himself? And we desire to see some plain
Places, that set up this Authority to Explain those which are obscure and
doubtful. We think it our Duty to read and search the Scripture, and especially
the New Testament, where we find very great Occasion for this Certain Authority
to be mentioned. We find Churches newly settled, and many Disputes and
Controversies started among them; and those of great and dangerous Consequence;
we find the Apostles giving frequent Advice to these Churches with respect to
these Differences, and with great earnestness giving Caution against Seducers,
and warning them of the danger of them; but not one Word can we find in all
their Epistles tending this way, or mentioning any Certain Authority they were
to submit to, for the putting an End to all Controversies. This is really a
Matter of so much Concernment to the whole Christian World, that if any such
thing had been in the Design of Christianity, I can never believe that the
Apostles would have omitted it in their several Epistles. Had not they
sufficient Care of the Certainty of Men's Minds, and of the Peace of the Church?
Was it a Secret concealed then from them? Or not thought fit to be communicated
by them, when it was most necessary to prevent the early Corruptions and
Errors of the Christian Churches? But they are so far from it, that I cannot
find any Intimation to that purpose in all their Writings, although they had
the fairest Occasions for it.

VII. If Men by Certain Reason have found out this Certain Authority, What are
they to do with this Certain Reason afterward? Methinks it is a little hard
for ever to discharge so useful a Servant immediately after so extraordinary a
piece of Service, as the finding out an Infallible Guide. We do not find the
Apostles directing the People not to make use of their Understandings, because
their Guides were Infallible. I am apt to think the Apostles were as Infallible
as Tradition or Church Authority ever since; and therefore what allowance was
made by them to a Judgment of Discretion is still to continue. What does St.
Paul mean to speak to the Corinthians in such a manner, 1 Cor. 10.15.
I speak as to Wise Men, judge ye what I say: How different is this from, I
speak by an Infallible Spirit, and ye are not to judge what I say? When he
says to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.
Prove all things, Does he mean, Swallow all things, and Prove nothing? When
St. John says, Try the Spirits, 1 John 4.1.
whether they are of God, Does he only mean, till they had found a Certain
Authority? Did not they believe St. John's Authority to be Certain? If not, to
what purpose did he write this Epistle to them? If he did, he supposed them
still to have a liberty of Judging, even those who pretended to Inspiration.
For, many false Prophets are gone out into the world. And there are certain
Rules and Marks to judge of the Pretenses to an Infallible Spirit, which were
in vain assigned, if they were not to judge by them.

VIII. Suppose Men differ about this Certain Authority, wherein it lies, and
how far it extends; Are not they to exercise their Reason still about this?
Suppose some pretend, that it lies in an Infallible Assistance which Christ
has promised to his Church in all Ages; and Others say, this is impossible to
be a Ground of Faith, because it is it self an Article of Faith: Must not a Man
exercise his Reason about this? Here is Certain Authority pleaded; but Others
say, there is Certain Reason against this Pretense of Certain Authority; and
they must grant I must follow Certain Reason, though against Certain Authority.
Again, Others say, the Certain Authority of Oral Tradition is a Novel, vain and
dangerous Opinion, destructive of Faith, and leading to Heresy and Atheism;
What is to be done in this Case? Must our Reason be quitted, and Men not be
allowed to judge of this Authority by it? Yes, till they come to own it, and
then they are to judge no longer; i. e. put out your Eyes once, and ye need
never think of opening them after. Be very circumspect in the Choice of your
Way, till you come to a Precipice, and when you are come there, be sure to
throw your self from it headlong, and there is an End of Controversies. But we
do not judge this a very Reasonable Method; but think he had much better keep
upon plain Ground, and use the best Method he can to find the true Way; and if
his Judgment, will serve him to find the Way to a Precipice, we think it will
much better serve him to keep him from it; And that he had better bear with
some imperfection of his Sight, than put out his Eyes that he may be the more
quietly led, he knows not whither.

There is only one thing more, which deserves to be taken notice of, about this
Argument, viz. that J. S. says, I expressly exclude the Churches Help; which
is, as he triumphantly concludes his Third Letter, The First Principle, nay the
Quintessence of all Heresy, Third Letter. Page, 104.
Fanaticism in the Egg, perfect Enthusiasm when hatched, and downright Atheism
when fledged. This is a parting Blow indeed. It is the bite of an Angry Viper,
at its last Gasp, when it puts its utmost force into the Venom, and hopes even
dying to destroy. Others love to conclude gently, but J. S. is a Man by
himself, and as though he were writing Epigrams, would reserve his Sting for
the last. But what Ground is there for all this venomous Froth? Even just as
much as there was for the Author of Pax vobis to say, that I am for introducing
Paganism; or for another to make me the Founder of Anti-Catholick, and Anti
Christian Doctrines, whereas I profess to own no other than what have been
received in this Church ever since the Reformation. But some Men's Spleen and
Gall must have a Vent lest it destroy them. It is some satisfaction to me to
think that none but such, who either Oppose or Betray our Church, set
themselves thus to defame me; and it is a great comfort to find such feeble
Reasoning, where so much Spite and Malice is discovered. Thus it is here, with
J. S. he could merit nothing without giving me hard words, and because many
look on the Beginning and End of a Book, who mind nothing else in it; therefore
he has here put together as the Consequence of my Doctrine, no less than
Heresy, Fanaticism, Enthusiasm, and downright Atheism. He thought he could not
make my Case Equal with his own, unless I were charged with Heresy, and
Principles leading to Atheism. But he is charged by the most Zealous
Catholics, and in respect to his avowed Principles; but my charge here is by
an enraged Adversary; and for such a Doctrine which is owned by all Men of
Understanding in both Churches, and if I may name him among them, even by J. S.
himself. My words are, If it be said, 2d. Letter, p. 21.
that the Churches Power will become explicit to any sober Enquirer, then every
such Person may without the Churches help find out all necessary Points of
Faith. And where lies the Heresy, the Enthusiasm, the Atheism of this
Doctrine, which I have already showed was asserted both by Fathers and
Schoolmen? And J. S. himself grants, that every Man is to judge for his own
Salvation; and of the best way to his Salvation, and of all the Controversies
between them and us, and especially of the true Grounds of Faith; and all this
without the Churches help. And if he can do all this, I desire to know whether
he cannot find out all Necessary Points of Faith? Has he indeed, resolved all
Controversies, and yet wants some necessary Points of Faith? And has he found
out the Churches Authority too, without the Churches Help, and yet does he want
some necessary Points of Faith? Then it follows, that after the submitting to
the Churches Authority, there are still necessary Points of Faith which may be
wanting; and then an absolute Submission is not all that is required of one
that has found out the Churches Authority. But my whole Argument there
proceeds upon a Supposition, viz. that if one may without the Churches Help
find out the Churches Authority in Scripture, then why not all necessary Points
of Faith? So that it goes upon a Parity of Reason; and I see no Answer at all
given or pretended, but only he endeavors to stop my Mouth with a handful of
Dirt.

Thus I have dispatched this long Argument about the Judgment of Discretion.
And I shall now sum up my Answer in these particulars.

I. Every Christian, as such, is bound to enquire after the true Way to
Salvation, and has a Capacity of Judging concerning it.

II. Every Christian proceeding according to the best Rules of judging, has
Reason to receive the Scripture as the Rule of his Faith.

III. The Scripture is so plain in all Necessaries, and God has promised such
Assistance to them, that sincerely seek it, that none who do so, shall want the
knowledge of such things as are necessary to their Salvation.

IV. When any thing is offered as necessary to be believed in order to
Salvation, every Christian has a Right and Liberty of Judging, whether it can
be proved by the Scripture to be so necessary or not.

V. We do not allow to particular Persons the same Faculty of Judging in
doubtful Points of Controversy, which we do as to Matters that immediately
concern their Salvation.

VI. No pretense of Infallibility or Authority can take away that Right of
Judging, which was allowed them by the Apostles, whose Authority was Infallible.

VII. This Right of Judging does not exclude the Churches due Authority as to
Matters of Faith and Controversies of Religion, (as it is declared Art. 20. of
our Church) but all that we now plead for, is (not any Authority as to others)
but a Right of Judging as to themselves, in Matters that concern their
Salvation.

VIII. The Certainty of Faith, as to them depends upon two Things; 1. The
clearness of Scripture about them, which implies the Certainty of Reason. 2.
The Promise of Divine Assistance which makes their Faith Divine, both as to its
Principle, its Ground, and its Effect.

But I have not yet ended his Objections about our Rule of Faith; For

Third Letter. Page, 34.
VI. He objects, That we cannot necessarily resolve our Faith into the Writings
of the Apostles only. What is the meaning that we cannot necessarily resolve
it? I think we must Resolve it into a Written Rule, till we see another proved.

Did the Apostles when they went to convert the World, go with Books in their
Hands, or Words in their Mouths? Doubtless, with Words in their Mouths. Or were
those Words a jot less Sacred, when they came from their Mouths, than when they
put them in a Book? Not one jot. Or lastly, does any Command from Christ appear
to write the Book of Scripture, or any Revelation before hand, that it was to
be a Rule of Faith to the future Church? No such matter; and the Accidental
Occasions of its writing at first, and its Acceptance afterward bar any such
pretenses. On the other side, their grand Commission was not scribite, but only
praedicate Evangelium.

I have given an Account so lately of the Reasons and Occasions of writing the
Gospels and Epistles of the New Testament, that I need only here to give these
general Answers.

I. Whatsoever was done as to the Writing the Books of the New Testament, was
done by the immediate Direction and Appointment of the Holy Ghost. Luke, 1.4.
Job. 20.31


II. The Reason given, by the Writers of the Gospels themselves, is, that
Matters of Faith might be delivered with the greatest Certainty.

III. Those Writings were not intended only for the Benefit of the Church then
being, but for future Ages; and thence the Books of Scripture were so received
and esteemed in the Primitive Churches.

IV. The most Ancient Writers of the Christian Church assure us, that the
Apostles wrote the same Doctrine they taught, and for that purpose, that they
might be a Pillar and Foundation of Faith.

V. The most certain way we now have to know what Doctrine the Apostles taught
is by their Writings; since they taught and wrote the same Doctrine; and we are
certain we have the Doctrine they wrote, but we have no other Way to be certain
what Doctrine they taught.

VII. He objects, That the Question being put concerning the New Testament's
containing all Divine Revelations of Christ and his Apostles, I gave no direct
Answer, Third Letter, p. 38.39, 40.
but shuffled it off to Matters necessary to Salvation. The setting out of this
is the Subject of some pages. To which I give an easy Answer.

The Question concerning the New Testament containing all the Divine
Revelations of Christ and his Apostles, may be taken in two Senses.

1. As relating to the entire Object of Faith; and so the Answer was most
direct and plain, to the second Question, That the Rule, whereby we hold all
the same Doctrine, that was taught by Christ and his Apostles, is by the Divine
Revelations contained in the Writings of the New Testament. For since we
believe all that is there, and nothing but what is there, that must contain the
Entire Object of our Faith. And the word All must relate to that.

2. As to all those things which particular Persons are bound to believe, as
contained therein; and so the Question being put, about the Universal Testimony
to assure us, i. e. all particular Christians, That the New Testament contained
all the Divine Revelations of Christ and his Apostles: My Answer was direct and
apposite to this Sense, viz. that the Universal Testimony of the Christian
Church, as to the Book of Scripture, and the Doctrine therein contained, is a
sufficient Ground to make us certain, i. e. all particular Persons, of all
Matters necessary to our Salvation. So that the Substance of my Answer lies in
these three things.

I. That all our Faith is contained in Scripture; and thereby we hold all the
Doctrine taught by Christ and his Apostles.

II. That although all particular Persons may not reach to the entire Object of
Faith contained in Scripture, yet they had thereby a Certainty, as to all
Matters necessary to their Salvation.

III. That the Ground of Certainty as to both these, was the Universal
Testimony of the Christian Church, concerning the Books of Scripture, and the
Doctrine contained therein.

The Words of my Letter are, We are to consider, Second Letter, p. 17.
that the Scripture being our sole and entire Rule of Faith, all Matters
necessary to Salvation, must be supposed to be contained therein; and therefore
the same Testimony, which delivers the Scripture to us, does deliver all the
necessary Articles as contained therein. Which are there received as in the
Lump; and if we receive the Book which contains all, we must by the same
Authority receive all contained in it. As if a Purse be left to a Man by his
Fathers Will, full of Gold and Silver, and this by the Executors be declared to
contain all the Gold and Silver his Father left him they who deliver this Purse
to him from the Executors, do certainly deliver to him all the Gold and Silver
left him by his Father. But if he suspects there was both Gold and Silver left
him by his Father, which was not in that Purse, then he must call in Question
the Integrity of the Executors, who declared that all was contained therein.
This is now the Case of the Christian Church, as to all Divine Truths which
respect Men's Salvation; the Primitive Church, who answer to the Executors in
the other Case, did unanimously declare that all such Truths were undoubtedly
contained in the Written Word. Although therefore there may be a real
Difference in the nature of the Doctrines therein contained, as there is
between Gold and Silver, yet he that receives all, must receive one as well as
the other; and the Matters of Salvation, being of greatest Moment, they that
receive the whole Will of God upon Grounds of Certainty, must be assured that
therein they receive all Matters necessary to our Salvation.

Never was any Purse so rifled as this is by J. S. he examines not only the
Coin in it, but the very Strings and Linings of it. He is a dreadful Man at
Ransacking a Metaphor. Third Letter, p. 40.
He tells me, My Similitude is so far from running on four Legs, that it is in
many regards lame on the right (and indeed only) foot it ought to stand on; and
which is worse, perhaps against my self. The sum of it amounts to this, that
because Scripture contains all, and Protestants have Scripture, therefore they
have all. A strange kind of Discourse! As if, because they have it in a Book,
therefore they have it in their Minds and Souls, in which, and no where else
Faith is to reside.

But was not the Question put, whether we had All the Points of Faith which our
Savior taught? And how could I answer a Question about All, but by showing
where we had All? If All the Doctrine of Christ be there, we must be certain we
have all, if we have the Scripture which contains all. But it is not enough to
have it in a Book. I grant it. But still if you ask, where all my Faith is
contained; I must refer you to that Book which contains All. For I profess to
believe every thing there, and nothing as a Point of Faith, but what is there.
We do not pretend, that it is enough for Persons to say, their Faith is in such
a Book; but we grant that they ought to read and search, and actually believe
what ever they find in that Book; but still all Points are not equally
necessary to all Persons that are therein contained, but all such as are
necessary to Salvation lie there open to the Capacities of all who desire to
know them.

Now this is one of the things J. S. finds fault with this similitude of a
Purse for, viz. That People think it is an easy thing to open, and as easy to
come at the Sense of Scripture, as to take Money out of a Purse: It Is but
plucking the Strings, and the Deed is done. And is this any Disparagement to a
Rule of Faith to be plain and easy? If it were not so, it could not be a Rule
of Faith for all Persons. We do not say, that any Person by opening the
Scriptures, may presently attain to the Certain Sense of all Places of
Scripture; but that which I assert, is, That no Man who sets himself to read
and consider the Scriptures as he ought, and prays for Wisdom from God, shall
miss of knowing all things necessary to his Salvation. But Mr. S. is for
mending the Similitude, and truly he does it after an extraordinary manner. He
will allow the Scripture to be a Purse, provided the Purses Mouth were tied up
with a Knot of such a mysterious contrivance, that none could open it but those
who knew the Mind of the Bequeather; and that the Church, to which it was left
as a Legacy, had knowledge of his Mind, and so could open it, whilst Others
only perplexed themselves more while they went about it.

The Point then between Us, is, whether the Scripture were left only to the
Church to Interpret it to the People in all Points; or whether it were intended
for the general good of the whole Church, so as thereby to direct themselves in
their Way to Heaven; and consequently, whether it may not be opened and
understood by all Persons in Matters that are necessary to their Salvation.

One would think by the Church of Romes management of the Scripture, keeping it
so much out of the Peoples hands, and talking so much of the Danger and
Mischief that comes by it, that they did esteem it just as the Old Romans did
the Sybillin Oracles, which were to be kept up from the view of the People, and
only to be consulted in Cases of great Difficulty, and no farther Questions
were to be asked, but what the Keepers of them declared to be their meaning,
was to be so received without any farther Examination. And this is the Sense of
the Politicians of that Church, concerning the Scripture.

But when they have written like Divines, and have been driven to state the
Controversy truly, they have been forced to such Concessions, as have
overthrown the Political Hypothesis. For,

I. They cannot deny, that the Scripture was designed to be a Certain and
Infallible Rule of Faith to all. This Bellarmin proves in the beginning of his
Controversies; Bell. de Verbo Dei l. 1.2.
where he shows at large, That the Law was the Rule in the Old Testament. To
the Law, and to the Testimony. Blessed are they that search thy Commandments,
etc. That in the New Testament Christ proves his Doctrine by the Scriptures,
and refers the Pharisees to the Scriptures, and confuted the Sadduces out of
them. That the Apostles direct Christians to honor, and esteem, and to rely
upon them. And then he proves, that a Rule of Faith must be Certain and Known;
and for the Scriptures, he says, Nihil est Notius, nihil Certius. Nothing is
more Known, nothing more Certain. How can this be, if there be such Mystical
Knots which tie it together, that none but the Church-Guides can unloose? How
can this then ever be so Known, as to be a Rule of Faith to the People? And not
merely a Rule, but a most Certain and Safe Rule. Which is the greatest
Nonsense in the World, if it cannot be understood by those, who are to make it
their Rule. They may as well say, That Algebra was a Rule for Masons and
Carpenters, and a Jacob's Staff for a Taylor's Measure.

But Mr. S. has beaten his Brains so long about Rules and Rulers, and that
which is ruled and regulated by them, that we must not expect that he should be
tied down to Cardinal Bellarmin's Notions; and therefore I must consider what
he says, after above Twenty years hard labor about these things.

He tells me plainly, Third Letter, p. 81.
I quite mistake the meaning of the word Rule. For (says he) it speaks
Rectitude. No doubt a Right Rule does. But still I mistake his meaning. How so?
There must be a Rectitude in the Rule. That is not it. What then? It must be
evident Rectitude, i. e. Evident to be Right. Not so. I hope we shall come at
it at last. It is such an Evident Rectitude as preserves those who regulate
themselves by it from Obliquity or Deviation, that is, in our Case, from
Error. And is this the wonderful Mystery? There wants but one Word to make it
past dispute, viz. who effectually regulate themselves by it. For Regulating is
an ambiguous Word, and may be taken, either 1. For what a Man takes and
professes to be his Rule which he is to act by; so a Ciceronian regulates
himself by Cicero, i. e. he declares his Manner of Speech to be the Rule he
orders his Speech by. And yet it is very possible that such a Man may use
Phrases which are not Cicero's, for want of sufficient Skill and Care. 2. For
what he does in Conformity to his Rule. And so he does Regulate himself by
Cicero, who does not in the least swerve from his Manner of Speaking. But
Cicero is the Rule to both these. And so the Question here comes to this,
Whether that can be said to be a true Intellectual Rule, which Men through
their own default, and not through any defect in the Rule, may deviate from? If
a Rule be in it self Certain, and be certainly received for a Rule, that is
surely enough to make it a Rule to a Man; but it is not necessary to the being
of a Rule, that a Man can never deviate from it by his own Fault. For, there is
no Intellectual Rule can be assigned, but it is possible for a free Agent to
deviate from; although he do at the same time profess it to be his Rule. Do not
all Christians agree the Commands of Christ to be an Infallible Rule of Life?
And J. S. by his admirable Logic will either prove this not to be a Rule, or
that it is impossible for Men to Sin. For, says he, A Rule speaks Rectitude,
and that such an evident one as preserves those who regulate themselves by it
from Obliquity or Deviation. Yes, says he, this is very plain, those who
Regulate themselves by Christ's Rule, cannot Sin; I grant it, those who do
effectually Regulate themselves by it; but Others may profess this to be their
Rule, and the most Infallible Rule of Life, and yet through their own Fault may
deviate from it. So here Persons may own the Scripture to be a most Certain and
Infallible Rule as to Truth and Falsehood; and they are sure while they
effectually regulate themselves by it, they can never Err; but while they
profess to do it, they may. So that all Mr. S's Subtilty vanishes into nothing,
by so plain and easy a Distinction. Therefore I am still of the mind, that a
Rule of Faith is that whereby we are to judge what we are bound to believe as
to Divine Revelations. No, says J. S. I ought to have said, It is that by
which, while we follow it, we shall be absolutely secured from erring in Faith.
This follows from the Rectitude of the Rule, that while Men keep to it, they
cannot Err; but it does not follow from the Nature of the Rule, that Men must
necessarily follow it. For is it possible for Men to misunderstand a Certain
Rule or not? i. e. such a Rule which if they truly follow, they shall be
secured from Erring: If not, then the Rule must be plain and evident to all
Capacities, to such a degree, that they cannot fail in judging by it. If it be
possible, then, although the Rule be in it self Certain and Infallible, yet it
is possible for Men to Err through such a Mistake, and while they think they
follow the Rule, they may run into Error. And it is strange to me, that Mr. S.
in all this time has not discerned the Fallacy that has misled him. If it
has really misled him, and not been set up by him, on purpose to Confound and
Confute Heretics, as he tells the Cardinals at Rome. But one of that Number
has fully proved, as I have showed already, that the Scripture was intended
for a Rule of Faith to the People; and then it follows from J. S. himself, that
while they Regulate themselves by it, they can never Err. What Reason then can
be given, why such a Rule of Faith should be kept from them? And the Purse be
tied up with so many Mysterious Knots, which are utterly inconsistent with the
Notion of a Rule of Faith.

II. They grant, that there is a great difference in the Points contained in
Scripture; of which some are allowed to be simply necessary to Salvation;
Bellar. de Verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 11.
as those which are required to Baptism; and Bellarmin yields, That all these
Points are certainly contained in Scripture; and were the things which the
Apostles constantly preached to all People. Who cannot be denied to have been
capable of Understanding these things, when they heard them preached; and how
could they lose the Capacity of Understanding them when they were written? And
if they might still Understand them, then the Scripture has no such Mysterious
Knots, but all Points necessary to Salvation may be understood by the People.
So that as to these Points of greatest Importance, the Scripture must be left
as a Legacy to all Christians, and not only to the Guides of the Church.

But J. S. craves leave to Explain himself; and it is great pity to deny it
him. Third Letter, p. 44.
Mistake me not, says he, I do not mean Scriptures Letter is not clear in such
Passages as concern Morality, or the X Commandments; nor in Matters of Fact, as
the Marks or Signs of the Messiah foretold by the Prophets; (Methinks the
Mysterious Knots should have been about Prophecies,) nor in Parables explained
by himself and such like; but in Dogmatical Points or Tenets, which are
Spiritual, and oftentimes profound Mysteries, as a Trinity, Christ's Godhead,
the Real Presence of his Body in the Sacrament, and such like; and in such as
these our Rule is not intelligible enough to keep the Followers of it from
Erring. I Answer, Either the Apostles Preached these Points to all Persons as
necessary to their Salvation, or they did not. If not, how come they to be
necessary to be believed now? If they did, then the People were capable of
Understanding them when they heard them, and therefore may as well understand
them when they read them. I do not mean the Manner as to the Trinity and
Incarnation (as to Transubstantiation, I know nothing in Scripture about it
either as to Thing or Manner) but the Revelation of such a Doctrine. So that if
these Points be owned to be necessary to Salvation, they must be so plain that
Men may understand their Duty to believe them. For, that is the Bound I keep my
self within, that all things Necessary to Salvation, are so plain, that we may
be certain of our Duty to believe them; but if not, we may Err without
Prejudice to our Salvation.

Mr S. asks what I mean by all things necessary to Salvation. Nothing but what
all others do mean by it. Page 48.
Did Christ (says he) teach any unnecessary Points? Alas for him! But are all
Points taught by Christ, or written in Scripture, equally necessary to the
Salvation of all People? No, he says presently after, That he will grant that
fewer means than the Knowledge of all Christ taught, may suffice for the
Salvation of some particular Persons. Very well; now I hope he will make
something of the main business in hand, viz. To prove that Absolute Certainty
of all that Christ Taught, is Necessary to Men's Salvation, when he grants that
some may be Saved, without so much as Knowing all that Christ Taught. To what
purpose was all this Heat about the Certainty of our Faith, as to all that
Christ Taught, if at last some may be Saved without so much as Knowing it? How
does Mr. S. prove, That those some are only the Ignorant People in the Church
of Rome; but that all Ours are tied to no less than Infallible Certainty of all
that Christ Taught. He would have done well, to have proved such a Privilege
for Ignorance to have been limited to their Communion; and that no Claim can be
allowed as to the Circumstances of any other particular Persons. Some few (he
says again) may be Saved without the Knowledge of such and such Points, Page
48.
slender Motives being enough for their Circumstances. I thank Mr. S. for this.
It seems the Point as to Salvation is gained, unless particular Persons among
us can be proved to be none of these few. But wherever they are, it seems they
may be Saved; but I hope, not without True and Saving Faith; whence it follows,
that such Faith has no necessary Relation to these high Points; and there is
no need of Infallible Certainty, as to them, of all Christ Taught. One of these
high Points, is that of Transubstantiation; too high for me and Thousands and
Millions besides, ever to apprehend, let us do our utmost; nay we cannot
apprehend (such is our dullness) that we can have any Certainty, as to Sense or
Reason, if we hold it. We hope therefore J. S. will enlarge his Number, and not
talk only of some Few that may be Saved without the Knowledge of such deep
Mysteries; we desire to be admitted into his Number, for truly our Capacities
can never be stretched so far, as to comprehend the Possibility of
Transubstantiation. Suppose our Motives be slender, yet they are such as move
us to that degree, that we cannot overcome the Reluctancies of Sense, and
Reason, and Revelation, and Tradition against it.

Ibid.
But Mr. S. brings himself off with a Salvo; Though all Points are not necessary
for every particular Person, yet all of them are necessary for the Body of the
Church, whose Pastors are to Instruct their Children in them, and apply the
Efficacy of them to their Souls, as their Capacities admit, and Exigencies
require. It seems still they are not Necessary to particular Persons, but
according to their Capacities and Exigencies, but they are to the Body of the
Church. But how came they to be Necessary to the Body of the Church? For
Instance, The Point of Transubstantiation is a very deep Point; and although
particular Persons may be Saved without believing it, yet I cannot understand
how this deep Point comes to be Necessary, in any Respect, for the Body of the
Church. I hope J. S. will not deny this to be one of his Necessary
Church-Points: Let him then show, how it comes to be so Necessary for the
Pastors of the Church to Instruct their Children in it. My Capacity, I assure
him, will not reach to this, and therefore I hope I may be excused; and in his
own words, my mind is not capable of being cultivated by such elevating
Considerations. I do not believe there is any such danger of the Flocks dying,
Page 49.
or falling short of their full growth they might have had in the Plentiful
Pasturage of the Church, as J. S. elegantly speaks, if they do not believe
Transubstantiation, or any such deep Points.

But still we have no Absolute Certainty of our highest Fundamentals. No? We
affirm the Contrary; and from Absolutely Certain Grounds. It is Absolutely
Certain, that whatever God Reveals is true, and ought to be believed by us. And
we are, as absolutely Certain as Scripture and Reason can make us, that God
has Revealed the Fundamentals of our Faith. But there is Experience to the
Contrary. What Experience? That we are not Certain? We affirm that we are; and
who can tell best? How comes Mr. S. to know we are not Certain when we say we
are? But all are not, as Socinians, etc. What are they to us? Are not we
certain, because some are not Certain? What pitiful Reasoning is this? Is Mr.
S. Certain of his Infallible Ground of Certainty, Oral Tradition? Why do I ask
such a Question? For very good Reason; because there are some not Certain of
it, and even in his own Church; but cry out upon it, as Fallible, Fallacious,
Dangerous, and Destructive of Faith, and leading to Atheism. From whence it
follows, on Mr. S's. Principles, that he cannot be Certain himself, because
others are not. Nay, it is impossible he should have any Certainty on his own
Grounds. For he can have no Rule of Certainty, as I shall evidently prove from
his own Words. A Rule must have Absolute Certainty; Absolute Certainty there
cannot be where Persons are left uncertain; but there are many in the Church of
Rome, that not only doubt of his Rule of Infallible Certainty, but utterly deny
it, and dispute against it. How is it then possible, for him to be certain of
it on his own Grounds?

But it is time to proceed to another Objection against our Rule of Faith.

Third Letter. Page, 50.
VIII. J. S. says, We can be no more certain of our Rule, than we are of the
Truth of the Letter of Scripture; but we cannot be certain we have the Right
Letter, unless we have a Right Translation, and that must be from a true Copy;
no Copy can be true, unless Conformable to the Original; and if there be any
failure in any of these, nay, if we have not absolute Certainty of all these,
we cannot have any absolute Certainty of our Faith.

This Objection, those of the Church of Rome, who believe Scripture to be a
Rule of Faith, (though not the Complete) are concerned to Answer, as well as
we. For, the Matters of Faith contained in Scripture are conveyed to their
Minds after the same manner. But Mr. S. says Their Case is different from
ours. Do not they make the Vulgar Translation Authentic? Page 51.
And will not the same Objections then lie against all those who rely upon it?
Let us see how J. S. clears this Matter: 1. The Canon of the Books comes down,
says he, by the Testimony of all Christian Churches, that are truly Christian.
And we say, the Canon of the Books comes down by the Concurrent Testimony of
all Christian Churches, however differing in other things. And herein, I think,
we have much the advantage. For, we do not except against the Testimony of any
Christian Churches; nor condemn them as not truly Christian till their Cause be
better heard and examined. 2. The Doctrine of Christ, says he, transfused into
the hearts of the faithful, both taught them how, Page 51.
and obliged them to correct the Copy in those particular Texts that concerned
Faith. What is this, but in plain terms to expose the Scriptures to the Scorn
and Contempt of Atheists and Infidels? Who would desire no better a Concession
than this, that the Scripture has been corrected in Matters of Faith,
according to the Faith of the Church. If this be granted, it is impossible to
prove that we have any true Original Texts, in Matters of Faith: For if the
Church did correct the Copy in those particular Texts, which concerned Faith,
according to the Sense of the faithful; then the Church in every Age might so
correct it: and consequently we can never be sure, that the Texts continue the
same for any two Ages together; unless it be first proved impossible for the
Sense of the Church to vary in any two Ages; or of those who think themselves
bound to correct the Texts. And I should be very sorry to have my Faith rest
upon such a slippery Foundation. I will put the Case, as to the Arian
Controversy. How was it possible for the Nicene Fathers to have convinced the
Arians on such a Supposition as this? You allege several Texts of Scripture,
might they say, to prove the Godhead of Christ, and his Equality with the
Father; but how can we know that these were Original Texts, and not corrected
by the Guides of the Church then, according to their own Sense? We do not deny
that there were some leading Men of this Opinion, and having gained a Party to
themselves, they corrected the Texts according to it: And therefore we can
never be satisfied, that these were the Original Texts, because we can bring
down a Tradition of a contrary Sense from the Apostles times. I do not see what
satisfaction they could ever receive, if this pernicious Principle be allowed,
that the Texts were to be corrected in Matters that concern Faith, according to
the Sense of the Church. But he says it is, If any Error, through the
carelessness, unattentiveness, or malice of the Translators, or Transcribers at
any time had crept in. This does not one jot mend the Matter. For if the Faith
of the present Church be the Rule, then the Texts are to be corrected according
to it, and the blame to be laid on the Carelessness or Malice of Translators and
Transcribers. This is a miserable Account of the Certainty of Texts of
Scripture in Points of Faith; As to other Texts of inferior concern, as he
speaks, they could be best corrected, by multitudes of other ancient Copies,
the Churches Care still going along, as was shown in the highest manner, by the
Council of Trent, that so it might be as exact as Human Diligence could well
render it. As to multitudes of Copies they serve us as well as them; but as to
the Care of the Council of Trent, I am by no means satisfied. For 1. They went
no farther than a Translation, and declared that Authentic; without due regard
to the Original Text. 2. The Care taken was not so exact; for then Clemens the
Eighth did great Injury to Sixtus the Fifth, when he recalled and corrected his
Bibles in so many Places after Sixtus the Fifth, had published his for an Exact
Edition. 3. There are still complaints in the Church of Rome of want of
Exactness in the Vulgar Latin. 4. After all this is but Human Diligence, and no
such Absolute Certainty, as J. S. requires from us.

But it may be, he will say, That he does not at all make it his Rule of Faith;
Let him declare so much; and then we know what to Answer. This is still putting
off. Therefore I will give a distinct Answer.

I. We do utterly deny that it is in any Churches Power to correct Original
Texts, because they contradict the Sense of the present Church; or any
Translations any farther, than they differ from the Originals. And I do not
know any assertion that shakes more our Faith, as to the Scripture, than this
of J. S. does.

II. The early Appeals made to Scripture in Matters of Faith, by the Writers of
the Christian Church, make us Certain that there could be no such Alterations
or Corrections of the Texts, according to these use of the Correctors. As for
Instance, we find the Places produced against the Arians used before against
the Samosatenians and Artemonites.

If it be said, They might correct the Fathers to I answer, That there is no
imaginable Ground for any such suspicion; because the Fathers lived in distant
Places and Countries, and therefore when their Testimonies agree about some
places of Scripture alleged by them, there can be no Reason to suspect any
Corruption or Alteration of the Text. As for Instance, no one Text of the whole
New Testament, has been more suspected than that of 1 S. John 5.7. There are
three that bear Record in Heaven, etc. And it cannot be denied, that there has
been great variety, both in the Greek and Latin Manuscripts about it; yea,
there was so in S. Jeroms time, as appears by his Preface to the Canonical
Epistles; who charges the leaving it out to the unfaithfulness of the
Translators. S. Jerome is cried out upon as a Party in this Controversy, and
therefore it is said on the other side, that he put it in as favoring his own
Opinion. But his Integrity is vindicated herein, S. Cyprian. de ^nit. Epist. ad
Jubai.
because S. Cyprian so long before the Arian Controversy produced this Place.
So that our Certainty as to Scripture does not depend upon the mere Letter, but
upon comparing the best and most ancient Copies, with the Writings of the
Fathers, who still made use of the Scriptures in all Discourses and Debates
about Matters of Faith.

III. The variety of Readings in Matters that are not of Faith, cannot hinder
our Certainty in Matters of Faith. We do not pretend, that there is no kind of
variety in the Copies of the New Testament; but I am of Opinion that this
rather establishes than weakens our Faith. For, considering the great
Multitudes of them, and how insignificant they are, it shows that this Book was
liable to the common Accidents of Books; but yet, that there is no such
variety, as to make one suspect any Fraud or Design in the Alterations that
appear in the Manuscript Copies. And as to Translations that have been made
among us, the People who are not able to examine them by the Originals, have no
Reason to suspect them, as to any Matter of Faith. Not merely from the Skill
and Integrity of the Persons, and the Care that has been taken, but because it
was so much the Concernment of some Men to have lessened the Credit of our
Translations, as much as was possible, and they have not been able to produce
any thing that might shake the Faith of a considering Man.

If it be said after all, This is but Human Faith, and not Divine; I answer,

IV. We must be careful to distinguish the Certainty of Human and Divine Faith
in this Matter. We do not pretend that we have an Absolute Divine Certainty of
things that are only capable of Human Certainty; and we do not say, that we
have only Human Certainty of things capable of Divine Certainty. If the
Question be put concerning the Objects of Divine Faith, then we do answer, That
we have a Divine Certainty of them from those things, which are the proper
Evidence of Divine Revelation. We believe the Doctrine of Christ with a Divine
Faith, because it was confirmed by Miracles and Prophecies: We believe the New
Testament to be written by the Holy Spirit, because the Promise of the Spirit
was fulfilled upon them; and especially in a thing of so great Concernment to
the whole Christian Church. But if the Question be asked only concerning a
Matter of Fact, as whether the Books that bear such Names were written by the
Persons, whose Names they bear; then I can have no greater Certainty than
belongs to a Matter of Fact; but then it is so circumstantiated, that I have a
greater and more absolute Certainty, as to this, then any other Matter of Fact
which wants the Proofs that this has. And if as to Books, and Copies, and
Translations, we have as high a Certainty, as the thing is capable of, it is
madness to expect and require more. For where there is but a Human Testimony,
there cannot be the Certainty of Divine Faith, which must not only have a
Divine Object, but must rest on a Divine Testimony; but where the Testimony is
Human, the Certainty must be such as relates to the highest of that kind. But
still, such a Faith may have Absolute Certainty of its kind; and although in
regard of its Testimony it be Human Faith, yet in regard both of its Object,
its inward Cause, and its Effects, it may be truly called Divine.

IX. The last Objection is, concerning the Number of Canonical Books. Third
Letter, p. 58.
Pray satisfy us (says Mr. S.) about this exact Number of Books; and how many
will just serve turn. One would think by his Objections, J. S. were preparing
Matter for the Critical History of the New Testament, he seems so concerned to
lessen the Authority of it. But I shall Answer the Objections he offers.

Page 56.
1. There may have been Books lost that were written by Persons divinely
inspired, and we have no unanimous Consent of the Christian Church that there
is none lost; and those Books might contain Matters different from, or to be
superadded to the Canon we have now; and without this, we can have no
Certainty, that the Books we have now, contained all the Divine Revelations. I
Answer,

I. If we have the unanimous Consent of the Christian Church, that we have the
Canon of the New Testament entire, then we have their Consent, that there is no
Book, written by Divine Inspiration, lost. And this appears by the Contest in
the IV. Century, about the just Number of the Canonical Books; The Churches
then differed about some Books not then Universally received; as the Apocalypse
in some, and the Epistle to the Hebrews in others. Which shows, that the
Churches were then so solicitous to preserve any Books that appeared to be
written by Persons Inspired, that although these did then want Universal
Consent, yet they were still kept, and read, and dispersed, till upon further
Examination they came to be Universally read. It is not therefore in the least
probable they should suffer any Apostolical Writings to be lost.

II. This is to charge the Christian Church with so gross a Neglect, as
overthrows the force of all his Arguments for Tradition. For we must suppose an
Apostolical Writing sent to some Church by Direction of the Holy Spirit, and
yet that Church be so notoriously careless, as to lose a Book containing in it
many Points of Faith; now I appeal to any one of common Sense, whether he could
trust their Word for Matters of Faith, who could be so negligent as to lose a
great many Points of Faith at once. And the more such a Book were dispersed,
the Argument is still stronger against Tradition. Besides, this shows the great
Insufficiency of Oral Tradition, if these Points of Faith are lost; because
such a Book was lost, wherein they were contained. If Tradition had been so
effectual a Means of Conveying Matters of Faith, it should have appeared in
such a Case, viz. in preserving such Matters of Faith, though the Books were
lost: But we find nothing like this, so much as pretended. Although it were
much easier pretended than proved.

III. This is to suppose the Providence of God not to be immediately concerned
in preserving Books written by Divine Inspiration. Mr. S. does really suppose
that Books written by Divine Inspiration may have been lost, or at least that
we cannot prove that they are not: But we think it a considerable Proof, that
they could not, because the Divine Providence does so immediately concern it
self in preserving that which tends so much to the Good of his Church. If a
Hair does not fall from our Heads, nor a Sparrow fall on the Ground, without
the Providence of God (as our Savior affirms) is it not very unreasonable to
suppose that a Divine Book, Mat. 10.29, 30.
written for the Benefit of the Christian Church, should be wholly lost?
Especially considering the extraordinary Care the first Christians took, in
Times of the greatest Persecutions, to preserve the Scriptures; and no force or
violence could extort them out of their hands. On Mr. S's Supposition, it was
no hard Matter for a Book of Scripture to be lost, viz. if the several Books
had been committed to the Custody of some Men in Trust for the whole Church;
but if we consider the things as they really were, it will appear hardly
possible. For the Books were not kept up at first in a few hands, but dispersed
abroad in multitudes of Copies, and received with mighty Veneration both on the
Account of the Authors of them, and the Matters contained in them. They were
read both in Public and in Private, they heard them in their Assemblies, and
they made them their constant Employment at home; they were their Rule of Life,
as well as of Faith. And how is it possible to suppose any Book so received, so
esteemed, so dispersed, so constantly read, could be suffered to be lost among
Christians?

If it be Objected, That they were not all so esteemed at first, as appears by
the Epistle to the Hebrews, and therefore might more easily be lost; I Answer,
That however they were not universally received at first, yet they were by
those Churches to whom they were written; and among them they were not kept up,
but mightily dispersed; so that there was no way to lose them, from the first
spreading of them abroad; unless we can suppose such multitudes of Christians
to conspire together to suppress a Book of so great Concernment to themselves.
As if Persons who claim an Estate by virtue of some Deeds, should all agree to
imbezel them, or any material part of them. Here was no pretense for Registers
and Abridgments, which some make use of to lessen the Authority of the Books of
the Old Testament; for here we have the very Authentic Writings of the
Apostles, and their own Epistles in their own style and Expressions. And
supposing the Churches, to whom they were sent, to have received them as their
Writings, and to have communicated them to others, as they did, I do not see,
under these Circumstances, how a Book, containing Divine Revelations, could be
lost.

II. He Objects, Page 58.
That the Canon of Scripture was not entire, but deficient for some hundreds of
years, till the whole Canon was collected and acknowledged, and therefore so
long the Church had no Perfect Rule of Faith.

I Answer,

I. I distinguish between a Complete Rule of Faith, and a Complete Canon of
Scripture. For, if the Books owned and universally received, contain in them
all Matters of Faith, then the Rule of Faith is Complete, although some
particular Books may be still in Dispute. As for Instance, it is certain, that
in St. Jerome's Time, the Church of Rome did not receive as Canonical the
Epistle to the Hebrews; Had not that Church therefore a Complete Rule of Faith?
If God has so abundantly provided for his Church, that there may be a full
Revelation of all Points of Faith in the rest, then the disputing the Authority
of such an Epistle, does not derogate from the Compleatness of the Rule of
Faith. For, if they have all Points of Faith, they must have a Complete Rule of
Faith.

II. It is no Prejudice to the true Canon of Scripture, that some particular
Books of the New Testament were for some time disputed by some particular
Churches. For, if it were done without Ground, it does reflect more on those
Churches than on those Books; especially when those very Churches afterward
received them. And this was the Case of the Church of Rome, as to the Epistle
to the Hebrews: St. Jerome affirms, That not only the Greek Churches all
received it, Hieronym. ad Dardanum.
but that all the Ancient Writers did so; and not merely as an Ecclesiastical,
but as a Canonical Epistle. Therefore this must be a late thing in the Church
of Rome; and in probability, began upon the Novatian Controversy, which
Epistle was thought too much to favor the Novatian Doctrine; and when that
Controversy did abate, that Epistle recovered its Authority in the Church of
Rome. But Mr. S. is angry with me, Third Letter, p. 57.
for reflecting on the Church of Rome for not receiving the Epistle to the
Hebrews in St. Jerome 's Time; which (he thinks) was an Act of Prudence,
antecedent to the Judgment or Determination of any Church, whether Greek or
Latin. One may see by this how well versed he is in the Canon of Scripture,
when St. Jerome declares, that not only all the Greek Writers received it, but
all the Ancient, and that as Canonical. Was here no antecedent Judgment of the
Church in this Matter? Does not the Consent of all Ancient Writers, even in St.
Jerome's Time, make a Judgment of the Church? But he adds, That what I make a
heinous Crime in the Church of Rome, was a commendable Caution in it. That
which I said, was, That it hence appeared, that the Church of Rome was far from
being believed then to have the Authority of making the Canon of Scripture, or
being Infallible in Faith. And what says J. S. in Answer to this? Not one
Syllable, but runs it off to another thing.

But why do I not as well blame the Greek Churches for not receiving the
Apocalypse? They do not pretend to such Authority and Infallibility in this
Matter, as the Church of Rome does. I do not deny that there were some Greeks
then to blame in rejecting the Apocalypse, but Bellarmin says, they were but
few and obscure Persons; and he produces the Testimonies of Justin Martyr,
Irenaeus, Theophilus Antiochenus, Melito Sardensis, Dionysius Alexandrinus,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin and Athanasius, all approving it. And the Occasion
of disputing it arose from the Millenary Opinion, which some thought they could
not confute, as long as the Apocalypse had such Authority in the Church.

And such Disputes as these, which wore off by degrees, are no real Prejudice
to the Canon of the New Testament, which was at first generally received; and
although some few Books were contested for a time, yet they recovered their
Authority, and have ever since been received by the Universal Consent of all
Christian Churches.

III. He Objects against this Universal Consent, the Testimonies of Marcion,
Ebion, Valentinus, Cerinthus, Third Letter, p. 59.
and Epiphanius his other Heretics, who rejected the Canon of the New
Testament. Could any Man but J. S. make such an Objection as this? But he had a
mind to bring me in as a Favourer of all Heretics; and, as such another Man of
Integrity has done, of all Anti-Catholick and Antichristian Doctrines. But
where have I given any Occasion for such spiteful Reflections? All that I said,
was, We have the Universal Consent of all Christian Churches for the Canon of
the New Testament, i. e. Of all since the time, that the Epistle to the Hebrews
was received in the Latin, and the Apocalypse in the Greek Churches;
notwithstanding all the Divisions they have since fallen into, yet they had no
Difference as to the Canon of the New Testament. And this I insisted on as the
Ground of our Certainty, viz. The Unanimous Consent of all the great Bodies of
Christians, that have continued under different Denominations to this day.

Page 74.
To this he gives no other Answer, but that my Answer to the Fifth Question, is
co-incident with that to the Fourth. I thought J. S. in the Self-evident way,
would have liked my Answer the better for it. But he does not comprehend the
design of it. I had said before, That we relied on the Universal Testimony of
the Christian Church; upon that the Question was asked, What I meant by the
Christian Church: My Answer was, That it was that which was made up of all
Christian Churches; i. e. says J. S. That all the Parts make the Whole; and
what Incongruity is there? When Mr. G. said, That the Christian Church may be
taken in several Latitudes, he desired to know in what Sense I took it; and
could I answer him more directly than to tell him, I took it in the largest
Sense, as it was made up of all the Parts; and not in such a Sense as they do,
who give the Denomination of the Whole to a Part? Page 75.
But by this I do not seclude all Heretics. I do not take upon me to judge of
all the Bodies of Christians in the World, whether they be justly charged with
Heresy or not; but I take them only as Christians, and from their Universal
Consent, I prove the Certainty of the Canon of Scripture. Hereby I profess a
Brotherhood with Excrementitious Outcasts. I know not what Brotherhood lies in
making use of their Testimony; but I had rather do it, than with unsufferable
Pride and Folly call so many Bodies of Christians; for whom Christ died,
Excrementitious Outcasts. But although he seems to own that their Testimony
does strengthen the Evidence for the Canon of the New Testament; yet he calls
it back again, Page 76.
and for extraordinary Reasons. 1. They may have corrupted the Letter of
Scripture, although they may allow of the Books. Let us then take their
Testimony for the Books, and examine the Letter afterward. 2. This Universal
Testimony must reach to each Chapter and Verse; Page 57.
but we must have Assurance not only of each Verse, but of each significant
Word in the Verse. How hardly are some Men satisfied about the Certainty of
Scripture! Are there not different Copies in all Parts to examine and compare,
if there be cause of Mistrust; and if there be none, What Prejudice is this to
our Certainty? At this rate, Men may argue against every thing; and that there
can be no Certainty of any Writing, unless the Person stood by and saw the
Author write; and even then he might question his Senses too. These Objections
do indeed lead to an Incurable Skepticism in the Church of Rome. Page 76.
3. The Judges suspect the Justness of the Cause, if known Knights of the Post
are called in to corroborate the Evidence. What a desperate Cause is that,
which forces Men to fling such Dirt in the Face of so many Christian Churches?
And that without the least Evidence or Proof against them. How come all the
Greek, Abyssine, Coptick, Oriental Christians, to be compared to Knights of the
Post, because they afford a Concurrent Testimony with us about the Canon of the
New Testament? They may be the honestest and best Part of Christendom, for any
thing J. S. knows; and what Justice can there be in such Uncharitable Censures?
It is not enough for you to say, They are all accounted Heretics or
Schismatics by you; for we that know how unjust and unreasonable your Censures
are so near home, have no Cause to regard them at such a distance.

Thus I have Answered all the Objections I have met with in J. S. against our
Rule of Faith.

I now come to the last part of my Task, which is to examine the Arguments
produced to prove the Infallibility of Oral and Practical Tradition.

First Letter p. 8.
The main Argument is thus set down by Mr. S. All Traditionary Christians
believe the same to day which they did yesterday, and so up to the time of our
Blessed Savior; and if they follow this Rule, they can never err in Faith, and
therefore are Infallible. And they could not innovate in Faith, unless they did
forget what they held the day before, or out of malice after it.

All the Parts of this Argument Mr. S. endeavors to show to be Self-evident;
but in truth it is a Self-evident Fallacy; as I shall show at large. But before
I particularly lay it open, I must consider what he says against the Method I
used in the Conference for answering it.

I then thought, and do still, that the clearest Answer to an Argument, which
proves a thing impossible was to bring an undeniable Instance that such a thing
really was, which was proved impossible to be. And to this purpose I produced
the Instance of the Greek Church, which professed to follow Tradition, and yet
they could not deny to have erred.

This Mr. S. says, Is giving no Answer at all; for this is no Answer to his
Argument, Page 10.
but producing a new Argument against him. And he magisterially tells me, That
it is my turn to answer; and therefore I am confined to Concedo, Nego or
Distinguo: as the Propositions are either true, false or ambiguous, or I may
deny the Inference, if I find more terms in the Conclusion than in the
Premises. But these are my Bounds which I must not exceed. But with submission
to these Logicians, I answer, That where an Argument is designed to prove a
thing impossible, which is contrary to Sense and Experience, the producing an
evident Instance is the plainest and shortest way of Answering; as well as in
an Induction which is allowed to be disproved by a plain Instance. As in the
Case of Zeno's Argument against Motion; Diogenes his Moving was a far more
effectual Answer, than if he had stood a great while with his Concedo, Nego and
Distinguo. J. S. confesses, That the vanity of Zeno 's Argument was not ill
ridiculed by Diogenes his moving before him. Page 11.
And why might not I then expose the vanity of this Demonstration by the
Instance of the Greek Church; unless some fault be found in the Instance. He
brings the Argument, and I an Instance against it, what are People the wiser?
and which shall they be for; the Argument or the Instance? Zeno brought his
Argument, and Diogenes his Instance; were not Bystanders the wiser, when it so
apparently proved the foppery of the Argument? Does J. S. think the vanity of
it was not enough exposed by that means? But he says, This is excepting
against the Conclusion, when there lies none against the Premises. No such
Matter; for it shows there is a Fallacy in the Premises: It is however but an
Argument, ad hominem; call it what you will, so it does my business; Page 12.
to show the vanity of the Demonstration. This way does but sham an Adversary.
And truly that is a great matter, if they be such as P.G. They are of no use
for discovery of Truth. As much as laying open Sophistry helps to the discovery
of Truth; which is not a little when we deal with Sophistical Disputers.

But we come to the Instance. How does he after all clear this Instance of the
Greek Church? Does he deny that they hold to Tradition? No. Does he deny that
they have erred notwithstanding? All that he says is, Page 13.
That P. G. was no ways obliged not to deny that the Greek Church had erred in
Points of Faith. No? then he must grant that the Roman Church has erred, for
they contradict each other. Let him take his choice; one does my business as
well as the other, and more effectually destroys the pretense of Infallibility
in the Roman Church. But I say, they did not err. What is my saying to the
business in hand? Besides, there are other Points contradictorily held between
the Greek and Roman Churches, besides that of the Filioque and the Argument
holds as well in any other, as in that. And therefore he must fix the Error on
one side or other.

After all this flourishing he takes heart, and resolves to grapple with the
Instance. Let us see what your Instance will do. Page 14.
Now I thought we shall have a direct Answer. But I am strangely disappointed.
For he runs still back to that, That I do not believe it erred. Was the
Instance brought against me, or against P. G? But his Answer does not make or
mar the business. The business of the Demonstration it does, and that was my
business. But this does not prove that a Church going upon Tradition errs, Page
15.
unless I will grant that the Greek Church has erred. What strange Trifling is
this? The Dispute was about P. G's. Argument, and not my Opinion. Is this the
Answer to the Instance about the Greek Church which Mr. M. promised? If this
pass for an Answer, I think J. S. may defend Sure footing. I mentioned P. G's.
Answer, That the Greek Church followed Tradition till the Arians left that
Rule, and took up a new one. And why says J. S. has he not answered well?
Because he did not answer to the purpose; which was not about the Arians, but
the present Greek Church. But a Church may follow Tradition at one time, and
leave it at another. Very true; but the Greek Church did not forsake Tradition,
and yet erred. And therefore Tradition and Error were found together, and
therein lies the force of this undeniable Instance. The rest is such Trifling,
that I am really ashamed to answer it over and over. Still he attempts to give
an Answer, and still fails; but it is something new, and therefore shall be
considered. His Answer, says J. S. holds as well as to the present as past
Greek Church. His answer! Where is it? Page 16.
It was that those who err in Faith must leave Tradition. But the Greeks did
not leave Tradition, and yet erred in Faith; so that the Instance holds good
still. He denies that Error and Tradition can be found together in the Greek
Church, or any other Ancient or Modern, i. e. the Conclusion must be held
against all the Instances in the World. But I ought to say, whether the
differences were in matters of Faith. Yes, in such which the Church of Rome
accounts matters of Faith. But how can an erring Church still plead Tradition
and adhere to it? Answer the Instance; for the Greek Church does plead
Tradition. But then pleading Tradition is no more but quoting some Expressions
of ancient Writers, as the Arians did: Not so neither; for the Greek Church
relies most upon Tradition from Father to Son in Practice of any Church in the
World. But if they adhere to Tradition, and that Tradition leads them to
Christ, who could not err, how can they possibly err? For, pray did Christ
teach any Error? No certainly. When a Father believed what Christ taught him,
and the Son what the Father believed, did not the Son too believe what Christ
taught? Run it on to the last Son that shall be born in the World, must not
every one believe what Christ taught, if every one believed what his Father
believed?

And so Goodnight to the Greek Church; we are come back to the Argument. Page
19.
I might as well have Instanced in the Latin Church it self. Truly I think so
too; and so you shall find in a short time; and how little Advantage you get by
such a Challenge.

Page 20.
But it is impossible for a Church to adhere to Tradition, and yet to Err;
therefore if the present Greek Church have Erred, it has not adhered to
Tradition; if it have adhered to Tradition, it has not Erred. That is, the
Argument must be good, let the Instance be what it will. But an easy
Distinction will show the Weakness of this Argument.

Adhering to Tradition may be taken Two ways.

I. For Adhering to Tradition, as the Rule and Means of Conveyance of Matters
of Faith.

II. For actually Adhering to that very Doctrine which Christ taught, and has
ever since been truly conveyed down by Tradition.

In this latter Sense we grant it impossible for Men to Err, while they
actually adhere to that very Doctrine which Christ taught, and is supposed to
be delivered down by Tradition. But this is not the Matter before us; which
lies in these Two Points.

I. Whether Tradition be an Infallible Way to convey the Doctrine of Christ
down to us.

II. Whether it be impossible for those who hold to This as Their Rule, to Err
or not.

And so the Answer is plain to the main Argument. If by Traditionary
Christians, be meant such as adhere to that very Doctrine which Christ taught,
and was actually conveyed down to them, then such Traditionary Christians, so
believing, cannot Err.

But if by Traditionary Christians be meant such as take Tradition for an
Infallible Rule of conveying all Matters of Faith; then we say such
Traditionary Christians may and have Erred: And that for Two Reasons.

I. Because Tradition is no Infallible Rule.

II. Because although it were, yet Men might Err, either by mistaking it, or
departing from it.

But says J. S. Page 8.
They cease to be Traditionary Christians if they do not believe the same to
Day which they did Yesterday, and so up to Christ.

If by Traditionary Christians be meant, they do not really believe what Christ
taught, we grant it, that they are.

If by Traditionary Christians be meant such as bear the Name of Traditionary
Christians, and look on Tradition as their Rule, and imagine they have the same
Faith which Christ taught; then they are still Traditionary Christians.

And now I am to give a clear and distinct Answer to the Demonstration of the
Infallibility of Oral Tradition, as it is managed by J. S. and taken into
Propositions.

I. All Traditionary Christians believe the same to day which they did
yesterday, and so up to the time of our Blessed Savior. J. S. hopes I have
nothing to say to this; but he is mistaken. For I have many things to say to
lay open the Notorious Fallacy of it in every Clause.

I. All Traditionary Christians. Who are they? Are all Christians Traditionary
Christians? This were to the purpose, if it could be proved. But how does this
appear? Why is it not said, All Christians have gone upon this Principle? He
knew this could never have been proved. And therefore he puts in the thing in
dispute, and would have it taken for granted, that there were no other but
Traditionary Christians. Which I deny, and I am certain he can never prove it.
Suppose then that there were Christians not Traditionary as well as
Traditionary, the Proposition appears ridiculous; so far is it from
Demonstration. Traditionary Christians believed so; Non-Traditionary Christians
believed otherwise; and which are to be believed, is the Question; and that to
be determined by the Certainty of the Ground they went upon; and so we are come
to the Debate between Scripture and Tradition.

II. All Traditionary Christians believe the same to Day which they did
Yesterday. This is capable of a threefold meaning.

I. That they do actually believe the same to Day which they did Yesterday.
Which is a mere contingent thing, and proves nothing. Or,

II. That they are bound to believe to Day, as they did Yesterday. And that may
be on several Accounts.

I. Because they see Evidence from the Word of God to Day as well as they did
Yesterday.

II. Or because their Guides of the Church teach them the same to Day which
they did Yesterday, whom they believe to be Infallible.

III. Or, merely because they receive it by an Oral Tradition, and not on the
other Accounts; and then it proves no more than that they are bound to do it;
and it is too well known that many fail to do what they are bound to.

Or III. That they do Infallibly believe the same to Day which they did
Yesterday. But then this ought to have been inserted in the Proposition, That
Traditionary Christians cannot fail to believe to Day what they did Yesterday.
If it be said, That this is employed in their being Traditionary Christians,
then I say, the whole is a Fallacy of (...), for he supposes all true
Christians to be Traditionary Christians, and then that they Infallibly hold to
Tradition as their Rule, and from thence he proves Tradition to be Infallible.
But if the Body of Christians may go upon another Rule, or if going upon
Tradition, they may misunderstand it, then there is no inseparable connection in
the several Links of this Chain.

And there is a further Fallacy in supposing that if any change in Faith
happens, it must be as sudden and remarkable, as if all Men should to day
refuse to believe what they believed Yesterday. Whereas the changes of Opinions
are oft-times wrought by insensible Degrees, and many concurrent Causes; and
sometimes the very same Words may be used and the Faith altered, as in the Case
of Merit, Sacraments, Sacrifice, etc. which shows Men may continue the very
same Terms, and yet believe quite a different thing. And where Changes are
gradual, it is very unreasonable to pitch upon such a precise and narrow space
of time, as between to Day and Yesterday. By the same Method, one may
demonstrate it to be impossible that any Language should be changed; for People
speak the same Language to Day which they did Yesterday and the same Yesterday
which they did the Day before, and so up to the very building of Babel; and yet
we all know that Languages are continually changed, and to such a degree, that
in some Ages they cannot understand, what was at that time intelligible by all.
In such cases, it is enough to assign the general Causes and Reasons of
Alterations without fixing a precise and determinate Time. And those I shall
speak to afterward.

III. And so up to the time of our Blessed Savior.

To prove any thing from hence it must be showed,

I. That there can be no Pretense to Tradition taken up without Ground; for if
there may, it can by no means follow, That if Men pretend to Tradition, that
Tradition must run up to the Time of Christ.

But then they cease to be Traditionary Christians. What then? Not in pretense,
for they may call themselves so still; but in reality they are not.

II. That if Men lay claim to a Rule they must always observe it. We do not
pretend to it as to the Scripture: And what Reason is there for it as to
Tradition? But if Men may pretend to follow Tradition, and do not, then from
their being Traditionary Christians, it can by no means follow that this
Tradition must be carried up to the Time of our Blessed Savior.

II. The second Proposition is, And if they follow this Rule, they can never
err in Faith. This is palpably self evident, says J. S. So say I too, but it
is only to be a mere Fallacy.

To follow this Rule is to believe the same to Day which they did Yesterday,
and so up to Christ, or downwards: If they did this from Christ's time, and so
forwards, they must continue to believe the same to the End of the World.

If they really believe the same Doctrine which Christ taught, no doubt they
cannot err. But the Question is, Whether this be an Infallible Rule for us to
Judge, they could never mistake in this Rule, nor follow any other: For if
either of these could happen, the Demonstration is lost. If it were possible
for Errors to come in some other Way, or for Persons to misapprehend the
Doctrine delivered; then it is not possible for us by this Way to be convinced
they could not err. The latter I have already spoken to; I shall now show that
there were some other ways that Errors might come in. And here I shall pass
over the Common Infirmities of Human Nature, which I think Oral Tradition can
never Cure, and which leave Men always liable to Error; but I shall name some
more particular Ways of introducing them.

I. By the Authority of False Teachers. And for this I shall not run back to
the False Apostles and Seducers in the Apostles times and afterward; but I
shall bring a present Instance in the Church of Rome; and that is of Michael de
Molinos, a Person solemnly condemned at Rome, Aug. 28. of this Year for 68
Propositions taken out of his Books and owned by himself, as the Decree says;
which are there said to be Heretical, Erroneous, Blasphemous, Offensive, Rash,
Seditious, and contrary to Christian Discipline. This Man is said to have had
Thousands of Disciples in Italy, in the very Heart of the Traditionary Church.
Now, I desire J. S. to inform me, If Tradition be Infallible, and that be the
Way followed in the Church of Rome, how it was possible for such Multitudes to
be deceived in Matters of such Consequence? To say they were not deceived, is
to expose the Authority of the Guides of the Church of Rome to the greatest
Contempt; To say they were deceived, is to own, That notwithstanding Tradition,
a single Priest may gain such Authority, as to deceive Thousands; and where
lies then the Infallibility of Tradition?

II. By Enthusiasm, or a Pretense to Immediate Revelation. For this I shall not
produce the Old Instances in Ecclesiastical History, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 3. c. 14.
c. 28. l. 7. c 31.
as of Montanus, Asclepiades, Theodotus, Manichaeus, Arius, AEtius, etc. who
all pretended to Revelations for their particular Opinions. But I shall keep to
the late Instance of Molinos, Theod. l. 1. c. 4. l. 2.
who asserts, That the Perfection of a Christian State lies in a Simple, Pure,
Infused and Perfect Contemplation, above the Use of Ratiocination or Discursive
Prayer, and that in order to this, nothing is so necessary as
Self-annihilation. This Doctrine is now condemned at Rome; but how came it into
the Church; Did not they believe the same to Day which they did Yesterday? If
there were Oral Tradition for it, how came it to be condemned? If not, then
notwithstanding Oral Tradition, dangerous Doctrines may get in under a pretense
of a more Sublime and Spiritual Way of Perfection, than is to be attained in
the Dull and Heavy Way of Tradition from Father to Son.

III. By a Pretense to a more Secret Tradition. And thus Christianity was at
first corrupted, by such as pretended that there was a Mystical Doctrine
delivered by Christ of a more purifying Nature, than the Plain and Common
Doctrine taught to all People by the Apostles. So Hegesippus in Eusebius
affirms, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 32. l. 4. c. 22.
That the Christian Church was corrupted by this Means; and to the same Purpose
Irenaeus. So that Tradition was so far from securing the Church from Error,
that it was the Means of bringing it in. And the Public Tradition could not
hinder this coming in of Error, because the Secret Tradition was pretended to
be more Divine and Spiritual; the other was only for Babes, and this for grown
Christians.

IV. By Differences among Church-Guides about the Sense of Scripture and
Tradition. Thus it was in the Samosatenian, Arian, Pelagian, Nestorian, and
Eutychian Controversies. Neither of the Parties disowned Scripture or
Tradition; and those who were justly condemned, pretended still to adhere to
both. And if such Flames could not be prevented, so much nearer the Apostles
Times, by the help of Tradition, What Reason can there be to expect it so long
after?

V. By too great a Veneration to some particular Teachers, not far from the
Apostolical Times, in regard to their Learning or Piety; which made their
Disciples despise Tradition in Comparison of their Notions. And thus Origens
Opinions came to prevail so much in the Church; and the Mixture of Platonism
with Christianity proved the occasion of several Errors, with Respect to the
State of Souls after Death, as well as in other Points.

VI. By Compliance with some Gentile Superstitions in Hopes to gain more easily
upon the Minds of the People; who having been long accustomed to the Worship of
Images and Tutelar Deities, it was thought no Imprudent Thing in some Guides of
the Church, when the main Doctrines of Paganism were renounced, to humor the
People in these things; so they were Accommodated to Christianity; but others
vehemently opposed this Method, as repugnant to the True Primitive
Christianity. But by Degrees, those Superstitions prevailed; and the Original
Tradition of the Church thereby corrupted.

VII. By Implicit Faith; which puts it into the Power of the Church-Guides to
introduce what Doctrines they thought fit. When the best of the People were
told it was against the Fundamental Rights of the Catholic Church for them to
examine any Opinions which were proposed to them by their Guides, That they
neither did, nor could, nor ought to understand them; and when once this Point
was gained, People never troubled themselves about Scripture or Tradition; for
all they had to do, was only to know what was decreed by the Church, though
with a Non-obstante to a Divine Institution; as is plain in the Council of
Constance, notwithstanding all the Tricks to avoid it.

If then, Errors might come into the Church all these ways, what a vain thing
is it to pretend, That Oral Tradition will keep from any possibility of Error?

And so I need give no other Answer to his last Proposition, That if Men did
innovate in Faith, it must be either through Forgetfulness or Malice; for I
have showed many other Causes besides these; especially since I intend to show
in a particular Discourse how the Errors and Corruptions we charge on the
Church of Rome did come into it: My design here being only to show the
Possibility of it.

There remain only two things which deserve any Consideration: 1. About the
Charge of Pelagianism. 2. About the Council of Trents Proceeding on Tradition;
which will admit of an easy Dispatch.

I. As to the Charge of Pelagianism. It does not lie in this, That he requires
any Rational Inducements to Faith, which we do assert as well as he. But it lay
in these Two things.

I. That a Divine Faith was to be resolved into a Natural Infallibility. For we
were told that Divine Faith must have Infallible Grounds; and when we come to
examine them, we find nothing but what is Natural. And now to avoid the Charge
of Pelagianism, this Divine Faith is declared to be mere Human Faith; Third
Letter, p. 24.
and so Human Faith is said to have Infallible Grounds, but Divine Faith must
shift for it self. For says J. S. It Is confessed and ever was, that the Human
Authority of the Church or Tradition, begets only Human Faith as its Immediate
Effect; but by bringing it up to Christ, it leads us to what is Divine. Well;
but what Infallible Ground is there for this Divine Faith? Where does that fix?
Is it on the Infallibibility of Tradition or not? If not, then we may have
Divine Faith without it. If it does, then Divine Faith is to be resolved into
Natural Means: And what is this but Pelagianism?

II. That he excludes the Pious Disposition of the Will, Faith Vindicated, p.
155.
from piecing out (as he calls it) the Defect of the Reasons why we Believe.
And in another place he excludes the Wills Assistance in these words, That
Faith, or a Firm and Immovable Assent upon Authority is not thoroughly
Rational, Page 157.
and by consequence partly Faulty, if the Motives be not alone able to convince
an Understanding rightly disposed without the Wills Assistance. How then can a
pious Disposition of the Will be necessary in order to the Act of Faith? And is
it not Pelagianism to exclude it?

Therefore I was in the right, when I said, That this way of Oral Tradition
resolves all into a mere Human Faith; and that this is the unavoidable
Consequence of it. No, he says, he resolves all into Christ's and the Apostles
teaching. Page 27.
How ridiculous is this? For, did not Pelagius and Coelestius the very same?
And the thing I charged upon them, was, That they went no farther upon this
Principle than they did. Upon this he asks a very impertinent Question; but if
I do not Answer it, I know what Clamours will follow. Pray do you hold that
Christ is a mere Man, or that Believing him is a mere Human Faith, or that the
Doctrine taught by Him or Them is merely Human? What Occasion have I given for
such a Question? But I perceive there is a design among some, to make me be
believed to be no Christian. I pray God forgive the Malice of such Men. I thank
God, I have better Grounds for my Faith than Oral Tradition. I do believe
Christ to be more than mere Man, even the Eternal Son of God, and that his
Doctrine is Divine, and his Apostles had Infallible Assistance in delivering
it. But what is all this to the present Question? I perceive some men when they
are hard pinched, cry out, that their Adversaries are Atheists or Socinians,
etc. and hope by this means to divert them from the business before them. But
these Arts will not do. And such a Dust cannot so blind the Readers Eyes, but
he must see it is raised on purpose, that he may not be discerned in making an
Escape.

II. As to the Council of Trents proceeding upon Tradition. That which I said,
was, The Church of Rome has no where declared in Council, that it has any
such Power of making Implicit Articles of Faith contained in Scripture to
become Explicit by its explaining the Sense of them. And the Reason I gave,
was, Because the Church of Rome does not pretend to make New Articles of Faith:
But to make Implicit Doctrines to become Explicit, is really so to do; as I
there proved. Now what says J. S. to this?

I. He says, That the Council of Trent defines it belongs to the Church to
judge of the True Sense and Interpretation of Scripture. As though all that
belonged to the Church, must presently belong to the Church of Rome; or all
Judgment of Scripture must be Infallible; or must make things necessary to be
believed which were not so before.

II. He shows, That the Church did proceed upon this Power. What Power? Of
making things not Necessary to become Necessary?

I. It declares Sess. 13. That from some Texts mentioned, the Church was ever
persuaded of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. This is an admirable Argument,
to prove, that it can make that Necessary to be believed, which was not,
because it was always believed.

II. Sess. 14. It declares 1 Cor. 11. to be understood of Sacramental
Confession by the Custom and Practice of the Church. Then I suppose the Church
thought it Necessary before.

III. Sess. 14. It declares Jam. 5. to be understood of Sacramental Confession.
But how? By its Power of making it Necessary to be believed merely by such
Declaration? No; but by Apostolical Tradition; then the meaning is, that it was
always so understood.

But because the Council of Trent does pretend to Apostolical Tradition for the
Points there determined, and the showing that it had not Catholic and
Apostolic Tradition, is the most effectual Confutation of the present Pretense
of Oral Tradition, I shall reserve that to another Discourse, part whereof, I
hope, will suddenly be Published.

FINIS.
A CATALOGVE of some BOOKS Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in S.
Paul's Churchyard.
A Rational Account of the Grounds of Protestant Religion; being a Vindication
of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference, etc. from the
pretended Answer by T. C. Wherein the True Grounds of Faith are cleared, and
the False discovered; the Church of England vindicated from the Imputation of
Schism; and the most important particular Controversy between us and those of
the Church of Rome thoroughly examined: By Edward Stillingfleet, D. D. and Dean
of S. Paul's, Folio, the Second Edition.

Origines Britannicae: Or the Antiquity of the British Churches; with a Preface
concerning some pretended Antiquities relating to Britain, in vindication of
the Bishop of S. Asaph, by Edward Stillingfleet D. D. Dean of S. Paul's, Folio.

The Rule of Faith: Or an Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J. S. entitled, Sure
footing, etc. by John Tillotson, D. D. to which is adjoined, A Reply to Mr. J.
S.'s third Appendix, etc. by Edward Stillingfleet D. D.

A Letter to Mr. G. giving a true Account of a late Conference at the D. of P's.

A second Letter to Mr. G. in answer to two Letters lately published concerning
the Conference at the D. of P.

Veteres Vindicati: In an Expostulatory Letter to Mr. Sclater of Putney, upon
his Consensus Veterum, etc. wherein the absurdity of his Method, and the
weakness of his Reasons are shown; His false Aspersions upon the Church England
are wiped off, and her Faith concerning the Eucharist of proved to be that of
the Primitive Church: Together with Animadversions on Dean Boileaus French
translation of, and Remarks upon Bertram.

An Answer to the Compiler of Nubes Testium: Wherein is shown That Antiquity
(in relation to the Points in Controversy set down by him) did not for the
first five hundred Years Believe, Teach and Practice as the Church of Rome does
at present Believe, Teach and Practice; together with a Vindication of Veteres
Vindicati from the late weak and disingenuous Attempts of the Author of
Transubstantiation Defended by the Author of the Answer to Mr. Sclater of
Putney.

A Letter to Father Lewis Sabran Jesuit, in answer to his Letter to a Peer of
the Church of England; wherein the Postscript to the Answer to the Nubes
Testium is Vindicated, and Father Sabrans Mistakes further discovered.

A second Letter to Father Lewis Sabran Jesuit, in answer to his Reply.

A Vindication of the Principles of the Author of the Answer to the Compiler of
Nubes Testium in answer to a late pretended Letter from a Dissenter to the
Divines of the Church of England.

Scripture and Tradition Compared, in a Sermon preached at Guild-Hall-Chappel,
Nov. 27. 1687. by Edward Stillingfleet D. D. Dean of S. Paul's, the second
Edition.

There is now in the Press, and will speedily be published,
An Historical Examination of the Authority of Councils, discovering the false
Dealing that has been used in the publishing of them, and the Difference
amongst the Papists themselves about their Number.


