LEX IGNEA: OR The School of Righteousness. A SERMON Preached before the KING,
October. 10. 1666. At the SOLEMN FAST appointed For the late FIRE in LONDON.

By WILLIAM SANDCROFT, D. D. Dean of S. Paul's.

Published by his Majesty's Special Command.



London, Printed for R. Pawlett, at the Bible in Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet.

ISAIAH xxvi. 9. -- When thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the
World will learn Righteousness.
THis Chapter with the two next before, and that which follows, are all four
parts of the same prophetic Sermon, (as appears by those words so often
repeated in them, In that Day, fixing and determining All to the same Epoch,
and period of Time;) belong All to the same subject Matter, sc. the Destruction
of Judah and Jerusalem, whether by the Babylonians, or the Romans, or both. So
that the Earth (or as we may rather translate, the Land, or the Country)
wasted, and utterly spoiled, and V. 1. and 3.
turned upside down, Cap. xxiv. is doubtless the Land of Jewry: And the World
that languisheth, and fades away, V. 4 of that Cap. not much wider; that, and
the neighboring Regions, with whom the Jews had commerce, and intercourse of
Peace and War, Moab, and Egypt, and Babylon, (...) and (...) and (...).
in a word, the Jewish World; (for so both the Hebrew and Greek words usually
translated the Earth and the World, are often in Scripture Language contracted
(...)
and limited by the Matter in hand:) And consequently the City of Confusion,
which is broken down, a City turned Chaos again, as the Hebrew imports, cap.
xxiv. 10. the City turned into a Heap, or a Ruin, nay, in tumulum, as the
Vulgar Latin, or (...), as the LXX. translate it, into one great Sepulcher to
it self, buried in its own Rubbish, Cap. xxv. 2. The lofty City laid low, even
to the Ground, and abased in the very Dust. Cap. xxvi. 5. The City desolate,
and forsaken, and lest Wilderness, and desert all over, Cap. xxvii. 10. are but
so many variations of the phrase, and signify all the same thing, the burning
of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, or Titus, or (as some will have it) by both.

This sad Devastation the Prophet first beholds in speculo prophetico, sees it
from far in his prophetic Telescope, as clearly, and distinctly, as if it were
before his eyes, and describes it here and there the whole Sermon throughout,
but chiefly, Cap. xxiv. in so lofty a Language, that many have mistaken it for
the End of the World, and the Consummation of all things. But then, to sweeten
so sad a Theme, he assures them, it shall not be a (...), God will not make a
final End now: No, a Remnant shall be left, as the shaking of an Olive Tree,
and as the gleaning Grapes, when the Vintage is done, Cap. xxiv. 13. Nor shall
they be only preserved, but restored too; The Lord God will in time wipe away
every Tear from off all Faces, and at last, swallow up this Death too in
Victory, Lacrymam Vulg.
Cap. xxv. 8. He Will turn their Captivities, and rebuild their City, and their
Temple too; and all this shall be as it were Life from the Dead, as the Apostle
calls it, so miraculous a Re-establishment, at a Juncture so improbable, Romans
xi. 15.
when they are destroyed out of all Ken of Recovery, that it shall be a kind of
Resurrection; and so like the great One, that it is described in the very proper
Ezekiel. xxxvii. Dan. xii.
phrases of that, both by the other Prophets, and by Ours too a little below
the Text, Thy Dead shall live again; My dead Bodies shall arise: Awake and
sing, ye that V. 19.
dwell in the Dust, etc. And then, (which is of nearest Concern to us, and to
our present Business) the Prophet directs the Remnant that should escape, how
to behave themselves under so great a Desolation; and he contrives his
directions into a threefold Song (that they may be the better remarkt and
remembered) tuned and fitted to the three great Moments of the Event.

The first, to the time of the Ruin it self, Cap. xxiv. where having set
before their Eyes the sad prospect of the holy City, and House of God in
Flames; When thus it shall be in the midst of the Land, says he, there shall
be a Remnant, and they shall lift up their voice, and sing for the Majesty of
the Lord, saying, Glorify ye the Lord in the Fires, V. 15. And this is (...) a
Song of Praise.

The second is (...) a Song of Degrees or Ascensions, fitted to the time of
their Return, when All should be restored and rebuilt again; and that we have
Cap. xx vii. 2. In that Day sing ye unto her; A Vineyard of Red Wine: I the
Lord do keep it; I will water it every moment; lest any hurt it, I will keep it
night and day.

The third (of which my Text is a principal strain) belongs to the whole middle
interval between the Ruin and the Restoration, in this xvi. Cap. In that day
shall this Song be sung in the land of Judah, We have a strong City; Salvation
will God appoint for Walls and Bulwarks, etc. As if he had said; Though our
City be ruined, yet God is still our dwelling place; our Fortresses dismantled,
and thrown down, but Salvation will he appoint us for Walls and Bulwarks; Our
Temples in the Dust, but God will be to us himself, as a little Sanctuary.
Ezekiel. xi. 16.
And this is (...) a Song to give Instruction, teaching them, and in them us,
how to demean our selves, while the Calamity lies upon us: sc. to make God our
Refuge, ver. 4. to wait for him in the Way of his Judgments, ver. 8. and in
this 9. ver. earnestly to desire him from the very soul in the Night (in the
Darkest, and Blackest of the Affliction;) to seek him early, when it begins to
dawn toward a better Condition; and in the mean time, as it is in the Text, to
improve all this severe Discipline, as he intends it, for the advancing us in
the knowledge of Him, and of our selves, and of our whole Duty; For when thy
Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will learn
Righteousness.

A Text you see, that supposes Judgments in the Earth, or upon a Land (as its
Occasions) and so suitable to our sad Condition: a Text too, that proposes our
Learning, as its End and Design, and so suitable (one would think) to our
Inclination too. The Character, and Genius of the Age, we live in, is Learned:
the pretense at this day so high, and so universal, that He is Nobody now, who
has not a new Systeme of the World, a new Hypothesis in Nature, a new Model of
Government, a new Scheme of God's Decrees, and the greatest Depths in Theology.
We are many of us acute Philosophers (that must not be disputed us;) most of us
grand Politics and Statsemen too; All of us (without exception) deep Divines:
-- will needs be wiser than our Neighbors, but however wiser than our Teachers
and Governors, if not wiser than God himself. A kind of Moral Rickets, that
swells, and puffs up the Head, while the whole inner Man of the Heart wastes and
dwindles. For like the silly Women, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7.
Disciples to the old Gnostics, while we are thus ever learning (pretending to
great Heights, and Proficiencies) we come never to the Knowledge of the Truth
(the Truth which is according unto Godliness;) In fine, amongst so many
Learners they are but few, that learn Righteousness: -- And therefore God
himself here opens us a School; erects a severe Discipline in the Text; brings
forth his Ferulas, when nothing else will serve the Turn. For he has indeed
four Schools, or rather four distinct Forms, and Classes in the same great
School of Righteousness; the last only (that of his Judgments) express in the
Text, but the Rest too supposed at least, or covertly implied.

For whether we look upon the latter Clause of the proposition. The Inhabitants
of the World will learn; -- We find our selves there under a double Formalitie;
As Learners, and as Inhabiters. As Learners first, and so endued 1.
with Faculties of Reason; Powers of a Soul capable of Learning, what is to be
learned; stamped, and possessed with first Principles, and common Notions which
deeply searched, and duly improved, and cultivated, might teach us Much of
Righteousness. And this is Schola Cordis in Domo interiori, the School of the
Heart, God's first School in the little World within us. Secondly, as
Inhabitants of the 2.
great World, which is God's School too, as well as his Temple, full of
Doctrines and Instructions; Schola Orbis, in which, He takes us forth continual
Lessons of Righteousness, -- Seque ipsum inculcat, and offert, Ut been cognosci
possit; and that both from the Natural World, and from the political; whether
Schola Regni, or Schola Ecclesiae. Or if we return to the former Branch of the
Text, When thy Judgments are in the Earth. This when they are, supposes
another time, when they Are Not in the Earth, and that time is the time of
Love, (as the Prophet speaks) Ezekiel. xvi. 8.
the Season of Mercy; So that, Thirdly, here is Schola Misericordiarum, the
School of God's tender Mercies inviting 3
us, gently leading, and drawing us with the Cords of a Man, Hos. xi, 4.
with the Bands of Love: And lastly, when nothing else 4.
will serve, here is Schola Judiciorum, the School of God's severe Judgments
driving us to Repentance, and compelling us to come in and learn Righteousness.
A provision (you see) every way sufficient, and abundant for our Learning,,
were not we wanting to our selves.

But alas! we may run by the Text, and easily read in it these three things, as
so many very Natural Deductions, and Emanations from it. First, our own
ignorance 1.
and Stupidity; Born like a wild Asse's Colt, as Zophar Jo b. xi. 12.
speaks; and then to our Natural we add affected Ignorance too: So that we are
much to seek, and to learn Righteousness it must be taught us. Secondly, God's
infinite, 2.
and inexpressible Grace and Mercy to us; that when we had blurred the
Original, defaced the first Traces of Righteousness upon our Souls, he was
pleased to provide Expedients to teach it us again the second time, that we
might be renewed unto Knowledge after the Image Col. iii. 10. Ephesians. iv. 24.
of him, that created us in Righteousness, as the Apostle speaks. And Thirdly,
Our indocible and unteachable Humor, our foul and shameful Non-proficiency
under 3.
so plentiful a Grace. For though the Text indeed speaks of our learning
Righteousness, when God's Judgments are upon us; yet (if the Appearances of the
World abroad suggested nothing to the contrary) it is introduced here in the
Text too, as the Effect of the last Form in God's School, in exclusion of all
the former as ineffectual; his utmost Method not to be used but at a pinch,
when all the rest are basfled, and prove improsperous upon us: And then it is
expressed in the Original, and learned Versions with so many Limitations and
Abatements (as we shall see by and by) that we may well give it up as the sum
and upshot of all, that our All-merciful God omits no Means or Methods of our
Improvement; but we (supinely negligent, and prodigiously stubborn as we are)
render them all ineffectual.

That we may do so no longer, but rather make good the profession, with which
we have dared to appear this Day before God, of humbling our selves under his
Almighty Hand; Let us, before we pass on any further, lift up our Hands and our
Hearts to Him in the Heavens, beseeching him by the Power of his Mighty Grace
so to sanctify to us All, both the Sense of his present Judgment, and all our
Meditations and Discourses thereupon, that by all we may be promoted in
learning Righteousness.

THe Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness or Justice: What Is that?
Is there such a thing in the World? Or is it a Name only, and a glorious
pretense? Is it not only another word for Interest or Utility, and so nothing
just, but what is profitable; Carneades his infamous Assertion retriv'd and
owned with open face V. Lactant. lib. v.
by Christians? Is it not the taking of a party, or the espousing of a Faction,
and appearing for it with heat and animosity; and a savage condemning and
destroying All that are not of it? Is it not the Profession to believe such a a
System of Opinions, what life soever is consequent thereupon? an airy invisible
Righteousness, that never embodies or appears in our Actions, but hovers in the
Clouds, in speculations and fancies, where no Man can find it?

The Truth is, there is no piece of Unrighteousness more common in the World,
than thus to weigh Justice it self in an unjust Balance; while every one
contrives his Hypothesis, so as to salve the Phenomenon, so declares his
Notion, as may best suit and comport with his own unrighteous practices. But
the Righteousness we are to learn in God's School, must not be a self-chosen
Righteousness: We must not pay God our Sovereign, the Tribute of our Obedience
in Coin of our own stamping; it must be such as will abide the Touchstone of
his Word, and the Balance of his Sanctuary. To make short, Righteousness or
Justice, though elsewhere a single Virtue, yet here it is vittually All: --
(...), said the Poet; and the Philosopher after him, (...), not a part, but all
Virtue: and so often both in Scripture, and Fathers, comprehensively all
Religion, the whole Duty of Man. (...), Theogn. Ethic. v. 1.
says S. Chrysostom: Omnes Virtutum species uno Justitiae nomine, says S.
Jerome. Not a particular Star, nor a single Constellation, but a whole Heaven
of Virtues, an entire Globe of Moral and Christian Perfections; an Universal
Rectitude of the Will, conforming us in all Points to Hom. 12. in S. Matthew.
God's Righteous Law, the Rule of our Righteousness, Or if you will in two
words, it is Suum cuique to give every one his Due; Suum Deo first, and then
Suum proximo; give God his Due, and your Neighbor too: These are the integral
parts of it. So that Righteousness, as the great Rule of it, has two Tables,
or, if you will two Hemispheres, the upper and the nether: Both so vast, that
we cannot measure them in a Span (the Span of time allotted me;) I shall
therefore contract them to the occasion, and give you only some of those
particular Lessons of Righteousness, which this present Judgment of God upon
our Land seems most clearly to take us forth, both in relation to God himself,
and to our Neighbors; and then call you, and my self to a serious Scrutiny,
how well we have learned them, and so an end.

And first we begin (as we ought) in giving God his due; in rendering to God the
things that are Gods. To limit this wide Universality too, and render it more
proper, and peculiar, we may reduce all to that first of Esai's three Songs
mentioned at the beginning, Glorify ye the Lord in the Fires; giving him upon
this sad Occasion the C. xxiv. 15.
Glory of that great Trinity of his Attributes; the Glory of his Power, and
Majesty; the Glory of his Justice and Equity; the Glory of his Goodness and
Mercy.

Give him the Glory of his Power and Greatness; which 1.
the Prophet calls, singing for the Majesty of the Lord, Cap. xxiv. 15. or
beholding the Majesty of the Lord, when his Hand is lifted up, in the verse
after my Text. How great and glorious our God is, who is in himself
incomprehensible, appears best by the glorious greatness of his Works. If he
builds, it is a World, Heaven and Earth, and the Fullness of both. If he gives,
it is his only Son out of his Bosom, the Brightness of his Glory, and the
express Image of his Person. If he rewards, it is a Crown, it is a whole Heaven
of Glories. If he be angry, he sends a deluge; opens the Cataracts of Heaven
above, and breaks up the Fountains of the great Deep below, and pours forth
whole Floods of Vengeance: Or else he rains down Hell out of Heaven, and in a
moment turns a Land like Salvian.
the Garden of God into a dead Sea, and a lake of Brimstone. If he discover
himself by any overt expression of his Power, though the Intention be mere
Mercy, and loving Kindness, Mortality shrinks from it, and cannot bear it. When
his Glory descends on Mount Sinai, the people remove, and stand afar off, and
Let not God speak with us (say they) lest we die: and Depart from me, O Lord,
Ex. xx. 18, 19.
says S. Peter. amazed at that miraculous draught of Fishes: Luc. v. 8.
How much more should the Inhabitants of the World tremble before him, when his
great and sore Judgments are in the Earth: Tremble thou Earth, the presence of
God (says the Psalmist) even when he improves the hard Rock Ps. cxiv. 7, 8.
into a Springing Well: much more when a fruitful Land Ps. evii. 34.
he turns into barrenness, or a stately City into Ashes, for the wickedness of
them that dwell therein. I am horribly asraid, says David, for the ungodly
that sorsake thy Law; and I exceedingly sear, and quake, said Moses, at the
giving Ps. cxix. 53. Hebr. xii 21.
of it: But when our Lord shall come again to require it, The Powers of Heaven
shall be shaken too; the Matthew. xxiv. 29.
Angels themselves (as S. Chrysestom interprets) though pure and innocent
Creatures shall tremble ((...)) to see the severity of that Judgment. How much
rather Hom. 77. in Matthew.
ought we, wretched Creatures that we are, conscious to our selves, of Dust,
and Sin, to tremble and quake at the Wrath of this dread Lord of the Universe;
at whose Voice alone, the great Emporous Caligula runs under Sueton. l. V. n.
51. Dan. v. 6.
the Bed, and the mighty Bel-shazzar's Loins are loosed, and his knees knock
one against another, when God but writes bitter things against him on the Wall.

It were a vain Affectation, to attempt a Description of the greatness of our
late horrible Devastation. This were to be Ambitiosus in Malis, to chew over
all our Wormwood, and our Gall again: This were Rogum ascia polire, which the
xii. TABLES forbad, to carve and paint the wood of our Funeral pile. I shall
only call back your thoughts to stand with me upon the prospect of that horrid
Theater of the divine Judgments, and say, Come hither, and behold the Works of
the Lord, what Desolation he Ps. xlvi. ^.
has made in the Earth; and then who will not join with me to say upon so
convincing an occasion? We humble our selves under the Almighty Hand of God,
the Lord of all the World; We adore his Power and Majesty in lowly
prostrations; before whom all the Nations of the World are as a Drop of the
Bucket, the Globe of the Earth Isai. xi. 15.
as the small Dust of the Balance, and who takes up the Isles (even our Great
Britains too, as we call them) as a very little thing. Great and marvelous are
thy Works, O Lord God Almighty! who would not fear thee, and glorify Apoc..
xv. 3, 4.
thy Name, when thy Judgments are thus manifest? Thou have brought them down
that dwell on high, and laid the lofty City low, even to the Ground; the Joyous
City of our Solemnities, the Royal Chamber, the Emporium of the World, the Mart
of Nations, the very Top Gallant of all our Glory in the Dust. Even so Holy
Father, Mattli. xi. 26.
for so it seemed good in thy sight. We say not to our God, What do thou?
Wherefore has the Lord done thus to this great City? we reply not, we answer
not again: The Lord has spoken; let all the Earth keep silence before him. We
acknowledge thy Hand in it, O our God; we submit to thy good pleasure in it; we
wait for thy Comfort, and thy Salvation in it. We meekly kiss the Rod that
strikes us: With dying Jacob we desire to worship (...), with perfect
Resignation as we are able, leaning Hebr. xi. 21.
and reposing upon the top of this thy severe Rod. For shall we rcceive Good at
the hand of our God, and shall we not receive Evil? It Is the same Blessed Hand
that distributes Job. ii. 10.
and strikes; and with equal Reverence and Affection we adore it, whether he
opens it wide in Bounty, or contracts it close in severity: The one the Divine
Rhetoric to persuade us to learn Righteousness; the other his more irrefragable
Logic to convince and constrain us. And therefore, we charge not our Maker
foolishly; but meekly accept the punishment of our Iniquity. And having thus
adored his Power (which was the First) we go on in the next place to acknowledge
his Justice too; saying with holy DAVID, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and Ps.
cxix. 137.
just are thy Judgments: The second part of God's Due.

Give him the Glory of his Justice also; and if you learn no other
Righteousness in his School, at least learn His, and frankly confess it too.
For though God's Judgments may be secret, yet they cannot be unjust: Like the
Ps. xxxvi. 6.
great Deep indeed, an Abyss unfathomable; But though we have no Plumb-line of
Reason, that can reach it, our Faith assures us, there is Justice at the Bottom.
Clouds and Darkness are round about him, says the Ps. xcvii. 2.
Psalmist; but, as it follows, Righteousness and Judgment are the Habitation of
his Throne: So much we may easily discern through all the Veils and Curtains
that invelop him, that Justice stands always fast by his Judgment Seat. And
therefore though it be a nice, and a delicate point to assign the particular
sins, for which God has thus sorely afflicted us; yet must we declare (as we
are warranted by sacred Authority) That God has laid his heavy Judgment upon
us All, as an Evidence of his Displeasure for The King's Declaration.
our Sins in general.

Not to engage in that Common Theme; we may clear it a little by the Light of
our own Fires, (the particular Instrument of our Calamity) in two or three
Reflections upon that. God spoke his Righteous Law at first out of the midst of
the Fire, Exodus xix. 18. And he shall appear from Heaven again in flaming Fire,
taking vengeance on them that obey it not, says the Apostle. Now 2 These. i. 8.
as the Prophet Amos argues from another circumstance of Terror, wherewith the
Law was given, the sound of the Trumpet (the first Trumpet certainly, we ever
read of in any Record in the World, as the last Trumpet (the Apostle tells us)
shall be that of the Archangel to 1 Cor. 15. 52.
summon us to account for it) Shall a Trumpet be blown Amos iii. 6.
(and so say I, shall a Fire be kindled) in the City (nay, a whole City become
but one great Fire) and the people not be afraid; We not reflect upon our own
Guiltiness before God, who came at first with a Fiery Law in his Right Hand to
teach us our Duty, and shall come again Deuteronomy. xxxiii.
2.
at last with Fiery Indignation at his left to devour all those that perform it
not? Again, Fire and Water are the two Hebr. x. 27.
great Instruments of God's double Vengeance upon the World of the Ungodly: The
One long since past recorded for our Instruction; the Other yet to come, the
Matter (it ought to be, I am sure) of our continual Terror. The World that then
was, perished by Water (says S. Peter) and the World that is now, is reserved
unto Fire: In the 2 Pet. iii. 6, 7.
mean time, Fire and Water, things of commonest Use with us, are also the
standing Metaphors almost in every verse of Scripture, to express God's
Judgments of all sorts: Is it not on purpose to remind us, when ever we hear
the sound, or make use of the things, or feel the smart of either, to reslect
upon the heavy wrath of God against Sin in his so solemn expressions of it?
Once more, Fire is the Tyrant in Nature, the King of the Elements, the mighty
Nimrod in the Material World. God has given us this Active Creature for our
Servant, and we degrade him to the meanest Offices, to the Drudgery of the
Kitchen, and the labor of the Furnace. But God can infranchize him when he
pleases, and let him loose upon us; and for our sins, of an useful Servant,
make him to us a a rigorous, and a Tyrannical Master. You saw him the other
Day, when he escaped from all your Restraints, mocked all your Resistance,
scorned the Limits, you would have set him: Winged with our Guilt, he flew
triumphant over our proudest Heights, waving his curled Head, seeming to repeat
us that Lesson which holy S. Austin taught us long since, That the inferior
Creatures serve us Men, only that we may serve him, who made both us and them
too. If we rebel against Heaven, (...), says the Wiseman; The World shall rise
in Wisd. v. 20.
Arms upon us, and fight with him against the Unwise. Even the Holy Fires of
the Altar too, though kindled from Heaven on purpose to propitiate an angry
Deity, proved often through Man's provocations the Instruments of his Fury; the
Mercy-seat became the Arsenal of Vengeance, and from the presence of God
himself went forth those Flames that devoured his Adversaries? And all to teach
us this Lesson, That it is Sin puts the Thunder into God's Hand, and turns
Flames of Love into a consuming Fire.

And therefore dream no longer of Granado's or Fireballs, or the rest of those
witty Mischiefs; search no more for Boutefieus or Incendiaries, Dutch or
French: The Dutch Intemperance, and the French Pride and Vanity, and the rest
of their Sins, we are so fond off, are infinitely more dangerous to us, than
the Enmity of either Nation; for these make God our Enemy too. Or if you will
needs find out the Incendiary, look not abroad; Intus host is, intus periculum,
says St. Jerome. Turn your Eyes inward into your own Bosoms; there lurks the
great Makebate, the grand Boutefieu between Heaven and us. Trouble not your
selves with Planetary Aspects, or great Conjunctions; but for your own
Oppositions direct and Diametral to God, and his Holy Law. Fear not the Signs
of Heaven, but the Sins on Earth, which has made a separation between you and
your God. It Is injurious to the sweet Influences of the Stars, to charge them
with such dire Effects, as Wars, and Pestilences and Conflagrations: Divinae
Justitiae opera haec, sunt (says the Father) and humanae injustitiae. These
are the Products of God's Righteousness upon our Unrighteousness. Wherefore
glorify we God in these our Fires, saying with the Prophet, Righteousness
belongs to thee, O Lord, but unto us confusion of Faces, as it is this day,
because of our manifold Trespasses Dan. ix. 7.
that we have trespassed against thee.

If yet it be expected I should be more particular, in assigning the very Sins
that have occasian'd this heavy Judgment, it is a slippery place, and hard to
keep firm footing in it. The mysterious Text of God's Holy Providence (as I
said before) is dark and obscure; and so much the more, because there are so
many Interpreters, (for though there be no infallible Judge of the Sense of it,
yet all Fingers itch to be doing;) their Conjectures so various, and full of
contradiction, so tincted and debaucht with private prejudice, that they do but
(...), wrest it unskilfully, as they do the other holy Text, Convertunt in
mentem suam (as the aethiopick turns that place in St. Peter) torture, and
torment it, till it confess their 2 Pet. iii. 16.
own Sense. As for the many spiteful and unrighteous Glosses upon the sad Text
of our present Calamity (on which every Faction amongst us has a Revelation,
has an Interpretation;) I will not mention, much less imitate them. Justus
Accusator sui, says the Wiseman. It Is a righteous thing for every Man to
suspect himself, to look Prove. xviii. 17.
first into the plague of his own Heart, and to be ready to say with the
Disciples, Master, Is it not I? We are all over apt to charge one another
foolishly enough; to take St. Peter's counsel, (...), to be kind and favorable
to our selves in our Interpretations and Censures; but God methinks, at present
seems to accuse us All.

When a Judgment is particular and reaches but a few, we have a savage
promptness in condemning the Sufferers, with, This is God's just Judgment for
such a thing, which we, it seems like not, though perhaps God himself does. So
long as the Thunderbolt flies over our own Heads, we hug our selves, and All
is well; it is our dear pastime, and a high voluptuousness to sit and censure
others, and flatter our selves, that we are more righteous than they. To meet
with this ill Humor, God has reached us now an universal stroke that comes
home to every Man: So that it is as our Prophet states it in the beginning of
this Sermon, As with the Prince and the Priest, (for (...) is both) so with the
people, as with the Master, Cap. xxiv. 2.
and the Mistress, so with the Servant, as with the Buyer, and the Borrower, so
with the Seller and the Lender. In fine, He is no Englishman that feels not
this Blow: And therefore as the Judgment is Universal, let us give Glory to
God, and confess, that the Sin is so too; saying with the good Nehemiah, Thou
art just, O God, in All that is brought Cap. ix. 32, 33.
upon us; on our King, and on our Princes; on our Priests, and on our Prophets;
on our Fathers, and on all thy People; For thou have done Right, but we have
All done Wickedly. God give us Grace to take every one the shame that belongs
properly to himself, and to join heartily together in a full Chorus at the
last, repeating that excellent Exomologesis of holy David, with which I began
this point, and shall now conclud it, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are
thy Judgments. But there is another yet behind. --

Lastly, give God the Glory of his Mercy too; that 3.
must in no wise be forgotten. It Is the privilege and S. Ambrose, Suo jure
omnibus Dei operibus superingreditur and supernatat. Ps. cxxxv. 7.
prerogative of Mercy, that it mixeth it self in all God's Works; even in
Justice it self too. He sends forth Lightnings with the Rain (says the
Psalmist) he brings the Winds out of his Treasuries. Strange Furniture, one
would think for a Treasury, Storms and Tempests! But there is so very much of
Mercy even in God's Judgments too, that they also deserve a place amongst his
Treasures, ay and amongst ours too. For he licenseth not a Wind, or a Storm,
lets not fly a flash of Lightning, or a Ball of Fire, but a Mercy goes along
with it; comes flying to us (if we miss it not by our Negligence or
Inadvertency) upon the Wings of that Wind; and discovers it self to us even by
the Light of those Fires. And therefore turn not away your Eyes in Horror, but
study the late Conflagration: And even in the Dust and Ashes of our City, if we
sift and examine them well, we may find rich Treasures of Mercy hidden.

Mercy first, that God spared us, and preserved us so long. For without his
Divine Manutenency, our strongest 1.
Fabrics had fallen immediately upon their very Builders, He that made all
things at first, by preserving makes them still; new makes them every Moment;
and for his Will's sake alone they were and are created. He carries Nature
always in his Bosom, fostering and cherishing her; and that not only as she
came out of his own hand, and bears the Impresses of his Infinite Wisdom and
Power; but as we have transformed and disguised her by our petty skill; as she
is fettered and shackled by our silly Artifices: Even the World of Fancy too,
the poor Attempts and Bunglings of Art, our Houses of Dirt and Clay (which we
call Palaces and so please our selves in) would quickly fall asunder, and
moulder all into the Dust they consist of, did not an Almighty Hand uphold
them. If he keep not the House and the City, in vain the Builder builds, and
the Watchman wakes, and the Sentinel stands perdu. And therefore give we him
the Glory of this Mercy, saying Thanks be to the Lord, who so long showed us
mavelous great Kindness, I say not with Ps. xxxi. 23.
the Psalm, in a strong City, (though the strongest without him is weakness)
but in a very weak One: A City in the Meanness of the Materials, the Oldness of
the Buildings, the streightness of some Streets, the ill Situation of others,
and many like Inconveniences, so exposed to this dismal Accident, that it must
needs have been long since in Ashes, had not his miraculous Mercy preserved it,
who, so long as he pleases (and that is just so long as we please Him)
continues the Fire to us useful and safe, serviceable, and yet innocent, with
as much ease as he lays it asleep, and quiet in the Bosom of a Flint.

Mercy again, That he afflicts us at all; that we are yet 2.
in his School; that he has not quite given us over, and turned us out as
unteachable and incorrigible. Felix cui Ps. xciv. 12.
Deus dignatur irasci, says Tertullian; in David's Language Blessed is the Man
whom thou chastnest, O Lord, and teach (...).
him in thy Law; send'st him thy Judgments, and learn'st him thy Righteousness.
But to sin, and not be punished, is the sorest punishment of all, says S.
Chrysostom. Dimisit eos secundum desideria Cordis, He suffered them to walk
Ps. lxxxi. 13.
after their own Heart's Lusts, that is a dreadful portion: Let them alone, Why
should they be stricken any more? Isai. i. 5. Prove. i. 32. Ps. xi. 6.
that is the prosperity of Fools that destroys them, as Solomon; or as David
phraseth it; This is for God to rain Snares upon the ungodly: A horrible
Tempest indeed! as he there calls it, and worse than the Fire and Brimstone in
the same Verse.

Mercy too, That he afflicts us himself, keeps us still under his own
Discipline, and has not yet given us over 3.
unto the Will of our Adversaries. The hand of an Enemy Ps. xxvii. 14.
poisons the Wound: His Malice or his Insolence doubles and trebles the
Vexation. The Malignity of the Instrument may invenom a Scratch into a
Gangrene. But the Blessed Hand of God, even when it strikes, drops Balsom. His
very Rods are bound up in Silk and Softness, and dipped before hand in Balm: He
wounds that he may heal, and in wounding heals: Una, eademque Manus Vulnus,
opemque -- And therefore may we never be beaten by the hand of a cruel and
insulting Slave: But let our Righteous Lord himself smite us, and it shall be a
Ps. cxli. 5.
Kindness; let him correct us, and it shall be an excellent Oil. O let us us
still fall into the Hands of God (for great are 2 Samuel xxiv 14.
his Mercies) but let us not fall into the hands of Men.

Mercy lastly in the Degree of the Affliction; That he 4.
has punished us less than our Iniquities deserve; afflicted us in measure;
corrected us in Judgment, not in his Fury, for then we had been utterly brought
to nothing: That we have had our Lives for a Prey, and are as so many
Firebrarnds plucked out of the Burning. And therefore, why should a living Man
complain? Say we rather as Abraham did in the Case of Sodom, when he had that
horrible Scene of Vengeance now in his Eye, We are but Genesis xviii. 27.
Dust and Ashes: Not only Dust in the course of ordinary Frailty, but Ashes too
in the merit of a far sharper Doom; deserve, that God should bring us to Dust,
nay, even turn us to Ashes too, as our Houses. It is of the Lam. iii. 22.
Lord's Mercies, that We our selves also are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not; that any part of our City is still remaining; that God
has left us yet a holy place to assemble in, solemnly to acknowledge (as we do
this Day) his most miraculous Mercy: That when all our Wit was puzzled, and all
our Industry tired out; when the Wind was at the highest, and the Fire at the
hottest, and all our hopes were now giving up the Ghost, Then He, whose season
is our greatest extremity; He, who stays his rough Wind in the Day of the
East Wind, as it is Cap. xxvii. 8.
in the next Chapter; He, who alone sets Bounds to the Rage of the Waters;
restrained also on the sudden, the Fury of this other merciless and unruly
Element, by the Interposition of his Almighty Hucusque, hitherto shall thou go,
and no further. Ay this deserves indeed to be the Matter of a Song, Joy in the
Lord upon so great an Occasion, upon so noble an Experience, sits not
unhandsome on the Brow of so sad a Day as this is. It shall be said in that
Day, says our Prophet, and let us all say it; say it with Triumph, and Jubilee
too,) Lo, this is our Cap. xxv. 9.
God, we have waited for him, and He has saved us; This is the Lord, we will
be glad, and rejoice in his Salvation: -- The third and last part (we shall
mention) of God's Due, the Glory of his Mercy.

And now having thus cleared and secured the Fountain of Righteousness, in the
Discharge of some part of our 2.
Duty to God (where regularly it must begin;) it remains, Ut ducatur Rivus
Justitiae de font Pietatis, as St. Gregory speaks: It must not be a Fountain
sealed or shut up within it self; (Religion is not, as some would have it, a
Supersedeas to Common Honesty; the performing our Duty toward God, no
Discharge of our Duty to Man:) In the next place it should run down like a
River, Amos. v. 24.
in mighty Streams of Righteousness to all our Neighbors round about us; the
other great Branch, the second Table, or (if you will) the other Hemisphere in
this great Globe of Righteousness. And here, Ecce nouas Hyadas, aliumque Oriona
-- So many new Asterisms and Constellations of Virtues appear, that the time
will not give leave to number them, or call them all by their Names: I can only
touch lightly the greater Circles, some of the more comprehensive Lines and
Measures of them in these few Generals, and so pass on.

It Is Righteousness Indefinitely First, and so Universally. So that 'twill not
be sufficient to take forth some 1.
part of it in God's School, a line or two, it may be, of our great Lesson, and
neglect the Rest; to study some one Page or Paragraph, and tear all the Book
besides; to break the Tables (to far worse Effect than Moses did) and content
our selves with some sorry Fragment: No, What ever goes under the common style
of Universal Justice; whatever falls within the large Bosom of that
comprehensive Epitome, into which our Lord himself abridg'd the Law and the
Prophets, All things whatsoever ye would Matthew. vii 12.
that men should do to you, do even so to them; Whatever comes within compass
of that (...), as S. James Jam. ii. 8.
calls it, the Royal Law, (the latter part of the holy Institutes, the other
tome of the Christian Pandects, the second great Commandment like the first, as
our Savior styles it) Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; Even all the
Offices Matthew. xxil. 38, 39.
and Instances of duty between man and man; (Reverence and Obedience to our
Superiors, Courtesy and Humanity to our Equals; Kindness and Condescension to
our Inferiors; Gratitude and Thankfulness to our Benefactors; Justice and
Upright-dealing toward All; Truth in our Words, and Faithfulness in our
Trusts, and Constancy to our Promises, and Candor, and Sincerity and Honesty in
all our Actions: And yet further and higher, for it is a Righteousness improved
and heightened, or at least interpreted by our Lord into Love, and so obliges
us beyond the strict Measures of Common Justice, and not only renders, what is
legally due, but gives and forgives beyond it;) Equity and Moderation to those,
that are any way obnoxious to us; Mildness and Gentleness to those that have
any way offended us; Sympathy and Compassion toward them that suffer; Mercy
and Bounty to them that need; Goodness and Peaceableness, and Charity to all
the World:) These are all parts of this great Lesson, and whatever else may
help to denominate us The Righteous Nation that keeps the Truth (as it is in
the second verse of this Chapter) or the City in which dwells Rightcousness.

But then as it is Righteousness indefinitely, (the Commandment 2.
exceeding broad, as David speaks, wide in the Ps. cxix. 96.
Extension; so is it also as deep in the Intension,) it is Righteousness
Internally and Spiritually too; as being a Righteousness taught us by God's,
and not by Man's Judgments only, and consequently must have an Effect
proportionable: It Is when Thy Judgments are in the Earth, Men will learn -- As
the Jews, while their fear toward God was taught them by the Precepts of Men,
drew near to him, and honored him with their Mouth only, but removed their
Hearts far away from him, Isai. xxix 13. Upon the same Ground, our
Righteousness will never exceed the Righteousness of Scribes, and Pharisees
Hypocrites, must needs prove Noise, and appearance only, a mere and vain
Semblance, if we learn it in no higher School than Man's; take it forth from the
XII Tables only, not from the Two, and have no other Tutor in it than Solon, or
Lycurgus, or Justinian. For the Derivation can return no higher than the
Fountainhead; and what is taught us only by the Statutes of Omri, or at
Caesar's Judgment Seat, will never come up to what the perfect Law of God
requires. While we are under this lower and external Discipline only, if we can
but skulk and shift, and play least in sight, and seem to be Righteous, though
we are not so; Recti^in Curia, though not upright in Heart: Or if we be
discovered and impleaded too, if we can, whether by Power or Artifice, break
through the venerable Cobweb, and run under the miserable shelter of a Temporal
Indemnity at these lower Bars: Why, All is well; with Solomon's Wanton we wipe
Prove. xxx. 20
our Mouths, and are suddenly very Virgins again, not only safe, but innocent
too. But though Humane Laws exact only outward Compliances, assume not to
themselves to judge the Heart, because they cannot discern it, nor take
Cognizance of secret Thoughts and Purposes, further than they are declared by
overt Acts: Yet God is a Spirit, and a Discerner of the inmost Thoughts and
Intentions; and his Law Spiritual too, and given to the Spirit; and the
Righteousness taught in his School, is not a Carcass, or an Outside only, but a
living Soul, and a Spirit of Righteousness: and by con'equence it stays not in
the outward Act, (the proper Object of Humane Laws and Provisions;) restrains
not only open violences (such as the Judgment Seat of Man condemns, and the
Scaffold, or the Gibbet take notice of;) not only smooths and polisheth the
outward Garb, to render that plausible in the eyes of the World: But goes yet
further and deeper, even to the Heart; composeth the whole Inner-Man too, and
labors to approve that to the Righteous Judge, who sees not as Man sees; and
in fine, calls us up to that glorious height of the Primitive Christians in
Justin Martyr, who obeyed indeed the Municipal Laws of their Country, but
outlived them too, and surmounted them far, (...), as he speaks; they
contented not themselves with so seant Measures, but flew a higher and a nobler
pitch, aiming at a more re^in'd and perfect Righteousness, the worthy Effect of
God's Judgments, and not of Man's only; taught in his School alone, and not at
our Tribunals. And then,

Lastly, It Is Righteousness Positively and Affirmatively too. For though the
Decalogue is almost all over Negative 3^.
in the Style and Form of it; yet, our Lord, by reducing all the Precepts of it
to one Affirmative (Love,) and also by his Affirmative Glosses or Additions to
it in his Sermon on the Mount, seems to have authorized the Rule of their
Exposition, received generally by Christian Divines, That the Negative still
infers the Affirmative, and that there are many Yeas concealed in the Bosom of
every such No. So that however it is indeed a part of our Duty, not to Murder,
and not so Slander, and not to Covet, and the like, (an Obligation consequent
upon God's prohibition; and he takes it well, when for his sake we abstain from
the Evil we are inclined or strongly solicited to, and so accepts graciously
our very Nothing, as I may call it, our not doing amiss; thus giving us leave
to enclose, as it were, a part of our Waste, and to ^aise some Revenue upon
it:) Yet this is so much short of the Height of the Lesson we are to learn in
God's School, that it is only the unlearning something that might obstruct it;
so far from making us truly Righteous, that it can only style us Innocent, and
set us Extra vitia rather than Intra virtutem. We must not then content our
selves with a Negative Righteousness; nor confine, and limit it within the
sorry Bounds of the Pharisaical Boast, That we are not, as other Men are, Luc.
xxiii. 11.
Extortioners or Unjust: In some Cases he is unjust too, that gives not his
own, as well as he that takes away what is another: In the Sacred Dialect,
Alms-deeds are Justice too; even Acts of Mercy, and Bounty to those Ps. cxii.
9. Isai. lviii. 7, 8.
that need them, stricti Juris, a part of our Righteousness sometimes so
indispensable, as not to be omitted without Sin. And therefore glorify thy
self no longer, that thou do harm to no Man:

-- Cum dicis stultum, qui donat Amico,
Qui paupertatem levat, attollitque propinqui, Juvenal. Sat. xiv.

Et spoliare doces -- could the Heathen Poet say: He robs his neighbor, that
relieves him not: He spoils his Friend, that in some Cases does not supply him.
And though it is well (a good Degree) if we can say with S. Paul, 2 Cor. vii. 2.
I have wronged no Man; yet he only is perfectly blameless in this kind, Qui ne
in eo quidem ulli noceat, quo prodesse desistat, as S. Jerome excellently; who
does not this Evil Lib i. Epist. 14. ad celantiam.
to his Neighbor, that he omits to do him all the good he can. Thou did not
burn thy Neighbors house, (a strange piece of uncouth Righteousness!) But
do thou receive him into thy own, now he is harborless? Thou have not
oppressed, or impoverisht thy Brother; It Is well: But is thy Abundance the Supply
of his Want in this present exigent? thy Superfluity the Ransom and Redemption
of his extreme Necessities? If not, remember, that Dives is in torments, not
for robbing Lazarus, but for not relieving Sin: And the dreadful Decretory
Sentence Matthew. xxxv.
proceeds at the last Day, not for oppressing the Poor, but for not feeding,
not clothing, not visiting them: A Reflection very common indeed; yet never
more proper or seasonable than at this time, when God presents us an Object of
Charity, the greatest, I think, and the most considerable that was ever offered
to this Nation, and when Heaven and Earth expect, that something extraordinary
should be done.

I have now opened the Book, and laid it before you, and given you a short
Draught of this very important Lesson: a Lesson so considerable, that our Wise
and Good God thinks it worth the while to rout Armies, and sink Navies; to burn
up Cities, and turn Kingdoms upside down; to send Wars, and Plagues, and
Conflagrations amongst us; to set open all his Schools, and ply all his
severest Methods to teach it us the more effectually. Think now, that he looks
down this Day from Heaven to take Notice of our Proficiency; to see how far we
are advanced by these his Judgments in learning Righteousness. And is it
possible, we should stand out any longer? Can we still resist so powerful a
Grace? Are not the parts of the Text by this time, happily met together? and
the Truth of it accomplished, and exemplified in us to the full? -- Gods
Judgments on us, and his Righteousness in us? Who would not think and hope so?
But as S. Jerome complains of his Age (which was indeed very calamitous) Orbis
Romanus ruit, and tamen Cervix nostra non flectitur: The World sinks and cracks
about our Ears, and yet our Neck as stiff, and the Crest of our Pride as lofty,
and as erect as ever. How few are they that repent in Dust and Ashes, even Now,
that God has laid our City in Dust, and our Houses in Ashes! Look we first
upon the Text, and then upon our selves, and we must ingenuously acknowledge,
that whatever Abatements or Diminutions to the Height of the designed event of
God's Judgments upon us the Text, or any Version of it note, or imply, our
wretched evil Lives do but too plainly express and justify. For --

1. Who are they that are said here to learn Righteousness in the Text? Not
always the Afflicted themselves, it seems; but some others that stand by and
look on. For it is not to be omitted, that the phrase manifestly varies in the
parts of the Proposition: Judgments in the Earth, or upon the Land, some
particular Country; and the World at large, or some few in it learn
Righteousness. Thus Tyrus shall be devoured with Fire, says the Prophet:
Ashkelon shall see it, and fear; Gaza and Ekron shall be very sorrowful: Zach.
ix. 4, 5.
But not a word how Tyrus her self is affected. God forbid it should be so with
us! May it never be said, that any of our neighbors make better use of our
calamities, than we our selves! Have we any so hard-hearted amongst us, that
can look upon so sad a Spectacle, as if they sat all the while in the Theater,
or walked in a Gallery of Pictures; little more concerned, than at the Siege of
Rhodes, or the Ruins of Troy? Shall any Neighbor-city say wisely -- Mea res
agitur, jam proximus ardet Vcalegon --? Shall our enemies themselves (the sober
and the Wise amongst them, at the least) tremble at the Relation, and we
continue stupid, and senseless? Shall Constantinople and Alexandria resent it,
and we not regard it as we ought? Nay, shall China and Peru (it may be) Surat
and Mexico, both the Indies hear, and be affected with it, and we our selves
insensible? Shall the Inhabitants of the World abroad warm themselves at our
Fires, with kindly and holy Heats; while in the mean time our Repentings are
not kindled, nor our Charity inflamed, and our Devotion as cold and frozen as
ever? Shall our Mountain (which we said in our jolly pride should never be
removed) be fulminated, and thunder-strook, but the Blessed shower, that
follows, the Instruction, that descends after, like the Rain, slide off to the
Valleys, to Others, that are round about us? Our Lord wept over Jerusalem,
because she knew not then (at forty Luc xix. 41.
years distance) the time of her Visitation; for the Days will come, says He,
when there shall not be lest one stone upon another: But Woe is me! Our Day is
come already, and our Visitation now actually upon us; and yet I fear, we will
not know it, as we ought. For --

2. Reflect a little upon the Tense of the Verb, how that varies too in the
parts of the Proposition: The Judgments Are in the Earth, and the Inhabitants
Will learn -- (So the Vulgar Latin and the English:) It Is still per verba de
suturo. For we list not to hand-fast our selves to God Almighty, to make our
selves over to him by present Deed of Gift; but would fain, forsooth, bequeath
our selves to him a Legacy in our last Will and Testament. Ay but In
necessitatibus nemo Liberalis: It Is not a free or a noble Donation, which we
bestow, when we can keep it no longer our selves: For such a Bequest we may
thank Death, rather than the Testator, says S. Chrysostom. But we are all
Clinicks in this point; would fain have a Baptism in Reserve, a Wash for all
our (...) Hom. xviii. in Ephesians.
Sins, when we cannot possibly commit them any more. Like Felix the unjust
Governor, when S. Paul reasons of Righteousness, our Heads begin to ache, and
presently we adjourn, Acts xxiv. 25.
with, Go thy way for this time; (...), (as he pretended) when we have time and
Opportunity, and convenient Leisure (which we read not, that he ever found) in
plain English, when we have nothing else to do, or can do nothing else, then
we will take forth this Lesson; -- Learn Righteousness, as Cato did Greek, Jam
Septuagenarius, just when we are a dying; -- Begin then to con our part, when
we are ready to be hist off the Stage, and Death is now pulling off our
properties. But take we heed in time: He may prove a false Prophet, that
promises himself to die the Death of the Righteous, when he has loved, and
pursued the Ways, and Wages of Unrighteousness all his life long: Who thinks if
he can but shape the last faint Breath he draws into a formal pretense of
forgiving all the World, and a sly desire of being forgiven; Upon these two
hangs the whole stress of his Righteousness, he goes out of God's School upon
fair terms, and thinks to render a plausible Account of himself. No no; the
great Lesson of the Text is harder and deeper than so: It Is that we must sweat
for, it is that we may bleed for: It Is all that Adam lost, and All that Christ
came to recover: It Is the Business of our whole life, and it is desperate Folly
and Madness to defer to learn it till Death, when God now calls us to account
for it. Though the Verb in some Versions be future (as I said) yet still it is
Descent Habitatores, we must learn it while we dwell here in the World, and who
can secure us that beyond the next moment? When once we remove hence, there is
no School beyond: The Platonic Eruditorum in ORIGIN (a place under Ground, I
know not where, in which separated Souls are supposed to learn what they mist
of, or neglected here) as very a Fable as the Platonic Purgatory. As there is
no Work, nor Labor; so no Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom Eccles. ix. 10.
in the Grave. The Schools are all in this World: All beyond is Prison, and
Dungeon, and place of Torment, for such as learn not their Duty here; Fire
without Light, and utter Darkness.

3. Again, They did learn (so the Syriac, and the Interlineary Latin) when thy
Judgments were in the Earth: For there is an Ellipsis in the Original of the
former clause, and the Verb Substantive may be supplied either way, when thy
Judgments Are or Were in the Earth: And the Conjunction may seem to stand fair
for the later (...) in quantum, or juxta quod; (...) (as R. David glosseth it)
qua mensura, aut modo; and so the Syriac, Qualia Judicia, talem Justitiam
dedicerunt: So much Judgment, so much Justice; Righteousness they did learn,
just while God's Rod was over them, and no longer. Thus while God's Plagues lay
heavy upon Pharaoh, even that stiff neck bowed, and that hard heart was
softened; As Iron in a quick Fire relents and melts; but take it out of the
Furnace, and it grows hard again, nay worse, Churlish and Unmalleable: And so
he, When he saw that there was Respite, says the Text, or a breathing time, He
hardened his Heart, Ex. viii. 15. And do not we all the same? Like teeming
Women, while the pangs are upon us, we have sorrow; when some great Affliction
gives us a smart Visit, strikes home, and deep, we seem to be a little Joh.
xvi. 21.
sensible Ay but the Throws once over, (...) says our Lord, the Woman
remembers them no more; and so we, If but for a little space Grace be showed
us, if God gives us but a little Respite in our Bondage, like Israel newly
returned from Babel, we straight forget his Commandments; which made the good
Ezra ashamed and blush to lift up his Face to Heaven; Ezra, Cap. ix. Verse. 8,
10.

Happy We, if, as Pliny advises his friend Maximus, Tales Lib. 7. Ep. 27.
esse sani perseveremus, quales futuros profitemur infirmi; if we continue such
in Health, as we promise to be upon our sickbeds. But alas! Convaluit; Mansit,
ut ante. How few with David pay the Vows which they spoke with their Mouths,
Ps. lxvi. 14.
when they were in trouble? Do not the engagements on the sickbed vanish, like
the Dreams of the sick, forgotten, as if they had never been? I appeal to your
own Bosoms; though affected at first with this late dismal Accident, does it
not prove to you a nine-days Wonder, and your Thoughts though much startled at
first, by degrees reconcile to it? Do not your Devotions begin to grow cold
with the Fires; raked up, like those dying sparks in dead Ashes, and buried in
the Dust; -- Ignes suppositi Cineri doloso? Just as our Prophet states it here,
While thy Judgments were upon them, they learned; But as it follows
immediately, Fiat Gratia Impio, Let Favor be showed to the Wicked, the least
Intermission Verse. 10.
or kind Interval, and he will not learn Righteousness, says the Text
expressly; he soon lays by his Book, and gives over. But

4. Lastly, What is it that we learn? or, to what good end or purpose? The
Chaldee Paraphrast interposeth here a very Material and Operative word, Descent
operari, they will learn (...) to do, or to work Righteousness. And this
Addition shows us another of our Defects; cuts off, I fear, above half the Roll
of our Learners at once. We live (as I said) in a learned Age: But in all this
Crowd and Throng of Learners, how few put themselves in good earnest into God's
School? And of them that do, how much fewer yet take forth their Lesson aright?
-- Learn any thing else they will, but not Righteousness; and if that, any
thing, but to do it? But this is not (...), rightly to divide; this is to
mangle the Text, and to saw Isaiah asunder again. Would learning or talking, or
pretending serve the turn, We might find Righteousness enough in the World: We
can define it, and distinguish it, Criticize upon the Word, and dispute of the
Thing without end: we stuff our Heads with the Notion, and tip our Tongues with
the Language, and fill the World with our pretenses to it: But Little Children,
says S. John, (Oye World of Learners) Be not deceived, (Let no Man seduce 1 John iii. 7.
you into this piece of Gnosticism, as if to learn, or to know, were
sufficient; No,) 'O (...), He that Does Righteousness, he is Righteous. Non
fortia loquimur, sed vivimus, says S. Cyprian; The life of Religion is Doing.
What we know, we must practice too; Whereto we have already attained, we must
walk in it, says the Apostle. They, that followed Christ, were Phil. iii. 16.
first indeed called Disciples, that is, Learners, (for there Actsxi. 26.
we must begin;) But they soon after commenced Christians at Antioch, Anointed
to Action, as the word implies; and this Name sticks by them still, as the more
essential. Their Oil must not be spent all in the Lamp, In Schola Sapientiae,
that they may shine by Knowledge; they must do their Exercises too In Gymnasio
Justitiae, be anointed to the Agon, and to the Combat (as the Champions of
old;) and if they expect the Crown of Righteousness, must not only learn
Righteousness, but learn to do it.

ANd therefore (to shut up All, and to enforce it a little upon such Topics,
as the Text, and the sad Face of things amongst us suggest;) Let us no longer
trifle with God Almighty, now we find to our cost, that He is in good earnest
with us. Be not deceived; God, I Am sure, is not mocked. It Is not our fasting,
and looking demure a little, and hanging down the Head, like a Bull-rush for a
Day; It Is not a few Grimaces of sorrow, a sad word or two, or a weeping Eye
will serve the turn: -- Our Hearts must bleed too, our Souls must be afflicted,
and mourn for our old Unrighteousnesses, and forsake them too, and renounce
them all for ever; and yet further, take forth new Lessons of Righteousness in
all holy Conversations and Godlinesses, as S. Peter 2 Pet. iii. 11.
speaks, even in all the instances of Piety, and Justice, and Charity, ye heard
of even now, or all this holy Discipline of God is lost, and spent in vain upon
us. For this is all the Cap. xxvii. 9.
Fruit, says our Prophet, to take away sin: If that remain still in us,
Adversity is a bitter Cup indeed. To keep our sins, and hold them fast, even
when God's Judgments are upon us for them, this is with Copronymus, to pollute
the Fountain that should wash us, to defile the salutary Waters of Affliction,
to profane the holy Fires of God's Furnace, and to pass through the Fire to
Moloch, to some reigning and domineering Sin, some Tyrant-lust, or
Mistress-passion. Correction without Instruction, this is the Scourge of Asses,
not the Discipline of Men, nor the Rod of the Sons of Men. To suffer much, and
not to be at all the better for it, it is certainly one of the saddest portions
that can befall us in this World; if not the fore-boding and prognostic of a
far sadder yet to come, the very beginnings of Hell here, the Fore-tasts of
that Cup of Bitterness, of which the Damned suck out the Dreggs.

And will thou after all this hide the sweet Morsel under thy Tongue, when thou
sensibly perceiv'st it already turning into the Gall of Asps? -- Still long for
the delicious portion, consecrated and snatch it greedily from God's Altars,
though thou see thy Fingers burn, and thy Nest on fire with it? -- Still
retain the old Complacence in thy sparkling Cup, though thou feel'st it already
biting like a Serpent, and stinging like an Adder? -- say still, Stolen Waters
are sweet, Prove. ix 17.
though like those bitter Ones of Jealousy, thou perceiv'st them carry a Curse
along with them into thy very Bowels? Dare we thus provoke the Lord to
Jealousy? Are we stronger 1 Cor. x. 22. Job xxviii. 3. Job xli. 9. Isai.
xxxiii. 14.
than He? Gird up now thy loins like a Man, thou stoutest, and gallantest of
the Sons of Earth. Have thou an Arm like God? or can thou thunder with a
Voice like him? Will thou set the Briars and Thorns of the Wilderness against
him in Battel-Array? or can thou dwell with everlasting Burnings? Or
despisest thou the Riches of his Goodness and Forbearance; not knowing Romans ii.
4.
(refusing to know) that the Long-suffering of our Lord 2 Pet. iii. 15,
is Salvation, and that his Goodness leads thee to Repentance? If not, know
assuredly, that thy Hardness and Impenitent Heart, do but treasure up for thee,
yet a fiercer, and a more insupportable Wrath.

And therefore let us not flatter our selves, nor think that God has now
emptied his Quiver, and spent all his Artillery upon us; Let us not come forth
delicately with the foolish Agag, saying, Surely the Bitterness of Death is
past: No, the 1 Samuel xv. 32.
Dregs of the Cup of Fury are still behind; God grant we be not forced at last
to drink them, and suck them up. Great Plagues remain for the ungodly, says
the Psalmist. Vae unum abiit; Ecce duo veniunt. One Woe is past, but behold
there come two Woes more; for the rest of Men that were not killed by the Ps.
xxxii. 11.
former Plagues, repented not, Apoc. ix. 12. 20. When God's Rods and his
Ferulaes (the Discipline of Children) are contemned, he has a lash of
Scorpions to scourge the obstinate. When the ten dreadful. Plagues are spent
all upon a stubborn Egypt without effect, there is a Red Sea yet in Reserve,
that at last swallows all: And if our present Affictions reform us not, that we
sin no more; take we heed, lest yet a worse thing befall us. Remember, that when
the Touch of God's little Finger did not terrify us, he soon made us feel the
stroke of his heavy hand. If the more benign, and benedict Medicines will not
work, nor stir us at all, he can prepare us a rougher Receipt, or a stronger
Dose; retrive and bring back his former Judgments in a sharper Degree, or else
send upon us new ones, which we never dream of.

The Devil of Rebellion and Disobedience, which not long since possessed the
Nation, rent and tore it till it fom'd again, and pined away in lingering
Cousumptions; that cast it often times into the Fire, and often times into the
Water (calamities of all sorts) to destroy it; is now through God's Mercies
cast out, and we seem to sit quiet, and sober at the Feet of our Deliverer,
clothed, and in our right Minds again. But yet this ill Spirit, this restless
Fury (this unquiet and dreadful Alastor, the eldest Son of Nemesis, and heir
apparent to all the Teriours and Mischiefs of his Mother) walks about day and
night, seeking Rest, and finds none; and he says in his heart, I will return
some time or other to my House from whence I came out. Oh let us take heed of
provoking that God, who alone chains up his Fury, least for our Sins he permit
him to return once more, with seven other Spirits more wicked than himself, and
so our last Estate prove worse than the former.

The Sword of the Angel of Death, which the last year cut down almost a hundred
thousand of us, may seem to have been glutted with our Blood, and to have put
up it self into the Scabbard. Quiesce and sile, as the Prophet speaks: God
grant it may rest here, and be still. But, as it follows Jer. xlvii. 6.
there, How can it be quiet, if the Lord give it a new Commission against us?
Methinks I see the Hand still upon the Guard, and unless we prevent it by our
speedy Repentance, it may quickly be drawn again more terrible than ever, new
furbisht, and whetted with the keener edge, and point, our wretched Ingratitude
must needs have given it. The Sun of Righteousness was ready to rise upon us,
with healing in his Wings, to clear our Heaven again, and to scatter the Cloud
of the last years unhealthiness. But yet, methinks, this slow-moving Cloud
hangs still over our Heads, hovers yet in view, with God knows how many Plagues
and Deaths in the Bosom of it: and without our serious Amendment we have no
Rainbow to assure us, that we shall not again be drencht in that horrible
Tempest. Though the best Naturalists say, That great public Fires are a proper
Remedy for Diamerbr. depeste Noviomag.
the Plague, Yet God, if he be angry, can send a ruffling Wind into the very
Ashes of our City, blow them into the Air, and turn them as those of the
Egyptian Furnace, into a Blain, and a Botch, and a Plague Sore upon us. Ex. ix.
8, 9.


Nay even out of those dead Ashes, can He raise yet a fiercer Flame, to consume
what still remains. As the Lightning comes out of the East, says our Lord, and
shines even unto the West, so shall my coming be, (sc. to destroy Jerusalem,)
and wherever the Carcass is, will the Eagles be gathered together, Matthew. xxiv.
Fire is the Eagle in Nature; nothing in the Elementary World mounts so high to
its place, and stoops so low to its prey: the two properties God himself
ascribes to that Bird, Job xxxix 27, 30. And if we still refuse obstinately to
be gathered, like Chickens under our Lord's Wing, he can again let loose this
Bird of Prey, this Eagle of Heaven upon us; and from the East, where it began
before, fly it home like Lightning (...), even to the utmost West, to seize,
and to devour where ever there is the least Quarry remaining.

Or if this move us not, let us remember that we have another City upon the
Waters, a floating Town of moveable Forts and Castles, the Walls and Bulwarks
of the Nation; stronger than those of Brass, the Fable speaks of. As we desire
that God would ever fill their Sails with prosperous Gales, and still bring
them home with Honor and Victory, and good Success, Let us take heed that we
fight not against them too. Our Sin, like a Talent of Lead, may sink them to
the Bottom; our Lusts, and Passions, and Animosities may fire them; our
Drunkenness, and deep Excesses may drown them; our Vollies of Oaths and
Blasphemies may pierce them; nay, our Seditious Murmurings, and Privy
Whisperings may blow them'over. For God is Piorum Rupes, Reorum Scopulus; a
Rock to found the Just upon, but a Shelf to shipwreck, and confound the
Unrighteous.

And yet all these are but the common Roads, and ordinary Instances of God's
Displeasures: But he has also, besides, and beyond all these, unknown
Treasures of Wrath, vast stores of hidden Judgments (for who knows the Power,
or the extent of his Anger?) laid up in those secret Magazines, Ps. xc. il.
where his Judgments are, when they are not in the Earth, reserved as his
dreadful Artillery against the time of trouble, against the day of Battle and
War, as he speaks himself, Job xxxviii. 23. Oh let us take heed of treasuring
up to our selves Wrath against that day of Wrath, and the Revelatian of his
Righteous Judgments. Romans 1. 5.


And now what shall I say more, if all that has been said hitherto, prove
ineffectual? The Text affords yet one (...), etc.
Expedient as the Chaldee Paraphrast may seem to have understood it: Because
thy Judgment, says he (not (...) as in the Hebrew, but (...) or (...) as the
Jews call it, and S. Jude from them, The Judgment of the great Day) because
Jude 6.
that Judgment, though not as yet in the Earth, is yet fixed, and appointed, and
prepared for all the Earth (...) in the Hebrew it self too, for rather than in
the Earth) therefore most certainly, if at all, or for any thing, the
Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness.

But if they put far from them this evil day too, as if they had made a
Covenant with Death and with Hell; if they finally refuse to come under God's
Discipline, and to take forth to themselves Lessons of Righteousness here, they
shall then be made themselves great Lessons, and dreadful examples of God's
Righteousness to all the World. If they will not glorify God in these Fires,
as they ought, nor walk in the light of them; let them remember that there are
Fires without Light, where none glorify him, but by suffering the Eternal
Vengeance of their Sins. There must they learn by saddest experience, who
obstinately refuse the more gainful Method, (...), That it is a searful thing to
fall into the Hands of a living God. For our enemies here must die, and our
storms at last blow over, and our Fires, you see, though never so great, in
time go out and vanish: But God lives; has a Worm too, that dies not (for
those that live not as they ought) and a fire that is not quenched: The
Babylonian Furnace, seven times hotter than usual, a cool walk to that; all our
Vulcans and Etnas, our Heclas and Andes faint types and shadows of it; the
great Conflagration, we so lately trembled at, and still bewail, but a spark to
that infernal Tophet, but a painted Fire to that dreadful Mongibel; even
Everlasting Burnings. From which, God of his tender Mercy deliver us All; and
give us Grace in this our Day, (the Day of his Judgments) so to learn
Righteousness, and so to do it, that at the last, and great Day of Judgment,
when he shall come again to Account with us for all our Learning, and for all
our Doings, we may through his Mercy receive the Crown of Righteousness, for
his sake alone, who so dearly bought it for us, even Jesus Christ the
Righteous: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed by us, and
all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth, Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power,
henceforth and for evermore. Amen.

(...)

FINIS.

